J Multimodal User Interfaces (2016) 10:13–29
DOI 10.1007/s12193-015-0205-4

ORIGINAL PAPER

Examining brain activity while playing computer games
Anastasios G. Bakaoukas1 · Florin Coada2 · Fotis Liarokapis3

Received: 7 July 2014 / Accepted: 20 October 2015 / Published online: 24 November 2015
© The Author(s) 2015. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com

Abstract In this paper, an investigation and its results
towards brain activity pattern recognition while playing computer games using a non-invasive brain-computer interface
(BCI) device is presented. The main aim of the study was
to analyse data recorded while participants were engaged in
playing popular computer games. The major contribution of
the analysis presented is the confirmation of the hypothesis
that there is a connection between activities in the brain and
the different categories of computer games. Three different
popular computer games were used, and the recordings took
place under the conditions imposed by two different environments, a noisy one (a typical open-access university computer
lab) and a quiet one (a typical controlled-access university
computer lab under controlled environmental parameters).
Initial results, obtained after analysing the raw electroencephalography (EEG) recorded data, suggest that there
might be a significant connection between the type of activity taking place in the human brain and the type of computer
game a player is engaging with.

B

Anastasios G. Bakaoukas
Anastasios.bakaoukas@northampton.ac.uk
Florin Coada
coadaf@uni.coventry.ac.uk
Fotis Liarokapis
liarokap@fi.muni.cz

1

Computing & Immersive Technologies Department,
University of Northampton, Avenue Campus, St. Georges
Avenue, Northampton NN2 6JB, UK

2

Faculty of Engineering and Computing, Department of
Computing, Coventry University, Priory Street, Coventry
CV1 5FB, UK

3

Faculty of Informatics, Masaryk University, Botanická,
554/68a, Ponava, Brno, Czech Republic

Keywords Brain computer interfaces · Brain activity ·
Computer games · Memory and cognition

1 Introduction
Brain-computer interface (BCI) technologies constitute complex advanced communications and control methods [1].
Even though studied for decades, it is only for the past
years that BCI technology has been more extensively used
and its capabilities more closely investigated. Inevitably, this
led to the opening of a major research area in the industry as well, rather than just the medical sector. One such
aspect of the industry is now emerging to be the computer
games industry. Although the number of research groups
currently focusing on ways to integrate BCI with computer games is increasing, research in the field still remains
largely application-driven. In this field, main interests are
based in recording EEG data, that can be later analysed in
an attempt to understand in more details the user’s state
[2].
BCI-based research nowadays involves more than 100
groups all over the world engaged in a broad spectrum of
topics, with more entering the field almost every month [3].
Recent research indicates the fact that BCI has already moved
from assistive care to such applications as computer games.
The significant improvement in usability, hardware, digital
signal processing centred techniques, and system integration
is predicted to yield applications in other non-medical areas
as well [4].
Results of this trend are already to be recognised in the
gaming and entertainment industries, where specific products offer cheap and viable solutions for the general public
interested in interacting with this new technology [5–8].

123

14

It is a well-known fact that the computer games industry
has put a moderate amount of research effort in the field
of BCI applications; however, further theoretical studies in
the area will offer possibilities to better understand brain
activity during gaming sessions leading to more effective
(stimulating game-play) devices. Traditionally, games are
separated into genres that reflect not exclusively the aspect
of the game, but rather, the overall game-play. This can
be traduced from a brain activity point of view as a separate mental task for different genres of games. Theoretical
analysis of this kind recently made scientific headlines [9]
and caused a considerable stir within the computer science
community.
The aim of this research is to investigate brain activity
during engagement with different computer game genres to
understand behavioural patterns. Methodology, analysis and
results obtained from processing recorded brain activity data
from a number of different users, gathered during play-time
are presented. At a later stage thorough comparisons between
results obtained were performed. The driving force behind
our methodology constituted the assumption that since every
computer game genre demands from the user to perform
different interaction tasks, can be initially considered to be
possible for the brain to respond to these processes in different ways, without loss of generality.
The complete underlining hypothesis emphasising the
research direction followed can be summarised as if indeed
brain activity is different between different computer game
genres, must be at the same time similar between different users engaged with the same type of computer game.
As a result, the bottom line was to analyse the recorded
data with the aim of identifying, if proved possible, brain
activity patterns to confirm or dismiss this underlining
assumption.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2
presents the necessary background information needed for
what comes next in the paper to become thoroughly understood. Section 3 provides detailed information about how
the different elements of the experiment were setup. The
BCI equipment used, the games setup, the data acquisition,
and the testing environments and conditions are explained
in detail. In Sect. 4, the brain activity recording methodology is discussed, as well as challenges encountered during
recording sessions and how these challenges were met. The
filtering approach and data analysis methodology steps are
presented in Sect. 5. The processing algorithm, developed
specifically for the purpose of analysing the recorded signals, is presented and its functionalities and capabilities
explained. Following, our analysis results are presented and
their meaning is thoroughly explained. Sections 6, 7 contain the results, ANOVA analysis of data, discussion and
conclusions respectively, as well as future directions of our
research.

123

J Multimodal User Interfaces (2016) 10:13–29

2 Background
Devices currently available in the market incorporating BCI
technology capabilities can be categorised in two main categories: (a) Assistive Devices (ADs), and (b) Entertainment
and research devices (ERDs). The main purpose of devices
classified as ADs is to assist users with various disabilities in
completing otherwise difficult or even impossible tasks. An
example is “IntendiX”, developed by “g.tec” which allows
users to spell by using their brain [10]. Devices classified
as ERDs are mainly intended for usage in the entertainment
industry (such as in gaming applications) and their main purpose is to assist in expanding research boundaries in various
areas. As a result they are not aiming in performing one singular task, as recent review papers regarding BCI systems
[11,12] report. For the benefit of the reader, a brief classification of other BCI areas based on different criteria can be
found in [13].
Concepts like electro-encephalography (EEG) patterns,
user identification and system adaptation without training
remain an issue for many years now. In terms of computer
games, an EEG pattern recognition system for serious games
has been designed with the purpose of comparing recognition rates for experimental serious games without traditional
controllers [14].
A user study in self-paced BCIs with virtual worlds
showed that, without training, roughly half of the participants exposed to it were able to control the application by
using real foot movements and a quarter of them were able
to control it by using imagined foot movements [15].
In a relatively early experiment involving a website based
game linked to a BCI system, real-time brain activities from
the prefrontal cortex of a rat successfully translated into
external device control commands and used to drive the
game [16]. Another BCI based 3D game measured the user’s
attention level in order to control the movement of a virtual
hand, using 3D animation techniques. Was developed for
training those suffering from Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) [17]. Researchers are now focusing on
the design and implementation of tennis computer games’
avatars requiring the user to supplement only brain activity signals as means of action control commands [18]. This
implementation will assist people with movement disabilities
in controlling a realistic tennis computer game, otherwise an
almost impossible task. For this to be achieved in the most
efficient way, studies focusing on the practicality of using the
mu (μ) brain activity rhythm have been conducted [19].
“Affective Pacman” is a computer game developed to
investigate the influence of loss-of-control in the performance of Brain-Computer Interfaces (the frustration level of
users while playing the game) [20]. The game’s controls consist of two buttons which rotate “Pacman”. In another study,
a Steady-State Visual Evoked Potential (SSVEP) based BCI

J Multimodal User Interfaces (2016) 10:13–29

was used to control an avatar in the computer game “World of
Warcraft” [21]. To control the avatar the user had in reality to
control four icons. Three of them were used to command the
avatar to turn left, right and forward, while the fourth was
used to instruct the avatar to perform certain general purpose actions, such as grasping objects and/or attacking other
avatars.
Recently, a player satisfaction model based on insights
from neurobiological findings as well as the results from earlier demographic game design models was proposed [22].
The model presents seven different archetypes of players and
explains how each of these player archetypes relates to older
player typologies and how each archetype characterises a
specific playing style. Authors conducted a survey among
more than 50,000 players using the model as a personality
type motivator to gather and compare demographic data to the
different “BrainHex” archetypes. In another pilot study, the
dynamic EEG patterns associated with long term video game
play in healthy human participants were examined based on
the theta (θ) rhythm distribution over the scalp [23]. The
dynamic brain activity during continuous video game play
using the high resolution EEG was also investigated. Participants played a competitive video game, “Mario Power
Tennis”, on a Nintendo Game cube while their EEG signals
were recorded at evenly distributed time segments [24].
Concluding, despite all the efforts, at the present time
BCI systems are slower and less accurate than traditional
input interfaces currently available. In addition, BCIs often
require training for achieving any level of interaction between
the end-user and the BCI-based computer game, something
that weakens the overall user experience. Overall, BCIs can
provide the end-user with experiences that no other traditional computer game controller can provide. Connecting
a user directly with a virtual world has the advantage of
offering a more natural way of control and communication.
Results indicate that both BCI technologies currently available possess the potential of being used as alternative game
interfaces [25]. Although BCI technology cannot by any standards considered to be ready yet, players find this novel way
of interaction very exciting and engaging.

3 Experimental setup
This section describes how the different elements of the
experiment were setup including: (a) the BCI equipment, (b)
the games setup, (c) the data acquisition, and (d) the testing
environments and conditions.
3.1 BCI equipment
The vast majority of brain activity monitoring and recording
devices developed for the non-medical sector are based on

15

EEG [4], which actually is nothing more than the monitoring
and recording of the electrical activity throughout the scalp
of the user. Although such devices are available to the general
public and fairly easy to use, other incorporating more complex techniques are also currently available in the market.
In this study the “g.MOBIlab+” device was used, capable of
capturing data from 8 different channels (sensors) placed on
the user’s scalp using the well-known 10–20 arrangement
system. The real advantage of the “g.MOBIlab+” device
comes from the fact that its 8 channels can be customised
in accordance to the size of the end-user’s scalp, as well as
each application’s specialised parameters.
For comparison reasons, a number of other similar devices
in existence, starting by the “Emotiv” headset, developed by
Epoch, were examined. The device is a 14-channels device
but in [26] is stated that before each trial, participants have
to go through a new profile creation procedure using the
“Emotiv” control panel, a procedure that takes approximately
30–60 mins. Other such devices like: “MindSet” and “MindWave” are even more limited in capabilities in comparison
to “g.MOBIlab+” (mainly, they do not allow for the usage
of extra sensors alongside the ones already attached to the
headset). Enobio (with 8, 20 or 32-channels) is an alternative device which allows for increased spatial resolution and
best-in-class signal-to-noise ratio in wireless systems [27].
Due to its characteristics, “g.MOBIlab+” can be used to
record raw data in a variety of environments, making it that
way the suitable tool of choice for conducting experiments
that involve brain activity measurements and signal recording, either in a noisy or a quiet environment. However, one
drawback of this type of a system is the amount of time
it takes to setup the sensors cap before actually proceeding
with the signals recording activities, but overall this is well
compensated by the better signal quality achieved [28].
3.2 Games setup
For the purposes of our experiments and study three completely different popular computer games were considered:
(a) the “Minesweeper” game, (b) the “Quake3 Arena” game,
and (c) the “Trackmania” game (Figs. 1, 2, 3). The goal was to
capitalise on the inherently different environmental parameters. The three games selected in such a way as to represent a
different computer game genre each. The fact that they target
different audiences played a significant role during the selection phase as well. For example, “Minesweeper” is engaging
a very wide range of players, while on the other hand, “Trackmania” target’s a smaller range of players and “Quake3
Arena” an even smaller one. Also, there is a big variation to be
observed on visual stimuli. The highest occurs with “Quake3
Arena”, while the lowest with “Minesweeper”. Exactly the
same pattern is applicable regarding interaction with the
games. Finally, in terms of concentration, “Minesweeper”

123

16

J Multimodal User Interfaces (2016) 10:13–29

Fig. 3 “Trackmania” belongs to the Arcade Racing (AR) category of
computer games

Fig. 1 “Minesweeper” belongs to the Puzzle Type (PT) of computer
games

ter lap time from that of your opponent(s) or to beat a pre-set
lap time.
Another factor to be taken into consideration is the amount
of effort required from the end-user’s side to achieve a
satisfactory level of interaction with the computer game’s
environment. As an example illustrative of the fact, for two
of the computer games used in the experiments, namely,
“Trackmania” and “Minesweeper”, participants had to be
aware of the full surrounding environment during gameplay. In contrast, effectively interacting with the “Quake3
Arena” environment, required from the participants to be
constantly and fully aware of only the exact location of the
AI-controlled bots. These were the major differences and
challenges imposed by the three computer games used for
the purposes of brain activity data gathering and analysis, the
results of those two procedures are presented in this paper.

Fig. 2 “Quake3 Arena” belongs to the First-Person Shooters (FPS)
category of computer games

3.2.1 Data acquisition

has higher cognitive workload but it is not clear how much
higher or what is the load on the other two games. Additional
to the mental tasks required from the player, are the environmental demands and the environmental parameters which are
unique for each game. This difference between environmental demands and parameters directly translates into different
visual stimuli received by the end-user’s brains from game
to game.
“Minesweeper” is considered to be a Puzzle Type (PT)
computer game, “Quake3 Arena” belongs to the First-Person
Shooters (FPS) category, while “Trackmania” belongs to the
Arcade Racing (AR) category. In “Minesweeper” the motivation is to solve a puzzle by using a combination of educated
guesses and logical steps, “Quake3 Arena” targets in keeping the player concentrated by aiming and dodging gun fire,
while in “Trackmania” the goal is to achieve each time a bet-

“g.MOBIlab+” is capable of capturing raw EEG signals from
8 different channels/sensors (namely, channel/sensors: O1,
O2, T7, P3, Cz, P4, T8, Pz) placed on the participant’s scalp
using the well-known and widely used 10–20 system of electrode placement (Fig. 4). Is also equipped with low-noise
bio-signal amplifiers and a 16-bit A/D converter (256 Hz),
which guarantees excellent data quality and a high signal-tonoise ratio.
The first step in every experimental process of this
nature is setting up the “BCI2000” computer software package required to retrieve the actual data from the headset.
“BCI2000” is a general-purpose computer software package specifically designed and implemented for BCI research,
which was used for recording brain activity data, detecting
stimulus presence, as well as brain monitoring purposes. The
generally stated goal of the “BCI2000” software package
project was to assist in the area of research and the develop-

123

J Multimodal User Interfaces (2016) 10:13–29

17

Fig. 5 During a brain activity recording session in a noisy environment, using “g.MOBIlab+”
Fig. 4 The raw EEG signals are from 8 different channels: O1, O2,
T7, P3, Cz, P4, T8, Pz, in accordance with the 10–20 system

ment of applications, with BCI extensions. That goal matched
exactly the needs and purposes of this research. Another
advantage of using this software package is the fact that is
freely available for non-profitable research and educational
purposes. Recently has been reported that over 600 laboratories are currently using it for similar to ours research and
educational activities, spread out in all over the globe [29].
The recording software package uses successively a high
pass filter with a cut-off frequency at 1 Hz, a notch filter with a
cut-off frequency at 50 Hz (to reject “mains hum” from power
lines) and all data were digitised in continuous recording
mode at a Sampling Rate of 256 Hz. The anti-aliasing filtering
operation insures that all frequencies which are too high to
be digitised by the ADC are rejected. Each recorded epoch
expands to a total duration of 66.684 Seconds, with 17,464
frames per epoch. The goal of the overall acquisition setup
here is to measure the signals with as little noise as possible
and without significant interactions due to measurement.
After the parameters were appropriately set into the application, the recording cap was placed on each participant’s
head and the sensors were aligned in accordance to the
10–20 International System as shown in Fig. 5. The overall data recording procedure involved four major steps: (a)
sub-procedures followed as necessary to achieve a quality
recorded brain activity signal, (b) a total number of 5 complete samples of data for “Minesweeper”, (c) a total number
of 5 complete samples of data for “Quake3”, and (d) a total
number of 5 complete samples of data for “Trackmania”.
The order in which the games were tested was randomly
selected. The main reason behind randomising the recording
order was to avoid brain activity reflecting the ever increasing amount of time spent in front of a computer screen to
contaminate brain activity data originating from interacting
with the computer game itself.

Fig. 6 The testing environments per recording session

3.3 Testing environments and conditions
The recordings took place in two different environments (a
noisy one and a quiet one) as depicted in Fig. 6. There are a
number of reasons behind employing two different recording
environments, the major ones of which being: (a) to accommodate the participants in a comfortable dedicated computer
gaming environment (such as Coventry University’s Games
Lab), and (b) for having the ability to effectively observe
if similar brain activity patterns occur during game-play

123

18

Fig. 7 The testing conditions as applied to all participants

even when the participants found themselves under differing environmental parameters; with the second, if turning to
be true, constituting further solid ground for validating the
final analysis results obtained.
To make the testing procedure as rigorous as possible,
all participants engaged with the games under exactly the
same conditions (Fig. 7). The testing conditions interrelations
between the three computer games were decided on the basis
of striking a balance between having as much as possible
similar testing conditions between games (difficulty level,
time limit etc.) and allowing the unique characteristics of
each game to unfold as fluently as possible during gameplay.

4 Methodology
This section presents: (a) the experimental design including
important issues for capturing and recording EEG data, (b)
participants information and, (c) the procedure followed.
4.1 Experimental design
In order for “g.MOBIlab+” to provide an experiment supervisor or the end-user with the ability to account for connectivity
issues and corrupted data compensation, comes together with
a recording software utility. During sessions, the recording
software utility provides real-time raw data observation, correction and adjustment capabilities.
There are various issues in respect to capturing and recording EEG data. The most significant one is noise artefacts that

123

J Multimodal User Interfaces (2016) 10:13–29

arise through movement of the head during the recording
phase. Another one is corrupted data which are coming as
a result of a misplaced cap and sensors on the participant’s
head (most commonly experienced at the initial stages of the
process). To minimise these errors a well verified method for
checking the connectivity status between the scalp and the
electrodes/sensors was followed [30].
The method involves a simple test that can be performed
before starting any data recording session. That way, can
detect from a very early stage channels with poor signal capturing performance. After certain adjustments made, further
improve the situation by adding extra “g.GAMMA” gel or
by readjusting as was though more appropriate the cable
connections. The experience gained out of this procedure
is suggestive of the fact that the single most important initial
step is to ask, as the experiment supervisor, the participant to
relax [10].
The next step was to instruct the participant to wink several times and look for variations in the real-time displayed
raw EEG waveforms. It is well-known that winking has as
immediate result higher waveform amplitudes to be detected
and, what’s more, the winking effect becomes almost immediately noticeable, as expected, in waveforms corresponding
to channels located closer to the eyes. This process can be
taken a step further by asking the participant to bite his/her
teeth for a short time. This causes high amplitude artefacts
to appear in the raw EEG waveforms [10]. This is marked as
one effectively addressing the problem of identifying poor
sensor connectivity and poor waveform quality.
Despite all that, it is important to emphasise that although a
brain activity waveform may appear to have a comparatively
improved quality that alone does not necessarily ensure and
its validity. So, it is still possible for all the sensors/channels
to respond as expected during the “eye blinking” and “teeth
biting” tests but for the waveforms captured from some of
the channels to be contaminated with unwanted artefacts.
An example of this situation was a waveform corresponding to the “Cz” channel and containing high level noise was
not correlating because of that with the rest of the incoming waveforms captured from the other channels. Although
at the beginning of the recording session connectivity quality insured by scholastically following the method described
above, during the actual recording period the incoming waveforms (raw data) observed to be abruptly corrupted by a high
level noise pattern. This was a fairly easy situation to resolve,
because the cause for this type of noise is generally recognised to be due to physical factors such as the participant’s
discomfort level, causing abrupt movement of the head which
results in dislocating some or even all the attached sensors.
In some other cases still, participants may show various types of tics which in general involve rapid movements
of the facial muscles as a net effect. A customary practice
in all these situations is to request participants to try and

J Multimodal User Interfaces (2016) 10:13–29

limit the disrupting movements to the minimum possible in
order for the interaction with the game’s interface phase to
commence.
4.2 Participants
Twenty one participants took part in the study performed at
Coventry University. Twenty were males with ages spanning
between 19 and 26 years old. Ten located in a quiet environment, and eleven located in a noisy environment. At the
beginning of each separate game session participants were
allowed a few minutes to familiarise themselves with the controls and mechanics of the game about to engage with. All
participants had previous experience with computer games
and they are considered to be gamers. As a result (and due
to the fact that the selected games were popular), nobody
expressed any problems in understanding them within the
two minutes minimum allowed time.
4.3 Procedure
The methodology followed for data analysis consisted of
three major steps: (a) data streaming manipulation, (b) data
processing and, (c) feedback delivery. Each of these steps was
broken down in a number of appropriate sub-steps for data
streaming: (a) channel selection, (b) data filtering and, (c)
buffering; a number of appropriate sub-steps for data processing: (a) data pre-processing, (b) feature extraction and, (c)
classification; and finally a number of sub-steps for feedback
delivery: (a) selection of desired end-user interactions based
on classification results and, (b) promotion of end-user interactions based on the same criteria.
The decision was made to use all eight channels provided
by the “g.MOBIlab+” device to obtain data from as many
as possible active brain locations. Another reason for going
along this option was to increase the amount of data used
in the data processing phase to 100 % and increase that
way at the same time possibilities of achieving very accurate results to the maximum possible. The data collected
were then filtered in accordance to the device’s standards
by employing the accompanying software package (signal
pre-amplification, signal amplification, High Pass Filtering
with a cut-off frequency at 1 Hz. Notch Filter with a cut-off
frequency at 50 Hz). The anti-aliasing filtering operation and
signal digitisation took place as part of the data recording
procedure (a build-in pre-processing/processing stage). The
data captured were then stored as a collection of row vectors,
one corresponding for each recording channel.
As part of the feature extraction and classification stages
all the logged data were analysed and fragmented off-line
in consecutive epochs of 66.684 s. Then EEG epochs with
ophthalmic, muscular and other types of artefacts were preliminarily identified by displaying the channels and manually

19

removing the artefacts by means of visual inspection. The
onsets of artefacts were chosen as close to zero crossing
as possible. The cut-off points were chosen so that their
slopes would match to avoid introduction of artificial changes
of direction in the recorded signals. Here it must be noted
the necessity of automated artefact removal algorithms for
even more accurate results. In that respect, the computerised
method described in [31] can be used for further analysis.
During the selection and promotion stages of the desired
end-user interactions, the EEG epochs strongly contaminated
by artefacts that could not be removed with the above mentioned procedure were rejected from the analysis living us
finally with three epochs from each user, one for each game
per experimental environment.
The selected signals were then grouped into a data set
of sixty three logged signals in total, ready for further
processing. For the final data processing stage a custombuilt processing software was developed based on the
MATLABTM programming environment. In parallel with
this and for verification purposes “EEGLAB” was used [32].
The purpose behind us building our own processing
software to process the logged data was not to emulate
functionality and processing capabilities already available
in “EEGLAB”, but rather to be capable of exerting absolute
control on all functional parameters even on those necessarily lying hidden in “EEGLAB”. Therefore it became possible
to easily fine-tune and readjust as was needed specific procedural parameters.
After artefact removal, the data were filtered using a lowpass elliptic filter with an order of 10, pass frequency of
50 Hz, a stop frequency of 60 Hz, and stop band attenuation of 60 dB. The final results were obtained directly from
the Time-domain EEG signals. The frequency-domain representation of these signals was obtained after application of a
digital FFT-based power spectrum analysis; the Welch technique with a Hamming windowing function and no phase
shift. The power density of the EEG rhythms with a 1 Hz
frequency resolution, ranging from 2 to 45 Hz was calculated. The final signals were computed by taking the average
across each individual channel, per recording environment,
per game.
Signal averaging is the technique that allows estimation
of small amplitude signals that are buried in noise, it is a
technique well justified from past EEG signal analysis applications, and was adopted in this research. It usually assumes
the following: (a) signal and noise are uncorrelated, (b) the
timing of the signal is known, (c) a consistent signal component exists when performing repeated measurements and,
(d) the noise is truly random with zero mean. In real situations, all these assumptions may be violated but the averaging
technique has been in general proven sufficiently robust to
provide accurate results under minor violation situations of
all four basic assumptions.

123

20

J Multimodal User Interfaces (2016) 10:13–29

5 Results
The first observation made is that the set of frequencies lower
than 8Hz appear increased in magnitude. Next, Beta waves
(i.e. 13–30 Hz) for the signals representing recordings under
noisy conditions appear to possess a considerably high magnitude level. Beta waves are generally associated with active
attention and concentration. An increased magnitude level
can reflect the participants’ attempt to concentrate and focus
more on the game’s environment than on the surrounding
environment and/or external disturbances.
By isolating Beta waves it can be demonstrated that each
game stimulates different magnitude levels, which in general
correlate with the noisy and the quiet experimental environments, with “Quake3” to show the highest magnitude levels
of Beta waves among the games. The peculiarity with this
game is that requires the player to be very context aware in
order to successfully avoid “death”.
Players must be aware of any traps in close proximity, enemies, as well as available ammunition in order to progress and
achieve the highest score possible. The very determination
of performing well can force players to concentrate more on
the game; something that directly reflects upon the increasing Beta rhythm activity levels. “Trackmania”, as the second
game put to test for the increasing Beta rhythm activity levels,
may doesn’t require from the players that much concentration and environmental awareness but, nevertheless, they
must prove careful enough not to collide with obstacles while
“driving” around the circuit; a more or less equally demanding task. This might result in lower Beta rhythm magnitude
levels than “Quake3”, but still higher than those resulting
from engaging with “Minesweeper”.
Regarding Alpha rhythm magnitudes, the Alpha rhythm
is known as a relaxation indicator. Results suggest that
“Quake3” related signals contain higher magnitude activity
levels of Alpha waves than when compared to those from
the other two games (second graph in every figure). This
indicates that although players concentrated more during
“Quake3”, found the game to be relaxing at the same time.
Signals related with the O2 sensor (Fig. 9) show trends
similar to those identified for the O1 sensor (Fig. 8). The highest magnitude levels for Alpha rhythm are encountered in
“Quake3” related signals, followed by “Trackmania” related
ones, with those for “Minesweeper” to follow immediately
after. This is most indicative of the fact that the relaxation
levels are higher for the “Quake3” game environment.
It is worth mentioning, that the Beta rhythm magnitude
levels are still higher under the Noisy environment recording
conditions, but for “Trackmania” the magnitude levels under
the quiet environment recording conditions seem to appear
slightly higher. It is difficult to predict why the specific sensor recorded higher Beta rhythm activity magnitude levels

123

Fig. 8 Sensor O1—all games—noisy environment (blue) & Quiet
environment (green)

J Multimodal User Interfaces (2016) 10:13–29

Fig. 9 Sensor O2—all games—noisy environment (blue) & Quiet
environment (green)

21

under the quiet environmental conditions. One suggestion is
that for the participants involved under these environmental
conditions the sensor detected higher levels of concentration. One sensor cannot recreate the complete brain’s activity
image, however can provide enough for a first conclusion to
be reached.
Another important issue to be addressed has to do
with similarities arising when a comparison is performed
between results coming as an outcome from analysing signals recorded under noisy environmental conditions and
those coming as the result of quiet environmental conditions.
Although the general magnitude levels are different between
them, the signal peeks are following a similar distribution
pattern and suggests the existence of general patterns relating to each type of games.
Data recorded from the T7 sensor (Fig. 10) appear to be
match different from those recorded from the O1 and O2 sensors. The first thing noticeable is the big difference between
the Beta rhythm magnitude levels under noisy and quiet
recording conditions. If in the previous case the gap in magnitude between the two types of recording environments was
not that great, in this case the gap appears significantly larger.
The higher difference can be observed for the “Minesweeper”
case (first graph in every figure), where power values extend
from approximately 38 units over to 40 units. Although
other cases do not project such a high difference, it is still
noticeable that the Beta rhythm magnitude levels appear to
be higher under the noisy environmental conditions. This
indicates that users do not concentrate more on the game
environment under noisy conditions, since external disturbances force them at some point to give up trying.
Another interesting result is the lack of high magnitude level values for the Alpha rhythm range of frequencies. Again, the higher magnitude levels appear to occur
during “Quake3” recording sessions, followed in magnitude by “Trackmania” (third graph in every figure) and
“Minesweeper” recording sessions. A possible reason is the
fact that although Alpha rhythm appears at the posterior
regions of the head and the sides, the sensor recorded EEG
data which translated into Beta rhythm. Of course, another
equally possible cause may be the presence of a noise level
such that causing the signal to be translated as Beta rhythm
activity.
The T8 sensor (Fig. 14) follows the O1 and O2 sensors’
pattern. The analysis shows higher magnitude levels of Beta
rhythm under the noisy environmental conditions, but the
magnitude gap between recording environments is lower than
that appearing in the case of the T7 sensor.
Moreover, the highest magnitude levels for Beta rhythm
appear in “Quake3” recording sessions, followed by “Trackmania” and “Minesweeper”. This suggests that “Quake3”

123

22

Fig. 10 Sensor T7—all games—noisy environment (blue) & Quiet
environment (green)

requires more concentration from the participant’s side,
although the possible cause for this may be attributed to the
more complex handling required by the game theme and the
level of concentration required to perform well. However, it
is important to acknowledge the fact that there is a considerably large error window in every such statement. Alpha
levels appear much clearer and higher in magnitude than
Beta rhythm levels. Alpha rhythm peeks are located around
the 10 Hz mark point in all the signals recorded. “Quake3”
appears to contain the highest magnitude levels for the Alpha

123

J Multimodal User Interfaces (2016) 10:13–29

rhythm band of frequencies, followed by “Trackmania” and
“Minesweeper” possessing between them very similar magnitude values. This is the case despite the fact that initial
predictions, suggest attributing the higher magnitude levels
in the Alpha rhythm to “Minesweeper” (which is the simpler
game to successfully engage).
Data recorded from the Cz sensor (Fig. 12) seem to possess
different data signatures from those observed in relation to
the previously mentioned channels. Alpha rhythm peeks are
not as obvious as in some of the previous sensors. Although
present in all the signals, it is hard to point out which one of
these signals possesses the higher magnitude values. However, higher levels of Alpha rhythm can be observed in
signals attributed to “Quake3”, followed by “Trackmania”
and “Minesweeper”.
The Beta rhythm magnitude levels tend to follow the previous observations, with higher magnitude values attributed
this time to “Quake3”, followed by “Trackmania” and
“Minesweeper”. The differences between noisy and quiet
recording environmental conditions, although not very obvious, are never the less clearly observable. Beta rhythm
magnitude levels seem to reflect the fact that in a noisy
environment users need to concentrate more to achieve good
results. Attempting a comparison between games, “Quake3”
is the game giving the higher Beta rhythm magnitude levels,
with them attributed to high concentration required during
game-play. Signals recorded from sensor P3 (Fig. 11) appear
similar to those recorded from sensor Cz. The Alpha rhythm
magnitude values are hard to identify, but they are clearer than
in the case of sensor Cz. “Quake3” and “Trackmania” have
higher values in the frequencies range of the Alpha rhythm
when compared to “Minesweeper”. This seems to be the case
for most of the sensors’ signals analysed.
Beta rhythm activity magnitude levels suggest that
“Quake3” required more concentration from the participants
than the other two games. The differences emerging between
the Noisy and the Quiet environmental conditions are again
clear in “Quake3” and “Minesweeper” as well. “Trackmania” possesses similar magnitude levels of Beta rhythm in
both recording environments. There are a number of reasons
for this, with the most important being the recording and/or
filtering artefacts persisted during the pre-processing stage.
However, the similarity between the Beta rhythm magnitude
levels does not necessarily constitute an indication of contaminated data.
Signals recorded from the Pz sensor (Fig. 15) resemble
both those from Cz and P3 sensors, as well as those from O1
and O2 sensors. Although not as obvious as in O1 and O2
signals, the Alpha rhythm peeks are much clearer. “Quake3”
gaming environment is responsible for the higher magnitude
levels of Alpha rhythm waves, followed by “Trackmania”
with similar levels under the noisy recording environmental
conditions and lower under the quiet recording environmen-

J Multimodal User Interfaces (2016) 10:13–29

Fig. 11 Sensor P3—all games—noisy environment (blue) & Quiet
environment (green)

23

tal conditions. The lowest levels can be observed for the
“Minesweeper” under both environmental conditions.
The Beta rhythm magnitude levels follow the tendencies
encountered in the case of the O1 and O2 sensors. Data
recorded from the P4 sensor (Fig. 13) are similar to those
recorded from the Pz sensor. The Alpha rhythm magnitude
levels are more visible and top magnitude levels can be
observed for “Quake3”. “Trackmania” and “Minesweeper”
show similar magnitude levels, however the latter show lower
magnitude levels under noisy environmental conditions. This
alone suggests the behaviour noticed and in the previous signals case, namely, that “Quake3” is indeed the game during
which game-play the higher magnitude levels of relaxation
occurred. The Beta rhythm magnitude levels are higher under
noisy environmental conditions, suggesting that participants
needed to focus more on the game-play when faced with an
overpopulated gaming environment.
Concluding, the final step was the averaging signals across
all channels to offer a better representation of the activity of
the brain during game-play for all three games.
As was the case for most of the individual channels situation, an obvious difference in Beta levels was noticed
between the quiet and noisy recording environmental conditions.
A reason for this can be that the participants needed to
concentrate more on the task at hand. Because of the noisy
environmental conditions participants had to try and ignore
disturbances from the surroundings in order to perform better during game-play. Another issue about Beta rhythm is the
difference in magnitude levels between games. The highest
level observed during “Quake3” and as mentioned above a
successful player needs to possess quick reflexes capabilities
and be capable of keeping up with the fast pace of the game.
The game belongs to first person genre, so the player’s gaming environment window is limited by what characters can
“see” concentrating more on querying the environment for
possible threats and enemies.
Furthermore, the interaction procedure for “Trackmania”
requires more active involvement to steer at the right time
and be careful not to collide with obstacles. “Minesweeper”
is the simplest game among the three when interaction
and game-play is considered. Alpha rhythm showed higher
magnitude levels for “Quake3”, followed by “Trackmania”
and “Minesweeper”, suggesting that participants were more
relaxed during engagement with “Trackmania”, with the
game showing the lowest relaxation magnitude levels being
“Minesweeper”.
Next, we obtained results from ANOVA testing our
hypothesis. Setting variable “SG1 ” to represent the
“Minesweeper” game, variable “SG2 ” to represent the
“Quake” game, and variable “SG3 ” to represent the “Trackmania” game we can formulate the NULL Hypothesis and

123

24

J Multimodal User Interfaces (2016) 10:13–29

Table 1 The 3-way ANOVA
(3 × 8 × 2) table

ANOVA factor

Contrasts

ANOVA levels

Factor X1

1. Participants in a Noisy Environment

Noise, Quiet

2. Participants in a Quiet Environment
Factor X2

Factor X3

1. Participants playing “Minesweeper”
2. Participants playing “Quake”

“Quake”,

3. Participants playing “Trackmania”

“Trackmania”

1. Participants’ Sensor 01

“Sensor 01”,

2. Participants’ Sensor 02

“Sensor 02”,

3. Participants’ Sensor T7

“Sensor T7”,

4. Participants’ Sensor P3

“Sensor P3”,

5. Participants’ Sensor Cz

“Sensor Cz”,

6. Participants’ Sensor P4

“Sensor P4”,

7. Participants’ Sensor T8

“Sensor T8”,

8. Participants’ Sensor Pz

“Sensor Pz”

the ALTERNATIVE Hypothesis for our ANOVA analysis as
follows:
(NULL Hypothesis) H0 : “SG1 ” = “SG2 ” = “SG3 ”
(ALTERNATIVE Hypothesis) H1 : “SG1 ” = “SG2 ” = “SG3 ”
From the description of our experimental setup, becomes
apparent that our scheme consists of three elements, with raw
data obtained from the participants as the Random Variable.
Factors as arranged are typically suggestive of a 3-way
ANOVA analysis which takes the form presented in Table 1.
The “Independent” ANOVA variables are then given as:

A
B
C

“Minesweeper”,

Environment type (Two Levels: Noisy, Quiet)
Type of sensor (Eight Levels: Sensor 1, …, Sensor 8)
Type of game (Three Levels: Game 1, Game 2, Game 3)

With X1 representing factor A, X2 representing factor B,
and X3 representing factor C (the “Independent” ANOVA
variables), p values in the last column of the table (Prob>F)
are suggestive of the validity of our hypothesis. Because the
output vector p contains p values for the NULL hypotheses
on the N main effects, element p(1) contains the p value
for the NULL hypothesis H0A , that samples at all levels of
factor A are drawn from the same population; element p(2)
contains the p value for the null hypothesis H0B , that samples
at all levels of factor B are drawn from the same population;
and finally, element p(3) contains the p value for the null
hypothesis H0C , that samples at all levels of factor C are
drawn from the same population.
The small p-value for H0A suggests that at least one
A-sample mean is significantly different from the other Asample means; that is, there is a main effect due to factor A.
The same is true for H0B and H0C . For the purposes of this
analysis it was chosen a bound for the p value to determine
whether a result is statistically significant of 0.05.

Three “Independent” ANOVA variables give four ANOVA
“Interactions” which are as follows:

6 Discussion
AB
AC
BC
ABC

Environment Type vs. Type of Sensor
Environment Type vs. Type of Game
Type of Sensor vs. Type of Game
Environment Type vs. Type of Sensor vs. Type of Game

The analysis was performed in a multi-way (n-way)
Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) for testing the effects of multiple factors on the mean of the input vector. In our case the
input vector was consisting of a combination of all the averaged signals as those presented in Figs. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13,
14 and 15, for each of the two environments. The resulted
ANOVA table of our analysis is as presented in Table 2.

123

Often, the properties of EEG signals need to be optimised for
maximum gain. For example, the sensors need to be placed at
optimum positions and all the necessary precautions need to
be taken so the recorded waveforms reflect the actual activity
taking place in the brains. Also, the external conditions (noise
in the environment, quality of the recording device, etc.) play
a very significant role.
However difficult to assess all these parameters, taking
care of all the necessary conditions can result in accurate enough recordings to be obtained for, after appropriate
processing of data, an attempt to be made to draw significant
conclusions in respect to how and to what extend engaging

J Multimodal User Interfaces (2016) 10:13–29

Fig. 12 Sensor Cz—all games—noisy environment (blue) & Quiet
environment (green)

25

Fig. 13 Sensor P4—all games—noisy environment (blue) & Quiet
environment (green)

123

26

Fig. 14 Sensor T8—all games—noisy environment (blue) & Quiet
environment (green)

123

J Multimodal User Interfaces (2016) 10:13–29

Fig. 15 Sensor Pz—all games—noisy environment (blue) & Quiet
environment (green)

J Multimodal User Interfaces (2016) 10:13–29

27

Table 2 The ANOVA table
Analysis of Variance
Source

Sum Sq.

d.f.

Mean Sq.

F

Prob>F

X1

1824.8

1 1824.82

58.9

0

X2

9965

7 1423.57

45.95

0

X3

2491.5

2 1245.74

40.21

0

X1*X2

270.3

7

38.61

1.25

0.2737

X1*X3

322

2

161.01

5.2

0.0056

X2*X3

340

14

24.29

0.78

0.6879

X1*X2*X3

202.8

14

14.48

0.47

0.9506

Error

65,438.1

2112

30.98

Total

80,854.5

2159

Constrained (Type III) sums of squares

with different computer games affects activity within human
brains. Thus, a useful insight into brain activity in relation to
computer games and how this activity can be used to differentiate brain signals from different computer games can be
gained, even to the extent of deciding with a fair amount of
accuracy about complex in nature issues like computer games
addictiveness or addictive elements in computer games scenarios, game-play, etcetera.
For the multiple games situation considered in the paper,
other adjustable parameters include the end-user’s focus
level, the recording environment, and the game’s difficulty
level. Parameters like these can be chosen based on the particular possible application in mind or the particular element
under investigation (for example the games’ difficulty level
can be chosen as in targeting particular brain activities).
Traditionally, humans automatically tend to consider
external noise as something unwanted which only purpose
is the destruction of our precious bunch of data. In recording and analysing brain activity related signals though, noise
can be proved to consist a significant factor to be taken into
account. If a useful device to perform BCI tasks is to be build,
even for experimental only purposes, cannot be thought of as
operating in a sterilised environment with no external environmental noise present. Instead of trying to eliminate such
kind of a noise from our recorded signals before any attempt
to analysis, an alternative route may be to try and understand
the effect of the environmental noise to the brain and how
is affecting the quality of the outcome of the end task to be
performed. Some very interesting conclusions is possible to
be drawn especially if the main focus of the investigation is
some sort of Plug-and-Play, Brain computer interface related,
device.
In summary, evidence strongly suggesting that brain
activity follows a different pattern for different categorised
computer games was provided. Results suggest a number of
influential factors. An environmentally stable, well arranged

and managed recording session with all the parameters taken
into account can capture all the relevant brain activity on
which further analysis can reveal activity patterns and common brain activity characteristics between categories of
computer games.
Even though we have actually not covered any of these topics to the minute detail, our point is that even with a simple
arrangement, only three computer games involved, and a relatively small group of participants, useful and accurate results
can be obtained and accurate conclusions can be drawn as a
result if proper conditions and analysis tools applied.
Although the research concentrated on three specific
computer games for BCI purposes, there are many other
possibilities for future work. For example, best-selling commercial computer games from a number of different games
platforms can be considered and investigated under the same
methodology for the purpose of identifying brain activity patterns and more. Highly successful commercial games played
on different video games consoles can be proved capable of
generating different brain activity patterns mainly because
of, but not restricted to, the different input devices used by
the different games consoles.

7 Conclusions
The aim of this research was to investigate brain activity during engagement with different genres of computer games in
an attempt to take a first step into understanding end-user’s
behavioural patterns. The initial hypothesis underlining our
work was that BCI techniques are capable of differentiating brain signals produced when engaging with different
computer games as well as recognising, to a certain degree,
different users engaging with the same type of computer
game (assessing mental tasks in three different computer
game genres). Although it was expected that the computer
game genre will be an important factor in defining the activity of the brain, other factors, such as the overall design, the
input mechanism and the game mechanics, were expected to
contribute significantly to the final results.
Results were obtained from analysing the rhythmic activity of the brain between a frequencies range of 2–45 Hz,
focusing on the Alpha and Beta rhythm waves. These waves
were of a greater interest than the others because they
reflected relaxation levels (Alpha rhythm) and concentration
levels (Beta rhythm) which constituted the main focus area
of our investigation. These two user states are considered to
be the most likely to be influenced by a game-play scenario.
Results revealed that the highest Beta rhythm magnitude levels are obtained when engaging with the “Quake3” game.
Beta rhythm magnitude levels observed were attributed to the
extra concentration required to successfully navigate around
the game’s environment, avoiding hazards and trying to sur-

123

28

vive from enemy attacks. It is fully appreciated that future
research in the area has to focus on a one parameter variation
situation. Only after multiple studies carried out under this
condition will become possible to predict with some good
level of accuracy how the brain will react during engagement
with different types of games.
Signal analysis confirms the existence of differences in the
brain activity during engagement with different categories of
games. However, there are still a number of important factors
that make impossible any attempt to pinpoint what exactly
causes the different activity patterns of the brain to emerge.
Results were suggestive of a number of influential factors,
such as the interaction procedure, the overall game-play, the
surrounding environment, and the presence of opponents.
Further studies in the area will almost certainly lead into
identifying the type of gaming environment or set of particular actions responsible for triggering different responses in
the brain.
Acknowledgments The authors would like to thank Human-Computer
Interaction Lab members for their support and inspiration. A video that
describes the system can be found at: youtube.com/watch?v=ncyUL2svi
kk&feature=youtu.be.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecomm
ons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution,
and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit
to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.

References
1. Tan DS, Nijholt A (2010) Brain–computer interfaces applying our
minds to human–computer interaction. Springer, London
2. Nijholt A, Tan D (2007) Playing with your brain: brain–computer
interfaces and games. In: Proceedings of the international conference on advances in computer entertainment technology, ACM
Press, New York, pp 305–306
3. Wolpaw JR (2007) Brain–computer interfaces as new brain output
pathways. J Physiol 579:613–619
4. Van Erp JBF, Lotte F, Tangermann M (2012) Brain–computer interfaces: beyond medical applications. IEEE Comput IEEE Comput
Soc 45(4):26–34
5. NeuroSky Inc. (2013) NeuroSky Brain Wave Sensors For Everybody. http://www.neurosky.com. Accessed 21 May 2013
6. Mattel Inc. (2013) MindFlex. Accessed 21 May 2013 http://
mindflexgames.com. Accessed 21 May 2013
7. Emotiv (2013) http://www.emotiv.com. Accessed 21 May 2013
8. Uncle Milton Inc. (2013) http://unclemilton.com. Accessed 21
May 2013
9. Denworth Lydia (2013) Brain-Changing Games, Scientific American Mind, January/February
10. g.tec, IntendiX (2013) Personal EEG–based spelling system—
advanced user and administrator manual. http://www.gtec.
at/Products/Complete-Solutions/intendiX-Specs-Features.
Accessed 21 May 2013
11. Nicolas-Alonso LF, Gomez-Gil J (2012) Brain computer interfaces,
a review. Sensors 12(2):1211–1279

123

J Multimodal User Interfaces (2016) 10:13–29
12. Bi L, Fan XA, Liu Y (2013) EEG-based brain-controlled mobile
robots: a survey. IEEE Trans Human-Machine Syst IEEE Comput
Soc 43(2):161–176
13. Brunner C, Birbaumer N, Blankertz B, Guger C, Kübler A, Mattia
D, Millán José del R, Miralles F, Nijholt A, Opisso E, Ramsey N,
Salomon P, Müller-Putz GR (2015) BNCI Horizon 2020: towards a
roadmap for the BCI community, brain–computer interfaces, Taylor & Francis, ISSN: 2326–263X (Print), pp 2326–2621 (Online)
14. Ahn JS, Lee WH (2011) Using EEG pattern analysis for implementation of game interface. In: Proceedings of the 15th international
symposium on consumer electronics (ISCE), IEEE Computer Society, Singapore, pp 348–351
15. Lotte F, Renard Y, Lecuyer A (2008) Self–paced brain–computer
interaction with virtual worlds: a quantitative and qualitative
study—out of the lab. In: Proceedings of the 4th international brain
computer interface workshop and training course
16. Lee U, Han, SH et al. (2006) Development of a neuron based
internet game driven by a brain–computer interface system. In:
Proceedings of the 2006 international conference on hybrid information technology, IEEE Computer Society, Vol. 02, pp 600–604
17. Jiang L, Guan C, Zhang, Wang C, Jiang B (2011) Brain computer
interface based 3D game for attention training and rehabilitation.
In: Proceedings of the 6th IEEE conference on Industrial Electronics and Applications (ICIEA), IEEE Computer Society, Beijing, pp
124–127
18. Lopetegui E, Zapirain BG, Mendez A (2011) Tennis computer
game with brain control using EEG signals. In: Proceedings of
the 16th international conference on computer games (CGAMES),
pp 228–234
19. Mattiocco M, Babiloni F et al. (2006) Neuroelectrical source imaging of mu rhythm control for BCI applications. In: Proceeding of
the 28th annual international conference of the IEEE on Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, IEEE Computer Society, pp
980–983
20. Reuderink B, Nijholt A, Poel M (2009) Affective Pacman: a
frustrating game for brain–computer interface experiments. In: Proceedings of INTETAIN 2009, Springer, Berlin, pp 221–227
21. Kapeller C, Hintermller C, Guger C (2012) Augmented control of
an avatar using an SSVEP based BCI, In: Proceedings of the 3rd
augmented human international conference, Article No. 27, ACM
Press, Vancouver
22. Nacke LE, Bateman C, Mandryk RL (2014) BrainHex, A Neurobiological Gamer Typology Survey, Entertainment Computing,
Elsevier 55–62
23. He EJ, Yuan H, Yang L, Sheikholeslami C, He B (2008) EEG
Spatio-spectral Mapping During Video Game Play, Proceedings of
the 5th International Conference on Information Technology and
Application in Biomedicine, in conjunction with The 2nd International Symposium & Summer School on Biomedical and Health
Engineering, Shenzhen, China, May 30-31, 346-348
24. Sheikholeslami C, Yuan H, He EJ, Bai X, Yang L, He B (2007)
A High Resolution EEG Study of Dynamic Brain Activity during
Video Game Play, Proceedings of the 29th Annual International
Conference of the IEEE EMBS, Cité Internationale, Lyon, France,
August 23-26, 2489-2491
25. Liarokapis F, Debattista K, Vourvopoulos A, Ene A, Petridis
P (2014) Comparing interaction techniques for serious games
through brain-computer interfaces: A user perception evaluation
study, Entertainment Computing, Elsevier 5(4):391–399
26. Vourvopoulos A, Liarokapis F, Petridis P (2012) Brain–Controlled
Serious Games For Cultural Heritage, Proc. of the 18th Inl’ Conference on Virtual Systems and Multimedia, Virtual Systems in the
Information Society, IEEE Computer Society, Milan, Italy, 291–
298
27. http://neuroelectrics.com/enobio

J Multimodal User Interfaces (2016) 10:13–29
28. g.tec, g.GAMMAcap EEG Sensor Cap - Instructions For Use,
Schiedlberg: Guger Technologies, (2010)
29. Schalk G et al (2004) BCI2000: a general-purpose brain–computer
interface (BCI) system. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng 51(6):1034–1043
30. g.Tec, IntendiX (2012) Advanced user and administrator manual
(Version 2.12.00), p 30, Copyright 2012 g.Tec Medical Engineering
GmbH

29
31. Moretti DV, Babiloni F, Carducci F, Cincotti F, Remondini E,
Rossini PM, Salinari S, Babiloni C (2003) Computerized processing of EEG–EOG–EMG artifacts for multicentirc studies in
EEG oscillations and event-related potentials. Int J Psychophysiol 47(3):199–216
32. SCCN, EEGLAB, Available at: [http://sccn.ucsd.edu/eeglab/],
Accessed at: 21/05/2013

123

