International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)
Volume 160 – No 1, February 2017

Comparison of Preprocessing Algorithms using an
Affordable EEG Headset
Sadiq J. Abou-Loukh, PhD

Arwa Ra'ad Obaid

Assistant Professor
Engineering CollegeBaghdad University

M.Sc. Researcher
Engineering CollegeBaghdad University

ABSTRACT
Brain Computer Interface is a technology make a
communication with the outside world via brain thoughts. The
performance of the BCI system depends on the choice of
approaches to process the signals of the human brain at each
step. The recording signals of a human brain having bad or
small signal to noise ratio (SNR) made brain patterns hard to
be distinguished. So, the signal quality need to be enhanced,
i.e. enhancing the SNR. The electroencephalogram (EEG)
signals are composed of true signal and noise signals so that
in order to have high SNR, the EEG signals should be
transformed so that the undesired components (noise signal)
will be isolated and the true signal will remain.
Methods proposed in this paper are for preprocessing, feature
extraction and classification of EEG signals (brain signals)
recorded from Emotiv EPOC. The raw EEG data is
preprocessed to remove noise and then is handled in order to
eliminate the artifacts using Principal Component Analysis
(PCA), Common Spatial Pattern (CSP), and Common
Average Reference(CAR). Power Spectral Density (PSD) is
computed from filtered data as a feature. Finally, Support
Vector Machine method used to interpret the EEG patterns.
The PCA algorithm showed good performance with a value
94.28% compared to other algorithms.

Keywords
Electroencephalogram (EEG), Brain Computer Interface
(BCI), Emotiv EPOC.

1. INTRODUCTION
The BCI system is an important technology to express human
thoughts to the outside environment. To design a BCI system,
the user should produce various brain activity patterns which
are captured in the form of Electroencephalogram (EEG) and
converted to commands by identifying the patterns by the
system. In most BCI, the identification of pattern is based on a
classification [1]. EEG offers inexpensiveness, noninvasiveness, ease of use, the possibility of implementation in
real-time, and high temporal resolution. BCI researches have
essentially contained the recording of EEG signals from
electrodes placed on the scalp. Many BCI researches have
contained the improving signal pre-processing approaches to
generate reliable and precise control of BCI applications [2].
Many paradigms for constructing EEG-based BCI systems
were tried out in the last 20 years. The EEG rhythms is a wellknown phenomenon occurring in EEG when interacting with
stimuli using sophisticated machine learning algorithms to
classify the EEG [1]. Alonso and Gomez-Gil offered
reviews of the modern BCIs by considering the steps that
designing the standard BCI starting from signal acquisition
towards classification and designing the control interface
steps [3]. Waldert et al. focused on extracting motor cortical

information that causes the movement of the corresponding
body part to design an efficient BCI system [4].
Lakshmi et al. concentrated on addressing the different
methodologies necessary to be applied in each step of BCI
designing with their advantages and drawbacks [5]. Leeb et al.
designed a BCI system that controlling a wheelchair to go
from one avatar to another and stopping at each one and
speaking to it [6]. Teich implemented a BCI system using an
affordable EEG headset (Emotiv EPOC EEG headset) [7].
Vidaurre et al. solved the “BCI Illiteracy” issue, that there is
(15% - 20%) of people who don’t have the ability to control a
BCI. Consequently, they also try to make the BCI more
adaptive such that they do not solely rely on off-line
calibration when using supervised learning [8].
Carlson and Millán also designed a BCI that controlling a
wheelchair by “left” and “right” commands and moreover
prepared the wheelchair to avoid the obstacles to make sure
that is safe to be used [9].
BCI system building paradigms use specific changes in the
EEG that occur through the presentation of controlled external
stimuli and they were implemented with great success. As
these EEG changes were through a stimulus, they are called
Evoked potentials. For example, many BCI systems that
utilized Steady-State Visually Evoked Potentials (SSVEP)
which can be elicited by ordering the subject to fixate on a
box/checkerboard on an LCD screen flickering steadily were
built. A corresponding power increase is identified in the
subject’s EEG at the same frequency and in the flickering’s
harmonic frequencies. SSVEP can control a computerized
device by flickering many different stimuli at various rates
while at the same time allowing a user to shift his/her gaze
between different stimuli [1].
Imaginings of the movements of the left or the right hand
produce a variation in the event-related de-synchronization
(ERD) for both α (8-13) Hz and β (14-30) Hz components of
sensorimotor rhythms at the contra-lateral sensorimotor region
of the human brain. It is particularly useful for severely
paralyzed patients. It also supports a good tool for normal
subjects to improve the communications ability with
peripheral devices [2].
In the present work, a comparison is made in terms of
accuracy between three preprocessing algorithms which are,
Principle Component Analysis (PCA), Common Average
Reference (CAR), and Common Spatial Patterns (CSP) to
remove noise and artifacts from brain signals recorded by 14electrodes Emotiv EPOC. The EEG signals pass through
several steps starting from acquisition the data till the
classification of data. These steps will be illustrated in Figure
1.

25

International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)
Volume 160 – No 1, February 2017
Table 1. The frequency range and amplitudes of EEG
bands
Type of EEG

Frequency (Hz)

Amplitude (µV)

Delta (δ)

1-3

10-300

Theta (θ)

4-7

< 50

Alpha (α)

8-13

~ 50

Beta (β)

14-30

< 30

Gamma (γ)

> 30

very low.

Fig 1: EEG signal processing steps to detect the brain
patterns

2. EEG DATA SET
An EEG is a recording of the very weak electrical potential
generated by the brain. This section consist of two
subsections, the first one illustrates how EEG signals were
recorded and by which device this process was accomplished,
the second one illustrates how the channel was selected to get
the relevant information from brain signals.

2.1 Recording of EEG Signals
The Electroencephalogram data set was recorded from 52 year
old man. He did not have any abnormalities in his health and
the recording's sampling rate is 128 Hz. The database consists
of EEG signals of nodding his head with four positions (right,
left, forward, and backward). Every single row in the EEG
database matrix represents one electrode only. EEG signal has
different frequency bands from which one the features can be
extracted depending on the task. Table 1 describes the
frequency bands of EEG signals [7].
The EEG signals were filtered by the EEG headset and
automatically by the notch filter to remove the 50 AC line
noise. Then, the signals were filtered by Sinc band pass filter
(order 5) to get the frequency band from 0.2 Hz to 45 Hz. The
obtained frequency band is the band that is more informative
according to [10] that shows the substantial is increasing in
the EEG spectral content below the frequency of 5Hz (delta
band brain activity), a medium increase in the range of 520Hz (alpha and low beta bands), and a smaller increase of
spectra in the higher frequency range can be observed. These
EEG data were recorded from Emotiv EPOC which it has 14
electrodes only and 2 reference electrodes (CMS and DRL).
The position of each electrode will be identified in Figure 2.

2.2 Channel Selection
Most of the EEG electrodes (channels) seemed to represent
redundant information. Furthermore, there are eight channel
locations are usually used for Movement-Related Cortical
Potentials (MRCP) analysis that covers the areas between
central and frontal positions (FC3, FCZ, FC4, C3, C1, CZ,
C2, and C4) [11]. According to the EEG headset, the signal
that includes the relevant information about head movement
can be found on FC4.

Fig 2: Emotiv EPOC EEG headset and the electrode
positions [7].

3. ALGORITHMS
3.1 Principal Component Analysis
Principle Component Analysis (PCA) [12] is a linear
transformation technique which converts the correlated
variables into uncorrelated variables named principal
components. The PCA detects the interior structure of the data
by explaining the alteration for the data. PCA may be used in
the preprocessing step of BCI design. The PCA may also be
used as a dimensionality decreasing method by fixing the
alteration of the EEG signals, by accounting for the
correlation among variables. The PCA finds the solution to
this equation
RW = WA

(1)

Where R is the covariance matrix of EEG data matrix, W is
the eigenvector matrix and finally, A is the diagonal
eigenvalue matrix. The PCA accomplishes this purpose by
rotating the coordinate structure so that each axes of the new
coordinate system will have the directions that the alteration
of the data will be maximized when projected for them. The
new axes were the eigenvectors of the covariance matrix of
the EEG data matrix. The tutorial of this algorithm is as
follows:
1: Get some data
In this work, the recorded EEG data set described in Section
2.1 is used. The EEG data set matrix A has two dimensions
n×m, where n is the rows represent the channels of the Emotiv
EEG headset and m is the columns represent samples of the
timed EEG signal.
2: Subtract the mean
For PCA to work properly, the mean should be subtracted
from each of the data dimensions.
The mean subtracted is the average across each dimension.

26

International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)
Volume 160 – No 1, February 2017
This produced B which is a data set matrix which having a
mean equal to be zero.
3: Calculate the covariance matrix of the data set resulted
from step 2
This is done in precisely by the following equation:
C = B T B/(n − 1)
(2)
Where B is the EEG data matrix with zero means.
4: Calculate the eigenvectors and eigenvalues of the
covariance matrix
Since the covariance matrix is square, the eigenvectors and
eigenvalues of the matrix resultant from step 3 can be
calculated. The resultant eigenvectors are considered as
principle components and will be organized in descended
form (from eigenvector having highest eigenvalues toward
eigenvector having the lowest eigenvalue).
5: Constructing the new data set
The originated principal component matrix is multiplied by
the data set matrix generated from step 2 according to the
following formula:
Datanew = PC ′ × B

(3)

3.2 Common Average Reference
Common Average Referencing (CAR) [13] is a simple
technique in computations, and therefore CAR is applicable
for both real‫ــ‬time and on‫ــ‬chip applications. It is usually used
in EEG signals, where it is essential to detect signal sources at
actual noisy recordings, the CAR of array where each row
represents single source and the columns represent samples of
EEG signals that can be computed by evaluating the mean of
all “good” recording channels (sample by sample), generating
only one main reference of all sites. So that the noise will be
removed by subtracting the mean from the desired source. In
this case, the SNR will be enhanced.
There are various recording references electrode locations
such as linked-ears, vertex (Cz), ipsilateral-ear, linkedmastoids, contralateral-ear, bipolar references, C7 reference,
and the tip of the nose. The best reference may be chosen
which will produce topographic distortion if the relatively
electrically neutral area is not employed. The techniques that
don't depend on the references will not suffer from problems
associated with an actual physical reference. In this work, the
DRL electrode will be used as a reference in the CAR
approach.
Below is the function to calculate CAR for FC6 electrode
(FC6 was selected as an example, and the whole number of
electrodes was 14 electrodes):
CAR = FC6 −

AF 3+AF 4+⋯+Oz +O2+DRL
15

(4)

3.3 Common Spatial Patterns
Common spatial pattern (CSP) [14] is a spatial filter which
has been the most popular technique in brain computer
interface (BCI). It enables discriminating ERD/ERS effects
with ease. The CSP finds directions that maximize variance
for one class and at the same time minimize variance for the
other class given two different classes embedded in a highdimensional space. This method is based on the simultaneous
diagonalization of two covariance matrices and is applied
successfully to the classification of movement-related EEG
which is a mathematical method used in signal
preprocessing for
splitting
a multivariate signal
into

additive subcomponents that have maximum differences
in between two windows. CSP was first defined by Koles and
it can distinguish abnormal EEG activity. CSP implements the
transformation of EEG signal into a variance matrix that
maximally discriminates between various classes by using
spatial filtering which detects the patterns in EEG. It is
sensitive to the electrode positions and artifacts. During the
training process, the identical electrode positions are to be
preserved to detect the same signals. The increase in
efficiency may occur due to the change in electrode positions.
Think through an arbitrary variable x ∈ RN that representing
the EEG data, which is recorded by N channels which is
desired to infer the intention of the user of the BCI system and
let c be the class label of this variable x, c ∈ C = {c1,…,cM}.
Let as denoting the class probability by P(ci ), where i = 1, . . .
, M, and suppose that the EEG data will be conditioned on any
class follows a Gaussian distribution with zero means, i.e.,
p(x|ci ) = N(0, R x|c i ), i = 1, . . . , M. This is no restriction in
the setting considered here for these details:
1. The linear transformation of x is considered only, and
hence any mean can be first subtracted and added again in the
end.
2. BCIs based on sensorimotor rhythms typically give the
information about the intention of the user from variations in
the EEG data in specific frequency bands through conditions.
As long as no information restricted in higher moments of x is
being used for inference, no information is lost by supposing
p(x|c) to follow a Gaussian distribution. A linear
transformation is needed to be determined where W ∈
RN ×L with
L << N, such that for finite training data by
means of reducing the dimension x = W T x for inferring the
intention of the BCI-user leads to an improved classification
accuracy, in contrast, to use x.

3.3.1

Binary Common Spatial Pattern

This section deals with two class paradigm i.e., C = {c1, c2}.
The CSP algorithm then solves the following optimization
problem:
𝑤 ∗ = 𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑚𝑎𝑥x ∈ 𝑅 𝑁

𝑤 𝑇 𝑅𝑥 |𝑐1 𝑤

(5)

𝑤 𝑇 𝑅𝑥 |𝑐2 𝑤

Where Rx|c1, Rx|c2 are the covariance matrices of x with the
given c1, c2 respectively. Since (5) is in the form of the wellknown Rayleigh quotient, solutions to (5) are given by
eigenvectors of the generalized eigenvalue problem:
𝑅𝑥|𝑐1 𝑤 = ʎ 𝑅𝑥|𝑐2 𝑤

(6)

The eigenvectors of (6) correspond to the desired spatial
filters. Also, for the given eigenvector w ∗ the corresponding
eigenvalue determines the value of the cost function:
𝑇

𝑤 ∗ 𝑅𝑥 |𝑐1 𝑤 ∗

𝜆∗ = 𝑤 ∗ 𝑇 𝑅

𝑥 |𝑐2 𝑤

∗

(7)

These eigenvalues are a measure of the quality of the acquired
spatial filters, i.e., the eigenvalue associated with a spatial
filter states the ratio of the variance between conditions of the
component of the EEG data extracted by the spatial filter. The
preprocessing is then generally completed by combining the L
eigenvectors from the equation (6) with the selected
eigenvalues to form W ∈ R N ×L and computing x = W T x.
The binary CSP algorithm is detailed as follows:

27

International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)
Volume 160 – No 1, February 2017
Binary CSP Algorithm
Input: a set of I preprocessed EEG trials Xi
with known class
Yi 2 f1; 2g.
Output: W projection matrix
1: 𝐟𝐨𝐫 𝐢 = 𝟏 to I do
2: 𝐏𝐗𝐢 = 𝐂𝐨𝐯 (𝐗𝐢) {Compute Sample
Covariance matrix}
3: end for
4: 𝐏𝟏 = 𝐀(𝐏𝐗𝐢 ; 𝐘𝐢 = 𝟏) {Arithmetic mean of
covariance matrices for class 1}
5:𝐏𝟐 = 𝐀(𝐏𝐗𝐢 ; 𝐘𝐢 = 𝟐) {Arithmetic mean of
covariance matrices for class 2}
6(𝐏𝟏 + 𝐏𝟐)−𝟏 𝐏𝟏 = 𝐖𝐃𝟏𝐖 𝐓 {Eigenvalue
decomposition}
3.3.2
Multi-class Common Spatial Pattern
The
7: binary
returnCSP
W can be extended to multi-class CSP by
execution two-class CSP on various combinations of classes,
i.e. by determining the CSP for one class against all other
classes, or by joint approximate diagonalization (JAD). Given
EEG data from M different classes, the goal of CSP by JAD is
to find a transformation W ∈ R N ×N that diagonalizes the
covariance matrices Rx|ci, i.e.
W T R x |ci W = Dci , i = 1, . . . , M

K(Xi , Xj ) is called the Kernel function which is based on the
inner product of two variants Xi and Xj . In original space, the
dot product is used in the calculation and it is converted into
higher space that can replace dot products as the kernel
function. In this paper, the Polynomial Kernel will be used for
good separated classes. The kernel function is as follows:
K Xi , Xj = [ 𝑋𝑖 𝑇 𝑋𝑗 + 1]𝑑

(10)

3.4.1 Linearly Separable
Linearly Separable classification as illustrated in Figure 3
separates the high dimensional data into two sets = {+1, -1}
without any misclassification or overlapping. SVM produced
a number of decision boundaries or margins where the best
margin is recognized by using perceptron algorithm.
The main objective of the Support Vector Machine (SVM) is
maximizing the margin width in order to decrease the
misclassification error.
𝑤1 𝑥1 + 𝑤2 𝑥2 − 𝑏 = 0

(11)

𝑤1 𝑥1 + 𝑤2 𝑥2 − 𝑏 = 1

(12)

𝑤1 𝑥1 + 𝑤2 𝑥2 − 𝑏 = −1

(13)

Where w1 and w2 are the positions of the hyperplane H1 and
H2 respectively. x1 and x2 are data points and takes the value
of +1, 0, - 1 which shows how far hyperplanes away from the
original line.

(8)

With Dci ∈ RN×N diagonal matrices.
There are several methods to this problem. The idea of using
JAD for multi-class CSP lies in the point that CSP for two
classes can be assumed as diagonalizing two covariance
matrices. More exactly, if the eigenvector of the generalized
eigenvalue equation (6) is combined in a matrix W, then
W T R x |ci W = Dci i = 1, . . . , 2. It then seems probable to
extend CSP to multi-class CSP algorithm by finding the
transformation matrix W which is approximately diagonalized
multiple covariance matrices. A total of L columns of the
obtained matrix W is then taken as the chosen spatial filters.
Here, the CSP for multi-class is achieved by determining the
CSP for one class against all other classes.

3.4 Support Vector Machine
Classification and detection of brain patterns are essential
steps. The human's brain creates patterns using several mental
tasks corresponding to the mental schemes, so BCI will detect
and classify /interpret them into suitable commands. This step
is accomplished using Support Vector Machine (SVM) [15]
which is a supervised learning model correlating with learning
classification algorithm. This method is used by a large
number of researchers because of its properties like, empirical
and structural risk minimization principles that are considered
as good features for SVM. A hyperplane makes a perfect gap
among different sets of data to be located in its true class.
Support Vectors will be the nearest points towards the
hyperplane and SVM model guarantee maximum space from
the hyperplane for nearby support vectors of the two classes.
The Data that will not separate linearly will be converted into
higher dimensional mapping for classification. The non-linear
SVM converting the original sample data into higher
dimensional mapping is called Feature Mapping and its
mapping function is denoted as Φ(xi). The kernel function is
used to determine the value of mapping function Φ.
Xi T Xj = K Xi , Xj = Φ xi

T

Φ xj

Fig 3: Linear hyperplane that separates one class from
another [15]

3.4.2 Linearly Inseparable
The SVM supports for the data holds noisy, errors, and faulty
data which having some possibilities of error rate. It is
unthinkable to construct a linear hyperplane without error for
binary classification data as shown in Figure 4. Linearly
inseparable classification can produce solutions for highdimensional data sets with overlapped or misclassified or
erroneous data. Slack variable ξ is used to represent the error
term with slight modification in constraint (equations (14 and
15)) and allow misclassified points.
𝑤𝑥𝑖 − 𝑏 ≥ +1- ξ for yi = +1 where ξ ≥ 0

(14)

𝑤𝑥𝑖 − 𝑏 ≥ -1+ ξ for yi = -1 where ξ ≥ 0

(15)

𝑦𝑖 𝑤𝑥𝑖 − 𝑏 ≥ ξ − 1 , ξ ≥ 0

(16)

(9)

28

International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)
Volume 160 – No 1, February 2017

4. PREPROCESSING

Fig 4: Linear hyperplane that separates one class from
another with a slack variable [15].

3.4.3 Non-Linearly Separable
Data are not linearly separable can be converted into higher
dimensional mapping for classification as shown in Figure 5.
The non-linear mapping of original sample data is
transformed into higher dimensional mapping are called
Feature Mapping and its mapping function is denoted as
Φ(xi). The kernel functions are used to find the value of
mapping function Φ.
𝑥𝑖𝑇 𝑥𝑗 = 𝐾 𝑥𝑖 , 𝑥𝑗 = Φ 𝑥𝑖

𝑇

Φ(𝑥𝑗 )

(17)

𝐾 𝑥𝑖 , 𝑥𝑗 is called the Kernel function which is based on the
inner product of two variants xi and xj. In original space dot
product of xi.xj is used for calculation and it is converted into
higher space can be replaced dot products as the kernel
function.

The EEG signal that comes from the human brain, which
represents any activity that happens is mixed with various
interior and exterior noises which named by artifacts. The
largest proportion of these artifacts can be removed or
reduced by applying simple filters. For that reason, the desired
frequency bands which can be selected by using BPF. The
preprocessing step aims at simplifying subsequent processing
operations without losing relevant information. An important
goal of preprocessing is to improve signal quality by
improving the so called signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). A bad or
small SNR means that the brain patterns are buried in the rest
of the signal (e.g. background EEG), which makes relevant
patterns hard to detect. A good or large SNR, on the other
hand, simplifies the BCI’s detection and classification task.
Transformations combined with filtering techniques are often
employed during preprocessing in a BCI. Scientists use these
techniques to transform the signals so unwanted signal
components can be eliminated or at least reduced. These
techniques can improve the SNR as given in [2]. In the
present paper, EEG signal will be processed by three steps as
illustrated below:
1.

The noise included in EEG signals caused by AC line
will be eliminated by applying a Notch filter to remove
(50 Hz), then a Sinc digital BPF was applied to extract
(0.2-45) Hz frequency band.

2.

EEG data will be normalized to have zero mean and unit
variance.

3.

Finally, the artifacts will be removed by using these
algorithms (PCA, CAR, and CSP).

5. FEATURE EXTRACTION AND
CLASSIFICATION
The brain patterns used in BCIs are characterized by certain
features or properties. For instance, amplitudes and
frequencies are essential features of sensorimotor rhythms and
SSVEPs. The firing rate of individual neurons is an important
feature of invasive BCIs using intracortical recordings. The
feature extraction algorithms of a BCI calculate (extract) these
features. Feature extraction can be seen as another step in
preparing the signals to facilitate the subsequent and last
signal processing stage, detection, and classification.
Detection and classification of brain patterns are the core
signal processing task in BCIs. The user elicits certain brain
patterns by performing mental tasks according to mental
strategies, and the BCI detects and classifies these patterns
and translates them into the appropriate commands for BCI
applications.

Fig 5: Non-Linear hyperplane that separates one class
from another [15].
Some of the popular Kernel functions are as follows:
1. Radian Kernel Function (RBF)
1 𝑥 −µ 2
)
б

𝐾 𝑥𝑖 , 𝑥𝑗 = 𝑒 −2 (

2. Linear Kernel Function
𝐾 𝑥𝑖 , 𝑥𝑗 = 𝑥𝑖𝑇 𝑥𝑗

Power Spectral Density (PSD) [16] was considered as a
feature that formulates EEG signals for simplifying the
discovery of EEG patterns. Finally, the features are fed to the
SVM classifier to recognize the EEG patterns. The PSD is the
most important application area in the digital signal. The data
segment can be represented as:

(18)
𝑥𝑖 𝑛 =

𝑥 𝑛 + 𝑖𝐷 ,

𝑛 = 0, 1, 2, … , 𝑀 − 1
𝑖 = 0, 1, 2, … , 𝐿 − 1

(19)

(22)

3. Polynomial Kernel Function
𝐾 𝑥𝑖 , 𝑥𝑗 = [(𝑥𝑖𝑇 𝑥𝑗 ) + 1]𝑑

(20)

4. Gaussian Function
𝐾 𝑥𝑖 , 𝑥𝑗 = exp⁡
(−[||𝑥𝑖 − 𝑥𝑗 ||2 ]/2б2 )

Where iD is the starting point for the ith sequence. If D= M,
the segment does not overlap and the L of the data sequence is
identical to the data segment of Bartlett method. Then the
EEG data will be segmented to computing the periodogram.

(21)

1

𝑖
𝑃𝑥𝑥
𝑓 = 𝑀𝑈

𝑀−1
𝑛=0 𝑥𝑖

𝑛 𝑤 𝑛 𝑒 −𝑗𝜋𝑓𝑛

2

(23)

29

International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)
Volume 160 – No 1, February 2017

Where U is a normalization factor for the power
𝑈=

1
𝑀

𝑀−1 2
𝑛 =0 𝑤 (𝑛)

(24)

The Welch power spectrum estimate is the average of
determined periodogram, is
1

𝑊
𝑃𝑋𝑋
=𝐿

𝐿−1
𝑖=0 𝑃𝑋𝑋

𝑖

(𝑓)

(25)

Mean value of Welch estimate
𝑊
𝐸 𝑃𝑋𝑋
𝑓

1

𝐿−1
𝑖=0 𝐸

=𝐿

𝑃𝑋𝑋 (𝑓)

(26)

6. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
EEG data from four various mental states have been
considered as illustrating in Section 2.1. The signal has been
preprocessed and the feature is extracted by computing PSD
to the EEG patterns and fed them to the classifier (SVM
algorithm with polynomial kernel and quadratic programming
method). The performance of a BCI can be measured in
various ways. A simple measure is classification performance
(also termed classification accuracy or classification rate). It is
the ratio of the number of correctly classified trials (successful
attempts to perform the required mental tasks) and the total
number of trials. In order to estimate the correct performance
of the classifier, the cross-validation technique (CV) will be
applied. The Random subsampling cross-validation (RSCV)
method performs 7 data splits of the entire data set and the
accuracy will be determined in each one. Table 2 represents
the efficiency of the three preprocessing methods using seven
folds for random subsampling cross-validation experiments.
In Table 2, the PCA has the best accuracy and specificity
followed by CAR which has lower accuracy.
Table 2. The random subsampling cross-validation results
The Accuracy of Cross-Validation Folds (%)
Algorithm

F

s

1

CSP

7

F2

F3

F4

F5

F6

F7

85

77.

82.

82.

65

80

5

5

5

5
CAR

PCA

9

82.

5

5

90

80

9

92.

92.

97.

0

5

5

5

In the future, the objective is to improve this system in online
applications, like controlling the robot movement. Moreover,
the extra data sets have to be classified to get more knowledge
in extraction and perfect decision rules.
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

94.28

85.4

78.2

1
PCA

CAR

CSP

Preprocessing Algorithms
Fig 6: Final classification results.

8. REFERENCES
[1] Padmavathi, R. and Ranganathan, V. 2014. A Review on
EEG Based Brain Computer Interface Systems.
International Journal of Emerging Technology and
Advanced Engineering. Vol. 4, No. 4, 683-696.
[2] Graimann, B., Allison, B.Z., and Pfurtscheller, G. 2010.
Brain Computer Interface, 4th (Ed.), Springer, Germany.
[3] Alonso, F., and Gomez-Gil, J. 2012. Brain Computer
Interfaces, A Review. Sensors. Vol. 12, No. 2, 1211–
1279.

85

[4] Waldert, S., et al. 2009. A Review on Directional
Information in Neural Signals for Brain-Machine
Interfaces. Journal of Physiology Paris. Vol. 103, 244–
254.

87.

10

5

0

[5] Lakshmi, M., Prasad, T., and Prakash, V. 2014. Survey
on EEG Signal Processing Methods. International
Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Science and
Software Engineering. Vol. 4, No. 1, 84-91.

77.

87.

5

5

100

PCA algorithm outperforms all recommended preprocessing
algorithms with accuracy equal to 94.2%. The CAR algorithm
ranked second with efficiency equal to 85.4% because that
CAR algorithm does not need to improve signal quality
because it's not in any way optimized to do that. The CAR can
even lower your signal quality, e.g. a single artifactual
channel that affects into all other channels. CSP and PCA
methods give a set of filters with the same size as your
channels, but CSP algorithm affected by the number of
electrodes and its positions, for this reason, this algorithm
ranked third with accuracy equal to 78.2%.

Accuracy (%)

𝑖 = 0, 1, … , 𝐿 − 1

7. CONCLUSION
This paper focuses on the comparison between the efficiency
of classification of EEG patterns of nodding the head in four
positions using three preprocessing algorithms (PCA, CAR,
and CSP) and PSD as a feature. The noise and artifacts will be
removed and then the PSD was computed as a feature of EEG
patterns. The EEG signals from FC4 electrode was selected in
the classification step to get the result shown in Figure 6. The

[6] Leeb, R. et.al. 2007. Self-Paced (Asynchronous) BCI
Control of a Wheelchair in Virtual Environments: A
Case Study with a Tetraplegic Computational
Intelligence
and
Neuroscience.
Computational
Intelligence and Neuroscience. Vol. 2007, 1-8.
[7] Teich, P. 2015. Designing a Brain Computer Interface
Using an Affordable EEG Headset. Freie University,
Berlin, Germany, MSc. Thesis.
[8] Vidaurre, C., Sannelli, C., Müller, K.-R., and Blankertz,
B.
2011.
Machine-Learning-Based
Coadaptive

30

International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)
Volume 160 – No 1, February 2017
Calibration for Brain-Computer Interfaces. Neural
computation. Vol. 23, No. 3, 791–816.
[9] Carlson, T., and Millán, J. 2013. Brain-Controlled
Wheelchairs: A Robotic Architecture. IEEE Robotics
and Automation Magazine. Vol. 20, 65–73.
[10] Mihajlovi´c, V., Patki, S., and Grundlehner, B. 2014. The
Impact of Head Movements on EEG and Contact
Impedance: An Adaptive Filtering Solution for Motion
Artifact Reduction. Engineering in Medicine and
Biology Society (EMBC), 36th Annual International
Conference of the IEEE, pp. 5064-5067.
[11] Alomari, M., Samaha, A., and AlKamha, K. 2013.
Automated Classification of L/R Hand Movement EEG
Signals using Advanced Feature Extraction and Machine
Learning. International Journal of Advanced Computer
Science and Applications. Vol. 4, No. 6, 207-212.

Network.
International
Journal
Applications, Vol. 1, 80-83.

of

Computer

[13] Ludwig, K., et al. 2009. Using a Common Average
Reference to Improve Cortical Neuron Recordings from
Microelectrode Arrays. Journal of Neurophysiology. Vol.
101, 1679-1689.
[14] Grosse-Wentrup, M., and Buss, M. 2008. Multi-class
Common Spatial Patterns and Information Theoretic
Feature Extraction. IEEE. Vol. 55, pp.1991-2000.
[15] Bhuvaneswari, P. and Kumar, J.S. 2013. Support Vector
Machine Technique for EEG Signals. International
Journal of Computer Applications. Vol. 63, 121-167.
[16] Gupta, H., and Mehra, R. 2013. Power Spectrum
Estimation using Welch Method for Various Window
Techniques. International Journal of Scientific Research
Engineering & Technology. Vol. 2, 389-392.

[12] Mahajan, K., Vargantwar M., and Rajput, S. 2011.
Classification of EEG using PCA, ICA and Neural

IJCATM : www.ijcaonline.org

31

