Downloaded from orbit.dtu.dk on: Jul 24, 2018

A Smartphone Interface for a Wireless EEG Headset with Real-Time 3D Reconstruction

Stopczynski, Arkadiusz; Larsen, Jakob Eg; Stahlhut, Carsten; Petersen, Michael Kai; Hansen, Lars Kai
Published in:
Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction
Link to article, DOI:
10.1007/978-3-642-24571-8_40
Publication date:
2011

Link back to DTU Orbit

Citation (APA):
Stopczynski, A., Larsen, J. E., Stahlhut, C., Petersen, M. K., & Hansen, L. K. (2011). A Smartphone Interface for
a Wireless EEG Headset with Real-Time 3D Reconstruction. In S. D Mello (Ed.), Affective Computing and
Intelligent Interaction: 4th International Conference, ACII 2011 Memphis, TN, USA, October 9-12, 2011
Proceedings, Part II (pp. 317-318). Springer. (Lecture Notes in Computer Science; No. 6975). DOI:
10.1007/978-3-642-24571-8_40

General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
• Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
• You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
• You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately
and investigate your claim.

A smartphone interface for a wireless EEG
headset with real-time 3D reconstruction
Arkadiusz Stopczynski, Jakob Eg Larsen, Carsten Stahlhut,
Michael Kai Petersen, and Lars Kai Hansen
DTU Informatics, Cognitive Systems
Technical University of Denmark, Building 321, DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
{arks,jel,cs,mkp,lkh}@imm.dtu.dk

Abstract. We demonstrate a fully functional handheld brain scanner
consisting of a low-cost 14-channel EEG headset with a wireless connection to a smartphone, enabling minimally invasive EEG monitoring in
naturalistic settings. The smartphone provides a touch-based interface
with real-time brain state decoding and 3D reconstruction.

Introduction
Functional brain imaging techniques including fMRI and EEG provide moving
picture access to the living human brain, however, relying on complex heavy
hardware they offer very limited comfort for the user, and thus can not be
used under naturalistic conditions. This induce largely unknown biases into the
current state of the art brain scanning, thought to be particularly problematic
for studies of emotion and social cognition. Cap-based EEG systems allow more
naturalistic conditions but typically limiting movement due to wiring. There
are obvious advantages of brain monitoring under naturalistic conditions [1],
in order to understand how we perceive our surroundings in mobile real-life
settings. We demonstrate a minimally invasive and mobile brain monitoring
system (see Fig. 1) that enables real-time brain state decoding and 3D cortical
activity visualization within a low-cost highly mobile smartphone environment.

Fig. 1. (left) The system with Emotiv EPOC wireless EEG headset (1), Receiver module with USB connector (2), USB connector and adapter (3+4), and Nokia N900 (5).
(right) Touch-based interaction with a 3D model of the brain using the smartphone.

2

Lecture Notes in Computer Science: Authors’ Instructions

EEG biofeedback has shown to produce behavioral effects including improvements in reaction times, emotional responses, and musical performance. Clinical
applications include attention-deficit and epilepsy, for a review see [2]. Such applications will benefit from a low-cost and easy-to-use personal brain monitor.

System Architecture
Our system provides a fully portable EEG based real-time functional brain scanner including stimulus delivery, data acquisition, logging, brain state decoding
and 3D activity visualization. The raw EEG data is obtained from a wireless
Emotiv 14 channel Neuroheadset with a sampling rate of 128Hz and electrodes
positioned at AF3, F7, F3, FC5, T7, P7, O1, O2, P8, T8, FC6, F4, F8, AF4 (the
international 10-20 system). The headset transmits the EEG data to a receiver
module connected to a Nokia N900 phone. Custom-made software is used on the
phone to do real-time transmission of the EEG data to a server and for local
processing, enabling real-time brain state decoding and a rich feedback signal to
the user through a 3D rendering of the active cortical EEG sources. The user
can interact with the 3D model of the brain by touch gestures (see Fig. 1).

Evaluation
A major concern in mobile real-time systems is the power consumption, hence,
battery life. Our experiments with local logging of EEG data allowed 7.5 hours
continous usage, whereas remote logging allowed 3.5 hours. The 3D brain model
contains 5124 vertices and 10240 triangles and is stored in the mobile application
and brain activity is reflected by changing colors, allowing rendering performance
of approximately 30 fps and fluent touch-based interaction with the 3D model.
The current design of the system has a delay of approximately 150 ms. between
the signal appearing in the brain and being visualized on the smart phone.
Our evaluations have demonstrated the potential for minimally invasive and
low-cost EEG monitoring in naturalistic settings, as the functional brain scanner
allow the user to do both long-term recordings and real-time monitoring of own
3D brain activity patterns on a smartphone.
Supporting Material. http://milab.imm.dtu.dk/eeg
Acknowledgments. This work is supported in part by the Danish Lundbeck
Foundation through CIMBI Center for Integrated Molecular Brain Imaging.

References
1. S. Makeig, K. Gramann, T.P. Jung, T.J. Sejnowski, and H. Poizner, “Linking brain,
mind and behavior” Int J Psychophysiol, vol. 73, no. 2, pp. 95100, 2009.
2. N. Weiskopf, F. Scharnowski, R. Veit, R. Goebel, N. Birbaumer, and K. Mathiak,
“Self-regulation of local brain activity using real-time functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fmri)” J Physiol Paris, 2005.

A smartphone interface for a wireless EEG headset

3

Description of the technical set-up and requirements
Our demonstration will allow participants to try the handheld brain scanner
setup including the wireless EEG headset and the smartphone.
Specific requirements for the demo setup include:
– Table and two chairs
– Power supply with at least 6 outlets
– Wireless network access – preferable the possibility to setup our own wireless
router enabling the communication (to a server) needed in our system.

