REVIEW ARTICLE

Annals of Agricultural and Environmental Medicine 2016, Vol 23, No 3, 399–402
www.aaem.pl

Practical measures of cognitive function and
promotion of their performance in the context
of research
Mariusz Gujski1, Tomasz Juńczyk2, Jaroslaw Pinkas3, Alfred Owoc4, Iwona Bojar5
Department of Prevention of Environmental Hazards and Allergology, Medical University, Warsaw, Poland
Faculty of Educational Studies, Adam Mickiewicz University, Poznan, Poland
3
School of Public Health, Medical Centre of Postgraduate Education, Warsaw, Poland
4
Centre for Public Health and Health Promotion, Institute of Rural Health, Lublin, Poland
5
Department for Woman Health, Institute of Rural Health, Lublin, Poland
1
2

Gujski M, Juńczyk T, Pinkas J, Owoc A, Bojar I. Practical measures of cognitive function and promotion of their performance in the context
of research. Ann Agric Environ Med. 2016; 23(3): 399–402. doi: 10.5604/12321966.1219176

Abstract

The aging of the population generates a number of very interesting research questions in the fields of medicine, psychology,
sociology, demography, and many others. One of the issues subject to both intensive research by scientists and exploration
by practitioners is associated with cognitive functions. The article presents current knowledge regarding practical actions
in the field of promoting cognitive function using diagnostic programmes and training using modern technologies. An
important aspect presented in this study is also related to the welfare of the maintenance or improvement of cognitive
function. Information and communication technologies will contribute to the dissemination of computerized cognitive
training, also personalized.

Key words

cognitive function, cognitive reserve, prevention, training programmes

INTRODUCTION
The change in the age structure of Europe is already a
fact. Predictions related to the number of people over 65
years of age in the coming decades indicate that in Poland
they could constitute more than 1/3 of the population [1].
This phenomenon generates a number of very interesting
research questions in the fields of medicine, psychology,
sociology, demography, and many others. It also inspires
practitioners and the business sector to create new, innovative
services dedicated to people over the of age of 65. One of
the issues subject to intensive research by both scientists
and practitioners is associated with cognitive functions. As
indicated in the vast literature available, in the population
aged 65+ the occurrence of cognitive impairment is highly
likely [2]. Thus, practitioners are looking for techniques that
could significantly delay the emergence of cognitive deficits,
and which would be accessible, easy to use and inexpensive,
and access to them could greatly benefit a significant part
of society.
Cognitive impairment associated with aging – ‘cognitive
reserve’. Cognitive ability decreases with age, especially
regarding processing speed and psychomotor speed. Some
skills, however, can remain at a stable, or even up to a
certain age can improve, for example, verbal memory [3].
There is a variety of cognitive changes linked to aging [4].
Understanding this aspect of cognitive aging (on the socalled cognitive reserve) can lead to the search for ways to
enhance cognitive function and prevent their deficits [5, 6].
Address for correspondence: Iwona Bojar, Department for Woman Health, Institute
of Rural Health in Lublin, Jaczewskiego 2, 20-090 Lublin, Poland
E-mail: iwonabojar75@gmail.com
Received: 08 August 2016; accepted: 24 August 2016

Currently available literature shows that within the
population there are individual differences in cognitive
processing and neurological brain function, which are
of particular importance in the context of prevention of
cognitive disorders or minimizing the cognitive deficits in
patients diagnosed with mild cognitive impairment (MCI)
and Alzheimer’s disease. Evidence for these differences
include cases of people with similar head injuries, but
result in completely different cognitive deficits. Stern, for
an explanation of this phenomenon, proposed the concept of
the so-called. ‘Cognitive Reserve’ (CR) [7]. ‘This term refers
to a set of mental skills and strategies needed to effectively
address the complex cognitive tasks, despite the existence of
the pathology of the brain. With the CR, even the presence of
advanced neuropathological changes does not rule out dealing
with difficult (complex or new) cognitive problems. Those
with a high reserve of cognitive functioning better than those
with low reserve – even when the severity of AD is typical
of similar’ [8]. The level of cognitive reserve is dependent on
a number of variables related to life experiences, challenges
undertaken, educational pastime, position, profession, social
status, etc. Therefore, the cognitive activity of the individual
is of great importance.
After the first suggestions that those with a higher level
of education have a lower incidence of dementia, there have
been studies suggesting that cognitive activity is associated
with a reduced risk for cognitive impairment and dementia.
Several prospective observational studies have reported that
people who engage in mentally stimulating activities, such as
learning to read, are less likely to develop dementia compared
with those who do not engage in such activities. Older people
who are cognitively active, can have a higher degree of
neuropathological changes without symptoms showing the
characteristics of dementia, compared with those who do not

400

Annals of Agricultural and Environmental Medicine 2016, Vol 23, No 3

Mariusz Gujski, Tomasz Juńczyk, Jaroslaw Pinkas, Alfred Owoc, Iwona Bojar﻿﻿﻿﻿. Practical measures of cognitive function and promotion of their performance in the context…

engage in cognitively stimulated activity. Broad action also
includes activity and forms of recreation among the activities
that maximize cognitive reserve. Studies have shown that
interventions that could reduce the risk of cognitive disorders
and slow cognitive deficits [9]. It has also been shown that
although mental training can improve memory, reasoning
and processing speed in the elderly [9], one cannot generalize
their impact on all the cognitive domains, and have no effect
on daily functioning [10]. It should also be noted that older
people with well-established memory impairment may be less
able to capture the benefits of memory training, compared
to those without such dysfunction [11].
The results of cohort studies published in BMC Public
Health in 2015, shows that a higher level of involvement in
physical, social and intellectual activity improves cognitive
abilities, and at the same time reduces the probability of
incident dementia [12], thus confirming the concept of
‘cognitive reserve’. Implementation of tasks that require the
involvement of cognitive function works not for prevention
but also brings significant benefits for people diagnosed
with AD. Research by Treiner et al. shows that in the case
of people who have dementia for less than a year, the lack
of commitment to the cognitive tasks may lead to lower test
scores in the MMSE of 3.9 points per year, while in people
performing five stimulating exercise per week, the decline
was 2.2 points [13].
It therefore appears that stimulating the development of
cognitive reserve through intellectual exercise is one of the
most effective forms of prevention of cognitive disorders,
and delaying the increase in cognitive deficits. This justifies
the need for professional development of the possibilities
available in terms of the training task.
Diagnostic programmes and training to support cognitive
function using modern technologies. In the area of software
supporting cognitive function, the best known at the moment
is Lumosity Brain Games & Brain Training. The company
(Lumos Labs, USA) has created several short games and
exercises aimed at strengthening cognitive function,
as specified by the manufacturer. In 2013, the software
recorded 50 million users [14]. Another important player
in the market is the platform HAPPYneuronPro (http://
www.scientificbraintrainingpro.com). The platform includes
three training programmes, including one dedicated to
people diagnosed with MCI (Mild Cognitive Impairment).
Games like Lumosity consist of a series of exercises, divided
thematically: Memory, Executive Functions, Attention,
Language, and Visual Spatial Orientation. Trade studies
indicate some of the most important cognitive vendors at
the moment [15]:
1) Brain Resource – contains not only exercises in the area
of cognitive function, but also those associated with a
reduction in stress, building positive emotions and
psychological resistance (www.mybrainsolutions.com).
2) CogState – focuses mainly on computerized diagnostic
tests (www.cogstate.com).
3) Emotiv – uses a portable device for measuring EEG,
connected with the personal computer and mobile devices
to monitor brain function (www.emotiv.com).
4) Lumos Labs – creator of Lumosity.
5) NeuroSky – similar to Emotive combines software
solutions with a portable device for monitoring EEG (www.
neurosky.com).

A Polish counterpart – NEUROGRA (www.neurogra.pl)
– contains four training programmes, including the socalled ‘prevention of dementia’. A similar offer is available
at www.brainmax.pl. Young researchers from the University
School of Social Psychology in Warsaw are responsible for
the laying out of the scientific programme. An extremely
interesting project has been initiated by Deutsche Telekom,
in cooperation with the University of East Anglia in the UK,
UCL Dementia Research, and the Alzheimer’s Research UK,
who have created a game in which the main task is to gather
information about the functioning or orientation of those
participating in the visual-spatial game. On the basis of a
huge number of collected data, a new model is created of the
development of dementia, and widely available diagnostic
tools (detailed information at: http://www.seaheroquest.
com/pl).
Another direction for the use of ICT in support of people
with cognitive impairment are themed games. An example
is a game called ‘Kitchen and Cooking’, dedicated to patients
with a diagnosis of MCI and AD (presentation of the game:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MzPnowouK7Y&featu
re=youtu.be). The game contains four scenarios associated
with the preparation of a specific meal. Each has a similar
list of tasks: choice of ingredients, planning of the order of
tasks, performance on the tablet specific traffic (e.g. rotation
of the object), starting ‘cooking’. A survey of 20 users of the
game, confirm that it is acceptable and ‘playable’ by people
with cognitive impairment, but – as in the case of cognitive
training – the issue of transfer of non-specifics remains
questionable [16].
Intensive development of software for the diagnosis and
maintenance of cognitive function will take place in the next
few years. Experts estimate that in 2012 the market value
was approx. $1 trillion, and by 2020 will increase six-fold to
approx. $6,000,000,000,000. The development will concern
both the software and portable devices to measure EEG and
heart rate variability (HRV) [16].
Research on the effectiveness of computer training
programmes. The available literature analyzing the
effectiveness of task-based computer computer training
programmes produces mixed results. The main area of
discussion refers to the transfer of specific vs. non-specific
trained skills. Transfer specific lies in the fact that the
individual, through a process of learning, is better able to
perform only the tasks of a similar nature as such as job
training. This similarity may be manifested in the wording of
instructions, appearance and character of a task, procedure,
etc. The transfer of a specific character is thus limited and
skills are not subject to broad generalizations. In the case of
non-specific transfetransfe, we have to deal with the ability
to apply previously acquired knowledge to solve problems of
a different nature, unlike those practiced [17]. In the case of
software to train specific cognitive transfer, this would mean
faster and more effective execution of the same exercises
(‘better do what I practice’), and non-specific transfer, the
transfer of practice from a situation training to a broader
spectrum of untrained cognitive function. Some studies have
confirmed the existence of the transfer of non-specific, such as
in patients with a diagnosis of MCI for which the exercises are
related to recognition. Pre-tests have demonstrated positive
changes in the functions of memory [18]. Similarly, in a study
published in 2014 involving 80 people aged 65–95s, applied

401

Annals of Agricultural and Environmental Medicine 2016, Vol 23, No 3

Mariusz Gujski, Tomasz Juńczyk, Jaroslaw Pinkas, Alfred Owoc, Iwona Bojar﻿﻿﻿﻿. Practical measures of cognitive function and promotion of their performance in the context…

exercises in verbal memory, working, and visual-spatial,
simultaneously observed transfer to other cognitive functions
[19]. At the same time, however, one can point out the study,
the results suggest that in the case of programmes of this
kind there is no transfer of non-specific [20]. According
to the researchers, part of the transfer of specific has been
proved, while the question of transfer of non-specific is still
controversial [21].

From these, some indications may result for the
development of training programsme, assuming that, like
any learning process associated with cognitive function,
they should be based on the mechanisms of motivation and
support.

Cognitive function and well-being. There are hundreds
of studies on the impact of positive affect on cognitive
processes, such as the search for creative solutions, abstract
thinking, information processing, and flexibility in thinking
[22]. In the search for a neurobiological explanation for
these relationships, researchers turned to dopamine as a
neurotransmitter, with a positive affect. Currently, there is
already evidence that the dopaminergic system – ventral
tegumental area (VTA) part of the brain – is active when people
experience positive emotions. Activity is increasing after the
presentation of rewarding stimuli [23]. Assuming that the
neurobiological basis of the positive affect of dopamine, the
researchers are subsequently seeking relationships between
the activity of the dopaminergic system and cognitive
processes. Research in this area are still being intensively
implemented. It turns out that there are projections of the
dopamine hippocampus and prefrontal cortex [24], which
are responsible for such processes as the consolidation
of information from short-term memory into long-term
memory, spatial orientation, working memory, planning
movements and activities. Therefore, since the positive affect
activates dopamine, and this in turn affects the biological
structures responsible for learning, it would be reasonable
to state that an effective system of support cognitive should
also include a positive emotionality. Confirmation of this
thesis is the study of long-term stress, which, after all – from a
psychological point of view – is a conglomeration of difficult
emotions. In seniors in whom glucocorticoid levels increased
over the years, the most significant changes have occurred
in the hippocampus, resulting in significant problems with
memory [25]. Conclusions from the studies show, among
others, that the decline in cognitive function can be up to 30%
higher in those individuals who have a high susceptibility
to distress [26], and that negative social relationships may
be a risk factor in the development of MCI [27]. At the
same time, it appears that patients with a diagnosis of MCI
and dementia cognitive performance associated with the
reminder and recognition of objects, increases at a time
when the task objects ‘positive’ [28]. In our opinion, these
are very inspiring for further research results, indicating
that the issue of cognitive impairment is a combination
of issues, strictly medical, biological and psychological,
resulting from the entity’s system of interpreting onesself, the
world and surrounding people. The creators of the modern
tools to support older people seem to increasingly notice the
complexity of the phenomenon. Perhaps that is why some
tools, which we have referred to at the beginning of the
article, also contain modules associated with the building of
well-being and good mood. It appears that the effectiveness
of cognitive exercises can be enhanced if the recipient is:
1) confident and psychologically ready for their use;
2) motivated and supported in their practice;
3) confident that performance will enable the learning of new
skills, apply them in practice, and that they are beneficial.

Information and communication technologies will contribute
to the dissemination of computerized cognitive training,
including those personalized. The undoubted advantage in
this case is to increase the availability of a relatively cheap
and user-friendly range of services. It is also noticeable that
a more comprehensive approach to the subject is developing:
from simple games, learners perform everyday life activities
through training programmes which consistof a series
of exercises purely cognitive, to comprehensive support
programmes, including cognitive tasks, building a good
mood or monitoring brain activity. Such a diversity allows
offers to every potential customer – from people for whom
prevention is important, to those after being diagnosed with
dementia. For them, such offers can be an essential element
of support in performing simple daily activities.

CONCLUSIONS

REFERENCES
1. Sytuacja demograficzna osób starszych i konsekwencje starzenia się
ludności Polski w świetle prognozy na lata 2014–2050, Główny Urząd
Statystyczny, Warszawa 2014.
2. Mossakowska M, Więcek A, Błędowski P. Aspekty medyczne,
psychologiczne, socjologiczne i ekonomiczne starzenia się ludzi w
Polsce, Termedia Wydawnictwa Medyczne, Poznań 2012.
3. Salthouse TA. The processing-speed theory of adult age differences in
cognition. Psychol Rev. 1996; 103: 403– 428.
4. Wilson RS, Beckett LA, Barnes LL, Schneider JA, Bach J, Evans DA,
Bennett DA. Individual differences in rates of change in cognitive
abilities of older persons. Psychol Aging. 2002; 17: 179 –193.
5. Schlaghecken F, Birak KS, Maylor EA. Age-related deficits in efficiency
of low-level lateral inhibition. Front Hum Neurosci. 2012; 6: 102.
6. Depp CA, Jeste DV. Definitions and predictors of successful aging:
A comprehensive review of larger quantitative studies. Am J Geriatr
Psychiatry. 2006; 14: 6–20.
7. Stern Y. Cognitive reserve. Neuropsychologia. 2009; 47(10): 2015–2028.
8. Barczak A. Wykształcenie, aktywność umysłowa i socjalna jako
czynniki protekcyjne otępienia. Aktualności Neurologiczne. 2014;
14(3): 161–166.
9. Acevedo A, Loewenstein DA. Nonpharmacological cognitive
interventions in aging and dementia. J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol.
2007; 20(4): 239–249.
10. Ball K, Berch DB, Helmers KF, Helmers KF, Jobe JB, Leveck MD,
Marsiske M, Morris JN, Rebok GW, Smith DM, Tennstedt SL, Unverzagt
FW, Willis SL. Advanced Cognitive Training for Independent and
Vital Elderly Study Group. Effects of cognitive training interventions
with older adults: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2002; 288(18):
2271–2281.
11. Unverzagt FW, Kasten L, Johnson KE, Rebok GW, Marsiske M, Koepke
KM, Elias JW, Morris JN, Willis SL, Ball K, Rexroth DF, Smith DM,
Wolinsky FD, Tennstedt SL. Effect of memory impairment on training
outcomes in ACTIVE. J Int Neuropsychol Soc. 2007; 13(6): 953–960.
12. Marioni RE, Proust-Lima C, Amieva H, Brayne C, Matthews FE,
Dartigues JF, Jacqmin-Gadda H. Social activity, cognitive decline
and dementia risk: a 20-year prospective cohort study. BMC public
health. 2015; 15: 1089.
13. Treiber KA, Carlson MC, Corcoran C, Norton MC, Breitner JCS,
Piercy KW, DeBerard MS, Stein D, Foley B, Welsh-Bohmer KA, Frye
A, Lyketsos CG, Tschanz JT. Cognitive Stimulation and Cognitive
and Functional Decline in Alzheimer’s Disease: The Cache County
Dementia Progression Study. The Journals of Gerontology, Series B:
Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences. 2011; 66(4): 416–425.

402

Annals of Agricultural and Environmental Medicine 2016, Vol 23, No 3

Mariusz Gujski, Tomasz Juńczyk, Jaroslaw Pinkas, Alfred Owoc, Iwona Bojar﻿﻿﻿﻿. Practical measures of cognitive function and promotion of their performance in the context…

14. http://blogs.wsj.com/digits/2013/11/05/small-brain-training-gamemaker-getting-bigger/
15. “The Digital Brain Health Market 2012–2020: Web-based, mobile and
biometrics-based technology to assess, monitor and enhance cognition
and brain functioning”, http://sharpbrains.com/market-report/
16. Manera V, Petit PD, Derreumaux A, Orvieto I, Romagnoli M, Lyttle
G, David R, Robert PH. Kitchen and cooking,’ a serious game for mild
cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease: a pilot study. Front
Aging Neurosci. 2015; 7: 24.
17. Schunk D. Cognitive learning processes W: Learning theories: An
educational perspective, (ed.) D. Schunk, Columbus, OH: Pearson
2004, p. 190–240.
18. Herrera C, Chambon C, Michel BF, Paban V, Alescio-Lautier B.
Positive effects of computer-based cognitive training in adults with
mild cognitive impairment. Neuropsychologia 2012; 50(8): 1871–1881.
19. Zinke K, Zeintl M, Rose NS, Putzmann J, Pydde A, Kliegel M, Eccles
J. Working Memory Training and Transfer in Older Adults: Effects of
Age, Baseline Performance, and Training Gains. Dev Psychol. 2014;
50(1): 304–315.
20. Richmond LL, Morrison AB, Chein JM, Olson IR, Duberstein P.
Working Memory Training and Transfer in Older Adults. Psychol
Aging. 2011; 26(4): 813–822.
21. Kowalczyk N, Brzezicka A, Kossut M. Zmiany neuroplastyczne
w wyniku intensywnych treningów poznawczych: porównanie

tradycyjnego podejścia i metod wykorzystujących gry komputerowe.
Neuropsychiatria i Neuropsychologia. 2014; 9(3–4): 104–111.
22. Schiffrin HH, Falkenstern M. The Impact of Affect on Resource
Development: Support for the Broaden-and-Build Model. North Am
J Psychol. 2012; 14(3): 569–584.
23. Barajas MS. Thinking and Feeling: The Influence of Positive Emotion
on Human Cognition. Hilltop Rev. 2015; 7: 1.
24. Czapiński J. (ed.), Psychologia pozytywna. Nauka o szczęściu, zdrowiu,
sile i cnotach człowieka, Wydawnictwo Naukowe PWN, Warszawa
2012.
25. Sapolsky R. Dlaczego zebry nie mają wrzodów? Psychofizjologia stresu,
Wydawnictwo Naukowe PWN, Warszawa 2010.
26. Wilson RS, Bennett DA, Mendes de Leon CF, Bienias JL, Morris MC,
Evans DA. Distress proneness and cognitive decline in a population of
older persons. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2005; 30(1): 11–17.
27. Wilson RS, Boyle PA, James BD, Leurgans SE, Buchman AS, Bennett
DA, Brown GG. Negative Social Interactions and Risk of Mild Cognitive
Impairment in Old Age. Neuropsychology. 2015; 29(4): 561–570.
28. Gorenc-Mahmutaj L, Degen Ch, Wetzel P, Urbanowitsch N, Funke
J, Schröder J. The Positivity Effect on the Intensity of Experienced
Emotion and Memory Performance in Mild Cognitive Impairment
and Dementia. Dement Geriatr Cogn Dis Extra. 2015; 5(2): 233–243.

