9

Towards Serious Games for Improved BCI
Brent J. Lance, Jon Touryan, Yu-Kai Wang, Shao-Wei Lu,
Chun-Hsiang Chuang, Peter Khooshabeh, Paul Sajda, Amar
Marathe, Tzyy-Ping Jung, Chin-Teng Lin, and Kaleb McDowell

Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Human Variability and BCI Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Human Variability Example #1: Evoked Potentials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Human Variability Example #2: Effect of Prior State on Evoked Neural Signals . . . . . . . .
Human Variability Example #3: Estimating Behavioral Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Challenges in Developing GWAP for BCI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Developing Engaging Gameplay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Integrating BCIs with Gameplay: The Free-To-Play (F2P) Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

198
203
204
206
209
214
214
216

B.J. Lance (*) • J. Touryan • A. Marathe • K. McDowell
Translational Neuroscience Branch, U.S. Army Research Laboratory, Aberdeen Proving Ground,
Aberdeen, MD, USA
e-mail: brent.j.lance.civ@mail.mil; jonathan.o.touryan.civ@mail.mil; amar.marathe.civ@mail.
mil; kaleb.g.mcdowell.civ@mail.mil
Y.-K. Wang • S.-W. Lu • C.-H. Chuang • C.-T. Lin
Brain Research Center, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan
e-mail: yukaiwang@cs.nctu.edu.tw; swlucifer@mail.nctu.edu.tw; chchuang@mail.nctu.edu.tw;
ctlin@mail.nctu.edu.tw
P. Khooshabeh
Cognitive Sciences Branch, U.S. Army Research Laboratory, Aberdeen Proving Ground,
Aberdeen, MD, USA
e-mail: peter.khooshabehadeh2.civ@mail.mil
P. Sajda
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA
e-mail: psajda@columbia.edu
T.-P. Jung
Swartz Center for Computational Neuroscience, University of California San Diego, San Diego,
CA, USA
e-mail: jung@sccn.ucsd.edu
# Springer Science Business Media Singapore (outside the USA) 2017
R. Nakatsu et al. (eds.), Handbook of Digital Games and Entertainment Technologies,
DOI 10.1007/978-981-4560-50-4_4

197

198

B.J. Lance et al.

Contextualizing Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Usable EEG Technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Recommended Reading . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

218
219
220
221

Abstract

Brain-computer interface (BCI) technologies, or technologies that use online
brain signal processing, have a great promise to improve human interactions
with computers, their environment, and even other humans. Despite this promise, there are no current serious BCI technologies in widespread use, due to the
lack of robustness in BCI technologies. The key neural aspect of this lack of
robustness is human variability, which has two main components: (1) individual
differences in neural signals and (2) intraindividual variability over time. In
order to develop widespread BCI technologies, it will be necessary to address
this lack of robustness. However, it is currently unknown how neural variability
affects BCI performance. To accomplish these goals, it is essential to obtain data
from large numbers of individuals using BCI technologies over considerable
lengths of time. One promising method for this is through the use of BCI
technologies embedded into games with a purpose (GWAP). GWAP are a
game-based form of crowdsourcing which players choose to play for enjoyment
and during which the player performs key tasks which cannot be automated but
that are required to solve research questions. By embedding BCI paradigms in
GWAP and recording neural and behavioral data, it should be possible to much
more clearly understand the differences in neural signals between individuals
and across different time scales, enabling the development of novel and increasingly robust adaptive BCI algorithms.
Keywords

Games with a purpose (GWAP) • Human variability • Brain-computer interface
(BCI) • Electroencephalography (EEG)

Introduction
Brain-computer interface (BCI) technologies, or technologies that use online brain
signal processing, have a great promise to improve human interactions with computers, their environment, and even other humans (Lance et al. 2012). In particular,
BCI technologies have a strong likelihood for enhancing or revolutionizing several
fields, including training and education, medicine, and communication technologies.
Broadly speaking, there are four classes of BCI systems that utilize neural data to
estimate or predict behavior: active, reactive, passive, and hybrid (Lance et al. 2012;
Wolpaw et al. 2002; Zander and Kothe 2011). Active BCIs rely on neural signals
intentionally induced by the operator, typically after some degree of training or
associative mapping. These volitionally generated patterns of brain activity are

9

Towards Serious Games for Improved BCI

199

then used as an input modality to directly control a computer, prosthetic limb, or
some specific function of a given technological system (e.g., sensorimotor rhythms
for control of virtual movement (McFarland et al. 2010)). Reactive BCIs rely on
neural responses elicited by an external stimulus or event, which are then used as an
input modality to a technological system (e.g., P300 spellers (Krusienski et al. 2006)
and for multimedia image triage and search systems (Sajda et al. 2010; Pohlmeyer
et al. 2011)). Passive BCIs, including cognitive monitoring systems, utilize implicit
or ongoing neural responses for the purposes of detecting an operator’s current
cognitive or affective state. Indicators of fatigue (Balasubramanian et al. 2011),
mental workload (M€uhl et al. 2014), and emotional state (Bos et al. 2010) can be
used as supplemental information to adaptively enhance or augment performance of
human-system interactions. Finally, hybrid BCIs may utilize any combination of
active, reactive, and passive approaches. In addition, hybrid BCIs may integrate other
signals reflective of operator state, including eye movement dynamics or behavioral
performance, as well as incorporate context awareness information obtained from the
environment or technological system itself (Zander and Jatzev 2012; Pfurtscheller
et al. 2010; Jangraw et al. 2014).
This chapter is written from the viewpoint of having a strong interest in the
development of serious (i.e., primarily nonentertainment in purpose), nonmedical
BCI technologies that improve the performance of healthy individuals. As a result,
this chapter focuses on BCI technologies that are noninvasive, i.e., based on sensors
which are not within the user’s body. While some medical BCI technologies are
invasive, i.e., based on sensors which are actually within the user’s body, we
consider noninvasive methods to be a more practical and user-acceptable approach
for nonmedical BCIs. In addition, this chapter focuses on mobile neuroimaging
technologies, primarily EEG. While the ability and precision of measuring brain
activity have been dramatically improved in recent years due to the advances in
neuroimaging technology, including functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI), magnetoencephalography (MEG), and functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS); electroencephalography (EEG) remains the most promising nearterm method for realizing broadly available BCI. For all classes of BCI, the
majority of approaches, algorithms, and systems continue to utilize EEG as the
neuroimaging modality of choice.
BCI technologies have seen expanding usage primarily within the medical and
entertainment domains (van Erp et al. 2012). For example, BCI technologies have
been used in the development of medical technologies that provide a clinical
population with a capability that they have lost, such as the BCI-controlled
wheelchair (Vanacker et al. 2007) or P300 speller (Krusienski et al. 2006),
which enables the disabled to slowly type via neural signals alone. They have
also been applied to the development of entertainment technologies such as the
Emotiv EPOC, a low-cost EEG headset designed to be used as a game controller,
or the Force Trainer toy by Uncle Milton, which uses a single EEG electrode to
control a fan and blow a light plastic ball through an obstacle course. Despite these
successes, there are essentially no current BCI technologies in widespread use.
This is because developing serious, nonmedical BCI technologies is a

200

B.J. Lance et al.

fundamentally different problem space than developing either medical or entertainment BCIs. For example, medical BCI technologies do not have to perform to
the level of a healthy individual’s motor control system to be useful. When
comparing normal mouse movement to BCI-controlled mouse movement,
Hochberg et al. (2006) found that users could reach a target on a screen 100 %
of the time in under 1.3 s with a mouse but could only reach the target 75 % of the
time in under 7 s using a BCI to control the mouse cursor. While this may be
acceptable for some clinical populations, entertainment BCIs that perform poorly
provide for frustrating gameplay (Dakan 2010), but have limited real-world effect.
Serious, nonmedical BCI technologies will need to perform to a higher standard
than either medical or entertainment BCI technologies and may also need to
emphasize different approaches (see Box 1).
Box 1: A Brief Overview of Relevant BCI Paradigms

There are many different BCI paradigms, several of which are described
elsewhere in this volume. The current most commonly used BCI paradigm is
the motor imagery paradigm, where a subject attempts to directly control the
movement of an effector by imagining the movement of an extremity such as
a hand or a foot. We take the view that this paradigm is poorly suited to
serious, nonmedical BCI technologies due to its poor performance when
compared to existing control technologies (Hochberg et al. 2006). As a result,
in this chapter, we focus on three different BCI paradigms: the steady-state
visually evoked potential (SSVEP) paradigm, the rapid serial visual presentation (RSVP) paradigm, and a specific driving performance estimation
paradigm. This section provides a brief overview of each of these paradigms,
including analytical methods and potential applications.
The SSVEP paradigm is a reactive BCI paradigm and involves detecting
which one of a number of objects the subject is attending to on a screen by
rapidly flickering the objects at distinct frequencies and phases. While the
subject’s attention is focused on a specific object flickering at a specific
frequency, a phase-locked increase in the spectral power of that frequency
can be detected in the visual cortex. Even through using simple methods such
as a fast Fourier transform (FFT) followed by classification, SSVEP can be
detected fairly reliably, rapidly, and with minimal time spent training either
the player or the classifier, due to its high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). More
advanced methods, such as canonical correlation analysis, allow for faster
processing, a broader range of frequencies, and multiple stimuli at the same
frequency but differing phases (Bin et al. 2009). One area in which SSVEPbased BCI technologies have been successfully used is in spelling applications that allow paralyzed patients to communicate.
The RSVP paradigm is also a reactive BCI paradigm, but it consists of
subjects looking for targets in a rapidly presented stream of images. In RSVP,
images are presented to a subject at a rate of about 5–10 Hz. These images
(continued)

9

Towards Serious Games for Improved BCI

201

either belong to a sparsely appearing target class or are distracter images
which do not belong to that target class. When the subject sees an image in the
target class, their brain will generate an evoked neural response which can be
detected using a machine learning classifier. Successful approaches include
ensembles of logistic regression classifiers or spatial filtering followed by
binary classification. Generally, the target images can make up no more than
15–20 % of the total number of images. Otherwise, two things occur: First,
the strength of the neural signal will begin to attenuate, and as a result,
classifier performance will begin to degrade. Second, the subject will begin
to increasingly make mistakes as a result of an effect known as the “attentional blink.” What this means is that, if two target images occur too close
together in time, the subject has a drastically increased probability of missing
the second target. RSVP has two key strengths: first, the neural signal evoked
when the subject sees a target can be recognized by a classifier with a high
degree of accuracy. Second, the neural signal can be evoked by a variety of
targets, leading to a potentially broad space of applications. One area in which
RSVP has been successfully applied is in the domain of satellite image
analysis. By using RSVP to pre-triage satellite images, targets such as
airfields can be detected more rapidly than with manual search (Sajda
et al. 2010). Figure 1 shows the neural response from an RSVP task. Within
this neural response can be seen an SSVEP-like neural signal induced by the
flashing of the images in the RSVP task.
While there are many passive BCI paradigms for neurally estimating
performance at simulated driving tasks, we will be focusing on the paradigm
described by Lin et al. (2005). In this task, the subject drives a car down a
simulated road and attempts to stay in the lane through periodic but random
“lane-deviation events,” which consist of a lateral force that attempts to push
the driver off of the road. The intended goal of this paradigm is to estimate
when driving performance decrements are more likely to occur, potentially
enabling them to be mitigated and thus decreasing the likelihood of accidents.
These lane-deviation events provide a probe to evaluate the performance of
the driver as their fatigue and attention fluctuate and as time-on-task
increases.

In order for BCI technologies to achieve this higher standard of performance, they
must be able to handle or adapt to human variability, both in terms of individual
differences and intraindividual variability. Every individual is different, as are their
neural signals, even those generated by individuals in similar mental states or being
exposed to the same stimuli. In practice, what this means is that the feature
extraction and classification methods underlying a BCI technology will perform
very poorly unless they are calibrated or customized for each individual user.
In fact, a percentage of the population may even be “BCI illiterate” in that BCI
technologies cannot be effectively trained on the neural signals of those individuals

202

B.J. Lance et al.

Fig. 1 Example neural signals from a 5-Hz RSVP task. In this task, a person is attempting to
discriminate target images from background images in a continuous image stream. Target images
are sparsely appearing images that the subject is tasked with identifying. Background images are
commonly appearing images that the subject is tasked with ignoring. The three curves show 1 s of
averaged neural response time-locked to image presentation. The black line shows neural response
to a background image, the red line shows neural response to a target image, and the blue line
shows the difference between the two. Slight but regular positive and negative deflections induced
by image presentation which are similar to an SSVEP response can be seen in both the target and
background neural responses. In addition, a large positive target-evoked inflection that peaks
around 600 ms can be seen in the target neural response. The difference wave clarifies this targetevoked response by subtracting out the SSVEP-like response. The scalp maps show the location of
the averaged neural responses as recorded on the scalp. Further description of this specific task and
data can be found in Touryan et al. (2014)

(Pfurtscheller et al. 2010). People also have significant intraindividual variability,
which can lead to differences in neural signals within the same individual during
similar mental states or in reaction to the same stimuli at different points in time
(Wu et al. 2010). Therefore, static feature extraction and classification methods that
are customized to the individual user will still have large fluctuations in performance over time. However, there are currently few BCI technologies that attempt to
adapt to the neural states of the individual users.

9

Towards Serious Games for Improved BCI

203

For serious, nonmedical BCI technologies to be viable, it will be crucial to
develop algorithms that can address both aspects of human variability by adapting
to the individual user and to the changes in their neural signals at multiple time scales.
To develop these algorithms, it will be necessary to study how individual differences
and variability in neural response affect BCI performance, which will require data
from large numbers of individuals using BCI technologies over considerable lengths
of time. One promising method for obtaining this needed data is through the use of
BCI technologies embedded into games with a purpose (GWAP). As defined by von
Ahn (2006), GWAP are a game-based form of human computation which players
choose to play for enjoyment. As a side effect of the gameplay, in GWAP the player
performs key tasks which cannot be automated but that are required to solve research
questions (von Ahn 2006). In this case, the player will interact with BCI paradigms
embedded into the gameplay while recording neural and behavioral data. Through
the analysis of this data, it should be possible to much more clearly understand the
differences in neural signals between individuals and across different time scales.
However, the development of BCI-based GWAP to study the effects of individual differences and intraindividual variability on BCI performance faces significant
challenges. First, among these is the fact that the individual differences and
intraindividual variability being studied will have significant negative effects on
the performance of the BCI paradigms embedded in the GWAP. The challenge
arises from the fact that forcing the player to continually use BCI paradigms that do
not function due to low performance will make the game unenjoyable and
non-immersive. As a result, the GWAP will not attract a large player base that
spends significant time with the game, and there will not be sufficient data to make
the GWAP worthwhile. In this chapter, we argue that this challenge can be
addressed by making the BCI paradigms peripheral to the main gameplay experience and sufficiently rewarding to the player.
The remainder of this chapter will review the research on individual differences
and human variability and their effects on the robustness of BCI technologies, the
potential value of GWAP for long-term and large-scale data collection, and the key
challenges for developing GWAP for collecting large-scale and long-term BCI data.

Human Variability and BCI Performance
As previously mentioned, humans are highly variable. People display significant
individual differences, with each individual generating distinct neural signals, even
under highly similar conditions. People also show strong intraindividual variation,
with neural signals varying across similar conditions at multiple time scales. A
hypothetical example of this can be seen in Fig. 2.
In this section, we will provide a review of human variability, including both
individual differences and intraindividual variability, and how this variability
affects BCI performance. We will focus on three distinct examples, showing how
both individual differences and intraindividual variability affect the underlying
neural signals that BCI technologies rely upon. First, we will discuss the effects

204

B.J. Lance et al.

Fig. 2 Hypothetical example of intraindividual variability over time. Variability occurs in the
course of minutes and hours, days and weeks, and even over months. Some of this fluctuation is
internally driven, such as short-term fluctuations in attentional focus, while some of it is in
response to changes in the external environment. Some of this variability is cyclic and predictable,
such as circadian rhythm and sleep cycles; most of it is not. The cumulative result of this
variability is neural signals that are nonstationary (i.e., the statistical properties of the signal
change over time) and non-ergodic (i.e., the signal may not return to previously seen states),
negatively impacting BCI performance

of individual differences and intraindividual variation on a three-image-class RSVP
task (see Box 1). We will then discuss how the prior state of an individual affects
their neural signals in a binary RSVP task and how this effect is modulated by
individual differences. Finally, we will give an example of how individual differences and intraindividual variability affect the estimation of task performance from
neural data.

Human Variability Example #1: Evoked Potentials
A specific example of both individual differences and intraindividual variability
from three different people performing an RSVP task (see Box 1) with three
categories of image stimuli, target, nontarget, and background images, can be
seen in Fig. 3. In this task, target images are sparsely appearing images that the
subject is tasked with identifying. Nontarget images are sparsely appearing images
that are visually similar to the targets but which the subject is tasked with ignoring.
Background images are commonly appearing images that the subject is also tasked
with ignoring. In Fig. 3, the top rasters show the single-trial evoked neural
responses time-locked to target images. Each horizontal row of the raster contains
the single-trial neural response to one target appearance, and each vertical column
contains one sample of EEG data. The color represents the amplitude of the neural
response, with blue pixels representing lower-amplitude EEG recordings, red pixels

9

Towards Serious Games for Improved BCI

205

Fig. 3 An example of human variability in both single-trial evoked neural responses and averaged
ERPs from an RSVP task. Each column contains the data from a different subject. Top three rows
show rasters of the single-trial evoked neural responses time-locked to target, nontarget, and
background images, respectively. Each horizontal row of the raster contains the single-trial neural
response to one target appearance, and each vertical column contains one sample of EEG data.
Blue pixels represent lower-amplitude EEG recordings, red pixels represent higher amplitude, and
green and yellow represent intermediate amplitude. Bottom row shows the averaged event-related
potentials (ERPs) from the three preceding rasters

representing higher amplitude, and green and yellow representing intermediate
amplitude. Similarly, the next two rasters show the neural responses to nontarget
and background images, respectively.
Finally, the bottom images show the averaged event-related potentials (ERPs)
from the three preceding rasters. ERPs are a traditional method for handling signal
variability in EEG by averaging the EEG signal that occurs immediately after a
stimulus (Geisler et al. 1958). Given enough trials where the data is time-locked to

206

B.J. Lance et al.

stimulus onset, the averaging will smooth out the variation that is not phase-locked
to the stimulus and leave only the common phase-locked neural response. The nonphase-locked variation removed by this approach is a combination of
intraindividual variation and the low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of EEG.
In Fig. 3, intraindividual variability in the recorded neural activity can be seen in
the row-to-row differences in both the peak amplitude of the neural signal and the
poststimulus latency of that peak within each raster. This row-to-row variability
causes the noisy appearance of the rasters. Clear individual differences between the
amplitude, latency, and even the amount of variability in the neural signals can also
be seen in the different subjects’ rasters. For example, Subject 11 has considerably
more variability in their rasters than does Subject 13. The averaged ERPs at the
bottom of Fig. 3 also reveal a very interesting pattern of individual differences in
the neural response to the nontarget images. Specifically, it shows that for some
subjects (such as Subject 07), the neural response to the sparse nontarget images
was indistinguishable from the response to the sparse target images. For other
subjects (Subject 13), the neural response to the nontarget stimuli was indistinguishable from the background images, while other subjects (Subject 11) were
between these end points.

Human Variability Example #2: Effect of Prior State on Evoked
Neural Signals
As the state of an individual changes due to intraindividual variability, this state
affects their neural signals in a way that is modulated by individual differences. The
concept of a “state” in this instance is intentionally ambiguous. Consider fatigue as
an example of state change. Over time, individuals will have levels of decreased
and increased fatigue. Different levels of fatigue have clear effects on an individual’s neural signals (Gevins et al. 1977). However, from the perspective of BCI
development, coping with these effects is extremely difficult for several reasons.
First, fatigue is a very loaded term, potentially being used to mean many different
but interrelated states, including sleep deprivation, physical exhaustion, time on
task, visual fatigue, mental fatigue, boredom, and inattention (Matthews and
Desmond 2002; Jung et al. 1997). While each of these different states will affect
the neural response to stimuli, the effects are often concurrent and not clearly
distinguishable. In addition, they will have differing effects on different individuals
and will even affect the same person differently based on additional factors such as
the stressfulness or consequences of their current situation.
Further, BCI research tends to use a limited number of approaches to address
fatigue. The most common approach is avoidance. Most BCI research is done with
experimental sessions that are sufficiently short and far apart in order to minimize
the effects of task-related fatigue. When this does not occur, another approach often
used is to discard the data recorded while the subject was fatigued and focus
exclusively on the period of time when the subject was alert. Approaches like
these are used to minimize the effects of fatigue because the alternative is BCI

9

Towards Serious Games for Improved BCI

207

Fig. 4 Pre-stimulus cognitive state modulates sensory encoding of rapidly presented visual
stimuli. Rapid serial visual presentation (RSVP) task in which subjects must classify the category
of an object in an image corrupted by visual noise. The difficulty of the task is manipulated by
controlling the noise level, through manipulating the images’ phase coherence. Shown are threephase coherence levels, with a lower coherence resulting in more noise in the image

systems that fail to perform reliably. As a result, the actual quantitative effect of
fatigue on BCI algorithms and technologies is poorly understood.
Fatigue is not the only state that a person can be in which affects their neural
signals. Many other factors of intraindividual variability, including emotion, stress,
and prior experience, can modify neural signals and thereby affect BCI performance. It is not at all clear how these factors all affect neural signals independently
and even less understood how they are interrelated. The interrelation and complexity of these factors mean that it can often be easier to consider abstract states,
defined as changes in neural signal during a task.
Consider the example shown in Fig. 4, a modified RSVP task where the
objective is to classify rapidly presented images masked with visual noise. In this
task, the image is “flashed” for 30 ms, and the subject must respond with a button
press to determine if the image was from category 1 (face) or from category 2 (car).
The goal of the BCI experiment is to classify whether or not the user correctly
identified the category of the image, using only the neural data. This is done by

208

B.J. Lance et al.

Fig. 5 Peak-to-peak amplitude of alpha power, grouped by the strength of the early poststimulus
component. Greater strength of the early poststimulus component is associated with lower
pre-stimulus alpha amplitude. Note that shortly after image presentation, alpha power drops
sharply and is no longer useful for predicting targets. Instead, it becomes necessary to rely on
the discriminating components identified using logistic regression (Reprinted from NeuroImage,
87, Lou et al., Prestimulus Alpha power predicts fidelity of sensory encoding in perceptual
decision making, 242–251, Copyright (2014), with permission from Elsevier)

using a windowed logistic regression to identify “discriminating components” in
the post-image presentation neural data that can be used to identify the image class
at a statistically significant level (Lou et al. 2014). This process identified two
primary discriminating components: one that is early (appearing approximately
170 ms after the image was displayed) and one that is late (appearing approximately
350 ms after image presentation).
Interestingly, the strength of these post-image presentation discriminating components is directly affected by the pre-image presentation state of the subject, as
defined by the oscillations that occur in the alpha frequency band (7–13 Hz) prior to
the display of the stimulus image. These oscillations may reflect idling processes in
the brain, with occipital (visual) alpha potentially serving as an index of attention.
High alpha power is associated with idling and a resulting reduction in visual
attention, while low alpha power represents engagement with the visual stimulus.
However, the spectral power of EEG frequencies is highly variable over time. Thus,
a subject might have different behavioral and neural responses evoked by the exact
same visual stimulus, depending in part on their pre-stimulus alpha state. Figure 5

9

Towards Serious Games for Improved BCI

209

Fig. 6 Decoding of EEG results in two poststimulus evoked components that predict the subjects’
choice: an early component and a late component. Shown is the decoding accuracy (chance is
choice probability of 0.5) across 12 subjects for the two components. The early component,
occurring around 170 ms poststimulus, is less of a predictor of the decision than the late
component, which occurs around 350 ms poststimulus (Reprinted from NeuroImage, 87, Lou
et al., Prestimulus Alpha power predicts fidelity of sensory encoding in perceptual decision
making, 242–251, Copyright (2014), with permission from Elsevier)

illustrates the variability of pre-stimulus alpha oscillations as a function of the
strength of the early poststimulus discriminating component. Trials where the
pre-stimulus alpha amplitude is low will tend to result in highly informative
poststimulus evoked responses (red curve in Fig. 5). Conversely, higher
pre-stimulus alpha results in less informative evoked responses (blue curve in
Fig. 5). This relationship between the pre-stimulus alpha and the evoked components is true for the early component but not the late component.
Figure 6 shows that, in addition to being affected by the state of the subject, the
information content of the two discriminating components also varies substantially
across the subjects. While the late component is more informative than the early
component for every subject, for some subjects (e.g., S06), both components are
significantly predictive. For other subjects (e.g., S09) neither is, and for some
subjects (e.g., S01) only the late component significantly predicts performance.

Human Variability Example #3: Estimating Behavioral Performance
For the third example, consider a passive BCI that attempts to estimate performance
at a task, based solely on neural signals (see Box 1). Intuitively, it seems like
developing a system that can estimate behavioral performance at a task from neural
signals should be straightforward. After all, the neural signals are the underlying
driver that causes the behavioral task performance. However, due to the effects of

210

B.J. Lance et al.

human variability; the behavioral task performance, the neural data being used to
estimate the behavior, and the relationship between the two are all widely variable,
both within and across individuals. As a result of this variability, robustly predicting
task performance using neural signals remains a promising but elusive goal.
Figure 7a demonstrates the variability of behavioral performance by showing the
change in average relative reaction times to a lateral force across 80 90-min
simulated driving sessions. This behavioral reaction time was smoothed using a
causal 90-s bell-shaped moving average filter to eliminate variance at cycle lengths
shorter than 1–2 min. The results follow a well-known trend of vigilance data, with
three distinct states clearly visible in the data: initial near-perfect (relative RT = 1)
performance begins to decay after about 1 min. Thereafter, reaction time to lanedeviation event rate rises steadily until 10 min into the task, after which it remains
more or less stable near three to four times the optimal RT. While this group mean
shows a strong time-on-task effect in this sustained attention task, the fluctuations
in task performance during a single session could largely differ from the group
trend and from those of other sessions.
Figure 7b shows that the behavior was highly variable both by individual and
over time. For example, some subjects had poor performance in the first half of the
session (e.g., S07), while others had exactly the opposite (e.g., S44). Similarly, the
relationship between neural activity and behavior was also highly variable across
subjects and over time. Figure 7c shows the correlations between EEG log power
spectrum and behavioral performance at the simulated driving task at each EEG
frequency. Some subjects had higher correlations between neural signals and
behavior in the lower frequency bands (e.g., S49), while, for others, the higher
frequency bands were more informative (e.g., S75). In addition, as shown in
Fig. 7d, the relationship between EEG spectra and the behavioral reaction time
varies as the subject performs the task. While increases in both the theta (4–7 Hz)
and alpha (8–15 Hz) bands are generally predictive of periods of slower reaction
time, they do not seem to predict just how slow the reaction time will be and, thus,
how problematic the period of slow reaction times is for the driving task.
Across all three of these examples, both individual differences and
intraindividual variability significantly affect the neural signals of BCI users. In
terms of implications for robust and reliable BCI, this means that systems must be
able to be calibrated to the individual user and must be able to adapt to the
variability that occurs in both the individual’s neural signals and task performance.
These are known problems in many areas of science and engineering, and several
techniques have been developed in order to address them, often by attempting to
capitalize on the similarities between and across individuals.
These include machine learning approaches such as transfer learning, active
learning, online learning, deep learning, and data mining approaches such as
collaborative filtering. Transfer learning is a class of machine learning methods
where data, features, or models from one domain are used to make predictions in
another domain and which can be used to transfer information learned from one
subject to help understand data collected from another subject or the same subject at
a later time (Pan and Yang 2010). Active learning methods select the most

9

Towards Serious Games for Improved BCI

Fig. 7 (continued)

211

212

B.J. Lance et al.

Fig. 7 (a) Group mean relative reaction time to lane-deviation events averaged across 80 90-min
simulated driving experiments. (b) Relative reaction times to lane-deviation events across five
example subjects, showing the differing variability of individual behavior. (c) Correlation between
EEG spectral power and reaction time for five individual simulated driving sessions. Correlations
are computed separately for 120 EEG frequencies between 0.98 and 30 Hz. (d) Reaction time, theta
band power, and alpha band power over the course of one experimental session for subject S07

informative data for labeling and incorporation into a model and can be used to
more rapidly calibrate systems to individual users (Settles 2010). Online and
adaptive learning methods continually update as the system is used, attempting to
adapt to the user. Deep Learning methods attempt to identify the most meaningful
representation of the data and develop models based on that representation. Collaborative filtering approaches attempt to identify the data in a data set that is most
relevant to a specific individual based on that individual’s similarities and differences from a set of other known individuals.
One key aspect that unites all of these distinct methodologies is that their
performance tends to increase as the amount of data available to train and infer
upon increases. To date, however, the amount of data that is available from
individuals using BCI technologies is highly limited, particularly with regard to
serious, nonmedical BCI technologies. We argue that using these approaches to
develop robust and reliable BCIs will require large amounts of data from large
numbers of individuals using BCIs over long periods of time. In order to
collect this large-scale and long-term data, it will be necessary to embed BCI
paradigms and technologies into systems that people either need to use or will
want to use. As a result, we argue that it should be possible to embed BCI
paradigms into a video game in order to obtain the required data. Games have
previously been utilized for both long-term and large-scale data collection.
Often, these results are achieved through the use of games with a purpose or
GWAP (Box 2).

9

Towards Serious Games for Improved BCI

213

Box 2: The Use of Games for Large-Scale and Long-Term Data Collection

Perhaps the earliest example of a successful large-scale GWAP is the ESP
game, also known as the Google Image Labeler game (von Ahn 2006). In this
game, two randomly selected players would be shown the same set of images.
Their task was to provide as many labels for each image as possible within a
short period of time, without communicating with the other player. If the
labels provided by the two players matched, then both players received
points. Players had profiles with persistent scores, and Google maintained
high-score lists for the game. The image labels provided by these players
served as the ground truth labels for searching the images with Google Image
Search.
Another early example of large-scale data collection using a game was the
deployment of the tracking real-time user experience or TRUE system (Kim
et al. 2008), by Bungie Studios during the development of Halo 3. The TRUE
system logged large quantities of data, including user interactions, contextual
information, and attitudinal data from users who playtested Halo 3. While not
technically a game with a purpose, the data collected using the TRUE system
allowed identification of problematic and frustrating areas in the game, as
well as improved fairness in multiplayer matches, resulting in an overall more
enjoyable gaming experience (Thompson 2007).
A more recent game with a purpose is the Airport Scanner game for
Android and iPhone, which simulates the task of searching for contraband
using an airport X-ray scanner. To date, anonymous data from thousands of
users performing millions of scans have been collected from players of the
game. Researchers have used this data to explore questions about how well
the airport baggage screening task can be performed. In particular, they found
that the less often a target appeared, the less likely it was to be seen by the
players. This was true even when looking at the high scoring subset of players
(Mitroff and Biggs 2013). Interestingly, this low-probability, high-consequence detection problem is exactly what Transportation Security Administration (TSA) screeners encounter on a daily basis but is very hard to replicate
in a relatively short laboratory experiment.
Games have also been used to study performance at cognitive tasks. In
particular, Lumosity provides a web-based platform for simple games which
are intended to be used for training various aspects of cognition. Recently,
Lumosity has made the data collected by individuals playing these games
available to researchers. This data set is the largest existing set of cognitive
performance data, consisting of over 35 million users playing 600 million
game trials. Researchers hope to use this data to obtain new insights into
human cognition and how people think. Initial analyses reveal that aging and
lifestyle factors such as amount of sleep taken and alcohol consumed significantly correlate with task performance (Sternberg et al. 2013).
(continued)

214

B.J. Lance et al.

The final example here is the Foldit GWAP. Foldit is a collaborative online
multiplayer protein-folding game (Cooper et al. 2010). Foldit players generate complex protein folds through directly manipulating protein structures
and working with automated protein structure prediction technologies. Protein folding is an extremely complex problem, with even simple proteins
having over 1000 degrees of freedom. It is also a problem that can have
potentially high real-world payoff in the understanding of disease and in the
development of novel drugs. One of the key successes of Foldit was in
identifying the crystal structure of the retroviral protease (a key component
of a retrovirus that influences viral maturation and proliferation) of the
Mason-Pfizer monkey virus, which causes AIDS in monkeys. This structure
had previously proved to be elusive to uncover through standard methods,
and it is hoped that understanding this structure will lead to new antiviral
treatments (Khatib et al. 2011).

Challenges in Developing GWAP for BCI
However, there is one primary challenge that must be overcome to develop a
BCI-based GWAP. This is the challenge of developing an entertaining and engaging game such that large numbers of people will choose to play the game and use
the BCI paradigms within the game in the face of the fact that the technical
capability for robust and reliable BCIs is currently lacking. As a result, any
BCI-based GWAP run the risk of either overemphasizing the BCI paradigms and
being too frustrating and unpleasant to play or overemphasizing the gameplay and
not providing viable data. Developing viable GWAP that incorporate BCI will
require carefully balancing three key factors: the game must be engaging such that
people will play for significant periods of time; BCI paradigms must be seamlessly
integrated with the game while keeping gameplay entertaining and ensuring that
sufficient experimental control is maintained; and sufficient information must be
recorded to contextualize the resulting data so that it can be usefully interpreted. A
hypothetical game that attempts to address all three of these challenges is shown in
Fig. 8.

Developing Engaging Gameplay
In order to obtain the amount of data required to successfully address the issue of
robustness and reliability in BCI, we will require the truly large-scale and long-term
usage that only comes from intrinsic motivation, i.e., subjects play the game
because they enjoy it. While there are an increasing number of BCI games available, none of them have obtained a large and dedicated audience sufficient to
provide the needed large-scale and long-term data. One of the key reasons for

9

Towards Serious Games for Improved BCI

215

Fig. 8 A hypothetical game with a purpose for collecting long-term and large-scale BCI data.
This hypothetical game is based upon an existing gameplay model which is known to be engaging,
that of an opposed gem-matching game, similar to the Puzzle Quest series. The game includes
multiple BCI paradigms that are integrated both mechanically and artistically with the game and
records multimodal physiological and behavioral data for contextualization

216

B.J. Lance et al.

this is that BCI games often focus on the BCI usage as the central aspect of the
experience (Marshall et al. 2013).
Many of these games are focused on directly controlling the movement of
objects on the screen through neural signals, either through the player directly
imagining the movement of the object or through modulation of the spectral power
within the alpha frequency band by attempting to feel more “relaxed” or “stressed.”
As the BCI paradigm is usually the central focus of the game, further aspects of
gameplay and game design tend to be very limited. While these games can initially
be highly entertaining, the novelty of the BCI wears off in a matter of minutes. Once
this occurs, it becomes clear that BCI technologies currently lack the robustness and
reliability required to be a primary human interface device, leading to gameplay
which is frustrating and unenjoyable (Dakan 2010). In fact, if the user gets frustrated by a BCI with subpar functional performance, this frustration itself affects
their neural signals and can further degrade functionality.
For BCI-based GWAP to be successful, the focus of the design should be on
ensuring that the game is sufficiently engaging and enjoyable that players will be
intrinsically motivated to play the game. Understanding the user experience is a
crucial aspect of game design, and previous research shows a key relationship
between engagement, user experiences, and increased play time (Hassenzahl and
Tractinsky 2006). We argue that focusing the game design on engagement, entertainment, and immersion first gains several advantages. It will make it possible to
create a game that can be fun for hours, making the long-term data collection much
less painful on the subjects and thereby decreasing the likelihood of subjects
dropping out of the experiment. It will also be much more likely to obtain a large
player base that will willingly play for free, enabling large-scale data collection.
One way to ease the development of a sufficiently engaging game is to utilize an
existing model of gameplay.

Integrating BCIs with Gameplay: The Free-To-Play (F2P) Model
There is a large body of previous research focused on increasing engagement and
immersion during gameplay, and there are many aspects of designing a game that is
engaging or even addictive. One example of the criticality of engaging experiences
is the development of free-to-play (F2P) games. F2P games are distributed online
for free and make money by providing in-game items, areas, or capabilities which
can be purchased. As a result, the game only makes money by drawing large
numbers of people in and getting them engaged over the long term. There are
lessons to be taken from the design of these F2P games on how to embed BCI usage
within a game in such a way that both BCI usage and long-term gameplay are
encouraged (Luban 2011; Luton 2013).
Under the F2P model, the use of the BCI can be viewed as the “price” that is paid to
play the game. As a result, it should be treated similarly to purchasing upgrades in a
standard F2P game. Thus, unlike the design of the core gameplay, which should
emphasize engagement, the integration of the BCI paradigms should be focused on

9

Towards Serious Games for Improved BCI

217

making the experience as painless and as rewarding for the player as possible. By this,
we mean that the player should not have to go out of their way in order to activate the
BCI paradigm and should receive a significant gameplay benefit for doing so. However,
due to the robustness of current state-of-the-art BCI technologies, it is likely that the
BCI paradigm will fail to work a significant percentage of the time. Therefore, the game
must be designed such that it is possible for the player to circumvent the use of the BCI
in the game, while still providing the required research data.
Consider how this could be done with the three BCI paradigms described in
Box 1. For example, the RSVP paradigm is very similar to reward “slot machines”
that are commonly used in F2P games. In these “slot machines,” a small number of
highly valuable in-game rewards are interspersed with a large number of low-value
rewards that are rapidly displayed to the player, similar to a wheel on a slot
machine. The player attempts to obtain a high-value reward by selecting it, which
is difficult to accomplish due to the speed of the display. By simply adding a
behavioral selection to the RSVP task and providing an in-game reward for
selecting a target, it is possible to mirror a successful mechanism that commonly
appears in F2P games. However, while this addresses the issue of integrating the
RSVP paradigm into the game, it may not provide sufficient experimental control,
depending on the goals of the experiment. For example, if the goal is to study the
effects of changes in states such as fatigue on BCI performance, then one key
problem that can arise is that of performance saturation. If the task is too easy, then
all players will always perform it with near-perfect accuracy. When this happens,
the fluctuations in behavior that would indicate low-performing states will simply
not appear in the data, making it impossible to address the intended question. One
possibility is to mask the targets and nontargets to make them more difficult to
distinguish. Figure 8 shows a faceted masking, which fits artistically with the
overall theme of the game, being used for this purpose.
There are many potential ways in which an SSVEP paradigm could be
implemented in a game. Several targets could be displayed on-screen simultaneously, all flickering at different frequencies. The player could then use the
SSVEP paradigm to select a desired reward or a target for an attack. However, in
order to minimize the potential for frustration, the player must have the capability to
circumvent a potentially nonfunctioning BCI. For example, the player could be
allowed to click on the desired target. Unfortunately, while this integrates the
SSVEP paradigm into the game, it does not provide sufficient experimental control.
Instead, what is likely to happen is that the player will rapidly click the desired target
without attending to it for the 1–2 s window that most SSVEP algorithms require. As
a result, the neural data recorded will be insufficient for later analysis. Alternatively,
the SSVEP paradigm could be interacted with through a mechanic where the player
receives an award based on how quickly they click on the target but only once the
target stops flickering. This would incentivize the player to pay close attention to the
flickering target in order to maximize reward and ensure that the desired neural data
of the player performing the SSVEP task would still be recorded.
Integrating the third BCI paradigm in Box 1, a passive behavioral performance
estimation paradigm, is perhaps the simplest of the three BCI paradigms. As a

218

B.J. Lance et al.

passive BCI paradigm, no additional interaction with the player is needed, although
if a specific task is being studied then that task could be embedded. Instead, what is
required is extensive logging of the player’s interaction with the game, as well as
metrics and heuristics for estimating the quality of the player’s moves. This data
can then be used to study the relationship between neural activity and player
behavior.
It is important to emphasize that the specific issues of maintaining experimental
control when integrating the BCI paradigms with gameplay will vary based on the
overall research goals being addressed. In addition, many of these issues, such as
performance saturation, are not unique to any single paradigm but are relevant
across many potential paradigms.
Finally, in order to encourage long-term gameplay, successful games provide for
the player to experience task-reward feedback loops with multiple avenues for
incremental progression. Example avenues for progression include difficulty,
reward, capabilities, game mechanics, virtual space, and narrative space. Each of
these also presents potential avenues for BCI integration. For example, there are
usually various levels or difficulties in a game, and players will generally complete
challenges in sequentially increasing difficulty (Brown and Cairns 2004). BCI
paradigms can similarly be scaled in terms of difficulty. For example, both
SSVEP and RSVP can be made more difficult by increasing the number of targets
and distracters. This can also be tied to narrative progression, with difficulty or
types of targets in a BCI also connected to sequential narrative episodes.

Contextualizing Data
Data recording and analysis is a key issue for F2P games, GWAP, and BCI
implementation. In F2P games, games are often launched in a minimally playable
state. Data from the game is then continuously monitored to determine key pieces
of information such as what aspects of the game keep players engaged, what causes
players to quit, and what drives players to perform in-game purchases. The game is
then continually refined and updated based on this information (Luton 2013). When
considering GWAP, in addition to monitoring this information, the experimental
questions at the center of the GWAP must also be answered. As a result, additional
data relevant to the experimental questions must also be recorded and analyzed
(von Ahn and Dabbish 2008). Similarly, the analysis of the EEG data used for
current BCI technologies requires a large amount of contextualization (Zander and
Jatzev 2012). In order to estimate what the recorded neural signals may mean, it is
necessary to know as much as possible about what the player is doing and how they
are doing it.
As such, EEG data is not the only type of data that would need to be recorded.
One key type of data needed is the information from the game itself, which includes
player actions, game events, the times these occur, and contextual information from
the state of the game that will serve as a basis for interpreting the other streams of
data. Alternative sources of physiological data can also be used to contextualize the

9

Towards Serious Games for Improved BCI

219

EEG data and game data as well. For example, eye tracking technology provides the
gaze direction in monitor coordinates and can be used to identify what aspect of the
game the player is focusing on at any given time. While this and other physiological
recording methods such as heart rate or electrodermal activity generally require
laboratory-grade hardware, it is becoming increasingly possible to approximate
these methods using common digital cameras. For example, pupil diameter, which
can serve as an approximation for physiological arousal (Partala and Surakka 2003),
can be detected using OpenCV, an open-source computer vision library (Schwarz
et al. 2012). Similarly, heart rate can be detected using a webcam (Poh et al. 2011).
In order to uncover the correlates of longer-term state change, it will also be
necessary to record self-report data from game players. Many of the correlates of
this longer-term variation, such as sleep history and stress, cannot be derived from
behavioral or physiological data while the subject is playing the game. However,
some of these can be approximated using self-report (Buysse et al. 1989; Brantley
et al. 1987).
One key challenge for recording this multimodal data is that the synchronization
across the data streams must be highly accurate. As the quality of the synchronization decreases, it becomes increasingly difficult to associate the recorded neural
signals with any external stimuli or behavior. For example, the amplitude of an
averaged ERP is rapidly attenuated as synchronization becomes increasingly noisy.
While other data streams may not degrade as rapidly with poor synchronization as
EEG does, it will still become extremely difficult to make sense of inaccurately
synchronized data during analysis.

Usable EEG Technologies
In addition to the challenges of developing an engaging game and integrating BCI
paradigms into that game, there are also clear engineering challenges that need to be
met in order to develop BCI-based GWAP which can obtain a large player base.
The primary challenge is in the development of electroencephalography (EEG)
recording devices which are low-cost, easy to use, and provide high signal quality
(McDowell et al. 2013; Liao et al. 2012). While a BCI-based GWAP may still be of
value without these devices, it will be limited in focus to single-session and
longitudinal experiments with small subject populations.
One key usability issue is that current EEG technologies require a conductive
NaCl-based gel or saline solution between the electrodes and skull to decrease the
impedance and improve signal-to-noise. These gels and solutions serve as a bottleneck to using the BCI applications by requiring a time-consuming pregame application and postgame cleanup. Several research groups are developing dry EEG
sensor technologies that would eliminate the need for this conductive gel while
maintaining the reliable measurement of EEG signals (Sullivan et al. 2008; Grozea
et al. 2011; Liao et al. 2014).
Likewise, traditional EEG systems transmit the measured brain activity through
a cable which is connected between the EEG cap and computer. This greatly limits

220

B.J. Lance et al.

usability, and the swaying of the wires when the player moves their head causes
additional artifact in the EEG signal. Wireless transmission using a protocol such as
Bluetooth or Wi-Fi can overcome this limitation (Liao et al. 2014) and is easily
extendable to tablet and mobile devices. While greatly adding to the usability of the
EEG technology, using these wireless protocols may require additional power, raise
bandwidth and packet loss issues, and increase the difficulty of properly synchronizing the EEG data.
While there are existing examples of commercially available dry-electrode,
wireless EEG technologies (Sullivan et al. 2008), these systems tend to be too
uncomfortable for long-term wear and to lack sufficient sensor density over a broad
enough scalp distribution to examine different brain areas associated with a variety
of cognitive functions. However, distinct types of BCI applications may relate to
these cognitive functions and require collecting data from several different brain
areas. For example, a motor imagery paradigm, where a BCI user attempts to
control an object by imagining either its movement or their own, is usually based
on the brain activity recorded from the motor cortex (Billinger et al. 2013). On the
other hand, the data acquired from motor areas may be not fully appropriate for
either SSVEP or RSVP paradigms. Instead, for these two types of BCI applications,
the activity in the visual areas is usually measured and analyzed (Lin et al. 2014).
For most research applications, the trend is to record the brain activity from the
entire brain. While this may not be needed for BCI applications, it is unlikely that
only one or two electrodes would be sufficient, although it is an open question as to
how many electrodes are needed.

Conclusion
Performance issues in BCI technologies arise in a large part from human variability,
including both individual differences and intraindividual variability, although there
are other causes. In fact, in nearly every area of BCI, both individual differences
and intraindividual variability have strong effects on the BCI users’ neural data.
This is not unique to BCI. There are existing approaches to deal with individual
differences and intraindividual variability which may drastically improve the performance of BCI technologies by detecting and adapting to the individual user and
their current mental state. However, using these approaches will require large
amounts of data from people using BCI technologies over long periods of time.
We propose that one method for obtaining this data is through the development
of BCI-based games with a purpose (GWAP) that not only are focused on obtaining
the required BCI data but are also engaging and entertaining enough that large
numbers of users will willingly play them. As a result, these BCI games which are
expressly designed for entertainment and engagement have the potential to revolutionize research into a broad range of serious BCI applications.
There are critical challenges that must be overcome to develop BCI-based
GWAP. The most pressing challenge is that of developing engaging BCI-based
games when BCI technologies have such low levels of performance. As a result,

9

Towards Serious Games for Improved BCI

221

developing these GWAP will require carefully balancing three key factors: developing an engaging and entertaining game, seamlessly integrating BCI paradigms
with the game, and properly contextualizing the resulting data to enable useful
interpretation and analysis. However, in order for data from a large number of users
to be obtained, EEG systems that are comfortable, easy-to-use, low-cost, and that
provide high-quality data will be required. A BCI-based GWAP would still be of
value without this EEG technology, as currently available EEG systems could be
used to obtain data from fewer participants over long periods of time. As a result,
whether these EEG technologies come in the near future or are longer-term
technologies, the future development of serious BCI applications for nonmedical
applications would benefit greatly from large-scale and long-term collection of data
from individuals performing BCI-relevant tasks in GWAP.

Recommended Reading
V. Balasubramanian, K. Adalarasu, A. Gupta, EEG based analysis of cognitive fatigue during
simulated driving. Int. J. Ind. Syst. Eng. 7(2), 135–149 (2011). doi:10.1504/IJISE.2011.038563
M. Billinger, C. Brunner, G.R. M€uller-Putz, Single-trial connectivity estimation for classification
of motor imagery data. J. Neural Eng. 10(4), 046006 (2013). doi:10.1088/1741-2560/10/4/
046006
G. Bin, X. Gao, Y. Zheng, B. Hong, S. Gao, An online multi-channel SSVEP-based
brain–computer interface using a canonical correlation analysis method. J. Neural Eng. 6(4),
046002 (2009). doi:10.1088/1741-2560/6/4/046002
D.P.-O. Bos, B. Reuderink, B. van de Laar, H. G€urkök, C. M€
uhl, M. Poel, A. Nijholt, D. Heylen,
Brain-computer interfacing and games, in Brain-Computer Interfaces, ed. by D.S. Tan,
A. Nijholt. Human-computer interaction series (Springer, London, 2010), pp. 149–178.
doi:10.1007/978-1-84996-272-8_10
P.J. Brantley, C.D. Waggoner, G.N. Jones, N.B. Rappaport, A daily stress inventory: development,
reliability, and validity. J. Behav. Med. 10(1), 61–73 (1987)
E. Brown, P. Cairns, A grounded investigation of game immersion, in CHI’04 Extended Abstracts
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA’04) (ACM, New York, 2004),
pp. 1297–1300. doi:10.1145/985921.986048
D.J. Buysse, C.F. Reynolds III, T.H. Monk, S.R. Berman, D.J. Kupfer, The Pittsburgh sleep quality
index: a new instrument for psychiatric practice and research. Psychiatry Res. 28(2), 193–213
(1989)
S. Cooper, F. Khatib, A. Treuille, J. Barbero, J. Lee, M. Beenen, A. Leaver-Fay, D. Baker,
Z. Popović, F. Players, Predicting protein structures with a multiplayer online game. Nature
466(7307), 756–760 (2010). doi:10.1038/nature09304
R. Dakan, Review: Emotiv EPOC, tough thoughts on the new mind-reading controller. Joystiq
(2010). 27 Jan. http://www.joystiq.com/2010/01/27/review-emotiv-epoc-tough-thoughts-onthe-new-mind-reading-cont/
C.D. Geisler, L.S. Frishkopf, W.A. Rosenblith, Extracranial responses to acoustic clicks in man.
Science 128(3333), 1210–1211 (1958). doi:10.1126/science.128.3333.1210
A.S. Gevins, G.M. Zeitlin, S. Ancoli, C.L. Yeager, Computer rejection of EEG artifact.
II. Contamination by drowsiness. Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol. 43(1), 31–42 (1977)
C. Grozea, C.D. Voinescu, S. Fazli, Bristle-sensors – low-cost flexible passive dry EEG electrodes
for neurofeedback and BCI applications. J. Neural Eng. 8(2), 025008 (2011)
M. Hassenzahl, N. Tractinsky, User experience – a research agenda. Behav. Inform. Technol. 25
(2), 91–97 (2006). doi:10.1080/01449290500330331

222

B.J. Lance et al.

L.R. Hochberg, M.D. Serruya, G.M. Friehs, J.A. Mukand, M. Saleh, A.H. Caplan, A. Branner,
D. Chen, R.D. Penn, J.P. Donoghue, Neuronal ensemble control of prosthetic devices by a
human with tetraplegia. Nature 442(7099), 164–171 (2006). doi:10.1038/nature04970
D.C. Jangraw, J. Wang, B.J. Lance, S.-F. Chang, P. Sajda, Neurally and ocularly informed graphbased models for searching 3D environments. J. Neural Eng. 11(4), 046003 (2014).
doi:10.1088/1741-2560/11/4/046003
T.-P. Jung, S. Makeig, M. Stensmo, T.J. Sejnowski, Estimating alertness from the EEG power
spectrum. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 44(1), 60–69 (1997). doi:10.1109/10.553713
F. Khatib, F. DiMaio, S. Cooper, M. Kazmierczyk, M. Gilski, S. Krzywda, H. Zabranska et al.,
Crystal structure of a monomeric retroviral protease solved by protein folding game players.
Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 18(10), 1175–1177 (2011)
J.H. Kim, D.V. Gunn, E. Schuh, B. Phillips, R.J. Pagulayan, D. Wixon, Tracking real-time user
experience (TRUE): a comprehensive instrumentation solution for complex systems, in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (ACM, 2008),
pp. 443–452. http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1357126
D.J. Krusienski, E.W. Sellers, F. Cabestaing, S. Bayoudh, D.J. McFarland, T.M. Vaughan,
J.R. Wolpaw, A comparison of classification techniques for the P300 speller. J. Neural Eng.
3, 299–305 (2006). doi:10.1088/1741-2560/3/4/007
B.J. Lance, S.E. Kerick, A.J. Ries, K.S. Oie, K. McDowell, Brain-computer interface technologies
in the coming decades. Proc. IEEE 100(Special Centennial Issue), 1585–1599 (2012).
doi:10.1109/JPROC.2012.2184830
L.-D. Liao, C.-T. Lin, K. McDowell, A.E. Wickenden, K. Gramann, T.-P. Jung, L.-W. Ko, J.-Y.
Chang, Biosensor technologies for augmented brain–computer interfaces in the next decades.
Proc. IEEE 100(Special Centennial Issue), 1553–1566 (2012). doi:10.1109/
JPROC.2012.2184829
L.-D. Liao, S.-L. Wu, C.-H. Liou, S.-W. Lu, S.-A. Chen, S.-F. Chen, L.-W. Ko, C.-T. Lin, A novel
16-channel wireless system for electroencephalography measurements with dry spring-loaded
sensors. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 63(6), 1545–1555 (2014). doi:10.1109/
TIM.2013.2293222
C.-T. Lin, R.-C. Wu, S.-F. Liang, W.-H. Chao, Y.-J. Chen, T.-P. Jung, EEG-based drowsiness
estimation for safety driving using independent component analysis. IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst.
Regul. Pap. 52(12), 2726–2738 (2005). doi:10.1109/TCSI.2005.857555
Y.-P. Lin, Y. Wang, T.-P. Jung, Assessing the feasibility of online SSVEP decoding in human
walking using a consumer EEG headset. J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. 11(1), 119 (2014). doi:10.1186/
1743-0003-11-119
B. Lou, Y. Li, M.G. Philiastides, P. Sajda, Prestimulus alpha power predicts fidelity of sensory
encoding in perceptual decision making. Neuroimage 87, 242–251 (2014). doi:10.1016/j.
neuroimage.2013.10.041
P. Luban. The design of free-to-play games. Gamasutra (2011). 22 Nov. http://www.gamasutra.
com/view/feature/134920/the_design_of_freetoplay_games_.php
W. Luton, Free-to-Play: Making Money From Games You Give Away, 1st edn. (New Riders, 2013)
D. Marshall, D. Coyle, S. Wilson, M. Callaghan, Games, gameplay, and BCI: the state of the art.
IEEE Trans. Comput. Intell. AI Games 5(2), 82–99 (2013). doi:10.1109/
TCIAIG.2013.2263555
G. Matthews, P.A. Desmond, Task-induced fatigue states and simulated driving performance. Q. J.
Exp. Psychol. A Hum. Exp. Psychol. 55(2), 659–686 (2002). doi:10.1080/
02724980143000505
K. McDowell, C.-T. Lin, K.S. Oie, J. Tzyy-Ping, S. Gordon, K.W. Whitaker, S.-Y. Li, S.-W. Lu,
W.D. Hairston, Real-world neuroimaging technologies. IEEE Access 1, 131–149 (2013).
doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2013.2260791
D.J. McFarland, W.A. Sarnacki, J.R. Wolpaw, Electroencephalographic (EEG) control of threedimensional movement. J. Neural Eng. 7(3), 036007 (2010). doi:10.1088/1741-2560/7/3/036007

9

Towards Serious Games for Improved BCI

223

S.R. Mitroff, A.T. Biggs, Mitroff, Biggs, The ultra-rare-item effect visual search for exceedingly
rare items is highly susceptible to error. Psychol. Sci. (2013). doi:10.1177/0956797613504221
C. M€
uhl, C. Jeunet, F. Lotte, EEG-based workload estimation across affective contexts.
Neuroprosthetics 8, 114 (2014). doi:10.3389/fnins.2014.00114
S.J. Pan, Q. Yang, A survey on transfer learning. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 22(10),
1345–1359 (2010)
T. Partala, V. Surakka, Pupil size variation as an indication of affective processing. Int. J. Hum.
Comput. Stud. 59(1), 185–198 (2003)
G. Pfurtscheller, B.Z. Allison, C. Brunner, G. Bauernfeind, T. Solis-Escalante, R. Scherer,
T.O. Zander, G. Mueller-Putz, C. Neuper, N. Birbaumer, The hybrid BCI. Front. Neurosci.
4 (2010). doi:10.3389/fnpro.2010.00003
M.-Z. Poh, D.J. McDuff, R.W. Picard, Advancements in noncontact, multiparameter physiological
measurements using a webcam. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 58(1), 7–11 (2011)
E.A. Pohlmeyer, J. Wang, D.C. Jangraw, B. Lou, S.-F. Chang, P. Sajda, Closing the loop in
cortically-coupled computer vision: a brain–computer interface for searching image databases.
J. Neural Eng. 8(3), 036025 (2011)
P. Sajda, E. Pohlmeyer, J. Wang, L.C. Parra, C. Christoforou, J. Dmochowski, B. Hanna,
C. Bahlmann, M.K. Singh, S.-F. Chang, In a blink of an Eye and a switch of a transistor:
cortically coupled computer vision. Proc. IEEE 98(3), 462–478 (2010). doi:10.1109/
JPROC.2009.2038406
L. Schwarz, Humberto Remigio Gamba, Fabio Cabral Pacheco, Rodrigo Belisario Ramos, Miguel
Antonio Sovierzoski, Pupil and iris detection in dynamic pupillometry using the OpenCV
library, in 2012 5th International Congress on Image and Signal Processing (CISP) (2012),
pp. 211–215. doi: 10.1109/CISP.2012.6469846
B. Settles, in Active Learning Literature Survey, vol. 52 (University of Wisconsin, Madison,
2010), pp. 55–66
D.A. Sternberg, K. Ballard, J.L. Hardy, K. Benjamin, P.M. Doraiswamy, M. Scanlon, The largest
human cognitive performance dataset reveals insights into the effects of lifestyle factors and
aging. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 7, 292 (2013). doi:10.3389/fnhum.2013.00292
T.J. Sullivan, S.R. Deiss, T.-P. Jung, G. Cauwenberghs, A brain-machine interface using
dry-contact, low-noise EEG sensors, in Circuits and Systems, 2008. ISCAS 2008. IEEE
International Symposium on (IEEE, 2008), pp. 1986–1989. http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpls/
abs_all.jsp?arnumber=4541835
C. Thompson. Halo 3: how Microsoft labs invented a new science of play. http://archive.wired.
com/gaming/virtualworlds/magazine/15-09/ff_halo?currentPage=all Mag. 15(9) (2007).
http://josquin.cti.depaul.edu/rburke/courses/f07/gam224/doc/science_of_play.pdf
J. Touryan, G. Apker, B.J. Lance, S.E. Kerick, A.J. Ries, K. McDowell, Estimating endogenous
changes in task performance from EEG. Neuroprosthetics 8, 155 (2014). doi:10.3389/
fnins.2014.00155
J. Van Erp, F. Lotte, M. Tangermann, Brain-computer interfaces: beyond medical applications.
Computer 45(4), 26–34 (2012). doi:10.1109/MC.2012.107
G. Vanacker, R. del José, E.L. Millán, P.W. Ferrez, F.G. Moles, J. Philips, H. Van Brussel,
M. Nuttin, Context-based filtering for assisted brain-actuated wheelchair driving. Comput.
Intell. Neurosci. 2007, 3 (2007). doi:10.1155/2007/25130
L. Von Ahn, Games with a purpose. Computer 39(6), 92–94 (2006). doi:10.1109/MC.2006.196
L. Von Ahn, L. Dabbish, Designing games with a purpose. Commun. ACM 51(8), 58–67 (2008).
doi:10.1145/1378704.1378719
J.R. Wolpaw, N. Birbaumer, D.J. McFarland, G. Pfurtscheller, T.M. Vaughan, Brain–computer
interfaces for communication and control. Clin. Neurophysiol. 113(6), 767–791 (2002).
doi:10.1016/S1388-2457(02)00057-3
D.D. Wu, C.G. Courtney, B.J. Lance, S.S. Narayanan, M.E. Dawson, K.S. Oie, T.D. Parsons,
Optimal arousal identification and classification for affective computing using physiological

224

B.J. Lance et al.

signals: virtual reality stroop task. IEEE Trans. Affect. Comput. 1(2), 109–118 (2010).
doi:10.1109/T-AFFC.2010.12
T.O. Zander, S. Jatzev, Context-aware brain–computer interfaces: exploring the information space
of user, technical system and environment. J. Neural Eng. 9(1), 016003 (2012). doi:10.1088/
1741-2560/9/1/016003
T.O. Zander, C. Kothe, Towards passive brain–computer interfaces: applying brain–computer
interface technology to human–machine systems in general. J. Neural Eng. 8(2), 025005
(2011). doi:10.1088/1741-2560/8/2/025005

