International Journal of Information and Education Technology, Vol. 8, No. 6, June 2018

Model Development in Assessing the Career Path of
Senior High School Students in Philippine Setting
Jheanel E. Estrada, Glenwin G. Bernabe, Jason S. Lopez, and Joyce Anne S. Potestades

Abstract—Choosing the right career is significant in the life
of every person and especially before entering college. Many
students have chosen their career path without a proper prior
advice from a guidance counselor. They’re overlooking the
NCAE, surveys, and different exams in helping them find their
right career. It may potentially cause some lapses in their
academic performance, mismatch with their personality,
interest, and abilities. To give the students some guidance, it is
important to create a system that provides direction in choosing
a career path. The use of an image type questionnaire will
significantly boost the interaction between the students and
make them more attentive in answering the questions. The
different factors and attributes will give some weight in
assessing the career path of the student. Hence, not only their
skills, and attitude will affect the outcome of the career. By
implementing this system, it will involve the student much more,
and for that matter, a much better result will be produced.
Index Terms—Data mining, pattern recognition, SHS,
visualization,

I. INTRODUCTION
Ref. [1] in the the year 2016, according to the Department
of Labor and Employment (DOLE) showed that out of the
4,239,392 domestic and international job vacancies offered
in thousands of job fairs nationwide in the past two years,
only 391,088 among 1,286,073 applicants were hired on the
spot. Also, [2] DOLE records in 2015, which showed that
roughly 135,590 were hired out of the 487,640 applicants in
the 1,661 job fairs held nationwide. In 2014, a total of
255,498 people were hired out of the more than 798,000
applicants in the 2,025 job fairs conducted throughout the
country. [3] In the past two decades, they found out that the
country’s unemployment rate has fluctuated between seven
to 14 percent. The heightened competition in the market and
the lack of adjustments of college and universities trigger the
jobs-skills mismatch. Students usually choose their career
path based on what their parents want and what they think
they want. Most of them are not thinking about the result of
their NCAE (National Career Assessment Examination) that
determines the career they need to pursue. Skills and attitudes
are necessary for establishing your career. That is what they
tell us, but there is another aspect that significantly affects in
knowing your job. It's analyzing the different patterns,
angles, categories, and various fields to correlate it and find
out what is the right course for you. The attributes in

II. REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURES AND STUDIES
According to Kostek [4], assessing yourself as well as your
career improves the quality of life. We can also use this
information about ourselves to dearly state who we are and
what we can do when pursuing career opportunities. In
today’s buyers job market an engineer must be able to
provide an employer with reasons to hire you and not
someone else. Career assessment can lead to a better
understanding of yourself and your goals. This can become a
key element in selling yourself. It can also help you in
accepting yourself as you are and not based on the position
you hold today or in the future.
There are a lot of ways assessing your characteristics and
behaviors to identify the career path that suited you. Due to
the advancement of technology, brain-computer interface
was used for personal career planner developed by Tan and
Chin [5].
The assessment is designed based on Holland code theory
to retain the reliability of the career planner. While the
assessment taker is answering the questionnaire, the EEG
signal from the scalp is recorded by the Emotiv neuroheadger
to identify the excitement level. Based on that, the system
will then generate the recommended guidance.
As part of the experiment, 20 subjects who are composed of
20 males and 10 females ages 15-30 years old were gathered.

Manuscript received April 7, 2017; revised November 25, 2017.
The authors are with the Technological Institute of the Philippines,
College of Information Technology Education, Manila, Philippines (e-mail:
jheanelestrada29@gmail.com,
jeysownlopez@gmail.com,
glenwinbernabe@gmail.com, joycenpotestades@gmail.com).

doi: 10.18178/ijiet.2018.8.6.1082

determining the right course will vary. An enormous amount
of unemployment and job mismatch happens because people
are choosing a career that is not exactly the path which they
need to pursue. They need to be serious about it. This kind of
problem motivates us to develop an application which sole
purpose is to guide students in choosing their career path.
Reduce the unemployment rate and job-skill mismatch here
in the Philippines because everyone’s future will depend on it.
Introducing, TrabaWHO: An application that will help the
user to determine the best career that will fit their skills,
knowledge, and personality.
We all know that there are a lot of factors and attributes
can help in determining the career path. This includes skills,
attitude, decision- making, home address, educational
background, work of their parents, etc. The researchers are
trying to use all of the possible attributes that will affect the
outcome of the report.
The result of this study will significantly give an idea to a
student in choosing the right career path. As job mismatch,
social difficulties, dropping out of school or even
unemployment can be limited with the proper guidance and
attribution to a teenager.

459

International Journal of Information and Education Technology, Vol. 8, No. 6, June 2018

high school in Technological Institute of the Philippines –
Manila participated in our study. The participants are
composed of thirteen (13) STEM, thirteen (13) HUMSS, and
thirteen (13) ABM students. They were all assessed and
supervise by the Guidance counselor.

The EEG signal of the subject is acquired via the 14 electrode
from Emotiv neuroheadgear with sampling frequency of
128Hz.

B. Data Gathering Tools
Prior to data gathering, we developed a mobile application
for Android Smartphone (Fig. 3). Developed using Android
Studio 2.2 and was designed specifically to get the primary
details of the user, give them a survey, and have a result in an
instant. Developed and patterned with the RIASEC test.
Fig. 1. Overview of the system.

Fig. 3. Android application.

We also developed a web-based application (Fig. 2) on the
server side (our laptop) which was used to store data gathered
from the smartphones and produce analytics presented in a
table and different graphs.

Fig. 2. Flowchart of the system.

According to the flowchart in Fig. 2, the neutral state is
recorded prior to any test is given. Subsequently, personality
questions are popped up and each excitement state is
recorded. Question will hold for 10 seconds and repeated for
18 questions. The question number is recorded if current
excitement state is higher than neutral state and discarded
when false. The system will then acknowledge the test
subject with their personality. 20 test subjects are tested and
results are compared with written assessment. The true
response indicate that both BCI and written assessment yield
the same results whereas false response indicates that a
wrong responses.
This method requires great computational complexity and
cost. Therefore, the proponents of this study tries to utilize
data mining techniques applicable to the data that were
gathered to determine and suggest possible career path of the
students in the Philippines.

Fig. 4. Web application.

C. Data Processing
Out of 39 participants, we divided the datasets into two
parts. One is the 80% of participants which are 30, and the
remaining part is the 20%.
The first group is identified as the training set while the
other one is the test set. To make the participants equally
distributed between the training set and the test set, the
proponents chose the participants of the training set by taking
10 for each senior high school track. Meanwhile, for the test
set, the proponents chose 3 senior high school students from
each track. The proponents sorted the data according to their
track, and they took the first 10 of each track to be included in
the training set, and the remaining 3 of each track will be used
for the test set.

III. METHODOLOGY

D. Model Development and Analytics
Using RapidMiner tool, model development was
conducted using the gathered data from surveys to predict the
appropriate course for a certain individual which in this case

A. Participants
Thirty-nine (39) respondents who are currently in senior
460

International Journal of Information and Education Technology, Vol. 8, No. 6, June 2018

are Senior Highs. The proponents tried different model in
training the data. They’ve used decision tree, default, model,
naïve bayes, and generalized linear model. The proponents
ended up using a polynomial class of Generalized Linear
Model which is the most commonly used in social
research.The proponents set the classifier as Split Validation
with the use of shuffled sampling as the sampling type to
validate the models because it gives the highest accuracy and
kappa for the data set.
The overall performance of the models regarding accuracy
rate and kappa statistic was presented in Figure 3 and Figure
4, respectively.

set. Most of the students have more than one result.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The proponents would like to thank all the persons who
assisted in the conduct of this study especially to: - Maria
Eloisa Monique Perez, Guidance Counselor, Technological
Institute of the Philippines – Manila
REFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]

[5]

57.14%

P. J. Kostek, “Career and life assessment”.
T. R. Razak et al., “Career path recommendation system for UiTM
perlis students using fuzzy logic,” 2011.
C. M. Chang, “Choosing career paths: The outputs of VTASI teams,”
2012.
P. J. Kostek, “Career and life assessment,” in Proc. the IEEE 1993
National Aerospace and Electronics Conference-NAECON 1993,
Dayton, OH, 1993, p. 1037, vol. 2.
H. H. Tan and S. W. Chin, “Personal career planner via brain-computer
interface,” in Proc. International Conference on Software Intelligence
Technologies and Applications & International Conference on
Frontiers of Internet of Things 2014, Hsinchu, 2014, pp. 47-51.

66.67%
Jheanel E. Estrada was born in June 29, 1992 in
Valenzuela city. She earned her bachelor of science in
computer science in Technological Institute of the
Philippines, Manila and continued her master of
science in computer science in Mapua University.
She is a full-time faculty member of the University
where she graduated her bachelor’s degree. She started
working as an instructor and does job as C language
trainer in a private company. She has different papers published in different
conferences such as IEEE and ACM.
Ms. Estrada is a member of the Philippines Society of Information
Technology Educators since 2012 until the present time.

Fig. 5. Model performance in terms of accuracy.

59.1%
40%

Jason Patrick S. Lopez was born in Sta. Cruz,
Laguna on February 23, 1997. He graduated with
distinction in Technological Institute of the
Philippines, Manila on April 10, 2017, with a degree
of bachelor of science in information technology.
He joined Eureka!thon Y! which is the corporate
incubation program of the PJ Lhuillier Group of
Companies as spearheaded by its ICT Arm, Networld
Capital Ventures, Inc in Jupiter St, Makati as his internship. They won the
competition and are currently working in their startup business which is
being funded, mentored, and incubated by PJ Lhuillier Group of Companies.

Fig. 6. Model performance in terms of Kappa.

Fig. 5 and 6 shows that Generalized Linear Model shows
the highest Accuracy for both training set. Which have an
accuracy of 57.14% for the training set and 66.67% in the test
set.
On the other hand, the kappa is classified as moderately
accepted which has 40% in the training set and 59.1% in the
test set.

Glenwin G. Bernabe was born at San Fabian,
Pangasinan on September 18, 1996. He obtained his
bachelor’s degree in information technology as
cumlaude at Technological Institute of the
Philippines in Manila, Philippines this April of
2017.
He is currently working at Networld Capital
Ventures Inc. as a project employee. He and his
teammates joined Eureka!thon Y! the corporate incubation program of the PJ
Lhuillier Group of Companies as spearheaded by its ICT Arm and the
aforementioned in Jupiter St, Makati as his internship. They won the
competition and currently his team is currently working on their idea for
start-up which is funded by PJLI.

IV. CONCLUSION
The primary objective of this study is to determine the
right career of a senior high school student through analyzing
the different set of attributes that will affect the overall result.
It helped us to determine if the educational attainment of their
parents, courses that have enrolled, school where they came
from, SHS track, desired program, province, religion, etc will
affect the career path of the student.
As shown in Fig. 1 and 2, by using RapidMiner Studio, the
proponents are able to detect the attributes that will affect the
career path of the student. The best and most acceptable
model performance regarding accuracy and kappa was the
Generalized Linear Model, classifier of Split Validation, and
the use of Split Validation. The model performs an accuracy
of 57.14% and a Kappa of 40% in training. We're able to
garner a 66.67% on accuracy and 59.1% on Kappa in the test

Joyce Ann S. Potestades was born in Infanta,
Quezon on 22 October 1997. She graduated from
Ungos National High School in Real, Quezon in
March 2013, and from Technological Institute of the
Philippines at Quiapo Manila with a bachelor of
science in information technology in April 2017.
At the last semester of college, she joined
Eureka!thon Y!, an incubation program of Networld
Capital Ventures Incorporated (NCVI) which is the ICT Arm of PJ Lhuillier
Group of Companies and work their as an intern. The aforementioned
company funded their project and they are now currently working in their
startup business in Makati City, Philippines.

461

