applied
sciences
Article

Detection of Movement Intention for Operating Methods of
Serious Games
Jung-Hyun Park 1 , Ho-Sang Moon 2 , Hyunggun Kim 3, * and Sung-Taek Chung 1, *
1

2

3

*



Citation: Park, J.-H.; Moon, H.-S.;
Kim, H.; Chung, S.-T. Detection of
Movement Intention for Operating
Methods of Serious Games. Appl. Sci.
2021, 11, 883. https://doi.org/
10.3390/app11020883
Received: 7 December 2020
Accepted: 15 January 2021

Department of Computer Engineering, Korea Polytechnic University, Siheung 15073, Korea;
andi95@kpu.ac.kr
Department of Advanced Technology Fusion, Korea Polytechnic University, Siheung 15073, Korea;
hosang0815@kpu.ac.kr
Department of Biomechatronic Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 16419, Korea
Correspondence: hkim.bme@skku.edu (H.K.); unitaek@kpu.ac.kr (S.-T.C.); Tel.: +82-(31)-290-7821 (H.K.);
+82-(10)-2770-2100 (S.-T.C.)

Abstract: In many post-stroke cases, patients show dysfunctions in movement, cognition, sense, and
language, depending on the damaged area of the brain. Active and repetitive physical rehabilitation
centered on the stroke-affected side is essential for effective and rapid neurological recovery of upper
extremity dysfunction due to hemiplegia. A symmetric upper extremity trainer is utilized to assist
the patient body, depending upon the degree of hemiplegia. In this study, we developed a novel
balance handle as a symmetric upper extremity trainer capable of extension, flexion, pronation, and
supination of the upper extremity. We collected the surface electromyogram (sEMG) signal data
while the subjects were playing a serious game and recorded the electroencephalogram (EEG) signal
data while the subjects were performing basic movements with the balance handle, to analyze the
effectiveness of the device as an assistive tool for rehabilitation. The triceps brachii were activated
during the extension movements, whereas the biceps brachii and deltoid muscles were activated
during the flexion movements. With the balance handle, the peak event-related desynchronization
(ERD) values were relatively lower while showing higher peak event-related synchronization (ERS)
values compared to other types of operating methods, such as hand gripping and gamepad operation.
Movement intention of tilting the balance handle for the α and β waves was clearly distinguished
from the other tasks. These data demonstrated the potential of various applications using the
developed proof-of-concept upper extremity trainer to bring out an excellent rehabilitative effect not
only through muscle growth but also via identification of large movement intentions inducing brain
activation exercise.
Keywords: bilateral movement training; event-related desynchronization; hemiplegia; serious game;
symmetric upper extremity trainer

Published: 19 January 2021

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.

Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).

1. Introduction
1.1. Background
A commendable outcome, in recent years, of the enormous advancement in medical
science is the continuous decrease in mortality rate of stroke [1]. However, in many poststroke cases, patients show dysfunctions in movement, cognition, sense, and language,
depending on the damaged area of the brain [2]. In particular, hemiplegia that occurs on
the opposite side of the damaged brain reduces locomotor function of the affected extremity
and causes an unstable balance sense, which in turn reduces the activities of daily living
(ADL), such as walking, eating, and dressing [3,4]. Symptoms of movement disorders due
to hemiplegia are normally more notable in the upper extremity than the lower one [5].
Upper extremity functions are closely related to the activities of exploring and manipulating
the surrounding environment; therefore, the upper extremity is particularly important for
the ADL and workability. Thus, active and repetitive physical rehabilitation centered on

Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 883. https://doi.org/10.3390/app11020883

https://www.mdpi.com/journal/applsci

Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 883

2 of 14

the stroke-affected side is essential for effective and rapid neurological recovery of upper
extremity dysfunction due to hemiplegia [6].
The methods to improve the stroke-affected movement functions of the upper extremity include constraint-induced movement therapy, rehabilitation robotics, mirror therapy,
and bilateral movement training [7–9]. Specifically, the bilateral movement training utilizes substitution, in which the neural network of the healthy side compensates for the
functions of the neural network of the stroke-affected side by simultaneously activating
the neural networks of both the healthy and pathologic sides [10]. In general, a symmetric
upper extremity trainer is utilized to assist the patient body, depending upon the degree
of hemiplegia. Recent studies have attempted to associate the rehabilitation equipment
used to improve or treat physical abilities with serious games, applying game elements
such as fun and challenge. Such programs are considered to increase the patients’ intention
to rehabilitate and effectively recovers the physical abilities by reducing the rejection or
boredom of treatment that patients may have [11]. Moreover, it can help users actively
perform steady repetitive exercises, which are the most important in rehabilitation, by
offering them a sense of reality beyond the limited user interface of the serious games,
consisting of a keyboard, mouse, and specific buttons and sticks [12,13].
In this study, a novel balance handle was manufactured as a symmetric upper extremity trainer to enable bilateral rehabilitation movements, such as extension, flexion,
pronation, and supination of the upper extremity. The balance handle was connected to a
serious game, and a surface electromyogram (sEMG) was measured for the triceps brachii,
biceps brachii, and deltoid to assess the muscular activation while the users played the
game. The sEMG signal has the advantage of quantitatively evaluating physical function
and tracking the results of the rehabilitation treatment by measuring and analyzing the motor signals expressed in the central nervous system (CNS) in muscle nerves. Additionally,
an electroencephalogram (EEG) was used to evaluate brain activation while the subjects
performed the rehabilitation movement process with the symmetric upper extremity trainer.
Reorganization of the damaged CNS was confirmed by evaluating the activation of the
motor cortex from the EEG signals [14]. In order to analyze the activation of the motor
cortex quantitatively, the signals measured by the symmetrical upper extremity trainer
were compared with other types of operating methods for serious games, such as hand
gripping and gamepad.
The EEG signals associated with the movement function helps analyze all the time
points of body movement pertaining to an idle rhythm, a state in which a set of neurons
in the motor cortex simultaneously displays a periodic signal. Movement intention can
then be predicted by analyzing the signal that appears before actual movement occurs [15].
When movement intention of the body is found in the idle rhythm state, an event-related
desynchronization (ERD) phenomenon, in which the power decreases at a specific frequency band by the excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP), occurs. Following the motion,
an event-related synchronization (ERS) phenomenon, in which the power increases again
at a specific frequency band by the inhibitory postsynaptic potential (IPSP), occurs. The
movement intention can be analyzed using ERD and ERS and employed as a good indicator to quantitatively measure the willingness and movement of patients participating
in training, as it demonstrates a statistical difference between rest and movement as well
as between different types of movement [16]. The movement intention was calculated
through the ERD/ERS analysis that can show the CNS activities based on the spontaneous
shifting of the measured EEG signals. The difference between the groups according to the
operating methods was compared by verifying the normality and performing the two-way
analysis of variance (ANOVA).
1.2. Related Work
Recent studies compared the effects of upper extremity trainers as well as attempted to
quantitatively measure movements or increase the effectiveness of rehabilitation. A variety
of customized trainers were developed to rehabilitate specific areas of the upper extremities.

Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 883

3 of 14

Movements of an end-effector robot capable of horizontal plane movement of the unilateral
forearm were quantitatively evaluated by moving a hand on a desk [17]. Assist-as-needed
training was conducted using an end-effector upper limb rehabilitation robot that helps
patients keep their arm close to a specific trajectory [18]. Information technology (IT),
including virtual reality (VR) and mobile applications, was integrated for accessible and
structured rehabilitation. VR has great strength in interaction and was employed as a
therapeutic treatment tool for rehabilitation of the upper extremities of stroke patients [19].
A mobile application was also developed as a useful tool for subject-specific rehabilitation
of the upper extremity following stroke [20].
The balance handle developed in this study can assist movement with respect to
the various axes, including extension, flexion, pronation, and supination of the upper
extremity, by allowing movements on the coronal and sagittal planes unlike traditional
trainers applying along a single axis. Improved effectiveness of rehabilitation is expected
by symmetrically performing bilateral movements of both upper extremities at the same
time compared to performing unilateral movements. Furthermore, this balance handle can
be utilized to quantitively measure movement data with respect to various tilting angles
and collect real time feedback data via Bluetooth connection.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Manufacture of the Balance Handle
We developed a novel balance handle as a symmetrical upper extremity trainer for
extension, flexion, pronation, and supination of the upper extremity. The balance handle
comprised a balance ball, arm holders, and handles (Figure 1).

Figure 1. The components of the balance handle.

The spherical balance ball positioned at the center between the arm holders was
designed to calculate its slope through an inertial measurement unit (IMU) sensor and send
the data through a Bluetooth module that did not interfere with the user movement. A user
with weak upper extremity muscle can comfortably place both upper extremity forearms
on the holders, hold the handle, and move it freely towards the longitudinal and lateral
axes. Furthermore, the user can push the buttons on the edges of both handles to add more
input data if needed. We used an AM530 sensor (Laxtha, Daejeon, Korea) to measure the
sEMG signals and a cap-type EMOTIV EPOC Flex (Emotiv, San Francisco, CA, USA) to
measure the EEG signals through up to 32 channels to examine the muscular (sEMG data)
and brain (EEG data) activation of the subjects while using the balance handle.
2.2. Measurement of the Muscular Activation Using the Balance Handle
Users activated the major upper extremity muscles by moving the balance handle
forward, backward, leftward, or rightward. Figure 2 displays the serious game developed
to induce these movements. Figure 2a shows the jet ski moving up and down as the user
tilted the balance handle forward and backward through extension and flexion of the upper
extremity. Figure 2b demonstrates the jet ski moving leftward and rightward as the user
tilts the balance handle to the left and to the right through pronation and supination of

Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 883

4 of 14

both upper extremity forearms. The user gained score points, the competitive element of
the serious game, by acquiring the displayed fuel and increase the content execution time.
The score was deducted if the user failed to avoid an obstacle. The highest score among the
participants was displayed on the screen to encourage competition.

Figure 2. Serious game contents for surface electromyogram (sEMG) measurement: (a) forward–
backward inclination; (b) left–right inclination.

2.3. Movement Intention Test
Ten adults (eight males and two females) in their twenties (average age 25.0 ± 1.7 years
old) with no experience of a damaged upper extremity participated in the experimental
tests to perform three operations: hand gripping, gamepad operation, and operation of
the symmetric upper extremity trainer similar to the Oddball Paradigm, to compare the
movement intention according to the operation methods for the serious game content
(Figure 3).

Figure 3. Sequence of the experimental task: (a) inter-stimulus interval; (b) grip task; (c) gamepad
task; and (d) balance handle task.

All the tasks were divided into preparation, stimulation, and rest stages, to reduce
their mutual influences before and after each task. A performance of 5 s was classified as a
single trial, and each operation was repeated 20 times to minimize any error during the
test process. Figure 3a demonstrates the rest stage after the stimulation stage between the
repeated tasks as a blank page in the preparation stage. The rest stage gives a measure
of the reference in the idle rhythm state before presenting a visual stimulus. The purpose
of the data measured at the preparation stage for 5 s was to measure the changes in the
data related to movement, and the relative amplitude was then calculated from these data.
The EEG signals of the reaction to the visual stimulus on the screen were recorded during
the stimulation stage. The rest stage was the idle moment before performing the next task;
therefore, no data during the rest stage were used in the analysis.
The grip task was to perform extension and flexion of the finger used in an intuitive
operation, such as using a keyboard or touching the screen, while the upper extremity
remained fixed. The contents were composed to indicate one of the hands to grip; this
for the user to perform the same task shown on the screen without bending the wrist

Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 883

5 of 14

(Figure 3b). A product from Joytron, consisting of nine general buttons, two analog sticks,
one cross button, and two trigger buttons, was utilized to conduct the gamepad task. The
screen displayed red arrows to instruct the user to move to the right or to the left with the
analog stick or to press the specified general button (Figure 3c). Lastly, for the task involving
the trainer interfaced with the serious game, the screen showed red arrows to instruct the
users to tilt the symmetrical upper extremity trainer (i.e., the balance handle) forward,
backward, leftward, or rightward, or press the button on the handle (Figure 3d). The system
was configured so that the task instruction was displayed in a random order to prevent the
test subjects from predicting and acting on the stimulus in each task, and the number of
repetitions was set to be the same in all the directions for straightforward comparison.
2.4. Measurement of the EMG and EEG Signals
With the balance handle, the subjects performed extension and flexion of their upper
extremity and pronation and supination movements of their joints, including shoulder,
elbows, and forearms, according to the device tilting movement. In order to collect and
analyze the sEMG signal data, an AM530 active surface EMG sensor (Laxtha, Daejeon,
Korea) was attached to the deltoid, biceps, and triceps while the reference electrodes were
attached to the elbow joint where there was no change in muscle activity (Figure 4). The
sEMG signal data were collected at a 1-kHz sampling frequency via serial communication.

Figure 4. Positions of the electrodes attached to collect sEMG signals.

The EEG signal data were collected for analysis of brain activation at a sampling
frequency of 1024 Hz and filtered through a band pass filter (BPF) ranging from 0.16 to
43 Hz and a notch filter at 50 and 60 Hz, such that the EEG signal data in the frequency band
were selectively collected and the noises induced by the power were removed. Following
the 10–20 international system of EEG electrode placement, 32 signal electrodes (hollow
white) and 2 ground electrodes (solid black) were configured with two channels (C3 and
C4) used to analyze the movement intention, displayed in red in Figure 5.
The C3 and C4 channels were positioned on the sensorimotor cortex encompassing
the motor cortex and somatosensory cortex in the central part of the cerebrum. Activation
of the sensorimotor cortex is closely associated with human body movement, which can be
directly correlated with the analysis of movement intention [21]. Moreover, the ERD and
ERS related to movement occur prominently in the opposite hemisphere of the moving
body part, and therefore the EEG data collected in the opposite hemisphere of the moving
hand were utilized for analyses of the hand gripping and gamepad operation. For the task
of using the balance handle with both hands, arithmetic averages of the collected data from
each hemisphere were analyzed.
2.5. Signal Processing and Data Analysis
The root mean square (RMS) values of the sEMG signal data measured from the upper
extremities were calculated to quantify muscle energy. A 50-ms window was used to
capture the rapid dynamic contraction of the joint movement of the upper extremity. In

Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 883

6 of 14

order to compare the muscle activation trends between the main upper extremity muscles
according to basic movement, down-sampling was performed at 10-ms intervals, followed
by smoothing through a moving average filter at 300 ms (Figure 6).

Figure 5. The 10–20 international system of EEG electrode placement.

Figure 6. Signal processing procedures for sEMG data: (a) raw sEMG; (b) RMS for the raw data; and
(c) down-sampling and moving averaging.

Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 883

7 of 14

On the other hand, as the time series data of the EEG signals were vulnerable to noises
from the surrounding environment, a signal-processing protocol, containing a suitable
filter and quantification processes, was designed to calculate the ERD/ERS data (Figure 7).

Figure 7. Flowchart of the signal processing for the event-related desynchronization (ERD)/eventrelated synchronization (ERS) calculation.

The EEG data collected at a frequency of 1024 Hz were down-sampled to 128 Hz,
and since the length of the input signal was sufficiently long, the FIR (finite impulse
response) filters for the α (8–12 Hz) and β (12–30 Hz) waves were employed to obtain
the time series data for a specific frequency band and remove the high-frequency noises
at the same time. The relative amplitude (RA) values for the idle rhythm state and the
upper extremity movement due to the stimulus were calculated for quantification using
Equations (1)–(3). Equation (1) signifies the rectification process that converts a negative
EEG signal into a positive amplitude to assure that the sum of the amplitudes would not be
zero. Equations (2) and (3) refer to extraction of the RA. In Equation (2), the pre-stimulus
baseline is calculated to examine the relative impact of the stimulus. The RA is then
calculated by subtracting the reference value from the time series data at each point in
Equation (3). Here, N refers to the total number of executions, y to the BPF process data of
the jth sample of the ith trial, Act(j) to the average of the squared jth sample, and R to the
reference, indicating the average of the section of 1 to 2 s prior to the stimulus.
Act( j) =

R=

1
N

N

∑ yij

(1)

i =1

1 r0 + k
Act( j)
k + 1 j∑
=r
0

(2)

Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 883

8 of 14


RA( j) (%) =

Act( j) − R
R



× 100

(3)

Due to the difficulty in identifying the RA pattern only with a single trial, the average
of the multi-trial data was employed to eliminate the extreme outliers in the data and
minimize noise. Moreover, the double moving average was used to more clearly represent
the data patterns. As the ERD peak was detected before a stimulus was given, the minimum
value was selected among the data collected 1 to 2 s before a stimulus occurred. The ERS
peak was selected as the maximum value at 1 s after occurrence on the stimulus. The
minimum ERD and the maximum ERS values are the key states of the CNS that express
participation in the activity of responses to movement or stimulus, indicating an induced
response of changes in EEG oscillation [22]. Averaging the induced response allowed us to
minimize the noise data and increase the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). As the change in the
stimulus became more notable in the idle state, the amplitudes were compared with each
other to determine the cognitive characteristics.
The normality of each data group was verified to compare the movement intention
according to the operating method, and the two-way ANOVA was performed with a
statistical significance level of 0.05. This method allowed to solve the increase in type-I error
due to the multi-test problem when repeatedly using t-tests in multiple group comparisons,
and also to validate the difference between groups with two or more independent variables.
Therefore, we distinguished the tasks as a group of independent variables and set the α and
β waves as independent variables and the ERD/ERS peak values as a dependent variable.
The resulting F statistic was the difference between groups for intra-group differences, and
the larger the F-value, the more pronounced the difference between the groups.
3. Results
3.1. sEMG during Operation of the Balance Handle
The sEMG signal data were recorded while the subjects operated the balance handle.
In Figure 8a, “A” shows the inclination angles of the balance handle while the subjects
performed the serious game by tilting the balance handle forward and backward. The
sEMG signals measured while doing the extension and flexion movements from the triceps,
biceps, and deltoid muscles are displayed in “B”, “C”, and “D”, respectively. During
extension movement by tilting the balance handle forward, the greatest muscle activation
was found in the triceps muscle (“B”). During flexion movement by tilting the balance
handle backward, the largest muscle activation was observed in the biceps (“C”). In
Figure 8b, “A” demonstrates the inclination angles of the balance handle while the subjects
performed the serious game by tilting the balance handle leftward and rightward. The
muscle activation in the right deltoid muscle during tilting the balance handle to the left
was displayed in “B”, and the muscle activation in the left deltoid during tilting the balance
handle to the right was displayed in “C”. As the muscle activation while using the balance
handle demonstrated a similar tendency as other conventional upper extremity trainers, it
was successfully validated that our balance handle was appropriate for interfacing with a
serious game to conduct rehabilitation exercise programs [23].
3.2. EEG for the Movement Intention Test
Figure 9 shows representative RA patterns of the three types of operational methods
(hand gripping, gamepad operation, and balance handle operation). It was clearly observed
that the ERD phenomenon of the α and β waves temporarily decreased immediately after
the “start”, which represented the occurrence time of the stimulus in the “stimuli” section.
ERD generally refers to a temporary change in negative potential due to an instantaneous
increase in the excitatory signals of the cortical neurons during the preparation for body
movement; therefore, an analysis of ERD allows to determine the movement intention [24].
On the other hand, ERS occurring after an action is performed is accompanied with an
increase in the α and β waves due to the positive potential changes following deactivation
of the nervous system due to inhibitory signals. This refers to conversion into an idle state

Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 883

9 of 14

and, in the EEG tests, it was confirmed that ERS occurred after ERD in the “stimuli” section.
Although the times of ERD/ERS in the RA patterns of the three operational methods were
found to be similar, the magnitude of the amplitude with the balance handle was the
largest, and the smallest magnitude of the amplitude was found with the gamepad.

Figure 8. The sEMG signal data corresponding to the tilting angles of the balance handle: (a) extension
and flexion; (b) pronation and supination.

Figure 10 demonstrates the box and whisker plots of the α and β waves of each task
to quantitatively compare the magnitude of the amplitudes. As tilting the balance handle
using the upper extremity was a physically different movement from pressing the buttons,
tilting and button pressing were classified into Handle_I and Handle_B, respectively. The
box represents the range of the first and third quartiles, the horizontal line in the box
defines the second quartile, the x mark refers to the median, and the whisker indicates
the range of the minimum and maximum values. The ERD/ERS peak distributions of
the α and β waves were similar. The ERD peak indicated the lowest average value (α:
−105.7%; and β: −81.1%) in the Handle_I task, whereas the ERS peak indicated the higher
peak value of the Handle_I task (α: −188.9%; and β: 141.9%) and the Handle_B task (α:
171.3%; and β: 146.1%). A comparison of the average ERD values showed that tilting the
balance handle resulted in the highest movement intention. Although pressing the button
on the balance handle was physically not much different from hand gripping or pressing
the button on the gamepad, a low ERD peak and a high ERS peak values were observed,
expressing relatively high movement intention. However, several outliers were found in
the Handle_B task due to the relatively low reproducibility of the ERS, resulting in large
deviation. These outlier data are consistent with previous studies that reported that ERS

Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 883

10 of 14

might not be necessarily associated with signal generation or muscle activation in the motor
cortex and rather reflected the short-term state to inhibit the motor cortex network [25].
Therefore, we intended to analyze the variance to verify the statistical significance of the
ERD and ERS peak values for each task.

Figure 9. RA measurements with the hand gripping, gamepad operation, and balance handle operation.

Figure 10. Box and whisker plots of the ERD/ERS peak values: (a) α wave (8–12 Hz); (b) β wave
(12–20 Hz).

Table 1 shows the outcomes of the normality test. The Shapiro–Wilk method, suitable

Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 883

11 of 14

for less than 2000 samples, was used in the normality test. A normal distribution was
considered if the p-value was larger than 0.05. The p-values for both the α and β waves of
ERD were larger than 0.05, confirming that these data had a normal distribution. However,
for the α wave ERS in the hand gripping and gamepad operation tasks, and for the β
wave ERS in the balance handle button task, the normality was not verified, presumably
attributing to the outliers found in the process of extracting the ERS peak values.
Table 1. Normality tests for the ERD and ERS peak values (* p < 0.05).
Peak

Rhythm

Task

Shapiro–Wilk Significance

α
8–12 Hz

Grip
Gamepad
Handle_I
Handle_B

0.111
0.328
0.278
0.746

β
12–30 Hz

Grip
Gamepad
Handle_I
Handle_B

0.198
0.605
0.052
0.802

α
8–12 Hz

Grip
Gamepad
Handle_I
Handle_B

0.006 *
0.023 *
0.271
0.589

β
12–30 Hz

Grip
Gamepad
Handle_I
Handle_B

0.080
0.090
0.956
0.005 *

ERD

ERS

Table 2 demonstrates the comparative data from the two-way ANOVA at a significance
level 0.05 to identify the difference between the tasks with the operational methods and
the post-hoc analysis using the Bonferroni method.
Table 2. Two-way ANOVA and post-hoc analysis (data shown as the mean ± SD, * p < 0.05).
Rhythm

Task

Relative Amplitude (%)

F-Value

p-Value

Post-hoc

α
8–12 Hz

Grip (a)
Gamepad (b)
Handle_I (c)
Handle_B (d)

−35.2 ± 26.4
−23.1 ± 23.5
−105.7 ± 72.0
−46.8 ± 36.3

6.914

<0.00 *

a, b, d > c
(Bonferroni)

β
12–30 Hz

Grip (a)
Gamepad (b)
Handle_I (c)
Handle_B (d)

−33.0 ± 16.4
−21.4 ± 44.1
−81.1 ± 60.9
−36.3 ± 42.2

3.567

<0.02 *

b>c
(Bonferroni)

α
8–12 Hz

Grip (a)
Gamepad (b)
Handle_I (c)
Handle_B (d)

114.0 ± 48.2
141.7 ± 175.4
188.9 ± 122.7
171.3 ± 86.5

0.782

0.512

β
12–30 Hz

Grip (a)
Gamepad (b)
Handle_I (c)
Handle_B (d)

120.4 ± 67.1
107.1 ± 117.9
141.9 ± 40.5
146.1 ± 186.1

0.247

0.863

ERD

ERS

The α wave ERD revealed that the Handle_I task was more significant than the other
three tasks (F(3,6) = 6.914, p < 0.05), and the F-value indicating the difference between the
groups was clearly larger than the other groups. The β wave ERD showed that the Handle_I
task significantly decreased for the gamepad operation task (F(3,6) = 3.567, p < 0.05). On

Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 883

12 of 14

the other hand, the ERS of the α and β waves demonstrated a large difference within the
group but a small difference between the groups, and outliers were found in some data,
indicating that these data were not suitable for comparison. Therefore, movement intention
of tilting the balance handle for the α and β waves was clearly distinguished from the
other tasks through ERD comparison; however, as the normality test of the ERS was not
passed, there was no process characteristics found while recovering to the idle rhythm
state after movement.
4. Discussion
Most of the post-stroke patients with hemiplegia have dysfunction of the upper
extremity. The usage of an assistive trainer capable of bilateral exercise to help these
patients exercise is an effective rehabilitation strategy [26]. Moreover, studies using serious
games to reduce the rejection and boredom of patients toward treatment and induce
voluntary participation have been actively ongoing in recent years [27]. In the present
study, we developed a novel balance handle as a symmetric upper extremity trainer capable
of extension, flexion, pronation, and supination of the upper extremity. We collected the
sEMG signal data while the subjects were playing a serious game and recorded the EEG
signal data while the subjects were performing basic movements with the balance handle,
to analyze the effectiveness of the device as an assistive tool for rehabilitation. In particular,
the effectiveness test using the EEG signals was conducted to compare the movement
intention with the balance handle to the movement intention in other types of operational
methods (hand gripping and gamepad operation) via analysis of the ERD and ERS values.
Normality tests were also conducted, and two-way ANOVA and post-hoc analyses were
performed for comparative studies.
The triceps brachii were activated during the extension movements, whereas the
biceps brachii and deltoid muscles were activated during the flexion movements. The
deltoid muscles on the opposite side were activated during the tilting of the balance handle
to the left or to the right. This ensured that the extensor and flexor muscle activities,
essential for increasing the hand and foot functions while moving the balance handle, were
properly executed, demonstrating similar sEMG characteristics to other upper extremity
trainers [28]. With the balance handle, the ERD peak values were relatively lower while
showing higher ERS peak values compared to other types of operating methods. It was
noteworthy that the task of pressing the balance handle button revealed a decrease in the
ERD peak compared to the task of hand gripping and gamepad operation, which did not
show much difference in exercise volume. The lower the ERD peak was, the higher the
movement intention was; therefore, it can be inferred that a higher level of movement
intention was expressed in the task of utilizing the balance handle [29]. However, for the
ERS peak, the higher values reflected more short-term states of inhibiting movement, which
corresponds to a previous study that the ERS phenomenon was not necessarily associated
with muscle activation in motor cortical networks [30]. As there were some outliers found
and data normality was not achieved, detailed classification of the frequency bands needs
to be further conducted to reduce individual differences related to motor functions.
Most of the previous studies have demonstrated the prediction of movement intention for only a single type of upper extremity movement or either left or right side of
the body movement using ERD analysis [31,32]. By contrast, the present study derived
movement intention while users operated the balance handle, and showed a considerable
difference compared to the other types of operational methods. These data demonstrated
the potential for various applications using the upper extremity trainer to bring out an
excellent rehabilitative effect, not only through muscle growth but also via identification of
large movement intentions inducing brain activation. To develop specific applications to
robot rehabilitation or nerve control using brain–computer interface (BCI) technologies,
further studies are required to achieve consistent outcomes in securing and comparing the
movement intention patterns; for example, by improving the signal processing methods.

Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 883

13 of 14

Author Contributions: Conceptualization, S.-T.C.; methodology, J.-H.P.; formal analysis, J.-H.P.
and H.-S.M.; investigation, J.-H.P., H.-S.M., H.K. and S.-T.C.; resources, S.-T.C.; writing—original
draft preparation, J.-H.P. and H.-S.M.; writing—review and editing, H.K. and S.-T.C.; visualization,
H.-S.M.; funding acquisition, S.-T.C. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of
the manuscript.
Funding: This work was supported by “Emerging Technology Integrated Design Education program
(P0012725)” program, a R&D project initiated by the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy, Republic
of Korea, and by the ITRC (Information Technology Research Center) support program (IITP-20202018-0-01426) supervised by the IITP (Institute for Information & Communications Technology
Planning & Evaluation) funded by the Ministry of Science and ICT, Republic of Korea.
Institutional Review Board Statement: All experiments were performed in accordance with the
relevant guidelines of Korea Polytechnic University.
Informed Consent Statement: All participants provided informed written consent.
Data Availability Statement: The datasets generated during this study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.
2.

3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

8.
9.
10.
11.

12.

13.
14.

15.
16.

Donkor, E.S. Stroke in the 21st century: A snapshot of the burden, epidemiology, and quality of life. Stroke Res. Treat. 2018,
2018, 3238165. [PubMed]
Franceschini, M.; Goffredo, M.; Pournajaf, S.; Paravati, S.; Agosti, M.; De Pisi, F.; Galafate, D.; Posteraro, F. Predictors of activities
of daily living outcomes after upper limb robot-assisted therapy in subacute stroke patients. PLoS ONE 2018, 13, e0193235.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Rafsten, L.; Danielsson, A.; Sunnerhagen, K.S. Anxiety after stroke: A systematic review and meta-analysis. J. Rehabil. Med. 2018,
50, 769–778. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Lee, M.J.; Lee, J.H.; Koo, H.M.; Lee, S.M. Effectiveness of bilateral arm training for improving extremity function and activities of
daily living performance in hemiplegic patients. J. Stroke. Cerebrovasc. Dis. 2017, 26, 1020–1025. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Stinear, C.M.; Byblow, W.D.; Ackerley, S.J.; Barber, P.A.; Smith, M.C. Predicting recovery potential for individual stroke patients
increases rehabilitation efficiency. Stroke 2017, 48, 1011–1019. [CrossRef]
Li, S. Spasticity, motor recovery, and neural plasticity after stroke. Front. Neurol. 2017, 8, 120. [CrossRef]
Figlewski, K.; Blicher, J.U.; Mortensen, J.; Severinsen, K.E.; Nielsen, J.F.; Andersen, H. Transcranial direct current stimulation
potentiates improvements in functional ability in patients with chronic stroke receiving constraint-induced movement therapy.
Stroke 2017, 48, 229–232. [CrossRef]
Bertani, R.; Melegari, C.; Maria, C.; Bramanti, A.; Bramanti, P.; Calabrò, R.S. Effects of robot-assisted upper limb rehabilitation in
stroke patients: A systematic review with meta-analysis. Neurol. Sci. 2017, 38, 1561–1569. [CrossRef]
Hsieh, Y.W.; Lin, Y.H.; Zhu, J.D.; Wu, C.Y.; Lin, Y.P.; Chen, C.C. Treatment effects of upper limb action observation therapy and
mirror therapy on rehabilitation outcomes after subacute stroke: A pilot study. Behav. Neurol. 2020, 2020, 6250524. [CrossRef]
Sheng, B.; Zhang, Y.; Meng, W.; Deng, C.; Xie, S. Bilateral robots for upper-limb stroke rehabilitation: State of the art and future
prospects. Med. Eng. Phys. 2016, 38, 587–606. [CrossRef]
Sánchez-Herrera-Baeza, P.; Cano-de-la-Cuerda, R.; Oña-Simbaña, E.D.; Palacios-Ceña, D.; Pérez-Corrales, J.; Cuenca-Zaldivar,
J.N.; Gueita-Rodriguez, J.; Balaguer-Bernaldo de Quirós, C.; Jardón-Huete, A.; Cuesta-Gomez, A. The impact of a novel immersive
virtual reality technology associated with serious games in parkinson’s disease patients on upper limb rehabilitation: A mixed
methods intervention study. Sensors 2020, 20, 2168. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Gutiérrez, Á.; Sepúlveda-Muñoz, D.; Gil-Agudo, Á.; de los Reyes Guzmán, A. Serious game platform with haptic feedback and
EMG monitoring for upper limb rehabilitation and smoothness quantification on spinal cord injury patients. Appl. Sci. 2020,
10, 963. [CrossRef]
Proença, J.P.; Quaresma, C.; Vieira, P. Serious games for upper limb rehabilitation: A systematic review. Disabil. Rehabil. Assist.
Technol. 2018, 13, 95–100. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Frolov, A.A.; Mokienko, O.; Lyukmanov, R.; Biryukova, E.; Kotov, S.; Turbina, L.; Nadareyshvily, G.; Bushkova, Y. Post-stroke
rehabilitation training with a motor-imagery-based brain-computer interface (bci)-controlled hand exoskeleton: A randomized
controlled multicenter trial. Front. Neurol. 2017, 11, 400. [CrossRef]
Pereira, J.; Ofner, P.; Schwarz, A.; Sburlea, A.I.; Müller-Putz, G.R. EEG neural correlates of goal-directed movement intention.
Neuroimage 2017, 149, 129–140. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Wang, K.; Xu, M.; Wang, Y.; Zhang, S.; Chen, L.; Ming, D. Enhance decoding of pre-movement EEG patterns for brain-computer
interfaces. J. Neural. Eng. 2020, 17, 016033. [CrossRef]

Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 883

17.
18.
19.
20.

21.
22.
23.
24.

25.
26.
27.
28.

29.
30.
31.
32.

14 of 14

Dehem, S.; Montedoro, V.; Edwards, M.G.; Detrembleur, C.; Stoquart, G.; Renders, A.; Heins, S.; Dehez, B.; Lejeune, T.
Development of a robotic upper limb assessment to configure a serious game. NeuroRehabilitation 2019, 44, 263–274. [CrossRef]
Zhang, L.; Guo, S.; Sun, Q. Development and assist-as-needed control of an end-effector upper limb rehabilitation robot. Appl.
Sci. 2020, 10, 6684. [CrossRef]
Mekbib, D.B.; Han, J.; Zhang, L.; Fang, S.; Jiang, H.; Zhu, J.; Roe, A.W.; Xu, D. Virtual reality therapy for upper limb rehabilitation
in patients with stroke: A meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. Brain Inj. 2020, 34, 445–465. [CrossRef]
Hughes, C.M.L.; Padilla, A.; Hintze, A.; Raymundo, T.M.; Sera, M.; Weidner, S.; Ontiveros, J.; Peng, T.; Encarcion, A.; Cruz, Z.A.;
et al. Developing an mHealth app for post-stroke upper limb rehabilitation: Feedback from US and Ethiopian clinicians. Health
Inform. J. 2020, 26, 1104–1117. [CrossRef]
Maier, M.; Ballester, B.R.; Verschure, P.F. Principles of neurorehabilitation after stroke based on motor learning and brain plasticity
mechanisms. Front. Syst. Neurosci. 2019, 13, 74. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Spüler, M.; López-Larraz, E.; Ramos-Murguialday, A. On the design of EEG-based movement decoders for completely paralyzed
stroke patients. J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. 2018, 15, 110. [CrossRef]
Trigili, E.; Grazi, L.; Crea, S.; Accogli, A.; Carpaneto, J.; Micera, S.; Vitiello, N.; Panarese, A. Detection of movement onset using
EMG signals for upper-limb exoskeletons in reaching tasks. J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. 2019, 16, 45. [CrossRef]
Choi, M.H.; Kim, B.; Kim, H.S.; Gim, S.Y.; Kim, W.R.; Chung, S.C. Perceptual threshold level for the tactile stimulation and
response features of ERD/ERS-based specific indices upon changes in high-frequency vibrations. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 2017,
11, 207. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Wilson, R.; Mullinger, K.J.; Francis, S.T.; Mayhew, S.D. The relationship between negative BOLD responses and ERS and ERD of
alpha/beta oscillations in visual and motor cortex. Neuroimage 2019, 199, 635–650. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Lotze, M.; Ladda, A.M.; Stephan, K.M. Cerebral plasticity as the basis for upper limb recovery following brain damage. Neurosci.
Biobehav. Rev. 2019, 99, 49–58. [CrossRef]
Alcover, E.A.; Jaume-i-Capó, A.; Moyà-Alcover, B. PROGame: A process framework for serious game development for motor
rehabilitation therapy. PLoS ONE 2018, 13, e0197383.
Angelova, S.; Ribagin, S.; Raikova, R.; Veneva, I. Power frequency spectrum analysis of surface EMG signals of upper limb
muscles during elbow flexion-A comparison between healthy subjects and stroke survivors. J. Electromyogr. Kinesiol. 2018, 38,
7–16. [CrossRef]
Jia, T.; Liu, K.; Qian, C.; Li, C.; Ji, L. Denoising algorithm for event-related desynchronization-based motor intention recognition
in robot-assisted stroke rehabilitation training with brain-machine interaction. J. Neurosci. Methods 2020, 346, 108909. [CrossRef]
Little, S.; Bonaiuto, J.; Barnes, G.; Bestmann, S. Human motor cortical beta bursts relate to movement planning and response
errors. PLoS ONE 2019, 17, e3000479. [CrossRef]
Weersink, J.B.; Maurits, N.M.; de Jong, B.M. EEG time-frequency analysis provides arguments for arm swing support in human
gait control. Gait. Posture 2019, 70, 71–78. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Wairagkar, M.; Hayashi, Y.; Nasuto, S.J. Exploration of neural correlates of movement intention based on characterisation of
temporal dependencies in electroencephalography. PLoS ONE 2018, 13, e0193722. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

