ICICTE 2018 Proceedings
!

A"VIRTUAL"REALITY"ENVIRONMENT"SIMULATING"DRUG"
USE"IN"SCHOOLS:"EFFECT"ON"EMOTIONS"AND"MOOD"
STATES"
"
Kalliopi"Evangelia"Stavroulia,"Cyprus"University"of"
Technology"
Cyprus"
Evangelia"Baka,"University"of"Geneva,"Switzerland"
Maria"Christofi"and"Despina"MichaelMGrigoriou,"Cyprus"
University"of"Technology,"Cyprus"
Nadia"MagnenatMThalmann,"University"of"Geneva,"""""""""
Switzerland""
Andreas"Lanitis,"Cyprus"University"of"Technology,"Cyprus"
Abstract
Virtual Reality (VR) can be exploited as a teacher-training tool promoting
understanding of students’ problematic situations. This paper aims to
investigate the potential of using VR for teacher training related to substance
use by students. During the experiment participants were exposed to a virtual
environment showing drug addicted students. Changes in participants’
emotional states before and after the exposure to the virtual environment were
recorded using EEG measurements, heart rate recordings and self-reported
data. The results indicate significant changes to participants’ negative
emotional and mood states, suggesting that the VR experience had a strong
impact on them.
Keywords: Virtual reality, emotions, substance use, teacher education,
empathy
Introduction
Substance use is not only a major societal concern, but also a serious problem
within the school environment. Research results concerning drug use in
schools, indicate cause for concern as there are many cases recorded, even in
primary education. Thus, substance use in schools is a fact and a real problem
and not a possibility and as such should be treated. However, this specific type
of problem has always been a taboo subject, and neglect has been an ongoing
challenge as the school and the teachers are afraid to deal with it. It is essential
that educational staff is in the position to realize that students dealing with
drug use disorders are not the problem, but they are facing a problem.
Additionally, it is of paramount importance that teachers are not only open to
accept this type of student disorder that might occur in their school or
classroom, but also be able to detect possible symptoms of students associated
with such disorders (such as aggression towards teachers or classmates,
indolence, sleepiness, etc.), as their role is significant to the promotion of
preventive actions and raising students’ awareness. However, preventive
!

225!

ICICTE 2018 Proceedings
!

actions by teachers are unclear and teacher training in issues concerning
substance use in school is missing. As a result, teachers face similar situations
with embarrassment, weakness and fear to face them, while at the school level
when such an incident occurs, the usual solution is the transfer of students to
another school so as to transfer the problem elsewhere.
Considering all the above, substance use issues in schools is an enormous and
challenging problem and it is everyone’s duty, especially teachers’, to act
instead of being idle waiting for things to change or by transmitting the
problem elsewhere. Teachers need to act, become more sensitive and deal
responsively with students experiencing these disorders. The first step for
changing teachers’ attitude towards the problem and at the same time
cultivating their care, compassion and empathy towards problematic students,
is to put them in the position of the student facing the problem, in an effort to
make them understand and change their behavior for the well-being of the
student. Thus, we propose a novel Virtual Reality (VR) application that could
be used to support the cultivation of teachers’ empathy skills regarding
substance use in schools, which, to the best of our knowledge, has not been
done before. Literature regarding the use of VR in teacher education is
extremely limited, while substance use related training scenarios have not
been used as part of teacher preparation. Using VR based methodology will
allow teachers to put themselves in the position of a student that faces
substance use problems, in order to understand in depth, the problem raising
their awareness. Another significant point is that the proposed VR approach
addresses a real problem of inadequate practical training in teacher education,
while the scenario is based on real-life incidents and real teachers’ needs. In
the long-term we aim to develop a VR tool that could be implemented as part
of teacher education within universities or other organizations.
The paper describes an experiment that aims to investigate the possibility of
cultivating empathy skills to in-service and potential teachers using VR
methodology. Moreover, the experiment aimed to investigate participants’
emotional states before and after the use of VR. This was essential, as Virtual
Reality Environments (VREs) can represent real-life situations, and thus
emotions have an integral part to play during the experience of the users.
Additionally, investigating participants’ emotional experiences is essential to
further investigate whether those states affect presence levels within the VR
environment and whether some of the states might be used as parameters in
order to design the scenario within a VR system for training purposes related
to the specific group of teachers. Although presence was also an integral part
of the current experiment along with the cultivation of empathy, the results are
still under analysis. Therefore, only the results regarding participants’
emotional states will be presented in this paper.
Related Work: Emotions and VR
Over the years, emotions have caught the interest of the scientific community.
Nevertheless, there is a wide range of scientific opinions regarding the role of
emotions. There are scientists who argue that people are always experiencing
some emotions. Others claim that emotions do not play a significant role to the
!

226!

ICICTE 2018 Proceedings
!

behavior of human, and still others claim that emotions are the primary
motivational system of humans and that emotions play a key role in
motivation (Izard, 1991). There is a need to investigate emotional experiences
in VR environments as there is a lack of research regarding the emotional
experiences of users (Felnhofer et al., 2015). The question that arises is why to
investigate emotional experiences in VREs. This derives from the fact that
emotions “are implicated in our phenomenological understanding of the
physical world” (Morie, Williams, Dozois, & Luigi, 2005, p. 1). Media such
as books or television can provoke emotions (Reiners et al., 2014). Thus, as
VREs can represent real-life situations, emotions have an integral part to play
during the experience of the users. Moreover, as Morie et al. (2005, p.2) argue
“emotions cannot be easily dismissed when focusing on pedagogical goals.”
Despite the fact the VR environments “provide the unique possibility of
creating rich and interactive true-to-life replications of emotionally charged
scenarios and stimuli,” the manipulation of the data regarding emotions from
researchers is problematic (Felnhofer et al., 2015, p. 48). Felnhofer et al. argue
that limited emotional experiences have been investigated in VR use including
relaxation, joy, sadness, anxiety, anger and boredom. Anxiety is one emotion
that has been addressed by many researchers in the context of using VR for
mental health problems and psychological treatment (Bouchard, 2010). Thus,
as the goal of the proposed VR system is to train teachers, their emotional
state within the VRE during their training cannot be ignored.
There are several methods for the recognition of the emotions in VR. First of
all, skin conductance has been used, as well as heart rate variability (HRV) in
order to capture the responses of autonomic nervous system (Baumgartner,
Valko, Esslen, & Jäncke, 2006; Kim, Rosenthal, Zielinski, & Brady, 2014).
Moreover, electrodermal activity (EDA) has recently been tested as a
reflection of the sympathetic activation of the autonomic nervous system
(Felnhofer et al., 2015). Lastly, EEG has been used in order to capture the
brain signal and its possible alterations as well as self-reports (Menezes et al.,
2017; Rodríguez, Rey, Clemente, Wrzesien, & Alcañiz, 2015). For the
purpose of the current research a multimodal approach was used, combining
HRV, EEG, self-reports and head movement detection in order to be able to
determine the intention of the user. The use of this multimodal approach was
decided in order to achieve higher reliability of the results based on the
outcomes of each instrument.
Methodology
The Scenario
The scenario was inspired by the real incident that took place in 2017 in a
school in Cyprus which had to do with the use of substances given to a 12year-old student by his classmates, in the form of pills and after threats
(Kounnou, 2017). The substance that is portrayed in the scenario is cannabis
(also mentioned as marijuana in the scenario) and it was chosen because
according to the 2017 Country Drug Report of Cyprus and Greece, cannabis
was the most commonly used illicit substance in these two countries, and its
use was concentrated among young adults aged 15-34 years (EMCDDA,
!

227!

ICICTE 2018 Proceedings
!

2017). The scenario that was designed takes place in the school outdoor space
during break time. A female student (named Anna) is watching her classmate
(Nikos), who is sitting on a bench, having done substance use and is
experiencing the so-called bad trip (all hallucinogenic, psychedelic drugs
including others like marijuana and cocaine can produce intense and
distressing effects like frightening hallucinations and delusions) (Hartney &
Gans, 2017). Anna is asking another classmate (Kostas) for explanations and
after admitting substance use by the student (Nikos), he is trying to pressure
her to smoke a cannabis cigarette. Anna refuses and being threatened by
Kostas and because of fear she remains indifferent when finally, the teacher
approaches asking questions about the student drug user.
The Virtual Environment
The VR system that was used for the experiment included the Head Mounted
Display (HMD) Oculus Rift CV. The VR application was developed with the
Unity© game engine. The 3D avatars (teachers and students) were created
using the online software Autodesk® Character Generator. The VR school
environment is presented in Figure 1.

Figure 1. The virtual school in unity and the student’s avatars.
The Research Tools
A combination of tools was used for the current research. Two questionnaires
were used pre- and post- the experiment, including closed-ended Likert-scale
questions. The questionnaire consisted of questions regarding participants’
demographic data, participants’ empathy skills and participants’ mood states.
The empathy scale used was based on already existing and validated scales
with many modifications so as to meet the needs of the current research and in
close collaboration with an expert psychologist on drug issues. The mood
states scale was based on the Positive and Negative Affect Schedule
(PANAS), which comprises of two mood scales, one measuring positive affect
and the other measuring negative affect. Moreover, the fitness wristband Fitbit
Charge 2 was used for the measurement of the participants’ heart rate, and the
14-channel wireless EEG EMOTIV EPOC+ for the recording of the brain
signals. Furthermore, user statistics, recorded from users’ head movement
through Oculus, was recorded real time through the VR application and was
used to track where the user was looking throughout the procedure.
The Sample
Α total number of 25 participants (n=25) took part in the experiment with 88%
(n=22) coming from Cyprus, one participant from Greece, one from Serbia
and one from Ukraine. Among the 25 participants, 52% experienced within
the VR the perspectives of the teacher and the student drug user, and 48%
experienced the perspectives teachers and student Anna. Of participants, 72%
!

228!

ICICTE 2018 Proceedings
!

(n=18) were female, and 28% (n=7) were male. Most of the respondents were
from 18 to 39 years old (84%), 8% were from 40 to 49, and 8% were from 5059 years old. Of the participants, 64% of the participants were active teachers,
while 36% were not currently working as teachers. The results indicated that
36% of the participants had no teaching experience; 20% reported to have
teaching experience between 5 to 10 years, 16% reported less than 1 years’
experience; 12% reported experience between 11 to 20 years, 12% reported
experience between 1 to 4 years and 4% reported over 20 years of experience.
The results indicated that 36% of the participants currently serve in secondary
education, 36% do not serve as teachers, 24% serve in higher education, and
4% in primary education. Regarding participants’ teaching specialty, the
results indicate a variety of fields including computer science (20%),
multimedia and graphic arts (16%), mathematics (12%), literature (12%),
foreign language (8%), primary school teacher, physical education (sports),
sociology, speech pathology, and web design. Regarding participants’
experience in the use of VR environments, the results indicate that most of the
participants were not familiar with the use of virtual reality as 36% claimed to
have never used VR in the past, 32% claimed to have ‘a little’ experience in
the use of VR, 12% claimed to have ‘moderate’ experience, 12 claimed
‘much’ VR experience, and 8% claimed to be ‘very much’ familiar with the
use of VR.
The Procedure
Initially, the participants were given a consent form with the instructions
regarding the experiment. Then, they had to complete the pre-questionnaire
and after the completion of the questionnaire, there were preparations for the
use of EMOTIV EPOC+, Oculus Rift and wristband to record the necessary
data. The experiment then began within the virtual world. The exposure of the
participants in the virtual environment lasted approximately 5 minutes,
depending on the pace with which they were advancing the dialogues of the
two scenes. After the end of the experiment, the participants were asked to
complete the post-questionnaire.
Results
Positive and Negative Affect Scale Results
Reliability analysis was conducted on the variables of the positive and
negative affect scale for both the pre- and post- questionnaires. According to
the results, the overall alpha for the pre-test scale is 0.841>0.7 indicating high
reliability of the variables. According to the results the overall alpha for the
post-test scale is 0.864>0.7 indicating high reliability of the variables. The
results from the tests of normality (namely the Kolmogorov-Smirnov Test and
the Shapiro-Wilk Test) both in pre- and post- questionnaires, revealed that
most of the items are below 0.05; therefore, the data significantly deviate from
a normal distribution, and non-parametric tests were used for the analysis.
A Wilcoxon test was used to understand whether there was a difference in
participants’ positive and negative mood states before and after the use of VR.
The response continuum for each positive and negative mood state scale is a
6-point scale (not at all-low-a little-moderately-very-extremely) indicating the
!

229!

ICICTE 2018 Proceedings
!

extent respondents agree or disagree with each mood state. For the problem
above the null and alternative hypothesis were:
Hnull: There will be no difference in the rankings of participants
regarding their positive and negative mood states before and after the
use of VR.
Halt: There will be a difference in the rankings of participants regarding
their positive and negative mood states before and after the use of VR.
A Wilcoxon signed ranks-test indicated that some post-test scores were
statistically significantly different than pre-test scores. Thus, some of
participants’ mood states were statistically significant different after the use of
the VR (see Figure 2). More specifically, the use of VR elicited a statistically
significant change in participants’ state of fear (Z=-3.51, p=0.000). Indeed,
median score rating for the state afraid was Mdn=6.0 (SD=1.05) before the
use of VR and Mdn=4.0 (SD=2.05) after the use of VR. Thus, we reject the
null hypothesis for the mood state of fear. The results indicate a change in
participants’ mood state of interest before and after the use of VR Z=-2.14,
p=0.035. However, median score rating for the mood interest does not indicate
a significant difference before (Mdn=5.0, SD=1.19) and after the use of VR
(Mdn=5.0, SD=1.53). Participants tended to be more active before the use of
VR (Mdn=5.0, SD=1.22), than after (Mdn=4.0, SD=1.50), Z=-2.43, p=0.015.
Moreover, the results indicate a statistically significant difference in
participants’ state of fear before and after the use of VR, Z=-2.31, p=0.21.
Indeed, median score rating for the state nervous was Mdn=5.0 (SD=1.73)
before the use of the VR and Mdn=3.0 (SD=1.99) after the use of VR. Thus,
we reject the null hypothesis for the mood state nervous. Moreover, the results
indicate that the use of VR elicited a statistically significant change in
participants’ state of sadness, Z=-2.94, p=0.003. The median score rating for
the state sad was Mdn=6.0 (SD=1.55) before the use of the VR and Mdn=2.0
(SD=1.96) after the use of VR. Hence, we reject the null hypothesis for the
mood state of sad. Furthermore, the results indicated a statistically significant
change in participants’ state upset, Z=-3.91, p=0.000. Indeed, the median
score rating for the state upset was Mdn=6.0 (SD=0.91) before the use of the
VR and Mdn=2.0 (SD=1.96) after the use of VR. Thus, we also reject the null
hypothesis for the mood state of upset.
A Wilcoxon signed-rank test showed that the use of VR elicited a statistically
significant change regarding participants’ state of feeling ashamed before
(Mdn=1.0, SD=1.11) and after (Mdn=2.0, SD=1.80) the use of VR, Z=-2.72,
p=0.006. Additionally, there are indications for participants’ fatigue after the
use of the VR, since the median score rating for the state sleepy was Mdn=5.0
(SD=1.19) before the use of the VR and Mdn=3.0 (SD=1.80) after the use of
VR. Moreover, according to the results the participants were more
downhearted after the use of VR, Z=-3.19, p=0.001. Indeed, the median score
rating for the state downhearted was Mdn=6.0 (SD=1.12) before the use of the
VR and Mdn=3.0 (SD=1.89) after the use of VR. Hence, we reject the null
hypothesis for the mood states ashamed, sleepy and downhearted.

!

230!

ICICTE 2018 Proceedings
!

A Wilcoxon signed-rank test showed that the use of VR did not elicit a
statistically significant change in participants’ inspiration (Z=-0.25, p=0.79).
Moreover, a Wilcoxon signed-rank test showed that the use of VR did not
elicit a statistically significant change in the states of calm (Z =-0.83, p=0.41),
confidence (Z=-1.22, p=0.22), tired (Z=-0.47, p=0.64), alert (Z=-0.09,
p=0.92), relaxed (Z=-0.64, p=0.52), determined (Z=-1.40, p=0.16) and
concentrating (Z=-1.89, p=0.59).

Figure 2. Participant’s mood states before and after the use of VR that were
mostly affected.
Head Movements
Data was collected regarding the head movements of the participants, and
more specifically the objects/people they were looking at more. As mentioned
before, all the participants in both groups experienced Perspective I (teacher),
in which, 18 out the 25 participants, turned their gaze more times towards
Kostas (the student/bully). In Perspective II (Student-drug user), 9 out of 12
participants also turned their gaze more times towards Kostas. In Perspective
III (healthy female student) 8 out of 13 again turned their gaze more times
towards Kostas. This can be explained by the fact that as observed by the
video footage of the participants, they weren’t moving their head or their body
as much (or at all), and in all three perspectives in front of them was Kostas,
so they were looking at him all the time.
Heart Rate and EEG Data
During the VR experience, the heart rate of the participants was measured.
The results indicate a significant difference before and after the VR
experience. HB1 represents the heart rate before the experiment (M=80.92
bpm, SD=10.59 bpm), while HB2 shows the heart rate after the experiment,
(M=87.21 bpm, SD=10.97 bpm (see Figure 3).

!

231!

ICICTE 2018 Proceedings
!

Figure 3. Participant’s heart rate before and after the use of VR.
The EEG data are under analysis in EEGLab and NBT toolboxes of
MATLAB. The results so far indicate a predominance of the alpha state in
frontal and parietal areas for the perspective of the student (healthy or drug
user), verifying the results of the questionnaire and the increase in the heart
rate. Moreover, there seems to be a difference in the occipital lobe between
the three perspectives that can possibly be explained by the intensity of the
recruited visual attention.
Discussion
The aim of the current paper was to present the initial results of an
investigation regarding the use of VR in teacher education regarding substance
use related problems in the school environment. The results are still under
analysis; however, the first results indicate that the use of VR elicited a
statistically significant change in participants’ negative mood states. It seems
that the context of the scenario had a strong impact on participants’ mood
states. Before the use of VR participants did not feel fear, nervousness,
sadness, upset, ashamed or downhearted. However, after the use of VR, the
results indicate a significant change of those states. Regarding the positive
states no statistically significant changes were found after the use of VR.
Thus, the scenario affected only the negative states that were absent before the
experiment.
Further research is required to investigate participants’ mood state changes
with a different scenario, because it is possible that the context of the scenario
with the drug use was indeed a taboo problem for the participants. Indeed, inservice and experienced teachers after the end of the experiment expressed
strongly the opinion that it is not their responsibility to deal with students
facing drug problems and their main concern must be to report the situation to
the principal’s office to transfer the responsibilities. What is interesting is that
those teachers reported to have encountered such an incident within their
classrooms but refused to act and preferred to ignore the student during the
lesson. Thus, raising teachers’ awareness and sensitizing them towards serious
problematic conditions including substance use should become a priority in
teacher training and VR can provide a training tool for this cause.
Nevertheless, this first preliminary investigation provided significant insights
regarding the use of a VR based approach to teacher training in relation to
substance use problems in the school setting and useful feedback was received

!

232!

ICICTE 2018 Proceedings
!

for future changes in the application. Moreover, regarding the effects of
cannabis on a user, further research is required, and interviews will be
conducted with ex-cannabis users, so that the virtual effects depicted are as
close to reality as possible. Additionally, after feedback from some of the
teachers/participants, the drug incident would be more likely to take place in
the bathrooms of the school and not in an open space like the schoolyard in
the future version of the application.
Acknowledgements
Authors acknowledge funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020
Framework Programme through NOTRE Project (H2020-TWINN-2015,
Grant Agreement Number: 692058).

References
Baumgartner, T., Valko, L., Esslen, M., & Jäncke, L. (2006). Neural correlate
of spatial presence in an arousing and noninteractive virtual reality: an
EEG and psychophysiology study. CyberPsychology & Behavior, 9(1),
30-45.
Bouchard, S. (2010). Emotions and the emotional valence afforded by the
virtual environment. InTechOpen. doi: 10.5772/12957
European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction (EMCDDA).
(2017). Cyprus, Country Drug Report 2017. Retrieved from
http://www.emcdda.europa.eu/system/files/publications/4514/TD0416911
ENN.pdf
Felnhofer, A., Kothgassner, O. D., Schmidt, M., Heinzle, A. K., Beutl, L.,
Hlavacs, H., & Kryspin-Exner, I. (2015). Is virtual reality emotionally
arousing? Investigating five emotion inducing virtual park scenarios.
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 82, 48-56.
Hartney, E., & Gans, S. (2017, Dec). What is a bad trip? Psychedelic drugs
can induce fear or distress. verywellmind. Retrieved from
https://www.verywellmind.com/what-is-a-bad-trip-22071
Izard, C. E. (1991). The psychology of emotions. New York, NY: Springer
Science & Business Media.
Kim, K., Rosenthal, M. Z., Zielinski, D. J., & Brady, R. (2014). Effects of
virtual environment platforms on emotional responses. Computer
Methods and Programs in Biomedicine, 113(3), 882–893.
Kounnou, A. (2017, March 14). They gave substance to my 12-year-old son at
school complains Father. Reporter. Retrieved from
http://www.reporter.com.cy/editors-choice/article/187411
Menezes, M. L. R., Samara, A., Galway, L., Sant’Anna, A., Verikas, A.,
Alonso-Fernandez, F., ... & Bond, R. (2017). Towards emotion
recognition for virtual environments: An evaluation of EEG features on
benchmark dataset. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 21(6), 10031013.
Morie, J. F., Williams, J., Dozois, A., & Luigi, D. P. (2005). The fidelity of
“feel”: emotional affordance in virtual environments. Retrieved from:
http://www.dtic.mil/get-tr-doc/pdf?AD=ADA459193

!

233!

ICICTE 2018 Proceedings
!

Reiners, T., Teras, H., Chang, V., Wood, L. C., Gregory, S., Gibson, D.,
Petter, N., & Teras, M. (2014, January). Authentic, immersive, and
emotional experience in virtual learning environments: The fear of dying
as an important learning experience in a simulation. In Transformative,
innovative and engaging. Proceedings of the 23rd Annual Teaching
Learning Forum. Perth, Australia. Retrieved from
https://clt.curtin.edu.au/events/conferences/tlf/tlf2014/refereed/reiners.pdf
Rodríguez, A., Rey, B., Clemente, M., Wrzesien, M., & Alcañiz, M. (2015).
Assessing brain activations associated with emotional regulation during
virtual reality mood induction procedures. Expert Systems with
Applications, 42(3), 1699-1709.
!
Author!Details!
Kalliopi Evangelia Stavroulia
kalliopi.stavroulia@cut.ac.cy
Evangelia Baka
ebaka@miralab.ch
Maria Christofi
mu.christofi@edu.cut.ac.cy
Despina Michael-Grigoriou
despina.grigoriou@cut.ac.cy
Nadia Magnenat-Thalmann
thalmann@miralab.ch
Andreas Lanitis
andreas.lanitis@cut.ac.cy
!

!

234!

