Author manuscript, published in "IEEE Transactions on Computational Intelligence and AI in games (2013)"
1

Two Brains, One Game: Design and Evaluation of a
Multi-User BCI Video Game Based on Motor
Imagery

hal-00784886, version 1 - 4 Feb 2013

Laurent Bonnet (Inria Rennes), Fabien Lotte (Inria Bordeaux), and Anatole Lécuyer (Inria Rennes)

Abstract—How can we connect two brains to a video game
by means of a BCI, and what will happen when we do so?
How will the two users behave, and how will they perceive this
novel common experience? In this paper we are concerned with
the design and evaluation of multi-user BCI applications. We
created a multi-user videogame called “BrainArena” in which
two users can play a simple football game by means of two
BCIs. They can score goals on the left or right side of the
screen by simply imagining left or right hand movements. To
add another interesting element, the gamers can play in a
collaborative manner (their two mental activities are combined to
score in the same goal), or in a competitive manner (the gamers
must push the ball in opposite directions). Two experiments
were conducted to evaluate the performance and subjective
experience of users in the different conditions. In the first
experiment we compared single-user situation with one multiuser situation: the collaborative task. Experiment 1 showed that
multi-user conditions are significantly preferred in terms of
fun and motivation compared to the single-user condition. The
performance of some users was even significantly improved in
the multi-user condition. A subset of well-performing subjects
was involved in the second experiment, where we added the
competitive task. Experiment 2 suggested that competitive and
collaborative conditions may lead to similar performances and
motivations. However the corresponding gaming experiences can
be perceived differently among the participants. Taken together
our results suggest that multi-user BCI applications can be
operational, effective, and more engaging for participants.
Index Terms—Brain Computer Interface, Game Design, Multiplayer games, Evaluation.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Brain-Computer Interface technology enables a user to send
commands to a computer or other system using only his/her
brain activity. The most common way to acquire such physiological signal is by using electroencephalography (EEG):
several sensors are placed on the user’s scalp to acquire the
micro currents produced by the activity of neurons in the brain.
The past decade has seen a widespread enthusiasm for this
technology and its potential applications. Many researchers
now drift from the original objective, helping disabled people
to recover a means of interaction with their environment and
surrounding [1], to multimedia applications such as video
games [2].
The video game context adds many new challenges for the
BCI research community, as both the physical and virtual
environments are usually highly complex [3]. Indeed, the
typical gamer is a healthy user that may produce a wide range
of movements during the gaming experience, most of them
disrupting the BCI itself. The virtual environment may also

disturb the BCI usage as it produces many distractors: visual,
tactile or auditory stimuli.
In spite of these challenges, video games hold a lot of
potential for use in BCIs as they aim to entertain and motivate
the users. As the motivation plays a major role in the success
of BCI interaction [4], video games thus represent a highly relevant application field for training and mastering BCI systems.
Previous studies by Leeb et al. [5] or Ron-Angevin et al. [6]
show how using Virtual Reality in BCI feedback improves the
performances of the system, especially with naive or untrained
users. Furthermore, the recent advances in the acquisition
technologies, resulting in low cost EEG devices [7][8], make
the use of BCI feasible in a gaming context outside the
laboratories. Multiple studies have already tackled the use
of EEG-based BCI in a video game context [9], regarding
the interaction techniques and nature of feedback [10], the
performances [10], or the subjective experience [11].
In this paper we focus on a particular interaction paradigm,
which is already widely used in gaming in general but mostly
neglected in BCI research so far: the multi-user interaction.
The objective is to connect multiple users to the same video
game application in real-time, through their brain activity.
We address several challenging questions. The first ones are
related to the technical feasibility and design of the system
itself. We seek to conceive and implement a multi-user BCI
system for gaming purposes, which implies merging multiple
BCI inputs. A tradeoff must be found between immersion and
simplicity for the design of the feedback: while a complex
and immersive feedback will be close to a commercial video
game, a simpler one with reduced distractors could lower the
mental workload, thus facilitating BCI use.
Secondly, how multi-user interaction differs from singleuser control is yet to be studied. Thus, we aim to qualify
and quantify the influence of a multi-user paradigm on the
BCI interaction, with regards to the performances and user
impressions (e.g. motivation or enjoyment).
Therefore, we propose in this paper three contributions:
• BrainArena, a new multi-user BCI video game based on
Motor Imagery. We present its concepts, architecture and
implementation.
• The introduction of two paradigms of interaction for
multi-user BCI applications : a collaborative mode (i.e.
the users share a common goal and a common action),
and a competitive mode (i.e. the two users have conflicting intentions, and their actions are opposed).
• An evaluation of our system in these conditions, on 20

2

naive subjects.
This paper is organised as follows. After reviewing the current state of the art regarding BCI video games, and multi-user
interaction and feedback design, we present the BrainArena
concepts, architecture and implementation. We then move on
to the results and analysis of two evaluations we conducted on
20 naive subjects playing the BrainArena BCI game. The first
experiment was comparing single-user condition with multiuser condition, whereas the second experiment was focused on
collaborative versus competitive situations. We finally discuss
these results and the potential applications of the multi-user
BCI interaction in video games.

prone to muscular artifacts and noise in such situations. The
author qualified and quantified the social behaviors between
the two players, such as utterances and empathic gestures. He
addressed the influence of the BCI on the collaboration level,
compared to mouse control condition. However this paper did
not compare performances nor preferences of users in multiuser versus single-user scenarios. Blankertz et al. reported
using the Berlin-BCI system in a 2-player environment [22],
inspired by the famous video game Pong. This application
was successfully used during the CeBIT expo 2006 (Hanover,
Germany) on 2 subjects performing demonstrations all day.
However to the authors’ best knowledge there exists no formal
description and evaluation of the system.

hal-00784886, version 1 - 4 Feb 2013

II. R ELATED WORK
A variety of games using BCI interaction has already been
developed. Some use the BCI explicitly as a control channel.
In the MindBalance [12] game the player was able to control
the balance of his avatar by focusing on two flickering targets
triggering different SSVEP responses. In the application of
Lotte et al. Use the force! [10], the player was able to lift a
virtual spaceship by performing Motor Imagery (MI) of the
feet (i.e. imagination of feet movements [13]). The control
paradigm used Event-Related Synchronization (ERS) of the
Beta rhythm. The Graz-BCI Game Controller developed by
Scherer et al. [14] was able to connect any BCI or physiological sensor input to a game, using intelligent and context-aware
tools. They used the Emotiv software suite to identify users’
mental states (e.g. excitement or meditation) and facial expressions, to control an avatar in the famous online game World of
Warcraft (WoW). The austrian company g.Tec presented at the
CeBIT expo 2012 (Hanover, Germany) the IntendiX-SOCI (for
Screen-Overlay Control Interface) [15], that relied on SSVEP
to select different items on a screen. Visitors could test it by
controlling an avatar in WoW. Recent research has also been
focused on implicit interaction with video games [16]. Nijholt
et al. introduced in AlphaWow [9] the use of alpha activity to
detect the stress level of the player, automatically adapting the
avatar’s form. Bacteria Hunt [17] was a multimodal BCI game
based on both explicit and implicit BCI interaction: while
the avatar movements were modified by the user stress level
(alpha), a target selection was done using SSVEP detection.
For a more comprehensive overview of BCI use in video
games, the interested reader can refer to [18][9][19].
While researchers were aiming at making BCI interaction
possible in a gaming context, the question of multi-user
interaction rose. Acknowledging the current trends in the video
game usage (e.g. network connection, multimodal interaction)
Nijholt in [20] described his objectives toward a multi-party
and social application of BCI in the future. The author foresaw
an integration of BCI interaction in our media-based social
life (e.g. Video Games, Internet). A first step toward such
multi-party social gaming was presented by Obbink in [21], in
which the author studied the influence on social interaction of
using BCI control (Selection using SSVEP) in a 2-player game
(Mind the sheep!) on the social interaction. As any cooperative
task implies interactions between users, both physical and vocal, it may conflict with the BCI usage itself. EEG systems are

Another issue of BCI game design is the influence of the
feedback presented to the user. The importance of feedback
was raised early in the BCI community [23]. Neuper and
Pfurtscheller reviewed the trends in BCI feedback in [24]
and pointed out the effect of feedback during the training
phase, and how its nature and computation mode influence
future performances. Barbero et al. were interested in the
feedback accuracy in [25]: during a motor-imagery task,
participants were presented a biased feedback (strong or weak,
positive or negative bias). This study concluded that subjects
with low performances benefit from a strong positive bias in
their feedback. Designing an appropriate feedback for BCI
applications in general is still considered as a an interesting
topic in the community. Introducing the BCI interaction in the
video game world, where the feedback must be entertaining
above everything else, is thus a challenge on its own.

When working on BCI games, another key point is motivation, which plays a major role in any BCI interaction.
Nijboer et al. studied this topic on severely paralyzed patients
suffering from Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) [4]. The
importance of motivation also emerged from the work of Nijboer et al. [26], while the authors were designing an auditorybased BCI and evaluating it on disabled subjects. Influence of
motivation has also been assessed by Kleih et al. on healthy
subjects [27]: by raising the motivation level of P300 speller
users (with financial incentive), authors observed an increase in
their performance. User acceptance and motivation is usually
assessed through questionnaires and subjective appreciation.
Plass-Oude Boss et al. emphasized the role of user experience
evaluation [28] in order to improve further designs of any BCI
application, especially in an entertainment context, e.g., video
games. This work was extended by Van de Laar et al. in [29].

We can conclude from the literature that multi-user interaction using BCI control in a gaming application has been
introduced only recently, and has not been studied in depth.
There has at present not been any experiment that specifically
compares solo and multi-player motor imagery-based BCI
gaming,and how it may influence performances and user
experience/preferences.

3

III. B RAINA RENA : A MULTI - USER BCI GAME BASED ON

hal-00784886, version 1 - 4 Feb 2013

MOTOR IMAGERY

We designed a multi-player video game concept called
BrainArena, a football game controlled by hand motor imagery. The objective of two users is to imagine left or right
hand movements to move a virtual ball towards a goal located
on the left or right side of the screen, respectively. The
design of this application covers a large panel of technical
issues: synchronization of the EEG acquisition and processing,
EEG signal processing and classification, video game visual
rendering, multi-user feedback design, and real-time feedback
rendering. The flexibility of our implementation enables easy
switching between three different modes: single-user condition, collaborative and competitive multi-user conditions (see
section III-D).
In this section we present first several definitions of multiuser interactions with video games to contextualise our work.
We then move on to the hardware and software components
of the BrainArena BCI game, and the different game modes
developed.

from two motor imagery classifications, the mental state
deduced from the most probable class.
3) At the level of the interaction technique, several dependent decisions can be combined to issue a multi-user
command given to the application. Cumulating several
actions on the same virtual or physical objects is a
possible use. For example an object can be pushed
according to two decisions, one for the direction and
one for the distance. In Figure 2, the example #3 shows
how two decisions (one hand motor imagery mental state
for a direction and one SSVEP outcome for a selection)
can be joined to produce a unique command.
4) At the level of the application, the feedback can be
defined as the result of several independent interaction
commands. A simple example would be several users
controlling their independent avatars in a virtual world.
The example #4 in Figure 2 uses 2 separated BCI
pipelines that issue different commands based on motor
imagery, moving two different objects on screen.

A. Multi-user BCI interaction with video games
A single-user BCI interaction with a video game environment, presented in Figure 1, is a closed loop system. The
EEG signals are first acquired from a user, then classified by
a signal processing unit. From this classification the decision
maker chooses in which mental state the user is considered,
then the interaction technique (i.e. the system for transforming
the interface input data to comprehensible information for the
application [30]) uses this decision to produce a command.
Finally the application gives a feedback to the user according
to the effects of the command.
We consider a situation of multi-user BCI interaction when
two or more people equipped with a BCI system share an interaction in a common environment. In a gaming context, multiuser interaction is also referred to as multi-player interaction.
We can extend this principle to an environment where actors
may be indistinctly people, objects or intelligent systems. This
configuration is related to the multi-party interaction presented
by Nijholt [20].
Multi-user BCI systems can connect users at four different
levels in the loop, as illustrated in Figure 2.
1) At the level of the signal processing system, input EEG
signals from several users can be merged to produce
a unique multi-user analysis. Offline works of Fallani
et al. on hyper-brain networks [31] or Astolfi et al. on
EEG hyperscanning [32] are related to this concept. The
example #1 in Figure 2 illustrates this connection with
2 users performing motor imagery of the hands, with
different EEG setups but a unique classification.
2) At the decision level, the chosen class can be viewed as
the result of several classification results. An example
could be the combination of different emotional mental
states, to decide what the dominant feelings are in
a viewer group watching a movie or a commercial.
Example #2 in Figure 2 presents a decision making

Fig. 1.
Single-user BCI interaction loop, illustrated by an example (in
red/italic font) inspired by the use of motor imagery paradigm. Two bipolar
channels are acquired on users scalps during a hand motor imagery trial.
The signal processing outputs a class label with a probability (e.g. class left
with 75% probability). The decision making concludes that the probability is
high enough to decide the user mental state: a left hand motor imagery. In
the interaction technique this decision is translated into a command for the
application: move left. From this command the application produces a visual
feedback: the ball on screen is moving left.

Any multi-user interaction in a video game can also be
characterized regarding the objective of the interaction.
• Independent multi-user interaction: the users have distinct
objectives while interacting with the environment. These
objectives are independent and unrelated.
• Collaborative multi-user interaction: two or more users
share the same objective. They may choose different
actions but their ultimate goal remains the same.
• Competitive multi-user interaction: users objectives are
in conflict. The goal may be different but ultimately the
course of actions collides. Only a subset of users can win.
As the objectives may be multiple in the same situation,
collaborative and competitive interactions can both be present
in the same context. For example in a sport video game,
with two teams of users: the interaction within the teams are
collaborative (e.g. move, pass), but competitive when facing
the opposite team members (e.g. score a goal). Even in a fully
collaborative game (e.g. two users resolving a puzzle game),
a form of competition can always be found if the users define
themselves a certain success metric (e.g. number of pieces
of puzzle resolved). We predict that competitive behaviors
are likely to happen with people experienced with gaming in
general, even if the game principles and objectives are not
designed as competitive.

hal-00784886, version 1 - 4 Feb 2013

4

Fig. 2. Four different scenarios of multi-user BCI interactions depending
on the user connection level, illustrated by examples in red/italic font. Only
the connection level inputs and outputs are described. (1): The EEG signals
from 2 users performing hand motor imagery are merged in the same signal
processing, that produces a unique classification with a probability (class Left
with 80% probability). (2): Two hand motor imagery classifications are merged
in the decision making, which here simply chooses the most probable mental
state between two classes. (3): Two decisions, one hand motor imagery state
and one focused target a BCI paradigm such as SSVEP, are merged to issue
a unique command for the application: move the selected target to the left.
(4): Two independant commands issued by 2 separated motor imagery BCI
pipelines, are merged into the application to produce a complex feedback
where two different objects (a ball and a goal keeper) are moved on a screen.

The BCI system we present in this paper makes the connection between users at the decision level. Each user has his/her
own EEG acquisition and tuned BCI pipeline, that outputs a
classification (a class label, left or right motor imagery, and
a value depending on the classifier result). BrainArena uses
the two classification results to decide which mental state is
dominant and to what extent. In our case, mastering a BCI
interface based on motor imagery is known to be difficult for
untrained users. Thus we chose a simple environment with
limited distractors.
B. Architecture
The architecture of the BrainArena BCI game is represented
in Figure 3.
It is composed of several layers:
• EEG acquisition: caps and amplifiers acquire the EEG
signals of both users in parallel.
• EEG processing: EEG signals are processed and classified
to identify the user’s mental state.
• Interaction paradigm: BrainArena takes the 2 BCI processing outputs to decide which is the dominant mental
state, and to control the feedback.
• Feedback: 3 possible feedbacks can be displayed according to the game mode (solo, collaborative, competitive).
Our implementation of this architecture relied on 3 interconnected computers. We assigned the different functions

Fig. 3.

Architecture of the BrainArena multi-user BCI application.

described previously onto these regular desktop computers.
The first one acquired the signals from 2 g.USBAmp amplifiers
(g.Tec GMbH, Austria) and GAMMACaps with up to 16 active
electrodes. This station also ran the multi-user video game
mode when required. The two other stations were assigned
to each subject, for the signal processing and the singleuser video game mode. The acquisition computer was used
as a monitoring station for the experimenter. We based our
implementation on the OpenViBE software platform [33] for
the EEG acquisition, the signal processing and the output
of commands for the external game application, and the
interconnection between every software component. The video
game programs were written using the Ogre3D rendering
engine [34]. A picture of the apparatus is shown in Figure
4, and Figure 5 shows the system in use.

Fig. 4.

Experiment apparatus.

5

D. Different paradigms: solo, collaborative and competitive
We designed three different paradigms, one single-user and
two multi-user interactions. The Solo mode involves only one
user, thus one BCI pipeline. The system asks the user to score
a goal on the left or right side of the screen, by performing
an imaginary movement of the corresponding hand. Figure 6
presents the application during a Solo trial. This paradigm was
used to compare single and multi-user control in a BCI game.

Fig. 5.

Two users playing BrainArena in a competitive trial.

hal-00784886, version 1 - 4 Feb 2013

C. Video game design
The application was designed as a tradeoff between the
complexity of the visual feedback and user’s visual workload.
We chose a very simple environment to avoid distractors that
could disrupt BCI usage. We displayed a ball at the center of
the screen on a black background. Goals were symbolized by
two triangles on each side of the screen (see Figure 6 for an
annotated screenshot). A green cross could be displayed in the
center, with green or blue gauges going left or right during the
game sessions.
The feedback gave two complementary pieces of information. First, the real-time feedback on the “intensity” of the
commands given by the users was provided: a gauge which
went left or right depending on whether left or right motor
imagery was recognized, and whose length represented the
actual intensity of the command. When two users were connected 3 gauges were displayed: the two single-user feedbacks
plus a multi-user gauge in the middle for the resulting overall
command, summing both users’ commands. The lengths of
the user gauges were directly proportional to the normalized
output of the classifier(s) used in the BCI process (see section
III-E). In multi-user modes, the sum of the output was divided
by two, so that the resulting multi-user feedback was in the
same range as the real-time feedback in the single-user mode.
The sizes and directions of the gauges were updated in realtime, 16 times per second.
The second form of feedback was that the ball could roll
horizontally when pushed by the mental commands (i.e. left or
right hand motor imagery), acting like a cumulative feedback
for the user. The real-time gauges could be viewed as a
representation of these push forces applied to the ball, each
push being added to the previous ones to move the ball.
This ball had a physics-based behaviour, thus when pushed it
acquired a velocity. This speed was attenuated by a viscosity
parameter which slowed the ball gradually, or by an opposite
push. Moving the ball to a given goal was the objective of
the game, and would increase the users scores. Figures 7 and
8 present this feedback during collaborative and competitive
trials respectively.

Fig. 6. Single-user mode: the user was instructed to imagine movements
of the hands to move the ball into the designated goal. The background is
presented here in white for better visibility, however the original configuration
uses a black background.

In multi-player gaming, people are expected to work together to achieve a goal and/or work against each other to
be the best. Thus we designed two versions of our multi-user
BCI game: a collaborative mode, where players are supposed
to join forces to achieve the goal and improve their score, and
a competitive version where they must perform better than
their opponent.
The Collaborative version (Figure 7) received inputs from
two BCI systems. The two users shared the same objective:
moving the ball to the left or right goal. The instruction was
displayed for each user beside their name (U SER 1 and U SER
2, see Figure 7). The application displayed the gauge feedback
of both users. Between users’ individual feedbacks, the multiuser feedback was presented in blue as the sum of both
feedbacks. The ball was pushed by the multi-user feedback. In
this context, scoring a goal could become very challenging as
one user performing poorly could easily prevent the ball from
reaching the goal. This was confirmed by beta testers before
the evaluation. To avoid the frustration that may be created by
such situation, the ball was automatically animated at the end
of each trial to reach the nearest goal.
The Competitive mode (Figure 8) was similar to the collaborative one except that the instructions given to the two users
were opposite. For example when the first user had to score
in the left goal, the second user had to score in the right one.
Scoring a goal in this situation was even more challenging.
To enhance the competition between users the ball was again
animated at the end of each trial, reaching the nearest goal
automatically. Thus one user would always score a goal against

6

the other, at the end of each trial.

hal-00784886, version 1 - 4 Feb 2013

Fig. 7.
A collaborative trial: users should score in the right goal. The
background is presented here in white for better visibility.

Fig. 8.
A competitive trial: users should score in opposite goals. The
background is presented here in white for better visibility.

E. EEG signal processing
Our BCI was built around a classical pattern recognition
scheme, which involves the following steps:
1) Acquisition of a training data set
2) Training of a subject-specific BCI model, i.e., of subjectspecific features and classifier. More precisely we used:
• subject-specific spatial filters obtained with the
Common Spatial Pattern (CSP) algorithm [35].
• a Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) as classifier [36], which employs the obtained CSP features
as input.
3) Online use of the resulting subject-specific model.
During the acquisition of the training set, the user was asked to
perform left and right hand motor imagery according to visual
instructions (see Section IV for details). A total of 40 training
trials were collected for each subject (20 trials from each
MI class). Each trial lasted 8 seconds, the instruction being

displayed at t=3s. The subject had to perform the instructed
imaginary hand movement continuously for 5 seconds.
Once the training data was acquired, it was used to optimize
CSP spatial filters. To do so, EEG signals were first band-pass
filtered in the mu and beta frequency bands (8-30Hz). Then,
the CSP filters were optimized on these filtered EEG signals,
using a 4 second time window extracted from each trial,
starting 500ms after the visual instruction. As recommended
in [37], we selected 6 CSP spatial filters, corresponding to the
highest and lowest eigenvalues of the Generalized Eigen Value
Decomposition used to optimized the filters.
Once the CSP spatial filters were obtained, they were used
to compute input features for the LDA classifier. The features
used were the logarithmic band power of the spatially filtered
EEG signals in the 8-30Hz band, averaged over one second
of signal. To train the LDA classifier, again a 4 second
time window starting 500 ms after the visual instruction
was extracted from each trial. Then, each of these 4 second
windows were sub-divided into 48 1-second segments, with a
step of 1/16th second (with overlap) between two consecutive
segments. A CSP feature vector (as described above) was
computed for each of these segments, and labeled according
to the trial label (left or right). The resulting 40 × 48 feature
vectors were used as training data for the LDA classifier.
During the online phase, CSP features and the LDA classifier were used to continuously classify the last 1-second
segment of EEG signal (with a step of 1/16th second, with
overlap, between two consecutive segments) into one of the
two classes (left or right). Since LDA classification is based
on the distance to a separating hyperplane, this distance was
normalized and used as the basis of the feedback provided to
the users.
This signal processing scheme was applied to each user,
each one ending with a specific set of CSP filters and an
LDA classifier. The CSP and LDA training was performed
before each session. It should be stressed that this EEG signal
processing pipeline is independent from the paradigm used
for the feedback (single-user, collaborative or competitive).
In other words, when more than one user was involved the
same processing was performed, just that the outputs of each
user’s EEG processing pipeline (i.e., each user’s LDA output)
were merged in the game. This decided which mental state
was dominant and deduced the commands that produced the
feedback.
F. Provisional conclusion
We designed a complete BCI system for multi-user interaction with a video game. We provided a high level architecture
and a first implementation using 3 general purpose desktop
computers (dual cores / 4 GB RAM). Fully operationnal,
this system worked in real time: acquisition, EEG signal
processing, classification and feedback rendering. We achieved
with our setup a constant frame rate of 60 frames per second.
The different components were interconnected on a local
network, supporting easily the connection and reconnection of
different video game programs. We proposed three different
mode for our game: Solo, Collaborative and Competitive.

7

More versions could be easily developed and connected to
the BCI system. Finally, this setup also had monitoring and
recording capabilities, thus can be used in an experimental
environment for evaluation purposes.
The following sections describe two experimental evaluations we conducted to evaluate the BrainArena BCI video
game, and the influence of a multi-user gaming experience
on the BCI performances and user preferences.

hal-00784886, version 1 - 4 Feb 2013

IV. E XPERIMENT 1: C OMPARING S INGLE - USER VERSUS
M ULTI - USER CONDITIONS
This experiment evaluated the multi-user and the singleuser interaction paradigm. We aimed to study the influence of
a multi-user situation on the performances and user experience
of two users connected through BCI to the same video
game program. Only two conditions were selected for this
first evaluation: single-user condition (S OLO) versus a 2-user
collaborative condition (C OLLAB).
The classification accuracy during the online sessions was
used as a performance metric. The reported performances are
the maximal classification accuracy over the trial duration, as
done by Graz [38][35]. Through subjective questionnaires we
also compared the user acceptance and enjoyment regarding
the two interaction techniques. The questionnaire was divided
into two parts. In the first part of the questionnaire, participants
rated the two paradigms on a 7-point Likert scale, over several
criteria. A second part of the questionnaire intended to gather
subjective answers to various questions regarding the tasks
and how they handled them, and their impressions on the
collaborative task and feedback.
A. Population
The population consisted of 20 volunteers, all of them naive
users of BCI technologies. The subjects age ranged from 23 to
52 years old (mean 31.1), 15 males and 5 females. From this
group 10 pairs were formed. In 8 pairs the participants knew
each other, and volunteered to participate together. The 2 other
pairs were formed randomly with the 4 remaining volunteers.
B. EEG Configuration
The setup for this experiment used the apparatus previously
described, with the following configuration. EEG signals were
sampled at 512 Hz. We used 8 EEG channels located around
the right and left motor cortices: C3, FC3, CP3, C1 and C4,
FC4, CP4, C2. We assumed that CSP spatial filters can be
reliably computed on this number of sensors since Ang et al.
successfully used it with even less sensors (3 bipolar channels
only) in their winning entry of BCI competition IV, data set
2b [39].
C. Procedure
The procedure was inspired by the Graz BCI [40]. One
session consisted of 40 trials, 20 left and 20 right, in a random
order. At time t = 0 a cross was displayed on screen, marking
the start of trial. At t = 3s the instruction was displayed as a
left or right arrow, instructing the user to perform left or right

motor imagery, respectively. At time t = 4.250s, the feedback
began to be displayed (only in the online phase, not in the
training phase). At time t = 8s the feedback phase ended. The
pause between each trial was randomly chosen between 1.5
and 3.5 seconds. Each session lasted approximately 8 minutes.
Participants had a 3 minutes break between sessions.
The experiment consisted of 5 sessions. The first session
was the acquisition of a training set for the CSP filters and
LDA classifier. During this first session no feedback was
displayed, only the cross and instructions. The following
sessions were either in the S OLO or C OLLAB condition
(2 S OLO, 2 C OLLAB). Preliminary testers reported a better
understanding of the instruction if they started in the S OLO
condition. Therefore, the first session was always in the S OLO
condition, the condition order for the other sessions being
randomly chosen.
Before starting the experiment, we instructed the user on
how to perform hand motor imagery. As recommended in
[41] we asked the user to perform kinesthetic imagery (feeling
the sensations of movement, first person process) rather than
visual imagery (seeing yourself doing the movement, third
person process).
The whole experiment, installation and explanations included, lasted approximately 90 minutes.
D. Results
The mean classification accuracies obtained in each condition are displayed in Table I. The mean accuracy for the S OLO
condition was 71.3% while it was 73.9% for the C OLLAB
condition. This difference was not found to be significant with
a paired t-test although it did show a trend (p = 0.06). Looking
at the course of performance over sessions do not suggest that
a learning effect occured. The average performance curves are
indeed rather flat. This is consistent with observation in [42]
that suggest that there is no learning on such a small number
of sessions.
We divided the subject pool into 2 subgroups, according
to their performance levels. The Winner subgroup consisted
of the dominant participants of each pair (best mean overall
accuracy). The Loser subgroup was the other half, with the
worst mean accuracy of each pair. As shown in Table I, in
the Winner group the mean classification accuracy in S OLO
condition was 75.0%, and 80.0% in the C OLLAB condition.
This difference was found to be significant with a paired t-test
(p = 0.01). The Loser group showed no significant differences
between the two conditions (S OLO: 67.5%, C OLLAB: 67.8%).
From the quantitative questionnaires we extracted the different grades given by the 20 participants. Figure 9 presents
the mean and standard deviation for each criteria:
• Difficulty to achieve the task (1: very difficult, 7: very
easy)
• Fun (1: very boring, 7: very entertaining)
• Motivation (1:not motivating at all, 7: very motivating)
• Global Appreciation (1: poor, 7: very good)
The questionnaire results showed significant differences
with a Wilcoxon signed rank test S OLO vs C OLLAB, for
the motivation and fun criteria (p < 0.05 with Bonferroni

8

Session Session Session Session
1
2
3
4
Pair 1

S OLO C OLLAB C OLLAB

S OLO

User 1 (W)
User 2 (L)

90
72.5

90
67.5

82.5
67.5

Pair 2

S OLO C OLLAB

S OLO

C OLLAB

User 1 (W)
User 2 (L)

65
62.5

62.5
65

62.5
57.5

77.5
62.5

Pair 3

S OLO

S OLO

User 1 (L)
User 2 (W)

80
82.5

62.5
80

Pair 4

S OLO

S OLO

User 1 (L)
User 2 (W)

80
77.5

75
92.5

Pair 5

S OLO C OLLAB C OLLAB

hal-00784886, version 1 - 4 Feb 2013

User 1 (W)
User 2 (L)

70
85

85
60

82.5
70

65
87.5

72.5
87.5

75
100

70
97.5

63.75
60

70
63.75

71.25
81.25

68.75
87.5

77.5
85

72.5
98.75

73.75
71.25

78.75
68.75

77.5
57.5
C OLLAB

User 1 (W)
User 2 (L)

62.5
62.5

75
52.5

70
50

Pair 7

S OLO C OLLAB C OLLAB

S OLO

User 1 (L)
User 2 (W)

62.5
60

62.5
70

57.5
57.5

Pair 8

S OLO C OLLAB

S OLO

C OLLAB

67.5
72.5

87.5
82.5

68.75
57.5

67.5
58.75

60
58.75

62.5
67.5

71.25
73.75

81.25
83.75

85
68.75

88.75
62.5

75
75

75
85

Pair 9

S OLO

S OLO

User 1 (W)
User 2 (L)

82.5
70

87.5
67.5

Pair 10

S OLO C OLLAB C OLLAB

S OLO

User 1 (W)
User 2 (L)

72.5
80

75
67.5

77.5
72.5

62.5
67.5

67.5
73.75

76.25
70

Means

73.37

72.62

72.25

72.12

71.25

73.94

75.0
67.5

80.0
67.8

C OLLAB C OLLAB
87.5
60

Winner (W) subgroup performance
Loser (L) subgroup performance

Fig. 9. Means and standard deviations of the quantitative questionnaire
grades. A star * indicates a significant difference between the two conditions
(p < 0.05, Wilcoxon signed rank test with Bonferroni correction for multiple
comparisons).

S OLO

75
67.5
S OLO

User 1 (L)
User 2 (W)

87.5
63.75

C OLLAB C OLLAB

S OLO C OLLAB

62.5
65

86.25
70

C OLLAB C OLLAB

Pair 6

65
67.5

Mean Mean
S OLO C OLLAB

90
65

TABLE I
M EANS OF THE CLASSIFICATION ACCURACY ( IN PERCENT ) OF EVERY
SUBJECTS ON THE 4 SESSIONS (2 IN EACH CONDITION ). T HE WINNER OF
EACH PAIR ( BEST MEAN OVERALL ACCURACY ) IS ANNOTATED WITH A
(W), LOSER WITH A (L).

correction). The differences for the other criteria were not
found to be significant.
The subjective questionnaire addressed 5 themes:
1) Motor Imagery Strategy: What was your strategy to
successfully achieve the task? Was it different in the
two conditions?
2) Motivation: Did you find different motivations while
performing the experience alone or with a partner?
3) Impressions on the Collaborative Feedback: Did the
feedback of your partner influence you? If so, how?
4) Self-Evaluation of the Performances: Did you find
yourself better than your partner? Three choices were
available better / equal / worse. Participants were also
asked to give details on how and why they felt such a

difference.
5) Preference: What is your preferred condition, alone or
with a partner?
Table II lists the different categories and number of subjects
per category. The 2 major strategies used by the participants
involved thinking of simple hand or arm movements. The users
reported different motivations when playing the game: “not to
impede the other’s performance” or “find a better mental state
control” incorporated most participants (5/20 participants for
both), while others chose more competition-oriented answers
(score goals, be better than the other). When asked for
their impressions on the collaborative feedback, participants
reported negative (7/20 users), neutral (8/20 users) or positive
feelings (5/20 users) on whether they found the feedback
disturbing, purely informative or helpful respectively. While
7/20 participants found themselves better than their partner,
8/20 found no differences and 5/20 felt worse performances.
Finally, the preference question showed that 10/20 participants
preferred the single-user condition. 6/20 participants preferred
the collaborative gaming context.
The user impressions toward the collaborative interaction divided the population into three subgroups: positive perception
(76.5% mean classification performance during collaborative
sessions), neutral perception (76.7%) or negative perception
(68.9%). The performance differences between negative perception and neutral or positive perceptions were found to be
significant with a paired t-test (p < 0.05). When looking at
the classification performance of these three subgroups during
single-user sessions, we also found to be significant differences between negative perception (67% accuracy) and neutral
(74.7% accuracy) or positive perception (76.5% accuracy).
The mean classification accuracies for the participants that
preferred S OLO over C OLLAB condition were 70.1% in S OLO
sessions and 75.9% in C OLLAB session. The difference was
found to be significant (paired t-test, p < 0.01). The subgroup
that preferred the C OLLAB condition achieved a mean classification performance of 70.1% in S OLO condition and 69.4%
in C OLLAB, the difference not being significant.

9

Motor imagery strategy
Arm movement
Hand gesture
Manipulation of objects from the everyday life
Hit a punching ball
Push the ball into the goal
Others strategies

4
3
2
2
2
2

Motivations
Try not to impede the other’s performance
Find a better mental state control
Achieve the task and score goals
Perform better than the other
Other/No opinion

5
5
4
2
2

Impressions toward collaborative feedback

hal-00784886, version 1 - 4 Feb 2013

Neutral: purely informative or no opinion
Negative: disturbs the user
Positive: helps the user adapting his/her mental
state

8
7
5

Self-evaluation of the performances
I performed better than the other
We performed equallywell
I performed worse than the other

7
8
5

S OLO

C OLLAB

C OMPET

Pair 1 User 1 (W)
Pair 1 User 2 (L)

78.333
66.67

76.67
70

90
68.33

Pair 2 User 1 (W)
Pair 2 User 2 (L)

78.33
78.33

83.33
71.67

88.33
90

Pair 3 User 1 (W)
Pair 3 User 2 (L)

78.33
81.67

76.67
70

75
55

Pair 4 User 1 (L)
Pair 4 User 2 (W)

70
75

65
90

65
65

Means

75.83

75.42

74.58

Winner (W) subgroup performance
Loser (L) subgroup performance

77.5
74.17

81.67
69.17

79.58
69.58

TABLE III
M EANS OF THE CLASSIFICATION ACCURACY ( IN PERCENT ) OF EACH
SUBJECT DURING THE THREE EXPERIMENTAL CONDITIONS . T HE WINNER
OF EACH PAIR ( BEST MEAN OVERALL ACCURACY ) IS ANNOTATED WITH A
(W), LOSER WITH A (L).

quality of the CSP filters, we raised the channel number to 16
for each user: C3, C4, FC3, FC4, C1, C2, CP3, CP4, C5, C6,
Fz, Cz, FCz, CPz, Pz and POz.
C. Procedure

Preference
Single-user condition
Collaborative condition
No opinion

10
6
4

TABLE II
D ESCRIPTIVE ANALYSIS OF ANSWERS TO POST- HOC OPEN QUESTIONS .

V. E XPERIMENT 2: C OMPARING C OLLABORATIVE VERSUS
C OMPETITIVE CONDITIONS
As observed in Experiment 1, the introduction of a multiuser BCI paradigm could influence the motivation and behaviour of the participants. In this second experiment, our
objective was to qualify more precisely the multi-user experience, and study how the users handle a competitive situation
compared to a collaborative one. We kept the best participants
from the first experiment and introduced the competitive
condition C OMPET. We monitored the same metrics as before,
i.e. performance and participants’ answers to a subjective
questionnaire.
A. Population
We selected the 8 best performing subjects based on the
classification accuracy obtained from experiment 1. Two pairs
were already formed during the first evaluation, the two other
pairs were randomly arranged.
B. EEG Configuration
We used the same apparatus, with the following configuration for the EEG acquisition. The amplifiers acquired data at
a 512 Hz sampling frequency. In order to try and improve the

This experiment was divided into 7 sessions. The first
session was the training session, made of 40 trials (20 left, 20
right in a random order). The 6 following sessions consisted
of 2 random sequences of 3 sessions, from each of the 3
conditions {S OLO, C OLLAB, C OMPET}. These 6 sessions
were shorter than in the previous evaluation (30 trials, 15 left
and 15 right in a random order) to limit the overall duration of
the experiment. The complete experiment lasted approximately
105 minutes.
D. Results
The classifier accuracy was computed for each user using
the same procedure as in the first evaluation. The mean
classification accuracy values of the 3 conditions for the 8
subjects can be found in Table III.
There was no significant difference between the collaborative and competitive conditions (C OLLAB: 75,4% ; C OMPET:
74,6%). This suggests that using a competitive context rather
than a collaborative one may not lower the performance
achieved by the users. We separated each pair to form the
Winner and Loser subgroups as we did in section IV-D. The
Winner groups achieved classification accuracies of 77.5% in
S OLO, 81.67% in C OLLAB and 79.58% in C OMPET, the Loser
group showed inverse tendency with 74.17% in S OLO, 69.17%
in C OLLAB and 69.58% in C OMPET. However none of these
differences were significant, which can be partially explained
by the small number of subjects.
The means and standard deviations of the questionnaire
grades are presented in Figure 10. Once again Fun and Motivation showed better results with the 2 multi-user conditions
than with single-user interaction. There was no significant
difference after Bonferroni correction.

10

knowledge trends, however it is done on a rather small number
of subjects. In order to confirm these trends, experiments on
more subjects are necessary.
VI. D ISCUSSION

Fig. 10.
grades.

Means and standard deviations of the quantitative questionnaire

Motor imagery strategy
Focus on the mental imagery
Adapt the mental state by analysing the situation

4
4

hal-00784886, version 1 - 4 Feb 2013

Motivations
Perform better than the other
Achieve the task and score goals
No opinion

3
2
3

Impressions toward multi-user feedback
Neutral: purely informative or no opinion
Negative: disturbs the user
Positive: helps the user adapting his/her mental
state

1
3
4

Self-evaluation of the performances
I performed better than the other
We performed equally
I performed worse than the other

2
5
1

Preference
Collaborative condition
Competitive condition

4
4

TABLE IV
U SER CATEGORIES AND NUMBER OF SUBJECTS PER CATEGORIES , FOR
EVERY QUESTIONNAIRE THEME .

Finally, the subjective questionnaires were analyzed to
classify the user on the same thematics as in experiment 1:
strategy, motivations, impressions toward multi-user feedback,
self evaluation of performances and preferences.
The strategies used were separated in two categories (4/8
participants per category): self-centered (focus on the mental
imagery) or context-based (analyse the situation and adapt the
mental state). The motivations were either competitive (3/8
users) or focus on achieving the task and score goals (2/8
users). 4/8 users found the multi-user feedback helpful, 3/8
users were disturbed by it. Most of the users (5/8 participants)
found their performances equal to that of their partner. Finally,
the users equally prefered the competitive and collaborative
conditions. None prefered the single-user condition.
This second experiment represents a reliable basis to ac-

The BrainArena BCI game was functional in experimental conditions. The system managed to handle EEG signal
processing and feedback rendering in real-time. The mean
classification performances over all users were above 70%
in all conditions. The two experiments we conducted on the
BrainArena BCI game allows us to evaluate the influence of
the multi-user interaction on users performance and subjective
impressions.
The first evaluation on 20 naive subjects compared the
single-user situation with the multi-user situation using the collaborative condition. Although the mean classification performance was not significantly better in collaborative condition, it
showed a tendency (p = 0.06), which will have to be confirmed
in further studies. However, when analyzing separately the best
performing users and the worst performing ones from each
pair, we found a significant difference between collaborative
and single-user for the best performing user only. This means
that operating a BCI in a multi-user context is possible without
any performance drop, and may even increase the classification performances of the best performing users. The 7/20
participants that found the collaborative feedback disturbing
reported for example: “Too much information to handle...”
or “it’s moving too fast, it disturbs my concentration”. As
this user group performed poorly in both conditions (67% in
single-user, 68.9% in collaborative) we can assume that they
could not handle the visual stimuli even in the single-user
condition. The users’ self-evaluation of performances showed
unbalanced results. More participants found themselves better
than their partner, compared to those who found themselves
worse (7 and 5 participants respectively). They were right in
both cases if we look at their placement in the Winner/Loser
classification. However 5 participants could not perceive the
difference of performance, even when this difference was high.
For example the user 1 of pair 6 perceived equal performances
while he outclass his partner by 10%. This can be interpreted
as another evidence of the difficulty to understand and evaluate
the collaborative feedback. These results offer several ideas of
improvement in order to make the BrainArena BCI game more
user-friendly: e.g. smoothing the real-time feedback to lower
the disturbance, or extending the trial duration to give users
the time to understand what is going on.
As the quantitative questionnaires revealed, motivation and
enjoyment showed significant differences in favor of the collaborative mode. Difficulty and global appreciation were not
statistically different. Thus we can assume that a multi-user
interaction can be controlled with the same level of difficulty
as a single-user interaction. However the user preferences
showed surprising results: 10 subjects preferred the singleuser condition and only 6 the collaborative one. Additionally,
those who preferred playing in a single-user condition performed better during the collaborative task, while the subjects
that prefered the collaborative task showed no differences in

hal-00784886, version 1 - 4 Feb 2013

11

performance between the two conditions. This can be interpreted in different ways. First, we could simply assume that
user preferences are not only dependent on the performances
achieved, nor on the enjoyment and motivation to do the task.
Secondly, several users prefered the single-user condition just
because they were in that case the only cause of success
or failure. The motivation that was the most raised from
the questionnaire was “I don’t want to impede my partner”
or “Understanding and finding a better control strategy” (5
users in both categories). Even if they performed better in
the collaborative mode, they still prefered a condition they
fully controlled. A third interpretation could be related to the
link between task complexity and efforts required to achieve
the task. As the collaborative task is found more complex,
the user must focus more intensively which therefore ensure
higher performance. However when asking for a preference,
the users turned to the simplest task: the single-user game
mode. This also applies to the second group who prefer the
collaborative condition: as they handle well the collaborative
task complexity, their efforts are on a similar level in both
conditions, which leads to similar performances.
This first evaluation highlights the complex relation between
user impressions, difficulty of the task, feedback understanding
and performances. The user preferences are not only related
to their performances nor motivations to do the task. The
psychology plays an important role, and even more when two
users are interacting within the same context. As the user
impressions show, the effects of multi-user may be negative
(e.g. “I felt very frustrated when I didnt manage to help my
partner”, “I was totally discouraged when I saw the other
going on the other side”) or positive (e.g. “good to have
someone to help when we don’t manage one side, “it’s better
to laugh together when we make mistakes than being frustrated
when we fail alone”). We see a high variablity in the users
behavior and subjective impressions.
The second evaluation was conducted on a smaller subset
made of the best participants. As they only participated in
4 sessions in the first evaluation, we cannot qualify them as
trained users, but we assume their first experience made it
easier to handle the task in one more multi-user condition :
the competitive mode.
When asked for their strategy to perform the mental imagery task, all participants naturally took a higher level of
abstraction: they tried either to “focus on the mental imagery”
or “analyse the context and adapt their mental state”. In
the previous evaluation, they were mostly focused on doing
the hand mental imagery or arm, or manipulating an object.
This group of subjects is characterized by a competitive spirit,
revealed in the questionnaires: the users only reported to be
motivated by “scoring goals” or “being better than the other”.
The classification results in the three conditions showed
no significant difference (75.83% in single-user, 75.42% in
collaborative, and 74.58% in competitive). All these results
have to be interpreted with care, as the limited number of
subjects questions the relevance of further statistical analysis:
additional experiments should be evaluated to further confirm
our results. The quantitative questionnaire results also revealed
no differences between the three conditions. This result sug-

gests that using a competitive condition over a collaborative
one does not affect the motivation and enjoyment of the users.
While performances remain the same in the three conditions,
the preferences go clearly in the multi-user direction: half the
subjects prefered the collaborative task, and the other half the
competitive condition. None of them prefered the single-user
condition. This further reveals that users’ preferences are not
only related to the performance achieved.
As the second experiment uses a reduced number of subjects (8 subjects, 4 pairs), future work should include larger
experiments to evaluate the collaborative versus competitive
conditions in order to make stronger conclusions.
The user impressions towards the multi-user feedback was
very variable and contrasted. Further research could be focused
on finding the best feedback concept. Such feedback should
be understood easily by all users, allowing them to accurately
evaluate their performance without giving them too much
disturbance. The tradeoff may be very dependant on users, and
finding new adaptation techniques, supervised or not, would
be useful.
The BrainArena multi-user BCI game gives every user equal
possibility at controlling the application. Thus disabled people
could play such a game together with healthy users with less
or identical frustration. Such multi-user BCI systems could
provide a new way of communication and interaction between
a patient and his/her relatives, based on entertainment.
VII. C ONCLUSION
In this paper we have studied the design and evaluation
of a multi-user BCI video game called BrainArena. This
video game application is based on hand motor imagery, and
allows two users to simultaneously play a simple football
game. The players can use left (or right) imagined hand
movements to push a ball towards the left (or right) goals.
A collaborative mode enables players to push together in the
same direction, whereas a competitive mode enables users
to play a duel and try to push in opposite directions. The
BrainArena video game was evaluated on 20 subjects in a
first experiment that compared single-user and multi-user collaborative conditions. The 8 best performers participated in a
second experiment where we added the multi-user competitive
condition. Our results show first that our multi-user video
game is fully operational and that our different scenarios can
be rapidly handled by participants. Motivation and fun were
strongly increased in multi-user conditions. Interestingly, the
performance of the ”winners” (people who performed better
than their partner) was found to increase in multi-user versus
solo conditions, suggesting a potential benefit of a multi-user
approach. Some interesting psychological factors or behaviors
are also exhibited. When two users are playing the same BCI
game, specific feelings of frustration, hesitation, shyness, or
irritability could occur. This opens possibility for further work,
where behavioral studies could benefit to BCI game design.
In these two experiments, most of the participants (16/20
subjects) knew each other and volunteered together. This
proportion does not make possible any statistical analysis,
however this would be interesting to study if and to what

12

extent this could influence the motivations and performances
of the users in the different conditions. On a broader scale,
multiuser BCI design, for video gaming purpose or not, could
also benefits from sociological studies on team design, collaboration and motivation among teams, and how it can influence
task performance. For example, Harrison et.al. addressed how
deep-level relationship between team members can influence
the performances [43]. For a review on team performances and
especially on the factors that influence team performance, the
interested reader can refer to [44].
We focused our study on the classification performances
and the user experience. In future work it would be interesting to conduct further analysis from a neuroscience perspective, e.g. by comparing the event-related synchronization
and desynchronization (ERS/ERD) [45] between the different
conditions.
Taken together our results pave the ways to new designs
and new evaluations of multi-user BCI applications.

hal-00784886, version 1 - 4 Feb 2013

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was supported by the French National Research
Agency within the OpenViBE2 project.

R EFERENCES
[1] J. Wolpaw, N. Birbaumer, D. McFarland, G. Pfurtscheller, and
T. Vaughan, “Brain-Computer Interfaces for communication and control,” Clinical Neurophysiology, vol. 113, no. 6, pp. 767–791, 2002.
[2] A. Lécuyer, F. Lotte, R. Reilly, R. Leeb, M. Hirose, and M. Slater,
“Brain-Computer Interfaces, virtual reality and videogames,” IEEE
Computer, vol. 41, no. 10, pp. 66–72, 2008.
[3] F. Lotte, “Brain-Computer Interfaces for 3D Games: Hype or Hope?”
in Foundations of Digital Games (FDG’2011), Bordeaux, France, Jun.
2011.
[4] F. Nijboer, N. Birbaumer, and A. Kübler, “The influence of psychological
state and motivation on braincomputer interface performance in patients
with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis a longitudinal study,” Frontiers in
Neuroscience, 2010.
[5] R. Leeb, F. Lee, C. Keinrath, R. Scherer, H. Bischof, and
G. Pfurtscheller, “Brain-computer communication: Motivation, aim, and
impact of exploring a virtual apartment,” Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 473 –482,
dec. 2007.
[6] R. Ron-Angevin and A. Daz-Estrella, “Brain-computer interface:
Changes in performance using virtual reality techniques,” Neuroscience
Letters, vol. 449, no. 2, pp. 123 – 127, 2009.
[7] (2012, April) Emotiv. [Online]. Available: http://www.emotiv.com/
researchers/
[8] (2012, April) Neurosky - research. [Online]. Available: http://www.
neurosky.com/Academics/Research.aspx
[9] A. Nijholt, D. Plass-Oude Bos, and B. Reuderink, “Turning shortcomings into challenges: Braincomputer interfaces for games,” Entertainment Computing, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 85 – 94, 2009, intelligent
Technologies for Interactive Entertainment.
[10] F. Lotte, Y. Renard, and A. Lécuyer, “Self-Paced Brain-Computer Interaction with Virtual Worlds: A Quantitative and Qualitative Study ”Out
of the Lab”,” in 4th international Brain-Computer Interface Workshop
and Training Course. Graz, Autriche: Graz University of Technology,
2008.
[11] D. Plass-Oude Bos, M. Poel, and A. Nijholt, “A study in user-centered
design and evaluation of mental tasks for bci,” in Advances in Multimedia Modeling, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, K.-T. Lee,
W.-H. Tsai, H.-Y. Liao, T. Chen, J.-W. Hsieh, and C.-C. Tseng, Eds.
Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 2011, vol. 6524, pp. 122–134.
[12] E. Lalor, S. P. Kelly, C. Finucane, R. Burke, R. B. Reilly, and G. McDarby, “Brain-Computer Interface based on the Steady-State VEP for
immersive gaming control.” BCI Workshop 2004, 2004.
[13] G. Pfurtscheller and C. Neuper, “Motor imagery and direct braincomputer communication,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 89, no. 7,
pp. 1123 –1134, jul 2001.
[14] R. Scherer, M. Proll, B. Allison, and G. Müller-Putz, “New input
modalities for modern game design and virtual embodiment,” in Virtual
Reality Workshops (VR), 2012 IEEE, march 2012.
[15] g.Tec Medical Engineering GmbH Austria., “Press release: intendixsoci: g.tec introduces mind-controlled computer gaming at cebit 2012,”
March 2012.
[16] L. George and A. Lécuyer, “An overview of research on ”passive”
Brain-Computer Interfaces for implicit human-computer interaction,” in
International Conference on Applied Bionics and Biomechanics ICABB
2010 - Workshop W1 ”Brain-Computer Interfacing and Virtual Reality”,
Venise, Italy, 2010.
[17] C. Muhl, H. Gürkök, D. Plass-Oude Bos, M. Thurlings, L. Scherffig,
M. Duvinage, A. Elbakyan, S. Kang, M. Poel, and D. Heylen, “Bacteria
hunt: A multimodal, multiparadigm BCI game,” Enterface workshop,
2009.
[18] A. Lécuyer, F. Lotte, R. Reilly, R. Leeb, M. Hirose, and M. Slater,
“Brain-Computer Interfaces, virtual reality, and videogames,” Computer,
vol. 41, no. 10, pp. 66 –72, oct. 2008.
[19] D. Plass-Oude Bos, B. Reuderink, B. van de Laar, H. Gürkök, C. Mühl,
M. Poel, A. Nijholt, and D. Heylen, “Brain-computer interfacing and
games,” in Brain-Computer Interfaces, ser. Human-Computer Interaction
Series, D. Tan and A. Nijholt, Eds. Springer London, 2010, pp. 149–
178.
[20] A. Nijholt, “Towards Multimodal, Multi-Party, and Social BrainComputer Interfacing.” in Proceedings 4th International ICST Conference on Intelligent Technologies for Interactive Entertainment (INTETAIN 2011), Genoa, Italy, 2012.
[21] M. Obbink, H. Gürkök, D. Plass-Oude Bos, G. Hakvoort, M. Poel, and
A. Nijholt, “Social interaction in a cooperative brain-computer interface
game.” in Proceedings 4th International ICST Conference on Intelligent

13

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

hal-00784886, version 1 - 4 Feb 2013

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]
[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]

[39]

[40]

[41]

Technologies for Interactive Entertainment (INTETAIN 2011), Genoa,
Italy, 2012.
B. Blankertz, M. Krauledat, G. Dornhege, J. Williamson, R. MurraySmith, and K.-R. Mller, “A note on brain actuated spelling with the berlin
brain-computer interface,” in Universal Access in Human-Computer Interaction. Ambient Interaction, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
C. Stephanidis, Ed. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 2007, vol. 4555, pp.
759–768, 10.1007/978-3-540-73281-5-83.
J. Wolpaw, N. Birbaumer, W. Heetderks, D. McFarland, P. Peckham,
G. Schalk, E. Donchin, L. Quatrano, C. Robinson, and T. Vaughan,
“Brain-computer interface technology: a review of the first international
meeting,” Rehabilitation Engineering, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 8,
no. 2, pp. 164 –173, jun 2000.
C. Neuper and G. Pfurtscheller, “Neurofeedback training for bci control,” in Brain-Computer Interfaces, ser. The Frontiers Collection,
B. Graimann, G. Pfurtscheller, and B. Allison, Eds. Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 2010, pp. 65–78.
A. Barbero and M. Grosse-Wentrup, “Biased feedback in brain-computer
interfaces,” Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation, vol. 7,
no. 1, p. 34, 2010.
F. Nijboer, A. Furdea, I. Gunst, J. Mellinger, D. J. McFarland, N. Birbaumer, and A. Kübler, “An auditory brain-computer interface (bci).”
Journal of Neuroscience Methods, vol. 167, no. 1, pp. 43–50, 2008.
S. Kleih, F. Nijboer, S. Halder, and A. Kübler, “Motivation modulates
the p300 amplitude during bci use,” Clinical Neurophysiology, vol. 121,
pp. 1023 – 1031, 2010.
D. Plass-Oude Bos, H. Gürkök, B. v. van der, F. Nijboer, and A. Nijholt,
“User experience evaluation in bci: Mind the gap!” International Journal
of Bioelectromagnetism, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 48–49, July 2011.
B. van de Laar, H. Gürkök, D. Plass-Oude Bos, F. Nijboer, and A. Nijholt, “Perspectives on user experience evaluation of brain-computer
interfaces,” in Universal Access in Human-Computer Interaction. Users
Diversity, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, C. Stephanidis, Ed.
Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 2011, vol. 6766, pp. 600–609.
A. Lécuyer, Using Eyes, Hands, and Brain for 3D Interaction with
Virtual Environments: A Perception-Based Approach. University of
Rennes 1, June 2010.
F. De Vico Fallani, V. Nicosia, R. Sinatra, L. Astolfi, F. Cincotti,
D. Mattia, C. Wilke, A. Doud, V. Latora, B. He, and F. Babiloni,
“Defecting or not defecting: How to read human behavior during
cooperative games by EEG measurements,” PLoS ONE, vol. 5, no. 12,
p. e14187, 12 2010.
L. Astolfi, J. Toppi, F. De Vico Fallani, G. Vecchiato, S. Salinari,
D. Mattia, F. Cincotti, and F. Babiloni, “Neuroelectrical hyperscanning
measures simultaneous brain activity in humans,” Brain Topography,
vol. 23, pp. 243–256, 2010.
Y. Renard, F. Lotte, G. Gibert, M. Congedo, E. Maby, V. Delannoy,
O. Bertrand, and A. Lécuyer, “Openvibe: An open-source software
platform to design, test and use Brain-Computer Interfaces in real and
virtual environments,” Presence : teleoperators and virtual environments, vol. 19, no. 1, 2010.
(2012, April) Ogre3d - open source 3d graphics engine. [Online].
Available: http://www.ogre3d.org/
H. Ramoser, J. Muller-Gerking, and G. Pfurtscheller, “Optimal spatial
filtering of single trial eeg during imagined hand movement,” Rehabilitation Engineering, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 441 –446,
dec 2000.
F. Lotte, M. Congedo, A. Lécuyer, F. Lamarche, and B. Arnaldi,
“A review of classification algorithms for EEG-based Brain-Computer
Interfaces,” Journal of Neural Engineering, vol. 4, pp. R1–R13, 2007.
B. Blankertz, R. Tomioka, S. Lemm, M. Kawanabe, and K. Müller,
“Optimizing spatial filters for robust eeg single-trial analysis,” Signal
Processing Magazine, IEEE, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 41–56, 2008.
A. Schlogl, F. Lee, H. Bischof, and G. Pfurtscheller, “Characterization
of four-class motor imagery eeg data for the bci-competition 2005,”
Journal of Neural Engineering, vol. 2, no. 4, p. L14, 2005.
K. K. Ang, Z. Y. Chin, C. Wang, C. Guan, and H. Zhang, “Filter bank
common spatial pattern algorithm on bci competition iv datasets 2a and
2b,” Frontiers in Neuroscience, vol. 6, no. 39, 2012.
G. Pfurtscheller, C. Neuper, G. Muller, B. Obermaier, G. Krausz,
A. Schlogl, R. Scherer, B. Graimann, C. Keinrath, D. Skliris, M. Wortz,
G. Supp, and C. Schrank, “Graz-bci: state of the art and clinical
applications,” Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, IEEE
Transactions on, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 1 –4, june 2003.
C. Neuper, R. Scherer, M. Reiner, and G. Pfurtscheller, “Imagery of
motor actions: Differential effects of kinesthetic and visualmotor mode

[42]
[43]

[44]

[45]

of imagery in single-trial EEG,” Cognitive Brain Research, vol. 25, no. 3,
pp. 668 – 677, 2005.
A. Kübler, D. Mattia, H. George, B. Doron, and C. Neuper, “How much
learning is involved in BCI-control?” in BCI Meeting 2010.
D. A. Harrison, K. H. P. ans Joanne H. Gavin, and A. T. Florey, “Time,
teams, and task performance: Changing effects of surface- and deep-level
diversity on group functioning,” The Academy of Management Journal,
vol. 45, no. 5, pp. 1029–1045, 2002.
E. Salas, N. Cooke, and M. Rosen, “On teams, teamwork, and team
performance: Discoveries and developments,” Human Factors: The
Journal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, vol. 50, no. 3,
pp. 540–547, 2008.
G. Pfurtscheller and C. Neuper, “Motor imagery and direct braincomputer communication,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 89, no. 7,
pp. 1123–1134, 2001.

