Brain Sci. 2015, 5, 318-354; doi:10.3390/brainsci5030318
OPEN ACCESS

brain sciences
ISSN 2076-3425
www.mdpi.com/journal/brainsci/
Review

The Human Factors and Ergonomics of P300-Based
Brain-Computer Interfaces
J. Clark Powers 1, Kateryna Bieliaieva 1, Shuohao Wu 2 and Chang S. Nam 2,*
1

2

Department of English, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 27695, USA;
E-Mails: jcpower2@ncsu.edu (J.C.P.); kbielia@ncsu.edu (K.B.)
Fitts Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, North Carolina State University,
Raleigh, NC 27695, USA; E-Mail: swu6@ncsu.edu

* Author to whom correspondence should be addressed; E-Mail: csnam@ncsu.edu;
Tel.: +1-919-515-8140; Fax: +1-919-515-5281.
Academic Editor: Stephen D. Meriney
Received: 23 June 2015/ Accepted: 24 July 2015 / Published: 10 August 2015

Abstract: Individuals with severe neuromuscular impairments face many challenges in
communication and manipulation of the environment. Brain-computer interfaces (BCIs)
show promise in presenting real-world applications that can provide such individuals with
the means to interact with the world using only brain waves. Although there has been a growing
body of research in recent years, much relates only to technology, and not to technology in
use—i.e., real-world assistive technology employed by users. This review examined the
literature to highlight studies that implicate the human factors and ergonomics (HFE) of
P300-based BCIs. We assessed 21 studies on three topics to speak directly to improving the
HFE of these systems: (1) alternative signal evocation methods within the oddball paradigm;
(2) environmental interventions to improve user performance and satisfaction within the
constraints of current BCI systems; and (3) measures and methods of measuring user acceptance.
We found that HFE is central to the performance of P300-based BCI systems, although
researchers do not often make explicit this connection. Incorporation of measures of user
acceptance and rigorous usability evaluations, increased engagement of disabled users as test
participants, and greater realism in testing will help progress the advancement of P300-based
BCI systems in assistive applications.
Keywords: brain-computer interface; P300; human factors and ergonomics; oddball;
assistive technology; user acceptance

Brain Sci. 2015, 5

319

1. Introduction
Brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) have been investigated for decades as a means to enable users
with profound neuromuscular impairment [1]. From initial steps, such as those by Vidal (1973) [2] and
Elbert et al. (1980) [3] using electroencephalography (EEG), research into BCIs and their applications
has grown rapidly in the decades since, with hundreds of peer-reviewed studies now being published
annually [4]. These studies use a variety of terminology, including brain-machine interface, brain interface,
neural prosthetic, neural interface, and so forth, but they are all united in that the various approaches do
not rely on peripheral nerves or muscles, but rather on signals from the central nervous system, to enable
communication or control [5].
Beyond the admittedly tantalizing possibility of being able to interact with the world using the
mind alone (which is quite an overstatement, as the user and the BCI must be trained to work in
concert [4]), BCI technology holds great potential in that it is perhaps the only possibility for enabling
individuals without voluntary motor function, but with cognitive function, to interact with their external
environment [5–9]. BCI has been proposed as an assistive technology (and we consider therapeutic
applications to be implicitly assistive) for individuals with disabilities such as those resulting from
autism [10–12], aphasia [13,14], brainstem stroke [15,16], spinal cord injury [17–19], and
neurodegenerative diseases [20–22], among other afflictions and challenges [23]. However, research has
put special attention on individuals with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) [24], as this condition
impacts voluntary muscle control while leaving cognitive function intact, making such patients an
obvious group to benefit from potential BCI-based assistive technologies. That said, this clinical group
is relatively small, with ALS having a prevalence of about six per 100,000 people [25], although
geographic distribution is not uniform. A 2010–2011 survey by the National ALS Registry recorded
12,187 persons in the United States living with ALS [26].
Among the systems that have been developed to implement BCI, one category is based upon
sensing the P300 wave, which is an event-related potential component associated with unexpected
stimuli that provide task-relevant information [27,28]. Unexpected stimuli that are not task-relevant
produce a similar component, but that component can be discriminated by a slightly lower
latency [29]. The P300 component can thus be associated with information processing [30],
decision-making [31], and intentionality [32]. Furthermore, the P300 wave has been the focus of much
BCI research because of its ease of evocation and consistency [29]. Furthermore, the evocation of the
P300 wave requires relatively little initial training of the subject [33].
The P300 takes its name from its polarity and latency—approximately 300 ms after a triggering event,
the P300 wave presents a positive voltage peak [34]. As neural stimulation produces electrical activity
that can be sensed by non-invasive means, P300-based BCIs capitalize on discriminating this voltage
peak from background signal noise, and associating the desired signal with an event. The most common
evocation method of the P300 wave is known as the “oddball” paradigm. The method involves a
discrimination task. Two stimuli are presented, one being the non-target stimulus, and the other being
the target stimulus. The name “oddball” arises because the latter stimulus is infrequent relative to the
former stimulus. The subject is to discriminate between the two, that is to respond to the target stimulus
but not to the non-target stimulus. The stimulus can take many forms, but is commonly visual or
auditory [35]. The acquisition of the resulting potential from the target stimulus, and the association of

Brain Sci. 2015, 5

320

that stimulus with an event, are what allow for subject control of a P300-based BCI using the oddball
paradigm. The P300-based BCI, although first described more than 25 years ago [36], has only received
significant attention in recent years. It is now one of the prominent types of BCI being developed [33].
2. Review Objectives
This review is concerned with the human factors and ergonomics (HFE) of P300-based BCIs. By
HFE we wish to indicate the concern with the cognitive and physical characteristics of
human-machine systems, and attending to them through study and design, so as to optimize human
well-being and system performance [37]. In relation to BCIs, we are concerned with HFE issues such as
interface design, usability, accessibility (across clinical and non-clinical groups), cognitive load,
affective response, and so forth [6,37,38]. P300-based BCIs, and BCIs generally, have received
insufficient attention in terms of HFE. This is largely due to the fact that the technology is still relatively
new, and the bulk of research is directed at the technological underpinnings of the
systems [39]. However, we cannot neglect the needs of users, and specifically of different user
types [16]. For example, Nam et al. 2012 [40] found significant differences in the BCI performance of
healthy vs. disabled subjects, and furthermore differences among disabled subjects depending on severity
of impairment. Even more importantly, HFE play a critical role not only in how a subject interacts with
a BCI itself, but rather how a BCI can be incorporated successfully into a subject’s preexisting physical
and social context. For example, Blain-Moraes et al. (2012) [41] conducted a focus group with ALS
patients and their caregivers who jointly had experience with BCI use. The participants reported that
while personal factors, such as physical, physiological, and psychological factors, were important for
them in accepting the use of BCI-based assistive technologies, of greater importance were relational
factors, such as corporeal (the subjects’ bodily relation with the equipment, such as electrodes and
screens), technological (the subject’s relationship and attitude towards technology generally) and social
(crucially, how BCI technologies and their human support networks integrate with users and their human
support networks). Together, the micro-level perspective (BCI systems) and the macro-level perspective
(BCI systems integrating into established caregiving and life-leading systems) underline the essential
consideration of HFE in the development of, research on, and eventual deployment of BCI-based
assistive technologies [41].
As such, our primary concern was P300-based BCI as an assistive technology, that is to say a
technology that provides ability to users with disability. As such, HFE are an implicit concern. To make
this concern explicit, we collected and assessed research relevant to HFE of P300-based BCIs. Of interest
were system characteristics or implementations that could, among other things, improve user performance
(in reducing error or increasing speed), reduce training needs, reduce fatigue and stress, and increase
overall ease of use. Uniting these interests was the question of user acceptance, and how best to measure
such acceptance. As HFE relevance to P300-based BCI is an overly broad metric, we focused on three
research questions to guide our review. These questions do not exhaust the HFE relevance to P300-based
BCI, nor do they cover the entire spectrum of relevant HFE concerns. Rather, as this was an exploratory
review of a relatively small subset of the literature, these questions were designed to “sample” the
spectrum of relevant HFE concerns—focusing (in order of presentation) on machine, human-machine
interface, and human. The research questions were:

Brain Sci. 2015, 5

321

RQ1—Within the dominant paradigm for P300 evocation (the oddball paradigm), what alternative
implementations (visual, auditory, visual/auditory, symbolic vs. iconic, abstract vs. schematic, etc.) yield
improved performance or satisfaction in subjects?
HFE studies seek to increase reliability, availability, increase efficiency, and increase ease of use.
Most literatures address various metrics of the performance for different BCI paradigms. An objective
of this review is to justify those proposed interface designs in the HFE perspective, and try to identify
the most promising future research directions.
RQ2—Within the constraints of BCI instrumentation, what environmental interventions (sedentary
vs. ambulatory implementation, comfort of instrumentation, “normality” of acquisition method, etc.) can
yield improved performance or satisfaction in subjects?
As P300-based BCI systems increase in utility through improvements in technique and instrumentation,
it is necessary to examine how they are translated into situations of actual use, where their application
as assistive technologies is realized. In moving from laboratory situations to real-world use, the success
of these systems (in terms of performance and uptake) will necessarily hinge on HFE.
RQ3—Guided by research conducted in other assistive technologies, how can we measure user
acceptance rates? Which concepts from HFE may increase user acceptance rates of P300-based BCI
systems applied in assistive technology?
Identifying accurate metrics for user acceptance is crucial for further advancement of P300-based
BCI assistive technology; if such technology is to be adopted by the target audience—users with
disabilities—research needs to focus on HFE of assistive technology acceptance, which consist not only
of reducing errors and increasing system performance, but also of improved maintainability, reduced
training requirements, reduced fatigue and physical stress, increased ease of use, increased aesthetic
appearance, and overall user acceptance.
It should be stressed that, in a sense, these questions were proxies; that is, we were not directly concerned
with, for example, evocation methods, or instrumentation and implementation, or specific techniques for
measuring acceptance. Rather, by observing changes in the question variables, we sought to investigate
the role of HFE generally. That explicit HFE terms and concepts are relatively under-represented in the
literature poses challenges to a direct review of them. However, these proxy question helped to provide
a framework that allowed us to conduct a systematic review (see Section 3.4.).
In that our primary motivation was to make explicit the role of HFE in P300-based BCI as an assistive
technology, we had no intention to answer these questions definitively, nor exhaustively to review the
body of literature. Rather, we wished to demonstrate through an exploratory review that, even in a small
subset of the literature, HFE are a crucial concern at all levels of research and system design of assistive
technologies, and that engaging with HFE directly can be productive in improving outcomes and
satisfaction of end-users.

Brain Sci. 2015, 5

322

3. Review Method
We systematically searched published literature on HFE of P300-based BCI to address the
following questions:
1.
2.
3.

What signal evocation methods yield improved performance or satisfaction in subjects?
What environmental interventions can yield improved performance or satisfaction in subjects?
How can user acceptance be measured in currently available BCI technologies? Which
concepts from HFE may increase user acceptance rates of P300-based BCI systems applied in
assistive technology?

3.1. Eligibility Criteria
We included original studies that used P300-based BCI, explicitly described their signal evocation
methods and interface construction, and applied multiple metrics to measure user acceptance or usability
of the technology tested. Our report eligibility criteria included articles in English published within the
past 27 years, since the first description of a P300-based BCI in 1988 [36].
3.2. Information Sources
The following online databases were searched:
•
•
•
•

Compendex, to provide an engineering perspective;
IEEExplore, to provide a targeted electrical/electronics engineering perspective;
MEDLINE, to provide a medical perspective; and
Web of Science, to provide a broad-spectrum perspective.

We constrained our search to the time period since the first description of a P300-based BCI, knowing
that most research activity on the topic has only occurred in recent years, and to studies published in
English. The search period lasted two months, and the final search was conducted on 30 March 2015.
3.3. Search
The general search strategy included key terms such as “BCI,” “P300,” “interface.” In addition,
the search was expanded with specific terms to address the research questions; for example, “oddball
paradigm” term for RQ1, “signal acquisition” for RQ2 and “user acceptance model AND assistive
technology” for RQ3. The main search constraint encountered was the relatively small body of literature
pertinent to HFE of P300-based BCIs.

Brain Sci. 2015, 5

323

3.4. Study Selection
Search inclusion and exclusion criteria were based on number of research subjects, oddball
implementation methods, control groups or comparison groups, and measures of user satisfaction,
described below. The literature on P300-based BCI is broad. However, much of it is concerned with the
technical aspects of improving signal evocation, acquisition, and interpretation. This is fundamental
work, but our research questions directed us towards studies of application. Thus, any review study needed
to have subjects, that is, a non-zero population. As our concern is assistive applications, we screened for
studies with representative subjects (i.e., subjects with neuromuscular disabilities and assistive needs).
However, as this group is a small percentage of the total population, we consistently faced a “small n”
problem, and thus did not exclude useful studies if they included only healthy participants. We excluded
no study on the basis of subject age, gender, or specific neuromuscular disability.
Following RQ1, we screened for studies that demonstrated or compared alternative implementations
of the oddball paradigm to evoke the P300 wave. The final selection of studies for RQ1 also needed to
present a variety of alternative implementations. Following RQ2, we screened for studies that demonstrated
or compared alternative BCI implementation environments. The final selection of studies for RQ2 also
needed to present a variety of alternative implementation environments. We screened for studies with a
design that included a control group or that managed treatments so as to provide a functional control
comparison. Given the nature of BCI research on assistive technologies, there were rarely true controls.
Most often, we selected studies that compared treatments or levels of a given treatment, or both. However,
we did not exclude studies that sought to demonstrate a new assistive application, if such study informed
our research questions. Following RQ3, we screened for studies that accounted for user satisfaction or
acceptance among its outcome metrics. For studies that did not explicitly include such a component, we
screened for those studies the outcomes of which could be logically linked with user acceptance
(improved performance in simulated life tasks, increased comfort, virtual or actual self-directed
mobility, etc.).
Given the nature of BCI research on assistive technologies, there is a narrow range of study designs
employed. Most frequently we encountered small-n, within-subject designs. That said, we did not screen
for design type, beyond the requirement already stated that the design involve human subjects. To guide
the review process, the authors followed the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic reviews and
Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) approach. PRISMA makes use of a 27-item checklist and a four-phase
process to developed to improve systematic reviews and transparent reporting of such reviews [42]. The
PRISMA flow diagram of the study selection process is presented in Figure 1.

Brain Sci. 2015, 5

324

Figure 1. PRISMA flow diagram of this review.
3.5. Data Items
Information was extracted from each included article to focus on the following variables:
•

•

•

Population: Initially, we screened for studies with representative subjects (i.e., subjects with
neuromuscular disabilities and assistive needs), but, due to the small-n problem, we decided not
to exclude useful studies if they included only healthy participants. We excluded no study on
the basis of subject age, gender, or specific neuromuscular disability.
Interventions: For RQ1, we screened for studies that demonstrated or compared alternative
implementations of the oddball paradigm to evoke the P300 wave. For RQ2, we screened for
studies that demonstrated or compared alternative BCI implementation environments. For RQ3,
we screened for studies that measured usability and/or user acceptance of assistive technologies
using BCI.
Comparators: We screened for studies with a design that included a control group or that
managed treatments so as to provide a functional control comparison. Given the nature of BCI

Brain Sci. 2015, 5

•

•

325

research on assistive technologies, there were rarely true controls. Most often, we selected
studies that compared treatments or levels of a given treatment, or both. However, we did not
exclude studies that sought to demonstrate a new assistive application, if such study informed
our research questions.
Outcomes: We screened for studies that accounted for user satisfaction or acceptance among
its outcome metrics. For studies that did not explicitly include such a component, we screened
for those studies the outcomes of which could be logically linked with user acceptance
(improved performance in simulated life tasks, increased comfort, virtual or actual
self-directed mobility, etc.)
Study designs: Given the nature of BCI research on assistive technologies, there is a narrow
range of study designs employed. Most frequently we encountered small-n, within-subject
designs. That said, we did not screen for design type, beyond the requirement already stated that
the design involve human subjects.

4. Review Results
4.1. Study Selection
A total of 21 studies were identified for inclusion in the review. The search of these databases yielded
3161 citations. Of these citations, we excluded 1155 citations because they were duplicates, because the
studies were not in our target language (English), or because we could not locate the full text of the
study. Of the 2006 remaining citations, we used software-based term screening to identify studies that
would inform our research questions. Through this process, we excluded a further 1812 citations. The
remaining 194 articles were reviewed by title and abstract to select those studies most appropriate to the
review. A final total of 21 articles were selected—five from Compendex, eight from IEEExplore, one
from MEDLINE, and seven from Web of Science.
4.2. Study Summaries
Tables 1–3 list the 21 articles reviewed. Entries marked as “N/A” were not applicable to the study in
question. This is to be distinguished from the “Unknown” entry, which indicates that information was
not explicitly stated. Detailed explanation and analysis are provided in later sections.

Brain Sci. 2015, 5

326
Table 1. Studies selected for RQ1.
Salvaris and Sepulveda (2009) [43]

Townsend et al. (2010) [44]

Acqualagna et al. (2010) [45]

Aloise et al. (2012) [46]
To study and compare
performances of gaze-independent
P300-based BCI and the
conventional P300 speller interface

Aim

To study the effect of changes to the
visual aspects of oddball protocol, e.g.,
dimensions of the symbols, distance
between the symbols, and colors

To compare checkerboard paradigm
with the conventional row and
column paradigm

To test a novel rapid serial visual
presentation paradigm in an
offline study, investigating two
different presentation speeds and
two different color conditions

Study design

Within-subject

Within-subject

Within-subject

Within-subject

Participants

8

18

9

10

Age

Mean 22.3, 19–28

Undergraduate students

24–31

Mean 26.82, σ = 4.21

Gender ratio
(male:female)

6:2

11:7

8:1

6:4

Disabled participants

0

3

0

0

Type of non-healthy
participant

N/A

ALS

N/A

N/A
Each character belonged to two
sets of size n. Each set presented at
the center of screen, forming a
regular geometric figure, with
characters displayed at the vertices

Signal evocation
method

Conventional oddball (6 × 6 matrix)

8 × 9 matrix

Stimuli presented in the center of
the screen on a gray background,
with a height of 3.5 cm or 1°
visual angle

Interface
construction

EEG with Biosemi ActiveTwo system
at a sampling rate of 512 Hz; 66
channels were used, including 2 as
reference; out of the 64, 8 were
selected according to performance
Participants sat 1 m from a 19 inch
TFT screen

EGG with a standard 32-channel
electrode cap; amplified and digitized
by two g.tex 16-channel USB biosignal
amplifiers;
ALS users sat in their wheelchairs
Participant sat 1 m from a
computer monitor

EEG with a 64-channel actiCAP
system; EEG data were sampled
at a rate of 1000 Hz and subjected
to off-line analysis
Participants sat 80 cm from a
computer monitor

Scalp EEG potentials were
measured using 10–10 standard on
an elastic cap; the EEG was
acquired using a g.USBamp
amplifier, sampled at 256 Hz
Eye movements were monitored on
an eye tracker system

Environment

Laboratory

Laboratory

Laboratory

Laboratory

Acceptance measure

N/A

N/A

N/A

NASA workload metrics;
User acceptance score (subjective)

Brain Sci. 2015, 5

327
Table 1. Cont.

Within-subject
10
N/A

To test an oddball-based paradigm with a
visual interface to conduct daily living tasks;
subjects could control a robotic arm
mounted on wheelchair to grasp items under
commands through the BCI
Proof of concept
6
24–40

Alcaide-Aguirre and Huggins
(2014) [49]
To evaluate a new P300 interface
with reduced amount of
information through series of
experiments on performing
hold-release and deactivation tasks
Within-subject
7
14–40

To study a hybrid P300-based EEG
interface integrated with eye movement
recognition, using both EEG and
electrooculography (EOG), in performing
two tasks of controlling robots
Within-subject
13
22–30

10:0

5:1

5:2

11:2

0

0

0

0

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

5 × 5 non-uniform grid was constructed with
algorithms, thus the oddball paradigm could
be applied onto 25 points

5 × 6 matrix for a P300 speller;
two layouts were used, in one of
which numbers were replaced with
asterisks to reduce perceptual
errors

Conventional oddball matrix interface for
EEG evocation

Akram et al. (2013) [47]

Aim

Study design
Participants
Age
Gender ratio
(male:female)
Disabled participants
Type of non-healthy
participant

Signal evocation
method

To study a modified T9 (text on
9 keys) interface with
word suggestions

T9 interface

Pathirage et al. (2013) [48]

Interface
construction

EEG data was acquired through a
32-channel BrainAMP MR
amplifier with a sampling
frequency of 250 Hz;
EEG potentials were measured
using 10–20 standard

8-channel electrode cap, a g-tec USBAmp-8
biological signal amplifier, the input signal
was sampled at 256 Hz

16-channel EEG electrode cap;
subjects sat in front of a computer
screen with BCI layout

Environment
Acceptance measure

Laboratory
N/A

Laboratory
N/A

Laboratory
N/A

Ma et al. (2014) [50]

EEG signal was recorded with 8 electrodes
with a sampling rate of 256 Hz and was
downsampled to 64 Hz
Three event-related potential components
were exploited: VPP, N170, and P300;
P300 was evoked by oddball event, while
the other two were evoked by the configural
processing of facial image
Laboratory
N/A

Brain Sci. 2015, 5

328
Table 2. Studies selected for RQ2.
Klobassa et al. (2009) [51]

Aim

To investigate auditory operation of
P300 speller

Escolano et al. (2010) [52]
To report a BCI telepresence
system and to study its
applicability to ALS patients

Castermans et al. (2011) [53]
To investigate the use of
P300-based BCI in an
ambulatory condition

Li et al. (2011) [34]
To evaluate contributing
factors to user performance in
BCI applications

Within-subject (each subject
performing at three treatment levels)

Within-subject (two treatments
at three levels of treatment)

7

20
Healthy (mean 27.9, σ = 3.6)
Disabled (mean 43.7, σ = 14.8)

Participants

Two-group, with partial control
(mixed design: one group had
Proof of concept
constant treatment, while other group
had treatment gradually reduced)
10
1

Age

Mean 47, 22–68

54

25–33

6:4

Unknown

Unknown

14:6

0

1

0

10

N/A

ALS

N/A

Auditory and auditory/visual oddball
Standard speller

Visual (iconic) oddball

Interface
construction

EEG cap,
reclining chair

EEG,
audio-visual interface
over Internet

Environment

Laboratory

Patient at home (Germany)
Telepresence robot (Spain)

Acceptance
measure

N/A

N/A

Study design

Gender ratio
(male:female)
Disabled
participants
Type of
disability
Signal evocation
method

Quasi-oddball (target not rare)
Standard speller
EEG cap,
accelerometer strapped to head,
lower limb kinematics, recorded
with infrared cameras
Laboratory
Quasi-ambulatory
(subject on treadmill)
N/A

Various neuromuscular
disabilities
ABC and Frequency oddball
Standard speller
EEG cap,
each method tested in 3 screen
sizes (monitor, GPS, and
phone) at appropriate distance
Laboratory
sedentary
N/A

Brain Sci. 2015, 5

329
Table 2. Cont.
Duvinage et al. (2013) [54]
To compare medical-grade and
consumer-grade EEG BCI by
comparing performance in P300

Tai et al. (2013) [55]
To propose a BCI to enable
disabled individuals to
utilize the Internet

Corralejo et al. (2014) [56]
To develop and assess an assistive
tool for operating electronic devices
at home by means of P300-based BCI

Study design

Within-subject (4 crossed
treatments: consumer vs. medical,
sitting vs. treadmill)

Proof of concept

Proof of concept

Participants

9

14

15

Age

24–34

20–25

Mean 50.27, 35–68

8:1

Unknown

7:8

0

0

15

N/A

N/A

Visual oddball

Visual oddball

Aim

Gender ratio
(male:female)
Disabled
participants
Type of
disability
Signal evocation
method
Interface
construction
Environment
Acceptance
measure

Emotiv Epoc (8 channel)
ANT (used at same positions)
Laboratory
sedentary and ambulatory
N/A

Varied motor and cognitive
disabilities
P3Speller-based
Visual (iconic)
Matrix menu based

Riccio et al. (2015) [57]
To evaluate hybrid P300-based
BCI with electromyographic
error correction
Proof of concept, and
within-subject (2 treatments:
P300 control and
P300 w/correction)
11
Healthy (28 ± 7)
Disabled (48, 54, 49)
Healthy (5:3)
Disabled (2:1)
3
Severe motor disabilities
Visual (color and shape)

Not explicit

EEG

EEG and EEG+EMG

Not explicit
Laboratory

Laboratory

Laboratory

N/A

Questionnaire

Interview

Brain Sci. 2015, 5

330
Table 3. Studies selected for RQ3.

Aim
Study design

Study description

Participants
Age
Gender ratio
(male:female)
Disabled participants
Type of non-healthy
participant
Signal evocation
method
Interface construction
Environment

Acceptance measure

Lightbody et al. (2010) [58]
To develop a BCI system that is
customizable in terms of its technology
and applications
Proof of concept
Quantitative and qualitative research of
user requirements in a 3-year iterative
development;
SSVP, ERD/ERD,
and P300 paradigms;
six 30-minute sessions with
4 oscillatory visual stimuli (30, 35, 40, and
45 Hz) presented simultaneously
20
Unknown

Riccio et al. (2011) [59]
To evaluate usability through subject performance,
workload, and satisfaction and to compare two
applications for P300-based BCI
Within-subject

Holz et al. (2013) [60]
To evaluate usability of new
SMR-BCI-controlled gaming prototype based on
effectiveness, efficiency, and user satisfaction
Within-subject

2 conditions:
split—oddball screen to select command and application
screen where commands were executed;
overlaid—oddball paradigm overlaid the application;
3 tasks:
Internet browsing, word processing,
and software configuration

6 sessions of BCI interactions with Connect-Four,
strategic game with
two competitive players;
2 types of tasks: copy task and free
playing mode

8
26.7 ± 1.3 years

4
45–48

Unknown

6:2

Unknown

5

0

Varied motor and cognitive disabilities

N/A

4
Severe motor disabilities;
2 out of 4 were locked-in

Visual (stimuli rendered through LEDs on
the outer edges of the screen)
EEG;
Mightex-universal LED controller;
TMSi Porti amplifier at a sampling rate of
2048 Hz
Laboratory
Workshops, questionnaire, and focus
group

Visual

Visual

EEG;
g.USBamp. amplifier;
BCI2000 brain transducer

EEG;
2-class SMR-BCI game;
Brain Vision and g.USBamp. amplifiers;

Laboratory

Laboratory
NASA TLX for subjective workload;
visual analogue scale for overall satisfaction;
Extended QUEST and ATD-PA for satisfaction
regarding different dimensions of BCI device;
semi-structured interview and focus group

NASA Task Load Index (TLX) questionnaire for
subjective workload, visual analogue scale for user
satisfaction, and unstructured interview

Brain Sci. 2015, 5

331
Table 3. Cont.

Aim
Study design
Study description
Participants
Age
Gender ratio
(male:female)
Disabled participants
Type of non-healthy
participant
Signal evocation
method

Bonnet et al. (2013) [61]
To design and implement a multi-user BCI-based gaming system and to
qualify and quantify the influence of
multi-user paradigm on BCI interaction
Within-subject
Brain Arena, simple football video game based on hand motor imagery
(MI), evaluated based on 3 paradigms (solo, collaborative, and
competitive) in 2 experiments;
classification accuracy = performance metric
20
23–52

Zickler et al. (2013) [62]
To evaluate usability of the Brain Painting prototype according to the
standards of the International Organization for Standardization.
Within-subject
3 tasks: copy spelling, copy painting, and free painting;
2 monitors for painting: BCI command screen and “canvas”;
recalibration available to support accuracy of at least 80%
4
39–55

15:5

Unknown

Unknown

4

Unknown

Varied motor and cognitive disabilities

Visual

Visual

Environment

EEG;
USBAmp amplifiers;
GAMMA Caps with 16 active electrodes;
OpenVibe software platform;
Ogre 3D rendering engine
Laboratory

Acceptance measure

Questionnaire (Likert scale, open questions)

EEG;
6x8 matrix for P300 spelling and Brain Painting app;
g.USBamp. amplifier;
BCI2000 software;
Brain Vision Analyzer 2
Laboratory and field (at home with external distractions)
Accuracy to measure effectiveness;
ITR and utility metric for efficiency;
NASA TLX for subjective workload;
QUEST and ATD PA for user satisfaction;
semi-structured interview

Interface
construction

Brain Sci. 2015, 5

332

4.3. Study Characteristics
4.3.1. Participants
Most of the BCI-related studies aimed at providing a tool through which people could communicate
with others or give control instructions to machines without muscular input. Different BCI paradigms
were used and tested among small groups of participants. For different individuals, the system would
have to be tuned according to their unique characteristics. Ideally, for the purpose of practical usage,
researchers need to consider having their experiment conducted on similar groups of potential users,
with a sufficiently large sample size.
Among the studies that we reviewed, the average number of participants was 10.7, with a maximum
of 20 and a minimum of 1. Some studies engaged a very small group of subjects because their studies only
focused on proof of concept [52], or because all their subjects were disabled [60,62]. The age of participants
varied by study. Nineteen out of twenty-two articles explicitly disclosed the age information of their
subjects; one article only mentioned that the participants were undergraduate students [44]; two did not
mention participants’ age [47,58]. Based on the known information, the oldest participant was 68 years
old, while the youngest one was 14. Generally, people with disabilities tend to be older and people in
the healthy group tend to be younger. Sixteen articles reported the gender distribution of their
participants [34,43–51,54,56,57,59,61]. The average percentage of male subjects among these papers was
76.4%. We observed that, in all experiments with gender information, the male population
was predominant in the participant pool. Eight studies recruited participants with
disabilities [34,44,52,56–58,60,62]. The most common type of disability, as seen in Escolano et al.
2010 [52] and Townsend et al. 2010 [44], was ALS. Other articles did not explicitly list the disability
type, but described participants’ disabilities as “varied” or “severe” [34,56–58,60,62]. In addition, three
articles mentioned “cognitive disabilities” [56,58,62]. Twelve studies reported all healthy
subjects [43,45–51,53–55,59], and one study did not disclose this information [61].
4.3.2. Experimental Design
With the relatively small sample sizes, most of researches used within-subject designs for their
experiments. Each participant would have opportunity to conduct all possible configurations of different
BCI paradigms. Five studies, however, did not make comparisons, but only conducted proof of concept
in their experiments [48,52,55,56,58].
4.3.3. Study Environment
Most of the experiments took place in a laboratory environment. Only two studies utilized a “daily
life” environment, for example in the home [52,62]. In almost all studies, participants were in a sedentary
position. Only two studies explored ambulatory conditions [53,54].

Brain Sci. 2015, 5

333

4.4. Results of Individual Studies
4.4.1. Studies Selected for RQ1
Research Question 1 concerned approaches to P300 evocation that benefitted HFE. Although the first
version of the P300-based BCI was proposed nearly 30 years ago, the general understanding of BCI
designs is still evolving rapidly. The conventional matrix (row- and column-based) oddball paradigm is
a productive approach, but it has limitations. The throughput rate is relatively low, certain training is
required, and its reliance on eye movement would limit its usability for people with certain disabilities.
In addition, users may favor different types of configurations. A good design, in the HFE perspective,
should increase reliability, reduce training requirements, reduce loss of time, and improve system
performance. For these reasons we investigated various evocation designs and their impact on various
HFE metrics, e.g., training requirements, effectiveness, and efficiency.
With regard to the design of stimulus presentation, we observed three research directions:
(1) improvement on variations of the conventional matrix-based oddball paradigm [43,44,48,49];
(2) non-matrix variations [45–47]; and (3) hybrid interfaces that utilized more than one feedback
signal [50,51,57].
Salvaris and Sepulveda (2009) [43] studied the effects of different visual aspects on the conventional
P300-based oddball protocol, as shown in Figure 2a. Specifically, three factors were considered: the
dimensions of symbols, the distance between symbols, and the color of symbols. They did not find a
single configuration that outperformed all others across all participants. However, they found that a white
background gave the best performance, while small symbol size gave the worst.

Figure 2. (a) An example of size differentiation of fonts in Salvaris and Sepulveda
(2009) [43]; (b) The checkerboard approach of Townsend et al. (2010) [44]; (c) The
non-uniform grid approach of Pathirage et al. (2013) [48]; (d) The two-layouts approach of
Alcaide-Aguirre and Huggins (2014) [49], where the left layout served for “holding” usage.

Brain Sci. 2015, 5

334

Townsend et al. (2010) [44] compared a proposed checkerboard presentation with the conventional
row and column presentation. An 8
9 black and white checkerboard matrix was developed, as in
Figure 2b. They found that the proposed design gave significant improvement in terms of mean online
accuracy and mean bit rate. Experimental results showed that the improvement for ALS participants was
more pronounced than that for non-clinical participants. Pathirage et al. (2013) [48] explored a new
usage for P300-based BCIs. They implemented an oddball-based paradigm with a visual interface to
control a robotic arm mounted on a wheelchair to grasp designated items. A camera imaged the
surrounding environment and then, using a computer vision algorithm, a grid of dots was overlaid on the
photo, as shown in Figure 2c. These dots were like the conventional letters in a row and column P300
speller. Participant could trigger the control command through oddball-based evocation and instruct the
robotic arm to complete the task. A 5 × 5 non-uniform grid was constructed, which could be regarded as
a variation of the common row and column setup. Alcaide-Aguirre and Huggins (2014) [49] took another
direction with a hold-release task with BCI. Instead of just triggering one control command or typing
one letter, their approach used two layouts that were capable of activating a “hold” instruction. With a
5 6 matrix, the first layout was similar to the original, while the information on the second layout was
reduced, so that participants could have more focus on certain icons and “hold” them, as shown in Figure
2d. Acqualagna et al. (2010) [45] developed a rapid serial visual presentation approach that featured a
sequence of letters rapidly presented at the center of the screen following the oddball pattern, as shown
in Figure 3a. This paradigm did not require eye movement of participants, which is promising for patients
with oculomotor impairment. In the study, two color setups and two speed setups were tested across all
subjects. They found that, although there was no significant effect of color, slower symbol presentation
gave higher accuracy.

Figure 3. Cont.

Brain Sci. 2015, 5

335

Figure 3. (a) The rapid serial visual presentation approach developed by Acqualagna et al.
(2010) [45] (image adapted); (b) Grouped presentation of Aloise et al. (2012) [46]; (c) The
T9 paradigm of Akram et al. (2014) [47].
Aloise et al. (2012) [46] proposed a gaze-independent P300-based BCI called GeoSpell. Instead of
presenting all letters in a matrix, as in the conventional matrix approach, they grouped all letters into
several subsets of size n, so that each letter belonged to two subsets, as shown in Figure 3b. During each
trial, a subset of letters would form a regular geometric figure at the center of the screen, with characters
displayed at the vertices (notice the hexagonal arrangement in Figure 3b). The online accuracy and speed
for GeoSpell was significantly lower than that of the conventional P300 speller, but certain users may
still favor GeoSpell as it does not require gaze shift. Akram et al. (2014) [47] demonstrated a phone
keyboard, similar to a text on nine keys (T9) approach, shown in Figure 3c, which took advantage of
initial typing and word suggestion. The layout of the presentation was a 3 × 3 matrix where each entry
contained more than one symbol. Participants could choose from the nine possible entries and form
words with completion suggestions. Compared to the conventional matrix approach, this proposed scheme
decreased typing time by 51.87%, which shows its efficiency. In Ma et al. (2014) [50], a hybrid interface
was proposed, taking advantage of both EEG and electrooculography (EOG). A P300-based EEG
interface was integrated with an eye movement tracking interface, and two tasks were performed. The
EEG evocation presentation had eight arrow icons around the center of the screen, pointing in eight
directions. Inverted facial images were used as stimuli and were placed upon the arrow icons to trigger
the EEG signal. This approach had a significant positive effect on the efficiency of the control process.
4.4.2. Studies Selected for RQ2
Research Question 2 concerned environmental interventions in P300-based BCI systems that could
have a positive impact on the HFE of performance and uptake. As research in these systems begins to
move more and more beyond the laboratory, attention to HFE-relevant system implementations will be
crucial to future development, and the eventual feasibility of P300-based BCI for assistive use [41].
The connection of these studies to HFE is evident when one considers the impact on the
cognitive-affective responses and physical needs of users. The latter point is more readily evident, as
questions of voluntary mobility and motion are paramount for many disabled individuals. The former

Brain Sci. 2015, 5

336

point, that of cognitive-affective response, is not as readily evident, but is necessarily a crucial factor in
performance. Assistive technologies that serve to aid users in real-world tasks and in real-world
environments are more than assistive, they are enabling. That is to say, positive affective response to
being enabled could synergistically lessen cognitive load, or at least make cognitive loads more easily
tolerated. For this reason, studies that relate to “normality” (of environment, of task, of simplicity, of
autonomy) directly speak to the HFE of BCI systems.
Castermans et al. (2011) [53] investigated the implementation of P300-based BCI in ambulatory
conditions. The BCI was augmented by accelerometer and kinematic recording in order to correct for
gait noise. They concluded that ambulatory P300-based BCI was feasible, but that noise correction did
not improve significantly over raw BCI data. To compromise between portability and performance, they
proposed the use of the xDawn spatial filter with an EEG configuration over the occipital and parietal
areas of the brain. In a similar study, Riccio et al. (2015) [57] investigated the use of EMG signals for
BCI error correction, as such a method could be of benefit to subjects with residual muscle activity.
Although the study was a standard laboratory implementation of a P300-based BCI, the utility of a
channel reading muscular activity could be extrapolated to real-world tasks and environments. They
found that while the hybrid system (EEG and EMG) had lower throughput, it provided increased
accuracy that allowed for decreased overall task time, and reduced user workload and frustration. They
concluded that the hybrid BCI is a significant step in developing functional (i.e., real-world) systems.
Corralejo et al. (2014) [56] demonstrated an implementation of P300-based BCI to enable the operation
of electronic devices in the home by people with severe impairment. They tested a P3Speller-based
interface that displayed menus to guide control devices that were then directly operated by means of
infrared emitter. In general, the researchers were impressed with the results obtained, given the simulation
of a real-life task environment, and given the range of cognitive and motor impairments of the subjects.
They concluded that degree of impairment was not a relevant issue in operation of the tool, and suggested
that it could be easily modified to suit the needs and requirements of users, and would decrease
dependence on caregivers. Duvinage et al. (2013) [54] compared medical-grade vs. consumer-grade
EEG-based BCI for P300 applications. While the consumer-grade product had much lower cost and was
simpler to operate, they found that its performance was much worse and its relative costs much higher
than the medical-grade BCI. They concluded that the consumer-grade system was appropriate for
non-critical applications such as gaming and communication, but for critical applications such as
rehabilitation and prosthesis control the medical-grade BCI was the necessary choice. They suggested
that a low-cost BCI for critical applications should be developed.
Escolano et al. (2010) [52] demonstrated a telepresence system, whereby an impaired subject
could achieve virtual mobility through BCI control of a robot that provided audiovisual feedback and
environmental interaction. They concluded that their system was advantageous in that it did not require
sustained attention (as the user decided the action of the robot, but the robot autonomously executed the
command); it had rehabilitative potential for ALS patients by allowing spatial, decision-making, and
communicative mental exercise; and—unusually for BCI systems—it was considered a fun way for
impaired subjects to engage in brain training (as reported by the subjects themselves).
Klobassa et al. (2009) [51] investigated auditory control of a P300-based BCI, to enable use by subjects
that may have visual or oculomotor impairment, thus rendering visual evocation unacceptable. They tested
environmental sounds, as opposed to abstract or “inhuman” sounds. The goal was not to compare

Brain Sci. 2015, 5

337

evocation methods, as such, but rather to see if evocation methods could be adapted to the environmental
and physical needs of users, and still offer information rates high enough for useful communication.
They found that an auditory system had lower performance than a visual system, and suggested that this
was related to the relative complexity of the task as sight allowed for effective filtering of input, whereas
this was more difficult with hearing. They concluded that the results were nevertheless promising, and
that further development of auditory systems was worthwhile. Li et al. (2011) [34] investigated the
impact of environmental variables of BCI system design. In addition to comparing interface types (ABC
vs. frequency-based matrices), they simulated real-life use by adapting the system to common screen
types (monitor, navigation device, cellphone). In terms of the interface construction, they found that
screen size had a significant effect on user performance and preference. They concluded that this fact
should inform future development of real-world assistive systems. Tai et al. (2013) [55] demonstrated a
P300-based BCI system designed to allow use of the Internet by severely disabled individuals. The design
integrated a visual evocation mechanism incorporated into a specially constructed web page. The system
allowed for cursor control and page navigation, activities comparable to real-world use of the Internet
for daily tasks. They demonstrated that a BCI could be integrated into a standard computer navigation
element (the cursor), and that this system could be integrated into a web browser. They concluded that the
simplicity and intuitiveness of the system allowed for high accuracy to be attained quickly, and that
future development would allow for impaired subjects to browse the Internet autonomously.
4.4.3. Studies Selected for RQ3
Research Question 3 addressed the issue of user acceptance of BCI systems. These studies used
metrics with varying degrees of complexity to capture objective and subjective data regarding user
acceptance. For example, while Bonnet et al. (2013) [61] used a questionnaire with Likert scale and
open-ended questions, Holz et al. (2013) [60] used the NASA Task Load Index (TLX) [63] to measure
participants’ subjective workload, visual analogue scale questionnaires for overall satisfaction, the
Extended Quebec User Evaluation of Satisfaction with assistive Technology (Extended QUEST [64])
and the Assistive Technology Device Predisposition Assessment (ATD-PA [65]) for satisfaction
regarding different dimensions of the BCI device, and semi-structured interviews and focus groups to
gather qualitative data.
User acceptance is related to the human–computer interaction concepts of the gulf of execution, i.e.,
translating goals to actions, and the gulf of evaluation, i.e., understanding the machine output [66]. User
acceptance metrics focus on better understanding the factors that play into the human perception of the
affordances and capabilities of a system before engaging with it. For this review, we looked at the factors
associated with the interface construction, which could be used to bridge the gulf of execution. The
review of various P300 signal evocation methods to identify the optimal system feedback method, which
would bridge the gulf of evaluation, helped us better understand the connection to user acceptance rates.
Bonnet et al. (2013) [61] evaluated the appropriate levels of feedback design in a BCI video game
and the gameplay multi-user paradigm by examining participants’ performance and subjective
experience of engaging with the system. To address the HFE impacting user acceptance level, the
researchers used a hand motor imagery (MI)-based football video game, with the purpose of identifying the
balance between immersion and simplicity for the feedback design. They conducted a two-step

Brain Sci. 2015, 5

338

experiment to compare subject performance in single-user vs. multi-user (collaborative) BCI interaction
in gameplay, and then two approaches in a multi-user setting (collaborative and competitive). In the
single-user condition, the BCI interaction with the game environment presented a closed-loop system,
and in multi-user condition, the system could connect the users at four different levels of the loop (brain
signal processing, decision-making, interaction technique, and application). The researchers concluded
that while mean classification performance and qualitative questionnaire results were in favor of the
collaborative BCI interaction, one third of participants found collaborative feedback distracting.
Lightbody et al. (2010) [58] conducted a study to improve a design of an integrated BCI system, using
the high-frequency Steady State Visual Evoked Potential (HF-SSVEP) approach. The objectives from
the HFE perspective included to increase the economy of production (economy of effort in this case),
reduce training requirements, improve system performance, maintainability, and reliability, and to
increase the user acceptance levels. User-centered design and development of the system entailed engaging
two user groups (healthy and disabled subjects) as well as a lead user, who participated in prototype
testing and provided feedback in early development stages of an iterative development process. The
workshops and questionnaires conducted in this study provided researchers with technical user
requirements, such as integration of access to multimedia and development of interoperable systems,
and general recommendations to improve training techniques and the usability of intuitive graphical user
interfaces (IGUIs).
Riccio et al. (2011) [59] compared two P300-based BCI applications evaluating their usability in
terms of effectiveness, measuring accuracy, efficiency, measuring subjective workload, and satisfaction,
using visual analogue scales and unstructured interviews. Using such a comprehensive approach to
measuring usability, the researchers collected data that addresses multiple HFE objectives, such as
improving system performance while reducing the operator fatigue and stress, addressing aesthetic
appearance, increasing ease of use, and reducing training requirements. The authors evoked the P300
signal under two conditions: two separate screens for oddball presentation of command and execution,
and one screen with oddball paradigm overlaying the application, using three different tasks—Internet
browsing, word processing, and configuration of the software. Contrary to their expectations, the
researchers did not observe any significant difference in effectiveness, efficiency, and user satisfaction
between the overlaid and split conditions.
Holz et al. (2013) [60] evaluated usability of an sensorimotor rhythm (SMR)-based BCI gaming
application design. Similarly to the study conducted by Riccio et al. (2011) [59], the focus was on HFE
of system design that would yield high user acceptance levels by improving system performance while
reducing operator fatigue and stress, addressing aesthetic appearance, increasing ease of use, and reducing
training requirements. The application’s usability was evaluated in accordance with ISO 9241-210 [67]
measuring effectiveness (accuracy), efficiency (information transfer rate and subjective workload), and
satisfaction (visual analogue scale, Extended QUEST, ATD-PA, semi-structured interview, and a focus
group discussion). Each study subject participated in nine sessions, five of which were BCI operations,
consisting of copy-task and free modes. The researchers found that overall usability metrics of
SMR-based BCI were lower than those of P300-based BCI (as reported in other studies): effectiveness
of three (out of four) users was low to medium, efficiency (mental workload) was moderate, and while
users rated their satisfaction relatively high regarding weight, safety, and learnability of the device, they
were dissatisfied with its dimensions, adjustment, ease of use, and speed.

Brain Sci. 2015, 5

339

Zickler et al. (2013) [62] engaged four subjects with varied motor and cognitive disabilities to
evaluate the usability of the P300-based Brain Painting prototype measuring its effectiveness (accuracy),
efficiency (information transfer rate, utility metric, and subjective workload), and user satisfaction
(QUEST, ATD PA, and Device Form). Subjects navigated a test display with a 6 × 8 matrix to perform
the tasks of copy spelling, copy painting, and free painting. At the beginning of each task, subjects
copy-spelled a word to assure a signal rendering accuracy of at least 80%. The study design had the basic
operational objectives of HFE embedded in the task conditions, so the feedback collected from the study
participants was focused primarily on reliability, maintainability, availability and integrated logistic
support, user perception of the system (gulf of evaluation) and their objectives. High external validity of
the experiment was granted by the test setting, either at the subject’s home or at the Information Center for
Supported Communication in Germany, which deliberately did not eliminate background noise or minor
distractions. The study results demonstrated high overall levels effectiveness, efficiency, and user
satisfaction, while providing an extensive list of user requirements for both hardware and software.
Overall, the key user acceptance metrics applied to evaluate P300-based BCI systems included
effectiveness, efficiency, user satisfaction, subjective workload, and ease of learning how to use
the system.
The most commonly used measure for user acceptance, applied in all five studies reviewed, was a
questionnaire of varying type and degree of sophistication. For instance, Bonnet et al. (2013) [61] used
a seven-point Likert scale questionnaire and a questionnaire with open-ended questions, which yielded
qualitative data with subjective user impressions; while other researchers (Holz et al. (2013) [60] and
Zickler et al. (2013) [62]) evaluated their BCI system’s user acceptance in accordance with ISO
9241-210, measuring accuracy in performing tasks, information transfer rate, subjective workload, and
qualitative data using questionnaires with a visual analogue scale, Extended QUEST, ATD-PA,
semi-structured interviews, and focus group discussions.
5. Discussion
5.1. Summary of Evidence
5.1.1. Evidence for RQ1
Research Question 1 was “Within the dominant paradigm for P300 evocation (the oddball paradigm),
what alternative implementations (visual, auditory, visual/auditory, symbolic vs. iconic, abstract vs.
schematic, etc.) yield improved performance or satisfaction in subjects?” This question concerns several
objectives of HFE, that is to increase system performance, reduce loss of time, increase efficiency and
reliability, and increase ease of use. A good design of the BCI stimulation presentation would much
benefit its end-users for efficiently conducting various tasks, e.g., communicating with other people and
controlling machines and robots, with minimized effort and reduced error. Out of the eight articles reviewed
to address RQ1, three [43,44,47] directly compared the performance of a new evocation approach with
the conventional row and column matrix first proposed by Farwell and Donchin (1988) [36], two [48,50]
extended the usage of P300-based BCI by integrating computer vision and a robotic control interface or
integrating the EOG scheme as assistance for robot control, and three [45,46,49] proposed new
paradigms for specific usages, e.g., gaze-independent interfaces, and “hold and release” tasks. We were

Brain Sci. 2015, 5

340

mainly interested in how evocation stimuli were presented to participants and how this affects HFE
metrics. As mentioned in preceding sections, researchers focused on extending and improving the
conventional row and column based approach in three main directions: optimizing the layout parameters
of the conventional paradigm, developing new layouts of letters and icons that better serve users, and
integration of other assistive technologies. There is potential for improving on the oddball paradigm by
adjusting its configurations, e.g., font size, color choice, distance between symbols, and arrangement of
matrix entries (uniform or non-uniform). Several studies only focused on a proof of concept, and there
was no comparison in terms of quantitative HFE metrics. Certainly, extending the usability of BCI into
more task situations can be regarded as an improvement in HFE, as it might benefit certain groups of
people with disabilities and enable them with more control/communication choices. However, there are
no universal rules of design in the construction of such BCIs, and the number of subjects participating
in such studies remains small and unrepresentative.
Meanwhile, new approaches depart from the established matrix presentation, oftentimes with the
triggered symbols placed at the center of the screen. Thus, users have the advantage that gaze shift is no
longer needed, as shown in Acqualagna et al. (2010) [45] and Aloise et al. (2012) [46]. Although the T9
interface, suggested by Akram et al. (2014) [47], still is row and column based, it should be considered
a new approach, as such an interface aggressively condenses the information and the size of the matrix,
and with word suggestion this interface significantly outperformed the conventional ones. There is much
potential in this direction of research, as it can better serve users with specific disabilities, and in terms
of user acceptance. Comparison among different designs might be difficult to conduct, as these designs
would serve different target groups. Thus, what matters is whether such designs can serve their purpose.
We argue that user acceptance could serve as a universal measure of this.
Finally, the hybrid approach is one of the more recent research directions. By adding more information
collected simultaneously from participants, hybrid BCIs should be capable of processing at a higher
bit-rate and performing more complex tasks. As shown in Ma et al. (2014) [50], users could control a
multifunctional humanoid robot and a mobile robot. Researchers not only collected P300-based signals,
but also captured other event-related potential components such as the N170 and the vertex positive
potential (VPP), which were evoked by the configuration processing of facial images. Users’ eye
movements, e.g., blink, wink, and gaze, were also recorded to assist the task. Riccio et al. (2015) [57]
and Klobassa et al. (2009) [51] also explored the possibilities of combining EMG signals or auditory
inputs with the conventional P300-based BCI. The former approach is especially promising for people
with severe motor disability, while the latter could greatly benefit patients with visual difficulties. Hybrid
approaches looked very promising in BCI applications, but with more components in the system, it will
be a challenging research direction.
The following recommendations are made for future research:
1.

After proof-of-concept studies, researchers need to conduct quantitative investigation on
various configuration parameters, so that the prototype system can achieve better performance
in terms of HFE. That is to say, having established proof-of-concept, while it is important to
investigate further extensions or applications of the concept, possible improvements to its
fundamental characteristics should not be ignored. Examination of approaches to yield incremental
BCI improvement, and thus HFE improvement, can be incorporated into whole-system tests.

Brain Sci. 2015, 5

2.

3.

341

For example, in a case such as Pathirage et al. (2013) [48], further investigation of the
wheelchair-mounted robotic arm could incorporate testing of variations on the configuration of
the non-uniform grid to see what configurations yield improved HFE, and thus overall
system performance.
Comparison with the conventional paradigm is recommended as it would convey more information
on performance metrics. In a manner similar to Aloise et al. (2012) [46] and Townsend et al.
(2010) [44], comparing the performance of the well-established matrix oddball paradigm with
variations or departures from it, as utilized by a common set of test subjects, allows the research
community to develop baselines of BCI performance, and to better gauge the implications of
new approaches to the conventional paradigm. For example, while the results of Akram et al.
(2013) [47] are promising, they would be made stronger had the researchers conducted actual
trials of the conventional speller with the test subjects, rather than only computing expected
task times, in order to allow for proper comparison with their experimental results.
Although adequate sample size is not always possible, researchers should try to find more users
that fit the specific usage of the BCI system. This is particularly important for designs that are
targeting certain clinical groups. Of the eight articles reviewed for RQ1, only Townsend et al. [44]
involved clinical participants, and then only three participants with ALS among 15
non-clinical undergraduates. That said, it cannot be assumed that all BCI research has in mind
the development of BCIs for assistive use. If the research is simply of a general nature, then the
selection of test subjects is not critical. However, if the research is intended to be of benefit to
assistive technologies or to certain clinical groups, then it should be made explicit and every
effort should be made to involve appropriate clinical participants in the research. If research has
not been conducted with clinical participants, then it can only be considered as proof-of-concept,
regardless of the degree of success or development of the underlying techniques or systems.
Given that certain clinical groups have a small population in absolute terms (such as ALS
patients), perhaps some studies could involve participants with more common disabilities to
simulate rarer clinical groups. For example, if work extending on Aloise et al. (2012) [46] were
to be directed explicitly at developing assistive technologies, for example for patients with a
neurodegenerative disease, it could be conducted with participants with oculomotor impairments
only. The use of such “proxy” participants might actually be preferable in some cases in order
to reduce potential confounds, as some clinical groups present simultaneously a broad variety
of capacities and challenges.

5.1.2. Evidence for RQ2
Research Question 2 was “Within the constraints of BCI instrumentation, what environmental
interventions (sedentary vs. ambulatory implementation, comfort of instrumentation, “normality” of
acquisition method, etc.) can yield improved performance or satisfaction in subjects?” This question was
concerned with findings that point toward system designs that could benefit HFE of BCI systems in
terms of cognitive–affective response and adaptability to varying physical needs of users. Of the articles
reviewed to address this question, four addressed system developments that could expand the applicability
of P300-based BCI to real-world applications [34,51,53,57], one addressed the important issues of cost

Brain Sci. 2015, 5

342

and simplicity—and thus availability and utility [54]—and three demonstrated potential real-world
applications [52,55,56].
Castermans et al. (2011) [53] demonstrated that ambulatory systems are feasible, while finding that
certain noise-correction methods did not add value. However, they were able to demonstrate the
advantage of the xDawn spatial filter for future development. Riccio et al. (2015) [57] demonstrated a
hybrid EEG–EMG system that reduced overall task time, and user workload and fatigue, thus indicating
possibilities for development of systems better adapted to users with residual muscular activity. These
studies speak to the issue of lessening cognitive load, which is crucial to good HFE for system
performance. Both efforts concerned a hybrid approach to the BCI that used alternate pathways to reduce
noise in the system and thus render signal acquisition more effective. In this way, the user’s gulf of
execution is made smaller, thus permitting increases in performance and reduction in fatigue and stress.
These two studies also expand possibilities with disabled users with mobility or residual motor activity.
This is a very important element, as an important aspect of the HFE of a system is its adaptability to the
needs of users. A similar HFE concern is adaptability to the user’s environmental context. Klobassa et al.
(2009) [51] observed the challenges facing auditory systems, but found that continued development
could yield benefits for users with impairments that prohibit the use of visual systems. By extension, this
suggests possibilities for applications that would benefit from the relative omnidirectionality of sound,
or where the user’s visual attention was otherwise engaged. Li et al. (2011) [34] demonstrated the importance
of considering screen size in system design, demonstrating the importance of accounting for user
capacities and preference in order to optimize system performance.
Duvinage et al. (2013) [54] recognized the need for low-cost and easy-to-use EEG equipment for
the wide-spread application of P300-based BCIs. They identified the weaknesses of consumer-grade
systems, but indicated that they do have a role for non-critical applications. They urged that low-cost,
simpler systems be developed. However, it must be remembered that this is the perspective of researchers,
not users. Simplicity, low encumbrance, and attractiveness should not be underestimated in terms of user
acceptance. A less-than-perfect system that users are willing or eager to employ is better than a quality
system that users resist. Cost should also be understood from an affective point of view, not simply a
monetary one. Given the burdensome medical costs that disabled patients already face, and the emotional
impact of such burdens, cost is not simply a monetary measure. The researchers should consider that
perhaps accessibility has greater value to users than relative quality, given that assistive technologies
must eventually exist “out in the world”, and not only in laboratories or well-equipped hospitals.
Corralejo et al. (2014) [56] demonstrated a BCI system for the control of home devices. They had
good results, and found that degree of impairment did not greatly impact the ability to make use of the
system. Furthermore, they suggested that such a system was easy to adapt to the needs and requirements
of users, and could reduce dependence on caregivers (which is of great benefit to users and caregivers
alike). Tai et al. (2013) [55] demonstrated the integration of a BCI into a web browser, and suggested
that, given further development, the ease of use of the system would allow for autonomous Internet
browsing by impaired individuals. Finally, Escolano et al. (2010) [52] demonstrated a telepresence
system through which an impaired individual could interact with the external environment through
remote control of a robot that provided audiovisual feedback. They demonstrated that the system was
advantageous in that, unlike other systems, it did not require sustained attention (which is difficult in
real-world situations). Furthermore, the system had rehabilitative potential for impaired patients, and in

Brain Sci. 2015, 5

343

addition the system was perceived as fun by users. The results of these studies suggest systems with
good initial HFE, and point to a design process that considered the needs and capacities of the user. They
also take an important step in the cognitive–affective direction by proposing systems that are more than
assistive, but that also are empowering.
HFE are an implicit and important component in all of the studies reviewed for RQ2. The investigation
of real-world applications, or techniques that will enable or improve real-world applications, necessarily
entail crucial HFE. From this perspective, all of these studies are important contributions to understanding
the HFE of P300-based BCI systems. These studies demonstrate the robustness of the oddball paradigm
in adapting to a variety of user needs and context. Furthermore, they demonstrate that assistive applications
can do more than simply improve system performance. Rather, they can empower users facing disabilities
that themselves present terrible cognitive-affective burdens [41]. As such, the value of these developments
is much greater than mere technical advancement. For able individuals, performance increases perhaps
are easily measured quantitatively. But given that the application of the systems and methods presented
in these studies are to the aid and benefit of disabled individuals, we must take greater account of the
cognitive-affective aspects of user experience, as these aspects will have greater impact on performance
than might be seen in use by able individuals. For this reason, we suggest that future research make
explicit the connection with and assumptions of HFE in system performance in real-world or
real-world-applicable contexts. Furthermore, researchers should take into account that HFE have greater
importance for users that face challenges due to disease or misfortune that are not faced by the general
population of users. While these are not strictly oversights, and are not a weakness in the current research,
they are lost opportunities to extend the value and potential of these assistive technologies. This gap can
be filled if researchers articulate clearly the link with HFE of their research, even if that research is not
strictly concerned with HFE. They must capitalize on and leverage the importance of HFE considerations.
The following recommendations are made for future research:
1.

2.

Make explicit the connections that real-world and real-world-applicable systems have to HFE.
That is to say, BCI research is applied research, in that BCIs are tools that have human users,
and which are intended to accomplish the users’ tasks. As such, HFE are an inescapable component
of such research. HFE are always at play, regardless of whether or not researchers have addressed
them. Thus, researchers must necessarily address them, as otherwise they become confounds.
Addressing HFE explicitly will serve to reinforce such good practice in future work.
Acknowledge the value of attending to HFE of users who already face severe challenges in this
regard. Similarly, understand that HFE might have greater importance for clinical groups than
for non-clinical groups. For example, Li et al. (2011) [34] acknowledged this, and as well made
an explicit connection with HFE, as they framed their work in the following manner:
“For those with motor disabilities, a greater degree of communication and control can
enhance their self-confidence and positive attitude toward life. For these reasons, BCI
applications provide hope and encouragement for people suffering from neurodegenerative
diseases …. The degree of communication and control afforded to people with motor
disabilities by BCI helps not only to make numerous simple tasks more convenient but also
to reduce the burden of their caretakers.”

Brain Sci. 2015, 5
3.

4.

5.

6.

344

Remember to view systems also from the perspective of users, and to evaluate them in this
regard. Speaking directly to the question of cost vs. quality raised by Duvinage et al.
(2013) [54], it could be that researchers should attend to the needs and capacities of users
beyond what is evident in experimental settings. These needs and capacities furthermore often
extend beyond individual users; Corralejo et al. (2014) [56] acknowledge this when they point
out that increasing an individual’s autonomy and independence decreases dependence on nurses,
caregivers and relatives. Researchers must keep in mind that unmeasured social or economic
pressures might be as strong as any measured factors. Thus, HFE must be attended to, but they
must also be expanded to incorporate socio-economic aspects of the user-system.
In making explicit the value of attending to HFE to improve system performance, be also sure
to make explicit the value of design that avoids potential HFE deficits. For example, while
Castermans et al. (2011) [53] were somewhat ambivalent about the value of their findings,
stepwise improvements that avoid the potential pitfalls of sedentary or overly noisy systems are
not neutral in HFE terms—they are a benefit. Similarly, Klobassa et al. (2009) [51] reported
throughput rates that were not impressive compared to those possible with the visual paradigm,
but they made the important point that visual mobility often is eventually impaired or even lost
among certain clinical groups—thus, an otherwise excellent hypothetical system designed only
according to the visual paradigm would offer nothing to such clinical groups.
Researchers must be aware that HFE for the disabled include more than the user—they also
involve the user’s support network. Corralejo et al. (2014) [56] pointed out the benefit of their
system not only to users, but also to caregivers. Similarly to point 3 above, researchers must
have a social perspective on HFE for disabled users, as the human–machine system necessarily
comprises more humans than the single user. Escolano et al. (2010) [52] acknowledged this in
that they stated that their system was designed not only with the participation of patients (itself
an essential factor), but as well with patients’ caregivers and family.
Researchers should attend more to the affective element of HFE. For example, Escolano et al.
(2010) [52] were unusual in that they noted that their system was “fun”. This is not a word
commonly seen in the literature. Nevertheless, researchers should not underestimate the potential
value of positive affect to overall performance and acceptance. Indeed, it is important that a
research agenda be targeted on the affective component of HFE, given the degree of influence
of affect upon cognition (e.g., Forgas (2008) [68]). Corralejo et al. (2014) [56] and Tai et al.
(2013) [55] could have given attention to the affective elements, given the potential of their
systems for individual entertainment or human interaction. It is important that the research
community makes a point to remember the importance of these more diffuse human needs, and
not simply decompose those needs into component tasks. If we do that, then we risk
decomposing users likewise into component tasks, and thus dehumanizing them (a risk which
they often already face [41]).

5.1.3. Evidence for RQ3
Research Question 3 was “Guided by research conducted in other assistive technologies, how can we
measure user acceptance rates? Which concepts from HFE may increase user acceptance rates of

Brain Sci. 2015, 5

345

P300-based BCI systems applied in assistive technology?” This question was concerned with identifying
accurate metrics for user acceptance ratings and analyzing those metrics from the HFE perspective to
make recommendations for further advancement of P300-based BCI assistive technology.
The viability of broad application of P300-based BCI technology depends on how the system can to
be adapted to the needs of users, who can be categorized into three distinct groups based on their physical
abilities: healthy users without disabilities, users with varying degrees of neuromuscular disabilities, and
“locked-in” users. Additionally, according to the Technology Acceptance Model [69], each category
will have different criteria for perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use of the new technology, as
well as the subjective norm, which is related to mandatory or voluntary technology usage to perform
tasks. We found that not only did most of the studies reviewed engage mostly or only with healthy
participants, but some studies also did not disclose information about participants’ type of disability
(e.g., [61]). Hence, one of our recommendations is that user acceptance evaluation of
P300-based BCI interfaces should involve users of all three categories to produce valid and reliable
suggestions for further design improvement. Out of five articles analyzed for this question, only
two [59,62] directly addressed usability testing of P300-based BCI technology; the other three articles
discussed usability and user acceptance of BCI technologies using different approaches:
MI-based [61], SMR-based [60], and HF-SSVEP [58]. Our review found gaps in current research
assessing P300-based BCI technology. Looking at the evaluation methods for the assistive BCI
technologies described, we observed a heavier focus on operational as well as reliability- and
maintainability-related objectives of HFE; system safety, accuracy, and performance were mentioned in
every single design evaluation. However, user-related HFE objectives, such as increasing the ease of use
and aesthetic appearance, were considered in very few studies. This could be due to the difficulties of
identifying the appropriate metrics for such subjective but extremely important factors in user
acceptance. Several studies approached usability assessment in accordance with ISO 9241-210 [67],
measuring effectiveness (accuracy), efficiency (subjective workload and/or information transfer rate),
and satisfaction (visual analogue scale, interview, Extended QUEST, and ATD-PA) [59,60,62].
Recognizing the value of such measurements, Riccio et al. (2011) [59] underlined the importance of
applying HFE methods and objectives to assess BCI technology and recommended their implementation
in further P300-based BCI research. We agree with these recommendations, and, in fact, we suggest that
future research of all viable, reliable and high-performing assistive BCI systems include user acceptance
testing applying the metrics discussed in this review.
Recognizing the importance of HFE objectives of focusing on the users, the BCI system operators,
the studies reviewed for RQ3 envisioned usability assessment as a crucial step in the process of developing
assistive technology that could adapt to the needs of the target user group; they engaged a limited number
of subjects that represented the target audience, users with various neuromuscular disabilities. The focus
on validity of the studies’ findings compromised their reliability, but even the degree of such external
validity was limited. This results in limitations of their user acceptance findings, particularly, due to the
complexity of experimental setup, as most studies were conducted in unnaturally simplified laboratory
environments. Even Zickler et al. (2013) [62], who recreated the most real life-like conditions with
background noise and minor distractions in participants’ homes or at the Information Center for
Supported Communication, recognized that the small sample size (n = 4) and the lack of evaluation of
long-term home use limited the study, yielding only descriptive conclusions, without any grounds for an

Brain Sci. 2015, 5

346

in-depth analysis. This constitutes a serious limitation for wide application and generalization of the
study findings on the user acceptance rates of the tested P300-based BCI systems. There seems to be a
cycle in developing P300-based BCI systems for assistive technologies with high user acceptance rates:
to further advance this technology, there needs to be a broad public support and interest, which is only
possible with increased user acceptance rates; but, at the same time, to improve user acceptance by
conducting comprehensive user testing in real life-like environment and long-term home use, the
technology needs to develop further to support faster performance, simpler use, and more independent
operation (reducing the necessary involvement of trained technicians or caregivers).
In the research of user acceptance rates of an MI-based video game, Bonnet et al. (2013) [61]
encountered the challenge of identifying the balance between immersion and simplicity for the feedback
design. They stated that the feedback system in a video game was crucial to evaluate the participant
performance, associated with the player’s enjoyment and motivation levels, but that more complex
feedback systems of commercial-quality immersive video games could lead to increased mental workload.
In addition, even though their experiment, which compared subject performance in a single-user vs.
multi-user (collaborative) BCI interaction in gameplay and then two approaches in a multi-user setting
(collaborative and competitive), did not identify any significant difference in the mean classification
performance within the three tested approaches, seven out of 20 participants reported being distracted
by the excessive feedback in the multi-user BCI interaction.
Holz et al. (2013) [60] found that overall usability metrics of SMR-based BCI were lower than those
of P300-based BCI (as reported in other studies): the effectiveness of three (out of four) users was low
to medium; efficiency (mental workload) was moderate; and, while users rated their satisfaction relatively
high regarding weight, safety, and learnability of the device, they were dissatisfied with its dimensions,
adjustment, ease of use, and speed. The dissatisfaction with the EEG cap and excessive electrodes that
restrict movement was one of the main findings in the study of Lightbody et al. (2010) [58], who tested
a HF-SSVEP-based BCI interface with a lead user and two user groups (healthy and disabled subjects).
Workshops and questionnaires conducted in their study offered more insight into technical user
requirements, such as integration of access to multimedia and development of interoperable systems,
and general recommendations to improve training techniques and usability of IGUIs. The two reviewed
studies that evaluated usability of P300-based BCI systems concluded with similar concerns expressed
by their test subjects [59,62].
The following recommendations are made for future research:
1.

The researchers working on advancing P300-based BCI in assistive technologies need to
engage participants with disabilities, who represent the majority of the target user group. This
is consonant with recommendation 3 of Section 5.1.1. However, that previous recommendation
specifies the involvement of users that match the intended usage profile of the system. This
recommendation more specifically stresses the participation of clinical groups. This is of great
importance in research that addresses the question of user acceptance. For example, Riccio et al.
(2011) [59] explicitly framed their research in the context of improving usability for those with
severe motor disability. Yet, despite a comprehensive assessment of usability, which is laudable,
the data were collected only from non-clinical participants. While the study did validate the
utility of the HFE methodologies used, they did so only for healthy participants. As such

Brain Sci. 2015, 5

2.

3.

347

methodologies generally have been developed by and for use on healthy individuals, we should
not assume that they are immediately valid for non-healthy individuals (cf. Anderson 2009 [70]).
The only way that the research community will be able to validate similar methodologies for
clinical groups is through their participation in studies using existing methodologies, and having
those methodologies adapted specifically to them.
To yield valid user acceptance data characterizing technology that is intended to become a part
of day-to-day life of users with disabilities, researchers need to conduct their tests not only in
the lab, but in a real life-like environment, with multiple distracting factors and complex
user-system interactions. That is to say, researchers must allow for environmental confounds,
which make up the fabric of life outside of the laboratory. Zickler et al. (2013) [62] is an
excellent example of this: EEG signals were not cleaned of artifacts such as eye blinks (as the
researchers assumed real-world use in an environment full of artifacts), and “Daily life
distractions, such as family members entering the room or telephone ringing were deliberately
not avoided to guarantee for highest possible external validity.”
The P300-based technology developers should attend to HFE concepts for design improvements,
as the reviewed literature suggested, for instance: improved appearance of EEG caps, more
conventional and user-friendly interfaces, simplified software installation processes, clarified
training systems for software use, elimination of the need for participation of a trained EEG
technician, interoperable systems development, and integration with other systems and devices.
Holz et al. (2013) [60] is an excellent example of how to incorporate attention to such a design
approach, and likewise how to measure user response and acceptance. While the researchers
collected useful system performance data in various trials, it was in using the Extended QUEST
2.0 [64] to assess participants that the researchers learned that some users felt not only
physically uncomfortable, but felt that they “look[ed] strange” in the EEG cap, or that they
found the cabling distracting and uncomfortable, or that they desired a different training
schedule, or that the EEG looked too much like the “hospital”. Users and researchers have
different goals and needs; to ensure acceptance by users (and thus to be able to provide to them
utility), researchers must not forget always to attend to those goals and needs, and to ask what
they are instead of making assumptions.

5.2. Review Limitations
This review was limited by the following factors:
•
•

•
•

The literature search was conducted only in English.
The generalizability of the findings is hampered by the specificity of the concern (i.e., assistive
technologies for individuals with certain neuromuscular impairments), and the resultant small
number of representative test subjects (in our reviewed studies, n ranged only from 1 to 20).
The bulk of research on P300-based BCI still addresses fundamentally technical issues, thus
studies explicitly accounting for HFE are relatively few.
Even among those studies addressing HFE, the goal is still technical (i.e., performance-oriented),
as much technical development remains to improve the functioning of P300-based BCI systems,

Brain Sci. 2015, 5

•
•

348

so that focus can be given to refining HFE. Despite the fact that these issues are related, HFE
remain a secondary concern.
It is difficult to isolate evocation methods and environmental/design variables, as each category
impacts the other.
Attention to user acceptance is confounded by the fact that many target users are impaired in
ways and in degrees that leave them little choice in assistive technologies. And even though
most authors of the articles reviewed for RQ3 agree on the importance of applying HFE methods
to assess BCI technology in terms of subjective workload (NASA TLX), user satisfaction
measurement, and accuracy, user acceptance is unfortunately often neglected.

6. Conclusions
We reviewed a sample of the current literature on P300-based BCIs from an explicit HFE perspective.
To evaluate what makes for good HFE in such systems, we focused on alternative implementations of
the oddball paradigm (the machine focus), on environmental interventions (the human-machine focus),
and on measurement of user acceptance (the human focus). In each focus, the review was grounded in
HFE concepts, and in how system performance (i.e., machine and human together) and satisfaction (not
only of users, but also of the users’ social and care networks) can benefit from the inclusion of an explicit
HFE perspective.
We find that HFE concerns are central to the performance of these systems (more accurately systems
of systems, given the social and technological complexity), although researchers do not often make
explicit this connection. Furthermore, the variety of possible assistive implementations [71], as well as
the variety and variability of user capacities and preferences [72], suggest that there is no universal metric
or “best practice” to describe HFE in BCI applications, aside from urging the systematic inclusion of
HFE. Each system must be tailored to users and contexts. As such, this argues for a general awareness
of and attention to HFE in BCI system research. In future studies, this will necessitate an incorporation
of measures of user acceptance, and rigorous usability evaluations (perhaps based on ISO 9241-210 [67]).
As well, despite the relatively small percentage of the population with disabilities that would benefit
from BCI assistive technologies, it is crucial that future research incorporate such potential users as test
participants, as their HFE needs differ substantially from the able population. Along these lines, greater
realism in testing is necessitated. That is, even techniques or systems that are in their infancy should be
tested in situations that strive to mimic or replicate real-world contexts, as this will drastically impact
the cognitive–affective state of users—a crucial concern for HFE. Finally, future research that explicitly
addresses HFE must expand its understanding of this topic to incorporate socio-economic concerns, as
well as user’s support networks.
The 12 recommendations put forward here provide a foundation from which could be developed a
framework for the systematic and consistent inclusion of HFE concerns into research on P300-based
BCIs, assistive technologies using BCIs, and assistive technologies in general. The relatively nascent
state of many of these technologies should not prevent researchers from looking forward to possible and
eventual real-world applications, as an HFE perspective will benefit not only outcomes, but as well the
processes that lead to those outcomes. Additionally, speaking generally to the development of BCI, a

Brain Sci. 2015, 5

349

systematic HFE perspective could help to anchor and to cohere the overall endeavor as it grows further
beyond the laboratory [41,70,73,74].
Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation (NSF) under Grant Number
IIS-1421948. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.
Author Contributions
All authors contributed equally to this work. J. Clark Powers, Kateryna Bieliaieva, and Shuohao Wu
conducted the review and drafted the initial manuscript. J. Clark Powers was responsible for writing and
editing the current manuscript under Chang S. Nam supervision who oversaw the project and guided it
to completion. All authors discussed the results and implications and commented on the manuscript at
all stages.
Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

Daly, J.J.; Wolpaw, J.R. Brain-computer interfaces in neurological rehabilitation. Lancet Neurol.
2008, 7, 1032–1043.
Vidal, J.J. Toward direct brain-computer communication. Annu. Rev. Biophys. Bioeng. 1973, 2,
157–180.
Elbert, T.; Rockstroh, B.; Lutzenberger, W.; Birbaumer, N. Biofeedback of slow cortical potentials.
Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol. 1980, 48, 293–301.
Shih, J.J.; Krusienski, D.J.; Wolpaw, J.R. Brain-computer interfaces in medicine. Mayo Clin. Proc.
2012, 87, 268–279.
Allison, B.Z.; Wolpaw, E.W.; Wolpaw, A.R. Brain-computer interface systems: Progress and
prospects. Expert Rev. Med. Devices 2007, 4, 463–474.
Birbaumer, N. Breaking the silence: Brain-computer interfaces (BCI) for communication and motor
control. Psychophysiology 2006, 43, 517–532.
Birbaumer, N.; Murguialday, A.R.; Cohen, L. Brain-computer interface in paralysis.
Curr. Opin. Neurol. 2008, 21, 634–638.
Kübler, A.; Kotchoubey, B.; Kaiser, J.; Wolpaw, J.R.; Birbaumer, N. Brain-computer
communication: Unlocking the locked in. Psychol. Bull. 2001, 127, 358–375.
Murguialday, A.R.; Hill, J.; Bensch, M.; Martens, S.; Halder, S.; Nijboer, F.; Schoelkopf, B.;
Birbaumer, N.; Gharabaghi, A. Transition from the locked in to the completely locked-in state:
A physiological analysis. Clin. Neurophysiol. 2011, 122, 925–933.

Brain Sci. 2015, 5

350

10. Friedrich, E.V.C.; Suttie, N.; Sivanathan, A.; Lim, T.; Louchart, S.; Pineda, J.A. Brain-computer
interface game applications for combined neurofeedback and biofeedback treatment for children on
the autism spectrum. Front. Neuroeng. 2014, 7, 1–7.
11. Pineda, J.A.; Friedrich, E.V.C.; LaMarca, K. Neurorehabilitation of social dysfunctions: A
model-based neurofeedback approach for low and high-functioning autism. Front. Neuroeng. 2014,
7, 1–6.
12. Zhu, H.; Sun, Y.; Zeng, J.; Sun, H. Mirror neural training induced by virtual reality in brain-computer
interfaces may provide a promising approach for the autism therapy. Med. Hypotheses 2011, 76,
646–647.
13. Geuze, J.; Farquhar, J.; Desain, P. Towards a communication brain computer interface based on
semantic relations. PLoS ONE 2014, 9, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0087511.
14. Lebedev, M.A.; Nicolelis, M.A.L. Brain-machine interfaces: Past, present and future. Trends
Neurosci. 2006, 29, 536–546.
15. Sellers, E.W.; Ryan, D.B.; Hauser, C.K. Noninvasive brain-computer interface enables
communication after brainstem stroke. Sci. Transl. Med. 2014, 6, doi:10.1126/scitranslmed.
3007801.
16. Wolpaw, J.R. Brain-computer interfaces. In Handbook of Clinical Neurology; Michael, P.B., David,
C.G., Eds.; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2013; Volume 110, pp. 67–74.
17. Huggins, J.E.; Moinuddin, A.A.; Chiodo, A.E.; Wren, P.A. What would brain-computer interface
users want: Opinions and priorities of potential users with spinal cord injury. Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil.
2015, 96, doi:10.1016/j.apmr.2014.05.028.
18. King, C.; Wang, P.; Chui, L.; Do, A.; Nenadic, Z. Operation of a brain-computer interface walking
simulator for individuals with spinal cord injury. J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. 2013, 10, 1–14.
19. Rupp, R.; Rohm, M.; Schneiders, M.; Kreilinger, A.; Muller-Putz, G.R. Functional rehabilitation
of the paralyzed upper extremity after spinal cord injury by noninvasive hybrid neuroprostheses.
Proc. IEEE 2015, 103, 954–968.
20. Han, Y.; Bin, H. Brain-computer interfaces using sensorimotor rhythms: Current state and future
perspectives. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 2014, 61, 1425–1435.
21. Papadelis, C.; Braun, C.; Pantazis, D.; Soekadar, S.R.; Bamidis, P. Using brain waves to control
computers and machines. Adv. Hum. Comput. Interact. 2013, 2013, 1–2.
22. Ribeiro, P.R.D.A.; Brasil, F.L.; Witkowski, M.; Shiman, F.; Cipriani, C.; Vitiello, N.; Carrozza, M.C.;
Soekadar, S.R. Controlling assistive machines in paralysis using brain waves and other biosignals.
Adv. Hum. Comp. Interact. 2013, 2013, 1–9.
23. Wolpaw, J.R.; Birbaumer, N.; McFarland, D.J.; Pfurtscheller, G.; Vaughan, T.M. Brain-computer
interfaces for communication and control. Clin. Neurophysiol. 2002, 113, 767–791.
24. Moghimi, S.; Kushki, A.; Guerguerian, A.M.; Chau, T. A review of EEG-based brain-computer
interfaces as access pathways for individuals with severe disabilities. Assist. Technol. 2013, 25,
99–110.
25. Mitchell, J.D.; Borasio, G.D. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Lancet 2007, 369, 2031–2041.
26. Mehta, P.; Antao, V.; Kaye, W.; Sanchez, M.; Williamson, D.; Bryan, L.; Muravov, O.;
Horton, K. Prevalence of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis—United States, 2010–2011. Morb. Mortal.
Weekly Rep. 2014, 63, 1–14.

Brain Sci. 2015, 5

351

27. Hillyard, S.A.; Kutas, M. Electrophysiology of cognitive processing. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 1983, 34,
33–61.
28. Pritchard, W.S. Psychophysiology of P300. Psychol. Bull. 1981, 89, 506–540.
29. Duncan, C.C.; Barry, R.J.; Connolly, J.F.; Fischer, C.; Michie, P.T.; Naatanen, R.; Polich, J.;
Reinvang, I.; van Petten, C. Event-related potentials in clinical research: Guidelines for eliciting,
recording, and quantifying mismatch negativity, P300, and N400. Clin. Neurophysiol. 2009, 120,
1883–1908.
30. Duncan-Johnson, C.C.; Donchin, E. The P300 component of the event-related brain potential as an
index of information-processing. Biol. Psychol. 1982, 14, 1–52.
31. Nieuwenhuis, S.; Aston-Jones, G.; Cohen, J.D. Decision making, the P3, and the locus
coeruleus-norepinephrine system. Psychol. Bull. 2005, 131, 510–532.
32. Tsai, C.C.; Kuo, W.J.; Hung, D.L.; Tzeng, O.J.L. Action co-representation is tuned to other humans.
J. Cognit. Neurosci. 2008, 20, 2015–2024.
33. Fazel-Rezai, R.; Allison, B.Z.; Guger, C.; Sellers, E.W.; Kleih, S.C.; Kübler, A. P300 brain
computer interface: Current challenges and emerging trends. Front. Neuroeng. 2012, 5, 1–14.
34. Li, Y.Q.; Nam, C.S.; Shadden, B.B.; Johnson, S.L. A P300-based brain-computer interface: Effects
of interface type and screen size. Int. J. Hum. Comput. Interact. 2011, 27, 52–68.
35. Polich, J.; Kok, A. Cognitive and biological determinants of P300: An integrative review.
Biol. Psychol. 1995, 41, 103–146.
36. Farwell, L.A.; Donchin, E. Talking off the top of your head: Toward a mental prosthesis utilizing
event-related brain potentials. Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol. 1988, 70, 510–523.
37. Dul, J.; Bruder, R.; Buckle, P.; Carayon, P.; Falzon, P.; Marras, W.S.; Wilson, J.R.; van der Doelen, B.
A strategy for human factors/ergonomics: Developing the discipline and profession. Ergonomics
2012, 55, 377–395.
38. Nam, C.S. Brain-computer interface (BCI) and ergonomics. Ergonomics 2012, 55, 513–515.
39. Nam, C.S.; Li, Y.Q.; Johnson, S. Evaluation of P300-based brain-computer interface in real-world
contexts. Int. J. Hum. Comput. Interact. 2010, 26, 621–637.
40. Nam, C.S.; Woo, J.; Bahn, S. Severe motor disability affects functional cortical integration in the
context of brain-computer interface (BCI) use. Ergonomics 2012, 55, 581–591.
41. Blain-Moraes, S.; Schaff, R.; Gruis, K.L.; Huggins, J.E.; Wren, P.A. Barriers to and mediators of
brain-computer interface user acceptance: Focus group findings. Ergonomics 2012, 55, 516–525.
42. Liberati, A.; Altman, D.G.; Tetzlaff, J.; Mulrow, C.; Gøtzsche, P.C.; Ioannidis, J.P.A.; Clarke, M.;
Devereaux, P.J.; Kleijnen, J.; Moher, D. The PRISMA Statement for reporting systematic reviews
and meta-analyses of studies that evaluate health care interventions: Explanation and elaboration.
Ann. Intern. Med. 2009, 6, doi:10.7326/0003-4819-151-4-200908180-00136.
43. Salvaris, M.; Sepulveda, F. Visual modifications on the P300 speller BCI paradigm. J. Neural Eng.
2009, 6, 1–8.
44. Townsend, G.; LaPallo, B.K.; Boulay, C.B.; Krusienski, D.J.; Frye, G.E.; Hauser, C.K.;
Schwartz, N.E.; Vaughan, T.M.; Wolpaw, J.R.; Sellers, E.W. A novel P300-based brain-computer
interface stimulus presentation paradigm: Moving beyond rows and columns. Clin. Neurophysiol.
2010, 121, 1109–1120.

Brain Sci. 2015, 5

352

45. Acqualagna, L.; Treder, M.S.; Schreuder, M.; Blankertz, B. A novel brain-computer interface based
on the rapid serial visual presentation paradigm. In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual International
Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, Buenos Aires, Argentina,
31 August–4 September 2010; IEEE: Buenos Aires, Argentina, 2010; pp. 2686–2689.
46. Aloise, F.; Arico, P.; Schettini, F.; Riccio, A.; Salinari, S.; Mattia, D.; Babiloni, F.; Cincotti, F.
A covert attention P300-based brain-computer interface: Geospell. Ergonomics 2012, 55,
538–551.
47. Akram, F.; Han, H.S.; Jeon, H.J.; Park, K.; Park, S.H.; Cho, J.; Kim, T.S. An efficient words typing
P300-BCI system using a modified T9 interface and random forest classifier. In Proceedings of the
Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, Osaka,
Japan, 3–7 July 2013; IEEE: Osaka, Japan, 2013; pp. 2251–2254.
48. Pathirage, I.; Khokar, K.; Klay, E.; Alqasemi, R.; Dubey, R. A vision based P300 brain computer
interface for grasping using a wheelchair-mounted robotic arm. In Proceedings of the 2013
IEEE/ASME International Conference on Advanced Intelligent Mechatronics, Wollongong,
Australia, 9–12 July 2013; IEEE: Wollongong, Australia, 2013; pp. 188–193.
49. Alcaide-Aguirre, R.E.; Huggins, J.E. Novel hold-release functionality in a P300 brain-computer
interface. J. Neural Eng. 2014, 11, 1–8.
50. Ma, J.; Zhang, Y.; Cichocki, A.; Matsuno, F. A novel EOG/EEG hybrid human-machine interface
adopting eye movements and ERPs: Application to robot control. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 2014,
62, 876–889.
51. Klobassa, D.S.; Vaughan, T.M.; Brunner, P.; Schwartz, N.E.; Wolpaw, J.R.; Neuper, C.;
Sellers, E.W. Toward a high-throughput auditory P300-based brain-computer interface. Clin.
Neurophysiol. 2009, 120, 1252–1261.
52. Escolano, C.; Murguialday, A.R.; Matuz, T.; Birbaumer, N.; Minguez, J.; IEEE. A Telepresence
robotic system operated with a P300-based brain-computer interface: Initial tests with ALS patients.
In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine
and Biology Society, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 31 August–4 September 2010; IEEE: Buenos Aires,
Argentina, 2010; pp. 4476–4480.
53. Castermans, T.; Duvinage, M.; Petieau, M.; Hoellinger, T.; de Saedeleer, C.; Seetharaman, K.;
Bengoetxea, A.; Cheron, G.; Dutoit, T. Optimizing the performances of a P300-based brain-computer
interface in ambulatory conditions. IEEE J. Emerg. Sel. Top. Circuits Syst. 2011, 1, 566–577.
54. Duvinage, M.; Castermans, T.; Petieau, M.; Hoellinger, T.; Cheron, G.; Dutoit, T. Performance of
the Emotiv Epoc headset for P300-based applications. Biomed. Eng. OnLine 2013, 12,
doi:10.1186/1475-925X-12-56.
55. Tai, Y.H.; Tian, Y.J.; Huang, T.W.; Sun, K.T. Brainwave technology gives Internet access to the
physically disabled. In Fourth Global Congress on Intelligent Systems; IEEE: Hong Kong, China,
2013; pp. 331–335.
56. Corralejo, R.; Nicolas-Alonso, L.F.; Alvarez, D.; Hornero, R. A P300-based brain-computer
interface aimed at operating electronic devices at home for severely disabled people. Med. Biol.
Eng. Comput. 2014, 52, 861–872.

Brain Sci. 2015, 5

353

57. Riccio, A.; Holz, E.M.; Arico, P.; Leotta, F.; Aloise, F.; Desideri, L.; Rimondini, M.; Kubler, A.;
Mattia, D.; Cincotti, F. Hybrid P300-based brain-computer interface to improve usability for people
with severe motor disability: Electromyographic signals for error correction during a spelling task.
Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 2015, 96, S54–S61.
58. Lightbody, G.; Ware, M.; McCullagh, P.; Mulvenna, M.D.; Thomson, E.; Martin, S.; Todd, D.;
Medina, V.C.; Martinez, S.C. A user centred approach for developing brain-computer interfaces.
In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Pervasive Computing Technologies for
Healthcare, Munich, Germany, 22–25 March 2010; pp. 1–8.
59. Riccio, A.; Leotta, F.; Bianchi, L.; Aloise, F.; Zickler, C.; Hoogerwerf, E.J.; Kubler, A.;
Mattia, D.; Cincotti, F. Workload measurement in a communication application operated through a
P300-based brain-computer interface. J. Neural Eng. 2011, 8, 1–6.
60. Holz, E.M.; Höhne, J.; Staiger-Sälzer, P.; Tangermann, M.; Kübler, A. Brain-computer interface
controlled gaming: Evaluation of usability by severely motor restricted end-users. Artif. Intell. Med.
2013, 59, 111–120.
61. Bonnet, L.; Lotte, F.; Lecuyer, A. Two brains, one game: Design and evaluation of a multiuser BCI
video game based on motor imagery. IEEE Trans. Computat. Intell. AIGames Impact Factor 2013,
5, 185–198.
62. Zickler, C.; Halder, S.; Kleih, S.C.; Herbert, C.; Kubler, A. Brain painting: Usability testing
according to the user-centered design in end users with severe motor paralysis. Artif. Intell. Med.
2013, 59, 99–110.
63. NASA TLX: Task Load Index. Available online: http://humansystems.arc.nasa.gov/groups/tlx/
(accessed on 6 June 2015).
64. Gelderblom, G.J.; de Witte, L.P.; Demers, L.; Weiss-Lambrou, R.; Ska, B. The Quebec User
Evaluation of Satisfaction with Assistive Technology (QUEST 2.0): An overview and recent
progress. Technol. Disabil. 2002, 14, 101–105.
65. Scherer, M.J. The Matching Person & Technology (MPT) Model Manual and Assessments, 5th ed.;
The Institute for Matching Person & Technology, Inc.: Webster, NY, USA, 2005.
66. Norman, D.A.; Draper, S.W. User Centered System Design: New Perspectives on
Human–Computer Interaction; CRC Press: Hillsdale, NJ, USA, 1986; p. 540.
67. International Organization for Standardization. Ergonomics of Human–System Interaction:
Human-Centred Design for Interactive Systems; ISO 9241:210; International Organization for
Standardization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2010.
68. Forgas, J.P. Affect and cognition. Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 2008, 3, 94–101.
69. Randolph, A.B.; Hubona, G.S. Organizational and individual acceptance of assistive interfaces and
technologies. Adv. Manag. Inf. Syst. 2006, 6, 379–400.
70. Anderson, K.D. Consideration of user priorities when developing neural prosthetics. J. Neural Eng.
2009, 6, doi:10.1088/1741-2560/6/5/055003.
71. Huggins, J.E. BCI applications. In Brain-Computer Interfaces: Principles and Practice;
Wolpaw, J.R., Wolpaw, E.W., Eds.; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK; New York, NY, USA,
2012; pp. 197–212.

Brain Sci. 2015, 5

354

72. Hochberg, L.R.; Anderson, K.D. BCI users and their needs. In Brain-Computer Interfaces:
Principles and Practice; Wolpaw, J.R., Wolpaw, E.W., Eds.; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK;
New York, NY, USA, 2012; pp. 317–323.
73. Allison, B. Trends in BCI research: Progress today, backlash tomorrow? XRDS 2011, 18, 18–22.
74. Kleih, S.C.; Kaufmann, T.; Zickler, C.; Halder, S.; Leotta, F.; Cincotti, F.; Aloise, F.; Riccio, A.;
Herbert, C.; Mattia, D.; et al. Out of the frying pan into the fire—The P300-based BCI faces
real-world challenges. In Progress Brain Research, Jens Schouenborg; Garwicz, M., Nils, D., Eds.;
Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2011; Volume 194, pp. 27–46.
© 2015 by the authors; licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

