Brief Report

Using a Wireless Electroencephalography
Device to Evaluate E-Health and
E-Learning Interventions
Tanya Mailhot ▼ Patrick Lavoie ▼ Marc-André Maheu-Cadotte ▼ Guillaume Fontaine ▼ Alexis Cournoyer ▼
José Côté ▼ France Dupuis ▼ Thierry Karsenti ▼ Sylvie Cossette

Background: Measuring engagement and other reactions of patients and health professionals to e-health and e-learning
interventions remains a challenge for researchers.
Objective: The aim of this pilot study was to assess the feasibility and acceptability of using a wireless electroencephalography
(EEG) device to measure affective (anxiety, enjoyment, relaxation) and cognitive (attention, engagement, interest) reactions of
patients and healthcare professionals during e-health or e-learning interventions.
Methods: Using a wireless EEG device, we measured patient (n = 6) and health professional (n = 7) reactions during a
10-minute session of an e-health or e-learning intervention. The following feasibility and acceptability indicators were
assessed and compared for patients and healthcare professionals: number of eligible participants who consented to
participate, reasons for refusal, time to install and calibrate the wireless EEG device, number of participants who completed the
full 10-minute sessions, participant comfort when wearing the device, signal quality, and number of observations obtained for
each reaction. The wireless EEG readings were compared to participant self-rating of their reactions.
Results: We obtained at least 75% of possible observations for attention, engagement, enjoyment, and interest. EEG scores
were similar to self-reported scores, but they varied throughout the sessions, which gave information on participants’ real-time
reactions to the e-health/e-learning interventions. Results on the other indicators support the feasibility and acceptability of
the wireless EEG device for both patients and professionals.
Discussion: Using the wireless EEG device was feasible and acceptable. Future studies must examine its use in other contexts of care
and explore which components of the interventions affected participant reactions by combining wireless EEG and eye tracking.
Key Words: e-health  e-learning  electroencephalography  engagement  pilot study
Nursing Research, January/February 2018, Vol 67, No 1, 43–48

P

hysical inactivity, smoking, hypercaloric diet, and other
unhealthy behaviors are priority targets for disease
prevention and management (Cardiometabolic Risk
Working Group: Executive Committee, 2011). To address
Tanya Mailhot, RN, PhD, is Postdoctoral Fellow, Faculty of Nursing and Faculty
of Medicine, Université de Montréal, Montréal Heart Institute Research Center,
Canada (""spell out province in bio).
Patrick Lavoie, RN, PhD, is Postdoctoral Fellow, William F. Connell School
of Nursing, Boston College, Massachusetts.
Marc-André Maheu-Cadotte, RN, BSc, is Doctoral Student and Guillaume Fontaine,
RN, MSc, is Doctoral Student, Faculty of Nursing, Université de Montréal,
Montréal Heart Institute Research Center, Canada.
Alexis Cournoyer, MD, is Doctoral Student, Université de Montréal, Hôpital du
Sacré-Cœur de Montréal, Canada.
José Côté, RN. PhD, is Professor, Faculty of Nursing, Université de Montréal,
and Researcher, Centre Hospitalier de l’Université de Montréal Research Center, Canada.
France Dupuis, RN, PhD, is Associate Professor, Faculty of Nursing, Université de
Montréal, and Researcher, Sainte-Justine Research Center, Montréal, Canada.
Thierry Karsenti, MA, MEd, PhD, is Professor, Faculty of Education Sciences,
Université de Montréal, Canada.
Sylvie Cossette, RN, PhD, is Professor, Faculty of Nursing, Université de Montréal,
and Researcher, Montréal Heart Institute Research Center, Canada.

Copyright © 2018 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1097/NNR.0000000000000260
Nursing Research

these risk factors, patients must initiate changes in their behaviors, and healthcare professionals must support those
changes (Garvey, Arathuzik, Miller, & Ard, 2016; The Emerging Risk Factors Collaboration, 2015). Over the last decade,
an increasing number of Web-based e-health and e-learning
interventions have been developed and tested for these
purposes (Cook et al., 2008). For patients, e-health interventions provide a learning environment that can support
behavior change (Wantland, Portillo, Holzemer, Slaughter,
& McGhee, 2004). For healthcare professionals, e-learning
can facilitate the acquisition of the knowledge and skills required to support patients in health behavior change (Cook
et al., 2008).
However, recent studies have shown that the effectiveness of e-health and e-learning interventions is limited by
dropout rates of 50%–80% (Cugelman, Thelwall, & Dawes,
2011; Krebs, Prochaska, & Rossi, 2010; Norman et al., 2007).
A possible explanation for these numbers resides in the lack
of user engagement, which is essential to sustain user participation and to achieve positive outcomes (Perski, Blandford,
www.nursingresearchonline.com

Copyright © 2017 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

43

44

Evaluating E-Interventions Using Wireless EEG

West, & Michie, 2017). Engagement can be divided into a
behavioral and a psychological component (Clark & Mayer,
2016). Behavioral engagement is reflected in overt actions
of users during the interventions—clicking, writing, or ticking boxes, for instances. Psychological engagement, on
the other hand, is reflected in the mental activity of users
toward the learning goals, making it a more difficult construct
to measure. Both forms of engagement are closely linked
with other affective and cognitive reactions involved in
learning, including attention, interest, enjoyment, relaxation,
and anxiety.
Thus, evaluating user engagement and other affective
and cognitive reactions in e-health and e-learning interventions is a top research priority (Michie, Yardley, West, Patrick,
& Greaves, 2017). Among the existing measurement methods,
electroencephalography (EEG) allows for real-time assessment of electrical signals in various parts of the brain. It
can detect patterns of mental activity associated with affective and cognitive reactions, including engagement (Li &
Lu, 2009; Mampusti et al., 2011; Murugappan et al., 2008).
However, EEG devices require users to wear dozens of electrodes while remaining completely still during the test, not
to mention the specialized training required to interpret the
results (Acharya, Hani, Cheek, Thirumala, & Tsuchida, 2016).
Beside EEG devices, other methods are more commonly used
to evaluate affective and cognitive reactions after online interventions. These methods involve users’ self-rating of their
reactions on visual analog scales (VAS) but do not provide
real-time assessments during the interventions (Funke & Reips,
2012; Kuhlmann, Reips, Wienert, & Lippke, 2016; Reips &
Funke, 2008).
In response to these challenges, wireless EEG devices
have been developed. Although they cannot be substituted
to full-scale EEG for diagnostic purposes, these devices are
cheaper and use less electrodes, which reduces the time
required for installation and allows users to move during measurement. The devices come with interpretation software
products that compute real-time scores for different affective
and cognitive reactions. Up to now, wireless EEGs’ tracings
have been compared to full-scale EEGs and their validity was
supported (Badcock et al., 2015), but the validity of the software interpretations remains to be scrutinized. Nevertheless,
wireless EEG devices are a promising and practical method
to measure users’ real-time reactions that could be used to evaluate e-health or e-learning interventions. Accordingly, the aim
of this pilot study was to assess the feasibility and acceptability
of using a wireless EEG device to measure affective and cognitive reactions of patients and healthcare professionals during
e-health or e-learning interventions.

METHODS
This prospective pilot study was conducted between April and
May 2017 in a Canadian cardiology hospital. The study was

www.nursingresearchonline.com

approved by the institutional review board (#2017-2134)
and registered at the ISRCTN registry (https://www.isrctn.
com; ISRCTN12825237).

Participants
Based on anticipated recruitment rate, we aimed to approach
20 eligible participants over 2 months. Eligible participants
were either patients expecting discharge from a coronary care
unit or professionals from the same setting. Written consent
was obtained from all participants.

Procedure
Upon enrolment, participants completed a sociodemographic
questionnaire, including age, gender, and education. A research
assistant then installed and calibrated a wireless EEG device
on their head. Participants were instructed to start the first
session of an e-health or e-learning intervention on a laptop
computer. Patients completed the procedure in their hospital room, and healthcare professionals completed it in a
closed office during a work shift. These conditions reflected
the course of events on the unit. There was a possibility that
participants could be interrupted to receive or provide regular
care at any time during the sessions. If they had not been
interrupted after 10 minutes, the research assistant ended
the experiment and asked participants to complete a questionnaire about their reactions to the intervention.

E-Health and E-Learning Interventions
Two interventions were used—one for patients and one for
healthcare professionals. Patients navigated through the first
session of TAVIE@COEUR (Cossette et al., 2017), an e-health
intervention designed to promote adherence to cardiovascular medication. Professionals viewed the first session of
MOTIV@COEUR (Fontaine et al., 2016), an e-learning intervention on motivational interviewing. A typical timeline of
the first 10 minutes of each intervention with actions assumed
to promote behavioral engagement (clicks and questions) is
presented in Figure 1. In both online interventions, participants
navigated through videos of a nurse providing topic-relevant
explanations (“N” in Figure 1). They had to click on “continue”
buttons to move from one video to the next.
Patients watched videos of a nurse addressing the importance of taking cardiovascular medication as prescribed
(3 segments  1 minute/segment) and on behaviors related
to medication (3 segments  1 minute/segment). They also
viewed a video of a patient sharing his experience with cardiovascular medication (2.5 minutes). On two occasions,
they had to answer yes/no questions; they also had to complete a questionnaire on drugs they were taking at home
(“Q” in Figure 1), and they were presented with a short text
on these drugs (“T” in Figure 1).
In the first video watched by healthcare professionals
(2 minutes), a nurse introduced brief motivational interviewing

Copyright © 2017 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

Evaluating E-Interventions Using Wireless EEG

Nursing Research • January/February 2018 • Volume 67 • No. 1

45

FIGURE 1. Typical timeline of the interventions. The MOTIV@Coeur timeline was used for patients, and the TAVIE@Coeur timeline was used for
professionals. Naviation through videos is identified with “N.” Clicking on “continue” buttons to move from one video to the next is identified as “Click.”
Completing a questionnaire corresponds to “Q” and “Questionnaire,” whereas reading a short text corresponds to “T.”

and the learning objectives for MOTIV@COEUR. In the second video (11 minutes), the nurse presented the theoretical
basis of motivational interviewing. On three occasions,
videos showed text to emphasize the nurse’s explanations
(“T” in Figure 1).

Data Collection
Emotive and Cognitive Reactions Participant reactions
were measured with a wireless EEG device and VAS. The
EPOC+ wireless EEG device (Figure 2) from EMOTIV (San
Francisco, CA) was used. The EPOC+ uses 14 electrodes
that are positioned per the 10–20 international positioning
system for EEGs (Acharya et al., 2016). Interpretation software for the device (MyEmotiv) computes real-time scores
for six affective and cognitive reactions: anxiety, attention, engagement, enjoyment, interest, and relaxation. Scores
range from 0 to 100, with higher scores indicating higherintensity reactions.

During the sessions, participant scores were recorded
every minute for each of the six reactions. Therefore, a total
of 60 scores per participant (10 scores  6 reactions) was
expected. Of note, the software requires a sufficient signal
quality to compute the reactions, with some reactions requiring a higher signal quality than others. Accordingly, it was
possible that the software would not provide scores for
some reactions if the signal quality was not sufficient. Because
there was no previous report of the number of scores to
expect, we estimated that obtaining 75% of possible scores
was acceptable.
Immediately after the session, participants rated the
degree to which they experienced the six affective and cognitive reactions measured by the wireless EEG device by tracing
an X on a 10-cm VAS. The distance from the beginning of the
VAS to the X was measured and transformed into a 0–100
score (e.g., 67 mm = 67 points).

Feasibility and Acceptability Indicators drawn from the
literature on pilot studies (Feeley & Cossette, 2016) were
assessed and compared for patients and healthcare professionals: number of eligible participants who consented to
participate, reasons for refusal, time to install and calibrate
the wireless EEG device, number of participants who completed the full 10-minute sessions, participants’ comfort
when wearing the device, signal quality, and number of observations obtained for each reaction. A VAS was also used to
measure participant comfort while wearing the wireless
EEG device.
Analyses

FIGURE 2. EPOC+ wireless EEG device from Emotiv. A person wearing
the wireless EEG headset is shown navigating through the MOTIV@Coeur
intervention.

Data were summarized with descriptive statistics, including
frequency, percentage, mean, and standard deviation (or median and minimum/maximum value if normality of the distribution was not achieved). Because the sample size was small,
groups were compared on the basis of visual inspection.

Copyright © 2017 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

46

Evaluating E-Interventions Using Wireless EEG

www.nursingresearchonline.com

Although the validity and reliability of the software interpretation was beyond the scope of this pilot study, the participant scores on the reactions for which we obtained at least
75% of possible observations were graphed. The curves from
the graphed scores were compared to participant self-rating
of their reactions during the intervention. A search for differences in trends among patients’ and professionals’ scores
was performed; as they had been exposed to different interventions, different trends were expected.

RESULTS
During the study period, 18 eligible participants (10 patients
and 8 professionals) were approached. Of those, 13 were recruited and enrolled (six patients and seven professionals).
The recruitment rates were high at 60% for patients and
87.5% for professionals. Reasons for refusal included being
too tired or not interested. On average, patients were 58 years
old (range: 53–65); healthcare professionals were 36 years old
(range: 26–54). Patients identified mostly as male (n = 4, 67%),
and half had completed a college education (n = 3, 50%).
Healthcare professionals identified mostly as female (n = 4,
57%), were all nurses, and all had completed a university
degree (n = 7, 100%).
Feasibility and acceptability results are reported in Table 1.
For both groups, the median time to install and calibrate the
wireless EEG device was shorter or equal to other reports
(2–5 minutes; Harrison, 2013); it took longer to install the device on patients than on professionals. All participants completed at least 7 minutes of the sessions. Approximately half
of the patients (n = 3/6, 50%) and the professionals (n = 4/7,
57%) completed the full 10-minute sessions. Patients were
interrupted mostly because a healthcare professional walked
into their room; healthcare professionals were interrupted
because one of their assigned patients required care.

Comfort scores were generally high and similar for both
groups. Comfort scores for participants who did (Mdn = 8.7)
and did not (Mdn = 7.9) complete the sessions were also
similar. Nevertheless, visual inspection of the comfort scores
revealed that patients and professionals who did not complete the sessions reported higher comfort scores. Thus, it
appeared that participants ended the sessions because of
contextual factors and not because of uncomfortableness
with the wireless EEG device. However, healthcare professionals who completed the sessions reported slightly lower
comfort scores than those who did not. This could mean that
wearing the wireless EEG device for a longer period increases
discomfort. Signal quality was generally high throughout the
sessions. We were unable to obtain any observations from
one healthcare professional, even if the signal quality was
moderate at 85% during the experiment. This participant
was removed from the subsequent parts of the analyses.
In the protocol, we planned to calculate the number of
observations obtained over 10 minutes. Half of participants
stopped the sessions after 7 minutes. Therefore, most of the
missing observations in the last 3 minutes of the experiment
were due to the interruption of the procedure and not to
the wireless EEG device. Thus, the first 7 minutes of the experiment were used for analyses. As shown in Table 1, at least
75% of possible observations for professionals’ attention,
engagement, enjoyment, and interest were obtained. This
threshold was not reached for anxiety and relaxation. Results for patients were similar, except for enjoyment, which
approached but did not reach the 75% threshold. However,
the threshold was reached with healthcare professionals,
and we decided to keep enjoyment for further analyses.
Affective and cognitive reactions are presented in Figure 3.
Trends in patient and professional scores on attention, engagement, enjoyment, and interest for the first 7 minutes of the

TABLE 1. Feasibility and Acceptability
Patients (n = 6)
Variable

Professionals (n = 7)

Mdn

Range

Mdn

Range

Install/calibrate (minutes)
Signal quality
Comfort (score)
Completed session
Did not complete session

2.5
92
8.7
8.7
8.8

1−10
55−100
4.6−9.5
7.9−9.4
4.6−9.5

1.0
100
7.7
6.5
7.7

1−4
85−100
2.5−9.7
2.9−9.7
2.5−8.1

Observations (first 7 minutes)

ja

(%)

ja

(%)

11
39
37
31
40
24

(26.2)
(92.3)
(88.1)
(73.8)
(95.2)
(57.1)

20
42
36
41
42
24

(47.6)
(100.0)
(85.7)
(97.6)
(100.0)
(57.1)

Anxiety
Attention
Engagement
Enjoyment
Interest
Relaxation

Note. Results are presented for the first 7 minutes, because approximately half of the participants did not complete an
entire 10-minute session. There were 42 possible observations for both patients and professionals (7 minutes  6 patients
or professionals). j = number of observations; Mdn = median. aBased on data from seven patients and six professionals.

Copyright © 2017 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

Nursing Research • January/February 2018 • Volume 67 • No. 1

experiment were similar to the VAS scores measured after the
experiment. On the EEG and the VAS, professionals scored
higher than patients. As expected, the wireless EEG scores
varied throughout the sessions, providing real-time information on participant reaction; this variation was not reflected
in the single VAS measures obtained after the intervention.
The difference in patient and professional curves reflects that
they were exposed to different interventions and suggests that
the wireless EEG device provides a measure that was reactive
to the interventions, which supports its potential.

DISCUSSION
These results support the feasibility and the acceptability of
using a wireless EEG device to evaluate e-health and e-learning
interventions with hospitalized patients and healthcare
professionals. Recruitment rates were high, installation and

Evaluating E-Interventions Using Wireless EEG

47

Data obtained with the wireless EEG device
are promising.
calibration of the device were feasible within a reasonable time,
participants were comfortable, and the device yielded the expected number of observations for most reactions. Data obtained with the wireless EEG device are promising; they show
variations in the intensity of reactions that are known to affect
the outcomes of e-health and e-learning interventions. The
strengths of this exploratory study include participants’ blinding
to their EEG scores and the absence of missing data for the VAS
scores. Feasibility and acceptability were assessed in naturalistic
clinical conditions, thereby increasing the applicability of the results to real-world settings and future nursing research. However,
this is also a limit of the study: Some sessions were interrupted by
clinical events on the unit, resulting in missing EEG data. Although appropriate for a pilot study, the sample size was small,
and we only approached 18 out of the possible 20 participants
because of administrative issues. It is also important to note
that all participants in this study came from one setting and
were clinically stable—patients were expecting discharge,
and professionals were assumed to be healthy.

Conclusions
Considering the strengths and limitations of this study, the results
suggest that the use of wireless EEG device warrants further
investigation. The next step would be to examine what components of the interventions affected participant reactions. This
could be achieved by combining wireless EEG and eye-tracking
measurements with a larger sample of patients and professionals.
Such studies could lead to adjustments of e-health and e-learning
interventions to increase their effectiveness regarding behavior
change and knowledge/skill acquisition. Also, it appears relevant
to test the wireless EEG device in other care settings and with
patients who present with different clinical states.
Accepted for publication October 11, 2017.
The paper was accepted under the Editorship of Susan J. Henly.
The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
This study received funding from the Montréal Heart Institute Foundation. The authors would like to acknowledge the valuable contribution
of Alain Vadeboncoeur, MD, Jean Lambert, PhD, Julien Terrier, RN
MSc, and Luc Dubé, PhD, to this study.
Corresponding author: Tanya Mailhot, RN, PhD, Faculty of Nursing and
Faculty of Medicine; Université de Montréal, Montréal Heart Institute Research Center, 5000 Bélanger Street, S-2490, Montréal, QC H1T 1C8,
Canada (e-mail: t.mailhot@uMontréal.ca).

REFERENCES
FIGURE 3. Descriptive results for attention, engagement, enjoyment,
and interest. Dotted lines represent the mean scores obtained with the
wireless EEG device at each time point. Full lines represent the mean
VAS score obtained after the online interventions. Scores for professionals
are presented in blue; patient scores are in black.

Acharya, J. N., Hani, A. J., Cheek, J., Thirumala, P., & Tsuchida, T. N.
(2016). American Clinical Neurophysiology Society guideline
2: Guidelines for standard electrode position nomenclature.
Neurodiagnostic Journal, 56, 245–252. doi:10.1080/21646821.
2016.1245558

Copyright © 2017 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

48

Evaluating E-Interventions Using Wireless EEG

Badcock, N. A., Preece, K. A., de Wit, B., Glenn, K., Fieder, N., Thie, J.,
& McArthur, G. (2015). Validation of the Emotiv EPOC EEG system for research quality auditory event-related potentials in children. PeerJ, 3, e907. doi:10.7717/peerj.907
Cardiometabolic Risk Working Group: Executive Committee, Leiter,
L. A., Fitchett, D. H., Gilbert, R. E., Gupta, M., Mancini, G. B., …
Ur, E. (2011). Cardiometabolic risk in Canada: A detailed analysis
and position paper by the Cardiometabolic Risk Working Group.
Canadian Journal of Cardiology, 27(2), e1–e33. doi:10.1016/j.
cjca.2010.12.054
Clark, R. C., & Mayer, R. E. (2016). E-learning and the science of
instruction: Proven guidelines for consumers and designers
of multimedia learning (4th ed.). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Cook, D. A., Levinson, A. J., Garside, S., Dupras, D. M., Erwin, P. J.,
& Montori, V. M. (2008). Internet-based learning in the health
professions: A meta-analysis. JAMA, 300, 1181–1196. doi:10.1001/
jama.300.10.1181
Cossette, S., Côté, J., Rouleau, G., Robitaille, M., Heppell, S., Mailhot,
T., … Guertin, M.-C. (2017). A Web-based tailored intervention to
support illness management in patients hospitalized for an acute
coronary syndrome: A pilot study. Journal of Medical Internet
Research Cardio, 1(2), e4. doi:10.2196/cardio.7342
Cugelman, B., Thelwall, M., & Dawes, P. (2011). Online interventions for
social marketing health behavior change campaigns: A meta-analysis
of psychological architectures and adherence factors. Journal of
Medical Internet Research, 13(1), e17. doi:10.2196/jmir.1367
Feeley, N., & Cossette, S. (2016). Pilot studies. In S. J. Henly (Ed.),
The Routledge international handbook of advanced quantitative methods in nursing research (pp. 199–212). New York,
NY: Routledge.
Fontaine, G., Cossette, S., Heppell, S., Boyer, L., Mailhot, T., Simard,
M.-J., & Tanguay, J.-F. (2016). Evaluation of a Web-based e-learning
platform for brief motivational interviewing by nurses in cardiovascular care: A pilot study. Journal of Medical Internet Research,
18(8), e224. doi:10.2196/jmir.6298
Funke, F., & Reips, U.-D. (2012). Why semantic differentials in
Web-based research should be made from visual analog scales
and not from 5-point scales. Field Methods, 24, 310–327. doi:10. 1177/
1525822X12444061
Garvey, W. T., Arathuzik, G., Miller, G. D., & Ard, J. (2016). Lifestyle
therapy in the management of cardiometabolic risk: Diabetes prevention, hypertension, and dyslipidemia. In J. I. Mechanick & R. F.
Kushner (Eds.), Lifestyle medicine: A manual for clinical practice (pp. 245–267). Cham, Switzerland: Springer International.
Harrison, T. (2013). The Emotiv mind: Investigating the accuracy of
the Emotiv EPOC in identifying emotions and its use in an Intelligent Tutoring System (Unpublished honours report). University
of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand. Retrieved from www.
cosc.canterbury.ac.nz/research/reports/HonsReps/2013/hons_
1302.pdf

www.nursingresearchonline.com

Li, M., & Lu, B. L. (2009). Emotion classification based on gammaband EEG. Conference Proceedings of the IEEE Engineering in
Medicine and Biology Society, 2009, 1323–1326. doi:10.1109/
IEMBS.2009.5334139
Krebs, P., Prochaska, J. O., & Rossi, J. S. (2010). A meta-analysis of computer-tailored interventions for health behavior change. Preventive
Medicine, 51, 214–221. doi:10.1016/j.ypmed.2010.06.004
Kuhlmann, T., Reips, U.-D., Wienert, J., & Lippke, S. (2016). Using
visual analogue scales in eHealth: Non-response effects in a lifestyle intervention. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 18(6),
e126. doi:10.2196/jmir.5271
Mampusti, E. T., Ng, J. S., Quinto, J. J., Teng, G. L., Suarez, M. T. C., &
Trogo, R. S. (2011, October). Measuring academic affective
states of students via brainwave signals. Paper presented at
the Third International Conference on Knowledge and Systems
Engineering, Hanoi, Vietnam. Retrieved from http://ieeexplore.
ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?arnumber=6063471
Michie, S., Yardley, L., West, R., Patrick, K., & Greaves, F. (2017). Developing and evaluating digital interventions to promote behavior
change in health and health care: Recommendations resulting
from an international workshop. Journal of Medical Internet
Research, 19(6), e232. doi:10.2196/jmir.7126
Murugappan, M., Rizon, M., Nagarajan, R., Yaacob, S., Zunaidi, I., &
Hazry, D. (2008, August). Lifting scheme for human emotion recognition using EEG. Paper presented at the 2008 International
Symposium on Information Technology, Kuala Lampur, Malaysia.
doi:10.1109/ITSIM.2008.4631646. Retrieved from http://
ieeexplore.ieee.org/iel5/4625945/4631638/04631646.pdf
Norman, G. J., Zabinski, M. F., Adams, M. A., Rosenberg, D. E., Yaroch,
A. L., & Atienza, A. A. (2007). A review of eHealth interventions
for physical activity and dietary behavior change. American
Journal of Preventive Medicine, 33(4), 336–345. doi:10.1016/j.
amepre.2007.05.007
Perski, O., Blandford, A., West, R., & Michie, S. (2017). Conceptualising
engagement with digital behaviour change interventions: A systematic review using principles from critical interpretive synthesis.
Translational Behavioral Medicine, 7(2), 254–267. doi:10.1007/
s13142-016-0453-1
Reips, U.-D., & Funke, F. (2008). Interval-level measurement with
visual analogue scales in Internet-based research: VAS generator. Behavior Research Methods, 40, 699–704. doi:10.3758/
BRM.40.3.699
The Emerging Risk Factors Collaboration. (2015). Association of
cardiometabolic multimorbidity with mortality. JAMA, 314, 52–60.
doi:10.1001/jama.2015.7008
Wantland, D. J., Portillo, C. J., Holzemer, W. L., Slaughter, R., &
McGhee, E. M. (2004). The effectiveness of Web-based vs. nonWeb-based interventions: A meta-analysis of behavioral change
outcomes. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 6(4), e40.
doi:10.2196/jmir.6.4.e40

Read and Send Letters to the Editor
Nursing Research now publishes Letters to the Editor in the print journal. To submit a Letter to the Editor you
should login to Editorial Manager here: http://www.editorialmanager.com/nres/default.aspx and choose article type ‘Letter
to the Editor.’ Authors of articles referenced in the Letter will be given the opportunity to respond.
Previous Letters published can be found on the publisher’s website: http://journals.lww.com/nursingresearchonline/
Pages/LetterstotheEditor.aspx.

Copyright © 2017 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

