NeuroQuantology | April 2018 | Volume 16 | Issue 4 | Page 62-68 | doi: 10.14704/nq.2018.16.4.1209
He S., Reliability Analysis of Driving Behavior in Road Traffic System Considering Synchronization of Neural Activity

Reliability Analysis of Driving Behaviour in Road
Traffic System Considering Synchronization of
Neural Activity
Shouhui He*, Lei Chen, Mingshi Yue
ABSTRACT
This paper aims to disclose the reliability of driving behaviour in road traffic system. For this purpose, the drivers’
electroencephalography (EEG) signals were collected with Emotiv, a portable device, and used for an experiment
in actual driving environment. Through the analysis on the synchronization of 14-channel EGG signals, the author
identified a proper threshold, and determined whether the brain network nodes are connected or not. On this
basis, a brain network model was created for the drivers. The driving behaviour reliability of the drivers was
discussed in detailed considering brain network parameters (clustering coefficient and global efficiency) and the
power spectrum features of EEG signals. The research results show that, with the increase in driving time, the
intercity drivers became increasingly fatigued and their brain network continued to densify, pushing up the
network parameters like clustering coefficient and global efficiency. In this case, the neuronal activities became
increasingly synchronized across the brain regions. In addition, the two brain network parameters of the drivers
were less discrete and more accurate than the fatigue indicator of EEG power spectrum features. Therefore, the
analysis of brain network parameters is a precise and feasible method for discussing driving behaviour reliability.
Key Words: Brain Network, Reliability, Driving, Clustering Coefficient, Global Efficiency, Spectral Features
DOI Number: 10.14704/nq.2018.16.4.1209
NeuroQuantology 2018; 16(4):62-68

Introduction
The road traffic system is a dynamic mechanism,
involving such factors as the “driver”, the
“vehicle”, the “road” and the traffic environment.
Specifically, the “driver” is the centerpiece and
only intelligent factor, the “vehicle” carries the
transport function, and the “road” lays the
foundation of the system (Curran & Stokes, 2003;
Li et al., 2015; Trancossi et al., 2016; Cascetta et
al., 2016; Zhao et al., 2015; Zhang and Shi, 2017).
It is hard to identify the impact of each factor on
traffic accidents. However, the big data statistics
show that over 80% of traffic accidents are
resulted from driver negligence (Just et al., 2008).
Compared to external measures like road repair
and vehicle improvement, reshaping the intrinsic

cognition of the driver is an effective way to
lower the occurrence of traffic accidents
(Graham, 1998). Thus, it is meaningful to explore
the reliability of driving behaviour considering
the cognitive features of the human brain.

Previous studies have shown that the
activities in the human brain can be reflected by
EEG signals (Calhoun, 2004). These signals are
the electrophysiological signals generated by the
electrical activity of neuronal clusters in the
cerebral cortex. The EEG information mainly
concentrates in the range of 0~32Hz. Depending
on the frequency, the EEG signals are divided
into slow waves like δ and θ and fast waves like
α and β. There are many effective means to

Corresponding author: Shouhui He
Address: Linyi University, Linyi 276000, China
e-mail  supremehe@163.com
Relevant conflicts of interest/financial disclosures: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any
commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Received: 9 February 2018; Accepted: 28 March 2018

eISSN 1303-5150

www.neuroquantology.com

62

NeuroQuantology | April 2018 | Volume 16 | Issue 4 | Page 62-68 | doi: 10.14704/nq.2018.16.4.1209
He S., Reliability Analysis of Driving Behavior in Road Traffic System Considering Synchronization of Neural Activity

extract the reliability features of driving behavior
from the EEG signals (Vanacker et al., 2007). Some
extraction methods are based on the energy of
rhythmic EEG signals (Curran et al., 2004) and
entropy (Fox et al., 1998). When the driver is in a
state of low driving reliability, the brain network
parameters change significantly (Schanke &
Sundet, 2000), leading to increasing clustering
coefficient and decreasing shortest path. In this
case, the reliability of driving behavior shows a
gradual decline trend.
To reflect the changing reliability of driving
behavior, this paper creates a brain network
model of the driver considering the cognitive
features of the human brain and relies on the
model to analyze the synchronization pattern of
neural activities in each brain region of the driver.
First, the drivers’ EEG signals were monitored and
collected in real-time by a portable acquisition
device; then, the brain network model of the
driver was established based on the signals and
the network structure theory; on this basis, the
author determined the two brain network
parameters of clustering coefficient and global
efficiency; meanwhile, the spectral features of the
EEG power and data discreteness were analyzed
to evaluate the reliability of driving behavior.
Brain Network Model
Before creating the brain network model, it is
necessary to define the nodes, quantify the
connection strength between the nodes, and
connect the nodes whose connection strength
exceeds the pre-set threshold. According to graph
theory, the brain regions in the human brain can
be viewed as “nodes” and the regional
connections as “edges”. In this way, it is possible
to establish a brain network model of the driver
and perform parameter analysis of complex brain
network. In this research, the clustering
coefficient and the global efficiency, two metrics
of the brain network model, are highlighted to
discuss how drivers differ in brain network
features and determine their physiological status.
In order to create drivers’ brain network model,
the first step is to pre-treat the drivers’ EEG
signals and remove the noises by extracting the
signals of a specific frequency; then, the
connection strength of each EEG channel in the
human brain should be quantified by the
synchronization likelihood algorithm; finally, a
proper threshold should be configured to build a
brain neural network model.

eISSN 1303-5150

The human EEG features are stochastic, nonlinear,
unstable and susceptible to external interference
(Galski et al., 1993). Therefore, the disturbing
signals must be removed before analyzing EEG
features. For this purpose, the wavelet packet
decomposition was introduced to remove the
signals of excessively high or low frequencies;
then, the remaining rhythmic EEG signals were
investigated to disclose the reliability features of
driving
behavior.
The
wavelet
packet
decomposition process is illustrated in Figure 1.
S
A1

AA2

AAA3

D1

DA2

DAA3

ADA3

AD2

DDA3

AAD3

DD2

DAD3

ADD3

DDD3

Figure 1. Wavelet packet decomposition

To construct the brain network model, the human
brain was partitioned into several functional
regions according to Brodmann’s human brain
atlas. Each functional region was treated as a node
in the brain network. Then, the relationships
between different channels of rhythmic EEG
signals were quantified by the synchronization
likelihood method. Next, the weightless approach
was adopted to determine a proper threshold T
for the brain network model. The relationship
strength of two nodes in the brain network
determines whether there is a connecting edge
between them. If the strength exceeds T, the two
nodes should be linked up with a connecting edge;
otherwise, no connecting edge is needed.
After creating the brain network model for
the driver, the author went on to determine the
clustering coefficient and global efficiency based
on the model and examine the reliability of
driving behavior in light of the two parameters.
The clustering coefficient depicts the tightness of
connections between neuronal clusters in each
functional
region,
and
the
functional
differentiation of the cerebral cortex neural
network. The global efficiency illustrates the
economy of energy consumption when the human
brain executes contagion tasks. Next, the EGG
power spectrum was analyzed and the
discreteness of the collected data was computed,
laying the basis for reliability analysis on driving
behaviour.

www.neuroquantology.com

63

NeuroQuantology | April 2018 | Volume 16 | Issue 4 | Page 62-68 | doi: 10.14704/nq.2018.16.4.1209
He S., Reliability Analysis of Driving Behavior in Road Traffic System Considering Synchronization of Neural Activity

Intercity Bus Driving Reliability Experiment
The driving reliability of intercity bus bears on the
life and property safety of the driver and
passengers. Considering the rising accident rate of
intercity buses, this paper attempts to examine
the reliability of the driving behavior under the
actual environment. The real-time EEG signals of
10 drivers were collected as they drove along the
expressway between Foshan and Huizhou, China.
Experimental plan and data processing
Ten male intercity bus drivers, aged 40±2.2 (SD),
were selected. All of them were in good health
condition and slept well in the two days preceding
our experiment. On the day of the experiment, the
drivers drove 165km along the expressway
between Foshan and Huizhou continuously for 3h
from 14:30 to 17:30.
The EEG signal acquisition device Emotiv
was employed to monitor and collect the EEG
signals of the drivers. The 14 electrodes of the
device, respectively denoted as T7, T8, AF3, AF4,
O1, O2, F3, F4, F7, F8, FC5, FC6, P7 and P8, are
presented in Figure 2. These electrodes display
the EEG signals of the neuronal activities in three
brain regions: the central region, the frontal
region and the posterior temporal region. In a 2D
coordinate system, the 14 electrodes were
expressed as (x, y) coordinates. The relative
positions of them are shown in Figure 3. The
electrodes worked normally during the data
acquisition process.

Figure 2. Electrode distribution of the Emotiv device

During the experiment, each driver’s EEG signals
were collected 7 times, respectively at the start
point, 30min, 1h, 1.5h, 2h, 2.5h and 3h of the
driving process. To remove the strong

eISSN 1303-5150

interference from the environment, the collected
EEG signals were denoised by wavelet packet
decomposition. The excessively high and low
signals were eliminated, leaving the rhythmic EEG
signals of the θ wave (4~8Hz) and β-wave
(12~32Hz).

Figure 3. 2D coordinates of the electrodes

Brain network model building
The brain network model can demonstrate the
dynamic coordination of functional activities of
neuronal clusters in different brain regions. The
human brain network exhibits vastly different
features under different mental state (Rapport et
al., 2008). Through a driving simulation, Kar &
Nayak discovered the rhythmic variation in the
brain network features of the EEG signals (δ, θ, α
and β waves) when the driver drove for a long
time. The θ wave in EEG signals changed
significantly as the driver shifted from the waking
state to the fatigue state. In the waking state, the θ
wave was relatively weak; in the fatigue state, the
θ wave was rhythmic and pronounced. Thus, the θ
wave of the EEG signals reflects that the brain
neural network system is restrained to some
extent (Kar et al., 2011).
The synchronization likelihood of every
pair of electrodes was calculated based on the
EEG signals from different brain regions of the
intercity bus drivers. The likelihood reveals the
degree of synchronization between the EEG
signals of the two electrodes. According to the
experimental results, the start period of the
experiment differed greatly from the other
periods in both clustering coefficient and global
efficiency when the threshold fell in [0.08, 0.11].
Therefore, the mean value (T=0.095) in the
interval was taken as the threshold. Then, the

www.neuroquantology.com

64

NeuroQuantology | April 2018 | Volume 16 | Issue 4 | Page 62-68 | doi: 10.14704/nq.2018.16.4.1209
He S., Reliability Analysis of Driving Behavior in Road Traffic System Considering Synchronization of Neural Activity

connecting edges were determined based on the
threshold. As mentioned before, the connecting
edge between each pair of electrodes depends on
the
connection
strength
between
the
corresponding nodes. If the strength surpasses T,
the corresponding nodes were linked up;
otherwise, the corresponding nodes were not
linked up. Figure 4 shows the brain networks of
intercity bus drivers in different periods of the
driving process.

8

6

6

4

4

y

10

8

y

10

2

2

0
-2
-2

0
0

2

4

-2
-2

6

x

0

8

6

6

4

4

y

y

10

8

2

2

0

0

-2
-2

-2
-2

2

x

4

6

0

2

4

6

(d)1.5h

10

10

8

8

6

6

4

4

2

Eglob _ i =

2

0

0
0

2

4

-2
-2

6

x

0

2

4

6

x

(e) 2.0h

(f) 2.5h
10
8

y

6
4
2
0
-2
-2

0

2

4

6

x

(g) 3.0h
Figure 4. Brain networks in different periods of the driving process

It can be seen from Figure 4 that the brain
network nodes were sparsely connected at
0~0.5h of the driving process. In this period, the
brain regions of the drivers were weakly
synchronized, that is, the nerves in each region
performed their own activities. With the increase
in the driving time, the brain network of the
drivers grew denser and denser. In this period,
the neuronal activities in the brain regions were
suppressed to varied degrees after a long-time
driving and became increasingly synchronized
across the regions. As a result, the drivers
suffered from mental fatigue and decreased
reliability of driving behavior.

eISSN 1303-5150

Ei
Di ( Di − 1) / 2

(1)

x

y

y

6

Ci =

(c)1.0h

-2
-2

4

(b) 0.5h

10

0

2
x

(a) 0.0h

Feature Analysis of Brain Network Reliability
Feature analysis considering brain network
parameters
In light of cognitive features, the driving behavior
reliability of intercity bus drivers was explored
considering the brain network parameters of
clustering coefficient and global efficiency. The
clustering coefficient Ci was defined as the ratio
between the number of edges connecting a node
in the network G with the “peripheral nodes” and
the maximum probable number of edges between
these “peripheral nodes”. As mentioned before,
this coefficient demonstrates the tightness of
connections between neuronal clusters in each
functional
region,
and
the
functional
differentiation of the cerebral cortex neural
network. The global efficiency Eglob_i illustrates the
economy of energy consumption when the human
brain executes contagion tasks. The two
parameters were calculated as follows:

1
1

N − 1 j ≠i∈G Li , j

(2)

Figure 5 presents the variation in the two brain
network parameters and throughout the driving
process.
As shown in Figure 5, the clustering
coefficient of the drivers’ brain network model
gradually increased with the continuous
extension of driving time. This means the
connection between electrodes in the brain
network grew in strength, and the neuronal
activities in the corresponding brain regions
became more synchronized with those in other
regions. With the increase in driving time, the
global efficiency of the drivers’ brain network
model exhibited an increasing trend, revealing the
decrease in the number of intermediate nodes. In
other words, the indirect connections between
specific pair of nodes were gradually replaced by
direct connections, and the path between the
nodes turned shorter. To sum up, the drivers’
brain network was densified after long-time,
continuous driving, pushing up the network
parameters like clustering coefficient and global
efficiency. In this case, the drivers became more
and more fatigued, and the neuronal activities in
the brain regions were suppressed to varied
degrees after a long-time driving and became
increasingly synchronized across the regions.

www.neuroquantology.com

65

NeuroQuantology | April 2018 | Volume 16 | Issue 4 | Page 62-68 | doi: 10.14704/nq.2018.16.4.1209
He S., Reliability Analysis of Driving Behavior in Road Traffic System Considering Synchronization of Neural Activity

Where Pi is the relative power spectrum of i wave
(i=δ, θ, α, β,); Eα, Eβ, Eθ and Eδ are the energy of α,
β, θ and δ, respectively.
Figure 6 displays the variation in relative
power spectrum of θ and β waves in EEG signals
of intercity bus drivers throughout the
experiment.
Next, the slow-fast wave energy ratio F was
defined as the indicator of driving fatigue. The
ratio can be calculated by the following equation:
F=

Eα + E β
Eθ + Eδ

(4)

(a) Clustering coefficient

Where Eα, Eβ, Eθ and Eδ are the energy of α, β, θ
and δ, respectively
Figure 7 depicts the variation in fatigue
indicator F corresponding to FC5, FC6, F3, F4, O1
and O2 channels of intercity bus drivers
throughout the experiment.

(b) Global efficiency
Figure 5. Variation in Ci and Eglob_i throughout the driving process

66
Analysis of EEG power spectrum

Figure 7. Variation in fatigue indicator F corresponding to FC5, FC6,
F3, F4, O1 and O2 channels

Figure 6. The relative power spectrum of θ and β waves in drivers’
EEG signals

The EEG spectral analysis can vividly reflect the
energy variation of EEG signals with different
rhythms. The results are intuitive and easy to
understand (Beeli et al., 2008). The relative power
spectrum of EEG rhythm is expressed as the ratio
of the power spectrum of EEG signals with a
rhythm to the total power spectrum. The ratio can
be calculated by the equation below:
Pi =

Ei
Eα + Eβ + Eθ + Eδ

eISSN 1303-5150

(3)

As shown in Figure 6, the relative power spectrum
of θ wave gradually increased while that of β
wave gradually declined with the increase in the
driving time. Figure 7 discloses a gradual
increasing trend of the fatigue indicator F
corresponding to FC5, FC6, F3, F4, O1 and O2
channels. These phenomena reflect the deepening
of driving fatigue of the drivers with the extension
of the driving time. When the intercity bus was
about to reach the destination at 3h, the relative
power spectrum of θ wave slightly turned up, that
of β wave dipped a little bit, and the fatigue
indicator F moved slightly downward. This is
because the drivers’ brains were excited for a
short while with the destination at hand.

www.neuroquantology.com

NeuroQuantology | April 2018 | Volume 16 | Issue 4 | Page 62-68 | doi: 10.14704/nq.2018.16.4.1209
He S., Reliability Analysis of Driving Behavior in Road Traffic System Considering Synchronization of Neural Activity

Analysis of data discreteness
Through the analysis above, it is learned that the
variation in driving behavior reliability of the
drivers during the experiment can be obtained by
the feature analysis of brain network parameters
and EEG power spectrum. On this basis, this
section probes into the reliability issue from the
angle of data discreteness. As its name suggests,
data discreteness shows the average degree of
dispersion of the data. It is usually expressed as
the variation coefficient C·V:
n

 ( x − x)
i =1

C ⋅V =

S
×100% =
x

i

n −1
x

×100%

(5)

where C·V is the variation coefficient; S is the
standard deviation; ̅ is the average value. Then,
the variation coefficients of the driving behavior
reliability parameters were calculated for
intercity bus drivers (Figure 8). The parameters
include the clustering coefficient of brain
network, the global efficiency of brain network,
and the fatigue indicator of EEG power spectrum
features.

Figure 8. Variation coefficient

It can be seen from Figure 8 that the clustering
coefficient and the global efficiency, two brain
network parameters of the drivers, had smaller
variation coefficients (C·V<0.08) than the fatigue
indicator of EEG power spectrum features. This
means the data of brain network parameters are
relatively concentrated and accurate. Therefore,
focusing on the coordination between neuronal
activities across brain regions, the analysis of
brain network parameters is a precise and
feasible method for discussing driving behavior
reliability of intercity drivers.

eISSN 1303-5150

Conclusions
In this paper, the drivers’ EEG signals were
collected with Emotiv, a portable device, and used
for an experiment in actual driving environment.
Through the analysis on the synchronization of
14-channel EGG signals, the author identified a
proper threshold, and determined whether the
brain network nodes are connected or not. On this
basis, a brain network model was created for the
drivers. The driving behavior reliability of the
drivers was discussed in detailed considering
brain network parameters (clustering coefficient
and global efficiency) and the power spectrum
features of EEG signals. The main conclusions are
as follows:
(1) The drivers’ brain network was densified after
long-time, continuous driving, pushing up the
network parameters like clustering coefficient
and global efficiency. In this case, the drivers
became more and more fatigued, and the
neuronal
activities
became
increasingly
synchronized across the brain regions.
(2) With the increase in the driving time, the
relative power spectrum of θ wave gradually
increased while that of β wave gradually declined,
and the fatigue indicator F exhibited a gradual
increasing trend.
(3) When the intercity bus was about to reach the
destination at 3h, the relative power spectrum of
θ wave slightly turned up, that of β wave dipped a
little bit, and the fatigue indicator F moved
slightly downward. This is because the drivers’
brains were excited for a short while with the
destination at hand.
(4) The clustering coefficient and the global
efficiency, two brain network parameters of the
drivers, had smaller variation coefficients
(C·V<0.08) than the fatigue indicator of EEG
power spectrum features. This means the data of
brain network parameters are relatively
concentrated and accurate.
Acknowledgements
Supported by Shandong Province Natural Science
Foundation (ZR2017PG001).
References
Beeli G, Koeneke S, Gasser K, Jancke L. Brain stimulation
modulates driving behavior. Behavioral and Brain
Functions 2008; 4(34): 1-7.
Cascetta F, Musto M, Rotondo G, Barbato L. The influence of
the filling percentage traffic on required ventilation
thrust in road tunnel. International Journal of Heat and
Technology 2016; 34(S2): S451-57.
Curran E, Sykacek P, Stokes M, Roberts SJ, Penny W,
Johnsrude I, Owen AM. Cognitive tasks for driving a brain-

www.neuroquantology.com

67

NeuroQuantology | April 2018 | Volume 16 | Issue 4 | Page 62-68 | doi: 10.14704/nq.2018.16.4.1209
He S., Reliability Analysis of Driving Behavior in Road Traffic System Considering Synchronization of Neural Activity

computer interfacing system: a pilot study. IEEE
Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation
Engineering 2004; 12(1):48-54.
Curran EA, Stokes MJ. Learning to control brain activity: a
review of the production and control of EEG components
for driving brain-computer interface (BCI) systems. Brain
& Cognition 2003; 51(3): 326-36.
Fox GK, Bowden SC, Smith DS. On-road assessment of driving
competence after brain impairment: review of current
practice and recommendations for a standardized
examination. Archives of Physical Medicine &
Rehabilitation 1998; 79(10): 1288-96.
Galski T, Bruno RL, Ehle HT. Prediction of behind-the-wheel
driving performance in patients with cerebral brain
damage: a discriminant function analysis. American
Journal of Occupational Therapy Official Publication of
the American Occupational Therapy Association 1993;
47(5): 391-96.
Graham J. Target risk: Dealing with the danger of death,
disease and damage in everyday decisions. Injury
Prevention 1998; 4(2): 161-63.
Just MA, Keller TA, Cynkar J. A decrease in brain activation
associated with driving when listening to someone speak.
Brain Research 2008; 1205(6):70-80.
Kar S, Routray A, Nayak BP. Functional network changes
associated with sleep deprivation and fatigue during
simulated driving: validation using blood biomarkers.
Clinical Neurophysiology Official Journal of the
International Federation of Clinical Neurophysiology
2011;122(5):966-74.
Li Y, Wei DD, Mu Z, Xiong ZH, Wang YH, Yin WS. Study of the
time-collocation of signal lamp at intersection,

Mathematical Modelling of Engineering Problems 2015;
2(2): 5-10.
Calhoun VD, Pekar JJ, Pearlson GD. Alcohol intoxication
effects on simulated driving: exploring alcohol-dose
effects on brain activation using functional MRI.
Neuropsychopharmacology 2004; 29(11):2097-107.
Rapport LJ, Bryer RC, Hanks RA. Driving and community
integration after traumatic brain injury. Archives of
Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation. 2008; 89(5):92230.
Schanke AK, Sundet K. Comprehensive driving assessment:
neuropsychological testing and on-road evaluation of
brain injured patients. Scandinavian Journal of
Psychology 2000; 41(2): 113-21.
Trancossi M, Pascoa JC, Xisto CM. Design of an innovative offroad hybrid vehicle by energy efficiency criteria,
International Journal of Heat and Technology 2016;
34(S2): S387-95.
Vanacker G, Lew E, Ferrez PW, Philips J, Brussel HV, Nuttin M.
Context-based filtering for assisted brain-actuated
wheelchair driving. Computational Intelligence &
Neuroscience 2007; 3: 1-12.
Zhang JM, Shi JL. Optimization of suspension parameters
based on vehicle roll stability and road friendliness,
Academic Journal of Manufacturing Engineering 2017;
15(3): 84-91.
Zhao MY, Zhao DX, Jiang ZX, Cui DM, Li J, Shi XY. The gray
prediction GM (1, 1) model in traffic forecast application,
Mathematical Modelling of Engineering Problems 2015;
2(1): 17-22.

68

eISSN 1303-5150

www.neuroquantology.com

