User-Centred BCI Videogame Design
Emilie Loup-Escande, Fabien Lotte, Guillaume Loup, Anatole Lécuyer

To cite this version:
Emilie Loup-Escande, Fabien Lotte, Guillaume Loup, Anatole Lécuyer. User-Centred BCI Videogame
Design. R. Nakatsu and M. Rauterberg and P. Ciancarini. Handbook of Digital Games and Entertainment Technologies, Springer, 2015, <10.1007/978-981-4560-52-8_3-1>. <hal-01230571>

HAL Id: hal-01230571
https://hal.inria.fr/hal-01230571
Submitted on 18 Nov 2015

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of scientific research documents, whether they are published or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

User-Centred BCI Videogame Design
Emilie Loup-Escande1, Fabien Lotte2, Guillaume Loup3 and Anatole Lécuyer 4

1

CRP-CPO EA 7273, Université de Picardie Jules Verne, Chemin du Thil, 80000 Amiens, France ; emilie.loup-

escande@u-picardie.fr
2

INRIA, Centre de Recherche Bordeaux Sud-Ouest, 200 rue de la vieille tour, 33405 Talence Cedex, France ;

fabien.lotte@inria.fr
3

LIUM, Université du Maine, 52 rue des docteurs Calmette et Guérin, 53020 Laval Cedex 9, France ;

guillaume.loup@univ-lemans.fr
4

INRIA, Centre de Recherche Rennes Bretagne-Atlantique, Campus de Beaulieu, 35042 Rennes Cedex, France ;

anatole.lecuyer@inria.fr

Abstract
This chapter aims to offer a user-centred methodological framework to guide the design and
evaluation of Brain-Computer Interface videogames. This framework is based on the
contributions of ergonomics to ensure these games are well suited for their users (i.e., players).
It provides methods, criteria and metrics to complete the different phases required by ae
human-centred design process. This aims to understand the context of use, specify the user
needs and evaluate the solutions in order to define design choices. Several ergonomic methods
(e.g., interviews, longitudinal studies, user based testing), objective metrics (e.g., task success,
number of errors) and subjective metrics (e.g., mark assigned to an item) are suggested to
define and measure the usefulness, usability, acceptability, hedonic qualities, appealingness,
emotions related to user experience, immersion and presence to be respected. The benefits and
contributions of the user centred framework for the ergonomic design of these Brain-Computer
Interface Videogames are discussed.

1

1. Introduction
A BCI videogame combines a Brain Computer-Interface (BCI) and videogame content. It
mainly consists in using a BCI as one of the input devices that can interact with the game. This BCI
can be used in an active way: to send control commands (e.g., Lotte et al., 2008), in a passive way: to
adapt the game content based one the user’s brain activity (e.g., George and Lécuyer, 2010), or both.
In a BCI videogame, the user can play by means of brain activity and the available output device
(mainly visual feedback) is used to provide a meaningful feedback to the user (Lotte et al., 2013). As
explained in (Scherer et al., 2013), a game, including a BCI game, is a problem-solving activity
performed with a playful attitude. The objectives of BCI videogames are multiple. Indeed, they can
be used in the medical area: for example, Holz et al. (2013) suggested the BCI videogame “ConnectFour” which aims to entertain the severely motor restricted end-users in their daily life in order to
increase their quality of life and decrease their depression. Connect-Four is “a strategic videogame
with two competitive players in which coins have to be placed in rows and columns with the goal to
connect four coins” (Holz et al., 2013, p. 113). A BCI videogame can also be a learning tool: for
example, as a motivating and engaging way to learn to use a BCI, to later used it to control a
neuroprosthetics, as in Müller-Putz et al. (2007). Obviously, a BCI videogame can be an
entertainment app: for example, “Mind the Sheep!” is a single- or multi-player videogame which
consists to fence a sheep in as quickly as possible by herding them with their dogs (Gürkök et al.,
2013).
To design and evaluate these BCI videogames, two complementary approaches co-exist: a
technocentric design and an anthropocentric design.
The technocentric orientation aims to design and optimize an innovative application by
testing its technological possibilities and solving technical challenges. This research path hardly
considers the characteristics of human activity. Typically, these studies aim to improve the
performance of the BCI at detecting mental states, in terms of information transfer rate (Yang et al.,
2010), classification accuracy or error rates, for instance.
The anthropocentric orientation aims to design an application which will be useful and usable
by their end-users. This approach focuses on the characteristics, capabilities and resources of endusers, the context of use of the designed application and the users’ activity (Rabardel and Béguin,
2005). In the context of BCI applications, the user-centred approach has already been introduced
(e.g., Kübler et al., 2013, Schreuder et al., 2013). However, its use is more recent for the design of
BCI videogames (e.g., Plass-Oude Bos et al., 2011; Van de Laar et al., 2011). This approach remains
minor compared to the technocentric approach. One reason could be the absence of a methodological

2

framework dealing with the ergonomic design of BCI videogames, compared to the research
conducted in technocentric design.
The purpose of this chapter is to propose a user-centred methodological framework to guide
the design and evaluation of BCI videogames. This methodological framework deals with the
ergonomic design of these applications and suggests methods, criteria and metrics.
The remainder of this chapter is organized as follows. In the following section, the relevance
of the user-centred design for BCI videogames is explained. The third section details the ergonomic
methods which are used or advocated in the context of user-centred design of BCI videogames. The
fourth section describes which ergonomic criteria could be introduced to user-centred design BCI
videogames, and proposes metrics for each criterion. The contribution of the proposed
methodological framework to the user-centred design of BCI videogames is discussed in the fifth
section. The sixth section provides a general summary and conclusion.

2. User-centred design and design of BCI videogames
Designing emerging applications suited to end-users requires design models from the
ergonomic literature. Among these models, a user-centred design is particularly promising for BCI
videogames. Indeed, a BCI videogame is an interactive system that could benefit from the “usercentred design” model as any interactive system. This model is formalised in the ISO 9241-210
standard through four iterative phases: 1) Understand and specify the context of use, 2) Specify the
user needs and the other stakeholders’ requirements, 3) Produce design solutions (e.g., scenario,
mock-up, prototype) and 4) Evaluate the solutions at all stages in the project from early concept
design to long term use to specify design choices. Consequently, it can be used to guide designers
toward an anthropocentric design of these specific videogames.
Moreover, the term “user-centred design” is already known in the BCI community to evoke a
concept which is assessed empirically (i.e., evaluated by a user during the accomplishment of an
experimental task). For example, in their study, Plass-Oude Bos et al. (2011) tried to evaluate users’
preference for three mental tasks (inner speech, association, stressed or relaxed mental state) which
are more adapted than traditional paradigms (e.g., Motor Imagery, P300, and Steady-State Visually
Evoked Potentials) considered too slow, non-intuitive, cumbersome or just annoying. They measured
the relationship between recognition performance and the preferences of users. To do that, fourteen
participants participated in five experiments consisting of playing World of Warcraft (WoW) for two
hours and for five weeks. They were divided into two groups. A real-BCI group: they controlled their
shape shifting action with their mental tasks, at least insofar as the system could detect it: i.e., the

3

users received feedback on the recognition of their mental tasks in the form of an orange bar in the
videogame (the bar is small if the system had detected the mental task related to elf form, while it is
large if the system had interpreted the mental task related to bear form). A utopia-BCI group: they
pressed a button to shape shift when they decided by themselves that they performed the mental task
correctly (in this group, a BCI system with 100% detection accuracy was simulated). After user test
sessions, the participants filled out a user experience questionnaire. The results show that the users
preferred the association tasks (i.e., the user had to feel like a bear to change into a bear, and to feel
like an elf to change into an elf) whereas the relaxed/stressed mental state seems to be disliked the
most. However, in practice, such a BCI paradigm with which a user could imagine being a bear to
turn its avatar into a bear is not necessarily realistic and robust, as such mental tasks cannot be
reliably detected in EEG. Furthermore, it appears that recognition performance has a strong influence
on users’ preferences.

3. Ergonomics methods used or advocated in the context of user-centred design of BCI
videogames
It is now known that the combination of ergonomics methods produces complementary data
enriching three of these four phases of user-centred design (e.g., Anastassova et al., 2005): specify
the context of use (step 1) and the functionalities of the future videogame (step 2) and evaluate the
designed solutions (step 3). Defining the future context of use and specifying the functionalities of
the BCI videogames are closely related as both steps involve identifying existing and latent needs
(3.1). Evaluating solutions at all stages in the project from early concept design to long term use to
specify design choices implies using prototypes evaluation methods (3.2) and methods to analyse
system appropriation (3.3).

3.1. Ergonomics methods to identify existing needs and latent needs in order to specify the
future context of use and the functionalities of the BCI videogame
Ergonomics uses methods which allow the designers to understand the future context of use
on the one hand, and to identify existing needs and anticipate latent ones in order to specify the
functionalities of the BCI videogame, on the other hand. According to (Robertson, 2001), the existing
needs correspond to:


Conscious needs: i.e., those clearly formulated by the (future) end-users,



Unconscious needs: i.e., those which exist but are not clearly formulated by users, because
they are not aware of the potential of the chosen technology. The latent needs are

4

characterized by their not proven yet or undreamed nature (Robertson, 2001). These needs are
an important issue for emerging technologies, like BCI videogames, which are still in
development in laboratories and whose uses are still sought.

3.1.1. Identification methods of existing needs
Interview is a currently used or recommended method to identify relevant needs in order to
suggest realistic expectations with BCI. For example, to design a suitable BCI system for domestic
use by people with acquired brain injury in order to facilitate control of their environment, Mulvenna
et al. (2012) have conducted interviews with disabled participants with acquired brain injury and
participants without movement disabilities. Before imagining a videogame, designers can interview
potential users about points such as:


The context of use, e.g., who are the users of the videogame (children, adults …)? Can you
explain the context in which the videogame will be used (in a classroom, at home …)?



The videogame, e.g., what is the goal of the videogame (entertainment, learning,
rehabilitation …)? Which actions can be done in the videogame? What the virtual
environment could be composed of?



The interaction, e.g., do you prefer to imagine that your hand is moving or to focus in order to
move the avatar? Which other interaction device can be used in addition to the BCI?

3.1.2. Anticipation methods of latent needs
Anticipating latent needs (i.e., not "existing" for users at a specific moment) involves the use
of creativity methods to widen potential uses, the functionalities and properties of the videogame
(Burkhardt and Lubart, 2010). This kind of methods is particularly relevant for the design of all
emerging technologies, specifically those designed for different users’ profiles like a BCI videogame.
Among these creativity methods, focus groups are often used. This method aims to create small
groups of potential users of an interactive system, and to interact on a relevant topic for the study to
achieve. As output, opinions, expectations, motivations and attitudes, from customs, practices,
experiences of participants are usually collected. Indeed, focus groups have recently been used for
the design of BCI applications in a study conducted by (Blain-Moraes et al., 2012). The purpose was
to determine the barriers and mediators of BCI acceptance in a population with amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis. The authors conducted a focus group which involved eight individuals with amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis (having previously used a P300-based speller with a visual display) and their nine
carers. The focus group consisted of open-ended questions asking participants’ about their desires

5

and concerns with the BCI. It was transcribed in full and data was thematically analysed. Focus
group analysis yielded two categories of mediators and barriers to user acceptance of this technology:
personal factors (i.e., physical, physiological and psychological concerns) and relational factors (i.e.,
corporeal, technological and social relationships with the BCI). This study showed that a focus group
is a relevant method to evoke needs in terms of mediators and barriers concerning the use of BCI by
people with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. This result is encouraging for the use of a focus group to
anticipate latent needs of potential users of BCI videogames to stimulate them to discuss together and
imagine new ideas on the usage of the technology (i.e., a person is able to imagine new needs
through creativity generated within a group). For example, future users are able to co-create together
a videogame scenario and to decide their preferred interaction paradigm (e.g.,, association task). In
addition to these methods, ergonomics uses and recommends methods to accomplish the fourth phase
of the user-centred design process which corresponds to the evaluation of prototypes (3.2) and the
appropriation of the BCI videogame by users (3.3).

3.2. Evaluation methods of prototypes
Prototypes are a means to immerse users in the context in which the BCI videogame will be
integrated. Users are able to evoke functionalities which were previously latent and unconscious. A
simulation of the future situation is an opportunity for the designer to explore the real impact of the
videogame on the users’ activities, in particular for the BCI videogames in learning and medical
areas. This simulation allows them to identify the improvements to be implemented so that the users
have a real benefit from its use (Burkhardt and Lubart, 2010).
In a user-centred design of BCI videogames, prototypes can be evaluated through user-based testing
(i.e., a simulation to study the users’ behaviour in front of the application) followed by
questionnaires. This observation is illustrated with some studies detailed below. These studies
provide an overview of the way the evaluation is carried out in the field of BCI videogame on three
aspects: the number of participants, the location of the test and the evaluation objectives (objective
evaluation of performance, subjective evaluation, etc.).
Badia et al. (2011) conducted a study aiming to explore the synergies of a hybrid BCI and a
BCI videogame for neuro rehabilitation system. This study involved 18 participants and consisted of
four phases based on a training task called “Spheroids”which is a videogame like task in which the
user has to intercept incoming spheres by moving the arms of the virtual avatar. First, the BCI
classifier was trained. Then, the “Spheroids” calibration phase was used to assess the level of control
of the participants by asking them to drive the virtual arms to specific locations. Subsequently,

6

participants played the “Spheroids” training videogame. Finally, all participants answered a 5-point
Likert scale (1 lowest, 5 highest) of 23 questions covering different aspects: enjoyment of the
experience, perceived performance learning during task execution, level of task ease, level of control
of the virtual avatar, and appropriateness of the system configuration (for instance, if arms were too
fast or too slow).
Van de Laar et al. (2011) have recently elaborated a standardised questionnaire, inspired by
the Game Experience Questionnaire and the Engagement Questionnaire. This questionnaire can be
used to evaluate the user experience in a BCI-based interaction for entertainment purposes. It offers
optional items depending on the category of BCI (e.g., passive BCI, active BCI). For passive BCI,
items measure the degree of comfort and of distraction from the main task due to the BCI hardware.
For active BCI, items measure the applicability of the mental tasks and perceived speed of the BCI
on the users’ actions.
In their study, Zickler et al. (2013) evaluated the usability of Brain Painting, an application
for entertainment offering the user creative expression by painting pictures. For that, they compared
Brain Painting with a P300 spelling application in terms of user satisfaction through three
questionnaires (i.e., Quebec User Evaluation of Satisfaction with assistive Technology 2.0, Assistive
Technology Device Predisposition Assessment (ATD PA)), Device Form, the effectiveness
(accuracy), the efficiency as measured by the information transfer rate and the subjective workload
using the National Aeronautics and Space Administration Task Load Index. Even if the results
globally showed a good usability, they revealed that the system operability and the EEG cap are the
main obstacles for use in daily life. Concerning the last observation, Nijholt and Gürkök (2013)
suggested reducing the complexity of gel-based electrodes installation by using wireless headsets and
dry electrodes.
These studies show three elements. First, BCI videogames, even relatively immature, can be
evaluated with a large number of users with highly varying skills and potentially very heterogeneous
needs. This is a key element in the context of BCI videogames which must be adapted to users other
than those who have been involved in the design. Second, these studies stressed the diversity of the
implementations of user-based testing that can take place in laboratory conditions (i.e., controlled
situations) and in conditions similar to real situations of interaction (typically, playing videogames at
home where the variables are not controlled). This suggests that user-centred evaluations of BCI
videogames can take place under experimental conditions (in the laboratory) and in more ecological
conditions relative to the future situation of use. These two ergonomic approaches are
complementary and coexist for the design of these emerging videogames. This opens perspectives for

7

users-based evaluations of BCI videogames for several types of applications (e.g., medical, learning
or entertainment applications). Third, it provides information about the questions properties: these
questions are generally measured on Likert scales (5 or 7-point) and less frequently open-ended
questions that allow the questioned person to express freely. The items covered in these
questionnaires concern the system (e.g., appropriateness of the system configuration, application
responsiveness to initiated actions) and subjective elements perceived by the user (e.g., enjoyment of
the experience, level of task ease). Even if the questionnaire is a relevant method, it should not be
used alone. From an ergonomics point of view, it must be complemented for instance by interviews
that will justify the scores obtained in the questionnaire.

3.3. Analysis methods of BCI videogame appropriation
To study system appropriation, longitudinal studies can be used. They are usually
implemented through observations, interviews and self-confrontation made at different periods (e.g.,
at 0 month, 3 months and 6 months after the integration of the BCI application in a situation).
Longitudinal studies have already been conducted in the context of BCI to measure the
influence of psychological state and motivation on the BCI performance (e.g., (Nijboer et al., 2010)).
In this study, six participants were trained for several months either with a BCI based on
sensorimotor rhythms or with a BCI based on event-related potentials (i.e., P300), or both.
Questionnaires assessing quality of life, severity of depressive symptoms, mood and motivation were
filled out by the participant before each training session. Results suggest that P300-based BCI must
be a first choice for allowing severely paralysed patients to control a communication program based
on a binary spelling system. Results also suggest that motivational factors may be related to the BCI
performance of individual subjects and suggest that motivational factors and well-being should be
assessed in standard BCI protocols.
This study illustrated that longitudinal studies have been conducted to measure the evolution
of some parameters’ effects on the use of a BCI-based speller and thus to study the appropriation of
the BCI application by users. This is necessary because the lack of training on these new tools and
the lack of support are factors that may lead end-users to abandon their use. Typically in the context
of BCI videogames, a longitudinal study may intend to measure the motivation and game
engagement for several months. It can also be used to study how the user skills at BCI control evolve
with time, in order to design adequate levels and content in the game that can match such BCI skill
progress.

8

These methods can be used to design and evaluate usefulness, usability, acceptability,
hedonic quality, sense of presence, immersion and user experience. In the next section, the ways in
which these ergonomic criteria can be taken account in the context of a BCI videogame are
presented.

4. Ergonomic criteria

4.1. Usefulness
In ergonomics, the term "usefulness" oscillates between two meanings: purpose-usefulness
and value-usefulness (Loup-Escande et al., 2013).
Purpose-usefulness is the description of system features and its uses. This description can take
many forms depending on the phase of the design process: concept (e.g., a BCI videogame to
entertain the motor restricted users in their daily life), specifications (e.g., this BCI videogame must
be multiplayers and could consist in a virtual ping pong activity, the interaction must be based on
relaxed / stressed mental state), prototype (e.g., the virtual environment is modelled, the ball passing
task between two users is implemented, the BCI interaction uses the Neurosky MindWave), final
application (e.g., the prototype is improved with a new point counting functionality and the
integration of the Emotiv Epoc instead of the Neurosky MindWave). Purpose-usefulness corresponds
to the functionalities of a videogame. These features are determined at a given time, even if they can
be subsequently modified by players.
Several metrics can be used to assess the BCI videogames’ usefulness. A well-known metric,
and common to all emerging systems, is the adequacies versus inadequacies between the features
implemented in a system on the one hand, and those desired at a time T by the user on the other hand
(Blandford et al., 2008). These adequacies or inadequacies are collected with the number of
responses Yes versus No to the question: Do you think this functionality / information is useful?
They are collected with metrics resulting from requirement prioritisation: nominal scale, ordinal
scale, ratio scale methods (Loup-Escande and Christmann, 2013). In nominal scale methods,
requirements are assigned to different priority groups. An example is the MoScoW method, which
consists of grouping all requirements into four priority groups, such groups corresponding to the
requirements that the project (must / should / could / will not) have. All requirements listed in a
category are of equal priority, which does not allow a finer prioritization. Ordinal scales methods
produce an ordered list of requirements; for example, the simple ranking where the most important
requirement is ranked ‘one’ and the least important is ranked ‘n’. Another known method called

9

Analytic Hierarchy Process asks users to compare all pairs of requirements. Ratio scale methods
provide the relative difference between requirements (e.g., the hundred dollar method asks users to
allocate a sum of money to each requirement). In addition to an ordered list of requirements, this
method also helps us to discover the relative importance of each requirement in relation to the others.
Value-usefulness is defined as a significant advantage of the videogame for players in
activities mediated by a computer system; this advantage is always relative to: the objectives of the
user, the existing tools, the use environment and the dependencies on other activities. Valueusefulness refers to improvements and benefits that the videogame provides to the players. In the
field of BCI, these benefits are evaluated in the short, medium or long term. For example, Yan et al.
(2008) conducted a study to evaluate the usefulness of a BCI videogame for treating children with
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD). In other words, they wanted to show that the
virtual reality neuro-feedback training could improve sustained attention. This study involves 12
subjects with ADHD aged form 8 to 12 years old, who were trained at least twice per week with five
virtual environment games for 25-35 minutes. During the training period, all subjects were requested
to stop taking any medication and behavioural therapy. To measure children’s attention, authors used
the integrated visual auditory – continuous performance test (IVA-CPT) at the beginning of the
treatment and after each one of the twenty training sessions. Results show that subjects’ attention had
been strengthened after 20 training sessions.
In order to evaluate the benefits and advantages for the user with respect to his goals, existing
tools, the environment of use and dependencies with other activities, the used metrics are more
specific to the domain for which the application was designed. For example, to evaluate the
usefulness of a BCI videogame to support learning, the metrics are specific to the knowledge that can
be learned with the system.
In a BCI videogame for entertainment, the value-usefulness can be measured by the degree of
engagement in the game if we consider that the more engaged the users, the more useful the
videogame for them (Brockmyer et al., 2009).
Both for the medical area, for the learning domain and for the entertainment field, the benefits
provided by a BCI videogame can be measured using indicators of well-being, since the objective of
the BCI videogame is to increase quality of life. Quality of life can be measured by the Schedule for
the Evaluation of Individual Quality of Life (Holz et al., 2013). To measure game engagement,
Brockmyer et al. (2009) have designed a questionnaire based on four dimensions:


The psychological absorption describes the “total engagement in the present
experience” (Brockmyer et al., 2009, p. 625): e.g., time seems to stand or stop,

10



The flow describes “the feelings of enjoyment that occur when a balance between skill
and challenge is achieved in the process of performing an intrinsically rewarding
activity” (Brockmyer et al., 2009, p. 625): e.g., I play without thinking how to play,



The presence is defined in terms of “being in a normal state of consciousness and
having the experience of being inside a virtual environment” (Brockmyer et al., 2009,
p. 624): e.g., I play longer than I meant to,



Immersion describes “the experience of becoming engaged in the game-playing
experience while retaining some awareness of one’s surroundings” (Brockmyer et al.,
2009, p. 624): e.g., I really get into the videogame.

4.2. Usability
In 1998, the International Organization for Standards published a definition of usability (ISO
9241-11): “The extent to which a product can be used by specified players to achieve specified goals
with effectiveness, efficiency, and satisfaction in a specified context of use”. Some authors add
learnability and memorability to define usability in BCI context, e.g., (Plass-Oude Bos et al., 2010).
Usability is therefore a combination of five elements: effectiveness, efficiency, satisfaction,
learnability and memorability (Plass-Oude Bos et al., 2010):


Effectiveness concerns the fact that the software allows the user to achieve the specified goal,



Efficiency is the capacity to achieve a task with the minimum of resources for user, i.e.,
efforts. For instance, can the user achieve multitasking with the BCI and control another input
at the same time?,



Satisfaction is influenced by ease-of–use (e.g., EEG sensors setup time, machine calibration
time, etc.) and by non-instrumental qualities (e.g., aesthetics aspects),



Learnability is what allows a novice user to devote himself quickly to a task, reducing the
time needed to learn how to use the application. The second aspect of learnability is how
efficiently can the game train the user to reliably perform mental tasks to use the BCI (PlassOude Bos et al., 2010, Lotte et al., 2013),



Memorability is what allows the user to perform the tasks after a period of non-use without
having to re-learn the functioning of the application (e.g., how well can a user perform the
BCI mental commands from one day of gaming to the next).
Plass-Oude Bos et al. (2010) adapted the usability characteristics commonly used in human-

computer interaction (i.e., learnability, memorability, efficiency, effectiveness, error handling, and
satisfaction) to the design of BCI videogames. The usability of BCI applications has already been
11

evaluated in some studies. For example, Ekandem et al. (2012) conducted a study to evaluate the
usability of two BCI devices: the Emotiv EPOC and the Neurosky MindWave. Authors compared
user comfort, experiment preparation time (i.e., total time from initial placement to final adjustment),
signal reliability and ease of use of each BCI. This study involved 13 participants. Each participant
completed a training phase before playing several simple videogames included with each system like
Pong, Tetris, and SpadeA. After having worn the BCI device for 15 minutes, the participant
completed a post-experiment questionnaire. Results show that the preparation time for the Emotiv
EPOC is longer than for the Neurosky MindWave and that the majority of participants indicated that
the Emotiv EPOC was comfortable whereas the Neurosky MindWave was not. Moreover, the
MindWave provided an easier signal acquisition whereas the EPOC clearly had contact issues due to
participants’ hair. However, the signal was maintained and even improved during the session once
the EPOC was connected and calibrated, while the MindWave experienced more signal fluctuations.
The previous study focused on the direct evaluation of a BCI device. Interestingly enough
some of the studies concerned the usability evaluation of BCI-based interaction with another system.
For example, Iturrate et al. (2009) aimed to evaluate a new brain-actuated wheelchair concept that
relies on a synchronous P300 brain-computer interface integrated with an autonomous navigation
system. The evaluation concerned the effectiveness and the efficiency of the BCI-based interaction
and of the graphical interface.
In Lotte et al (2008), the usability of a BCI videogame in 3D (Figure 1) was assessed using
questionnaires that measured the feeling of control, the fatigue, comfort and frustration induced by
the BCI game, both for control commands based on real and imagined foot movements.

Figure 1: The “Use-the-force” application. The user had to lift up a virtual spaceship using foot
motor imagery (©CNRS Phototèque/Hubert Raguet).

12

These studies suggested that the usability evaluation of BCI videogames can have different
objectives. Indeed, it can concern either the BCI hardware (EEG cap), the BCI software (e.g., the
reliability of mental state detection) or the BCI-controlled application (e.g., a robot).
A BCI controlled application is often evaluated in terms of effectiveness using for example
the degree of accomplishment of the task, the distance travelled to accomplish the task, the task
success, the total time taken to accomplish the task (in seconds), the number of missions to complete
the task (Iturrate et al., 2009; Escolano et al., 2009).
To evaluate the efficiency of a BCI videogame, Holz et al. (2013) used the NASA-TLX to
estimate the subjective workload experienced in a specific task and its main sources (i.e., mental,
physical and temporal demand, effort, performance and frustration). In addition, the efficiency of a
BCI system is often measured using the Information Transfer Rate (ITR), which measures how much
information can be conveyed by the system in a given time (e.g., in Bits per second) (Wolpaw, 2002).
Thomas et al. (2013) listed several metrics used to quantify the performance of a BCI and evoked the
evaluation strategies employed to compare the performance of two or more BCI. They suggested the
following metrics to measure the performance of BCI based on synchronised control (i.e., the system
is periodically available to the user when it is on, but does not support the non-control): accuracy
(i.e., classification error), kappa, bit−rate (Wolpaw or Nykopp), confusion matrix and task
specificity. They recommended those to estimate the performance of BCI based on self-paced system
(i.e., the system is continuously available to the user when it is on, and supports non-control): hitfalse difference, confusion matrix, task specificity, utility, efficiency, True Positive (i.e., it quantifies
the chance of correctly identifying intentional control states) and False Positive (i.e., it quantify the
chance of incorrectly identifying the non-control state).To evaluate the satisfaction evoked by a BCI
videogame, the semantic differential scales corresponding to the following items, provided by
(Hassenzahl, 2001), can be used: Understandable versus Incomprehensible, Supporting versus
Obstructing, Simple versus Complex, Predictable versus Unpredictable, Clear versus Confusing,
Trustworthy versus Shady, Controllable versus Uncontrollable and Familiar versus Strange.
To the authors’ best knowledge, there are very little studies on the evaluation of learnability
and memorability in the BCI field. An exception is the study of Jeunet et al (2014), which assessed
the subjective learnability and memorability (among other measures) of standard BCI training
procedures, using questionnaires. However this was not in a gaming context. In technological
systems though, learnability is better assessed by comparing task execution time by a novice group
(who has never used the application before) and task execution time by an expert group (who already

13

used the application). If the time taken by the group of novices is inferior or equal to the time taken
by the experts group, then the learnability of the application is good.
The learnability is linked with a specific phenomenon called "BCI illiteracy/BCI deficiency"
(Allison and Neuper, 2010). Indeed, a given BCI system does not work for all users because several
users cannot produce detectable patterns of brain activity necessary to a particular BCI approach
(Guger et al., 2003).
Memorability is assessed by measuring task execution time at different times over a period of
weeks. If the time obtained during the first week is superior or equal to the time obtained during the
following weeks, then the memorability of application is good.

4.3. Acceptability
According to (Venkatesh et al., 2003), acceptability refers to an individual's perception of the
system’s value. To assess the acceptability, authors try to identify the intentions of individuals to use
a system through questions. Thus, models of acceptability identify the variables that contribute
significantly to the determination of intentions to use a technology. Among these models, the most
complete is the UTAUT (Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology) by (Venkatesh et
al., 2003). According to this model, behavioural intention is influenced by the performance
expectancy, effort expectancy and social influence, use behaviour is influenced by behavioural
intention and facilitating conditions. Previous experience with the system, the voluntariness or not of
use, gender and age moderate the effects of direct determinants like performance expectancy, effort
expectancy, social influence and facilitating conditions.
According to (Venkatesh et al., 2003), acceptability is measured by eight factors:


Performance expectancy is defined as the degree to which an individual believes that using
the system will allow him/her to gain in task performance (e.g., gain speed in the achievement
of the task, score a lot of points, be able toget in a relaxed / stressed mental state),



Effort expectancy corresponds to the degree of ease associated with the use of the system,



Attitude toward using technology corresponds to an overall affective reaction of an individual
using a system,



Social influence is defined as the degree to which an individual perceives that important
others believe he/she should use the new system,



Facilitating conditions are defined as the degree to which an individual believes that an
organizational and technical infrastructure exists to support the use of the system (e.g., BCI
patients association or BCI companies which provide technical support),

14



Self-efficacy corresponds to "an individual’s belief in one’s capability to organise and
execute the courses of action required to produce given attainments” (Bandura, 1997, p. 3),
(e.g., does the player believe he/she can control a game efficiently by mental activities alone),



Behavioural intention to use the system corresponds to the intention to use the system in the
next months,



Anxiety. (e.g., is the player anxious that the BCI may read his/her mind without his/her
consent).

Table 1 describes metrics (or items) for BCI videogames acceptability inspired and adapted
from (Venkatesh et al., 2003).

Factors influencing acceptability

Items
I would find the BCI videogame useful

Performance expectancy

Using the BCI videogame entertains me
Using the BCI videogame enables me to learn / to
treat / to rehabilitate
My interaction with the BCI videogame would be

Effort expectancy

clear and understandable
I would find the BCI videogame easy to use
Learning to operate the BCI videogame is easy for me
Using the BCI videogame is a good idea

Attitude toward using technology

Using the BCI videogame is fun
I like using the BCI videogame
People who influence my behavior think that I should
use the BCI videogame

Social influence

People who are important to me think that I should
use the BCI videogame

I have the knowledge necessary to use the BCI
videogame
Facilitating conditions

The BCI videogame is not compatible with other
systems I use

15

I intend to use the BCI videogame in the next <n>
months
Behavioral intention to use the BCI

I predict I would use the BCI videogame in the next

videogame

<n> months
I plan to use the BCI videogame in the next <n>
months

Anxiety

I feel apprehensive about using the BCI videogame
The BCI videogame is somewhat intimidating to me

Table 1: Items used to assess factors influencing acceptability

These items formalised in the form of positive affirmation are associated with the Likert scale
on which the user notes the degree of agreement or disagreement.
Instead of questionnaires, some authors perform interviews with players after a test session.
Gürkök et al. (2014) conducted semi-structured interviews with 42 players to investigate their
opinions on control and playability of the BCI videogame based on the famous multiplayer online
role-playing game “WoW”. They used the answers to provide some general guidelines for the design
and the evaluation of BCI videogame acceptability. For example, they observed that “the experience
of fun resulting from playing a BCI videogame once does not reliably represent the experience of
pleasure that unfolds by playing the videogame”. Consequently, the authors suggested that the “BCI
videogames should be developed and evaluated for the pleasure rather than the fun they provide”. To
do that, literature in ergonomics and psychology proposes to design and measure hedonics qualities
and appeal.

4.4. Hedonic qualities and appeal
Hedonic qualities refer to the aspects of a BCI videogame that are related to a person’s
pleasure. The pleasure derived from the use of a BCI videogame is associated with its appealing
characteristics and aesthetic.
To evaluate the hedonic quality of all applications including videogame, Hassenzahl (2001)
suggested the following items using the semantic differential scales: Interesting versus Boring,
Costly versus Cheap, Exciting versus Dull, Exclusive versus Standard, Impressive versus
Nondescript, Original versus Ordinary, and Innovative versus Conservative. To evaluate the comfort
and discomfort of BCI devices, Ekandem et al. (2012) used three indicators: the comfort of the
device (very uncomfortable, uncomfortable, indifferent, comfortable and very comfortable), the time
the participants felt they could comfortably wear the device (0–5 minutes, 5–20 minutes, 20–60
16

minutes, 60–120 minutes and more than 120 minutes) and the type of discomfort perceived (sharp,
dull, itchy, heavy, throbbing, awkward, burning or other).
To evaluate the appealingness of these systems, Hassenzahl (2001) suggested the following
items: Pleasant versus Unpleasant, Good versus Bad, Aesthetic versus Unaesthetic, Inviting versus
Rejecting, Attractive versus Unattractive, Sympathetic versus Unsympathetic, Motivating versus
Discouraging and Desirable versus Undesirable.

4.5. Immersion and Presence
Two additional dimensions can be specified to evaluate the BCI videogames: immersion and
presence. Each of these dimensions has led to many definitions (e.g., (Witmer and Singer, 1998;
Brockmyer et al., 2009)). The following definition remains the most comprehensive: immersion
corresponds to the degree with which the system interface controls the sensory inputs for each
modality of perception and action. So, immersion can be described (but not only) in terms of specific
devices: a common dichotomy derives from the opposition of "immersive" systems (Head Mounted
Display, Cave Automatic Virtual Environment) and "non immersive" systems (desktop, mouse).
According to Sanchez-Vives and Slater (2005), immersion determines the sense of presence
perceived by users through display parameters, visual realism, sound, haptics, virtual body
representation and body engagement. The International Society for Presence Research (2000) ruled
that presence is “a psychological state or subjective perception in which even though part or all of an
individual’s current experience is generated by and/or filtered through human-made technology, part
or all of the individual’s perception fails to accurately acknowledge the role of the technology in the
experience”. In others words, the sense of presence is experienced when the place illusion (i.e., the
sensation of being in a real environment) and the plausibility illusion (i.e., the feeling that the virtual
scenario is actually occurring) occur (Slater, 2009).
These links between immersion and presence appeared in the literature: immersion has been
studied in the context of many studies on BCI and virtual environment. For example, an immersive
environment can improve the sense of presence while carrying out navigational tasks through
imaginary movements (Lotte et al., 2013). Donnerer and Steed (2010) observed that P300 can be
used successfully in immersive virtual environments and Groenegress et al. (2010) proved that P300
based navigation lowered the sense of presence compared to gaze-based navigation.
In the field of BCI, this dimension was evaluated in some studies. For example, Hakvoort et
al. (2011) conducted a study with 17 participants aiming to measure immersion in a BCI videogame
named “Mind the Sheep!”. Their experiment consisted in two different sessions: a BCI session and a

17

non-BCI session. Each session was divided into three trials: a familiarity trial (i.e., participants had to
collect 10 objects which were placed across the playground), an easy trial (i.e., participants had to
park a small flock of 5 sheeps using the dogs) and a difficult trial (i.e., participants had to gather 10
sheeps, which were more scattered across the playground, into one pen that was placed in the centre
of the playground). After each session participants filled in a questionnaire on their perceived
immersion in the videogame. The 31 questions dealt with cognitive involvement, emotional
involvement, real world dissociation, challenge and control. Results showed that the BCI selection
method was more immersive than the non-BCI selection method (i.e., a mouse).
To measure immersion and presence during a videogame, Witmer and Singer (1998) designed
a questionnaire which was used in numerous studies. In their approach, these authors evaluate the
presence according to four categories that we adapted below for BCI videogames:


The control factors correspond to the degree of control that a person has in playing with a
BCI videogame, the immediacy of control (i.e., the delay between the action and the result),
the anticipation concerning what will happen next, whether or not it is under personal control,
the mode of control (i.e., the manner in which one interacts with the environment is a natural
or well-practiced method) and the physical environmental modifiability (i.e., the ability to
modify physical objects in an environment)



The sensory factors are the sensory modality (i.e., visual information and other sensory
channels), the environmental richness in term of information, the multimodal presentation to
simulate completely and coherently all the senses, the consistency of multimodal information,
the degree of movement perception (i.e., the observer must perceive self-movements through
the virtual environment) and the active search (e.g., the observers can modify their viewpoints
to change what they see),



The distraction factors correspond to the isolation from the used devices (e.g., head-mounted
display), the selective attention (i.e., the observer’s willingness or ability to focus on the
videogame stimuli and to ignore distractions) and the interface awareness,



Realism factors are the scene realism governed by scene content, texture, resolution, light
sources, field of view and dimensionality, the consistency of information with the objective
world, the meaningfulness of experience for the person and the anxiety/disorientation when
users return from the videogame to the real world.

18

4.6. User experience
User experience is a consequence of an interaction between a user (with his characteristics)
and a product (with its features and qualities) appearing after an evaluation process (Hassenzahl,
2001). The user experience is defined by the perceived usefulness, usability, hedonic quality,
appealingness and the sense of presence and the emotional reactions. The emotions arise from
subjective feelings, physiological reactions, motor expressions and cognitive appraisals (Mahlke et
al., 2006):


Subjective feelings can be evaluated and measured by the “Self-Assessment Manikin” defined
as “a non-verbal pictorial assessment technique that measures the pleasure, arousal, and
dominance associated with a person’s affective reaction to a wide variety of stimuli”.
Pleasure is measured by the following items: Unhappy versus Happy, Annoyed versus
Pleased, Unsatisfied versus Satisfied, Melancholic versus Contented, Despairing versus
Hopeful and Bored versus Relaxed. Arousal is measured with these adjectives: Relaxed
versus Stimulated, Calm versus Excited, Sluggish versus Frenzied, Dull versus Jittery, Sleepy
versus Wide-awake and Unaroused versus Aroused. Dominance is measured with items:
Controlled versus Controlling, Influenced versus Influential, Cared for versus In control,
Awed versus Important, Submissive versus Dominant and Guided versus Autonomous.



Physiological reactions can be estimated from peripheral (e.g., muscle tension, heart rate,
electro dermal activity), and central nervous system signals (e.g., electroencephalogram)
(Mühl, 2009),



Motor expressions can be measured with electromyography of the two facial muscles
associated with positive emotions (zygomaticus major) and negative emotions (corrugator
supercili),



Cognitive appraisals can be measured by the “Geneva Appraisal Questionnaire” which
measures five appraisal dimensions: intrinsic pleasantness (i.e., a stimulus event is likely to
result in a positive or negative emotion), novelty (i.e., a measure of familiarity and
predictability of the occurrence of a stimulus), goal/need conductiveness (i.e., the importance
of a stimulus for the current goals or needs), coping potential (i.e., the extent to which an
event can be controlled or influenced), and norm/self-compatibility (i.e., the extent to which a
stimulus satisfies external and internal standards).
The user experience has been often evaluated in the context of BCI videogames. The user

experience resulting from these technologies has been measured by its perceived usability, its
hedonic quality, its appealingness and the sense of presence. Some studies on user experience in BCI

19

and videogames are conducted to compare the user experience resulting from the use of different
controllers (e.g., BCI, mouse) and to understand the added-value relating exclusively to BCI control
(Gürkök et al., 2013), or to find the differences between real and imagined movement in a BCI
videogame in relation to user experience and performance (Plass-Oude Bos et al., 2010) using a user
experience based on the Game Experience Questionnaire (Ijsselsteijn et al., 2013).
These studies are focused on the comparison of user experience according to paradigms and
interaction devices, only in the videogame field. Thus, user experience was evaluated with a specific
questionnaire dedicated to game experience.

4.7. Competition and collaboration, two relevant criteria for multi-brain videogames
In the entertainment area, some multi-brain videogames begin to appear (Figure 2): each
player uses a BCI (e.g., Bonnet et al., 2013).

Figure 2: Two users playing BrainArena in a competitive trial.

For these specific BCI videogames, it is important to provide and measure competition or
collaboration (Nijholt and Gürkök, 2013). In multi-brain videogames providing competition, two
players compete using their brain until one of them is the winner and the other is the loser, e.g.,
(Hjelm and Browall, 2000). For example, in the “Brainball” game (Hjelm and Browall, 2000), two
players have to compete by relaxing, their performance is measured by EEG, their brain activity is
compared and the difference determines the direction of the ball (i.e., moving into the direction of the
player who is less relaxed).
In multi-brain videogames promoting collaboration, Pope and Stevens (2012) suggest to
distribute the control of the input devices among the two players, e.g., one player acts physically
while the other uses his/her brain. According to Nijholt and Gürkök (2013), the evaluation of the
20

collaboration level requires several metrics such as the tasks’ repartition and the number of social
interactions between the two players, and has to integrate the environmental context, e.g., Are players
co-located or distributed? Is there an audience? What does the audience see and is there any
interaction between the audience and the players?

5. Discussion
Our framework suggested specific methods to be used to define and measure specific criteria
(Figure 3). Overall our framework highlighted that usefulness, usability and acceptability are criteria
that need to be considered both to identify and to anticipate user needs (i.e., contexts of use and
features) through interviews and focus group. These criteria have also been integrated in the
evaluation phase to assess both intermediate solutions (e.g., prototypes) with user based tests
associated with questionnaires, and the system’s appropriateness by conducting longitudinal studies.
In the same way, our framework stressed that hedonic qualities, appeal, immersion and presence,
emotions and more generally user experience also need to be measured in the evaluation phase
through user based tests and questionnaires. Moreover, this framework recommended specific
metrics associated with each ergonomic criterion. For example, in a questionnaire or in an
interview’s grid, some questions can allow to evaluate usability (e.g., the degree of complexity),
usefulness (e.g., the order of priority of the suggested functions), acceptability (e.g., the intention to
use the system in the next 4 months), hedonic quality (e.g., the degree of boredom ), appeal (e.g., the
degree of appeal), emotion (e.g., the degree of arousal), immersion and presence (e.g., the degree of
provision of visual aspects).

21

Figure 3: Methodological framework for the user-centred design of BCI videogames
22

The studies concerning the design of user-centred BCI videogames are
uncommon compared to studies aimed to optimise the performance of these
applications. One possible reason may be that research on BCI videogames requires
technological developments before players can be confronted with the system in an
actual context of use. However, integrating players from the early design phase to the
use of application is necessary to design applications which will be suitable. Despite
this, very few papers have focused on the methods, criteria and metrics for the
ergonomic design of BCI videogames.
Concerning the studies on user-centred design of BCI (and not specifically BCI
videogames), this chapter highlighted three observations. First, these studies concerned
mainly the evaluation phase, i.e., the evaluation of prototypes and of the appropriateness
of applications (e.g., (Nijboer et al., 2010)), to the detriment of the early design phase
aiming to understand the context of use or to specify the user needs (e.g., (Blain-Moraes
et al., 2012)). Second, the majority of studies used only one method: the user based test
is mainly used to evaluate the usability (e.g., (Valsan et al., 2009)) and the usefulness
(e.g., (Yan et al., 2008)) ; the focus group to characterise the acceptability (e.g., (BlainMoraes et al., 2012)) and the questionnaire is used to measure the user experience (e.g.,
(Van de Laar et al., 2011)) and, in longitudinal studies, to assess the application’s
appropriateness (e.g., (Nijboer et al., 2010)). Third, the assessments of BCI videogames
focused on a single criterion which was mainly the usability (e.g., Holz et al., 2013;
Gürkök et al., 2014) at the expense of other criteria such as immersion, presence (e.g.,
(Hakvoort et al., 2011)) or usefulness (e.g., (Yan et al., 2008)).
To overcome these observations, our framework suggests three guidelines. The
first guideline insists on all phases of the user-centred design process for which
ergonomics is equipped: understanding and specifying the context of use (phase 1),
specifying the user needs (phase 2), evaluating the prototypes and assessing the
appropriateness of applications (phase 4). Indeed, involving players from the
identification of needs before the implementation of the application to the application’s
use allows designers to integrate the evolution of characteristics, needs and expectations
of players. Our methodological framework is comprehensive in that it deals with every
phase of the process, and not only the evaluation phase partially covered in the literature
of human-computer interaction. The second guideline concerns the necessity to use
several methods: interview and focus group to define specifications based on players’

23

needs, user based testing, questionnaire and longitudinal studies to evaluate the BCI
videogames. Indeed, using several ergonomic methods to study a criterion is advisable
because they provide complementary data. Our methodological framework suggests
implementing at least two methods to evaluate the same criterion. For example, to
evaluate the usefulness of a BCI videogame, it is desirable to achieve (1) quasi
experimentation-based longitudinal studies (i.e., comparison between a group that uses
the application and another group that does not use it, for a period of several months),
and (2) after-use questionnaire tests with questions on the intention to use the BCI
videogame in the future etc. The third guideline recommends defining and measuring
several ergonomic criteria and underlines the importance of evaluating one criterion
using several metrics. Indeed, designing a technological system suited to the end-user
implies integrating several criteria and not just one: typically, a usable BCI videogame
cannot be used if it is not useful for its players. The methodological framework
incorporates several ergonomic criteria such as usefulness, usability, acceptability,
hedonic qualities, appeal, immersion and presence, emotions and user experience, and
several metrics for each of them.

6. Conclusion
The analysis of the BCI applications literature suggested that current evaluations
of BCI videogames are mainly technocentric in order to technically improve the BCI
videogames before using them in real contexts of use. However, some recent works tend
to show the need to include characteristics, expectations and requirements of users in
early design phases. To do so, methodological guidelines, from literature on ergonomics
and human-computer interaction, are necessary.
In this paper, a user-centred methodological framework was proposed to guide
the designers of BCI videogames so that the games are adapted to human
characteristics, to the players’ needs and to the context in which these applications will
be integrated (e.g., at home, in a classroom, during a medical consultation). For each
user-centred design phase, our framework discussed methods, criteria and metrics to
guide designers in the design and evaluation of the usefulness, usability, acceptability,
hedonic qualities, appealingness, immersion and presence, emotions and more generally
user experience associated with BCI videogames for therapy, learning or entertainment.

24

The implementation of this methodological framework to design and evaluate
numerous BCI videogames could suggest several research perspectives. A first
perspective could be to assess empirically the potential of a user-centred methodological
framework, comparing one BCI videogame resulting from a technocentric design
process (i.e., as traditionally implemented to develop these applications) and an
application resulting from a design process based on the user centred framework. A
second perspective could be to improve the framework with the empirical results using
it to design applications for different scopes (e.g., BCI videogames for learning). An
example of results could be the enhancement of the metrics’ database for the usefulness
criterion that is highly dependent on the applications’ scope. Because one conclusion of
the massive use of this framework could be a partial use depending on the application, a
third perspective would be to develop a tool to assist in the decision-making concerning
the selection of methods, criteria and metrics according to the scope of the application.

References
Allison B Z, Neuper C (2010). Could anyone use a BCI?. In Brain-computer interfaces.
Springer London. pp. 35-54
Anastassova M, Burkhardt J-M, Mégard C,Leservot A (2005) User-centred design of
mixed reality for vehicle maintenance training: An empirical comparison of two
techniques for user needs analysis. HCI International
Bandura, A. (1997). Self Efficacy: The exercise of control. New York: Freeman
Bermudez i Badia S, Samaha H, Morgade AG, Verschure PFMJ (2011) Exploring the
synergies of a hybrid BCI - VR neurorehabilitation system. International
Conference on Virtual Rehabilitation (ICVR). doi: 10.1109/ICVR.2011.5971813
Blain-Moraes S, Schaff R, Gruis KL, Huggins JE, Wren PA (2012) Barriers to and
mediators of brain-computer interface user acceptance: focus group findings.
Ergonomics 55: pp. 516-525. doi: 10.1080/00140139.2012.661082
Blandford A, Green TRG, Furniss D, Makri S (2008) Evaluating system utility and
conceptual fit using CASSM. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies
66: pp. 393-409. doi: 10.1016/j.ijhcs.2007.11.005
Bonnet L, Lotte F, Lécuyer A (2013) Two Brains, One Game: Design and Evaluation of
a Multi-User BCI Video Game Based on Motor Imagery. IEEE Transactions on

25

Computational Intelligence and Artificial Intelligence in Games (IEEE TCIAIG
5: pp. 185-198. doi: 10.1109/TCIAIG.2012.2237173
Brockmyer JH, Fox CM, Curtiss KA., McBroom E, Burkhart KM, Pidruzny JN (2009)
The development of the Game Engagement Questionnaire: A measure of
engagement in video game-playing. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology
45: pp. 624-634. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2009.02.016
Burkhardt J-M, Lubart T (2010) Creativity in the Age of Emerging Technology: Some
Issues and Perspectives in 2010. Creativity and Innovation Management 19: pp.
160-166. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-8691.2010.00559.x
Donnerer M, Steed A (2010) Using a P300 brain-computer interface in an immersive
virtual environment. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments 19: pp.
12-24. doi:10.1162/pres.19.1.12
Ekandem J I, Davis TA, Alvarez I, James MT, Gilbert JE (2012) Evaluating the
ergonomics of BCI devices for research and experimentation. Ergonomics 55:
pp. 592-598. doi: 10.1080/00140139.2012.662527
Escolano C, Antelis J, Minguez J (2009) Human brain-teleoperated robot between
remote places. IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA). pp.4430-4437. doi: 10.1109/ROBOT.2009.5152639
George L, Lécuyer A (2010) An overview of research on “passive” brain-computer
interfaces for implicit human-computer interaction. International Conference on
Applied Bionics and Biomechanics
Groenegress C, Holzner C, Guger C, Slater M (2010) Effects of p300-based bci use on
reported presence in a virtual environment. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual
Environments 19: pp. 1-11. doi: 10.1162/pres.19.1.1
Gürkök H, van de Laar B, Plass-Oude Bos D, Poel M, Nijholt A (2014). Players’
Opinions on Control and Playability of a BCI Game. International Conference
on Universal Access in Human-Computer Interaction (UAHCI). pp. 549-560.
doi : http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-07440-5_50
Gürkök H, Nijholt A, Poel M, Obbink M (2013) Evaluating a Multi-Player BrainComputer Interface Game: Challenge versus Co-Experience. Entertainment
Computing 4: pp. 195-203. doi: 10.1016/j.entcom.2012.11.001
Guger C, Edlinger G, Harkam W, Niedermayer I, Pfurtscheller G (2003) How many
people are able to operate an EEG-based brain-computer interface (BCI)?. IEEE

26

Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering. 11: pp. 145147
Hakvoort G, Gürkök H, Plass-Oude Bos D, Obbink M, Poel M (2011) Measuring
Immersion and Affect in a Brain-Computer Interface Game. In Campos P,
Graham N, Jorge J, Nunes N, Palanque P, Winckler M (Eds.) Human-Computer
Interaction – INTERACT 2011, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 115-128
Hassenzahl M (2011) The effect of perceived hedonic quality on product appealingness.
International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction 13: pp. 481-499. doi:
10.1207/S15327590IJHC1304_07
Hjelm SI, Browall C(2000) Brainball – using brain activity for cool competition.
NordiCHI
Holz EM, Höhne J, Staiger-Sälzer P, Tangermann M, Kübler A (2013) Brain–computer
interface controlled gaming: Evaluation of usability by severely motor restricted
end-users.

Artificial

intelligence

in

medicine

59:

pp.111-120.

doi:

10.1016/j.artmed.2013.08.001
Ijsselsteijn W A, de Kort YAW, Poels K (in preparation) The Game Experience
Questionnaire: Development of a self-report measure to assess the psychological
impact of digital games.
Iturrate I, Antelis JM, Kübler A, Minguez J (2009) A noninvasive brain-actuated
wheelchair based on a P300 neurophysiological protocol and automated
navigation. IEEE Transactions on Robotics. 25: pp.

614-627. doi:

10.1109/TRO.2009.2020347
Jeunet C, Cellard A, Subramanian S, Hachet M, N'Kaoua B, Lotte F (2014) How Well
Can We Learn With Standard BCI Training Approaches? A Pilot Study.
International Brain-Computer Interface Conference
Kübler A, Holz EM, Zickler C, Kaufmann T (2013) A user centred approach for
bringing BCI controlled applications to end-users. In Fazel-Rezai R (Ed.), Braincomputer interface systems - recent progress and future prospects. InTech. doi:
10.5772/55802
Lotte F; Renard Y, Lécuyer A (2008) Self-paced Brain-Computer Interaction with
Virtual Worlds: a Qualitative and Quantitative Study 'Out-of-the-Lab'.
International Brain-Computer Interface Workshop and Training Course

27

Lotte F, Faller J, Guger C, Renard Y, Pfurtscheller G, Lécuyer A, Leeb R (2013)
Combining BCI with Virtual Reality: Towards New Applications and Improved
BCI. In Allison BZ, Dunne S, Leeb R, Millán JR, Nijholt A (Eds) Towards
Practical Brain-Computer Interfaces: Bridging the Gap from Research to RealWorld Applications, Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-29746-5_10
Loup-Escande E, Christmann O (2013) Requirements prioritization by end-users and
consequences on design of a virtual reality software: an exploratory study.
International Conference on Evaluation of Novel Approaches to Software
Engineering (ENASE). pp. 5-14
Loup-Escande E, Burkhardt J-M, Richir S (2013) Anticipating and evaluating the
usefulness of emerging technologies in ergonomic design: a review of
usefulness in design. Le travail humain 76: pp.25-55. doi: 10.3917/th.761.0027
Mahlke S, Minge M, Thüring M (2006) Measuring multiple components of emotions in
interactive contexts. CHI Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. pp.1061-1066, doi: 10.1145/1125451.1125653
Müller-Putz G, Scherer R, Pfurtscheller G (2007) Game-like training to learn single
switch operated neuroprosthetic control. Internationational Conference on
Advances in Computer Entertainment Technology
Mühl C (2009) Neurophysiological Assessment of Affective Experience. Affective
Computing and Intelligent Interaction
Mulvenna M, Lightbody G, Thomson E, McCullagh PJ, Ware M, Martin S (2012)
Realistic Expectations with Brain Computer Interfaces. Journal of Assistive
Technologies 6: pp. 233-245. doi: 10.1108/17549451211285735
Nijboer F, Birbaumer N, Kubler A (2010) The influence of psychological state and
motivation on brain-computer interface performance in patients with
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis - a longitudinal study. Frontiers in Neuroscience 4.
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2010.00055
Nijholt A,Gürkök H (2013) Multi-Brain Games: Cooperation and Competition. In
Stephanidis C., Antona, M. (eds.) Universal Access in Human-Computer
Interaction. Design Methods, Tools, and Interaction Techniques for Inclusion
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 652-661
Plass-Oude Bos D, Reuderink B, Laar B, Gürkök H, Mühl C, Poel M, Nijholt A, Heylen
D (2010). Brain-computer interfacing and games. In Tan DS, Nijholt A (eds.)

28

Brain-Computer Interfaces, Human-Computer Interaction Series, SpringerVerlag London, pp. 149-178
Plass-Oude Bos D, Poel M, Nijholt A (2011) A study in user-centered design and
evaluation of mental tasks for BCI. International Conference on Advances in
multimedia modeling, pp. 122-134. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-64217829-0_12
Pope AT, Stevens CL (2012) Interpersonal Biocybernetics: Connecting through Social
Psychophysiology ACM International Conference on Multimodal Interaction,
pp. 561–566. doi=10.1145/2388676.2388795
Rabardel P, Beguin P (2005) Instrument mediated activity: from subject development to
anthropocentric design. Theoretical Issues in Ergonomic Science. 6: pp. 429 461. doi: 10.1080/14639220500078179
Robertson S (2001) Requirements trawling: techniques for discovering requirements.
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies. 55: pp. 405-421. doi:
10.1006/ijhc.2001.0481
Sanchez-Vives M V, Slater M (2005) From presence to consciousness through virtual
reality. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 6(4), pp. 332-339.
Scherer R, Moitzi G, Daly I, Muller-Putz GR (2013) On the Use of Games for
Noninvasive EEG-Based Functional Brain Mapping. IEEE Transactions on
Computational

Intelligence

and

AI

in

Games

5:

pp.

155-163.

doi:10.1109/tciaig.2013.2250287
Schreuder M, Riccio A, Risetti M, Dähne S, Ramsav A, Williamson J, Mattia D,
Tangermann M (2013). User-centered design in brain–computer interfaces - A
case study. Artificial Intelligence in Medicine. 59: pp. 71-80. doi:
10.1016/j.artmed.2013.07.005
Slater M (2009) Place illusion and plausibility can lead to realistic behaviour in
immersive virtual environments. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society B: Biological Sciences, 364(1535), pp. 3549-3557.
Thomas E, Dyson M, Clerc M (2013) An analysis of performance evaluation for motorimagery based BCI. Journal of neural engineering. doi:10.1088/17412560/10/3/031001

29

Valsan G, Grychtol B, Lakany H, Conway BA (2009) The Strathclyde brain computer
interface. IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society. pp. 606-609. doi:
10.1109/IEMBS.2009.5333506.
Van de Laar B, Gurkok H, Plass-Oude Bos D, Nijboer F, Nijholt A (2011) Perspectives
on user experience evaluation of brain-computer interfaces. In Stephanidis C.
(ed.) Universal Access in Human-Computer Interaction - Users Diversity,
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 600-609
Venkatesh V, Morris MG, Davis GB, Davis FD (2003) User acceptance of information
technology: toward a unified view. MIS Quarterly 27: pp. 425-478.
Witmer BG, Singer MJ (1998) Measuring Presence in Virtual Environments: A
Presence Questionnaire. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments 7:
pp. 225-240. doi: 10.1162/105474698565686
Wolpaw J, Birbaumer N, McFarland D, Pfurtscheller G, Vaughan T (2002) Braincomputer interfaces for communication and control. Clinical Neurophysiology
113: pp. 767-791
Yan N, Wang J, Liu M, Zong L, Jiao Y, Yue J, Lv Y, Yang Q, Lan H, Liu Z (2008)
Designing a brain-computer interface device for neurofeedback using virtual
environments. Journal of Medical and Biological Engineering 28: pp. 167-172
Yang F, Chen W, Wu B, Qi Y, Luo J, Su Y, Dai J, Zheng X (2010) An adaptive BCI
system for virtual navigation. International Conference on Information Science
and Engineering (ICISE) pp. 64-68. doi: 10.1109/ICISE.2010.5688650
Zickler C, Halder S, Kleih SC, Herbert C, Kübler A (2013) Brain Painting: Usability
testing according to the user-centered design in end users with severe motor
paralysis.

Artificial

Intelligence

in

Medicine,

59:

pp.

99–110.

doi:

10.1016/j.artmed.2013.08.003

30

Cross-references
BCI and player experience
Brain-Computer Interface Games: Towards a Framework
Brain-Computer Interfacing and Virtual Reality
Ethics and Games
Ethics of New and Emerging Science and Technology

Keywords
Brain-Computer Interface; Videogame; Ergonomics; User-Centred Design; Evaluation

31

