International Journal for Research in Applied Science & Engineering Technology (IJRASET)
ISSN: 2321-9653; IC Value: 45.98; SJ Impact Factor: 6.887
Volume 6 Issue VI, June 2018- Available at www.ijraset.com

Epilepsy Detection by Processing of EEG Signals
using Labview Simulation
S. N. Hallur1, D. A. Torse2 , S.S. Santaji3
1,2,3

Asst. Professor, Dept. of ECE, KLS Gogte Institute of Technology, Belagavi

Abstract: Epileptic seizure or epilepsy commonly known as fits have been occurring one in a 100 in day to day life and the causes
to this are many. Inspite of so many causes it appears physically as much as most of the time to a lot of people. The overview of
the work presented over here is that the occurrence of the epilepsy to appear physically can be treated or controlled before in
hand. There are various methods to do that. This detection before in hand itself is done by various procedures which includes the
methods of capturing and monitoring the Electroencephalograph (EEG) signals from the patients, separating the signals with
respect to their frequencies and then comparing it with the threshold with respect to their amplitudes. Crossing the threshold
indicates the occurrence or initiation of the Epilepsy and thus is beforehand itself indicated by the occurrence of an alarm. This
detection here is being performed by using Labview in which Software Simulation is done, the EEG signal samples are given as
input and the objective is achieved.
Keywords: Epilepsy, EEG, threshold, simulation, Labview.
I.
INTRODUCTION
A. Introduction to Eeg Signals
The recording of the electrical activity of the brain along the scalp which is a result of current obtained due to the firing of neurons
in the brain coz of fluctuation of voltage is known as Electroencephalography (EEG). The brain gives a response to the stimulus and
thus the measurement of the response to the stimulus is known as Event-Related Potential (ERP). The stimulus may be sensory,
motor or cognitive in nature. Various patterns of EEG are recorded in the table below as follows:
Sl. No
Wave Patterns
Frequency (In Hz)
1
Delta
4
2
Theta
4-7
3
Alpha
7-14
4
Beta
15-30
5
Gamma
30-100
6
Mu
8-13
Table 1. EEG wave patterns and their frequency ranges
Some brain wave rhythms and waves whose frequency ranges as indicated above are being diagrammatically represented as below.

Fig 1. Various Rhythmic patterns in the human brain

©IJRASET: All Rights are Reserved

888

International Journal for Research in Applied Science & Engineering Technology (IJRASET)
ISSN: 2321-9653; IC Value: 45.98; SJ Impact Factor: 6.887
Volume 6 Issue VI, June 2018- Available at www.ijraset.com
B. Epilepsy
Epilepsy is completely a chronic disorder which is always recurrent and is always provoked by the unprovoked seizures. The people
who have fits or epilepsy have symptoms more than one type of seizure and they most of the times of have other neurological
problems as well. Epilepsy may also be said as a spectrum condition with a wide range of seizure types and the control varies from
person to person. Epileptic seizures signals characterized from small range low signals to vigorous shaking. The cause of the
epilepsy is unknown though most of the defects are birth defects and sometimes they also occur due to the electrolytic imbalance in
between the neurons. The most common type of the seizures is known as convulsive and its constitute about 60% of the total
seizures that are present. Among which 1/3rd of them occur start occurring due to its affect in both the hemispheres of the brain.
2/3rd of all the seizures are due to the partial affects that are being occurred and then completely affect the person. The rest 40% of
the seizures are non-convulsive. About 6% of the epilepsies that are caused in the world are due to the seizures that are being
triggered by the specific events which are also known as reflex seizures. These reflex seizures always occur as a result of a specific
stimulus.

Fig 2. EEG of a person with childhood absence epilepsy showing a seizure
C. Source of Neural Activities
The home for neural activities for the origin of EEG signal may be human brain and the neuron. The most fundamental cell in
neuropsychology is neuron from which the firing occurs and thus EEG come into picture. Thus the following has been presented in
the following sections below.
D. Human Brain
The human brain is divided into 3 parts: Cerebrum, Cerebellum and Medulla Oblongata. The major concentrated parts for EEG
reference are Cerebrum and Cerebellum. Complex body movements including co-ordination and muscle tone modulation are
controlled by cerebellum. The cerebellum is again divided into 6 parts. They are frontal lobe, temporal lobe, insular lobe, limbic
lobe, occipital lobe and parietal lobe. Pain, taste sensations and problem-solving activities are being concentrated in the parietal
lobe. Hearing and Memory are associated with temporal lobe. Vision-related tasks are being taken care by occipital lobe. The frontal
lobe is associated with problem solving, emotions, movement and speech.

Fig 3. Functional diagram of human brain
Somatosensory cortex and premotor cortex is a location where a primary motor cortex lies. Different areas of the primary motor
cortex control different movements of the body. Upper part of the primary motor cortex controls shoulders, elbow, wrists, fingers
and thumb. The larger area of the primary motor cortex is being occupied by the facial movements such as eye, lips, face, neck,
tongue, jaw and swallowing. Any movements occurring in the body gives rise to some specific signals from primary motor cortex.
Thus for the assessment of motor related brain activity, the EEG signal recording should be originated from the appropriate location
in the spatial domain for the correctness reading of each electrode.

©IJRASET: All Rights are Reserved

889

International Journal for Research in Applied Science & Engineering Technology (IJRASET)
ISSN: 2321-9653; IC Value: 45.98; SJ Impact Factor: 6.887
Volume 6 Issue VI, June 2018- Available at www.ijraset.com
E. Neuron

Fig 4. Structure of a neuron
The main components of the Central Nervous System (CNS) are nerve cells and glia cells. Every neuron has cell bodies, dendrites
and axons. The function of the nerve cells is to respond to stimuli and to transmit the information over long distances. The sending
and transmitting of an electrical signal occurs through an axon which is a long cylindrical tube. The proteins to the end of the cell is
being delivered by axon’s transport system. The resting membrane potential of neuron is about is about -70 to 60mV.

Fig 5. Action Potential of a Neuron
F. Measurement of EEG Signals
The electric potential generated by a single neuron is very much insufficient to be captured up by EEG and thus a collective data of
millions of neurons that are synchronously working with similar spatial orientation is collected and then the EEG is analyzed. The
cognitive state changes and the sleep states of the neurons are being analyzed by the EEG. EEG data can be acquired using 2 types
of instruments: Digital and Analog EEG instruments. Analog Instruments consists of an amplifier, a writing device and a
galvanometer where the output of the amplifier is always being controlled by low frequency and high frequency filters and
sensitivity controls. Ex: A sensitivity of 10µV/mm means that a signal with amplitude of 100µV will produce 1cm deflection on the
vertical scale. The analog waveform is being converted to digital values and thus this process is known as Analog to Digital
Conversion where the continuous signal is being quantized according to a particular interval and quantization values are being given
to the signal with respect to its amplitude.

Fig 6. Analog Waveform

Fig 7. Sampling rate of 240Hz
The sampled waveforms can be then displayed as waveforms after storing and manipulating the values that are being stored. The
rate at which the waveform data is being sampled is known as Sampling Rate for which minimum acceptable range is 2.5 times
greater than the highest frequency as most digital EEG systems support sampling rate of 240Hz. Some recordings from brain
directly have a frequency of nearly 200Hz. Some digital systems have optional sampling rates of 480Hz which are then being
converted using analog to digital converter after being passed on with the anti-aliasing filter.

©IJRASET: All Rights are Reserved

890

International Journal for Research in Applied Science & Engineering Technology (IJRASET)
ISSN: 2321-9653; IC Value: 45.98; SJ Impact Factor: 6.887
Volume 6 Issue VI, June 2018- Available at www.ijraset.com
G. Sensors / Electrodes
The electrodes can be categorized Based on
1) Circuitry design
2) Conduction
3) Communication

Fig 8. Classification of Electrodes
H. Based on Circuitry Design
Electrodes are classified based on whether the circuitry is inbuilt within them or not.
1) Active Electrodes: They have inbuilt circuitry where the current is being amplified due to which the signal quality received is
greatly improved and also the skin preparation and conductive pasting required by passive electrodes can be avoided.
2) Passive Electrodes: They don’t have inbuilt circuitry and thus the results are less efficient than the active ones
I. Based On Conduction
1) Wet Electrodes: Wet electrodes rely on electrolytic gel to penetrate hair wherein the gel also acts as a medium to fill up the air
gaps in between the sensors and the electrode and provide a clean conductive path
2) Dry Electrodes: Dry electrodes directly comes in contact with the skin wherein the electrolytic gel is not necessary at all. Here
since the sensors have to be in their place intact and thus to avoid the noises and artifacts mechanics and electronics comes into
picture. Ex: Quick 20.
J. Positioning of Electrodes
The positioning of electrodes is one of the important aspects in the EEG signal capturing and detection. For this purpose the 10-20
Method is being used wherein the electrodes are being placed along the scalp of the head. The 10-20 method is based on the
relationship between location of the electrode and underlying area of the cerebral cortex. The positioning of the electrodes along the
scalp is shown as follows in the figure depicted below.

Fig 9. International 10-20 Placement System
The letters used indicate:
F for Frontal Lobe
T for Temporal Lobe
C for Central Lobe
P for Parietal Lobe
O for Occipital Lobe
“Z” indicate that an electrode is being indicated on the midline.

©IJRASET: All Rights are Reserved

891

International Journal for Research in Applied Science & Engineering Technology (IJRASET)
ISSN: 2321-9653; IC Value: 45.98; SJ Impact Factor: 6.887
Volume 6 Issue VI, June 2018- Available at www.ijraset.com
K. Abnormal EEG Patterns:
Abnormality is being indicated by certain variations in the EEG signals that are being generated by the brain. The reasons for the
following may be due to the following as such as increase in the abnormal EEG patterns, decrease in the abnormal EEG patterns or
sudden disappearance of the EEG patterns and thus the non-specific abnormalities in the EEG signals can be categorized into 3
categories. They are as follows:
1) Intermittent slow wave abnormalities that are widespread and are usually associates with brain dysfunction and are seen in delta
wave range.
2) Persistent bilateral EEG, most of the times usually associated with the impaired conscious reactions of the cerebral hemisphere.
3) EEG associated with disturbance of cerebral hemisphere focused.
A burst-type signal is being associated with the first-category signal which is reduced/ attenuated by alerting the particular
individual by eye-opening and then it can also be fastened or accentuated by drowsiness, closing of eyes, etc. The maximum
amplitude is being usually observed in the frontal regions and is influenced by age. This is most prominently observed in the
occipital and posterior head region in children. It is also observed as the most prominent combinations of the pathological processes
including system metabolic and toxic disturbances in the frontal regions.
In the second category, i.e. bilateral persistent EEG, the occurrences and the processes among different stages of conscious,
impaired, purposeful responsiveness are totally non-specific and the mechanisms responsible for the following above occurrences
are only partially understood.
In the third category of classification, i.e. focal persistent EEG, the abnormalities are noticed in the form of disappearances or
distortions of the normal patterns occurring in the EEG. Increase or appearances of all abnormal patterns but such kind of changes
are always seen at the cerebral cortex. The focal distortion of the normal rhythmic patterns results in an asymmetry in frequency,
reactivity or amplitude of the rhythm.
The focal abnormalities may also be the reason for the rhythmic delta waves being produced and thus this is the most reliable
findings in the focal cerebral disturbance. These disturbances resulting in the generation of the delta waves are more polymorphic
and non-rhythmic and are always less-reactive but are more reliable.
II.
OBJECTIVES
The Epileptic Seizure more oftenly called as FITS occurs at any time because of some of the abnormalities that occur within the
human brain. The main reason that the epilepsy occurs is due to the abnormal sparking of the neurons which inturn is caused by the
irregular activities within the brain. Thus the person may not have medical aid at that particular instant of time and may collapse.
Since occurrence of epilepsy gives some instincts or appearance symbols some few hours before its actual physical appearance,
capturing its initial signals of start of it will be notified by the comparison with the threshold set by the hardware and thus this gives
an indication of its occurrence before its actual physical appearance by the display and buzzer indication and the patient can survive.
III.
LITERATURE SURVEY
A common chronic neurological disorder, marked by seizures is known as Epilepsy which is due to excessive discharge of cortical
cells from the brain. The epileptic seizure is undetectable and cannot be completely cured but it can be controlled through proper
medicinal drugs. The detection of seizures is highly needed since they are unpredictable and occur very rarely. Here, some of the
previous methods that were used for the automatic detection of epileptic seizure in EEG signals are discussed.
Logesparan & Rodriguez-Villegas in the year 2011 proposed an algorithm which is based on data selection which was based on
phase congruency and determining interictal spikes from background EEG. A modification of the traditional phase congruency was
being involved in the approach where dynamic estimate of the muscle activity along the scalp is included. The performance was
greatly increased by 80% even if the data was reduced by more than 50%.
A Novel approach by Guo in 2010 for the automatic epilepsy seizure detection that used the line length features based on the
decomposition of the wavelet transform. The EEG signals for detecting the presence and absence of the seizure was being done by
the Artificial Neural Networks. The preprocessing of the database was being done by removing the artifacts. In the year 2011,
automatic feature extraction was being done from the original feature database in epileptic classification of EEG signals and this
was done by applying Genetic Programming (GP).
Hierarchical EEG classification system which may be useful in detecting epileptic seizures was proposed by Wang in the year 2011.
The proposed method includes 3 steps:
Representing the original EEG signals by wavelet coefficient of packets and its feature extraction by best entropy available

©IJRASET: All Rights are Reserved

892

International Journal for Research in Applied Science & Engineering Technology (IJRASET)
ISSN: 2321-9653; IC Value: 45.98; SJ Impact Factor: 6.887
Volume 6 Issue VI, June 2018- Available at www.ijraset.com
k-Nearest neighbor classifier and Cross-Validation (CV) approach for Hierarchical Knowledge Based (HKB) construction.
Accuracy Computation and rate rejection to be calculated.
Proposed method was Channel selection which was done by Chang in the year 2010 which reduces the channels from 22 to less than
6. Thus computational load can be reduced. By doing so 70% increase in efficiency in 3-channel cases of EEG database.
In the year 2010, Liang, in order to detect the seizures a systematic evaluator approach was used. With a combination of spectrum
analysis and complexity analysis, the evaluation can be done. Genetic Algorithms and Principal Component Analysis (PCA) were
applied to linear and non-linear methods.
A method for establishment for differences in power spectra between EEG channels and successive time intervals was being
introduced by Lewis in the year 2010. The differences among the time intervals during seizures can be minimized by characteristic
evolution of seizures. The combination of Discrete Finite Automata (DFA) and Spectral analysis is very much useful in seizure
identification.
With an objective of evaluation of the estimation of the lateralization of epileptic EEGs and preprocessing effect on synchronization
analysis, a synchronization analysis on EEG was carried out by Verez Perez in the year 2011. Preprocessing includes cancellation of
noise by Wavelet Denoising (WD), Blind Source Separation (BSS) and classification. This method has an efficiency of 90% in
locating the epileptic zone.
A Discrete harmony search proposed by Gandhi in the year 2012 which is for detecting epileptic seizure activity from background
EEG data recorded from normal and epileptic subjects. Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT) with entropy, standard deviation, mean,
kurtosis energy and entropy estimation was included in the approach and later followed by Probabilistic Neural Network (PNN).
This is highly in demand and thus has 100% efficiency.
Guo in the year 2010 presented a method of automatic epileptic seizure detection which uses entropy features derived from Multi
Wavelet Transform (MWT) combined with an ANN to detect the presence of seizure but increases the cost of computation.
IV.
METHODOLOGY
Initially in the first phase, the complete analogy of epilepsy (Fits) is being gone through and then the concept of the EEG signal that
is being generated by the brain is being studied. The concept of the EEG signal generation, capturing and processing is also being
studied but here processing of the EEG signal is not within the scope of this current implementation and thus it will be studied based
on the upper surface. The voltage levels and the action potentials of the neurons are being studied during their normal activity and
abnormal activity.
In the second phase, the components required for the current implementation such as the electrodes, types of electrodes needed, its
specifications are gone through. The interfacing devices are also being studied which are necessarily required for the signal
capturing. Analog to Digital Conversion specifications and various factors affecting the conversions are being studied. Comparators
are also being taken into considerations and thus its specifications are chalked out. Various other components utilized are also being
studied in this phase.
In the third phase, plans are being chalked out in order what way to implement the current implementation. In this phase, initially
the block diagrams are being implemented according to the components necessary step by step. Then combining all the blocks
together and assigning the inputs and outputs are being taken out.
In the fourth phase, all the components are being practically implemented according to that as per chalked out in the third phase as
per the block diagram. The components are properly connected and then the connections are being analysed whether they are
connected as per the circuit required. The inputs are properly connected and the outputs are properly taken out and analysed in the
next phase of the current implementation.
In the fifth phase, the results are being obtained by applying various inputs at the input side and thus the outputs are being analysed
based on the applied inputs. The output is checked and verified as to confirm whether the expected output is obtained or not. The
conclusion is being drawn based on the results obtained and thus analyzing them. Also based on the implementation done, the
advantages and disadvantages of the current implementation can be drawn and may be notified. The following figure below depicts
the implementation process of the current implementation.
V.
LABVIEW SIMULATION
The EEG signal extraction, processing and reporting can be done by using various methods. But a particular method has to be
followed for the acquisition of EEG signals. Thus the following method or stages are as mentioned below are as done.

©IJRASET: All Rights are Reserved

893

International Journal for Research in Applied Science & Engineering Technology (IJRASET)
ISSN: 2321-9653; IC Value: 45.98; SJ Impact Factor: 6.887
Volume 6 Issue VI, June 2018- Available at www.ijraset.com
A. EEG Extraction
The EEG signals captured from some about wireless EEG cap that are being placed on the patient’s scalp is being captured as in the
file formatted as “.edf” extension. The examples for wireless EEG sensors used are EMOTIV EPOC, EMOTIV INSIGHT. The
following figure below depicts the actual wireless EEG sensors.

Fig 10. Emotiv Epoc EEG Headset
This then can be later used in processing. The extracted and transmitted signals also contain the signals which may be unnecessary
in actual processing. The unnecessary signals need to be filtered out since the EEG signals are in the range of 0.5Hz to 100Hz. The
divisions of the frequencies are shown as follows.

Table 1. Table 1. Frequency Ranges of EEG Signals
A clinical routine checkup of an epileptic seizure or epilepsy involves a EEG signal recording of nearly 20-30 minutes and this
recording usually involves the capturing the signals from the electrodes attached to the scalp. The EEG amplifier such as EMOTIV
INSIGHT and the electrodes to the scalp are used to capture the signals. The raw data captured from the electrodes attached to the
scalp of the person are sent to the computer wirelessly, i.e. Wi-Fi or Bluetooth and the file is then saved with an extension “.edf”.
The electrodes are attached as shown in the figure below.

Fig 11. EEG Electrodes attached and EEG Measurement points using EMOTIV-EPOC system
EEG signal can be very easily simulated in the Lab VIEW using the biomedical toolkit. The signal is always analyzed to determine
the current human state. The signals are simulated using EEG.
The signals that are being captured from the electrodes include the noise and external signals from the environment. The disturbance
in the signals that are being separated by the use of filters. Various EEG filters are available within the Lab VIEW such as IIR and
FIR filters. A linear phase response is being provided by FIR filters and a non-linear phase response is being provided by IIR filters.
Thus FIR filters can be used in applications where phase information is necessary and IIR filters are being used where phase
information is not necessary.

©IJRASET: All Rights are Reserved

894

International Journal for Research in Applied Science & Engineering Technology (IJRASET)
ISSN: 2321-9653; IC Value: 45.98; SJ Impact Factor: 6.887
Volume 6 Issue VI, June 2018- Available at www.ijraset.com
The major difference in between the FIR and IIR filter is the impulse response among them where it is finite for FIR filters and
infinite for IIR filters. FIR filters always typically require more number of multiplications and summations than compared to IIR
filters for the same filtering performance. Since, certain computer architectures are very much suited for the digital computation of
the given architectures such as for digital signal processors (DSP’s) which are frequently very much better suited for the FIR
filtering. The computation speed of FIR filter is very much higher than the IIR filter
IIR filter always provide very high co-efficients values as compared to the FIR filters and this with a lot of co-efficients being
available, the computations are easily possible and the computational speed also increases and thus is much more efficient than an
IIR filter.
The captured “.edf” file is being read using the Lab VIEW biomedical module. The extracted EEG signals are being filtered out
using the specific filter that is being designed and thus the specific EEG rhythm is obtained. The specific IIR butterworth bandpass
filter. The Delta signal is being obtained by setting the lower frequency of bandpass filter as 0.5Hz and the higher frequency as
3.9Hz. Similarly to obtain the Theta waves the frequency boundaries of the bandpass filter has to be set to 4.1Hz and 6.9Hz. The
Alpha waves are got passed through the bandpass filter having the passband being set as 8Hz and 12Hz. The frequency band for the
bandpass filter that are being set to 13Hz and 30Hz to obtain the Beta Frequency. The signal boundary frequencies for the passband
in order to obtain the Gamma Signals are 30Hz and 100Hz. The Amplitudes and the frequencies are being extracted using single
tone measurement module. In order to repeat this for N times a loop is being used. The following diagram below depicts the block
diagram for signal filtering.

Fig 12.Block Diagram for Signal Filtering
The filters used here is the Butterworth filter. Adjusting the band frequency boundaries is as follows shown in the figure below:

Fig 13. Filter Parameters for Delta
Similarly, the parameters for all the other 4 EEG signals are set. Plotting the block diagram gives the front panel view as shown
below.

©IJRASET: All Rights are Reserved

895

International Journal for Research in Applied Science & Engineering Technology (IJRASET)
ISSN: 2321-9653; IC Value: 45.98; SJ Impact Factor: 6.887
Volume 6 Issue VI, June 2018- Available at www.ijraset.com

Fig. Front Panel View for the Block Diagram
VI.
RESULTS
The .edf file source obtained is then given as the input. The results obtained due to the set threshold are as follows:
A. Case 1: Normal Person
The EEG signal samples were collected from five different normal persons and the results were averaged to obtain the different
average wave values.
Wave
Frequency
Limit
Avg
(In Hz)
Lower / Higher
Obtained
Freq (in
Hz)
Delta
4
0.5Hz / 3.99Hz
2.12
Theta
4-7
4.0Hz / 6.99Hz
6.3
Alpha
7-14
7.0Hz/13.99Hz
7.4
Beta
15-30
15.0Hz/29.99Hz
21.6
Gamma
30-100
30.0Hz/99.99Hz
68.8
Mu
8-13
8.0Hz/12.99Hz
9.7
Table 2. EEG Frequencies obtained in Normal Persons
A graph is plotted for the obtained average frequency from the EEG signals of normal persons.

Fig 13. Graph of averaged frequencies obtained from normal people
B. Case 2: Epileptic Seizure Affected Person.
Initially a sample of the “.edf” file is obtained from the patient who suffers from Epilepsy. This file is given to the LabVIEW
simulation model that is built. The frequencies obtained from the epileptic EEG signals are as shown in the table below.
Wave
Frequency
Limit
Avg
(In Hz)
Lower / Higher
Obtained
Freq (in
Hz)
Delta
4
0.5Hz / 3.99Hz
9.1
Theta
4-7
4.0Hz / 6.99Hz
13.4

©IJRASET: All Rights are Reserved

896

International Journal for Research in Applied Science & Engineering Technology (IJRASET)
ISSN: 2321-9653; IC Value: 45.98; SJ Impact Factor: 6.887
Volume 6 Issue VI, June 2018- Available at www.ijraset.com
Alpha
7-14
7.0Hz/13.99Hz
20.2
Beta
15-30
15.0Hz/29.99Hz
40.5
Gamma
30-100
30.0Hz/99.99Hz
112.4
Mu
8-13
8.0Hz/12.99Hz
24.2
Table 3. EEG Frequencies obtained in Epileptic Seizure Affected Persons
A graph is plotted for the obtained frequency from the EEG signals of Epileptic Seizure affected persons.

Fig 14. Graph of EEG frequencies obtained from Epileptic Seizure Affected people
Simultaneously, when the frequency crosses the threshold limit set. The alarms are triggered and the LED is lit in order to notify
that the person has been affected with the epileptic seizure.
VII.
APPLICATIONS
There are various applications of the EEG signal analysis amongst which some of them are mentioned below:
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.

Neuromarketing
Psychology and Psychiatric Studies
Lie Detector
Estimation of Mental Workload, Fatigue and Stress of the driver.
Sports.
VIII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE SCOPE
A. Conclusion:
The results obtained from the simulation is perfectly obtained with alarms being triggered and LED’s lit when the EEG signal
frequencies cross the threshold being set. This helps the person to take precautions in timely manner so that further effects of the
seizure can be avoided.
B. Future Scope
The future scope of the project lies in the same implementation being deployed on the hardware as MyDAQ and MyRIO. Also
convention method implementation using basic electronic circuital components are planned to be deployed since the simulation is
static only to a planned area.
REFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]

Tina Thomas, Mareena James, Roshmi Rose Shaji, Binu C Pillai, “Interpretation of Human Stages from EEG Signals Using LabVIEW”, IJARCE, 3rd March
2016.
Chetan Umale, Amit Vaidya, Shubham Shirude, Akshay Raut, “Feature Extraction Techniques and Classification Algorithms for EEG Signals to detect Human
Stress”, IJCATR, 2016.
Seema Kute, Dr. Sonali Kulkarni, “Data acquisition through EEG for meditative states in BCI using non-invasive Emotiv Epoc Neuroheadset”, ICGTETM,
2016.
Yash Mahajan, Tejas Nikam, Harish Nikte, Kedar Phadke , Prof. Deepali K “ Innovative brain wave based control system”, IJTRA, 2016.
Mdbelal Bin Heyat, Mohd Maroof Siddiqui, “Recording of EEG, ECG, EMG Signal”, IJARCES, Oct 2015.
Mandeep Singh, Mooninder Singh, Ankita Sandel, “Data Acquisition Technique for EEG based Emotion Classification”, IJITKM, 2014.
M. Rajya Lakshmi, Dr. T. V. Prasad, Dr. V. Chandra Prakash, “Survey on EEG Signal Processing Methods”, IJARCES, January 2014.
Aruna Tyagi, Sunil Semwal, Gautam Shah, “A Review of Eeg Sensors used for Data Acquisition”, IJCA, 2012.

©IJRASET: All Rights are Reserved

897

International Journal for Research in Applied Science & Engineering Technology (IJRASET)
ISSN: 2321-9653; IC Value: 45.98; SJ Impact Factor: 6.887
Volume 6 Issue VI, June 2018- Available at www.ijraset.com
[9] Bao Hong Tan, “Using a Low-cost EEG Sensor to Detect Mental States”, IJAER, August 2012.
[10] M. Teplan, “Fundamentals of EEG measurement”, MSR, 2002.
[11] Suraj R. Gaikwad, Shruti S. Kshirsagar, “A Review: Analysis of EEG Signal based Brain-Computer Interface”, IJSR, 2012.

©IJRASET: All Rights are Reserved

898

