Introducing Neuroberry, a platform for pervasive EEG
signaling in the IoT domain
Evdokimos I. Konstantinidis

Nicola Conci

Giorgos Bamparopoulos

Medical Physics Laboratory, Medical
School, Faculty of Health Sciences,
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki
Greece

MEDIA Lab
DISI - University of Trento
Italy
+390461283919

Medical Physics Laboratory, Medical
School, Faculty of Health Sciences,
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki
Greece

evdokimosk@gmail.com

conci@disi.unitn.it

gbamparop@gmail.com

Efstathios A. Sidiropoulos

Francesco De Natale

Panagiotis D. Bamidis

MEDIA Lab
DISI - University of Trento
Italy
+390461282058

Medical Physics Laboratory, Medical
School, Faculty of Health Sciences,
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki
Greece,
+30-2310-999310

Northern Greece Neurofeedback
Centre
Ag. Sofias 5, Thessaloniki
Greece
+30-6973303550

stathsid@gmail.com

francesco.denatale@unitn.it

ABSTRACT
The emergence of inexpensive off-the-shelf wireless EEG devices
led researchers to explore novel paradigms in the field of Human
Computer Interaction. In fact, the compliance of these devices with
the IoT principles towards pervasive EEG signaling in smart home
environments enables new models of interaction and a different
perspective from traditional affective computing. In this paper, the
implementation of wireless EEG (Emotiv EPOC and Mindawave)
IoT connectivity of real time raw signals, through IoT hardware
devices and through the Raspberry Pi 2, is presented.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
C.0 [Computer Systems Organization-]: General – System
architectures.
J.3 [Computer Applications]: Life and Medical Sciences –
Health, Medical information systems.

General Terms
Measurement, Design, Standardization

Keywords
EEG, Emotiv, Internet of Things, cross device, smart home

1. INTRODUCTION
The availability of inexpensive wireless electroencephalography
(EEG) devices has opened new research perspectives spanning
from clinical assessment to human-computer interaction. Wireless
headsets are compact and easy to be worn during activities, as the
Emotiv EPOC [7] and Neurosky Mindwave [17], and could be
deemed as representative devices of the field. Although both of
them have not been introduced as medical devices, the

bamidis@med.auth.gr
comparatively little effort required for installation and use leads to
augmented flexibility and mobility over traditional EEG [18].
Emotion recognition [9][19][25] and cognitive load [4][22][23]
through wireless EEG devices is a very active area of research,
considering that emotions and affective computing has been in the
eye of the research community during at least the last two decades
[14]. Moreover, monitoring player’s gaming experience [18] and
also while performing serious games [24] has emerged as a very
relevant application area. In addition, similar systems have been
demonstrated to work well detecting focused thoughts [16][10] or
even controlling smart home devices [21]. The maturity level of the
research along with the vision for commercial applications based
on EEG signals is reflected by the emergence of application stores
specifically targeted at exploiting EEG data in different application
domains.
On the other hand, the recent convergence of advances in
ubiquitous computing, consumer electronics, and wearable sensor
technologies have led to the need for standards to handle
intercommunication among these devices and applications. Dealing
with the physical integration of everyday objects and their unique
capabilities on the Internet [20], Internet of Things (IoT) tackles
some of these challenges. However, the “device independency”
principle of IoT is sacrificed for the development simplicity and
specific knowledge requirement, by employing mobile devices as
gateways [6][12] rather than developing IoT enabled devices per
se. Hence, the device has to be always paired with a smart phone
[15].
Aligned with the increased adoption of IoT systems, a large number
of IoT compliant hardware and software frameworks have emerged
to facilitate developments on the field. Raspberry Pi 2,
MinnowBoard Max, Galileo and Arduino are some of the IoT ready
hardware devices while Windows 10 IoT Core, WebIOPi, IoTivity,
ThingBox and Smart Living are only some of the available
frameworks. In addition, there are custom frameworks following
the IoT principles that are designed to support commercial game
controllers and wireless EEG devices, like the Controller
Application Communication (CAC) framework [11].
However, the literature does not exhibit many efforts towards the
combination of IoT and the discussed wireless EEG devices. More
specifically, the Appmethod IoT framework has been used to

MOBIHEALTH 2015, October 14-16, London, Great Britain
Copyright © 2015 ICST
DOI 10.4108/eai.14-10-2015.2261698

connect the Emotiv EPOC as a control source to other IoT
devices/gadgets like the Google Glass and the Parrot AR Drone
2.01. However, there is no provision for other wireless EEG
devices. As an omen of our work, Sinharay et al. [23] presented
their work by assuming the existence of a cognitive load
information through commercial low-cost, low resolution, wireless
EEG devices connected to the cloud through an Internet of Things
(IoT) platform in real-time that could be utilized for different
applications.

packet collision, etc.). As far as the programming language is
concerned, Python has been chosen also thanks to the light-weight
handling of processes in terms of memory requirements. In
addition, the Python script was configured to be executed as a
service during startup. Hence, Neuroberry (c.f Figure 2) can be
deemed as a black box gateway for the wireless EEG devices
without the need for an external monitor screen.

All this considered, the aim of this paper is to present an IoT
approach of the emerged wireless EEG devices though a low cost
commercial hardware (Raspberry Pi 2). Although there are
implementations where these devices are connected to the Internet
through a smart phone acting as a gateway, this work is one of the
first implementations towards wireless EEG IoT connectivity of
real time raw signals through IoT hardware devices.

2. MATERIALS AND METHODS
2.1 CAC framework
The CAC cross device-application communication [11] framework
facilitates the connectivity and data exchanging among applications
and controllers. Based on the standard, real time, Internet
communication technologies of Websockets (a Restful web service
interface is also available for compatibility with obsolete
technologies), the CAC framework encapsulates the raw
information from the device, in a structured way and streams it to
the subscribed clients. Adopting a lightweight publish/subscribe
messaging mechanism, the framework’s design principles align
with the Internet of Things (IoT) paradigm. A controller/device
subscribes to the framework and publishes its information. Hence,
every client (application or device) that is subscribed to the same
session, receives the corresponding data. Each streamed packet is
transmitted along with information regarding the origin device
(device type, session ID, mandatory packet transmission) and the
current frame (packet’s date and time in milliseconds at the source).
Given the fact that contemporary controllers are not Internetenabled yet, a processing component / application is in charge of
acquiring information from the device and transmit it to the CAC
server.

Figure 1 Neuroberry architecture. Each color represents a
separate thread.

2.3 Mindwave and Emotiv Data Acquisition
The Mindwave EEG wireless device with no mobile compatibility
was used during the development. Therefore, the Mindwave Data
Acquisition component was based on the BarkleyUS/mindwavepython library2. Accordingly, Emotiv Data Acquisition component
was built upon the ozancaglayan/python-emotiv3. Both
components connect to the corresponding USB port for initializing
and establishing the communication with the corresponding
headset. As far as the headset remains connected, every new
received packet is transmitted to the CAC framework server by
invoking the Websockets component (running in a different
thread). Table 1 presents a Mindwave data packet formed according
to the CAC framework. When a hardware or communication error
takes place (e.g. USB dongle unplugged), the component reinitiates itself and enters the standby mode waiting for a new
connection to be established.
Table 1 Mindwave streaming JSON instance in compliance
with the CAC framework

It must be highlighted that any type of modern hardware and
software that can access the Internet, including conventional
computer applications or embedded software in custom hardware
such as smart phones, smart TV sets, tablets, or robotic devices, can
subscribe to the CAC framework and get access to the streamed
information.

{"Device":{"ID":0,"DeviceID":"1","PublicIP":null,"LanIP":nu
ll,"GUID":null,"DeviceType":4,"LastUpdateDateTime":"\/Dat
e(62135596800000)\/","SocketID":null,"SessionID":"DEMO",
"DeviceExceptionCmd":0,"ObligatoryTransmission":false},"Fr
ame":{"ms":0},"Battery":30,"PoorSignal":1,"Attention":45,"M
editation":69,"Raw":456,"Delta":2456,"Theta":7845,"Alpha1":
542,"Alpha2":4531,"Beta1":17540,"Beta2":9873,"Gamma1":1
2456,"Gamma2":4578,"BlinkStrength":1,"Error":false,"Packet
sRead":346}

2.2 Neuroberry Architecture
The Raspberry PI 2 low cost device (<€50) was selected for the
Neuroberry IoT implementation. The Neuroberry system consists
of three independent components (c.f. Figure 1): a) the data
acquisition of the Mindwave, b) the data acquisition of the Emotiv
EPOC and c) the data streaming to the CAC server component.
Considering that components need to operate in real time, multiple
threads are in charge of specific tasks, also to secure the
uninterruptedly functionality of the thread itself by absorbing any
hardware or communication error. Additionally, synchronization
techniques ensure the highest possible streaming speed (if a packet
is currently submitted, the forthcoming packet is skipped to prevent
1

2

http://blog.appmethod.com/developing-the-internet-of-thingsemotiv-epoch-brain-computer-interface
https://github.com/BarkleyUS/mindwave-python

2.4 WebSockets client (python) and client
protocol
Widely available to any programming language, the Websockets
client relies on the websocket-client library4. The Websockets
thread is responsible to keep the thread alive and always connected
3

https://github.com/ozancaglayan/python-emotiv

4

https://pypi.python.org/pypi/websocket-client

(when this is possible) to the CAC framework server. On startup as
well as in case of disconnection, the component subscribes to the
Websockets session by sending the corresponding Session ID. The
Websockets component communicates with the other threads by
exposing two methods. The SendMessageMindwave method
accepts as argument a Mindwave headset object while the
SendMessageEpoc method gets an Epoc headset object as
argument. The role of these functions is to form a JSON message
packet in compliance with the CAC framework and transmit it.
Taking into consideration that real time transmission and especially
streaming a considerable number of packets per second is not a
simple task, the component drops any incoming packet when a
transmission is already in progress. This way, high streaming speed
is maintained at the cost of dropping some packets.

compose multiple images starting from the same set of cubes. For
a complete profiling of the users, additional metrics are collected
from the system besides the neurological signals (e.g. cognitive
load, attentions, etc.), as the time of execution or the matching
score. A sample snapshot of the gaming station is provided for
completeness in Figure 3.

Figure 3. Overview of the gaming station and the visual
interface.

3.2 HTML5 online games

Figure 2 The Neuroberry connected to a monitor through
HDMI for demonstration purposes.

3. SCENARIOS
The UNCAP project intention is to deliver a platform based on open
industrial standards able to create new care and assistance
paradigms. Cognitive or physical exercises, delivered as part of the
UNCAP solution, will create incentive mechanisms to help keep
users healthy from a physical and cognitive point of view through
games. The cognitive exercises will include puzzle solving while
the physical exercises will aim at full body standard physical
exercises [13]. Delivered through different devices and interfaces
(the cognitive exercises through PC while the exergames through
smart TV or tablet), the games indicated the need for a unified
solution of the wireless EEG connectivity and employment.
Following Styliadis et al. work [24] on employing affection in
elderly healthcare serious games intervention by applying wireless
EEG recordings during exergames, the senior will be asked to
utilize the Emotiv EPOC or Mindwave wireless EEG sensor as part
of the game. Therefore, the senior’s mental status and gaming
experience, including focus, engagement, interest, excitement,
affinity, relaxation and stress levels, will be monitored and
collected during gameplay.

3.1 Puzzle game
One of the envisaged scenarios for the application of such
technology is in the implementation of puzzle games, where the
user is required to compose a puzzle starting from a template image
presented on the screen. The game involves and stimulates the
physical and cognitive abilities (tiles require manual handling)
while being recorded from an ad-hoc acquisition system relying on
a regular webcam. The system aims at performing visual matching
between the image template and the actual tile positioned on the
grid. The system acknowledges the operations through a simple
visual interface that turns the corresponding square to green in case
the tile is positioned correctly. In order to make the tool more
engaging and challenging, puzzles are made of 3D cubes, so as to

Another scenario of use is the adoption of the wireless EEG sensors
as game controllers in exergames. Therefore, studying emotions,
user’s mental status, focus and stress levels within the gaming
environment and in-game metrics would give a more
comprehensive overview of the users and their gaming experience.
Moreover, exergame analytics [2] may reveal new knowledge
about the role of exergames on the seniors.

4. DISCUSSION
Our work was motivated from challenges that emerged in the area
of IoT and the recent trend for pervasive real-time EEG signaling
as well as the need for conducting ecologically valid interventions
on active and healthy aging in naturalistic everyday environments
[1]. It can be inferred that the combination of the main
characteristics of IoT, such as Ubiquitous Communication /
Connectivity and Pervasive Computing [8] with the wireless EEG
interfaces could enrich the Ambient Intelligence approach. More
specifically, multiple interfaces (e.g. serious games) could get
concurrently access to the wireless EEG devices’ output at the same
time, regardless of the software and hardware used. Following this
approach, the user’s mental state, which is in the interest of the
research community [14], will open roads in the pervasive Human
Computer Interaction.
The work presented in this paper complies with the intuitive
interface of the wireless EEG devices, as it is defined by the
unobtrusiveness [21]. This, in conjunction with the perceived ease
of use, which is of primary interest in determining the attitude
towards ICT [5], would turn these devices into acceptable means of
HCI in daily life. Therefore, scenarios like the ones presented in
this paper, which are representative of the recent Active and
Healthy Aging smart homes paradigms [3], would be feasible to be
carried out at the seniors’ homes, provided the capability of
embedding modules for Internet connection directly onboard of the
EEG. However, such devices should be equipped with native
Internet connectivity through standard IoT protocols (MQTT,
XMPP, etc).
In the future, the authors’ intention is to incorporate a web server
into Neuroberry as a remote configuration interface and an internal
recording component. Being at the same architectural level with the
Websockets, this component will record the measurements in an
internal database in case of limited Internet availability. This will
give also the opportunity for offline monitoring and subsequent

analysis. Finally, the Raspberry PI system image will be available
soon for downloading at www.cac-framework.com.

5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The work has been partially supported by the UNCAP Project (GA
643555; http://www.uncap.eu) funded through the Horizon 2020
programme, as well as, the LLM Care (www.llmcare.gr) selffunded initiative that emerged as the business exploitation of the
Long
Lasting
Memories
(LLM
Project)
(www.longlastingmemories.eu) originally funded by the ICT-CIPPSP programme.

6. REFERENCES
[1] Bamidis, P.D., Vivas, A.B., Styliadis, C., Frantzidis, C.,
Klados, M., Schlee, W., Siountas, A. and Papageorgiou, S.G.
2014. A review of physical and cognitive interventions in
aging. Neuroscience and biobehavioral reviews. (2014).
[2] Bamparopoulos, G., Konstantinidis, E., Bratsas, C. and
Bamidis, P.D. 2015. Towards exergaming Commons:
composing the Exergame ontology for publishing open game
data. Journal of Biomedical Semantics. Submitted, (2015).
[3] Billis, A.S., Kartsidis, P., Garyfallos, D.-K.G., Tsatali, M.S.,
Karagianni, M. and Bamidis, P.D. 2015. Ecologically valid
trials of elderly unobtrusive monitoring: analysis and first
results. 4th International Workshop on Artificial Intelligence
and Assistive Medicine (Pavia, Italy, 2015), 32–41.
[4] Das, R., Chatterjee, D., Das, D., Sinharay, A. and Sinha, A.
2014. Cognitive Load measurement - A comparative study
using Low cost Commercial EEG devices. 3rd Internaltional
Conference on Advances in Computing, Communications &
Informatics (Delhi, 2014).
[5] Davis, F.D. 1989. Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of
use, and user acceptance of information technology. MIS
quarterly. (1989), 319–340.
[6] Delicato, F.C., Pires, P.F. and Batista, T. 2013. Middleware
Solutions for the Internet of Things. Springer.
[7] Emotiv EPOC: https://emotiv.com/epoc.php. Accessed:
2015-07-06.
[8] Gubbi, J., Buyya, R., Marusic, S. and Palaniswami, M. 2013.
Internet of Things (IoT): A vision, architectural elements,
and future directions. Future Generation Computer Systems.
29, 7 (Sep. 2013), 1645–1660.
[9] Jatupaiboon, N., Pan-ngum, S. and Israsena, P. 2013.
Emotion classification using minimal EEG channels and
frequency bands. The 2013 10th International Joint
Conference on Computer Science and Software Engineering
(JCSSE) (May 2013), 21–24.
[10] Jatupaiboon, N., Pan-ngum, S. and Israsena, P. 2013. Realtime EEG-based happiness detection system. The Scientific
World Journal. 2013, (2013).
[11] Konstantinidis, E.I., Antoniou, P.E., Bamparopoulos, G. and
Bamidis, P.D. 2014. A lightweight framework for transparent
cross platform communication of controller data in ambient
assisted living environments. Information Sciences. 300,
(Dec. 2014), 124–139.
[12] Konstantinidis, E.I., Bamparopoulos, G.G., Billis, A.S. and
Bamidis, P.D. 2014. Internet of things for an age-friendly
healthcare. Studies in health technology and informatics.
210, (2014), 587–591.

[13] Konstantinidis, E.I., Billis, A.S., Mouzakidis, C., Zilidou, V.,
Antoniou, P.E. and Bamidis, P.D. 2014. Design,
implementation and wide pilot deployment of FitForAll: an
easy to use exergaming platform improving physical fitness
and life quality of senior citizens. IEEE Journal of
Biomedical and Health Informatics. (2014) , DOI:
10.1109/JBHI.2014.2378814.
[14] Luneski, A., Konstantinidis, E. and Bamidis, P. 2010.
Affective medicine: a review of affective computing efforts
in medical informatics. Methods of information in medicine.
49, 3 (2010), 207–218.
[15] Morales, J.M., Díaz-Piedra, C., Di Stasi, L.L., Romero, S.
and others 2015. Low-cost Remote Monitoring of
Biomedical Signals. Artificial Computation in Biology and
Medicine. Springer. 288–295.
[16] Nacke, L.E. 2010. Wiimote vs.Controller:
Electroencephalographic Measurement of Affective
Gameplay Interaction Lennart. Proceedings of the
International Academic Conference on the Future of Game
Design and Technology - Futureplay ’10 (New York, New
York, USA, May 2010), 159.
[17] NeuroSky, Mindwave:
http://store.neurosky.com/products/mindwave-1. Accessed:
2015-07-06.
[18] Parsons, T.D., McMahan, T. and Parberry, I. 2015.
Neurogaming-based Classification of Player Experience
Using Consumer-Grade Electroencephalography. (2015).
[19] Pham, T.D. and Tran, D. 2012. Emotion recognition using
the emotiv epoc device. Neural Information Processing
(2012), 394–399.
[20] Porter, M.E. and Heppelmann, J.E. 2014. how smart
connected products are transforming competition. Harvard
Business Review.
[21] Simoens, P., De Coninck, E., Vervust, T., Van Wijmeersch,
J.-F., Ingelbinck, T., Verbelen, T., Op de Beeck, M., Dhoedt,
B., de Beeck, M. and Dhoedt, B. 2014. Vision: smart home
control with head-mounted sensors for vision and brain
activity. Proceedings of the fifth international workshop on
Mobile cloud computing & services (New York, New York,
USA, Jun. 2014), 29–33.
[22] Sinha, A., Chatterjee, D., Das, D. and Sinharay, A. 2014.
Analysis of Cognitive Load--Importance of EEG Channel
Selection for Low Resolution Commercial EEG Devices.
Bioinformatics and Bioengineering (BIBE), 2014 IEEE
International Conference on (2014), 341–348.
[23] Sinharay, A., Chatterjee, D. and Pal, A. 2015. Cognitive
Load Detection on Commercial EEG Devices: An Optimized
Signal Processing Chain. Internet of Things. User-Centric
IoT. Springer. 87–92.
[24] Styliadis, C., Konstantinidis, E., Billis, A. and Bamidis, P.
2014. Employing affection in elderly healthcare serious
games interventions. Proceedings of the 7th International
Conference on PErvasive Technologies Related to Assistive
Environments (2014), 32.
[25] Yu, H., Sunderraj, C.M.A.A., Chang, C.K. and Wong, J.
2015. Emotion Aware System for the Elderly. Smart Homes
and Health Telematics. Springer. 175–183.

