eTELEMED 2017
The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social
Medicine
ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1
MATH 2017
The International Symposium on Mobile and Assistive Technology for Healthcare

March 19 – 23, 2017
Nice, France

eTELEMED 2017 Editors
Marike Hettinga, Windesheim University of Applied Sciences, the Netherlands
Yoshitoshi Murata, Iwate Prefectural University, Japan
Britt Östlund, Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), Sweden
Bobby Gheorghiu, Canada Health Infoway/Inforoute Santé du Canada, Canada
SeungHee Lee, University of Tsukuba, Japan
José Machado, University of Minho, Portugal
Carlos Filipe da Silva Portela, University of Minho, Portugal
Aranka Dol, Hanzehogeschool University of Applied Sciences, the Netherlands
Paolo Perego, Politecnico di Milano, Italy

eTELEMED 2017
Forward
The ninth edition of The International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social
Medicine (eTELEMED 2017), held in Nice, France, March 19 - 23, 2017, considered advances in
techniques, services, and applications dedicated to a global approach of eHealth.
Development of wireless homecare, of special types of communications with patient data, of
videoconferencing and telepresence, and the progress in image processing and date protection
increased the eHealth applications and services, and extended Internet-based patient coverage
areas. Social and economic aspects as well as the integration of classical systems with the
telemedicine systems are still challenging issues.
eTELEMED 2017 provided a forum where researchers were able to present recent research
results and new research problems and directions related to them. The topics covered aspects
from classical medicine and eHealth integration, systems and communication, devices, and
applications.
eTELEMED 2017 also featured the following Symposium:
- MATH 2017: The International Symposium on Mobile and Assistive Technology
for Healthcare
We take this opportunity to thank all the members of the eTELEMED 2017 Technical Program
Committee as well as the numerous reviewers. The creation of such a broad and high-quality
conference program would not have been possible without their involvement. We also kindly
thank all the authors who dedicated much of their time and efforts to contribute to the
eTELEMED 2017. We truly believe that, thanks to all these efforts, the final conference program
consists of top quality contributions.
This event could also not have been a reality without the support of many individuals,
organizations, and sponsors. We are grateful to the members of the eTELEMED 2017 organizing
committee for their help in handling the logistics and for their work to make this professional
meeting a success.
We hope that eTELEMED 2017 was a successful international forum for the exchange of ideas
and results between academia and industry and for the promotion of progress in eHealth and
Telemedicine research.
We also hope that Nice provided a pleasant environment during the conference and everyone
saved some time for exploring this beautiful city.

eTELEMED 2017 Chairs
eTELEMED Steering Committee
Lisette Van Gemert-Pijnen, University of Twente - Enschede, the Netherlands
Marike Hettinga, Windesheim University of Applied Sciences, the Netherlands
Joseph Finkelstein, Center for Bioinformatics and Health Analytics - Columbia University, USA
Åsa Smedberg, Stockholm University, Sweden
Yoshitoshi Murata, Iwate Prefectural University, Japan
Anthony Glascock, Drexel University, USA
Britt Östlund, Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), Sweden
eTELEMED Industry/Research Advisory Committee
Anne G. Ekeland, Norwegian Centre for e-Health Research, Norway
Salah H. Mandil, eStrategies & eHealth for WHO and ITU - Geneva, Switzerland
Bobby Gheorghiu, Canada Health Infoway/Inforoute Santé du Canada, Canada
MATH 2017 Chairs
Paolo Perego, Politecnico di Milano, Italy
Cristiana Degano, Gruppo Sigla, Italy
Maurizio Caon, HES.SO, Switzerland
SeungHee Lee, University of Tsukuba, Japan

eTELEMED 2017
COMMITTEE
eTELEMED Steering Committee
Lisette Van Gemert-Pijnen, University of Twente - Enschede, the Netherlands
Marike Hettinga, Windesheim University of Applied Sciences, the Netherlands
Joseph Finkelstein, Center for Bioinformatics and Health Analytics - Columbia University, USA
Åsa Smedberg, Stockholm University, Sweden
Yoshitoshi Murata, Iwate Prefectural University, Japan
Anthony Glascock, Drexel University, USA
Britt Östlund, Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), Sweden
eTELEMED Industry/Research Advisory Committee
Anne G. Ekeland, Norwegian Centre for e-Health Research, Norway
Salah H. Mandil, eStrategies & eHealth for WHO and ITU - Geneva, Switzerland
Bobby Gheorghiu, Canada Health Infoway/Inforoute Santé du Canada, Canada
eTELEMED 2017 Technical Program Committee
James G. Anderson, Purdue University, USA
Adina Astilean, Technical University of Cluj-Napoca, Romania
Luigi Benedicenti, University of Regina, Canada
Andrzej Cacko, Medical University of Warsaw, Poland
Marcos C. d'Ornellas, Universidade Federal de Santa Maria, Brazil
Aranka Do, Hanze University of Applied Sciences, Netherlands
Georg Duftschmid, Medical University Vienna, Austria
Leila Eadie, University of Aberdeen, UK
Øystein Eiring, National Institute of Public Health, Norway
Anne G. Ekeland, Norwegian Centre for e-Health Research, Norway
Henrik Eriksson, Linköping University, Sweden
Ivan Evgeniev, Technical University of Sofia, Bulgaria
Manuel Filipe Santos, Universidade do Minho | Research Centre Algoritmi, Portugal
Joseph Finkelstein, Center for Bioinformatics and Health Analytics - Columbia University, USA
Audrey Dunn Galvin, University College Cork, UK
Catherine Garbay, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique - Laboratoire d'Informatique de
Grenoble, France
Anthony Gelibert, LCIS, France
Gersende Georg, Haute Autorité de Santé, France
Bobby Gheorghiu , Canada Health Infoway/Inforoute Santé du Canada, Canada
Piero Giacomelli, SPAC SPA - Arzignano (Vicenza), Italy
Anthony Glascock, Drexel University, USA
Wojciech Glinkowski, Polish Telemedicine Society / Center of Excellence "TeleOrto", Poland
Conceição Granja, Norwegian Centre for eHealth Research | University Hospital of North Norway,
Norway
David Greenhalgh, University of Strathclyde, Scotland
Päivi Hämäläinen, National Institute for Health and Welfare, Finland

Oliver Heinze, University Hospital Heidelberg, Germany
Marike Hettinga, Windesheim University of Applied Sciences, Netherlands
Chun-Hsi Huang, University of Connecticut, USA
Ashutosh Jadhav, IBM Research - Almaden, USA
Bridget Kane, Karlstad University Business School, Sweden
Ali Khan, Bremen University, Germany
Pinar Kirci, Istanbul University, Turkey
Haridimos Kondylakis, Institute of Computer Science | Foundation for Research and Technology Hellas,
Greece
Lenka Lhotskam, Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics - Czech Technical University in
Prague, Czech Republic
Sarah N. Lim Choi Keung, University of Warwick, UK
Margarita Loyola, Telehealth - Island Health, Canada
Flora Malamateniou, University of Piraeus, Greece
José Manuel Machado, University of Minho, Portugal
Salah H. Mandil, eStrategies & eHealth for WHO and ITU - Geneva, Switzerland
Catalina Martínez Costa, Institute for Medical Informatics, Statistics and Documentation - Medical
University of Graz, Austria
Janet Mattsson, The Red Cross University College, Sweden
Yoshitoshi Murata, Iwate Prefectural University, Japan
Lambert J.M. Nieuwenhuis, University of Twente / Fontys International Business School, Netherlands
Britt Östlund, Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), Sweden
Fulvio Patara, University of Florence, Italy
Vitor Pinheiro de Almeida, IBM Research, Brazil
Isabel Pirillo, University of Camerino, Italy
Haider Raad, Xavier University, Cincinnati, USA
Elisabeth Rakus-Andersson, Blekinge Institute of Technology, Sweden
David Riaño, Universitat Rovira i Virgili, Spain
Rainer Röhrig, Carl von Ossietzky University Oldenburg, Germany
Sanna Salanterä, University of Turku, Finland
Abdel-Badeeh M. Salem, Ain Shams University Abbasia, Cairo, Egypt
Jacob Scharcanski, UFRGS - Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil
Artur Serrano, Norwegian Centre for eHealth Research, University Hospital of North Norway, Norway
Åsa Smedberg, Stockholm University, Sweden
Sanjay Sood, Centre for Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC), Mohali, India
Karl A. Stroetmann, empirica Communication & Technology Research, Germany / University of Victoria,
Canada
Judith Tabolt Matthews, University of Pittsburgh, USA
Vicente Traver Salcedo, ITACA - Universitat Politècnica de València, Spain
Ceara Treacy, Dundalk Institute of Technology, Ireland
Masatsugu Tsuji, Kobe International University, Japan
Gary Ushaw, Newcastle University, UK
Aristides Vagelatos, CTI&P, Athens, Greece
Lisette Van Gemert-Pijnen, University of Twente - Enschede, The Netherlands
George Vassilacopoulos, University of Piraeus, Greece
Miriam Vollenbroek-Hutten, University of Twente, Netherlands
Sule Yildirim-Yayilgan, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Norway

MATH 2017 Chairs
Paolo Perego, Politecnico di Milano, Italy
Cristiana Degano, Gruppo Sigla, Italy
Maurizio Caon, HES.SO, Switzerland
SeungHee Lee, University of Tsukuba, Japan
Program Committee Members
Abdulellah A. Alaboudi, Staffordshire University, United Kingdom
Sibylle Artz, University of Victoria, Canada
Hao Cai, Aalborg University, Denmark, & Guangdong University of Technology, China
Maurizio Caon, HES.SO, Switzerland
Carme Carrion, Universitat Oberta de Catalunya, Spain
Cristiana Degano, Gruppo Sigla, Italy
Yannis Ellul, University of Patras (Clinical University), Greece
Carlo Emilio Standoli, Politecnico di Milano, Italy
Florian Evéquoz, HES-SO and University of Fribourg, Switzerland
SeungHee Lee, University of Tsukuba, Japan
Inge Lissau, Skane University Hospital, Sweden
Fulvio Marchetti, Healthy Reply, Italy
Vasileios Megalooikonomou, University of Patras, Greece
Mauro Migliardi, University of Padova, Italy
Franco Molteni, Ospedale Villa Beretta, Italy
Giandomenico Nollo, University of Trento, Italy
Paolo Perego, Politecnico di Milano, Italy
Giovanni Saggio, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Italy
Ziba Vaghri, University of Victoria, Canada
Nadine Vigouroux, Université Paul Sabatier, France

Copyright Information

For your reference, this is the text governing the copyright release for material published by IARIA.
The copyright release is a transfer of publication rights, which allows IARIA and its partners to drive the
dissemination of the published material. This allows IARIA to give articles increased visibility via
distribution, inclusion in libraries, and arrangements for submission to indexes.
I, the undersigned, declare that the article is original, and that I represent the authors of this article in
the copyright release matters. If this work has been done as work-for-hire, I have obtained all necessary
clearances to execute a copyright release. I hereby irrevocably transfer exclusive copyright for this
material to IARIA. I give IARIA permission or reproduce the work in any media format such as, but not
limited to, print, digital, or electronic. I give IARIA permission to distribute the materials without
restriction to any institutions or individuals. I give IARIA permission to submit the work for inclusion in
article repositories as IARIA sees fit.
I, the undersigned, declare that to the best of my knowledge, the article is does not contain libelous or
otherwise unlawful contents or invading the right of privacy or infringing on a proprietary right.
Following the copyright release, any circulated version of the article must bear the copyright notice and
any header and footer information that IARIA applies to the published article.
IARIA grants royalty-free permission to the authors to disseminate the work, under the above
provisions, for any academic, commercial, or industrial use. IARIA grants royalty-free permission to any
individuals or institutions to make the article available electronically, online, or in print.
IARIA acknowledges that rights to any algorithm, process, procedure, apparatus, or articles of
manufacture remain with the authors and their employers.
I, the undersigned, understand that IARIA will not be liable, in contract, tort (including, without
limitation, negligence), pre-contract or other representations (other than fraudulent
misrepresentations) or otherwise in connection with the publication of my work.
Exception to the above is made for work-for-hire performed while employed by the government. In that
case, copyright to the material remains with the said government. The rightful owners (authors and
government entity) grant unlimited and unrestricted permission to IARIA, IARIA's contractors, and
IARIA's partners to further distribute the work.

Table of Contents

The Problem of Retrieving Clinical Guidelines in Self-Care
Juha Puustjarvi and Leena Puustjarvi

1

Roadmap for Collaborative eHealth Service Architectures for Homecare
Niels Frederik Garmann-Johnsen and Santiago Martinez

5

A Qualitative Study of Parents` Experiences of Information Exchange between the Tertiary Health Service and the
Child`s Local Support Team using Videoconference
Merete Kristin Tschamper and Wenche Schroder Bjorbaekmo

11

Kansei Design Applied on Hospital Beds: Medical Design for Patient and Caregiver
Eiji Onchi and SeungHee Lee

15

Sleep Evaluation Influenced by Negative Emotions and Memories After Awakening Among Adolescents and
Young Adults
Huan Wen Lu and SeungHee Lu

18

Study on the Effectiveness of Coloring on Physical and Mental Health of the Elderly in Adult Daycare Centers
Chuan Feng, Ya Wen Deng, Naomi Okubo, Tetsuya Sanpei, and SeungHee Lee

23

A Diary Study of Smart Phone Notification System For College Students
Ji Wang, Qingyao Zhang, Qinqing Gong, and SeungHee Lee

26

Kid’s Friendly Wearable Device for Children’s Daily Safety
SeungHee Lee

29

Improving Diagnosis-related Groups with a Computerized Clinical Coding Tool for ICD-9-CM Codification
Cecilia Coimbra, Marisa Esteves, Filipe Miranda, Filipe Portela, Manuel Santos, Jose Machado, and Antonio
Abelha

33

Pervasive Business Intelligence in Intensive Medicine - An Overview of a Clinical Solution
Ana Pereira, Filipe Portela, Manuel Filipe Santos, Jose Machado, Antonio Abelha, and Fernando Rua

37

Future Directions of Applying Healthcare Cloud for Home-based Chronic Disease Care
Yan Hu, Sara Eriksen, and Jenny Lundberg

42

Technology in Health Care. A New Research and Teaching Subject in Collaboration Between Nursing and
Engineering
Britt Ostlund, Gunilla Bjorling, Janet Mattsson, Sara Stridh, and Madeleine Sahlstrom

46

How to Evaluate a m-Health Project: Case of e-Ambulance in Japan

50

Masatsugu Tsuji, Yoshihisa Matsumoto, and Masaru Ogawa
Proposal of Gait Monitoring Shoes Based on Comparative Analysis of Walking Gait Cycle between Normal
People and Stroke Patients
Shohei Yoshida and Yoshitoshi Murata

56

Mood Detection and Memory Performance Evaluation with Body Sensors
Jonathan Bohbot and Zeljko Zilic

62

Cumulative Benefits of Digital Health Investments in Canada
Bobby Gheorghiu and Simon Hagens

69

Leverging Technology to Advance Patient Engagement in a Mental Health Care Setting
Wendy Odell and Sanaz Riahi

72

An Ultra-Band Study of Pulse Rate Variability for Homecare by Using Instantaneous Pulse Rate Variability
Po-Hsun Huang, Chia-Chi Chang, and Tzu-Chien Hsiao

76

Application of Holo-Hilbert Spectral Analysis on Human Breathing Movement with Isovolume Maneuver
Jia-Hua Lee, Ya-Chen Chen, and Tzu-Chien Hsiao

80

Engaged Scholarship as Research Method: a Best Practice for evidence based ITinnovations for People with
Severe Dementia
Elles Gyaltsen-Lohuis and Marike Hettinga

85

Simulation-Based Learning in Undergraduate Nursing Education in Japan A review of the literature
Kazuma Takahashi and Natsuko Miura

87

Effects of a Blended Learning System on Improving the Physical Assessment Ability of Nursing Students
Machiko Saeki Yagi, Natsuko Miura, and Shigeki Tsuzuku

91

Development of Educational Medical Equipment Capable of Displaying Abnormal Value ?To turn simulated
patient into real patient?
Natsuko Miura, Kazuma Takahashi, and Takanori Ito

97

Demonstration of The KINECT-Based Auscultation Practice System
Yoshitoshi Murata, Kazuhiro Yoshida, and Natsuko Miura

99

The Use of Dialectical Dialogues in a Personalized Virtual Coach for Obese Emotional Eaters: A Research
Protocol for a field study among target group
Aranka Dol, Olga Kulyk, Hugo Velthuijsen, Lisette van Gemert, and Tatjana van Strien

101

Toward a Generic Personalized Virtual Coach for Selfmanagement: a Proposal for an Architecture

105

Johan Blok, Aranka Dol, and Talko Dijkhuis

Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)

Predicting of Running Injuries from Training load: a Machine Learning Approach
Talko Dijkhuis, Ruby Otter, Hugo Velthuijsen, and Koen Lemmink

109

Improving the Well-Being of Older People by Reducing Their Energy Consumption Through Energy-Aware
Systems
Jon Robinson, Kofi Appiah, and Raheem Yousaf

111

Tele-rehabilitation Platform for Upper and Lower Limb in Elderly Patients, the HEAD Project
Franco Molteni, Cristina Gramigna, Samuela Canobbio, Milena Peverelli, Silvia Aggujaro, Mauro Rossini,
Giovanna Palumbo, Giandomenico Caruso, and Mario Covarrubias

117

A Novel Kinematic Model for Wearable Gait Analysis
Marcello Fusca, Paolo Perego, and Giuseppe Andreoni

123

Proposal of a Validation Protocol for Wearable Systems Reliability Assessment
Giuseppe Andreoni, Paolo Perego, Marcello Fasco, Martina Caramenti, Fabio Rastelli, and Claudio Lafortuna

129

FrailSafe eCRF Clinical Data collection tool
Luca Bianconi, Cristiana Degano, Fabio Podda, and Matteo Toma

135

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

The Problem of Retrieving Clinical Guidelines in Self-Care
Juha Puustjärvi

Leena Puustjärvi

Innomedi
Helsinki, Finland
email: juha.puustjarvi@cs.helsinki.fi

The Pharmacy of Kaivopuisto
Helsinki, Finland
email: leena.puustjarvi@kolumbus.fi

Abstract— Self-care is what people do for themselves to
establish and maintain health, prevent and deal with illness. A
clinical guideline is a document with the aim of guiding
decisions and criteria regarding diagnosis, management, and
treatment in specific areas of healthcare. Clinical guidelines
have been in use for thousands of years during the entire
history of medicine. An interesting question arising from these
notions is whether clinical guidelines can be used in self-care to
ensure that the treatment is in line with the medical
recommends. A problem, however, is that the retrieval
methods of clinical guidelines are mainly aimed at healthcare
personnel who are taught to retrieve relevant guidelines. In
order to simplify patients’ tasks in retrieving guidelines, we
have designed an ontology (vocabulary) for annotating clinical
guidelines. A patient can then query clinical guidelines by
keyword expressions, which are intuitive and clear for patients.
Technically annotations are presented according to the
Semantic web technologies, and so they are machine
understandable. Further, guidelines can be retrieved from a
variety of sources within one query. In addition, the system can
be easily extended such that guidelines and other relevant
health-oriented information can be retrieved in a query.
Keywords – Self-Care; Clinical Guidelines; Evidence-Based
Medicine; Semantic Web; SPARQL

I.
INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, health care provision is moving towards selfcare from the physician centric model where the treatment
decisions are made almost exclusive by physicians. This is a
challenging trend as it is estimated that 70% to 95% of all
illnesses could be managed without the intervention of a
doctor [1], i.e., by self-care [2].
To promote self-care some Personal Health Records
(PHRs) already provide links to websites that provide
information concerning patient’s treatment and medication.
However, many patients have regarded these sites to be
overly commercial, and often patients cannot determine the
source of the published medical information [3]. In addition,
browsing these pages has turned out to be long lasting and
frustrating as their provided medical information is not
relevant, is overly specific for patients or is overly superficial
[4].
After all, success in self-care requires patients to have
relevant medical treatment information [5]. Traditionally,
such information is provided for physicians in clinical
guidelines, which are document with the aim of guiding
decisions and criteria regarding diagnosis, management, and
treatment in specific areas of healthcare [6].

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

Clinical guidelines are based on an examination of
current evidence within the paradigm of evidence-based
medicine (EBM) [7]. It emphasizes the use of evidence from
well designed and conducted research in healthcare decisionmaking [8]. EBM is one of the most significant
developments in the clinical use of information over the last
decades [9]. Practicing EBM represents a thorough change in
the way that physicians are taught to think and retrieve
relevant guidelines [10].
There are a variety of ways how the digital volumes of
guidelines can be organized. For example, guidelines may be
grouped in an alphabetic order of the disorders they deal
with, grouped by specialities, or grouped by body parts.
Accessing guidelines from such digital volumes have proven
to be easy for physicians and healthcare professionals as
healthcare providers are obliged to know how to find
relevant guidelines.
Instead searching relevant guidelines from such volumes
is not necessary a trivial task for patients. This is regrettable
as clinical guidelines are intended also for patients’ use.
Furthermore, clinical guidelines have special versions for
different user groups.
Our argument is that clinical guideline oriented services
should also provide specific retrieval methods for patients, as
they are not taught to think in accordance with EBM. For
example, a pregnant patient may be interested to know
whether she has some risks in using pain drugs. In this case,
finding relevant information from guidelines dealing with
pregnancy and from guidelines dealing with pain drugs may
be long lasting and frustrating process.
In order to develop appropriate retrieval methods for
patients, we have annotated clinical guidelines by
appropriate metadata items such as keywords and
classification identifiers. A patient can then query clinical
guidelines by Boolean expressions [11] comprising of
operands and operations. The operands are the used
keywords and the operands are typically “and”, “or”, and
“not”. The Boolean model is intuitive and clear. For
example, the query “pregnancy and pain drugs” returns the
guidelines (if any) that are annotated by these keywords.
Another problem concerning the retrieval of clinical
guidelines is that they are fragmented. That is, there are
many sites publishing guidelines, and therefore searching
relevant guidelines from a variety of sites is often hard and
long lasting. In order to avoid such weakness, a key point in
our solution is that in one query patient can retrieve
guidelines located in many web sites. This, however,
requires that all the sites use the same vocabulary (ontology)
and technology in annotating clinical guidelines.

1

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Technically, in our solution, each site is assumed to provide
a web service that supports SPARQL queries. SPARQL is a
query language developed for Semantic web [12].
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. First, in
Section II, we shortly present the architecture of the system
that we are developing. Then, in Section III, we consider the
Guideline ontology that we use in annotating guidelines. In
Section IV, we give an example of a SPARQL query that
exploits the Guideline ontology in searching guidelines from
two data stores. In Section V, we consider the extension of
the system by medicinal data. Finally, Section VI concludes
the paper by considering our future research.
II.

THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE GUIDELINE SERVER

In our developed architecture, users (patients) retrieve
clinical guidelines through the Clinical Guideline Portal (Fig.
1). The portal provides a set of applications each providing a
specific search method, such as searches based on keywords
or body parts. These applications communicate with the
SPARQL Processor, which access clinical guidelines
through their Web Services.
User
Browser
Clinical Guideline Portal

Application 1

Application 2

Guideline applications

...

Application n

SPARQL Processor

Web Service

Web Service

Clinical
guidelines

Clinical
guidelines

...

Web Service

Web Service

Clinical
guidelines

Clinical
guidelines

...

Figure 1. The architecture of the Clinical Guideline Retrieval system.

A useful feature of the SPARQL Processor is that it is
capable for querying many RDF-formatted [13] data sources
within one SPARQL query.
III.

GUIDELINE ONTOLOGY

An ontology characterizes the meaning of concepts and
their relationships [14. Within computer science, an ontology
is usually represented by using classes, properties, and their
values as modeling primitives [15]. Hence an ontology
provides a systematic way to standardize the used metadata
items [16]. As an example consider our defined Guideline
Ontology, which is graphically presented in Fig. 2.
requires

parentKeyword

keyWord

keywordName

belongsTo

clinicalGuideline

hasKeyword

language

parentItem

isPartOf

name

URL

speciality
specialityName

In this figure, ellipses represent classes and rectangles
represent data type as well as object properties. These
representations are modeling primitives in OWL [17]. Object
properties (e.g., belongsTo) relate objects to other objects (or
to itself, e.g., requires), and datatype properties (e.g.,
specialityName) relate objects to datatype values.
An instance of the Guideline Ontology is presented in
RDF in Fig. 3. RDF is a key for representing machine
understandable data. It is a data model with a variety of
syntaxes for storing data files. By RDF we can express facts
with tree-part statements called as triples. The subject
identifies the thing being described, predicate is a property
name, and object is property value. That is, each triple is
like a little sentence that states a fact. However, RDF in
itself does not bring interoperable semantics. It depends on
the expression power of the used vocabulary. By a
vocabulary we refer to a set of ontologies, which specifies
the used terms and their semantics.
In order to illustrate the dependency of RDF and
ontologies consider the RDF-description (a set of RDFstatements concerning the same subject) of Fig. 3. The
RDF-description states, by using the Guideline Ontology as
a vocabulary, that a guideline named Pregnancy has
keywords pregnancy and pain drugs, and the guideline is a
part of a guideline named gynaecological diseases. That is,
pregnancy is a subclassification of gynecological diseases.
<rdf:RDF
xmlns : rdf=”http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#”
xmlns : no=http://www.helsinki.fi/GuidelineOntology#>
<rdf:Description rdf:about=”pregnancyGuideline”>
<rdf:type rdf:resource=“&po;clinicalGuideline”/>
<no : hasKeyword>pregnancy</no :hasKeyword>
<no : hasKeyword>pian_drugs</no :hasKeyword>
<no : isPartOf>gynaecological diseases</no:isPartOf>
</rdf : Description>
</rdf:RDF>
Figure 3. An annotation of a guideline.

The Guideline Ontology enables to attach parenKeyword
to each keyword meaning that keywords comprise
taxonomies (hierarchies). The logic behind taxonomy is that
when one goes up the taxonomy toward the root, the
keywords become more general, and respectively when one
goes down towards the leaves the keywords become more
specialized [16]. We can also state this in a more formal
way: depending on the direction of the link each link
between a parent and a child node represents a
subclassification relation or superclassification relation. For
example, type 2 diabetes is a subclassification of diabetes,
and diabetes is a superclassification of type 2 diabetes.
Taxonomies can be exploited in searching, if the used
keywords return too many guidelines. For example, we could
replace keyword diabetes by its subclassification type 1
diabetes, type 2 diabetes, or gestational diabetes (a
condition in which women without previously diagnosed
diabetes exhibit high blood glucose levels during pregnancy).

Figure 2. Guideline Ontology.

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

2

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

IV.

GUERYING GUIDELINES FROM MULTIPLE
DATASTORES BY SPARQL
SPARQL is a query language that is able to retrieve and
manipulate data stored in RDF-format. It was made a
standard by the RDF Data Access Working Group of the
World Wide Web Consortium, and is recognized as one of
the key technologies of the semantic web [18].
A SPARQL query specifies the pieces of data that meets
the stated requirements. The requirements are described with
triple patterns, which are similar to RDF triples but they
include variables to add flexibility in how they match against
the queried data [18].
There is a variety of SPARQL technologies available for
running queries against data both locally and remotely. For
example, SPARQL provides two ways for querying
remotely: using FROM keyword or using SERVICE
keyword. In the former way the FROM keyword names a
dataset to query that may be local or remote file. In the latter
and our used way, instead of pointing at an RDF file
somewhere, a SPARQL endpoint is pointed. An endpoint is a
Web service that accepts SPARQL queries, runs the queries,
and finally returns the result.
Further, Federated Queries in SPARQL allow searching
multiple datasets with one query. For each dataset is created
a subquery which access datasets by using SERVICE
keywords.
To illustrate this, consider the federated
SPARQL query presented in Fig. 4. It accesses two datasets
through SPARQL endpoints. The result of the query is the
union of the results of the two subqueries. The query returns
links (URLs) to those clinical guidelines that are annotated
by the keywords pain drug and pregnant. The query is based
on the ontology presented in Fig. 2 (the prefix no in the
query refers to this ontology).

V.

EXTENDING THE GUIDELINE SERVER

The Clinical Guideline Retrieval System presented in
Section II is focused only on retrieving relevant guidelines.
However there are also websites that have information about
medication, and thus they can provide valuable
supplementary information for self-care. For example, a
patient may be interested to know more about a pain drug
recommend in a clinical guideline.
A problem however is that most health-oriented web sites
are developed only for human consumption, and so they as
well as their metadata is not machine understandable. In
order to transform their metadata in machine understandable
format, we have developed an appropriate ontology (called
Medicine Ontology) for annotating the documents that deal
with medicine.
A portion of the Medicine Ontology is graphically
presented in Fig. 5. In this graphical representation ellipses
represent classes and rectangles represent data type and
object properties. Object properties relate objects to other
objects while data type properties relate objects to datatype
values. Classes, data type properties and object properties are
modelling primitives in OWL.
clinicalGuideline

productInfoUrl

productName

brandName

substitutable
medicine

medicine

price

literal

dealsWith

corresponds

manufcturer

literal

drugId

includes

drug

medical
product
group

companyId
companyName

PREFIX owl: <http://www.w3.org/2002/07/owl#>
PREFIX rdf: <http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#>
PREFIX no: <http://www.cs.helsinki.fi/registryOntology#>
SELECT ?URL
WHERE
{
SERVICE <http://documentRegistry_A/sparql>
{ SELECT ?URL
WHERE
{
?no:name no:hasKeyword pain_drug ;
?no:name no:hasKeyword pregnant ;
?no:name no:URL ?URL .
}
}
SERVICE <http://documentRegistry_B/sparql>
{ SELECT ?URL
WHERE
{
?no:name no:hasKeyword pain_drug ;
?no:name no:hasKeyword pregnant ;
?no:name no:URL ?URL .
}
}
}

Figure 4. A simple federated SPARQL query.

isSuclassOf

Company

companyInfo

contactInfo

Figure 5. Graphical presentation of the Medicine Ontology.

Note that the Medicine Ontology and the Guideline
Ontology are overlapping in the sense that they both include
the class clinicalGuideline. As a result we can use the
Medicine Ontology in annotating clinical guidelines by
medicinal data. For example, in Fig. 6, the annotation
presented in Fig. 3 is extended by stating that the instance
deals with Aspirin.
<rdf:RDF
xmlns : rdf=”http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#”
xmlns : no=http://www.helsinki.fi/GuidelineOntology#>
xmlns : ro=http://www.helsinki.fi/MedicineOntology#>
<rdf:Description rdf:about=”pregnancyGuideline”>
<rdf:type rdf:resource=“&po;clinicalGuideline”/>
<no : hasKeyword>pregnancy</no :hasKeyword>
<no : hasKeyword>pian_drugs</no :hasKeyword>
<no : isPartOf>gynaecological diseases</no:isPartOf>
<ro : dealsWith>Aspirin</ro :hasKeyword>
</rdf : Description>
</rdf:RDF>

Figure 6. Using two ontologies in annotating a clinical guideline.

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

3

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Similar to the extension on Medicine ontology we can
also introduce other ontologies as well. For example,
introducing an ontology for the terms of welfare might also
be useful.
VI.

CONCLUSION

Web-based e-health models and the Semantic Web
support each other: Web-based health-oriented services
provide a new paradigm for sharing health information while
Semantic Web enables the presentation of information in a
machine understandable form. As a result the use of Webbased e-health services is rapidly increasing. Yet, by using
together a variety of services we can still achieve new
services that would not be achievable by independently
working systems. For example, we can achieve new
outcomes by the interoperation of the systems developed for
self-care, welfare, and smart homes. Technically the
interoperation can be implemented by a SPARQL processor.
So far we have used these technologies in developing a
patient-friendly retrieve method for clinical guidelines. We
have also extended this solution by the services that provide
information about medicines. In our future work we will
consider how the information of clinical guidelines,
medication, welfare and smart home can be used together in
developing new services.

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]
[12]
[13]

REFERENCES

[14]

“The Role of the Pharmacist in Self-Care and SelfMedication”.
Available
at
at:
http://apps.who.int/medicinedocs/pdf/whozip32e/whozip32e.p
df. Retrieved: 6, 2016.
[2] “What is self-care?” ISF International Self-Care Foundation.
Available
at:
http://isfglobal.org/what-is-self-care/.
Retrieved: 7, 2016.
[3] “Health Education in Self-Care: Possibilities and Limitations.
Report of a Scientific Consultation”. Geneva,Switzerland:
World Health Organization; November 21–25, 1983.
[4] S. Lowell, S. Levin, and L. Idler, “Self-Care in Health“.Vol.
4: 181-201, 1983.

[15]

[1]

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

[16]

[17]

[18]

“Self-care in the Context of Primary Health Care”. Report of
the Regional Consultation Bangkok, Thailand, 7–9 January
2009. Avialable at:
http://www.searo.who.int/entity/primary_health_care/docume
nts/sea_hsd_320.pdf. Retrieved: 6, 2016.
L. Trevena, H Davey, A. Barratt, P. Butow, and P. Caldwell,
“A systematic review on communicating with patients about
evidence”. Journal of Evaluation in Clinical Practice, 12,(1):
13-23, 2006.
J. Puustjärvi and L. Puustjärvi. ”Practicing Evidence-Based
Medicine in Developing Countries”. In the proc. of the ISTAfrica 2015 Conference & Exhibition. 2015.
N. Mulyar, M. van der Aalst, and M. Peleg, “A pattern-based
analysis of clinical computer interpretable guideline modeling
languages,” Journal of American Medical Information
Association, Vol. 14, no. 6, pp.781–787.2007.
M. Peleg, S. Tu, P. Ciccarese, and J. Fox, “Comparing
computer-interpretable guideline models,” A case-study
approach. Journal of American Medical Information
Association, 2003, pp.10–58.
T. Leaon, K. Kaiser, and S. Miksch, “Free and open source
enabling technologies for patient-centric,guideline-based
clinical decision support,” A survey. Methods of Information
in Medicine, pp. 74–86, 2007.
Baeza-Yates, R. and Ribeiro-Neto, B. 1999. “Modern
Information Retrieval”. Addison Wesley.
"SPARQL Query Language for RDF", Available at:
http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-sparql-query/. Retrieved: 2, 2016.
“RDF – Resource Description Language”. Available at:
http://www.w3.org/RDF/. Retrieved: 2, 2016.
T.R. Gruber, "Toward principles for the design of ontologies
used for knowledge sharing." Padua workshop on Formal
Ontology, March 1993.
G. Antoniou and F. Harmelen, "A semantic web primer," The
MIT Press. 2004.
M. Daconta, L. Obrst, and K. Smith, "The semantic web. :A
Guide to the Future of XML, Web Services, and Knowledge
Management," John Wiley & Sons. 2003
"OWL - WEB OntologyLanguage", Available at:
http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-features/ Retrieved: 2, 2016.
Retrieved: 2, 2016.
DuCharme. Learning SPARQL. O'Reilly Media.

4

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Roadmap for Collaborative eHealth Service Architectures for Homecare
General eBusiness Requirements

Assoc. prof. Niels F. Garmann-Johnsen, Ph.D

Assoc. prof. Santiago Martinez, Ph.D

Dept. of Information Systems,
Faculty of Social Science, University of Agder
Kristiansand, Norway
e-mail: niels.f.garmann-johnsen@uia.no

Dept. Nursing and Health Sciences
Faculty of Health and Sport Sciences, University of Agder
Grimstad, Norway
e-mail: santiago.martinez@uia.no

Abstract— In many industrialized countries, such as the
Scandinavian, one of the main goals for eHealth innovation is
to use information and communication technologies to avoid
the approaching inflection point in healthcare: it is estimated
that by 2025 the demand of care could not be sufficiently
attended based on today’s healthcare delivery. eHealth services
and business models for enabling older people in need of care
and patients with chronic conditions may increase efficiency of
healthcare and improve Quality of Life for residents. However,
eHealth business models are known by their fast speed of
change, what results in the need of a methodology to rapidly
adapt technical requirements to these typical inter-agency
changes. This work presents a research roadmap for
collaborative eHealth Service Architectures for homecare. The
research focused on the business requirements in service
architectures (eBusiness, Enterprise systems), whose findings
can inform eHealth research in general, health professionals
and vendors.

research in eHealth service design, especially in homecare,
see Fig. 1. In this first paper, the authors reviewed the
literature related to (e-)business models and eHealth to then
offer propositions on service design.

Keywords-eHealth; Service architecture; Business models;
Enterprise systems; technology innovation; technology adoption.

I.

INTRODUCTION

In many industrialized countries, such as Norway, one of
the main goals for eHealth innovation is the use of
information and communication technologies (ICT) and
information systems (IS) to avoid the inflection point in
healthcare: it is estimated that by the year 2025, the demand
of care could not be sufficiently covered based on today’s
healthcare delivery [1]. Change and innovation are needed
for treatments maintaining the quality of care within
assigned budgets, where the resources needed transcend
those of one singular organization. Technology that helps
people with care needs to stay safely, longer at home and
out of institutions and hospitals may be a strategy to reduce
the total healthcare costs of society [2].
The authors present a roadmap for service design and
architecture development in collaboration across
organizations in healthcare. The research focuses in the
home care, leaving clinical care outside the scope of this
study. A challenge associated to the home care is that it
presents a broad spectrum of user requirements within the
same information technology (IT) infrastructure. Research
in eBusiness models may inform future strategies and

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

Figure 1. eHealth ontology, teleology and scope of the research

Studies of stakeholder requirements in eHealth
innovation and pre-procurement [3] underline the need for
increasing stakeholder involvement. Furthermore, design
principles for business models that can facilitate such
involvement are here elicited. The need in homecare is to
develop an adaptive framework that allows front-line
personnel (e.g., nurse, general practitioner) and other endusers to dynamically manage and (re-) configure business
processes, patient services and health treatment clinical
pathways, with the purpose creating service-oriented
solutions whose core elements are patient autonomy and
interactivity.
The authors have designed a three-step research
roadmap with a peer-reviewed research article associated to
each step (see Fig. 2). This article represents the first step,
where we present the literature review on (e-) business
models in the domain described followed by general
business propositions. In the second step, a case study on
the process of eHealth innovations will serve as a test of the
elicited general (e-) business propositions and requirements
of a design-process through action research in projects in a

5

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Living Lab research methodology. In the third step, we seek
to generalize the findings from the second step into a unified
architecture or design model: an innovation and preprocurement roadmap towards a technical architecture for a
dynamic service management infrastructure that meets these
requirements, enabling co-creation of eHealth services with
end-users. Our level of analysis in the organization varies
with each step. In the first one, we take a holistic view of the
business model. In the second one, we focus on transitions
in end-users’ life, downstream activities and their
consequences for collaboration with eHealth technologyvendors. In the third one, we apply findings from the two
previous steps to induce a general design model for the
architecture of ICT applications and infrastructure
integrations, see Fig. 3 at the end of this article.
The main research question in this article is to find in the
research literature general business requirements that
influence eHealth services in home care. This lead to the

Figure 2. Research design, steps and expected research outcomes

two research questions addressed in this paper:
RQ 1. What are the business requirements for Enterprise
Systems that create value for users in the context of
eHealth?
RQ 2. What are user preconditions to gain benefits from
new Enterprise Systems and increase efficiency and quality
in eHealth adoption?
The paper is structured in different sections. A
theoretical framework is presented in Section 2. The method
employed is described in Section 3. Section 4 presents the
results, with the answers to the research questions. The
paper ends with the conclusion and future work in Section 5.
II.

THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK

There is a variety of business models, but Hwang
proposes three main types or business model templates that
explain the business processes of modern enterprises better
than the traditional Value Chain model of the firm [4] does
alone [5]:
1. Solution shop. A place where customers describe
their problem and it is fixed. For example, general
practitioners and hospitals curing patients.

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

2.

Value-adding process (comparable to the Value
Chain) typical of manufacturing enterprises;
comparable to Porters’ [4] model of the firm. For
example, pharmaceutical producers.
3. Facilitated user networks (Value Networks) to
connect users and services. For example, different
web communities (most communication- and
internet-based businesses fall under this category).
With regard to these models, Hwang [5], building on
works by Stabell and Fjeldstad [6], states that the facilitated
user network is under-represented in the health sector—and,
thus, represents growth potential: as more businesses move
online, facilitated user networks represent a business model
template of increasing significance, including eHealth. Thus
the authors will explore these concepts further in relation to
eHealth service architecture. Frameworks for analyzing
value creation in e-Business (e.g., Amit and Zott, [7]) are
relevant for understanding the eHealth landscape because
many eHealth systems contain elements of e-Business
models which belong to the category of Value Networks.
Amit and Zott’s [7] e-business value creation model
categorizes the sources of value creation into four main
groups: efficiency, novelty, lock-in and complementarity.
These groups are relevant to e-business models that often
implement instances of the facilitated user network
archetype of business models, and inter-organizational
process collaborations. According to Amit and Zott,
efficiency has been one of the primary driving forces for the
transition to a more digital economy in all phases of the
transaction. Complementarities that arrive from the bundle
of goods provide more value to the users than the sum of
values provided by each good alone. Complementarity and
novelty imply collaboration and innovation—both themes of
significance in healthcare. Novelty means that there is a
“first” here, either in the service itself or in the way that it is
conceived or delivered. Combining or connecting two or
more previously unconnected parties, domains or methods
often achieves this. A lock-in value is created through users’
reuse of one-time transactions costs (e.g., for registration
and service customization).
Seddon et al [8] proposed a model that explains how
organizations, such as municipalities, can overcome
organizational inertia and successfully adopt new enterprise
systems and obtain benefits, e.g., quality and efficiency.
Enterprise systems support processes, information flows,
reporting and business analytics within and between
organizations and individuals. Specifically, these processes
support organizations’ business models. Business models
are models of how enterprises create value for themselves
and other, while also capturing value. An organization can
have more than one business model, and business models
can include more than one organization.
Since RQ 2 aims to explore the affordance of ES in
realizing emergent business models in eHealth, the authors
have chosen to use Seddon et al.’s model of key factors
affecting Organizational Benefits from ES (OBES) [8]:

6

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

1.

Short term/On-going business improvement
projects:
a. Functional fit (FF)
b. Overcoming organizational inertia
(OOI)
2. With the addition of long-term organizational
benefit factors:
a. Integration
b. Process optimization
c. Improved access to information
Functional fit of software means that the processes
supported by the ES are efficient and effective for the
organization and that they help people to finish their tasks.
Overcoming organizational inertia is the extent to which
organizations’ members are motivated to learn, use and
accept new systems. Integration refers to the unification of
systems and/or data from resources within and outside an
organization. Tailoring the information systems to an
organization’s goals help to achieve process optimization.
This often necessitates improved access to information.
III.

METHOD

The authors searched through scientific literature about
business models in eHealth using Amit and Zott’s
framework [7] for value creation in eBusiness to answer RQ
1., and conceptualize the requirements. Then, we analyze
concepts found in the review with the model proposed by
Seddon et al [8] to answer RQ 2., and produce general
propositions for information system design with special
regards to primary care and homecare.
The literature search was performed in spring 2014
using the search engines ProQuest and EBSCOhost. The
search engines targeted science and social science
disciplines. The authors used truncations *health* AND
(*ecommerce* OR *reward*) AND “business models” in
the search terms. The search included scholarly papers and
trade journals, choosing to include the latter due to the
“newness” of the area in explored. The authors found 286
papers that matched the search criteria. However, a
screening showed that 246 of the found papers were not
related with eHealth business models. These papers were
excluded. The excluded papers were concerned with topics
such as: clinical trials, environmental issues, other nonhealth-related issues and management issues at large.
The remaining 40 papers (34 found through ProQuest
and 6 found through EBSCOhost) were rated as relevant to
the research topic and, thus, analyzed. A table showing the
results and list of the searched and reviewed articles is
included in the appendix.
IV.

RESULTS

A. Answer to RQ1
This section shows the findings from the systematic
literature review (for details, see appendix), which were
aggregated and conceptualized following the guidance of

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

Webster and Watson [9], and then sorted according to Amit
and Zott’s model. The authors added the category “Other”
to collect concepts that were not easily sorted under Amit
and Zott’s four main sources; these were predominantly
societal and public policy factors. These other sources
stemmed from the special public or semi-public financial
context of eHealth in countries like the British and
Scandinavian.
1) Efficiency concepts
Easier scaling and sharing: new eHealth concepts
leverage the efficiency and cost-flexibility of cloud
computing. Cloud computing facilitates the use of
intelligent algorithms to detect heightened risks of
worsening conditions and supports the triage classification
of patients (triage is an assessment of urgency of treatment).
Such capabilities can be shared and utilized by several
organizations. Standardizations and reductions in the
number of product lines greatly reduce overhead cost ratios.
Companies must defend low costs against overly
personalized service.
Transaction cost efficiency: through e-business’
transaction efficiency, doctors can now charge costs
associated to phone calls and online consultation. Cloud
computing also creates the opportunity for self-service
solutions. Online solutions also enable easier care and
quality coordination.
Easier sourcing: cloud services provide easier
possibilities for sourcing support functions (e.g., system
running).
2) Novel concepts
Rapid customization and co-innovation: the cloud model
allows for rapid prototyping and innovation in processes,
products and services. Co-innovation and co-creation
generate new organizational and shared values. Surplus
innovation can be sold-off, generating rent (commercial
profit). Moreover, the possibility of doctor “visits” via
secure video-conferencing enthuses patients. Partnerships
with educational providers provide focused and
personalized professional training.
3) Lock-In concepts
Revenue and reward splits: cloud services can store user
preferences, which can enable product and service
customization. Offering consumers, a choice of market
channels can be mutually beneficial for all channels, due to
the aggregation of products and services. For instance, the
Hello Health website [10] negotiates a revenue split of
subscriptions with physicians. Sharing information across
organizational borders creates better possibilities for
personalized health coaching.
Fun and belonging: online solutions can leverage the
network and “gamification” (i.e., comparing progress with
peers) effects of social media. Algorithms for the content
and sentiment analysis of entries in online communities can
suggest alternatives or interest groups that might be
beneficial to join. Corporations should link medical plans

7

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

for employees with corporate strategies, which could, for
example, reward the use of fitness facilities and programs.
4) Complementarity concepts
Aggregating services: Internet offers possibilities for
aggregating and sourcing services and finance. For instance,
a combination of many travel-related and medical
businesses and services can facilitate medical tourism).
Shared development risk: alliance management
capabilities have positive effects on research and
development capabilities. For example, in targeted
medicine, there is a call for cross-business collaboration.
Targeted medicine makes it possible to treat rare, previously
untreatable conditions; however, the cost per patient is high,
and some governments may refuse reimbursement. By
reducing development time through improved collaborations
between test laboratories and pharmaceutical companies,
targeted medicine can be achieved at manageable costs.
Pharmaceutical companies must learn how to fit into other
companies’ business models. All actors need to be satisfied,
for example with “win-win” scenarios.
Management coordination: primary and secondary care
must be better coordinated. Companies’ external and
internal resources must be aligned in order to facilitate the
internalization of knowledge. Many user networks’ business
models are without profit or low profit; however, as a
potential source of empowerment of patients, they represent
ideal opportunities for business models for treating chronic
diseases. These are costly treatments and are not well suited
to the traditional business model of hospitals and
physicians.
5) Other effects: Public and Societal concepts
New reimbursement schemes for better coordination:
payment models in health should encourage coordination.
Reimbursement models should encourage preventive
measures, such as Healthy Outlook [11]. They should also
reward the results of coherent treatment over “pay-perconsultation” systems. New reimbursement schemes may
pose new challenges for financial reporting.
Knowledge management: knowledge benefits from
exchange, rather than protection. The best “players” build
“invisible” information infrastructures for developing, for
example, cancer-focused IT system and evidence-based
medicines.
Ethical compliance: Ethical compliance management is
of growing significance in a changing eHealth business
environment. Better management can be achieved through
collaboration and democratic governance.
B. Answer to RQ2
Based on the business concepts induced from literature
and rendered in the previous section, the authors propose the

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

following propositions as design principles for a Municipal
eHealth architecture:
Proposition 1. Shared e-commerce solutions: Ecommerce solutions shared among collaborating partners,
such as Hello Health [10], enable easier scaling and sharing,
greater transaction cost efficiency and easier sourcing of
non-strategic support functions, such as system running
(i.e., application-server management). Shared e-commerce
solutions support short-term functional fit and long-term
business
benefits,
providing
integration,
process
optimization and improved access to information.
Proposition 2. Co-creation with partners and clients (and
patients): by providing customers and partners alternatives
for customizing their services and by encouraging and
proactively collecting feedback on services, it is possible to
distinguish patterns that provide an impetus for improving
services and creating new ones. Co-creation may produce
positive short-term effects and long-term effects.
Proposition 3. Aligning internal and external resources:
to overcome organizational inertia, structural changes may
become necessary. Internal organizational resources should
be dedicated to match external resources (business partners)
in order to extract and embed external knowledge within an
organization. This process is linked to propositions 4, 5 and
7.
Proposition 4. Aligning price and reward (bonuses and
revenue sharing): aligning rewards and bonus schemes
through the delivery chain and throughout user levels
encourages the achievement of goals for treatment and
health policies.
Proposition 5. Iterations for the economic alignment of
interests: throughout a delivery chain, there is information
asymmetry with regard to knowledge of processes and costs.
Over time, all actors in the chain experience a learning
curve; thus, collaborative iterations are needed to optimize
business processes and to maintain win-win situations
throughout the delivery chain. The role of ES is to provide
accurate, reliable and comparable data for collaborative
decision-making, thereby stimulating and supporting
organizational learning.
Proposition 6. Social media integration and capabilities:
to ensure that users and patients choose digital solutions and
achieve the efficiency benefits that such solutions provide,
the digital solutions should ideally be socially oriented and
easy and fun to use. Gamification allows users to compare
their personal data in fitness or treatment programs—and,
thus, encourages and motivates users/patients to adapt and
use solutions. Gamification can be developed and stimulated
through social networks. Actors in healthcare (e.g.,
hospitals, primary care) need to develop their social media
strategies [12].

8

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Proposition 7. Alignment of incentives: a strong
reallocation of Intellectual Property Rights and revenue
sources may be necessary to encourage more efficient
research and development and to achieve joint goals for
development, thereby lowering the costs of new treatments
(e.g., targeted medicine). Increased use of public-private
collaboration contracts around research and development
might be potentially considered.
Proposition 8. Transparency (sharing information across
different levels): often, the patient is not the one who pays
the full price for a medical service. In many economies, the
state or voluntary or compulsory insurance or company
medical plans pay for such services. Demographic changes,
combined with improving treatment options, have led to
rising costs of healthcare. To counter this, reimbursement
schemes increasingly seek possibilities to pay for results
rather than consultations. For health providers, this calls for
increased information sharing, and transparency of
treatment results. This proposition is linked to proposition 9.
Proposition 9. Linking performance measurement and
finance: the enterprise/planning systems of medical
providers and vendors must increasingly be able to provide
data for quality performance and financial performance to
both the market and the government. Business intelligence
and balanced scorecard systems are needed for quality and
performance management, and they can be directly linked to
reimbursement schemes in the future.
Proposition 10. Democratic governance: ethical
compliance is gaining importance in many areas, and it has
great significance in eHealth [13]. A proactive strategy for
compliance management, involving consistent policies for
handling legal, quality and treatment deviations or
complaints, including privacy and security issues, may
benefit an organization in the long term. This may help
overcoming barriers to e-Health adoption [14]. Actively
involving users and employees in this work through
democratic governance can enable such a result [13].
V.

Figure 3. A general model of Municipal/Homecare eHealth Service
Design: Level of analysis in each research step

(Software as a Service, cloud computing solutions) will also
be explored.
REFERENCES
[1]
[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

This study has answered the two research questions
(RQs) by eliciting business models and enterprise systems
design principles that may inform future eHealth
architectures and applications. Although these principles are
not exhaustive, they illustrate the need for flexibility and
capability of co-creation with users at all levels.
In the future, the authors will test the found propositions
in a Living Lab test setting [15], with special regard to
adaptability, flexibility and facility for user-co-creation in
design of eHealth services. Based on the empirical findings
from these case-studies, we will seek to generalize a preprocurement design process-model; a roadmap, in step
three, which allows for a co-creation process that combines
the goals of all stakeholders; application-vendors,
municipalities and their constituents and end-users (see Fig.
3). The connection between innovations in local media and
applications and central information infrastructures

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

[7]
[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

D. M. Gaba, “The future vision of simulation in health care, ”
Simulation in Healthcare 2, no. 2, pp. 126-135, 2007.
N. F. Garmann-Johnsen, “What seems to be the problem?—a
study of connections between national contexts and regional
e-health strategies,” Health Policy and Technology, vol. 4,
issue 2, pp. 144-155, 2015.
N. F. Garmann-Johnsen, Ø. Hellang, editors, “Collaborative
Process Modelling and evaluation in e-health,” Scandinavian
Health Informatics, Norway, 2014.
M. E. Porter, “Towards a dynamic theory of strategy,”
Strategic management journal, vol. 12, suppl. 2, pp. 95-117,
1991.
J. Hwang, “The innovator's prescription: an examination of
the future of health care through the lenses of disruptive
innovation,” Archives of pathology & laboratory medicine,
vol. 133, issue 4, pp. 513-20, 2009.
C. B. Stabell, and Ø. D. Fjeldstad, “Configuring value for
competitive advantage: on chains, shops, and networks,”
Strategic management journal, vol. 19, issue 5, pp. 413-437,
1998.
R. Amit, and C. Zott, “Value creation in e-business,” Strategic
Management Journal, vol. 22, issue 6-7, pp. 493-520, 2001.
P. B. Seddon, C. Calvert, S. Yang, “A multi-project model of
key factors affecting organizational benefits from enterprise
systems,” MIS quarterly, vol. 34, issue 2, pp. 305-328, 2010.
J. Webster, and R. T. Watson, “Analyzing the past to prepare
for the future: writing a literature review, ” MIS quarterly, pp.
xiii-xxiii, 2002.
R. L. Kravitz, “Improvement happens: a commercial IT
solution for reviving primary care? An interview with Hello
Health CEO Nathanial Findlay and colleagues,” Journal of
general internal medicine, pp. 1-5, 2013.
P. Micheli, M. Schoeman, D. Baxter, K. Goffin, “New
business models for public-sector innovation: successful
technological innovation for government,” ResearchTechnology Management, vol. 55, issue 5, pp. 51-57, 2012.
R. Effing, and T. A. Spil, “The social strategy cone: towards a
framework for evaluating social media strategies,”
International journal of information management, vol. 36,
issue 1, pp. 1-8, 2016.

9

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[13] C. L. Rossi, “Compliance: an over-looked business strategy,”

International Journal of Social Economics, vol. 37, issue 10,
pp. 816-831, 2010.
[14] I. Pirillo, G. Ricci, F. Amenta, “The Future of e-Health,” The
Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and
Social Medicine, eTELEMED 2014, pp. 280-284, 2014.

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

[15] M. Pallot, B. Trousse, B. Senach, D. Scapin, editors, “Living

lab research landscape: from user centred design and user
experience towards user cocreation,” First European Summer
School Living Labs, 2010.

10

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

A Qualitative Study of Parents` Experiences of Information Exchange
between the Tertiary Health Service and the Child`s Local Support Team
using Videoconference
Merete Kristin Tschamper (MPhil)

Wenche Schrøder Bjorbækmo (PhD)

Dept. of children and youth, Division for Neuroscience,
National Center for Epilepsy
Oslo University Hospital
Oslo, Norway
E-mail: meretek@ous-hf.no

Dep. of Health Science
The University of Oslo
Oslo, Norway
E-mail: w.s.bjorbakmo@medisin.uio.no

Abstract - In this study, four children with rare, epileptic
condition
including
intellectual
disability
were
interdisciplinary assessed in the National Center for Epilepsy
(SSE). The results of the assessments were communicated to
the children`s local support service using videoconference (VC)
with the parents present. The purpose for this study was to
obtain a deeper insight into parents` experiences with
information exchange using VC. Methods: In-depth interviews
were performed with five parents within a week after the VC.
The generated material was analyzed with a thematic
hermeneutic research approach. Results: The local
participation increased from 2-6 in traditional face-to-face
meetings to up to 22 participants in the VCs. The parents
described how the increased participation ensured a direct,
oral information exchange that prevented treatment
misunderstandings. The parents were relieved from the
responsibility to inform all professionals involved in the local
community. In addition the parents suggested this increased
the multidisciplinary collaboration and facilitated a
comprehensive approach to the children`s complex situations.
The parents experienced increased user-involvement in the
process of arranging the VC compared to traditional face-toface consultants. Some parents had started to initiate VC
themselves. Conclusion: VC was considered a more potent tool
for information exchange between providers than face-to-face
meetings due to the increased local participation and that
everyone was assured to get the same information
simultaneously. However a crucial prerequisite seem to be that
the professionals from the tertiary health service had clinical
knowledge of the child and tailored the information exchanged
according to each child and family`s needs.

assessment- and treatment service for people with rare
epileptic conditions. A disease is defined rare in Europe
when it affects less than1 in 2000 of the general population
[4]. Each condition affects the patient individually and there
is a need for tailored treatment. SSE, together with The
National Center for rare, epilepsy related disorders (NK-SE),
are legally required to educate the patients, their relatives,
and the patient`s local support service in order to ensure
optimal treatment [5][6]. Norway is aerially a relatively large
country
with
a
widely
distributed
population.
Communication between patients and providers using VC
bridge geographical distances and thus holds the potential to
be cost-efficient with a broader multidisciplinary scope for
information exchange than traditional face-to-face
consultants [7]-[10]. Although SSE and NK-SE increasingly
use VC to exchange information as an alternative to
traditional face-to-face meetings, scant attention has been
paid to the parents` experiences with VC as an arena to
exchange information about their child`s condition and care
[11]-[13]. There is a need for a deeper understanding of how
parents of chronic ill children experiences information
exchange using VC. A deeper insight into the parents`
experiences may have implications for adjusting standard
practice to better meet their needs. The findings are likely to
be transferable beyond the current context.

Keywords-Parent; chronic disease/illness; epilesy; disability;
videoconference; patient education.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Epilepsy in combination with disability is a condition
that causes various needs for long-term multidisciplinary
support. Research show that parents with chronic ill children
experiences the lack of information exchange between the
child`s providers as one of the main stressors leading to
inadequate treatment of the child [1]-[3]. Among other
services SSE provides a nationwide and interdisciplinary

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

II.

INTERDISCIPLINARY ASSESSMENT

An interdisciplinary assessment in SSE normally
contains 17 days of hospitalization. According to each
child`s individual need, this might include a medical
assessment performed by a pediatrician and a nurse specialist
in epilepsy, a cognitive assessment performed by a
psychologist and a special educator, a motor assessment
performed by a physiotherapist and an occupational
therapist. The parents also have the opportunity to consult a
social worker while hospitalized for advice concerning legal
rights for benefits and support. At the end of the
hospitalization the results of the assessment, along with
recommendations for treatment and educational interventions
are communicated to the parents and the child`s local support
service either in a meeting face-to-face at SSE or using VC.

11

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

III.

VIDEOCONFERENCE

VC is a virtual way of meeting that can be used to
exchange information, and provide support and care. The
security of sensitive information is ensured through the
Norwegian Health Net [14]. In this study the local
participants met in VC rooms at the municipal Labour- and
Welfare departments. The professionals from SSE or NK-SE
participated from a VC-room at Oslo university Hospital.
The VCs lasted from 1, 5 to 2, 5 hours.
A. Participants in the VCs
The parents participated in the VC concerning their
child. They had the choice whether to participate while
hospitalized at SSE or at home after discharge. The
multidisciplinary professionals responsible for assessing
each child participated from a VC-room at SSE.
The special educators responsible for the educational
assessment were responsible for arranging the VC in
cooperation with the parents. The parents decided whom to
invite locally. The local participants were multidisciplinary
supporters from the children’s local support service.
According to each child`s individual need, that might
include teachers and assistants, municipal physiotherapists,
health visitors, representatives from the municipal
educational and psychological counseling service, social
educators and assistants from respite care-homes. In one VC
a grown up sibling, an aunt together with representatives
from the municipal Labour-and Welfare department
participated.
B. Content of the VCs
The results from the interdisciplinary assessments,
together with treatment options, were presented and
discussed with the local participants in the VC. Another goal
for the information exchange was to discuss possible
facilitation of the child`s environment to prevent seizures,
contribute to optimal development and quality of life. The
parents were present in the VC. According to practice they
were informed about the results of the assessments in
advance of the VC.
IV.

METHODS

The empirical material stems from in-depth interviews
exploring the parents’ experiences of the VC. The thematic
hermeneutic analyses of the interview identified several
themes of which three is presented in this article.
A. Inclusion criterions
The parents participating in the study have a child aged
5-12 with a rare epileptic condition that include moderate to
severe intellectual disability. The study included 5 parents
who`s child had recently undergone an interdisciplinary
assessment at SSE followed by an information exchange
with the local support service using VC. In order to provide a
nuanced description of specific cases, the parents fitting the
inclusion criterions were strategically chosen consecutively

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

as they were admitted to SSE. Only one parent had
experienced information exchange using VC at SSE before.
Three of the parents had experienced multiple traditional
face-to-face meetings in SSE exchanging information with
the child´s local support service. One of the children had
been hospitalized in SSE for the first time.
B. Collecting of data and analyses
In-depth interviews were performed with four mothers
and a father within a week after the VC. The interviewer did
not attend the VCs. The interview guide had few and open
questions that aimed to explore how the parents experienced
the use of VC for information exchange. The interviews
were transcribed verbatim and analyzed with a thematic
hermeneutic research approach [15]. Three of the initial
themes identified were: A) VC an efficient tool to exchange
information between multidisciplinary providers B)
Increased parental control and involvement C) The impact of
the relationship with the professional arranging the VC.
V.

FINDINGS

In the following, the results from three of the identified
themes will be presented.
A. VC an efficient tool to exchange information between
multidisciplinary providers
In the VC there were from 10 to 22 local participants
compared to 2-6 in former face-to-face meetings at SSE.
According to the parents, the direct information exchange
and discussions between the professionals prevented
treatment misunderstandings that occurred when the local
support service only received written reports. In addition,
the parents experienced an increased multidisciplinary
collaboration that facilitated a comprehensive approach to
the child`s complex situation. Finally the parents saved time
not having to attain meetings explaining the reports from
SSE to the local providers.
B. Increased parental control and involvement
The parents experienced increased control and userinvolvement in the process of arranging the VC. As almost
all the invited local professionals participated, the scope for
the information exchange widened. Some of the parents
actively used the VC as an arena to inform not only the
providers of care and education, but also other providers
like social workers, family members or the principal on the
local school. Some parents had started to initiate VC
themselves by contacting personnel at SSE or NK-SE.
C. The impact of the relationship with the professional
arranging the VC
The parents suggested that the positive and trusting
relationship they had established with the professional
arranging the VC was important for the quality of the
information exchange. They also considered it crucial that
the professional from SSE and NK-SE had clinical
knowledge of their child in addition to special scientific

12

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

knowledge of the rare, epileptic conditions in order to tailor
the information to the child and family`s needs.
VI.

DISCUSSION

For the parents in this study the most important issue was
that the VC increases the local participation. The increased
local participation enabled a direct information exchange
between providers from different levels of the health
service, school and social services in a way that would not
have been possible without this technology. Thus The VC
offers an arena for the participants to relate, share
experiences and co-shape their knowledge of the child´s
situation and needs. The possibility for the local providers to
ask clarifying questions directly to the professionals
prevented misunderstandings in the follow-up treatment.
However, this outcome seemed to depend upon the
quality of the interaction created between the participants in
each VC. As the interactions in the VC are dynamic, the
parents experienced the quality of the interaction differently
from each other. To ensure that misunderstandings in the
follow up treatment are prevented, the participants need to
contribute and ask question – this requires a dialogue.
Without dialogue the VC becomes an arena simply for
information transfer – not for information exchange.
Whereas some of the VCs in this study seem to have a
relaxed ambiance where the local participants asked
questions and contributed, others seem to have been tense,
with less interaction. The parents suggest the local
participants might feel insecure talking in the virtual space
in front of a camera with the whole local support team
present. The VCs with the most dialogue seemed to be the
ones were the participant communicated at regular basis
using VC. The communication in the VC where the
participant met for the first time a mother described as “a
monologue.” In this VC the local participants listened
without responding. If the local providers do not provide
any feedback, it is impossible for the participants from SSE
or NK-SE to correct potentially incorrect impressions. Thus,
it is possible that the VC might create, not prevent,
misunderstandings.
The parents’ relationship with the providers seemed
important for their experiences of the quality of the
information exchange. It seemed crucial for the parents to
have a trusting relationship with the professional arranging
the VC, and for them to share the same opinion regarding
the child`s condition. According to the parents, the
professionals organizing the VC recognized and used the
parents’ experiential knowledge of the child as a basis for
the information exchange. The parents’ opinion and the
professionals’ clinical understanding of the child´s situation
seem to have united during the hospitalization in SSE/SS.
The parents explained that they trusted the professionals
at SSE or NK-SE to describe the child`s needs in a tailored
way. They also appreciated the way they were included in
all stages of organizing the VC. This, and the fact that they

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

decided whom to invite locally, seemed to increase the
parents’ sense of control of the information being
exchanged in the VC.
The parents also appreciated that the child was
interdisciplinary assessed during one hospitalization. This
facilitated a comprehensive approach to the child and
family`s needs.
VII. CONCLUSION AND FURTHER WORK
The parents considered the VC a more potent tool for
information exchange between providers than face-to-face
meetings due to the increased local participation. However a
crucial prerequisite seem to be that the professionals from
SSE and NK-SE had clinical knowledge of the child and
tailored the information exchange according to the child and
family`s needs. In this qualitative study the sample was not
designed to be statistically representative. However the
findings are consistent with other research concerning the
use of VC in information exchange for patient with longterm conditions [7]-[10], [16]. The importance of a trusting
relationship between the patients and the providers for the
interaction to be successful is also consistent with previous
research [17][18]. There is a need for further studies of the
conditions that needs to be present in order to ensure the
quality of the information exchange using VC. The longterm effect on the treatment of the child and whether the use
of VC reduces hospitalizations also needs to be investigated.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank the parents and the providers who
participated in this study. The study was conducted in
collaboration with The National center for rare, epilepsy
related disorders, Oslo University Hospital and Solberg
School, Norway.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]
[5]

Gundersen T. 'One wants to know what a chromosome is': the
internet as a coping resource when adjusting to life parenting
a child with a rare genetic disorder. Sociology of health &
illness. 2011;33(1):81
Grut L, and Kvam M. Facing ignorance: people with rare
disorders and their experiences with public health and welfare
services. Scandinavian Journal of Disability Research.
2013;15(1):20-32
Pelentsov LJ, Fielder AL, Laws TA, and Esterman AJ. The
supportive care needs of parents with a child with a rare
disease: results of an online survey.(Report). BMC Family
Practice. 2016;17(1)
What
is
a
rare
disease?
[Available
from:
http://www.rarediseaseday.org/article/what-is-a-rare-disease
Pasient-brukerrettighetsloven.
Pasientog
brukerrettighetsloven. LOV-1999-07-02-63: Helse- og
omsorgsdepartementet; 1999 [Sist endret: LOV-2014-06-2041
fra
01.01.2015:[Available
from:
https://lovdata.no/dokument/NL/lov/1999-07-02-63

13

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

Spesialisthelsetjenesteloven.
Spesialisthelsetjenesteloven.
LOV-1999-07-02-61 Oslo: Helse- og omsorgsdepartementet;
1999
[Available
from:
https://lovdata.no/dokument/NL/lov/1999-07-02-61
Cameron MPL, Ray R, and Sabesan S. Physicians’
perceptions of clinical supervision and educational support
via videoconference: a systematic review. Journal of
telemedicine and Telecare. 2014, Vol. 20(5) 272–281
Lindberg B, Nilsson C, Zotterman D, Soderberg S, and Skar
L. Using information communication technology in home
care for communication between patients, family members,
and healthcare professionals: a systematic review.
International journal of telemedicine and applications.
2013;2013:31
Hagen K. Users’ Experiences with Clinical Video
Conferencing at a Resource Centre for Rare Disorders
[Master]: University of Tromsø, Norway; 2010
Gentles SJ, Lokker C, and McKibbon KA. Health information
technology to facilitate communication involving health care
providers, caregivers, and pediatric patients: a scoping review.
Journal of Medical Internet Research. 2010;12(2):e22
Chi NC, and Demiris G. A systematic review of telehealth
tools and interventions to support family caregivers. Journal
of Telemedicine and Telecare. 2015;21(1):37-44

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

[12] McLean S, Protti D, and Sheikh A. Telehealthcare for long

[13]

[14]
[15]
[16]

[17]

[18]

term conditions. BMJ: British Medical Journal.
2011;342(7793):374-8
Åkesson K, Saveman BI, and Nilsson G. Health care
consumers' experiences of information communication
technology: A summary of litterature. International Journal of
Medical Informatics. 2007;76(9):633-45
Norsk
Helsenett
SF.
[Available
from:
https://www.nhn.no/helsenettet/video/Sider/default.aspx
Braun V, and Clark V. Successful qualitative research: a
practical guide for beginners. LA: SAGE. 2013
Steel K, Cox D, and Garry H.Therapeutic videoconferencing
interventions for the treatment of long-term conditions.
Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare 2011;17(3) 109-117
Wade V, and Eliott J. The role of the champion in telehealth
service development: a qualitative analysis. J Telemed
Telecare 2012;18:490–492
Carlisle K, and Warren R. A qualitative case study of
telehealth for in-home monitoring to support the management
of type 2 diabetes. Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare
2013;19(7) 372–375

1)

14

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Kansei Design Applied on Hospital Beds: Medical Design for Patient and Caregiver

Eiji Onchi

SeungHee Lee

Kansei, Behavioral and Brain Sciences
Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences
University of Tsukuba
Ibaraki, Japan
Email: onchi.eiji@gmail.com

Faculty of Art and Design
Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences
Univeristy of Tsukuba
Ibaraki, Japan
Email: seungheekansei@gmail.com

Abstract—The paper proposes new design directions, using a
Kansei Design approach, of the mechatronic hospital bed made
by the Pontifical University Catholic of Peru, and analyzes the
Kansei aspects of the overall user experience. Implementing a
semi-autonomous, easy to use adjustable bed, not only facilitates
the work of medical personnel, but may improve the recovery rate
of patients by boosting their emotional state by enabling mobility.
It is suggested to correlate the personality of the users with the
impressions of this medical bed to find if using a mechatronic
system is suitable for all patients.
Keywords–hospital bed; kansei design; rehabilitation; user experience; emotions.

I. I NTRODUCTION
The technology developed in the past years has eased the
advancement of automation in different areas, meaning that
the quality of life of humans could arguably improve. In spite
of that, there are concerns that automation will dehumanize
certain procedures or could be misused and abused if not used
correctly [1]. In response to this, researches and developers
are starting to apply Kansei Design approaches to consider
human factor, with a focus on human emotions, as the core
when designing a product. The use of ’kansei’ (a Japanese term
that conveys the meaning of affection, emotion, aesthetics, and
related terms) as the base for developing a product, aims to
improve the synergy between humans and objects [2].
In health-care, automation aims to be beneficial for both
patient and caregiver. In this regard, the evolution of adjustable
beds, commonly known as hospital beds, plays a key role in
any medical institution. From the traditional mechanical and
electromechanical beds (controlled by handles or buttons that
are cumbersome to operate), to the most advanced automated
medical beds (embedded with sensors, actuators and a central
processing unit), the goal has been to provide movement and
comfort to bedridden patients.
Nevertheless, it is of the uttermost importance to take into
account injuries caused by prolonged lack of movement, such
as skin pressure ulcers, and reduce the risk of death by sleep
disorders, like sleep apnea, while relieving caregivers of workrelated stress. In this sense, the University of New Hampshire
developed a medical bed [3] that monitors the patients’ blood
pressure and breath rates in real time to react to possible
complications. Moreover, beds that monitor temperature and
spatial location of the patient [4] can prevent skin injuries,
while systems with pressure sensors [5] help for apnea sleep
disorder. Following this trend, hospital beds as those produced
by EPOSbed project [6] or Stryker [7] implement mechatronic

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

systems to ease the workload on the caregiver and yield more
freedom to the patient.
In addition, to complete and complement the aforementioned researches and projects, the Pontifical Catholic University of Peru developed a mechatronic SmartBed [8] with these
considerations in mind. However, most of these developments
mainly focus on the technical features and usability of adjustable beds rather than the user experience and ’kansei’ of
the patient, the caregiver, and those members related to the
bedridden person.
Therefore, based on this [8] previous research, this paper
discusses the developed mechatronic hospital bed from a
Kansei Design perspective and proposes improvements on
its design. The structure of the document is as follows. In
Section I, the State of the Art development of hospital beds
are introduced. In Section II, the general characteristics of the
SmartBed [8] are presented. Section III details the experimental procedure and obtained results, next to the analysis and
discussion in Section IV. Finally, in Section V, the conclusions
of this research are laid out.
II. M ECHATRONIC S MART B ED
The following section briefly describes the characteristics
of the mechatronic SmartBed show in Figure 1.
1) Mechanical Specifications: This hospital bed can be
adjusted to seven standard medical positions, namely: trendelenburg, anti-trendelenburg, fowler, gatch, self-contour, lateral,

Figure 1. Mechatronic SmartBed.

15

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 4. User Experience Survey
Figure 2. Smartbed User Interface

and flat. To achieve these shapes, four linear actuators act
as pillars, while two linear actuators control the angle of the
header and footer.
2) Electronic Specifications: Several sensors measure the
weight, position and shape of the patient, while synchronizing
these data to a web-based database. The bed itself communicates wireless to a tablet, where doctors and caregivers are
able to manipulate the medical bed at ease.
3) Interface Design: All collected data is synchronized and
stored on a web server in order to be accessible anywhere
with an Internet connection. In this manner, family members,
as well as medical personnel, can keep track of the patient’s
condition in real time. The interface is presented on a tablet
and uses icons to control all motor functions of the hospital
bed, as shown in Figure 2, while providing processed data
from sensors. The tablet can only control paired beds, so as
to avoid misuse or hacking.
III. E XPERIMENT AND R ESULTS
A. Experiment
As stated in [8], the carried out user study had two
objectives: 1) confirm the functionality of the system, and
2) evaluate the users’ perception of the interface. In this
regard, the focus of this paper will be to discuss the later.
To accomplish the objectives, 20 participants from 17 to 28
years old tested the adjustable bed, as shown in Figure 3, and
filled a survey that encouraged the participants to think of the
system as a robot.
The procedure for the experiment went as follows:

Figure 3. SmartBed during the experiment

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

1)
2)
3)
4)

Training (1 min) - participants laid down on the bed
and were given instruction on how to navigate the
user interface.
Predefined sequence (2 min) - participants experienced automatic movement of the SmartBed.
Free control (3 min) - participants freely interacted
with the interface.
Questionnaire (4 min) - participants filled out a
questionnaire

For the survey, the following items were asked and answered with a scale from 1 (Not at all) to 5 (Of course), using
a Godspeed style questionnaire [9]:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Friendliness: how friendly the system feels.
Smartness: how smart the system feels.
Wisdom: how knowledgeable the system seems.
Relaxation: how relaxed the system seems.
Calmness: how calmed the system feels.
Ease of use: ease of use of the interface.
Capability: how capable the system feels for the task.
Personal Preference: whether the subject would like
to be catered by a robotic interface.

B. Results
The results of the survey presented in Figure 4 are as
follows. Having an adjustable bed controlled by just a tablet
seemed to be easy to use for the participants. Moreover, most
subjects felt the bed to be calmed and relaxed. On the contrary,
while some people thought the SmartBed was somewhat smart,
the majority agreed that it did not infer wisdom.
C. Follow Up
A follow up of this experiment took place on an actual
hospital environment, where a designated nurse and patient
tested the bed for a week. From the care-giver’s perspective,
the developed system proved to be functional and convenient,
as they could control the hospital bed remotely, without any
major effort. On the other hand, the patient reported that the
movement of the bed was comfortable and felt secure while
using the system.
Notwithstanding, this convenience of controlling the
SmartBed remotely might distance the interaction between
caregiver and patient, while the emotional state of the bedridden may not be conveyed promptly and correctly.

16

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

IV. K ANSEI A NALYSIS AND D ISCUSSION
In Kansei Design, user experience plays an important role
in defining the direction of development for a product. The
reaction of the final user is as important as solving the problem
with the most optimal procedure, which is the reason why
a constant feedback from the users is necessary to create
a closed-loop like system that allows for a better design.
Additionally, the environment where the product will be used
must be taken into consideration, as that determines limitations
and restrictions of the design.
Taking the aforementioned factors into account, the results
presented on the previous section show that the overall feedback of the participants tends toward perceiving the bed as
having seemingly human-like characteristics. Nonetheless, it is
worth noting that the survey encouraged the subjects to think
of the SmartBed as a robot, instead of an entirely controllable
machine. Moreover, the subjects were around their twenties,
which means that it is highly probable that they are used to
interacting with technology.
In this sense, the general perception that this hospital bed is
capable of doing what it is expected to do, but without having
any knowledge or good judgment for its actions, namely
wisdom, could mean that potential users (both patients and
medical personnel), might think of the system as a slave
machine rather than a companion throughout rehabilitation.
Yet, this perception may give the patient the notion of freedom
and independence, as the user will be able to control the system
by itself, thus potentially increasing his/her motivation and
mood, and improve the rehabilitation process.
Furthermore, as the SmartBed is projected to be used by
people not familiar with technology, it is proposed to redesign
the user interface. With the bed’s ability to do biometric
measurements of the patient, it is possible to process these data
to present some of the emotional states of the user, as well as
programming countermeasures to react to negative emotions.
Also, Figure 5 shows a draft of the redesigned user interface:
a cover and tablet which displays the face of the patient
and caregiver, alongside simple inputs, to lessen the negative
effect produced by remote controlling, and to make the bed
both easier to use for general people, and a communication’s
channel.
On the other hand, a redesign of this medical device,
considering the approach suggested by Lee, et al. [2] of
creating a 3D model in clay before sketching, can be applied to
obtain unconventional results to actual hospital beds in order to

circumvent the feeling of entrapment for bedridden patients.
After that, the model must be adjusted with hospital safety
standards to ensure its usability.
V. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
Although designing a hospital bed with only technical
aspects in consideration may improve user experience, the
’kansei’ of the user must be appraised to develop a medical
device that feels and is safe.
Likewise, adding convenience to a system might improve
usability, but could diminish patient-caregiver relationship.
Thence, it is suggested to consider these factors on future
designs.
Finally, further evaluations must be made on an actual
hospital environment to assess the emotional and psychological
response of target users. It is suggested to correlate the personality of the patient with the impressions of this SmartBed
to find if using a mechatronic medical bed is suitable for all
patients.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the Potifical Catholic
University of Peru and its researchers for providing the background work of this project.
[1]
[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]
[7]

[8]

[9]

R EFERENCES
R. Parasuraman, “Humans and Automation: Use, Misuse, Disuse,
Abuse,” Human Factors, vol. 39, no. 2, 1997, pp. 230–253.
S. H. Lee, A. Harada, and P. J. Stappers, Design Based on Kansei. Taylor
Francis, London, 2002, chapter 16, pp. 219–229, in Green, W. S. and
Jordan, P. W., Pleasure With Products: Beyond Usability, ISBN: 0-41523704-1.
“UNH Research Enhancing Patient Care With ”Smart” Hospital Beds,”
2012, URL: http://www.unh.edu/news/cj nr/2010/dec/dw07smart.cfm
[accessed: 2017-02-26].
A. Bandala and et al., “Development and Design of Automated Hospital
Bed with Incremental Panels for Bedsore Prevention,” in IEEE Region
10 Conference TENCON 2014, Bangkok, Thailand, Oct. 2014, pp. 762–
767.
D. Townsend, M. Holtzman, R. Goubran, M. Frize, and F. Knoefel,
“Relative Thresholding With Under-Mattress Pressure Sensors to Detect
Central Apnea,” IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement, vol. 60, no. 10, 2011, pp. 3281–3289.
“Welcome to the EPOSbed Project Website,” 2011, URL:
http://www.eposbed.com/ [accessed: 2017-02-26].
“In-Touch Critical Bed Care,” 2016, URL: http://www.stryker.com/enus/products/PatientHandlingEMSandEvacuationEquipment/Beds/Critical
CareBeds/InTouch/index.htm [accessed: 2017-02-26].
E. Onchi, C. Pealoza, and F. Cullar, “Design and implementation of a
mechatronic SmartBed for improved rehabilitation,” in Proceedings 2016
IEEE International Conference on Industrial Technology (ICIT), Taipei,
Taiwan, Mar. 2016, pp. 1482–1487.
C. Bartneck, E. Croft, and D. Kulic, “Measurement Instruments for the
Anthropomorphism, Animacy, Likeability, Perceived Intelligence, and
Perceived Safety of Robots,” International Journal of Social Robotics,
vol. 1, no. 1, 2009, pp. 71–81.

Figure 5. Proposed Interface Draft

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

17

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Sleep Evaluation Influenced by Negative Emotions and Memories After Awakening
Among Adolescents and Young Adults
Huan Wen Lu

SeungHee Lee

Faculty of Industrial Design
Eindhoven University of Technology
Noord-Brabant, The Netherlands
Email: klu@live.nl

Faculty of Art and Design
Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences
Univeristy of Tsukuba
Ibaraki, Japan
Email: seungheekansei@gmail.com

Abstract—This paper examined the influence of sleep experience on self-sleep evaluation among adolescents and young
adults. 64 participants (age between 16-27, 36 males, 28 woman)
have participated in a questionnaire study. Sleeping habits and
subjective sleeping experience have been mapped and analyzed.
In a follow-up study, three participants have been tracking their
sleep experience, daily activities and sleep hygiene. The results
have shown that the participants of both studies sleep less than
average, but within the margin for healthy sleep. However, 25,8%
of the participants evaluate their sleep as insufficient or as an
unpleasant experience. The case study showed that the evaluation
process of sleep experience is unbalanced. Memories of bad sleep
and negative emotions have a bigger impact on sleep evaluation
scores. Memories of pleasant sleeping experiences are more easily
replaced by new thoughts and are often forgotten during the sleep
evaluation process.

Keywords– sleep hygiene; sleep evaluation; activity tracking; bad sleeping experience.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Insufficient sleep, difficulties waking up and a bad mood
are consequences of experiencing bad sleep. In the long run,
unpleasant sleeping experience and mental fatigue may lead to
sleeping disorder [1]. Out of this, only a small fraction of the
big group of problem sleepers has officially been diagnosed
with a sleep disorder and are receiving professional help
and treatment [2]. The common sleeper is thus, unaware of
what good sleep and bad sleep implies. On the other hand,
information found on the internet is not always accurate or
is difficult to understand for everyday people. As a result, the
difference between good sleep and bad sleep is therefore often
misunderstood [3]. Sleep can be influenced by many different
factors, where sleep hygiene and consuming behavior plays an
active role [4].
In recent studies regarding sleep quality perceptions, it has
been suggested that there is a wide variety in how accurately
insomnia sufferers perceive their sleep [5]-[8]. Insomnia sufferers tend to underestimate the overall sleep time and have
a negative view on sleeping compared to normal sleepers.
Furthermore, investigations into sleep misperceptions have
shown that people with a healthy sleep hygiene have proven
to be more accurate to evaluate their sleep [9]-[11]. In this
regard, the goal of this study is to map down and analyze

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

the sleep data of adolescents and young adults to find how
self-sleep evaluation is influenced by sleep experience.
The topic of this paper is introduced in section I. In section
II, the methodology, target audience and the setup of both
studies is explained. Section III shows the obtained results
and subject evaluation of both studies. The discussion and
conclusion are written in section IV and V.
II. M ETHODS
This study is divided into two parts: (1) the sleep evaluation
analysis of the younger generation in the area of Eindhoven
and (2) a case study of three subjects to find how selfsleep evaluation is influenced by sleep experience. Adolescents
and young adults were approached to participate in a survey
and share their past experiences, thoughts about sleep quality
and how they would evaluate their own sleep. Moreover,
people regardless of background, gender, or medical dossier
were allowed to participate in this questionnaire. The only
requirement was to be within the age group of 16 to 27 years
old.
According to the adolescents and young adults participating
in this study, they are facing more problems related to sleep
such as: feeling tired, insufficient sleep, irregular sleep patterns
and stress. To look further into the case of sleep evaluation, a
specific case study is designed to track the sleeping experience
and consuming behavior of adolescents and young adults
outside a clinical environment.
A total of 64 participants (28 female) successfully filled
in the sleeping evaluation questionnaire. Figure 1 and 2
show the age distribution and occupation. The occupations
are distributed among three groups: 66% are in education or
training, 31% are employed, and 3% are unemployed and
not in education. Among this group, 16 participants (25,8
%) stated they have troubles regarding one, or more of the
following points: falling asleep, staying asleep, going to bed,
waking up, or tiredness. In all cases the participants were not
officially diagnosed with any sleeping disorder.
The following statements were hypothesized: (1) Adolescents and young adults do not have a clear overview of what
good sleeping experience means. The true definition of good
sleep is not clearly defined, causing misunderstandings; (2)

18

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

sleep evaluation is influenced by time. The moment when it is
evaluated makes a difference in evaluation score. People have
different opinions about their sleep during the day; (3) only a
small percentage of the adolescents and young adults do have
(symptoms of) sleeping problems; (4) consuming and activity
behavior prior going to bed does have a measurable impact
on sleep experience. Physical exercise, caffeine and alcohol
consumption may have an influence on one’s sleep.
Based on the results of the sleep evaluation analysis, three
subjects were chosen out of the 64 participants to participate
in a case study. They were chosen from the initial group of
participants based on questionnaire results, Pittsburgh Sleep
Quality Assessment (PSQI) score and willingness to participate. What is more, the subjects completed an interview
process, about their personal standing on the subject of sleep,
survey results and past sleeping experiences. They, consisted
of two non-problem sleepers and one problem sleeper, where
the last has not been diagnosed with a mental sleep disorder.
In this research, the following assumptions were made: a nonproblem sleeper is someone who (a) sleeps everyday at least
six hours; (b) falls asleep in less than 30 minutes; (c) is
sleeping in a bedroom environment; (d) is excluded from any
disorders or illnesses; (e) has a PSQI score of less than five.
A problem sleeper is defined if he or she does not qualify for
at least one of the statements written above.

A. Sleep Evaluation Questionnaire
Each participant was given a set of questionnaires to complete in their own time. Included in the set were three different
questionnaires related to: sleep quality, sleep experience, and
daily activities for the past month. Moreover, questions were
based on different studies for diagnosing sleep disorders:
Pittsburgh Quality Sleep Index (PSQI) [12], Consensus Sleep
Diary (CSD) [13] and Stanford Sleeping Scale (SSS) [14]. The
questions in the survey were slightly modified to be applicable
to the public audience who is not familiar to mental sleep
disorders [15]. In the end, the participants were asked if they
would like to volunteer as subjects in the case study.
B. Case Study Procedure
Based on the results of the questionnaire study, three subjects were chosen: two males (22 and 24), and one female (26).
One of the subjects (24/M), claimed to have sleep troubles
consisting of: falling asleep, irregular sleeping patterns and
feeling tired during the day. Au contraire, during the study, the
subjects were required to keep track of: (a) food, beverages,
medication, and tobacco consumed/used; (b) physical exercise
(what exercise and how long); (c) activities from at least
2 hours prior going to bed; and (d) sleep evaluation after
awakening. Furthermore, they did not change their sleeping
schedule, consuming, and activity behavior. Before starting
the experiment, the volunteers were guided on how to use
the tracking tools, interviewed about their thought of the
experiment, and a questionnaire related to sleep experience
was given to fill in. Besides, two tracking tools were provided
to register the activities: (1) a notebook, consisting of questions
and feedback requests on their sleep, a blank table and
some additional blank comment space; and (2) a smartphone
application with questions related to their sleeping experience,
tracking option for consumables and activities and a comment
section (see Figure 3). Either one of the two diaries had to

Figure 1. Age Distribution Participants

Figure 2. Occupation and Gender

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

Figure 3. Tracking Application: Rested Beta 0.2

19

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

be filled. Before starting the experiment, the volunteers were
guided on how to use the tracking tools, interviewed about
their thought of the experiment, and a questionnaire related to
sleep experience was given to fill in.
The tracking application for the smartphone was created to
make tracking easier and accessible for the subjects. At the end
of the experiment, the subjects were once again interviewed
with the same questions as the pre-experiment interview and
were given the same questionnaire about sleep experience to
fill in.
The results from all data provided by the participants and
subjects have been analyzed through a cause and effect study.
The relationship of consuming, activity behavior, and sleeping
evaluation were mapped into multiple subgroups and analyzed.
The groups consisted of occupation, age, and sleep evaluation
score.

Figure 5. Sleep Evaluation Data 2

III. R ESULTS
The results from the sleep evaluation questionnaire are
shown in Figures 4, 5, and 6. These include sleep evaluation
score, bedtime, wake time, and a plot of sleep evaluation
against the total amount of sleep. In this regard, sleep evaluation is based on a [0-10] point scale, where 0 is the most
negative and 10 the most positive sleep experience. Participants filled the questionnaire individually, without further
instructions, while questions left open were not taken into
account. From the aforementioned, the participants are divided
into sub-groups: (a) Good sleepers (8+), normal sleepers (57), bad sleepers (4-); (b) student and non-student; and (c)
by age group: between 16 and 19 years old, consisting of
mainly students attending high school, from 20 to 23 years old,
consisting of mainly students attending university or college,
and 24-27 years old, consisting of mainly working adults.
The results are compared to guidelines given on sleep for
adolescents. According to previously published research, the
body has optimal rest and growth when adolescents sleep on
average eight hours per day. Healthy sleep is sleeping between
6 and 9 hours per day [16]. However, a different study reported
that only 15% of the adolescents are sleeping eight hours [17].
Among the participants, 14,5 % (9 out of 62) did sleep the

Figure 4. Sleep Evaluation Data 1

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

Figure 6. Sleep Time Versus Evaluation Score

recommended 8 hours of sleep per day. In the questionnaire,
certain sleep - wake behaviors were asked and are shown in
Figure 5 and 6. In overall, the participants in the age group
of 16-19 and 24-27 are the most satisfied with their sleep.
Participants aged from 20-23 experience the worst sleep.
The results from the case study are shown in Figure 7. A
diary study gave more accurate values in sleep wake times and
daily activities of the subjects. In addition, according to the
data sheet, it was clear that the subjects underestimate their
amount of sleep. The total amount of sleep is approximately
half an hour to an hour more than the time submitted at the
questionnaire. The subjects were always looking at the worst
case scenario. Therefor they were underestimating their total
sleep time.
Consuming and activity behavior having an impact on sleep
experience does not clearly show in the results from the
case study; likewise, interviews with the participants gave
different answers without a clear conclusion. Notwithstanding,
regular eating and drinking habits do have a small influence
on one’s sleep. In a different study, it was stated for optimal
sleep hygiene, food, drinks, and physical exercise is not
recommended prior bed time. In contradiction to the previous
statement, one of the subjects (26/F) was having intense
physical exercise 2-3 times per week prior going to bed. In the
after-interview, she clearly stated ”Physical exercise improves

20

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 7. Case Study Data Summary

my sleep experience, it helps me to fall asleep more easily
and it helps to clear my mind”.
The evaluation of sleep is influenced by memories and
feelings related to bad sleep. Subjects (22/M and 24/M) gave
their opinion that bad sleep has more impact on their morning
routine. The difference between good and bad sleep experience
cannot be compared as many factors affect this judgment. The
moment of evaluation is also very important. For example,
evaluating your sleep directly after waking up, will result in a
lower evaluation score; whereas doing it after taking a shower,
or having a morning coffee, will improve the evaluation score.
It has been stated by the subjects that memories of bad sleep
are stronger and more memorable, while memories of good
sleep are easily forgotten and replaced by new thoughts of
activities and events.
On another topic, the tracking application was favored over
the traditional paper notebook, during the two-week study:
all three subjects preferred to use the smartphone application.
One of the subjects (22/M) gave his opinion about activity
tracking: ”Tracking my activities gave me more insight about
my daily routines and consuming behavior. However, I did
not change my behavior a lot”. The subjects were interested
in sleep hygiene and behavior change, however, they were not
willing to change their own daily routines.
IV. D ISCUSSION
The case study sampled sleep experience and activity behavior across multiple nights and outside clinical settings. The
findings found in this study are based on the results provided
by the participants, which are subjective statements and believes they have themselves. Moreover, the findings supported
previous studies about the sleep patterns of adolescents and

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

young adults, but a bigger sample size is required to give a
final conclusion. Inevitably, the coherence between consuming
and activity behavior prior going to bed is unclear and cannot
be confirmed in this study. Consuming and activity behavior,
a part of sleep hygiene, has on a certain degree effect on one’s
sleep. The positive effect has been stated in previous studies as
well, but sleep hygiene is due to contradictory result material
not used in this study. It can be concluded that activity and
consuming behavior do have a relation to sleep experience.
When reviewing the findings and implications discussed
herein, it is important to consider the limitations which may
have influenced these findings. The data is in all cases subjective information provided by the participants themselves. The
participants’ self-evaluation is based on own knowledge and
attitude towards sleep. People who are biased towards good
sleeping experience, are evaluating their sleep with more care.
As a result, these people were very satisfied with their own
sleep.
The other group has a more diverse opinion on sleep, these
individuals consisted mainly of college and university students.
Hence, due to projects, exams and social relations, there is
less structure in their sleep hygiene. Pressure from school,
social relationships and (part-time) work is in some cases more
important than sleep, which results in their sleep evaluation to
be below average. Subsequently, people with a more negative
view on sleep, are always looking at the worst case scenario.
As a result, they were underestimating their total sleep time
on a regular base. It is thought that, as a result of this study,
sleep evaluation is influenced by many more factors outside
of the domain of sleep. Negative emotions and memories do
have a significant impact on sleep evaluation.
From the results of the sleep evaluation questionnaire, it
can be argued that: (a) adolescents and young adults of this
study do not reach the quota of sleep recommended for their
age group, but are within margin of healthy sleep behavior;
(b) subjective thoughts about sleep experiences are more
negative than the actual sleep experience. 25,8 percent of the
participants rate their sleep overall bad (less or equal than four
on the 10-point scale), and there are only five cases where
people sleep less than the norm of at least five hours; (c) most
of the people are misinformed about what good quality sleep
means. Their view on sleep in general very negative. This may
be caused by all the information available on the Internet about
various sleep disorders.
V. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORKS
Adolescents and young teenagers do sleep less, but within
the margin for healthy sleep. However, the evaluation process
of subjective sleep experience is unbalanced. Memories and
emotions related to unpleasant sleeping experience are more
memorable and present than pleasant sleeping experiences.
Pleasant memories are more easily replaced by new thoughts
and are often forgotten during the sleep evaluation process. As
a result, negative emotions and memories have more influence
on the results of subjective sleep evaluation.

21

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

In future studies, the domain of subjective sleep experience
is not only limited to factors as overall sleep time, wake time,
sleep quality, but factors as feelings, memories and emotions
could be included in addition. Following the Japanese trend
of design emotion, the approach of Kansei design, where
research and development are focused towards the customer’s
psychological feelings and emotions could be used as one of
the starting points.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like express their appreciation towards
the subjects and people involved in this research, TU\E, The
Netherlands for guiding and supervising the whole process,
and Lee Laboratory, Tsukuba University, Japan for supervising
the revision of this paper.
R EFERENCES
[1] American Sleep Disorders Association, American Sleep Disorders Association. International classification of sleep disorders: Diagnostic and
coding manual. Rochester, MN: American Sleep Disorders, Rochester,
MN: American Sleep Disorders Association, 1991.
[2] A. L. Jr Chesson, R. A. Ferber, and J. M.Fry, ”The indications for
polysomnography and related procedures, ” Sleep, vol. 20, no. 6, pp.
423-87, June, 1997.
[3] A. R. Wolfson and M. A. Carskadon, ”Sleep Schedules and Daytime
Functioning in Adolescents”, Child Development, vol. 69, no. 4 pp. 875887, August, 1998.
[4] ZubiaVeqar, M EjazHussain. ”Sleep Quality Improvement and Exercise:
A Review”, International Journal of Scientific and Research Publications,
vol. 2, no. 8, August 2012.
[5] M. A. Carskadon, et al. ”Self-reports versus sleep laboratory findings
in 122 drug-free subjects with complaints of chronic insomnia”, Am J
Psychiatry, vol 133, no 12, pp. 1382-1388, December, 1976.

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

[6] J. D. Edinger, A. I. Fins. ”The Distribution and Clinical Significance of
Sleep Time Misperceptions among Insomniacs”, Sleep, vol. 18, no. 4, pp.
232-239, May, 1995.
[7] E. Libman, L. Creti, R. D. Levy, W. Brender and C. S. Fichten, ”A
Comparison of Reported and Recorded Sleep in Older Poor Sleepers”,
Journal of Clinical Geropsychology, vol. 3, no. 3, 199-211, 1997.
[8] D. Schneider-Helmert, A. Kumar, ”Sleep, its subjective perception, and
daytime performance in insomniacs with a pattern of alpha sleep”,
Biological Psychiatry. vol. 37, no 2, 859-865, January, 1995.
[9] M. H. Bonnet and D. L. Arand, ”Physiological activation in patients with
Sleep State Misperception”, Psychosom Med. vol 5, no. 5, pp. 533-540,
September-October, 1997
[10] E. Hoddes, M. Carskadon, R. Phillips, V. Zarcone, W. C. Dement ,
”Total sleep time in insomniacs”, [Abstract] Sleep Research, vol 1, pp.
152, 1972.
[11] W. F. Seidel, et al. ”Daytime alertness in relation to mood, performance,
and nocturnal sleep in chronic insomniacs and noncomplaining sleepers”,
Sleep, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 230-238, 1984.
[12] D. J. Buysse, C. F. Reynolds, T. H. Monk, S. R. Berman and D.J.
Kupfer, ”The Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI): A new instrument
for psychiatric research and practice”, Psychiatry Research, vol. 28, no.
2, pp. 193-213, May, 1989.
[13] E. Colleen, et al. ”The Consensus Sleep Diary: Standardizing Prospective Sleep Self-Monitoring”, Sleep, vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 287-302, February
2012.
[14] A. Shahid, K. Wilkinson, S. Marcu, C. M. Shapiro, ”Stanford Sleepiness
Scale (SSS)”, STOP, THAT and One Hundred Other Sleep Scales, pp.
369-370, November 2011.
[15] A. J. Spielman, P. Saskin ,M. J. Thorpy, ”Treatment of chronic insomniaby restriction of time in bed”, Sleep, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 45-55, February
1987.
[16] “Teens and Sleep,” 2016, URL: https://sleepfoundation.org/sleeptopics/teens-and-sleep [accessed: 2017-02-27].
[17] D. F. Kripke, et al. ”Mortality Associated With Sleep Duration and
Insomnia”, Arch Gen Psychiatry, vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 131-136, February
2002.

22

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Study on the Effectiveness of Coloring on Physical and Mental
Health of the Elderly in Adult Daycare Centers

Chuan Feng∗ , Ya Wen Deng† , Naomi Okubo‡ , Tetsuya Sanpei§ and SeungHee Lee¶
∗ Kansei,

Behavioral and Brain Sciences – Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences
University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan
Email: feng111@outlook.com
† National Tsing Hua University – Institute of Service Science, Hsinchu City, Taiwan
Email: dengyawenjp@gmail.com
‡ coco de class Corp., Ibaraki, Japan
Email: n.okubo@cocodeclass-afs.com
§ Japan Prime Computing Corp., Ibaraki, Japan
Email: sanpei.tetsuya@j-pc.jp
∗ Faculty of Art and Design – Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences – University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan
Email: seungheekansei@gmail.com
Abstract—It has been reported that coloring provides a widerange of health benefits for all ages, especially the elderly. Many
nursing homes started to apply coloring as a routine activity for
their residents in Japan, and its usefulness is expected. As the
rapidly declining birthrate and aging of the population continue,
it is necessary to develop new activities to improve the lifestyle
of senior adults. The purpose of this study is to assess the
effectiveness of coloring therapy for the elderly on their mood
states, and to investigate whether there is a correlation between
color and the mood stage while coloring. A daily experimental
scheme is proposed for the elderly in a daycare center by
providing purposeful line drawings with concrete elements.
Keywords–coloring; art therapy; elderly; daycare center.

I. I NTRODUCTION
As Japan enters the super-aging stage, the number of
people certified for long-term care/support has been increasing.
Citizens over the age of 65 account for 26.7% of the country’s
population, and only around 1.7 million care workers are
available for almost 6.2 million individuals requiring special
attention [1]. This increase in elderly per caregiver ratio results
in a heavy burden for the worker and a reduction in quality
care. In response to this, many nursing homes arrange activities
beyond daily care to lessen stress on caregivers and provide a
better living environment.
Recently, a number of nursing centers started applying
’coloring’ as a routine activity, since it has been reported
that coloring books have a wide-range of therapeutic and
health benefits [2]. Furthermore, related research proved that
the use of coloring in non-pharmacological treatment made
a positive impact on patients with various diseases of aging,
like cognitive disorders and disabilities. Hattori et al. [3] found
significant improvements in the vitality and quality of life
on patients with mild Alzheimers disease. Moreover, it is
suggested to be an effective stress reducer for persons with
intellectual disability [4], while cardiac rehabilitation patients
also experienced a greater relaxation and positive mood response after the coloring therapy [5]. However, although the
use of coloring books is encouraged as a pleasurable activity,
it is not considered as professional art therapy [6].
In this regard, the purpose of this study is to determine

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

the effectiveness of coloring on physical and mental health of
adult daycare center users, and provide evidence on whether
or not this activity affects the elderly. This paper is structured
as follows. In Section I, the current state of Japanese elderly
care and coloring as a therapy is introduced. In Section II,
general information of the cooperative facility is given, and in
Section III and IV, the methodology and preliminary study
are described, respectively. Finally, a brief discussion and
conclusion for the current study progress are given in Sections
V and VI.
II. DAYCARE C ENTER
For this research, a daycare center in Ibaraki, Japan, was
visited. This facility nurses 32 senior adults in need of LongTerm Care(LTC) / Support, 11 males and 21 females, ranging
between the age of 60 and 105, with a mean age of 87. According to the Japanese Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare, the
level of care is classified from Support Level 1(Needs social
support and partial assistance with ADLs but may maintain or
improve functions), to Care Level 5 (maximum demand for
full service) [7]. Following this classification, the users of the

Figure 1. Number of Elderly Users and Care Levels

23

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 4. Answer Icons

Figure 2. Number, Ages and Gender of Care Workers

care center are distributed as presented in Figure 1, while 81%
of the elderly able to do coloring are below Care Level 3.
On the other hand, Figure 2 shows that from the 17 care
workers at the daycare center, only one is male. What is more,
the majority of carers are concentrated on the 50-60 age range
group, while no one is in their twenties.
III. M ETHODOLOGY
This study included a total of N=30 elderly. Even though
most of the participants are under Care Level 3, they are
more or less suffering some common geriatric disease, such as:
hypertension, heart diseases, bone and joint pain or diabetes.
In addition, some of them are observed to have different
degrees of progressive memory loss and cognitive impairment,
namely suspected of having Alzheimer’s disease (AD). For
this reason, in order to avoid causing discomfort, the length of
each coloring time and the complexity of the drawings were
designed as stated below.
A. Drawing Design
Considering cultural influences, Japanese elderly prefer
contents which are familiar and related to their past. To elicit
emotion and empathy, three themes were chosen: ’Flowers’
and ’Traditional Objects’ (Figure 3). The contents of these
line drawings are colorless and were previously tested with
the elderly to not be difficult for the subjects.
B. Procedure
Firstly, the participants, after signing an informed consent,
are presented with a set of 12 pre-determined colored pencils

Figure 3. A Sample Drawing From Each Theme

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

and line drawings. Coloring time is divided into two sessions
of 30 minutes each. On the first session, the subjects will color
an specific drawing, whereas, on the second session, the elderly
are free to choose which drawing to color.
Secondly, before starting coloring, the subjects are asked
to record the ’date’, ’weather’, and ’mood’ at the time of
the activity. To account for participants with mild cognitive
impairment, each answer uses easy to understand icons as
shown in Figure 4.
Finally, the finished coloring works are collected and
scanned to build a digital database. Then, the ’color’, ’drawing’, ’blood pressure’, ’hearbeat rate’, ’body temperature’,
’date’, ’weather’, and ’mood’ elements are analyzed to find
relationships between the activity and change on the elderly.
Furthermore, a color analysis program will assess color usage,
line pressure, and line consistency of each work.
IV. P RELIMINARY S TUDY
For the purpose of collecting design data, a preliminary
study was conducted at the daycare center. A pilot study
with prototype drawings (Figure 5) showed that most of the
elderly were willing to try coloring. During the activity time,
the atmosphere became lively and relaxed. In addition, two
opposite phenomena were perceived: some of the subjects
were extremely devoted and refused to communicate with the
outside world; while some actively communicated with people,
showing a significant social desire.
Additionally, Figure 6 presents the coloring works of one
subject (age 92). This female participant is a farmer living with
her son and daughter in law, husband deceased. According
to the information provided by the daycare center, she has
been attending this institution for 3 years, 6 times per week,
and suffers from astigmatism and arrhythmia. On the other
hand, during the activity, she showed careful thinking while
filling the line drawings. Moreover, some of her personality
traits made detectable during the experiment were: will not say
anything when depressed, murmurs while drawing if feeling
angry, gets easily angry when remembering bad experiences,
and goes along with other people.

Figure 5. Pilot Study on Coloring

24

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank all colleagues and students
who contributed to this study, and are grateful to the National
Federation of Agricultural Cooperative Associations, the daycare center of JA-Hitachi Fureai, Tokai, and the daycare center
of JA-Hitachi Daisuki, Takahagi, for their collaboration during
preliminary investigations.
[1]
[2]
Figure 6. Collected Data from a Subject
[3]

V. D ISCUSSION
This study found that the following points need more
strictly control for the upcoming experiment. On one side,
there are many factors of external interferences on the processes of coloring and not all of the elderly can finish their
works everytime. On the other side, the pilot study did
not found any significant relationship between the emotion
of subject and the color they have used. Therefore, in the
upcoming experiment, the study will introduce the experiment
more specifically to the elderly, and briefly interview them
about their feeling while coloring to have more information to
analyze.
VI. C ONCLUSION
The purpose of this study was to determine the effectiveness of coloring as a therapy for elderly nursing home
users, and provide evidence supporting the positive effects that
coloring can make on mental and physical health. A daily
experimental scheme was proposed by providing meaningful
line drawings with figurative elements to the elderly, to collect,
analyze and track their daily mood.
From the guidelines presented in this paper, a three months
research will be conducted at the daycare center to gather and
process the data.

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

R EFERENCES
“Considering a Social Model to Overcome Population Aging,” Japan
Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare, Tech. Rep., 2016.
“Why grown-ups love coloring books too,” 2016, URL:
http://ideas.ted.com/why-grown-ups-love-coloring-books-too/ [accessed:
2016-06-26].
H. Hattori, C. Hattori, C. Hokao, K. Mizushima, and T. Mase, “Controlled study on the cognitive and psychological effect of coloring and
drawing in mild Alzheimer’s disease patients,” Geriatrics Gerontology
International, vol. 11, no. 4, 2011, pp. 431–437.
C. Schrade, L. Tronsky, and H. Kaiser, “Physiological effects of mandala
making in adults with intellectual disability,” The Arts in Psychotherapy,
vol. 38, no. 2, 2011, pp. 109–113.
D. Elkis-Abuhoff, M. Gaydos, R. Goldblatt, M. Chen, and S. Rose,
“Mandala drawings as an assessment tool for women with breast cancer,”
The Arts in Psychotherapy, vol. 36, no. 4, 2009, pp. 231–238.
R. Carolan and D. Betts, “The adult coloring book phenomenon,” 2015,
URL:
http://3blmedia.com/News/Adult-Coloring-Book-Phenomenon/
[accessed: 2016-06-26].
“About the Certification of Needed Long-Term Care,” 2015, URL:
http://www.mhlw.go.jp/topics/kaigo/kentou/15kourei/sankou3.html
[accessed: 2016-09-05].

25

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

A Diary Study of Smart Phone Notification System For College Students
Ji Wang∗ , Qingyao Zhang, Qinqing Gong† , SeungHee Lee∗ ,

§

∗ Kansei,Behavioral

and Brain Sciences
Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences
University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan, 305 0005
Email: wangji@kansei.tsukuba.ac. seungheekansei@gmail.com
† School of Psychology
Shaanxi Normal University, Xi’an, China, 710062
Email: qingyaozhang@outlook.com purivy0430@sina.com

Abstract—Smart phone can support a variety of functions in
people’s daily life. Notification is one of the basic core function of
smart phone user experience. This research explored the college
students ’ behaviors when they deal with the notification system
of smart phone. In order to know the behaviors of user, this study
conducted a diary study method to record the information about
notification users received from the smart phone. Before the one
week diary study, a pre-experiment interview was conducted, the
results of interview shown that they have a negative evaluation
to receive notifications (disruptive). Hierarchical linear model
analyses on the diary contents suggested that the current task
types had significant influence on the college students’ evaluation
on notification disruptive. The evaluation on the importance of
notification content can predict user’s evaluate on the disruptive
of notification content.
Keywords—notification system; smart phone; dairy study; user
experience.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Smart phones have become an integral part of college
life, current smart phone can support a variety of functions.
Notification is one of the basic core functions of smart phone.
Notification is used to drive the users attention to the content
of a notification message and remind user about something. As
the media for user to communicate with the outside world, it
is difficult to measure the importance of notification. However,
many users feel pressure for the notification system. Previous
studies have shown a core problem with notifications was that
users tend to drop their current task to check the notification
instead [1]. In the work context, this can be explained by the
fact that notifications interrupt workers. Information workers
find it difficult to return to a previous task after having been
interrupted by a notification. They report higher subjective
workloads when receiving notifications during phases of focused work. However, previous studies have also shown that
people value notifications. Those studies also suggested that
notifications vary in different levels of importance [2]. A diary
study was conducted to explore the extent to what kinds of
notifications are needed by college students. Dairy method
have high ecological value as they carried out in the users
real environments [3]. It helps the researchers to get in-depth
understanding of users day to day jobs and environment diary
study can be used which involves participants reporting their

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

activities over a specific period of time in their normal daily
lives addressing the when, the what and the how. This study
will use diary method, which will record daily events of
the user deal with the notifications accurately. It helps to
understand how the notification usage changes over the time
(Compared to a traditional in lab usability study where this
study typically gather information on firstly time usage of a
system or product) and the kinds, frequency of notification and
so on.
The structure of the paper is as follows: Section I introduces
the essence of the smart phone and notification system. In
section II the method of the experiment is introduced. Section
III reports the result of the diary study on the smart phone
notification system. In Section IV, the analysis and discussion
of the diary study results are presented. Finally, in Section V,
the conclusions of this research are laid out.
II. M ETHOD
A. The Participants
Fourteen participants from Shannxi Normal University took
part in this experiment , 8 female and 6 male, with the age
distribution 18-24 years old (M = 20, SD = 1.96). 2 out of 14
participants (one female and one male) interrupted the diary
collected during the study,so this study totally collected twelve
participants’ data.
B. Device
All the mobile phone (provided by participants) used in this
experiment with the version above Android OS 4.3 or iOS
8.1 ). Participants were required to install Smartisan Notes (A
notetaking app.User can add picture in the notes and download
this APP in Apple Store or Google Play for free). Participants
should set on their phone notifications system in the mode that
the notifications come and it can show on the lock screen.
C. Procedure
Pre-experiment interview was conducted to know the
background information about participants smart phone
notification interview questions included :

26

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Q1: How many app installed on your phone?
Q2: These types of app (social network/ video and
image/education/payment/online shopping service), how
many of each kind app and how you set the notification
systems of these app ?
Q3: Share a recent experience about the Notification affect
( disturb) your study or work ?
Dairy study:
Contents of dairy collection as shown in Figure 1

applications were considered less important, life services
application notifications were more important. Additionally,
there was no significant difference between the importance of
notification from social networks and life services applications.
The result of primary data was shown in Figure 2. It shows
the average rating of disruptive at different times of the whole
day. Morning and afternoon periods were more disruptive
than other periods, because it was the study time for college
students.

Figure 1. The Example of Dairy Content

Each participants took the records of dairy content for one
week [2].

Figure 2. The Average Rating of Disruptive at Different Times

III. R ESULT

IV. D ISCUSSION

In this experiment, pre-experiment interview were conducted for 14 college students, they installed 11 to 42 applications (M = 23.64 , SD = 9.39) in their smart phone.
These applications can receive notifications when connected
network. Based on the previous survey of applications types,
we classify the applications into: social networks, video and
images education, entertainment, payment and life services.
We collected a total 739 notification messages information
from 12 participants in one week. Coding scheme: gender
codes are: 0 = female, 1 = male; grade codes are: 1 = freshman,
2 = sophomore, 3 = junior students, 4 = senior students.
There are 21 categories in current task, 9 categories in
location and 21 categories in notification sources. Based on the
real life situation (classification of apple store applications),
we coded the current task again. To facilitate the analysis of
the hierarchical linear model, we did the dummy coding for
current task, location, notification sources. Current task was
coded as 4 dummy variables location was coded as 3 dummy
variables, the notification sources was coded as 4 dummy
variables.
To test the the relationship between notification sources and
the importance of the notification ( short for importance ) ,
we built the multilevel random slopes model in this study.
Results showed that the mean value at level 2 of dummy
variables entertainment, life service, and education achieved
significant difference (P < 0.05) , indicated that the source
of the notification message affects participants evaluation
about the importance and urgency of a specific message.
Specifically, compared with the notification from the social
networks, the notification from entertainment and eduction

From the dairy content, we found that college students
interact with their smart phone all the time in their daily life.
They basically put attention to the notifications when they
came. This finding is consistent with previous study[1], even
though the importance of those notification content were not
high. Hierarchical linear model analyses was conducted on
the diary contents, the results shown the current task types
had significant influence on the college students evaluation
on notification disruptive. When college students focused on
current tasks, especially those tasks correlated with study, the
interrupt caused by dealing with notification make college
students rated the disruptive of notification in a high score.
This study also found he change in on the importance of
notification content can predict users evaluate on the disruptive
of notification content. The results of this study can give
suggestion to the college students to deal with the notification
system. For instance, when students are carrying out study
or work task they can choose to set the notifications system
to Do not disturb or Mute mode, it will reduce the times of
notification interrupt the current task.

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

V. C ONCLUSION
This research carried out a dairy study to explore college
students evaluations about the notifications of their smart
phones. It suggests a new usage model for smart phone manufacturers to develop in their devices for college students. The
notification sources were categorized into four categories, they
were, listed in descending order of importance, life services,
social networks, entertainment and education. Additionally,
the current activity affects participants’ evaluation about the

27

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

interference of the notifications. Specifically, when they were
studying or working, they considered the notifications are more
noisy. Due to the limitation of sample size, a wider range
of participants–including office staff, programmers and other
brain-workers, could yield an opportunity to more broadly
generalize the results.
R EFERENCE
[1] M. Czerwinski, E. Horvitz, and S. Wilhite , A diary study of task
switching and interruptions, in Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on
Human factors in computing systems. ACM, 2004, pp. 175-182, 2004.
[2] A. Sgirazi et al. , Large-Scale Assessment of Mobile Notification,
in proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing
systems. ACM, 2014, pp. 3055-3064, 2014.
[3] A. Sigh and S. Makhorta, A researchers guide to running diary studies,
in proceedings of APCHI 2013, pp. 296-300, 2013.

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

28

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Kid’s Friendly Wearable Device for Children’s Daily Safety

SeungHee Lee
Faculty of Art and Design
Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences
University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan
e-mail: seungheekansei@gmail.com
Abstract— This study introduces the development of a
practical product based on Kansei simulation of children’s
behavior and physiological reaction against anxiety. It started
in 2006 with children under 6-years-old who had few
experiences of accidents or events, and less linguistic
communication skills with their parents. The reliability of
heart rates to detect fear and anxiety was tested to know if it
could be one of the functions on this device. The heart rates
and behaviors of children while watching simulated movies
showing dangerous situations was analyzed. With the support
of the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications, a
device named “Onigiri Machine” was developed to keep
children safe while their parents work during daytime. It was
highly evaluated by scientists worldwide through conferences
papers, newspapers, and magazines. Now, keeping track of
children and elderly in shopping malls or in hospitals became
an issue in Tsukuba, Japan. For this reason, the device was
refined to update the functions and qualities for practical uses
in public services. Finally, this study shows how the device can
be used to keep children and elders safe in public spaces, and
how it delivers personal based data in an easy interface for
their companions.
Keywords- wearable device: kid’s
information sharing; children’s safety.

I.

friendly

design;

INTRODUCTION

The idea of this study was based on personal interests in
security for children between 0 to 6 years old in nurseries or
kindergartens while parents work during daytime. For the
development of the device, a basic research on physiological
data from children between 1 to 6 years was needed to detect
unconscious states in children through their heart rate.
Generally, regular working mothers should stay with
their children at least for 8 hours a day, and should
communicate with them, face to face, for 4 - 5 hours a day in
average. It is hard to say that this is enough to know what is
happening to their children’s growth, both physically and
mentally. Furthermore, the linguistic communication ability
of 0 to 6 years old children, before elementary school, is not
enough to be correctly understood by adults. In this regard,
the author had some frustration to communicate and get
information on her child, meaning that the only way to
understand was to keep watching her behavior and reactions
during limited moments. On the other hand, children under 6
years old get most of their influences from people around
them while imitating their behaviors naturally. As such, there

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

must be a clever way for working parents to know and feel
their children.
This study introduces the development process from
researching on children’s behavior and emotional reactions
to the final stage of making a practical system for real users
in public places. In order to develop a device that can detect
children’s conditions in anxious or emergency situations, the
following components were selected: heart rate measurement
device, GPS, camera, 3D accelerometer, XBee network, and
a microcontroller for connecting and controlling the sensors.
The most outstanding progress of this study was done
between 2009 and 2011, with the aid of the Strategic
Information and Communications R&D Promotion Program
(SCOPE) funded by the Ministry of Internal Affairs and
Communications. Based on the children’s heart rates
experiments started in 2006, a device named “Onigiri
Machine” was developed and updated to support information
sharing of children and elderly who cannot communicate
satisfactorily with people.
The structure of the paper is as follows. In Section II, the
basic research used as a base for this study is introduced. In
Section III, a design approach based on behavioral aspects of
children concerning safe construction of form, namely
“Kid’s Friendly Design”, is presented alongside advanced
technologies to detect a variety of situations. Section IV
details the experiment conducted for this study. Finally,
Section V concludes this research.
II.

BASIC RESEARCH

This study uses as base a foundation research done in
2006 concerning heart rate measurements on children during
stressful situations combined with the Kansei approach of
design.
A. Kansei
Kansei is a Japanese term that implies subjective
perception and reaction based on experiences. It involves
emotion, preferences, and learning of daily habits. People
react to an event depending on their personal experience,
including knowledge and intuitive response from image
matching of the past. Kansei reaction is more important for
surveying behavioral habits, in addition to being more
creative in finding new solutions for design development.
B. Heart rate Experiments
Heart rate is one of the elements in measuring
unconscious feelings of anxiety while facing new

29

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 2. Kid's Friendly Design Approach

necessary information is read from their chest. Emotional
and cognitive behavior could be detected by 3D acceleration
and heart rate measurement, in order to share their status
with their parents online, complemented with an image from
the child’s point of view.

Figure 1. Physiological test of anxiety for Children under 6 years old

experiences or any uncomfortable situation. The purpose of
the experiment was to know how heart rate relates to
emotional prediction in children while the device detects
their conditions during any situation. Figure 1 shows the
setup for the experiment. Children in a nursery from 1 to 6
years old participated. Simulation films which entail
dangerous and anxious situations from an adult standpoint
were prepared. These movies were originally edited with
royalty free copies. All the participants’ parents agreed with
the Institutional Review Board (IRB) of University of
Tsukuba while the safety of the experiments for testing the
heart rates was thoroughly checked. The result of the
experiment was that children’s Kansei is generally expressed
around 2 - 3 years old with practical experiences and
learning from their parents or people around. Therefore, their
emotional reaction gets closer to an adult’s.
III.

B. Weight and Size of the Device
In accordance to the Research Institute of Human
Engineering for Quality Life of Japan, which has a database
of the average body size for Japanese children between 0 and
12 years old since 2005, the size of the device was decided.
The width of a 3-year-old child’s chest is 164mm and for a
5-year-old is 176mm. Based on this information, the device
should not exceeded 100mm in diameter. Moreover, most of
the objects that can be attached on child’s neck weight
between 30 to 50 grams, while on their waist are less than
100 grams. Additionally, a survey among mothers in the
kindergarten reveled that 75 percent of them would allow
devices under 100 grams to be attached to their children. For
reference, an alarm buzzer weights between 45 to 60 grams,
likewise mobile phones for children range between 130 and
150 grams.
C. How and Where to Wear the Device
To attach the device on an appropriate position on

DESIGN DEVELOPMENT

For the development of the “Onigiri Machine”, a unique
approach was proposed. To make children attracted to, and
willing to, wear the device, a fascinating shape was designed
before deciding on the technological components. As shown
on Figure 2, this approach was denominated “Kid’s Friendly
Design”.
A. Maintaining the Integrity of the Specifications
For “Kid’s Friendly Design”, the first step was to decide
on the weight and size of the device, followed by how and
where to wear on a child’s body. Graphical design and
decoration was the last step. The main goal is to create a
fascinating appearance for kids to keep wearing it while the

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

Figure 3. Kid's Friendly Design Approach

30

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

the final user test, 50 children were selected through an
ethical research pre-survey with their parents. The subjects
were in average ten children per age. To observe the
behavior, and check both physical movements and digital
data of the children with the devices, 5 selected personnel
attended the test.
Complementary to the device, a website for parents,
shown in Figure 5, was made available at the beginning of
the experiment. With this tool, they could monitor the
movement of their children inside the kindergarten, besides
watching their point of view constantly. Nevertheless, for
everyday use, these shots are meant to be taken when a child
registers a sudden change in heart rate or shifts his/her
position up and down rapidly.

Figure 4. Implementation of Onigiri Machine

children’s body, a survey of the sizes of desks and tables in
the kindergarten was conducted. The machine should not
disturb the activities of the kids in the classroom or in the
playground. At the same time, the camera on the device
should be set at a stable position on the chest, so as to allow
them to actively run around.
D. Building the Prototype
Based on shoulder sac types of design, the built of the
sensors followed the concept “B-3”, presented in Figure 3.
The total weight of the built-in sensors had to be at most 90
grams. Notwithstanding, a necklace type of design was
rejected from the candidates, due to the burden generated on
the children’s neck. From a pool of four ideas for shoulder
types, “B-3” offers a relatively high position for the camera,
while being easy to wear. An updated sketch of “B-3” was
prototyped using a 3D printer to verify the size of the device.
Furthermore, the layout of the sensors was tested. What is
more, small connection parts were created on the corners for
the straps attached to the body. Finally, an on-off switch was
placed on the rear side in a tiny hole, as to be securely turned
with an originally designed stick, thus preventing unwanted
manipulation.
Figure 4 shows the final device ‘Omusubi’ (=Onigiri),
which means ‘rice ball’ or ‘connection’ in Japanese. A ‘rice
ball’ is a traditional snack between lunch and dinner popular
among all ages in Japan. ‘Connection’ is also a meaningful
concept within this study, as information is not only shared
between children and parents, but also with local caretakers.
IV.

V.

CONCLUSION

To develop a new device concerning children’s safety,
emotional and physical growth with new experiences are the
most important points. Those aspects were treated using an
approach with Kansei, physiological data, and behavioral
movements sensed by highly technical solutions. For
practical uses of the device, fascinating and reasonable
design, fitting children’s preferences, was highly evaluated.
Currently, real production of the “Onigiri Machine” is being
prepared based on the behaviors and preferences of children
and elderly. In this regard, it will increase its potential: not
only as a tool to prevent lost people, but also as a mean to

EXPERIMENT

For the experiment, 12 hand-made devices were built
with a setup of over 30 relay sensors to monitor the position
of the devices every 10 meters inside the kindergarten. For

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

A. Extension of the Experiment
One of the biggest shopping malls in southern east Japan
adapted this system to prevent children getting lost while
shopping in the facility. In addition, with the function of
measuring heart rates, shops can get information on when the
children got excited in relation to certain products, making
this feedback useful for the store to promote their products or
events practically. On the other side, for detecting the
position of lost children, a GPS was implemented in the
device. However, as indoor measurements were not accurate,
and XBee mobile network was deployed at the shopping
mall for every 30 meters for monitoring and controlling the
devices. Figure 6 shows the setup and positioning of the
XBee mobile network inside the mall.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

Figure 5. Online Website Interface for Onigiri Machine

31

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

know the user’s Kansei in various situations, regardless of
age. With the mechanical engineering and information
technology developed, this concept, that started from a
personal need to prevent loss or kidnaping of children,
brought more possibilities for the improvement of
Information and Communication Technology for the future.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]
Figure 6. Signal receptors position in the mall

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

S.H.Lee, J.H.Sohn, A.Usami, M.Hamanaka, Development of
Wearable Device by Kid's friendly Design for Kid's Safety,
Human Computer Interaction 2010, Brisbane, Australia, 2010.
S.H.Lee, M. Hamanaka, Y.Iwamoto, D. Kim, Heart-rate
Response to Simulated Anxious Events- Development of
Kid's Friendly wearable device for children's safety, Design
and Emotion Conference 2010, Chicago, USA.
M. Hamanaka, Y. Murakami, A. Usami, Y. Miura, S.H.Lee,
System for Detecting Kindergartners’Potential Emergency
Situations, World Multi- Conference on Systemics,
Cybernetics and Informatics 2010(WMSCI2010), July Florida,
USA, Vol. I, pp. 296-301.
J. Farringdon, A.J.Moore, N.Tilbury, J.Church, P.D.
Biemond, ,Wearable Sensor Badge and Sensor Jacket for
Context Awareness. ISWC, p.107. 2009.
N. Kern, B.Shiele, H. Junker, P. Lukowicz, G.Troster,
Wearable sensing to annotate meeting recordings Euro-Par
2006. LNCS, vol.7, No.5, pp. 263-274. Springer, Heidelberg
London. 2003.
M. Wiklund, Usability in practice: how companies develop
user-friendly products. Academic Press Professional, Inc.,
1994.
“Japan's already-safe streets could become even safer for
children”, 2010, URL: http://www.csmonitor.com/World
/Global-News/2010/1201/Japan-s-already-safe-streets-couldbecome-even-safer-for-children/ [accessed: 2017-02-26].

32

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Improving Diagnosis-related Groups with a Computerized Clinical Coding Tool for
ICD-9-CM Codification
Cecília Coimbra, Marisa Esteves, Filipe Miranda, Filipe Portela, Manuel Filipe Santos, José Machado * and
António Abelha
Algoritmi Research Centre,
University of Minho
Braga, Portugal
e-mail: {id6881, id6884, id6883}@alunos.uminho.pt, {cfp,mfs}@dsi.uminho.pt {jmac, abelha}@di.uminho.pt
* Corresponding author
Abstract—In recent years, in Centro Hospitalar do Porto
(CHP), a major Portuguese hospital at the North of the country,
there has been felt an increasing need for a computerized clinical
coding tool to aid in the codification of the episodes of hospital
discharges from patients admitted to its healthcare units. The
process was slow and performed manually by the coding
professionals, not having a centralization and unification of the
information and processes associated with the clinical coding of a
hospital discharge. Hereupon, in the context of this study, the
aim of the present work was to design and develop a clinical
coding tool for International Classification of Diseases, Ninth
Revision, Clinical Modification (ICD-9-CM) to support the
clinical practice in healthcare units. The coding of hospital
discharge processes enables the grouping of episodes into
diagnosis-related groups (DRGs) that correspond to clinically
coherent and similar groups that are expected to use the same
level of hospital resources. The main motivation for the
implementation of this classification system is that it provides a
financial and patient classification system, trying to contain the
costs and waste associated with healthcare services. Thereby, a
single-page application (SPA) for ICD-9-CM was designed in
order to help health professionals of CHP in their daily work,
namely the clinical coding of the episodes of hospital discharges.
The main advantages and contributions of the development and
use of this Web application are the centralization of information
and tasks associated with the coding of hospital discharges, the
increase of productivity and the reduction of wastes of time.
Consequently, the ambition is sought to mainly improve the
quantity and the quality of work performed by coding
professionals.
Keywords—ICD-9-CM; Diagnosis-related Groups; Hospital
Discharges; Single-page Application; Proof of Concept.

I. INTRODUCTION
The health sector represents a tricky situation for the people
and systems responsible for the storage and processing of that
kind of information. The problem is not in the lack of data but
in the diversity and complexity of the health field. An hospital
offers a wide range of services for each patient per clinical
condition leading to hundreds or even thousands of specific
and unique situations. It is then of extreme importance to find
a way to measure the hospital productivity and aggregate the
multiple activities performed at a healthcare unit. This led to
the adaptation of the DRGs to this scenario. These kind of
classification systems rely on a prior coding system that
translates all the diagnostics, procedures, external causes and

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

morphologies into universal codes like ICD-9-CM, increasing
the semantic interoperability and reducing the ambiguity of a
discharge report. The introduction of new Web frameworks
and solutions for Web development resulted in a new wave of
codification platforms for this kind of code systems. With
modern layout and intelligent helping tools, it is possible to
reduce the codification errors dramatically and increasing
efficiency.
This paper presents an insight into the development,
implementation and impact analysis of a Web application
directed to the ICD-9-CM codification in a major Portuguese
hospital in the North of the country – CHP. The focus of this
paper is mainly to highlight the differences between the prior
method (by hand) and the new one.
In Section II, the state of the art and similar works are
briefly described. Thereafter, in Section III, the research
methodologies adopted are presented. Section IV – “Singlepage Application for ICD-9-CM Codification” – presents the
work developed and its main results, followed by a brief
Strengths Weaknesses Opportunities and Threats (SWOT)
analysis in Section V. In Section VI, the conclusion and future
work concluded this paper.
II. STATE OF THE ART
The present section intends to highlight the main topics
addressed throughout the work as well as main studies from
the scientific community regarding medical codification.
A. Diagnosis-related Groups
DRGs are a classification system for inpatients at acute
healthcare units aggregating under the same code cases with
similar resource consumption and clinical similarities [1][2].
Developed at the Yale University (U.S.A) in the 60’s, it is
used since 1983 by Medicare to calculate the compensation in
cases of hospitalization [3]. Due to the immense success on
that field, the system was adopted throughout the world in
healthcare systems to improve the planning and allocation of
funds reducing the disparities and the errors.
The DRG requires a minimal dataset (MDS) in order to
attribute one of the 25 main diagnosis categories to the
discharge report [1]. So, the MDS includes, as follows [4]:
 The main diagnosis responsible for the patient
admission;
 Other diagnosis;

33

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine



Procedures performed on the patient during the
internment;
 Gender, age and height;
 Destination after discharge (transferred, death or
discharged against medical order).
Each DRG group has an associated relative weight and
weighting coefficient, as well as an exception threshold for the
number of hospitalization days that helps convert each case
into equivalent patients [4].
Wilm Quentin and colleagues in “Hospital Payment Based
on Diagnosis-related Groups Differs in Europe and Holds
Lessons for the United States” highlights the differences
between the original DRG and the one that countries like
France, England or even Portugal implement. This adaption is
the basis of most European countries method to finance
hospitals proving to be less cost worthy with high quality of
services [2].
Carina Fourie et. all present in “Systematically Evaluating
the Impact of Diagnosis-related Groups on Healthcare
Delivery: A Matrix of Ethical Implications” a study of ethical
implications and importance of the DRGs in diverse Swiss
hospitals [3]. On other hand, in order to highlight the diversity
of the subject, Yantao Xin presented a comparison of the
amount of medical waste generated in major healthcare units
using as basis the DRGs [5].
B. ICD-9-CM
Every time a patient is discharged from a healthcare unit a
discharge report is issued with daily logs from the physician in
charge of that patient. The ICD-9-CM is a perfect fit to encode
diagnostics, medical procedures, external causes and
morphologies, consisting in a list of codes recognized
anywhere in the world. As the name states, it is an adaptation
of the ICD-9 codification system performed by the U.S.
Health Department in collaboration with the Medicare and
Medicaid Service Centres [6]. With more than 13,000
diagnostics and 3,500 procedures, it is essential to develop
tools or systems focused on the codification process. Some
Web applications like “Find-A-Code” or the work of Marisa
Teresa Chiaravalloti et. all in “A Coding Support System for
the ICD-9-CM Standard” are examples of systems developed
for codification purposes [7]. The late one processes text in
natural language using text mining algorithms, returning a list
of possible codes for each case.
After the codification process, every discharge report can
be read and perfectly understood in every country that adopts
the same terminology. For the purpose of the present work
and as stated by international directives, the ICD-9-CM codes
are the basis of the DRGs decision [2].
C. AIDA and AIDA-PCE
Some Portuguese systems are equipped with a platform
called AIDA (Agência para Integração, Difusão e Arquivo de
Informação Médica) that uses intelligent agent systems that
ensure the interoperability between different and
heterogeneous information systems (SAM, SONHO, PCE,
SAPE, RIS, LIS, among others) [8][9]. The electronic health
record (EHR) is responsible for the safe and organized storage

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

of all the information about a patient, from personal data to
diagnostics and procedures [10]–[13]. The constant update is
vital in this scenario, so the same Algoritmi group from
Minho University that developed AIDA put together the
AIDA-PCE. Following the Problem Oriented Medical Record
(POMR), all the patient information like symptoms, medical
observations, diagnostics and treatment plans are stored inside
that structure.
Although using free text and other non-universal
information the AIDA and AIDA-PCE present innovative and
novel solutions to accomplish interoperability. On the other
hand, the incorporation of the ICD-9-CM codes into the EHR
represents an important feature to accomplish a cross-border
medical record. The storage of ICD-9-CM coded discharge
report saves space on AIDA-PCE databases and reduces
medical errors in near future.
The next section presents the main research methodologies
followed to implement this work.
III. RESEARCH METHODOLOGIES
The realization of any study in the field of Information
Technologies (ITs) includes the scrutinized research and
analysis of the set of methodologies and technologies
available and feasible in the design of the defined IT solutions.
The choice of the most appropriate methods and tools is
mostly based on the advantages pointed out, as well as on
associated limitations and compliance issues with related
systems.
Thus, the achievement of the SPA for ICD-9-CM is based
on the research methodology Design Science Research (DSR),
mostly used in the construction and evaluation of useful and
rigorous IT solutions. Each of the design phases presented in
this study included the choice and use of the most appropriate
methodologies, technologies and tools for the definition and
elaboration of the desired solution. Finally, a Proof of Concept
(PoC) was also carried out corroborating the viability and
usefulness of the clinical coding tool for ICD-9-CM designed
and developed, which consisted essentially of a SWOT
analysis (Section V).
The next section presents the SPA for ICD-9-CM
codification developed and implemented.
IV. SINGLE-PAGE APPLICATION FOR ICD-9-CM CODIFICATION
The codification of the discharge reports was made
manually in CHP, making the process too slow and with a
high error probability. Thus, it emerged the need to create a
process that would reduce the codification time. Therefore, a
SPA was developed through which the health professionals
are capable to perform the codification process, and at the
same time to consult patients’ data, such as the discharge
report, the personal information and the hospital services were
the patient was admitted.
The purposed layout in this scenario encompasses a
solution with three main components: the patient information,
the codification area and the discharge report. The
codification area presents five frames: diagnosis, external
causes, procedures, tumor morphology and observations. With

34

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

exception of the observations board, which is the only one that
allows free text insertion, all the other boards are composed
by rows divided mainly in priority, description and code.
The main characteristic that makes this process faster than
the already existing is the dynamic and aided search. When a
word is typed in the description field a list of all the ICD-9CM codes is presented, and when the user picks one of them
on the description the respective code is automatically filled.
On the other hand, when the user enters the code the
description is also automatically filled.
When a codification is finished, the user sends it to an
evaluator. If the codification fails in this evaluation phase for
any reason, it is sent again to the list of codifications that
needs to be done. Thus, the application was developed with
three different modules. One to be used in the first
codification, another to be used when a discharge report was
already codified and for some reason failed in the evaluation
phase, and one final module to be used when the user only has
view permissions. In this last module, the users are not able to
change any field present in the codification.
The application development leaned on the LAMP
architecture. It uses Linux as the operative system, Apache as
the Web server, MySQL as the relational database
management system (RDBMS) and PHP as the objectoriented language.
In order to develop a fluid and dynamic application, the
AngularJS framework greatly contributed. The modularity and
extensibility of this JavaScript framework allows the
development of diverse and futuristic applications.
The database storages all the data related to the
codification codes, the discharge reports, user information,
and all the information generated by the codification process.
The RESTful Web service mediates the communication
between the SPA and the database.
The next section presents the SWOT analysis of the Web
application developed.
V. SWOT ANALYSIS
To test the viability, the utility, the quality and the
efficiency of the application a PoC was necessary, in this case,
a SWOT analysis. This analysis allows to analysis the
strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats of the
application [14].
Strengths:
 High usability, intuitive and easy to learn (user-friendly);
 Easy access to the data of patients, as well as the hospital
services in which the patient was;
 High scalability;
 Easy of reissue of coded discharge reports;
 Decrease of the codification time of the discharge
reports;
 Decrease of human error;
 Easy adaptability to different health institutions.

 Use of ICD-9-CM instead of the more current ICD-10CM version.

Opportunities:
 Modernization and organizational development;
 Increasing expectation of the hospital administration to
obtain methods that facilitate the hospital financing
calculation;
 Provide the tool to help in the calculation of the hospital
financing.
Threats:
 Lack of acceptance to resort to new technologies by
health professionals.
The next section presents the conclusion and future work
of this study.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Finally, the realization of this case study allowed the
development of a clinical practice tool, namely a user-friendly
clinical coding tool for ICD-9-CM. The Web application is
currently implemented in a production machine of CHP, and it
is currently being used by the coding professionals of the
hospital in order to perform the clinical coding of the episodes
of hospital discharges from patients admitted to CHP. This
will then facilitate the grouping of processes into DRGs, that
is, a financial system that can manage the costs and waste
associated with healthcare services. In the coming years, the
expansion of the Web application is expected.
Trained professional using the ICD-9-CM clinical coding
tool reported significant differences in time consumption and
committed errors when using a computerized system to
perform their tasks. It represents a valuable an asset to its
users, since it facilitates the work of health professionals, and
increases their capacity and speed of work by reducing the
number of tasks required to perform a certain codification. In
this way, the development of the clinical tool allows the
centralization of a set of tasks and information in a SPA,
greatly benefiting its users.
Regarding future work, the addition of a Business
Intelligence (BI) module in the clinical coding tool for ICD-9CM is foreseen, that is, the addition of a module with clinical
and performance indicators [15]. Its principal aim is the
visualization of indicators that show the association between
the number of coded processes and each coding professional,
as well as the temporal evolution of the number of processes
encoded by each coding professional. Thus, the main
objective of the insertion of this module is to study and
analyze the performance of the coding professionals, that is, to
identify, for example, the coding professionals who codify the
most and also those who are coding the least. In this way, it is
tried to encourage even more the increase of the production of
the health professionals of CHP.

Weaknesses:
 Requires internet connection;

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

35

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Finally, at the end of 2016, we already began the update of
the system from the ICD-9-CM codification to the newer
ICD-10-CM version.

[14] R. Pereira, M. Salazar, A. Abelha, and J. Machado, “SWOT
Analysis of a Portuguese Electronic Health Record,” in
Collaborative, Trusted and Privacy-Aware e/m-Services,
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013, pp. 169–177.
[15] A. Brandão et al., “A Benchmarking Analysis of Open-Source
Business Intelligence Tools in Healthcare Environments,”
Information, vol. 7, no. 4, p. 57, Oct. 2016.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work has been supported by Compete POCI-01-0145FEDER-007043 and FCT - Fundação para a Ciência e
Tecnologia within the Project Scope UID/CEC/00319/2013.
REFERENCES
[1] M. M. Bellanger, W. Quentin, and S. S. Tan, “Childbirth and
Diagnosis Related Groups (DRGs): Patient Classification and
Hospital Reimbursement in 11 European Countries,” Eur. J.
Obstet. Gynecol. Reprod. Biol., vol. 168, no. 1, pp. 12–19, May
2013.
[2] W. Quentin, D. Scheller-Kreinsen, M. Blumel, A. Geissler, and
R. Busse, “Hospital Payment Based On Diagnosis-Related
Groups Differs In Europe And Holds Lessons For The United
States,” Health Aff., vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 713–723, Apr. 2013.
[3] C. Fourie, N. Biller-Andorno, and V. Wild, “Systematically
Evaluating the Impact of Diagnosis-related Groups (DRGs) on
Healthcare Delivery: A Matrix of Ethical Implications,” Health
Policy (New. York)., vol. 115, no. 2–3, pp. 157–164, 2014.
[4] S. B. Rimler, B. D. Gale, and D. L. Reede, “Diagnosis-related
Groups and Hospital Inpatient Federal Reimbursement,”
RadioGraphics, vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 1825–1834, Oct. 2015.
[5] Y. Xin, “Comparison of Hospital Medical Waste Generation
Rate Based on Diagnosis-related Groups,” J. Clean. Prod., vol.
100, pp. 202–207, 2015.
[6] M. Rouse and D. Fluckinger, “ICD-9-CM (International
Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision, Clinical
Modification),”
2014.
[Online].
Available:
http://searchhealthit.techtarget.com/definition/ICD-9-CM.
[Accessed: 31-Jan-2017].
[7] M. T. Chiaravalloti, R. Guarasci, V. Lagani, E. Pasceri, and R.
Trunfio, “A Coding Support System for the ICD-9-CM
Standard,” Proc. - 2014 IEEE Int. Conf. Healthc. Informatics,
ICHI 2014, pp. 71–78, 2014.
[8] H. Peixoto, M. Santos, A. Abelha, and J. Machado, “Intelligence
in Interoperability with AIDA,” in Foundations of Intelligent
Systems, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012, pp. 264–273.
[9] J. Machado, A. Abelha, J. Neves, and M. Santos, “Ambient
Intelligence in Medicine,” in IEEE Biomedical Circuits and
Systems Conference, 2006, pp. 94–97.
[10] M. Salazar et al., “Step towards Paper Free Hospital through
Electronic Health Record,” in Advances in Information Systems
and Technologies, Springer International Publishing, 2013, pp.
685–694.
[11] J. Duarte et al., “Data Quality Evaluation of Electronic Health
Records in the Hospital Admission Process,” in EEE/ACIS 9th
International Conference on Computer and Information Science,
2010, pp. 201–206.
[12] J. Duarte, C. F. Portela, A. Abelha, J. Machado, and M. F.
Santos, “Electronic Health Record in Dermatology Service,” in
ENTERprise Information Systems, Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
2011, pp. 156–164.
[13] F. Portela et al., “Electronic Health Records in the Emergency
Room,” in IEEE/ACIS 9th International Conference on
Computer and Information Science, 2010, pp. 195–200.

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

36

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Pervasive Business Intelligence in Intensive Medicine
An overview of clinical solution

Ana Pereira, Filipe Portela*, Manuel Filipe Santos, José Machado, António Abelha and Fernando Rua
Algoritmi Research Centre, University of Minho, Guimarães, Portugal
Intensive Care Unit, Centro Hospitalar do Porto, Porto, Portugal
{cfp,mfs}@dsi.uminho.pt; {jmac,abelha}@di.uminho.pt

Abstract— In the Intensive Care units, the information and
data collected have a high value. It can help the physicians to
take the best decision in the patient best interest. In this
field, it is imperative to have the information available
anywhere and anytime using Business Intelligence Concepts.
Pervasive Business Intelligence (PBI) arises as a new
technological field. This solution is focused on a personcentered approach, where the patients and the clinicians are
the core. In this paper, the Pervasive Computing area is
addressed having in consideration the Pervasive Health Care
and the Intensive Care units. At first, the Strengths,
Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats analysis are
presented, and then an overview of a PBI solution is
described.
Keywords-Pervasive; Business Intelligence; Intensive Care
Unit

I.

INTRODUCTION

The technological developments related to the
diminishing of electronic components have been
enormous. At the same time, the creation and spread of
the Internet, connecting all machines and providing the
worldwide sharing of information capacity reinforce the
value of computing. Also the developing new techniques
and new technologies, on par with an ever-growing
capacity of miniaturisation of the devices and their cost
reduction, developed the research capacity in this area.
Huge advances were achieved regarding the portability
and storage capability, as well as new arrangements of
human-computer interaction and wireless communication
technologies, allowing to find computing and
communication technologies anywhere and anytime. This
situation has allowed and potentiated new interactions
between people and their physical environment.
Especially in the field of healthcare, the Business
Intelligence (BI) systems advancements have been
enormous and especially in the latest years, many
solutions have been implemented, given the vast quantity
of data to gather and process. In the intensive health care
units, the amount of data to pick increases exponentially,
many times collected in real time. The need to make

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

available the gathered data is of vital importance for the
health professionals in these units. To access the patient’s
history, at any time and from any place starts to be a need
for these intensivists.
In this article, we aim to understand the concept
Pervasive, its appearance and joining of the Pervasive
Healthcare with the BI systems in this field. This work
may, therefore, serve as a guide to those who, in the
future, aim to insert Pervasive in the BI systems.
This paper is divided into four sections. After a briefly
Introduction, the related concepts are presented in
Background Section. Then, in Section 3, the Strengths,
Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats (SWOT) analysis
is presented, and a brief solution analysis is done. Finally,
some conclusions are written, and the future work is
mentioned.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

II.

BACKGROUND

This section presents the related concepts of the work.
A.

Pervasive HealthCare

The definition of the term Pervasive is, according to the
free dictionary, “to spread something widely and deeply;
affecting all aspects of something.” As in the MerriamWebster dictionary, Pervasive means “to exist in each
part of something; spreading to all parts of something.”
Applying the concept Pervasive to the health field
arises the Pervasive Healthcare (PHC) concept. PHC is
considered an important area of research [1]. These
systems have a dynamic structure and configuration, and
an adequate understanding of these structures and the
communication between its components, as well as the
warranty of a proper and timely execution, is crucial.
Pervasive Healthcare is one of the developing
technologies using the Pervasive computing paradigm [2].
Pervasive computing presence provides an innovative
way for the data transmission from medical applications.
Currently, it is used wireless technology in various health
domains [2].

37

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

For Rafe and Hajvali [1], Pervasive Healthcare is
characterised by complex information, a dynamic number
of interesting parts (stakeholders), and by ubiquitous
computing, which connects perfectly the digital
infrastructures in our daily lives. It gathers, processes and
distributes “any kind” of personal information and
contextual data at any time [1]. Pervasive Healthcare
demands knowledge of the standard individual functions
so that it provides the advanced detection of diseases,
changes in functionality. It also provides pro-active
prevention, as well as health services to predict individual
well-being. This means that Pervasive Healthcare requires
information that covers a person’s entire life, including
data on the personal behaviour, lifestyle, emotions,
genealogical data, social data, psychological functionality
and environmental sensors data [1].
Pervasive Healthcare is considered a key factor in the
reduction of expenses and it is known for allowing
improvements in disease management. The advances in
communications technologies and wireless networks
provided the acquisition, transmission, and treatment of
critical medical information in real time [8].
B.

Understanding Ubiquitous Computing

For M. Weiser [3], Pervasive computing is the most
recent paradigm in computing, known as Ubiquitous
Computing (Ubicom). Saha [4] foreseen that the
Pervasive Computing (PerCom) devices would not just
be personal computers. PerCom is also much smaller
devices. It can be invisible appliances incorporated into
almost any type of object that you can imagine, including
cars, tools, household appliances, clothing and various
consumer goods, all communicating through continuously
more interconnected networks.
Currently, Ubiquitous computing represents a new
direction in researchers about the integration and use of
computers in people’s lives and aims to reach a new
computing paradigm, in which exists an elevated degree
of penetration and ample availability of computers and
other IT devices, with communication capabilities in our
physical environment.
Beyond our personal computers, various computing
devices incorporate physical places and interconnected
objects fixed or mobile, the latter usually being wireless.
Ubiquitous computing already represents, in fact, a
new computing paradigm, including the assumption that
computers should “disappear” in the physical
environment, becoming an integral part of such.
The Pervasive systems and ubiquitous technologies are
ever more present in the domains of almost all businesses,
improving the method of fulfilling them. In more personal
or social areas, they are used principally to improve
people’s quality of life.

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

As examples of technology innovations, we have iPad
Mini and the iPhone 6 (both devices are from Apple) or
the Samsung Galaxy Tab. These devices have, for
example, A-GPS, camera, microphone, with 7-9 hours of
battery, 4G Internet and Wi-Fi connection, digital
compass, accelerometer, environment light sensor, etc.
C.

Understanding Pervasive Computing

For D. Saha [4], Pervasive computing (PerCom)
would be, in the future, “omnipresent” combining
ubiquitous open-source applications with the quotidian
activities of the human being.
From PerCom’s point of view, the environment would
be saturated with a series of computing and
communication resources very well blended with daily
life. It allows the user to interact with a smart
environment from everyplace, using an apparently
invisible
infrastructure
from
various
devices/communication/computing, fixed and wireless
networks. PerCom would create a digital omnipresent,
sensible and adaptable environment for the human needs,
characterised by the following essential elements:
Pervasiveness (omnipresence), transparency (invisibility)
and intelligence [4].
Pervasive computing would provide surprising
enhancements in our capacity to connect and
communicate [9]. It would gradually become integrated
into our lives and daily activities, through natural ways of
human-computer interaction, such as it has been verified.
Even currently, the benefits and applications of Pervasive
computing are far from being finished.
Various business fields, such as insurance companies,
government agencies, health organisations, etc., can still
get multiple benefits from Pervasive computing.
What was initially limited to the development of
technology to make Pervasive computing more than a
vision, as clearly gone beyond the first frontiers reaching
the development of applications for various organisational
domains [5]?
D.

Pervasive Mobile Architecture

PerCom, as mentioned in [4], was pointing to the
world where every object, every building, and even
everybody would become part of a network service,
where there is an expectation that the number of
Pervasive devices would multiply rapidly.
Ideally, PerCom should approach all and every device
on the globe with embedded active/ passive intelligence.
These new smart gadgets or smart devices would be fit
into microcomputers that would allow the users their
connection to intelligent networks, and therefore, gain
direct access, straightforward and secure, to information

38

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

and services. These devices would then be mainly known
as Pervasive devices [6].
One of the most common, current examples are the
GPS based sensors, which provide location data that is
translated into an internal representation of latitude,
longitude, and altitude. Then advancing in time, we can
verify that for Prabhakar et. al [6], there is more and more
advances in mobile technology devices, such as, for
example, smartphones, these technologies will become
more Pervasive and omnipresent. Therefore, this verified
reality in 2015, was in 2005 just a forecast/vision almost
impossible to believe.
E.

INTCare

The INTCare system was elaborated by Portela et al.
[7] and implemented in the Intensive Cares Unit (ICU) of
the Santo Antonio’s Hospital, Porto’s Hospital Center
(CHP). It is an intelligent decision making support
Pervasive system, composed of a group of integrated
modules that execute all chores regarding knowledge
discovery in an automated way and in real-time. In
accordance to Portela et. al [7] INTCare can present
anywhere and at any time information/knowledge,
essential for the clinic decisions and whose primary
purpose is the blending of a group of data sources to
obtain interoperability advantages and the use of Data
Mining models.
The INTCare System has improved the way the data is
gathered and how it allowed the performance of manual
actions made by the ICU professionals. It allows an
entirely automatic collecting data process, in real-time,
and besides that, it avoids paper registry [7].
In [8], it is referred that the INTCare health system
consists of a Smart Decision Making Support System and
Pervasive (SDMSSP), focused on the field of intensive
medicine, developed in the unit of intensive care at Santo
Antonio’s Hospital, with the following characteristics:
Online training; Real-time; Adaptability; Data Mining
models; Decision Models; Smart Agents; Precision;
Security̧; Pervasive/Ubiquity; Privacy; Safe access from
the exterior and Use policy.
III.

RESULTS

The achieved results are divided into two groups:
SWOT and web application.
A.

healthcare area.

SWOT Pervasive Analysis

Weaknesses

Strengths
· Access to information timely and
anywhere
· Emergency and innovation of Pervasive
· Promoted by Doctors with background in
intensive healthcare
· More motivated team and staff with
strong commitment to medical mission
· Exclusive access to specific critical
healthcare information
· Consistent delivery of high quality
decision support information
· Innovative healthcare services improves
and optimizes units capacity
· High level of organization / department
efficiency through BI systems
· Excellent technological infrastructure

·
·
·
·
·
·
·

·
·

Trust network questions
Confidentiality of information
Shortage of critical healthcare staff
Lack of technological infrastructure in
healthcare units
Lack of available / appropriate input
information
Possible need for key technical expertise
recruitment
Problems on supporting decisionmaking if information is inappropriate /
out-to-date
Ineffective practice information
management system
Over dependency of decision support
systems in decision-making

Opportunities Threats
· Very large market (hospitals, clinics, etc)
· Decrease in the value of insurance / health
equity
· Increased emphasis on quality in critical
healthcare area
· Increased awareness of preventive
medicine in intensive care units
· Increased managed care business
· Arrival / adoption of new technologies
· An unfilled critical healthcare need
· Information up-to-date
· Avoid common pitfalls of clinical decisionmaking

· Medical staff not available to deal with
technology
· Privacy and security health hazards
· Cost of implementing / extending
technology infrastructure
· Healthcare regulation laws could impact
· Lack of financial resources / budget
deficits / decreased health staff /
decreased technical staff
· Network attack risk making private
patient information left unprotected

SWOT

Figure 1 presents a SWOT analysis of the Pervasive
concept inserted in Business Intelligence Systems,
developed while keeping in mind the context of critical

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

Figure 1. SWOT Analysis

39

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

B.

Application

In this work, several dashboards were developed (sum,
average, mode, max, and min). These panels address
Admissions from emergency, urgency, other ICU, other
hospitals, other, Admission type (urgent or programmed),
disease, vital signs, ventilation, therapeutics (medications,
dosages), patient information (sex, age), clinician, date
(day, month, year, hour), type and others. In the next
images, it is possible to observe some of the contents
developed. Figure 2 refers to a dashboard where it is
possible to verify the total number of patients admitted to
the Intensive Care Unit (ICU). Here, we can know the
admissions regarding the origin of the patients by service
(SERVICO, DESP) and the number of admissions by sex
(SEX), which, in this case, they were mostly male, with
1738 cases of this sex and only 1139 of the women. In
Figure 2, it is also possible to see that 102 patients had a
cardiac issue (insufcardiac) and 36 used a pacemaker; 40
patients did chemotherapy and 28 a radiotherapy. Finally,
123 patients were taking insulin.

Figure 3. An example of Dashboards developed - data from patients
admitted to the ICU of CHP.

IV.

CONCLUSION

This paper presents the first overview of a Business
Intelligence solution developed in an Intensive Care Unit.
In this study, the SWOT analysis shows that the
Information Security is the primary concern and the data
availability (anywhere and anytime) is the main benefit of
PHC. Complementary, this paper also showed the first
application images.
After a first analysis, the intensivists consider this
application interesting; however, it needs a deeper clinical
analysis done by them. A Business Intelligence
Application provides only the data in an intuitive way.
Then the professionals make the results analysis with the
focus on the contribution of it to their decision-making
process.
In the future, the intensivists will perform a deep
analysis of the dashboards. Other panels are being
developed, and then the final solution will be deployed in
the real environment.
ACKNOWLEDGES

Figure 2. An example of Dashboards developed - total number of
patients admitted to the Intensive Care Unit.

In Figure 3, it is possible consulting the data collected
from patients admitted to the ICU of CHP and some of
their characteristics, such as the episode number of
hospitalisation
(EPISODIO),
process
number
(PROCESSO), sex (SEX), date Birth (Year, Quarter,
Month, Day).
During the period of October 2010 - March 2016, ICU
had 2877 patients (1738 Males and 1135 females)
admission with an average of 66,91 years old. 50% of the
admissions came from either ICU or cardio service
(UIHC).

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

This work has been supported by Compete: POCI-010145-FEDER-007043 and FCT - Fundação para a Ciência
e
Tecnologia
within
the
Project
Scope
UID/CEC/00319/2013.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

V. Rafe and M. Hajvali, “Designing an architectural style for
Pervasive Healthcare systems.,” J. Med. Syst., vol. 37, no. 2, p.
9927, Apr. 2013.
G. Sudha and R. Ganesan, “Secure transmission medical data for
pervasive healthcare system using android,” in 2013 International
Conference on Communication and Signal Processing, 2013, pp.
433–436.
M. Weiser, “The computer for the 21 st century,” ACM
SIGMOBILE Mob. Comput. Commun. Rev., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 3–11,
Jul. 1999.
D. Saha, “Pervasive Computing: A Vision to Realize,” in Advances
in Computers, vol. Volume 64, V. Z. Marvin, Ed. Elsevier, 2005,
pp. 195–245.

40

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[5]
[6]

[7]
[8]

[K. Lyytinen and Y. Yoo, “Issues and Challenges in Ubiquitous
Computing,” Commun. ACM, vol. 45, no. 12, pp. 63–65, 2002.
T. V. Prabhakar, U. Mysore, U. Saini, K. J. Vinoy, and B.
Amruthur, “NFC for Pervasive Healthcare Monitoring,” in 2015
28th International Conference on VLSI Design, 2015, vol. 2015Febru, no. February, pp. 75–80.
F. Portela et al“Pervasive and intelligent decision support in
Intensive Medicine – the complete picture.” Springer, 01-Jan-2014.
[F. Portela, M. F. Santos, and M. Vilas-Boas, A pervasive
approach to a real-time intelligent decision support system in
intensive medicine. Springer, 2012.

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

41

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Future Directions of Applying Healthcare Cloud for Home-based Chronic Disease
Care
Yan Hu, Sara Eriksén

Jenny Lundberg

Department of Creative Technologies
Blekinge Institute of Technology
Karlskrona, Sweden
e-mail:{yan.hu, sara.eriksen}@bth.se

Department of Media Technology
Linnaeus University
Vaxjo, Sweden
e-mail: jenny.lundberg@lnu.se

Abstract— The care of chronic disease has become the main
challenge for healthcare institutions around the world. To meet
the growing needs of patients, moving the front desk of
healthcare from hospital to home is essential. Recently, cloud
computing has been applied to healthcare domain; however,
adapting to and using this technology effectively for home-based
care is still in its initial phase. We have proposed a conceptual
hybrid cloud model for home-based chronic disease care, and
have evaluated its future feasibility by a case study of diabetes
care in Blekinge, Sweden. In this paper, we discuss some
possible future opportunities and challenges to apply this cloud
model with the huge population for home-based chronic
diseases care. To apply this model in practice, a professional IT
healthcare education team is needed for both healthcare
providers and healthcare recipients. For home-based
healthcare, a monitoring system with an automatic alarm to
healthcare providers is also necessary in some cases. Also, how
to record and integrate excises data through wearable devices in
a cloud should be considered. Given the high demand, sharing
medical images through the cloud should be another research
focus.

[2]. All of the ICT technologies could help improve the quality
of home-based healthcare.
In recent years, cloud computing has been used to support
healthcare. The obvious advantages of cloud computing, like
big data storage, pay-as-go online software services, and
powerful data analysis capacity make it a great benefit to
apply cloud computing in home-based healthcare [3]. In our
previous work, we have proposed a conceptual hybrid
healthcare cloud model for home-based care. Moreover, we
have tested the feasibility of the model by a case study of
diabetes care in Blekinge, Sweden [4]. We believe that cloudbased solution is a future trend of healthcare technology. To
prefect and realize our hybrid healthcare cloud in large-scale
population, there are other technologies to be further explored.
This paper mainly discusses future opportunities and
challenges of applying cloud model with the huge population
for home-based chronic diseases care. Section 2 is a brief
introduction of our research project, while in Section 3, we
give a brief description on our Swedish case study. Section 4
lists some opportunities and challenges are discussed in
Section 5. Conclusion and the suggestions of future work
conclude the paper.

Keywords-future trends; hybrid cloud; chronic diseases;
home-based care

II.
I.

INTRODUCTION

The care of chronic disease has become the main challenge
for healthcare institutions around the world. According to a
WHO report in 2014, almost 90% of deaths in Sweden are
caused by chronic diseases [1]. As the incidence and
prevalence of chronic diseases continue to increase, traditional
hospital-based healthcare is less able to meet the requirements
of patients. To meet the growing needs of patients, moving the
front desk of healthcare from hospital to home is essential.
Home-based healthcare could enable the care recipients to live
independently at home. Healthcare providers could reach the
patients based on their shared daily health data, and provide
clinical suggestions. Also, for home-based healthcare, more
people are encouraged to assist with the care, such as family
members and other patients with similar symptoms.
The development of Information Communication
Technology (ICT) has enabled people to enter a modern
digital society. Our quality of life is promoted by the
application of ICT in all fields. In the healthcare domain, by
widely using personal computers, smartphones, and other selfmonitoring devices, ICT has brought healthcare in a new era

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

HEALTH IN HAND PROJECT

The Indo-Swedish R&D project Health in Hand –
Transforming Healthcare Delivery is a project funded by
VINNOVA (Reg.No.2013-04660) for three years. The main
objective of the project is to establish long-term Indo-Swedish
R&D collaboration around leading-edge applied health
technology, with a focus on mobile health services, namely
mHealth. mHealth technologies usually mean “medical and
public health practice supported by mobile devices, such as
mobile phones, patient monitoring devices, personal digital
assistants (PDAs), and other wireless devices [5]”. In this
project, we mainly refer to “mobile services which inform,
motivate and enable individuals to manage their own health
information and knowledge sharing, as well as support
communication and community building among both patient
and caregiver communities [6]”. The project uses
participatory design as a research approach, to focus on the
local design of design methods, techniques, and tools that
promote participatory design for mHealth development [7].
One of the aims of the project is to discover possible
solutions to enhance collaboration around the complex
systems which are the base for innovative mobile technologies
in healthcare among different healthcare providers and

42

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

between healthcare providers and recipients. In the final year
of the project, the study is focusing on concerning up-scaling
and commercialization of mHealth technologies in
collaboration with industry and public sector [6]. In the
beginning of the project, we tried to develop applications
based on mHealth technologies. When we had our first
Swedish case study, we found that there were already a
number of mobile applications in the market, so we move our
research focus to how to integrate these mobile applications
into current healthcare system.
III.

A CASE STUDY IN SWEDISH DIABETES CARE

In our previous work, we have studied on how to adapt
cloud computing to healthcare domain and have proposed a
conceptual hybrid cloud model for home-based chronic
diseases. In this conceptual model, healthcare recipients using
mHealth technologies for self-recording home-based
healthcare data, and communicating with their healthcare
providers, is one of the key elements. Within the scope of the
project, we have conducted a two-step case study in diabetes
care. The purpose of this case study was to improve the
conceptual model and test its feasibility on one hand, and to
explore some possible technical trends for up-scaling and
commercialization of this model on the other hand [4]. The
improved model is shown in Figure 1.
This model is a hybrid cloud model, which contains
private clouds from the hospital and primary care centers, as
well as public clouds for home-based self-management data.

This model is based on that diabetes patients can measure their
blood glucose and other parameters themselves at home via a
few devices and upload the values to the app’s public cloud
automatically. The secure connected public cloud of the app
not only stores the data, but also deals with the data with the
help of powerful data processing capacity of cloud computing
to monitor the threshold values and create different kinds of
reports. The doctors at the hospital can access the public cloud
if they have the authorization of their patients. Between the
hospital’s and primary care centers’ private clouds, there is an
internal journal system for sharing partly patients’’ data
sharing. All these ways of sharing data already existed in
Blekinge, as well as other counties in Sweden. The improved
communication between patients and primary care providers
is the most pressing demand of the day.
This model visualizes the current data sharing of homebased diabetes care, as well as provide a cloud computing
solution to enhance collaboration around the healthcare
systems and moblie applications based on mobile
technologies. For other types of chronic diseases, this model
could also be used for data sharing. From our interviews with
both healthcare providers and healthcare recipients, we found
that it is feasible to apply this hybrid cloud in future homebased healthcare. For the model’s up-scaling and
commercialization, there remains future work to be further
explored.

Share some selective
information from internal
journal system

Primary cares’ private
cloud

Hospital’s private cloud

Doctors can
access the data

Access the part of
patient record
through 1177

Alarm to the
care providers

Responses

Public Cloud

Home-based care
Figure 1. Conceptual hybrid cloud model [4]

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

43

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

IV.

FUTURE OPPORTUNITIES

A. Professional healthcare IT education
From our case study, we found that all eleven participants
feel ICT technologies have developed very fast, and it is quite
difficult for them to follow the steps of the development. The
lack of IT knowledge sometimes reduces the enthusiasm of
users to try new ICT technologies in healthcare. Especially
with mobile technologies used for home-based healthcare,
healthcare recipients thought it was healthcare providers’
responsibility to teach them to use the mobile applications or
self-recording devices. However, most of the healthcare
providers thought they were not good at technology
themselves. Although there are use guides from the service or
device providers, the healthcare recipients still ask lots of
technically related questions to their healthcare providers.
From our case study, we were surprised find that healthcare
providers are less interested in adopting new ICT technologies
than healthcare recipients. The reason is that they felt their
main work is diagnosis and treatment, and that using new
technologies reduced their work efficiency in some way.
In this situation, building up a professional healthcare IT
education team is of utmost importance. This education team
should be built by people who have certificated knowledege
in healthcare technology. It could be supported by government
or set up as an independent commercial organization. The
educational programs provided by this team should address
both healthcare recipients and healthcare providers. For
healthcare providers, training on their working systems and
the communications between these systems could be offered
frequently, like once a year. Since in chronic diseases care,
self-management is a key factor [8], the education to help
healthcare recipients to use different ICT technologies for
self-management would be the main focus.
B. Mobile doctor
Another trend of home-based chronic diseases healthcare
is the mobile doctor. The mobile doctor here refers to having
a communication with a primary care doctor through a phone,
tablet or computer. Healthcare recipients could receive
primary care at any place of their convenience. In Sweden,
there are two of this kind of services on the market, KRY [9]
and Min Doktor [10]. The difference between these two
services is that KRY provides a booked 15 minutes video
meeting with doctors while Min Doktor provides the
communication with the doctors with messages all day round.
Both these two services are linked with personal ID;
healthcare recipients must log in with their social security
number. This will guarantee the healthcare recipients could
receive the same benefits as they are visiting local primary
healthcare centers.
Both these services are still in their beginning phases. In
the future, we believe more and more chronic disease
healthcare recipients will choose this type of remote primary
care to communicate with their healthcare providers. How to
promote and improve the quality of these mobile doctor
services should be under discussion.

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

C. Real-time monitoring system
In Sweden, most patients with chronic diseases now
contact more often with primary a healthcare center than with
a hospital, which means primary healthcare centers take more
responsibility for chronic diseases care. However, from our
case study, we found that the communication between patients
and primary healthcare centers is still based on regular mail
and telephones.
As big data in the cloud brought a revolution in healthcare
[11], a real-time monitoring system with alarm could be a
possible mechanism for primary care. The calculated
threshold values by the big data in the public cloud, together
with healthcare providers in primary healthcare centers, can
help the patients to set threshold values for their daily health
parameters. When a patient’s self-recording data is uploaded
at home, and the values reach the threshold values, the data
processing program in the public cloud can send an alarm to
the responsible primary care center. As soon as the care
providers see the alarms, they could contact the patients and
give them some feedback. The design and development of this
real-time monitoring system could be another future direction
to apply a healthcare cloud for home-based chronic diseases
care.
D. Wearable devices to record excise data
According to WHO, lack of physical activities is a
significant risk factor for chronic diseases such as stroke,
diabetes, and cancer. However, an estimated 23% of adults
and 81% school-going adolescents are not active enough [12].
In most cases of chronic disease care, healthcare providers
suggest their patients do daily physical excise as the main
method to control their condition. With the widely use of
wearable devices, it is possible for people to record their
excise data[13]. Today most data recorded by the wearable
devices is stored in device companies’ servers. With the 5G
network [14] and several sensors that are being introduced
into the healthcare environment, and which provide even more
healthcare data.
In the future, integrating this excise data with other homebased self-management data from both mobile applications
and sensors will be an important trend.
E. Medical images sharing
The huge data storage capacity in the cloud makes it easier
to store and process medical images. This will promote
medical image sharing between healthcare providers and
recipients. In Blekinge, Sweden, until now, there is no such
kind of medical image sharing system, but the demands are
keen according to our case study, especially for aged people
who live independently. They want to bs able to take photos
of wounds at home and send them to the healthcare providers
in wound centers, which would be better than regular visiting.
Moreover, the healthcare providers in wound centers also
thought it could save time to treat the wounds.
A multi-functional medical image sharing mobile
application could be a future research orientation. For
example, how to pre-process the wound images before the
healthcare providers review them, such as wound highlight,
3D visualization, are worthy of consideration.

44

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

F. Games for health
Mobile games have a significant influence on people’s
physical activities, as illustrated by the success of Pokémon
Go [15]. Games for health are not limited to serious games
anymore. Designing an entertaining and fun digital game to
encourage patients with chronic diseases to do more excises
or an educational mobile game to help the healthcare
recipients to get more knowledge of their diseases could be a
new interest for both game and healthcare industry.
V.

FUTURE CHALLENGES

Challenges to future development of healthcare cloud in
home-based chronic diseases care also need to be carefully
considered and addressed
A. User-friendly information system design
Most patients with chronic diseases are aged people. Thus
the new information systems designed for home-based
chronic diseases need to be user-friendly. In additional, smart
tablets are easier to use for aged people than smartphones
since the screen is bigger.
B. Data leakage of public cloud
In home-based healthcare, most self-recording data from
home environment is stored in public cloud. Thus, it is a risk
of data leakage. Access control and data security protection
are always necessary for healthcare related data.
C. Reliability of third party healthcare services
There are a huge amount of healthcare mobile applications
to support home-based chronic disease care, but not all of
them are reliable. According to study on medical related
mobile apps, less than half of the studied apps are reliable[16],
which means if healthcare recipients use these unreliable apps,
they may get wrong information and advice about their
diseases. To overcome this challenge, the companies provided
healthcare services, responsible government agencies and
mobile app users should make efforts together.
VI.

CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

We found that our cloud model is feasible to be applied in
home-based chronic disease care in the future. It will help to
promote patient-centric healthcare in Sweden. In this paper,
we mainly address the future trends of applying healthcare
cloud for home-based chronic disease care. To upscale and
commercialize the healthcare cloud, professional healthcare
IT education, mobile doctors, real-time monitoring systems,
wearable devices to record excise data, medical image sharing
and games for health could be the main future directions.
User-friendly design, data privacy and security, and reliability
of services would be challenges to promote healthcare cloud
development. In the future, we will put the focus on one or
two above issues in our continued research.

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was partly supported by VINNOVA project”
Health in Hand – Transforming Healthcare Delivery” (Reg.
No. 2013-04660).
REFERENCES
[1] “WHO | Noncommunicable diseases country profiles 2014,” WHO.
[Online]. Available: http://www.who.int/nmh/publications/ncd-profiles2014/en/. [Accessed: 02-Feb-2017].
[2] S. S. Deo, D. N. Deobagkar, and D. Deobagkar, “Design and
development of a web-based application for diabetes patient data
management,” J. Innov. Health Inform., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 35–41, 2005.
[3] Y. Hu and G. Bai, “A cloud model for interoperable Home-based Chronic
Diseases Healthcare,” in 2014 World Symposium on Computer Applications
Research (WSCAR), 2014, pp. 1–6.
[4] Y. Hu, G. Bai, S. Eriksén, and J. Lundberg, “Hybrid cloud model for
diabetes some-based care -a case study for perceived feasibility in the
future.” unpublished.
[5] “mHealth New horizons for health through mobile technologies.”
[Online].
Available:
http://www.who.int/goe/publications/goe_mhealth_web.pdf. [Accessed: 03Feb-2017].
[6] S. Eriksén, M. Georgsson, M. Hofflander, L. Nilsson, and J. Lundberg,
“Health in hand: Putting mHealth design in context,” in 2014 IEEE 2nd
International Workshop on Usability and Accessibility Focused
Requirements Engineering (UsARE), 2014, pp. 36–39.
[7] S. Eriksén, J. Lundberg, M. Georgsson, L. Nilsson, M. Hofflander, and
C. Borg, “Transforming Healthcare Delivery : ICT Design for Self-Care of
Type 2 Diabetes,” in Nordic Conference on Human-Computer Interaction
(NordiCHI), in press.
[8] H. Holman and K. Lorig, “Patient self-management: a key to
effectiveness and efficiency in care of chronic disease,” Public Health Rep.
Wash. DC 1974, vol. 119, no. 3, pp. 239–243, Jun. 2004.
[9] “KRY - meet doctors online,” KRY - meet doctors online. [Online].
Available: https://kry.se. [Accessed: 04-Feb-2017].
[10] “My Doctor: Meet doctors safely & easily in the app” [Online].
Available: https://mindoktor.se/. [Accessed: 04-Feb-2017].
[11] B. Kayyali, D. Knott, and S. V. Kuiken, “The big-data revolution in US
health care: Accelerating value and innovation | McKinsey & Company.”
[Online].
Available:
http://www.mckinsey.com/industries/healthcaresystems-and-services/our-insights/the-big-data-revolution-in-us-healthcare. [Accessed: 04-Feb-2017].
[12] “WHO | 10 facts on physical activity.” [Online]. Available:
http://www.who.int/features/factfiles/physical_activity/en/. [Accessed: 02Feb-2017].
[13] D. Son, J.Lee, S.Qiao, R. Ghaffari, J.Kim, J.Lee et al., “Multifunctional
wearable devices for diagnosis and therapy of movement disorders,” Nat.
Nanotechnol., vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 397–404, May 2014.
[14] A. Osseiran, F. Boccardi, V. Braun, K. Kusume, P. Marsch, M. Maternia
et al., “Scenarios for 5G mobile and wireless communications: the vision of
the METIS project,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 52, no. 5, pp.
26–35, May 2014.
[15] T. Althoff, R. W. White, and E. Horvitz, “Influence of Pokémon Go on
Physical Activity: Study and Implications,” J. Med. Internet Res., vol. 18,
no. 12, Dec. 2016.
[16] F. Haffey, R. R. W. Brady, and S. Maxwell, “A Comparison of the
Reliability of Smartphone Apps for Opioid Conversion,” Drug Saf., vol. 36,
no. 2, pp. 111–117, Feb. 2013.

45

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Technology in Health Care
A new research and teaching subject in collaboration between nursing science and engineering
Britt Östlund
Department of Technology and Health
Royal Institute of Technology, KTH &
Swedish Red Cross University College, SRCUC
Stockholm, Sweden
e-mail: britt.ostlund@sth.kth.se

Gunilla Björling, Janet Mattsson, Sara Stridh, Madeleine Sahlström
Swedish Red Cross University College, SRCUC
Stockholm, Sweden

Abstract— Today, health care systems face a number of
challenges related to technological developments. This
work in progress is a new Swedish initiative for

collaboration between nursing science and engineering
focusing digitization, demographics and participation.
The initiative aims at understanding how digitization
affects patients and health care professionals and the
role of engineers and how this collaboration proactively
contributes to systems that support caring and nursing.
The presentation expects input on the programs
substance and boundaries and whether this initiative is
fruitful to create sustainable health care systems.
Keywords; collaboration, nursing science, caring science,
engineering, patient support, digitization.

I . INTRODUCTION
Today, health care systems face a number of challenges
related to technological developments. The Global
Commission on Education of Health Professionals for the
21st Century describes a mismatch between the care offered
and people's demands and needs; lack of cooperation;
discontinuous care chains; tenacious hierarchies, and not
least, a focus on technology founded on flawed
understanding of the context in which the technology is
used [1]. The gender system that locks structures what
perceived as male and female work is deemed particularly
difficult to change. Significant is also the lack of good
examples of how to meet these types of challenges. Other
publications confirm these results, reporting on a lack of
accuracy in technological support for health care, not least
the confidence in individual solutions. There are reports on
an imbalance between the success factors in health care increased life expectancy and better treatments - and the
expectations of what you want done and what to expect [2]
[3]. At the same time, the belief in technology as the
ultimate solution still prevails. The Swedish Society for
Nursing identifies a lack of knowledge about the impact of

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

technology on caring interventions. To meet this, they
emphasize individual health as an important aspect to
investigate and call for possibilities to actively participate in
design, implementation and assessment of new technology
[4] [5]. Others stress the economic values of returning to
patient centred strategies [6]. To mention one example,
creating digital health care records and digital information
to citizens are among the most difficult tasks to accomplish
despite the wide access to Internet and digital
infrastructures. Google declared a few years ago that their
investment in Google Health was one of their biggest
failures due to its complexity [7]. Instead they are now
developing databases focusing on health and aging sciences.
Another way to meet these challenges is through
multidisciplinary initiatives between scientific disciplines
and between academy and industry. Today there are a
number of examples of international multidisciplinary
collaboration, e.g., the Bio design Fellowship program at
Stanford University since 2003 which is also implemented
in Sweden as The Centre for Technology in Medicine and
Health (CTMH). These types of commitments are key
elements in promoting interdisciplinary research and
development in medicine focusing problem-solving in
general. However, it is rarer to find a technology focus in
relation to nursing and caring.
Section 2 describes the rationale behind the organization
of a new collaboration between engineers and nurses to
meet the challenges pointed out above. Section 3 describes
the aim more in specific with emphasis on digitization
effects on inter-professional collaboration and the
dependency on active patients to make technology work in
their social context. In section 4 and 5 some arguments are
presented to why nursing and critical technology research is
a relevant combination to set the agenda for this new
collaboration. Section 6 summarizes the main conclusions.

46

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

II. NEW INITIATIVE TO MEET THE CHALLENGES
With this background we would like to present a new
Swedish initiative for collaboration between nursing science
and engineering, initiated jointly between KTH, the Royal
Institute of Technology and SRCUC, the Swedish Red
Cross University College in Stockholm. The reason for
submitting this work in progress at this conference is to
gather input and comments on two main issues. The first
one is whether this is a fruitful strategy to create more
sustainable health care systems. The second issue is how we
in a multidisciplinary collaboration can work to define
“Technology in health care”, its substance and its
boundaries.
The collaboration between KTH and SRCUC is
implemented in parallel with a new interdisciplinary
postgraduate program - Technology in Health Care (in
Swedish: Teknisk vårdvetenskap) at KTH and as a part of
the nursing science program curriculum at SRCUC. The
Nursing Science program at SRCUC will therefore have a
unique technological profile, added to its 150 year tradition
of training nurses. At KTH, the Department for Technology
and health will be given new opportunities for research into
how technology works in caring settings.
The aim of the collaboration is to create sustainable and
effective systems of health care through increased
knowledge about how technology affects people's
opportunities to regain their health and more proactive
nurses and engineers participating in design and innovation
processes which also enhance patient safety. The technology
focus is digitization encompassing both biomedical
engineering used by health care professionals in hospitals,
and home health care systems, as well as digital tools used
by both health care professionals, citizens at home and in
mobile settings. Demographic developments will be key
focusing on children and older populations, the groups that
will increase the most until 2050. Many projects fall outside
the boundaries of eHealth, yet include the combination of
technical skills and caring skills to solve the problem at
stake. Digitization is central. It is estimated that within a
decade, the majority of the world’s population will have
accesses to virtually all the world's information in a machine
that fits in its own palm. These profound changes occurring
within one generation naturally has a great impact on the
Red Cross, which together with the Red Crescent, is the
world's largest non-profit organization (97 million
members). Digital media, robots and sensors, create new
opportunities to practice disaster response and care, in
dangerous situations and in the monitoring of health.
The SRCUC-KTH collaboration was initiated jointly in
2012, a professor was installed 2014 and 2016 we are
moving from preparations and discussions to research and
education activities supported by structures for training,
qualification, publication and projects.

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

III.

PROGRAM CONTENT AND GOALS

The aim is to understand how digitization affects patients
and healthcare professionals and proactively contribute to
functioning systems that support caring and nursing. With
digitization we refer to the on-going development from a
hospital- and function-based organization focused on
patients, diseases, wards and elimination of risks with single
technical applications, towards a focus on health, home
health care such as cancer and palliative care, monitoring
and communication on distance, digitized and accessible
patient care records requiring active patients and citizens
and more of inter-professional collaboration and teamwork
between health care professionals. These shifts in the way
care and contacts with citizens are understood is underway.
Our analysis goes even further, focusing on-going
developments and implementations of patient safety outside
hospitals and between hospitals and homes, distance surgery
and design of self-care devices, the use of robotics,
genetically guidance and other new roles for nurses. The
critical input from this program to influence this
development is a proactive approach including the ability to
collaborate with engineers, initiate and formulate relevant
research questions. The theoretical foundation for this
critical input will be Science-Technology-Studies research
providing insights on the configuration of users and contexts
and from Informatics and Implementation science providing
knowledge on participation in implementation of health
information systems. This is expected to offset the dominant
paradigm of deterministic and paternalistic views leading up
to a mismatch between the care offered and people's
demands and needs; lack of cooperation; discontinuous care
chains; tenacious hierarchies, and not least, a focus on
technology founded on flawed understanding of the context
in which the technology is used. The research environment
at KTH and SRCUC in which this program is developed
include other programs which will be expected to make
considerable input to the multi-disciplinary approaches,
such as care logistics engineering, ergonomics, monitoring,
nursing and public health.
To be proactive requires knowledge about technological
developments and the ability to collaborate with engineers
and participate in design and innovation processes both for
healthcare professionals and concerned citizens. The first
attempts to joint learning opportunities for engineers and
nurses were successful and will continue this year The
exercise is organized as a part of the curriculum in which
students in nursing and students to become medical
engineers collaborating around a report from the Swedish
Accident Investigation Authority about a serious failure at a
Swedish hospital involving medical technology and a
patient. The meeting received very positive feedback and
created a broader perspective on each other's responsibilities
and the role of technology in a real life setting. For the
moment the research group includes one professor from the
engineering department with a STS-background, two PhD in
medicine and nursing, one PhD in medical education related

47

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

to informatics, three assistant professors, two PhD students
and two project employed persons. The first six years of this
collaboration is based on joint funding from KTH and
SRCUC and from external funding. For the moment the
external funding include a China-Sweden collaboration
building home health care and housing for ageing
populations; development of medical devices and patient
safety funded by Swedish and Norwegian foundations; child
intensive care developments funded by Karolinska hospital;
digital ethics funded by Swedish foundations; and Age
Management funded by Swedish Industry and a Swedish
Research Council. The professor leading this group has for
thirty years been dedicated to research and development in
aging, technology and design and was responsible for ten
years for the Ageing and design program at Lund
University, where she still holds a visiting professorship.
Her publications include a range of projects with old people
participating in design and implementation. The first articles
in this context were published by Mattsson & Stevens [15]
[16] and Björling on coated endotracheal tubes and central
venous catheters with focus on patient safety [17] [18].
During the same period Östlund published several articles
on robotics and ethics [19] [20] [21].
The result of this program are expected to reinforce the
participation of citizens and health care professionals in
designing future health care, and as a consequence
broadening the innovation capability in health care and
citizens' trust and confidence in the health care system. The
most tangible results in the short term is expected to be
technology that does not impair care but that facilitates and
enhances people's opportunities to recover and maintain
their health.
IV.

THE RELEVANCE OF NURSING AND CARING SCIENCES

Nursing is central in the development of future health
care. In the Nordic countries, nursing as a research subject,
have for thirty years, developed in parallel with “caring
sciences”. Both have been expansive including caring
informatics and caring theory. Nursing, which is the broad
international field, has its focus on guiding nurses in
practice such as routines and regulations and patient safety.
Caring sciences, published in Journals, such as the
Scandinavian JN for Caring Sciences among other JN,
originate from phenomenology and the interest to
understand principles for utilization [8] [9] [10]. Caring
science is today related to person-centred care, selfsufficiency and independence. Especially since the core of
caring has been revealed as central, holistic, individualized
and at the same time providing expert physical care
combined with fulfilling emotional needs in an adaptive
environment [11]. As digitization increasingly moves in to
the realms of health and self-care, the relationship between
the caregiver and the individual citizen, patient or care
receiver, becomes more important. Result from innovation
and implementation research have not yet been applied in
this field but can be important to promote”self-care

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

management, personalized medicine” and consequences of
the demographic development [12] [13].
V.

TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT

Technology development today is leading to greater
complexity. We are now entering a new phase where it is
more about interconnected systems and no longer just
individual applications. Today, the use of different types of
IT applications is not unknown to anyone in health care.
“APPS”, digital patient records, alarms, sensors for
monitoring health, social robots, “robocats”, digital
incontinence, remote surgery, decision support for
diagnosis, balance training for stroke sufferers are all
examples of products that can add value”. Many of these
examples have been shown to increase the quality of care
and have already become successful business solutions. At
the same time, this raises awareness about the fact that
individual technical artefacts are hardly the solutions to the
health care problems. This leads to a number of questions
which need to be addressed: How can we permanently and
sustainably integrate new applications in health care? What
is the best way to implement accurate solutions in health
care with a comprehensive and ongoing digitization?
Another important question concerns what is called the
technological imperative in relation to caring values: are we
always obliged to do what can be done in terms of
technological development? Or can we find ways to criticize
such deterministic views? Although technology is closely
associated with the development of modern medical care,
the relationship to technological development is divided
[14]. Here is a criticism that high-powered specialization
risks creating problems and become counterproductive. The
German philosopher George Henry Gadamer asserted, for
example, that it is precisely in highly developed technical
civilizations that the phrases "quality of life" and "whole"
are expressed, because something has been lost (15).
Meanwhile, with a critical perspective on technology
development, we can see that technology has a special
attraction and that it has become a force for change. It also
becomes apparent that a narrow technical perspective
sometimes tends to give healthcare professionals the role of
managing technology instead of people. It also contributes
to the technological imperative i.e., what is possible to be
measured must be measured even if the benefit is unclear.
VI.

CONCLUSIONS

This short paper suggests that a program based on
multidisciplinary collaboration between nursing and
engineering is one of the key strategies to make digitization
in health care sustainable. Although this can be expected to
solve many of the problems addressed in the literature it is
not enough. A theoretical reflection is also needed that
questions the prevailing paradigm where technology is
regarded as a tool independent of the influence of the
context in which it is used. Such critical input will open up
for more proactive strategies including the understanding of

48

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

how digitization affects patients and how to increase
participation in design and implementation of health
information systems.
REFERENCES

-

[1] J. Frenk et al. “Health professionals for a new
century: transforming education to strengthen health
systems in an interdependent world,” The Lancet vol.
376, no. 9756, pp. 1923-1958, 2010.
[2] I. R. Hallberg, “Moving nursing research forward
towards a stronger impact on health care practice,”
International Journal of Nursing Studies, vol. 46, pp.
407-412, 2009.
[3] Swedish Society of Medicine, Onödiga eller skadliga
åtgärder i svensk allmänmedicin – ett
diskussionsunderlag, [Unnecessary or harmful actions in
Swedish general medicine - a basis for discussion],
Swedish Society of Medicine, Stockholm 2013.
[4] Swedish Society for Nursing:
Kunskapsluckor inom omvårdnad. En första inventering
[Gaps within caring. A first inventory], Stockholm 2013.
Strategi för sjuksköterskors arbete med eHälsa [Strategy
for nursing and eHealth], Stockholm 2012.
Värdegrund för omvårdnad [Valuebased caring],
Stockholm 2010.
[5]S. Bakken, “Informatics for patient safety: a nursing
research perspective,” Annu. Rev. Nurs. Res, vol. 24: pp.
219–254, 2006.
[6] M. E. Porter and E. Olmsted Teisberg, “Redefining
Health Care. Creating Value-Based Competition on
Results,” Harvard Business Review Press, Boston Mass.
pp. 98-148, 2006.
[7] R. Kurzweil, The Singularity is Near. New York:
Viking, 2005.
[8] V. Sorlie, L. Jansson and A. Norberg, “The meaning
of being in ethically difficult care situations in paediatric
care as narrated by female Registered Nurses,” Nordic
College of Caring Sciences, vol. 17, pp. 285-292, 2003.
[9] L. Fagerstrom, K. Eriksson and I. B. Engberg, ”The
patient's perceived caring needs: measuring the
unmeasurable,” Int. JN. Nurs. Pract, vol. 5, no. 4, pp.
199-208, 1999.
[10] P. E. Benner, C. A. Tanner and C. A. Chesla,
Expertise in nursing practice : caring, clinical judgment
& ethics, 2rd ed., New York: Springer Pub. 2009.
[11] J. Mattsson, M. Forsner, M. Castrén and M. Arman,
“Caring for children in pediatric intensive care units: An
observation study focusing on nurses’ concerns,” Journal
of Nursing Ethics, vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 528-538, 2013.
[12] L. Damschroeder et al. “Fostering implementation
of health services research findings into practice: a
consolidated framework for advancing implementation

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

science,” Implementation Science, vol. 4, no. 50, pp.115, 2009.
[13] I. R. Hallberg, ”Omvårdnadsvetenskapen i ett
framtidsperspektiv [Caring science in future
perspectives],” In E. Hamrin, M. Kihlgren, A. Rinell
Hermansson and G. Östlinder (eds.), När omvårdnad
blev vetenskap. De första decennierna [When caring
became science. The first decades], Stockholm: Liber
AB, pp. 328-337, 2014.
[14] H. Eriksson, ”Vårdvetenskap för en postmodern tid
[Caring Sciences for a Postmodern Era],” In Eriksson, H
(ed.) Vårdvetenskap och postmodernitet [Caring
Sciences and Postmodernity], Lund: Studentlitteratur,
pp. 29-48, 2014.
[15] J. Y. Mattsson and L. Stevens, “Development of an
individual assessment instrument for critical care nursing
students,” Journal of Nursing Education and Practice,
vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 54-61, 2017.
[16] H. Engstrand and J. Mattsson, “The non-verbal
communication in handover situations are the spice
between the lines, to understand the severity of the
patient´s condition,” Journal of Nursing Education and
Practice, vol. 7, no. 5, pp.1-8, 2017.
[17] G. Björling, D. Johansson, L. Bergström, S. Jalal, I.
Kohn, C. Frostell and S. Kalman, S, “Tolerability and
performance of BIP endotracheal tubes with noble metal
alloy coating – a randomized clinical evaluation study,”
BMC Anesthesiology, vol. 15, no.174, 2015.
[18] G. Björling, D. Johansson, L. Bergström, J.
Sanchez, A. Strekalovsky, C. Frostell and S. Kalman,
“Central Venous Catheters Coated with a Noble Metal
Alloy – A Randomized Clinical Pilot Study,” Scand.
Cardovascular Journal. In-press
[19] S. Frennert and B. Östlund, “What happens when
seniors participate in new eHealth schemes?” Disability
and Rehabilitation: Assistive Technology. July, pp-1-9,
2015.
[20] S. Frennert, H. Eftring and B. Östlund, “Case
Report: Implications of Doing Research on Socially
Assistive Robots in Real Homes,” Int. JN of Social
Robotics, Accepted January 11, 2017.
[21] B. Östlund, B. “Digital ageing in the making and its
ethical challenges,” In H. Campbell, G. Grieve and M.
Lövheim (eds), Digital Existance, Routledge Studies in
Digital Religion, In printing November 2016.

49

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

How to Evaluate an m-Health Project: Case of e-Ambulance in Japan
Masatsugu Tsuji
Faculty of Economics
Kobe International University
Kobe, Japan
e-mail: mtsuji@kobe-kiu.ac,jp

Yoshihisa Matsumoto

Masaru Ogawa

Graduate University for Advanced
Studies
Tokyo, Japan
e-mail: ymatsumoto@avaya.com

Faculty of Business Management
Kobe Gakuin Universsity
Kobe, Japan
e-mail: CZK07133@nifty.ne.jp

Abstract— This study aims at evaluating the economic effect of
a e-ambulance project, or emergency telemedicine in the rural
areas in Kouchi Prefecture in Japan. The focus is on
ambulances equipped with ICT devices which transmit images
of acute patients to remote hospitals. Kouchi Prefecture started
the e-ambulance project in Aki and Muroto Cities in 2012.
From two cities, it takes approximately one hour to reach
emergency hospitals located in Kouchi City, the prefectural
capital. One of the merits of e-ambulance with the image
transmitting system is that doctors in accepting hospitals can
monitor real time situation of a patient and prepare for
necessary treatment prior to the time patient arrives. They
thus save time and effort. In measuring benefit, this study
employs different methodology; the e-ambulance project
enhances wellness of residents since they perceive more secure.
Thus the contingent valuation method (CVM) is applied and
willingness to pay (WTP) is used as an index of benefit and
estimated based on surveys to residents, which amounts to
1,747 yen per resident per year. Total cost calculated is
381,792,228 yen over three years, and accordingly, B/C ratio
amounts 0.459.
Keywords- e-ambulance; WTP; Cost-benefit analysis; CVM;
B/C ratio.

I. INTRODUCTION
e-Health has been implementing in many countries, and
in order for the system to be diffused further, there are still
lots of obstacles such as the legal framework, economic
foundations of implementations, and other regulations. All
medical systems were established in the age of face-to-face
medicine fair prior to e-Health. To overcome these obstacles,
it is required to demonstrate its effectiveness, that is, eHealth contributes to efficiency of medical services and
enhances wellness of people [1]. Therefore, its costeffectiveness must be proved by comparing its benefits and
costs. The latter consists of equipment such as servers and
peripheral devices, salaries and wages of doctors and nurses,
and maintenance fees such as communication charges and
other miscellaneous operating costs. On the other hand, to
obtain its concrete benefits in monetary terms is analytically
difficult, since the benefits mainly come from users’
subjective satisfaction which is difficult to measure [2][3].
Without a firm basis of its cost-effectiveness, the future
sustainability of the e-Health cannot be guaranteed.
The authors have been analyzing the benefits or merits of
e-Heal in terms of the amounts of medical expenditures or
treatment days saved by e-Health employing different

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

methods, which are mainly statistical analyses [4]-[9]. These
analyses became possible since the precise data of medical
expenditures or treatment days were obtained. Based on the
construction of the database, the effect of e-Health on these
out comes were estimated for the various objectives or
methods. The effect in the long-term effect such as 10 years
is the example of the former [7], whereas the estimations
without biases such as [5][8] are those of the latter. On the
other hand, this study takes a different method other than
statistical and focuses on the comparison of costs and
benefits of e-Heath. In this sense, this paper examines eHealth in terms of cost effectiveness.
In order to measure the benefits of public services such as
e-ambulance which are not traded on the market, the
following methods are utilized in this field: (a) travel cost
method: (b) replacement costs method; (c) hedonic approach;
and (d) contingent valuation method (CVM). In what
follows, this study employs CVM, which has been recently
widely adopted in the fields of health economics and
environmental economics [10][11][12]. CVM measures the
benefits to users in terms of willingness to pay (WTP), which
is the monetary amount that users want to pay for receiving
the service. By asking WTP of each user, we can then
construct the surrogate demand function for the e-Health
service. It should be noted that this paper utilizes the results
of economic evaluation of e-Health for the assessment of a
project which aims to introduce the system. If the system is
not introduced yet, it is impossible theoretically to evaluate a
project by asking residents about WTP. CVM, however, can
be applied even in this case, since it asks imaginary
questions to people relating to benefits [13]. Although CVM
and WTP have a strong theoretical basis, CVM tends to have
a bias because it asks for concrete valuation and choice under
fictitious circumstances. Care should be taken to clarify what
kind of bias it possesses and to remove them.
This paper aims to analyze the Cost/Benefit analysis of the
e-ambulance project in two cities in the rural and
depopulated areas in Japan: Aki City and Muroto City,
Kochi Prefecture. Ambulances are equipped with ICT
devices which transmit images of patient to remote hospitals.
In the depopulated areas, the number of clinics and medical
specialist is small and a patient with acute disease or
wounded by accident must be transported to hospitals with
full facilities. Traditional ambulances are equipped with the
mobile communication system only for voice or facsimile,
and accordingly information transmitted from the ambulance
to hospitals is limited. Kouchi Prefecture started the e-

50

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

ambulance project in Aki and Muroto Cities in 2012. From
these two cities, it takes about approximately one hour to
reach emergency hospitals located in Kouchi City, the
prefectural capital. One of the merits of e-ambulance with
the image transmitting system is that doctors in the accepting
hospital can monitor real time situation of a patient and
prepare for necessary treatment when patient arrives. They
thus save time and effort.
The analysis in this study provides not only the firm
theoretical basis of evaluating e-Health project but also
practical guideline for regions which plan to implement eHealth. In particular, surveys to residents were conducted not
only above two cities but also Ino Town, Kochi Prefecture,
which plans to implement e-ambulance. In this context, we
can compare how WTP is different between two types
regions which are implementing or not, we can compare expost and ex-ante WTP. This study therefore leads to useful
information to local governments which plan to implement
e-Health.
The structure of the paper is as follows: In the next
section, the surveys to residents and their results are briefly
summarized and explained. Section III estimates WTP based
on the data. The content of various costs and the comparison
with benefits are analyzed in Section IV. The brief
conclusion and further analysis are presented the final
section.
II.

SURVEYS CONDUCTED

A. Aki and Kuroto Cities
In this section, let us briefly describe Aki and Muroto
cities. These neighboring cities are located in east Kochi
Prefecture. They are mountainous and face the Pacific
Ocean. Their primary industries are agriculture and fishery.
Their population is declining, while the percentage of the
elderly is increasing. Aki City with the area of 317.37km²
has 18,657 residents and 8,055 households, and the elderly
ratio is 29.14%, while Muroto with the area of 248.25 km²
has population 17,490 and 7,598 households, and its elderly
ratio is 32.94%. There are 42 in Aki City and 23 clinics in
Muroto City, but no tertiary emergency medical facility in
two cities and therefore patients who emergency services
need have to be transferred to Kochi City. This is the
background of the e-ambulance project.
B. Surveys to residents
The surveys were conducted to residents in Ino Town on
November 5, Aki City on November 18 and Muroto City on
November 19, 2013. We interviewed 62 in Ino Town, 55 Aki
City, and 47 Muroto City, totaling 164, and asked questions
pertaining to the following: (a) WTP; (b) effectiveness; (c)
frequency of usage; and (d) user properties such as age,
gender, income, education, and health condition. These are
supposed to affect WTP of residents.
Let us examine characteristics of residents who replied to
our questionnaires. 76 are males, while 85 are females
(TABLE I). The average age is 42.7 (TABLE II) and
regarding education, high school, junior college, and

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

university and higher are equally distributed (TABLE III).
153 are still working, while 8 not working (TABLE IV). The
average family size is 2.9 (TABLE V), and people living
alone and living with wife or husband share more than half.
The number of children and grandchildren living in the same
city is shown in TABLE VI. Regarding health condition,
more than two-thirds replied either good, fair or all right
(TABLE VII). Accordingly, the average frequency of
visiting medical institutions per month is 1.6, and more than
90% reported no necessity for outside medical help, and
these are due to their average ages (TABLE VIII). Even
though two cities located depopulated areas, they are enough
neighboring clinics, and the most of them live close to clinics
(TABLE IX).
TABLE I. GENDER

1 Male
2 Female
Total

Freq.
76
85
161

%
47.2
52.8
100

TABLE II. AGE DISTRIBUTION

Age
20-24
25-29
30-34
35-39
40-44
45-49
50-54
55-59
60-64
65-69
70-74
75-79
total

Freq.
12
13
6
16
17
24
29
22
10
6
4
1
160

%
7.5
8.1
3.8
10.0
10.6
15.0
18.1
13.8
6.3
3.8
2.5
0.6
100.0

TABLE III. EDUCATION

Freq.
5
56
51
49
161

1. Junior high school
2 High school
3 Junior collage
4 University and higher
total

%
3.1
34.8
31.7
30.4
100.0

TABLE IV. EMPLOYMENT

1 Working
2 Not working
total

Freq.
153
8
161

%
95.0
5.0
100.0

51

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

TABLE V. NUMBER OF FAMILY

Freq.
15
27
38
0
12
3
135

0
2
3
4
5
6
total

III.

%
11.1
20.0
28.1
0.0
8.9
2.2
100.0

TABLE VI. NUMBER OF CHILDREN AND GRANDCHILDREN
LIVING IN THE SAME CITY

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
total

Freq.
123
14
9
9
3
2
1
161

%
76.4
8.7
5.6
5.6
1.9
1.2
0.6
100.0

TABLE VII. DISEASES TREATED

Diseases
1 High blood pressure, Atherosclerosis
2 Heart diseases
3 Diabetes
4 Stroke
5 Chronic Gastritis, Gastric ulcer
6 Assume
7 Backache, arthritis, rheumatism
8 Gglaucoma, cataract
9 Rrenal disease, kidney failure
10 Hemorrhoid
11 Others
total

Freq.
11
1
2
1
3
1
6
1
3
0
11
40

TABLE VIII. FREQUENCY OF VISITING CLINIC

Number
10
2 1-2
3 3-5
4 6-9
5 more than10
total

%

Freq.
90
66
1
0
0

57.3
42.0
0.6
0.0
0.0

157

100.0

TABLE IX. MINUTES TO THE NEAREST CLINIC

Time
1 less than 10 minutes
2 10-less than 30
3 30-less than 60
4 60-less than 2 hours
total

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

Freq.

%

79
52
16
9

50.6
33.3
10.3
5.8

156

100.0

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

%
27.5
2.5
5.0
2.5
7.5
2.5
15.0
2.5
7.5
0.0
27.5
100.0

ESTIMATION OF WTP

A. CVM
In order to measure the benefits of services which are not
traded on the market, the following methods are utilized: (a)
travel cost method: (b) replacement costs method; (c)
hedonic approach; and (d) CVM. In what follows, we use
CVM, which has been recently widely adopted in the fields
of health economics and environmental economics
[10][11][12]. CVM measures the benefits to residents or
users of e-Health in terms of WTP, which is the monetary
amount which users are willing to pay for receiving the
service. By asking the WTP of each user, we can then
construct the surrogate demand function for the e-ambulance
system. Although CVM and WTP have a strong theoretical
basis, CVM tends to have a bias because it asks for concrete
valuation and choice under fictitious circumstances. Care
should be taken to clarify what kind of bias it possesses and
to remove them.
B. Questionnaire
We conducted the surveys to residents in Ino Twon on 5,
Aki City on 18 and Muroto City on 19, November 5, 2013,
and asked questions pertaining to the following: (a) WTP;
(b) whether they know the e-ambulance project, (c) desire to
continue the project; and (d) user properties such as age,
gender, income, education, and health condition. The
questionnaire related to WTP is based on the three-stage
double bound method: We begin by asking whether they
would be willing to pay monthly charges of 1,500 yen
(US$15). This initial value in CVM method is important,
since WTP tends to depend on the initial value. If their
answer is “yes,” we then ask whether they would be willing
to pay 2,500 yen (US$25). If they reply “yes” again to 2,500
yen, their WTP is 2,500 yen. If “no”, then we lower the
amount to 2,000 yen (US$20). If they reply “yes” to 2,000
yen, then that is their WTP. If again their answer is “no,” we
lower the amount further to 1,500 yen. In the first question of
1,500, if the reply is “no” to 1,500 yen, then we lower the
amount to 500 yen. If the reply to 500 yen is “yes,” then we
ask whether 1,000 yen is acceptable. If the reply to 1,000 yen
is “yes,” then his/her WTP is 1,000 yen. If not, it becomes
500 yen. On the other hand, the reply to 500 yen is “no,”
then we ask how about 250 yen. If the reply is “yes,” then
WTP becomes 250 yen. If it is “no,” then we ask how much
he/she wants to pay. They reply their acceptable amounts.
These series of questions are standard in the evaluation of
issues in public services, environments, and so on.
The distribution of WTP from the survey shown in
TABLE X is as follows: more than 3,000 yen (5), 2,5002,999 yen (5), 2,000-2,499 yen (5), 1,500-1,999 yen (10),
1,000-1,499 yen (18), 500-999 yen (30), 250-499 yen (36),
and 1-249 yen (11). It should be noted that there are 33
residents responded that their WTPs is zero. After checking
their reasons, those are considered as “non-response,” and
their replies are omitted from the analysis.

52

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

TABLE X. DISTRIBUTION OF REPLIED WTP

WTP (JPY)
Number
WTP (JPY)
Number

3,000>
5
1,0001,499
18

2,5002,999
5
500999
30

2,0002,499
5
250～
499
36

1,5001,999
10
1～
249
11

C. Estimation of demand function and WTP
Based on the above WTP of each respondent, the demand
function of the e-ambulance service is estimated; more
precisely, the probability of acceptance to amounts
questioned is estimated and the number of residents who will
agree to pay. The functional form of demand to be estimated
is assumed to be logistic, namely,
Probability of acceptance = 1- 1/(1 + exp (-α-βlogWTP)) (1)
The probability of acceptance is the ratio of the residents
who reply that they are willing to use the device at the
amount of charges provided in the questions. The estimated
coefficients α and β are summarized in TABLE XI. The
average WTP is calculated as the area under this demand
function, which results in being 1,747 yen (approximately
US$175) per resident per year. The mean value For WTP,
which is the amount that the probability of acceptance is
50%, is estimated at 1,379.45 yen. This paper uses the
average value as WTP in the analysis in what follows.
TABLE XI. RESULTS OF ESTIMATION

Coefficients
S.D.
α
18.765
1.276
β
2.596
0.175
Log likelihood function: -475.7578

IV.

t-value
14.711
14.854

p-value
0.000
0.000

***
***

COST BENEFIT ANALYSIS

A. Total benefits
In the Cost/Benefit Analysis, total benefits and costs are
compared over the period of several years. In this paper, two
kinds of the time span are used: one is three years, which is
the same as the project period, while that of five year is also
considered, which is usual period of public projects like eambulance. WTP obtained above is for per resident per year,
and it is multiplied by total number of residents, since all
residents have a chance to use ambulance. The population of
each city is 18,657 in Aki City and 17,490 in Muroto City as
of January 1, 2014, and thus total population is 36,147. Since
all residents have possibility of using ambulance, even if
they are babies or 100 years old, the numbers of residents
who receive benefit are total of two cities, we multiply WTP
1,747 yen by population of 36,147, which ends up with
63,148,089 (US$631,000). That is, one-year benefits of eambulance services total approximately 63,148,809 yen
(US$631,000). In order to obtain three and five years’ worth

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

of benefits, the present values of three or five years’ benefits
are calculated with a 4% discount rate, and we assume that
population of two cities remains at the level for six years.
This results in three (five) years’ benefits totaling
175,243,694 yen (281,127,278 yen)
B. Total costs
The total cost of the system consists of two major
categories; initial fixed and annual operating costs. The
former is the items which have to pay at the first year of the
project and covers that (i) ICT hardware equipment of the
systems of transmitting and receiving images and related
equipment, (ii) ambulance, (iii) costs related to software
development and the purchase of software, (iv) installment,
and (v) initial training cost. The latter, on the other hand, the
latter is required annually and contains the followings: (vi)
salary of ambulance crew; (vii) maintenance fees which
consist of those related to hardware and software; (viii)
gasoline mainly for ambulance; and (ix) communications
charges for the wireless and wired devices. These cost items
are summarized in TABLE XII for the annual basis.
TABLE XII. COSTS OF THE E-AMBULANCE PROJECT

C.

Total Cost (single year)
1. Initial cost
Hardware (equipment)
1-A Equipment
Ambulance
1-B Ambulance
Software
1-C Software development
1-D Software
Installment
1-E Installment cost
Training
1-F Initial training
subtotal
2. Operational Cost
Salary
2-A Salary of ambulance
crew
Maintenance
2-B Software maintenance
2-C Hardware maintenance
Fuel
2-D Gasoline
Communication
2-E Communication fees
subtotal
Total

JPY

8,144,662
36,000,000
19,341,000
4,114,803
2,706,784
1,680,000
71,987,249

50,572,080
893,928
654,360
2,400,000
1,200,000
55,720,368
127,707,617

In order to obtain total costs of three (five) year period,
operational annual costs must be discounted at a 4% discount
rate. As a result, the costs of salary in three (five) years are
140,342,126 yen (225,137,915 yen), respectively, while
those of miscellaneous expense including maintenance,

53

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

gasoline and communications are 9,990,328 yen (16,026,560
yen). Thus, total operating costs for three (five) years are
150,332,453 yen (241,164,475 yen), respectively.
C. B/C ratio
From the above calculation, benefits total 175,243,694
yen (US$1,752,436) over the period of three years and
281,127,278 yen (US$2,811,272) over the period of five
years, whereas costs total 381,792,228 yen (US$3,817,922)
over the period of three years and 472,624,250 yen
(US$4,726,242) over the period of five years. On the other
hand, total costs amount to 381,792,228 yen (US$3,817,922)
for three years and 472,624,250 (US$4,726,242) yen for five
years. Therefore, the B/C ratio over the period of three years
is 0.459 (see TABLE XIII), while 0.595 over the period of
five years, that is, benefits are about half of costs for three
year project, and about 60% for five year project (see
TABLE XIV). It can be concluded that benefits are far
smaller than costs.
Here the viewpoint is changed, that from the view of local
governments which implementing the project, that is, Aki
and Muroto Cities, they only bear the costs of operating
costs, since initial costs are borne by subsidies from the
central government, and they can bear only cost of operating
costs. The B/C ratio calculated in this way is 1.166 over the
both of periods indicating that for two local governments,
benefits exceed its costs. Thus from the view of city, this
project is favorable, and worthy to implement.
TABLE XIII. COST/BENEFIT: 3 YEARS

Total benefit B3
Initial cist IC3
Operating cost OC3
Total Cost TC3
B3/TC3
B3/OC3

JPY
175,243,694
231,459,775
150,332,453
381,792,228
0.459
1.166

TABLE XIV. COST/BENEFIT: 5 YEARS

Total benefit B5
Initial cist IC5
Operating cost OC5
Total Cost TC5
B5/TC5
B5/OC5

JPY
281,127,278
231,459,775
241,164,475
472,624,250
0.595
1.166

D. Comparison with other e-Health projects
There is no economic evaluation of e-ambulance, but the
results can be compared with other e-Health projects which
are implementation of telecare. Telecare transmits healthrelated data of its users such as blood pressure, ECG, and
blood oxygen to a remote medical institution via a
telecommunications network. The system is equipped with a
simple device which, when used continuously, records the

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

condition of the elderly or a patient’s illness in graphs, which
are then used for diagnosis and consultation. Reports sent by
the medical institution are also helpful for users to enhance
their daily health consciousness and make an effort to
maintain good health. Such positive effects have been
identified through field surveys.
Tsuji et al. [14] applied the Cost/Benefit Analysis to the
telehealth systems in the following four regions in Japan:
Kamaishi City, Iwate Prefecture; Nishiaizu Town and
Katsurao Village, Fukushima Prefecture; and Sangawa
Town, Kagawa Prefecture. Benefits are expressed in terms of
WTP based on CVM, whereas the costs are calculated as the
sum of equipment, salaries of doctors and nurses, and other
operations. Then, the benefits and costs are compared in
terms of the B/C ratio, and the results obtained are shown in
TABLE XV. Since the users receive and perceive benefit
from telecare by using every day, while benefits of eambulance are less noticed by residents, WTP of eambulance tends to be larger than e-ambulance.
TABLE XV. COSTS AND BENEFITS OF TELECARE BY CVM
Unit: JPY

Number of devices
WTP
Equipment
Salaries
Others
Total costs (6 years)
B/C
(B/C)**
Number of devices
WTP
Equipment
Salaries
Others
Total costs (6 years)
B/C
(B/C)**

Kamaishi
211
4,519
39.9*
8.6*
1.9*
95.5*
1.07
1.87
Katsurao
325
1,640
111.4*
3.36*
10.4*
184.2*
0.54
1.42

Nishiaizu
400
3,177
136.7*
3.7*
1.9*
184.5*
0.58
2.31
Sangawa
225
2,955
133.5*
4.5*
3.0*
174.3*
0.61
2.60

Note 1: * indicates million yen
Note 2: (B/C)** indicates Benefit/Operating cost
Source: [14]

Thus the B/C ratios obtained for e-ambulance are similar to
those of telecare, which were operated by local governments
and received subsides for initial equipment from the central
government. As a project, they are less than 1, that is,
benefits are smaller than costs, while for local governments it
is worthy to implement since benefits to the users are larger
than costs which were borne by local governments. From the
view of local governments which implementing the project,
that is, Aki and Muroto Cities, they only bear the costs of
operating costs, since initial costs are borne by subsidies
from the central government, and they can bear only cost of
operating costs. The B/C ratio calculated in this way is 1.166

54

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

over the both of periods indicating that for two local
governments, benefits exceed its costs. Thus from the view
of city, this project is favorable, and worthy to implement.

[5]

[6]

V.

CONCLUSIONS

In this paper, WTP in Aki and Kuroto Cities and Ino
Town is estimated by CVM and WTP obtained is 1,747 yen.
According to our rigorous analysis, we found that this value
is not different from the ex-post WTPs estimated in our
previous research. The effects of the e-ambulance in Aki and
Muroto Cities are also similar to realized ones in the other
regions. These results indicate that WTP can be an indicator
of potential effectiveness of regional health policy
implemented by local governments.
So far, we have conducted surveys of four local
governments as shown in TABLE XV. Except for Kamaishi
City, their B/C ratios are approximately 0.5, that is, benefits
cover only half of the costs. In addition, regarding the
frequency of usage of the device, Kamaishi City also has a
much higher ratio than the other local governments. This is
due to charges, not free like other region, their efforts to
promote usage such as a users’ association which organizes
events to enhance consciousness towards health, and the
participation by medical doctors in this system, which
increases the users’ reliance on the system. It is clear from
our previous studies that telecare is useful for consultation
and maintaining the good health of the elderly and patients
suffering from chronic diseases who are in stable condition,
but it is not for curing disease. It therefore has a
psychological effect such as providing a sense of relief to its
users by the knowledge of being monitored by a medical
institution 24 hours a day. This makes it difficult to estimate
its benefits in concrete terms.
On the other hand, benefits of e-ambulance are hardly
perceived by residents, except transported by ambulance. But
the residents feel wellness because of e-ambulance, since in
case of acute diseases they would be treated better than the
situation without it. These benefits are less perceived and it
is difficult to measure. CVM seems to be the only suitable
method to measure benefits.

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

Y. Akematsu and M. Tsuji, “Measuring the Effect of Telecare
on Medical Expenditures without Bias Using the Propensity
Score Matching Method,” Telemedicine and e-Health, Vol.
18, pp. 743-747, 2012.
Y. Akematsu, and M. Tsuji, “Relation between telecare
implementation and number of treatment days in a Japanese
town,” Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare, Vol. 19, pp. 3639, 2013.
Y. Akematsu, S. Nitta, K. Morita, and M. Tsuji, “Empirical
analysis of the long-term effects of telecare use in Nishi-aizu
Town, Fukushima Prefecture, Japan,” Technology and
HealthCare, vol. 21, pp. 173-82, 2013.
K. Minetaki, Y. Akematsu, and M. Tsuji, “Effect of e-Health
on Medical Expenditures of Outpatients with Lifestyle-related
Diseases,” Telemedicine and e-Health, Vol. 17, pp, pp. 591-5,
2011.
K. Minetaki, Y. Akematsu, and M. Tsuji, “Empirical Study
of Emergency Medical Service,” Journal of eHealth
Technology and Application, Vol. 18, pp. 167-76, 2010.
G. Garrod, and K. G. Willis, Economic Valuation of the
Environment: Method and Case Studies, Edward Elgar,
London, UK, 1999.
J. B. Loomis, and R. G. Walsh, Recreation Economic
Decisions: Comparing Benefit and Costs, Second Edition,
Venture Publishing Inc., State College, Pennsylvania, 1997.
M. Tsuji, W. Suzuki, “An Economic Assessment of Telehealth: The WTP Approach,” Proceedings of APT
Conference, Jakarta, Indonesia, 2002.
M. Tsuji, C. Iizuka and, F. Taaoka, “On the Ex-ante and Expost Evaluation of Economic Benefits of the Japanese eHealth System,” Proceedings of 3rd APT Telemedicine
Workshop 2005, pp. 68-72, Multimedia University, Kuala
Lumpur, Malaysia, 2005.
M. Tsuji, W. Suzuki, and F. Taoka, “An Empirical Analysis
of the Economic Assessment of the Tele-health System by
CVM,” in Proceedings of MODSIM2003, pp. 1950-5,
Townsvill, Australia, 2003.

REFERENCES
M. Tsuji, “The Telehomecare/telehealth System in Japan,”
Business Briefing: Global HealthCare, pp. 72-6, London,
2002.
[2] M. Tsuji, W. Suzuki, and F. Taoka, “An Empirical Analysis
of a Telehealth System in term of Cost-sharing,” Journal of
Telemedicine and Telecare, Vol. 9, pp. 41-43, 2003
[3] M. Tsuji and W. Suzuki, “The application of CVM for
assessing the tele-health system: an analysis of the
discrepancy between WTP and WTA based on survey data,”
(with Wataru Suzuki) in Assets, Beliefs, and Equilibria in
Economic Dynamics: Essays in Honor of Mordecai Kurz, ed.
by C. D. Aliprantis, K. Arrow, P. Hammond, F. Kubler, H.M. Wu, N. Yannelis, pp. 493-506, Springer, 2003.
[4] Y. Akematsu and M. Tsuji, ”Estimating the Effect of eHealth
on Medical Expenditure,” Journal of Telemedicine and
Telecare, Vol. 16, pp. 169-71, 2012.
[1]

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

55

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Proposal of Gait Monitoring Shoes Based on Comparative Analysis of Walking Gait
Cycle between Normal People and Stroke Patients

Shohei Yoshida

Yoshitoshi Murata

Graduate School of Software and Information Science
Iwate Prefectural University Graduate School
Takizawa, Japan
e-mail: g231n034@s.iwate-pu.ac.jp

Faculty of Software and Information Science
Iwate Prefectural University
Takizawa, Japan
e-mail: y-murata@iwate-pu.ac.jp,

Abstract— Elderly people have an increased risk of falling and
consequently injuring themselves. The prevention of falls is one
of major important issues to keep healthy life, because a fall is a
main reason for them to hospital administration or a residential
care. Motion capture systems are a key component to prevent
falls. We comparably analyzed walking gait cycle between
normal people and stroke patients using a wearable device (WD)
to detect warning signs of falls. In this paper, we experimentally
clarify to which body part a WD is best attached and what kind
of signs are useful to prevent falls. We also develop a pair of
shoes with a WD in each heel in accordance with results of preexperiment.

sensor, and sensors for electromyography. They mentioned
that fall risk estimation is an important application of gait
analysis using wearable sensors [9]. However, they did not
describe about motion of gait for elderly people or stroke
patients.
Stacy J. Morris Bamberg et al. developed a prototype shoe
in which several kinds of wearable sensors, such as
accelerometer, gyroscope, force sensor, bidirectional bend
sensor and so on [10]. The calibrated sensor outputs were
almost same as results obtained simultaneously from a
biological motion measuring equipment. They calculated the
maximum pitch (angle between the shoe sole and floor at the
toe-off timing), minimum pitch (angle between the shoe sole
and floor at the heel-strike timing), the stride length from
output of accelerometers and gyroscopes. They also compared
the maximum pitch, minimum pitch and stride length between
the healthy gait and parkinsonian gait. There were differences
on mean value of calculated data between the healthy gait and
parkinsonian gait. However, considering standard deviation of
calculated data, such differences were small. They also did not
measure and analyze motions of gait for elderly people or
stroke patients.
Farzin Dadashi et al. measured motion of gait for many
elderly people with shoe-worn inertial sensors and provided
normative values for a clinician to measure reference gait
parameters [11]. They analyzed motion of gait and clarified
the difference in gait parameters, such as the clearance
between a shoe sole and floor, gait speed, stride length
between males and females by considering the effect of age
factors. However, their data did not show differences clearly
between the male and female, and the effect of age factor. And,
they did not investigate data for stroke patients or analyze
reasons for tripping.
Mourad Benoussaad et al. introduced a method to robustly
estimate foot clearance during walking using a single inertial
measurement unit (IMU) placed on the subject’s foot [12]. In
their paper, the foot clearance was the height of ankle from a
floor. However, the toe clearance is more critical for tripping.
And, they did not measure the toe clearance for stroke patient
or analyze reasons for tripping.
Here, we focus on extracting warning signs of tripping for
stroke patients, such as cerebrovascular patients. We got
output data of an acceleration sensor and gyroscope sensor in
the wearable device (WD), Sony SmartWatch 3, mounted on
the front part of a foot to estimate the kicking power and
change of angle between a foot and floor. We noticed that an

Keywords-falls; trip; wearable device; hemiplegia; guit; shoes.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Percentage of elderly people in the population is
increasing in the world [1]. As the number of elderly increases,
the number of functionally impaired people, such as
cerebrovascular patients who have one side paralysis, will also
increase. These people have an increased risk of falling and
consequently injuring themselves [2]. Falling down is one if
the main reasons for them to be hospitalized or placed in
residential care.
There are many researches related to a fall for elder people.
The World Health Organization Regional Office for Europe
analyzed these studies and classified fall risks amongst elderly
people by history of falls, age, gender, living alone, ethnicity,
medicines, medical conditions, impaired mobility and gait,
sedentary behavior, psychological status - fear of falling,
nutritional deficiencies, visual impairments, and foot
problems [2]. Stroke patients, such as a cerebrovascular
disease especially are at substantially high risk of falling
[3][4][5][6]. The higher frequency of falls for them due to
weak muscles, one-side paralysis, and toes pointing down. For
people with impaired mobility and gait, tripping is a major
cause of falls [7][8], so we focus on tripping in this paper.
Since weak muscles, one-side paralysis, and toes pointing
down strongly appear in the movement of leg and foot, motion
capture for them are a key component to analyze impaired
mobility and gait and useful to prevent tripping and conduct
therapy and rehabilitation of hemiplegia.
Weijun Tao et al. reviewed gait analysis technologies
based on wearable sensors that were the accelerometer,
gyroscope, electromagnetic tracking system, magnetoresistive sensors, flexible goniometer, sensing fabric, force

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

56

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

angle velocity at the terminal stance and an angle at the
terminal swing show clearly differences between unimpaired
student and stroke patients. After that, we develop a pair of
shoes built a WD on.
In the next section, we consider how people trip on a flat
floor. Different features between physically unimpaired
students and stroke patients are extracted from measured data
in Section III. The best body part to which a wearable device
(WD) can be attached is described in Section IV. We
introduce a pair of shoes with a WD in each heel and example
data measured using them in Section V. Conclusions are
summarized in Section VI.
II.

-

Case 2: Kicking power of the front part of a foot is
insufficient at phases 4 and 5 to raise the heel and toe
up from the floor. In this case, a person does not swing
but shuffles. When the frictional force between a shoe
sole and the ground or floor is stronger than his/her
muscular power, he/she trips (Fig. 2(b)).
Case 3: A toe touches the floor due to it pointing down
during the swing phases (5-8), and the knee goes
further forward than the foot. When the dragging
strength is stronger than the person’s muscular power,
he/she trips (Fig. 2(c)).

-

CONSIDERATION OF TRIPPING FACTOR

When the swing foot progression is unexpectedly
obstructed, a trip occurs that leads to a forward rotation of the
body and eventually might cause a fall.
Mourad Benoussaad et al. measured the minimum toe
clearance (MinTC) to avoid tripping. MinTC is a critical value
to clear obstacles on the ground or floor. However, elderly
people, especially those who have had strokes, sometimes trip
on flat ground or floors, not obstacles. In this section, we
consider reasons a person trips on flat ground or floors. We
divide the normal walking gait cycle into eight phases the
same as Weijun Tao et al. as shown in Fig. 1 [9]: (1) initial
contact (heel-strike timing), (2) loading response, (3) midstance, (4) terminal stance (toe-off timing), (5) pre-swing, (6)
initial swing, (7) mid-swing, and (8) terminal swing.

Figure 2. Cases of tripping

The above problems suggest that the kicking power at
phases 4 and 5 and the angle between the foot and a floor are
critical parameters.
III.

EXTRACTION OF WARNING SIGNS FOR TRIPPING

In this section, we experimentally investigate whether the
kicking power at phases 4 and 5, and the angle between the
foot and lower limb are critical parameters.
A. Experimental method
Since kicking power must be expressed as the angle
velocity or the acceleration for the foot, we mounted a WD
which had an accelerometer and gyroscope on the foot. In this
experiment, we used Sony SmartWatch 3 as a WD which is
mounted on the front part of a foot with Velcro tape as shown
in Fig. 3. This mounting position was same as one in Farzin
Dadashi’s experiment [11]. The sampling rate was 40 msec.
We measure angle velocity for up and down directions of
the front part of the foot (X axis of a 3D gyroscope). We also
adopted a three-point moving average of the angle velocity to
calculate the angle, because output values extremely change
up and down. Therefore, the angle for X axis Anglexn at time
tn is calculated as follows.
(1)

Figure 1. Normal walking gait cycle (See a right foot)

Most stroke patients have weak muscles and are hard to
raise their toe. Therefore, they are at risk of three types of trips.
- Case 1: A toe touches the floor first instead of a heel
at phase 1. Since phases 2-5 are skipped, the toe is
dragged along the floor. When the dragging strength
is stronger than the person’s muscular power, he/she
trips (Fig. 2(a)).

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

Gxn is the value of angle velocity for X axis at time tn. We
also recorded video and measured locations of a patient’s
knee, ankle and foot by using Microsoft-KINECT to monitor
their motions (Fig. 4). The UNIX time is introduced to
synchronously measure data with a WD and MS-KINECT.
Before measuring, we investigated the measuring
accuracy of Sony SmartWatch 3 using a slant rule as shown
in Fig. 5. We measured data five times. Calculated angles vs.
angles given by the slant rule are listed in Table I. These data
showed calculated angles were so accurate. We noticed drift

57

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

errors of a gyroscope that increase the value by 0.2 rad. /sec.
during a WD sets on a flat floor. However, each measurement
lasted less than 20 sec. Therefore, we think the effect of the
drift error is negligible.
Participants were five physically unimpaired students and
five stroke patients. Every stroke patients in this experiment
had one-side paralysis, and trained periodically at a
rehabilitation facility. Some of them used a wheel chair and
could not walk by himself before training. They walked along
a straight line to MS-KINECT. A WD was attached on the
front part of foot on the paralysis side. We measured data for
each stroke patient two times.

(a) WD: Sony SmartWatch 3
(b) WD mounted on foot
Figure 3. Measuring device and WD mounting method

(a) MS-KINECT set up in (b) WD mounted on stroke patient
rehabilitation facility
Figure 4. Measurement environment in rehabilitation facility

B. Measured data and consideration
Fig. 6 and 7 show examples of change of angle velocity,
angle, and acceleration for a physically unimpaired student
and a stroke patient. Data for two steps are plotted.
Each flat period (roughly the center period) in these
figures is when the entire shoe sole touched the floor; this
period corresponds to phases 2 (loading response) and 3
(mid-stance). The reason that the value during this period is
not zero is that the WD measures the angle between the front
part of the foot and the floor, which depends on the person
and shoe. Therefore, we reset this angle for the gait
monitoring shoes described in Sections IV and V when the
entire shoe sole touched the floor. This processing enables the
WD to measure the angle between the back of the foot and
the floor. This value does not depend on person or shoe.
The maximum angle velocity at timing A means the
kicking power from phase 4 (terminal stance) to 5 (preswing), and the minimum angle at timing B means the angle
to the floor at phase 8 (terminal swing). This processing
removes the drift error of the gyroscope.
Lower angle velocity at A in Fig. 6 is about 420 deg./sec.
On the other hand, higher angle velocity at A in Fig. 7 is about
250 deg./sec. Thus, a physically unimpaired student and a
stroke patient obviously differ in terms of gait. The stroke
patient clearly has weaker kicking power at phase 4 (terminal
stance) than the physically unimpaired student.
Higher angle at B in Fig. 6 is about -18 degree. On the
other hand, lower angle at B in Fig. 7 is about -8 degree. Thus,
a physically unimpaired student and a stroke patient
obviously differ in terms of the angle to a floor at phase 8
(terminal swing). This shows that it is difficult for a stroke
patient to raise his or her toe at the terminal swing phase.

Figure 5. Slant rule
TABLE I. ACCURACY OF CALCULATED ANGLES

Given angle
(degree)
+50
+40
+30
+20
+10
0
-10
-20
-30
-40
-50

Calculated angle
(degree)
+49.00
+39.17
+28.92
+19.58
+9.21
0.21
-9.72
-19.47
-30.70
-40.57
-50.54

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

SD
(degree)
0.45
0.74
0.51
0.63
0.58
0.15
0.58
0.34
0.56
0.41
0.53

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

Figure 6. Changes of angle velocity, angle, and acceleration for physically
unimpaired student

58

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

TABLE IV. ESTIMATED CADENCE

Participant
Student
Stroke patient
IV.

Figure 7. Changes of angle velocity, angle, and acceleration for stroke
patient

The other hand, the acceleration basically change
corresponding to the angle velocity and angle. However, they
have much noise, and their amplitudes are not stable.
Tables II and III list the averages and standard deviations
(SDs) of measured data for angle velocity at timing A and
angle at timing B. The angle velocity at timing A is clearly
different between unimpaired students and stroke patients.
There is a big difference between them in the angle at timing
B, however this value would be sometimes overlapped each
other.
We also measure the cadence for a gait using the WD and
MS-KINECT. In this paper, we define the cadence as the
number of steps per minute. We estimated the cadence
derived from an average of 10 intervals between one timing
A and the next A, which are peak angle velocities of a step,
when a WD is used. Estimated cadence is listed in Table IV.
A physically unimpaired student and stroke patient do not
obviously differ in terms of cadence.
As the result of this experiment, we decided to adopt the
change of angle velocity and angle between a foot and floor
to detect warning signs of falls.

Average (steps/m)
46.4
49.0

SD (steps/m)
5.0
6.2

SUITABLE WD ATTACHING POSITION

A WD has to be attached somewhere on a body during
walking to detect signs of tripping to prevent a fall. A WD
was attached to the front part of the foot in Section III.
However, it is difficult for a WD to firmly be set at this place
for a long time because it is easily detached. Therefore, we
studied which position is the best to detect the change of
angle velocity for a foot and angle between a foot and floor.
We attached WDs to a heel and a lower limb as shown in Fig.
8.
For this test, we used STEVAL-WESU1 by STMicroelectronics (See Fig. 9) as a WD instead of Sony SmartWatch
3. This wearable unit includes four sensors:
3D-accelerometer,
3D-gyroscope,
3D-magnetometer,
MEMS pressure.
This device is 37 x 40 x 8 mm and weighs 9.6 g.
We inserted STEVAL-WESU1 into the heel of a shoe as
shown in Fig. 8 (a) (details in Section V). Angle velocity and
acceleration data of STEVAL-WESU1 are sent to and
processed by an Android smartphone. The sampling rate was
40 ms. We adopt a three-point moving average to remove
noise.
We requested three unimpaired students to walk with
their normal gait. Since their data change was basically the
same, graphs of one participant are shown in Fig. 10 and 11.
Both plotted lines in Fig. 10 are similar in shape to those in
Fig. 6. Timing A and B correspond to timing A and B in Fig.
6. Timing B in Fig. 10, which is the angle at the terminal
swing, is shown more clearly than that in Fig. 6. On the other
hand, timing C in Fig. 11 shows the kicking power from
phase 4 (terminal stance) to 5 (pre-swing) is the same as
timing A in Fig. 6 and 10. However, the angle at timing D in
Figure 11 is between not the foot and floor but a single limb
and the vertical line to the floor. The plotted angle in Fig. 11
clearly shows a change of angle for the single limb.
As the result of this experiment, we decided that the heel
was the best position to place a WD.

TABLE II. ANGLE VELOCITY AT THE TERMINAL STANCE

Participant
Student
Stroke patient

Average (deg./s)
509.36
342.06

SD (deg./s)
18.91
86.52

Table III. Angle at the terminal swing

Participant
Student
Stroke patient

Average (deg.)
-17.76
-7.45

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

SD (deg.)
8.02
8.02

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

(a) Heel

(b) Single limb

Figure 8. WD attaching position

59

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

turned. When these graphs were measured, a participant
played a stroke patient who had a one-side paralysis for the
right side of the body. Therefore, most strength of angle
velocity at A for right foot were smaller than that for left foot.
And, most amplitude of angle at B for right foot were smaller
than that for left foot.

Figure 9. STEVAL-WESU1 by STMicroelectronics

Figure 10. Angle velocity and angle data at heel in normal walk
Figure 12. Gait monitoring application for Android

Figure 11. Angle velocity and angle data at single limb in normal walk

V.

We experimentally monitored walking for two
participants. They were unimpaired people. They walked and
played the three types of trips in Fig. 2. Example measured
data are shown in Fig. 13. Therefore, curves of angles in these
graphs have different discontinuity to those in other graphs at
the sole of a shoe touching a floor.
In (1); toe touching the floor first instead of a heel, and
(2); shuffling, shapes of angle velocity resemble that of the
normal walk shown in Fig. 10. However, maximum values of
angle velocity and minimum angle in a cycle in Fig. 13 (1)
and (2) are much smaller than those in Fig. 10. Their absolute
minimum values are also much smaller than those in Fig. 10.
This feature must show that when muscle strength is weaker,
more trips occur.

GAIT MONITORING SHOES

As described in Section IV, we determined the heel of a
shoe is the best place to measure angle velocity of the foot
and angle between the back part of a foot and the floor. We
inserted a WD (STEVAL-WESU1 by STMicroelectronics)
into soles of both shoes. And, we also developed a gait
monitoring application for Android smartphone which
measures and stores the angle velocity and angle as shown in
Fig. 12. The upper part shows ID of WD for the right and left
shoe, and the lower part shows angle velocities at A in each
step for right foot, angle at B in each step for right foot, angle
velocities at A in each step for left foot, and angle at B in each
step for left foot. In this application, direction of angle is

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

(1)

Toe on floor at the initial contact

60

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

them. We plan to develop a warning system using the
proposed shoes for fall prevention. More data of above
critical parameters for stroke patients in daily life including
tripping conditions will be measured to develop such system.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

(2)

Shuffle instead of swing
[3]
[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]
(3)

Toe collision with floor at the initial swing

Figure 13. Example measured data for tripping with gait monitoring shoes
[8]

In (3), a toe dragging the floor due to it pointing down
at the initial swing, the swing did not start smoothly. The red
circle in Fig. 13 (3) shows this situation clearly. In the case
of a normal walk, angle velocity rapidly decrease from the
pre-swing to the initial swing. However, in (3), the angle
velocity limply decrease on the way.
VI.

CONCLUSION

We comparably analyzed walking gait cycle between
normal people and stroke patients using a wearable device
(WD) to detect warning signs of falls. The results of
experiments for physically unimpaired students and stroke
patients show that the angle velocity at the terminal stance
phase and the angle between the back of foot and a floor at
the terminal swing are critical parameters. We determined a
shoe heel to be the best place to place a WD, inserted WDs
into heels of a pair of shoes, and showed data measured using

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

[9]
[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

World Population Ageing: 1950-2050, Population Division,
Department of Economic and Social Affairs, United Nations,
http://www.un.org/esa/population/publications/worldageing19502050
/ [retrieved: Fe, 2017].
World Health Organization Regional Office for Europe, “What are the
main risk factors for falls amongst older people and what are the most
effective interventions to prevent these falls?,”
http://www.euro.who.int/en/data-and-evidence/evidence-informedpolicy-making/publications/pre2009/what-are-the-main-risk-factorsfor-falls-amongst-older-people-and-what-are-the-most-effectiveinterventions-to-prevent-these-falls [retrieved: February, 2017]
F. A. Batchelor, S. M. Mackintosh, C. M. Said, and K. D. Hill, "Falls
after stroke," Int J Stroke, Vol. 7, pp. 482-90, 2012.
G. S. Verheyden, V. Weerdesteyn, R. M. Pickering, D. Kunkel, S.
Lennon, A. C. Geurts, and A. Ashburn, "Interventions for preventing
falls in people after stroke," Cochrane Database Syst Rev. (5),
CD008728, 2013.
J. A. Tutuarima, J. H. P. van der Meulen, R. J. de Haan, A. van Straten,
and M. Limburg, "Risk Factors for Falls of Hospitalized Stroke
Patients," Stroke, Vol. 28, pp. 297-301, 1997.
R. Teasell, M. McRae, N. Foley, and A. Bhardwaj, "The Incidence and
Consequences of Falls in Stroke Patients During Inpatient
Rehabilitation: Factors Associated With High Risk," Arch Phys Med
Rehabil Vol. 83, 2002.
R. K. Begg, O. Tirosh, C. M. Said, W. A. Sparrow, N. Steinberg, P.
Levinger, and M. P. Galea, "Gait training with real-time augmented
toe-ground clearance information decreases tripping risk in older adults
and a person with chronic stroke." Frontiers in Human Neuroscience,
Vol. 8, Article 243, 2014.
A. J. Blake, K. Morgan, M. J. Bendall, H. Dallosso, S. B. Ebrahim, T.
H. Arie, P. H. Fentem, and E. J. Bassey, "Falls by elderly people at
home: prevalence and associated factors," Age Ageing; Vol. 17, pp.
365-72, 1988.
W. Tao, T. Liu, R. Zheng, and H. Feng, "Gait Analysis Using Wearable
Sensors," Sensors, 12(2), 2012, pp. 2255-2283.
Stacy J. Morris Bamberg, Ari Y. Benbasat, Donna Moxley
Scarborough, David E. Krebs, and Joseph A. Paradiso, "Gait Analysis
Using a Shoe-Integrated Wireless Sensor System," IEEE Transaction
on Information technology in Biomedice, Vol. 12, No. 4, 2008.
F. Dadashi, B. Mariani, S. Rochat, C. J. Büla, B. Santos-Eggimann, and
K. Aminian, "Gait and Foot Clearance Parameters Obtained Using
Shoe-Worn Inertial Sensors in a Large-Population Sample of Older
Adults," Sensors 2014, Vol. 14, pp. 443-457, 2014.
Mourad Benoussaad, Benoît Sijobert, Katja Mombaur, and Christine
Azevedo Coste, "Robust Foot Clearance Estimation Based on the
Integration of Foot-Mounted IMU Acceleration Data," Sensors 2016,
2016.
William P. Berg, Helaine M. Alessio, Eugenia M. Mills, and Chen
Tong, "Circumstances and consequences of falls in independent
community-dwelling older adults", Age Ageing, Vol. 26, pp. 261–268,
1997.

61

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Mood Detection and Memory Performance
Evaluation with Body Sensors
Jonathan Bohbot

Zeljko Zilic

Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering
McGill University
Montreal, Quebec, Canada
jonathan.bohbot@mail.mcgill.ca

Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering
McGill University
Montreal, Quebec, Canada
zeljko.zilic@mcgill.ca

Abstract—This paper provides the design of a system employing an Android application connected to body sensors, which
is capable of assessing the mood and memory performance of
humans. The mood detection is based on the heart rate, its
variability, as well as on the captured brain waves. The memory
performance is evaluated based on specific brain waves observed
as well. Experiments were conducted to assess the main features
of the system. The mood experiment has been successful at
raising the mood levels of the majority of participants when
being shown stimuli composed of images and sounds. Negative
or neutral mood levels could be explained by participants having
other thoughts or emotions during the experiment, and by the
attenuation and dampening of the body sensors’ signals. The
ability of participants to reach a particular mood (relaxed,
engaged, and sad) more quickly in response to a conducive
stimulus is related to a person’s physical characteristics; for
example, younger participants reach a particular mood more
quickly than older participants. The memory experiment has
been successful at raising the memory levels of the majority of
participants when being asked to perform a modified Sternberg
memory task. Results show a positive memory activity for
the majority of participants, even in the presence of signal
attenuation in the body sensors.

in the steering wheel and door handles to pick up electric
signals from the skin. A camera mounted on the windshield
could analyze facial expressions. When the driver is stressed,
the car’s sensors could soften the light and music, or broaden
the headlight beams to compensate for the loss of vision [1].

Keywords-Mood Detection; Body Sensors; Heart Rate Variability; Android Application; Brain Waves.

A. Application Features

I. I NTRODUCTION
Mood detectors can identify trends pointing to a person’s
mood. They can be found in modern computers, laptops,
smartphones, tablets, sensors such as skin sensors, electroencephalography sensors, and voice recognition sensors.
Thanks to existing technology, they can be carried everywhere and accessed anytime. Furthermore, these devices
feature lower costs, high speed, low power consumption, and
many other benefits for the subject, clinician or researcher.
Mood detectors can be integrated in our daily lives, such
as when driving a car. The driver might feel stressed and
tired when driving long distances. A car with sensors can
understand the driver’s emotion and feelings and prevent an
accident, which could save many lives. Sensors could nest

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

The importance of mood detection has been increasingly
recognized because it could prevent mood disorders from
affecting us and harming us in our daily lives. Mood disorders
include depression and bipolar disorders. Anyone can be
affected from mood disorders: children, teenagers, adults,
and the elderly. Stressful events in our lives can result in
transitory depression, or any of several mood disorders.
Symptoms include being sad, anxious, hopeless, helpless, and
having low self-esteem. These symptoms can be overcome
with the knowledge of one’s current mood by using the
above-mentioned devices and taking the right actions, such
as a psychiatric consultation and/or the commencement of
medication.

Mood detection is a growing and rapidly developing field.
Many existing devices can approximate one’s current mood.
Devices such as wrist sensors can provide information on
stress levels when worn. They can communicate this information via the internet. For example, a sensor worn on a
child’s wrist might detect that the child is stressed. The stress
signal is communicated via the internet and the parent can
see on his/her smartphone that the child is stressed, thereby
enabling the parent to take action to reduce that stress level
[2].
In recent years, many applications for smartphones and
tablets capable of telling a person’s mood have been released.
Samsung has developed a smartphone that can tell one’s
mood based on how the phone is used. For example, it
monitors the speed at which the user is typing some text,
and how much the device shakes [3]. The ”mood detection

62

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

and memory evaluation” Android application combines many
of the features from the applications mentioned below:
• The system requires Bluetooth Low Energy in order to
work.
• Mood is measured using brain and heart sensors, so it is
very accurate.
• Mood data and user data is sent to the Web on a Dropbox
Web Server, which is safe and secure.
• Mood data can be compared between users.
• Mood data for each user can be graphed, so it is easy for
the user to compare his/her mood on a daily basis.
The paper is organized as follows: section 2 briefly discusses the system’s features such as mood and memory
performance algorithms and the valence/arousal model. Section 3 discusses the experimental work. Finally, Section 4
concludes on the paper work and speculates on the future of
this growing field.
II. BACKGROUND
This section discusses essential background information of
the work. Please note that this application is not standalone
code, but is connected to body sensors communicating with
it via Bluetooth Low Energy.
A. Mood and Memory Performance Algorithms
This section discusses the procedure for measuring different
emotions and memory performance in real time through
the use of mood and memory performance algorithms. This
section also shows a pseudocode implementation of the mood
and memory performance algorithms.
The recognition of different emotions and memory performance is achieved as follows:
• First, we record the resting heart rate of the participants.
Any significant rise in this heart rate (when the participant
is seated and relaxed) is explained by strong emotions, such
as excitement, happiness, anger, and arousal [4].
• Second, we record the heart rate variability of the participant. We calculate it by using the formulas described in the
next subsections. The heart rate variability is a useful feature
in mood classification, since a bigger heart rate variability is
an indicator of good health and a lower heart rate variability
is an indicator of bad health, stress, and heart diseases.
• Third, we process the EEG data of the brain using the
procedures described in the next subsection. The processed
data consists of the EEG average band powers (alpha, beta,
gamma, and theta). Using relations and formulas discussed
in the next subsections, we obtain the arousal and valence

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

information and we use this information along with the 2D
valence/arousal model to recognize different emotions in realtime. Furthermore, memory performance evaluation follows
almost the same procedure except that we look at the band
powers, especially the alpha band power to evaluate retention
in a short-term memory task.
1) Android Pseudocode Implementation
The pseudocode implementation of the relaxation mood
(how to find the relaxation level of an individual given
some parameters such as heart rate) is shown as all other
mood and memory performance algorithms follow a similar
implementation.
Referring to Algorithm 1, RelaxHR% measures how relaxed a person is from heart rate. A value close to 0%
indicates that a person is not relaxed, and a value close to
100% indicates that a person is very relaxed. RelaxSDNN%
measures how relaxed a person is from heart rate variability
(ageSDNN is the ideal SDNN a person should have given
his/her age). RelaxEEG% measures how relaxed a person
is from EEG. Together, these values are used to find the
relaxation level.
B. Data Processing
The procedure for data processing to obtain mood and
memory performance levels works as follows: first, the DC
offset and slow drift of the raw signal is removed. The
best way to do this is with a high-pass filter with a cutoff frequency greater than 0.16Hz. The data segment is then
multiplied by a tapered window function which smoothly
forces the two ends of the data segment to match exactly. Step
changes and start-finish differences will put fake responses
into Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) data since the algorithms
assume an infinitely repeating copy of the segment of data.
The FFT algorithm is then executed. The FFT algorithm
returns a complex set of values at each frequency increment.
The magnitude of these complex numbers is squared by
multiplying each complex number by its complex conjugate.
Power is proportional to the square of the magnitude, so now
we have the power per frequency interval. The powers are
added up for each element of the frequency range of interest,
so now we have the average EEG band powers.
C. Resting Heart Rate
The resting heart rate is the heart pumping the lowest amount
of blood. If a person is sitting or lying, and is calm, relaxed
and in good health, his/her resting heart rate should range
between 60 and 100 beats per minute. A heart rate lower
than 60 could be explained by a medical condition, taking
drugs such as beta blockers, or being physically active and
very athletic. Active people often have lower resting heart

63

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Algorithm 1 Relaxation Mood Algorithm
Input: heart rate, heart rate variability (SDNN), valence, and
arousal.
Output: relaxation level
if (HR/HRrest*100)<100 then
RelaxHR% = 100
else
if ((1-((HR / HRrest)-1))<0.0) then
RelaxHR% = 0
else
RelaxHR% = ((1 - ((HR / HRRest) - 1)) * 100)
end if
end if
if (age>=0&&age<=49) then
ageSDNN = 50
else
ageSDNN = 40
end if
if (SDNN/ageSDNN*100)>100 then
RelaxSDNN% = 100
else
RelaxSDNN% = ((SDNN/ageSDNN)*100)
end if
if (valence>0) then
if (arousal>0.4&& arousal<=1) then
RelaxEEG% = 100
else if (arousal>1) then
if ((1-(arousal-1))<0) then
RelaxEEG% = 0
else
RelaxEEG% = ((1 - (arousal - 1)) * 100)
end if
else
RelaxEEG% = (arousal/0.4)*100
end if
else
RelaxEEG% = 0
end if
RL = RelaxHR%/4 + RelaxSDNN%/4 + RelaxEEG%/2
return RL
rates because their heart muscle is in better condition and
does not need to work as hard to maintain a steady beat [5].

Time domain measures are the simplest to calculate and
include the mean normal-to-normal (NN) intervals during
the entire recording and statistical measures of the variance
between NN intervals. The most important time domain
measures are the SDNN (HRV), and the RMS-SD.
• The SDNN is the standard deviation of the NN intervals,
which is the square root of their variance. A variance is
mathematically equivalent to the total power of spectral
analysis, so it reflects all cyclic components of the variability
in recorded series of NN intervals. It is inappropriate to
compare SDNN values derived from the NN recordings of
different lengths. A recording can last a short period of time,
such as five minutes, or it can last a full 24-hour day. SDNN
is measured in milliseconds [6].
• The RMS-SD is the square root of the mean squared
differences of successive NN intervals. This measure estimates high-frequency variations in heart rate in short-term
NN recordings that reflect an estimate of parasympathetic
regulation of the heart. RMS-SD is measured in milliseconds
[6].
Formulas to calculate these time domain measures are
given:
Let N be the total number of heart beats. Let MRR be the
mean of RR (or NN) intervals. It is calculated as follows:
M RR = I¯ =

Heart rate variability (HRV) is the degree of fluctuation in the
length of intervals between heart beats. A bigger regularity
of heart beats lowers HRV and vice versa. Regularity of heart
beats is derived from a quantity of numbers equal to the time
elapsed between successive heart beats. These are named R-R
intervals and are measured in milliseconds (ms) [6].
HRV can be assessed in two ways: as Time Domain

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

N
1 X
I(n)
N − 1 n=2

(1)

In this formula, I(n) is the value in milliseconds of the nth
NN interval. The SDNN can be expressed as:
v
u
u
SDN N = t

N
1 X
¯2
[I(n) − I]
N − 1 n=2

(2)

Finally, the RMS-SD can be expressed as:
v
u
u
RM SSD = t

D. Heart Rate Variability

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

Analysis, or in the frequency domain, as Power Spectral
Density Analysis. We will concentrate on Time Domain
Analysis because it is more simple and straightforward.

N
1 X
[I(n) − I(n − 1)]2
N − 2 n=3

(3)

E. Valence/Arousal Model
The 2D Valence/Arousal model is used to characterize emotions such as: happy, sad, relaxed, and angry. Emotions are
characterized based on their valence and arousal values. For
example, happiness is characterized by a positive valence and

64

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

high arousal, anger is characterized by negative valence and
high arousal, relaxation is characterized by positive valence
and low arousal, and sadness is characterized by negative
valence and low arousal [7].
High arousal (excitation) is characterized by a high alpha
power and a low beta power (a high alpha activity and a
low beta activity). The ratio of the beta to the alpha power
characterizes the arousal level of a person (Arousal =
beta/alpha). The arousal level of a person is measured using
the frontal electrodes of the Emotiv Insight brain sensor. This
relationship holds because beta brainwaves are associated
with an alert or excited state, while alpha brain waves are
associated with a relaxed state [7].
To determine the valence level, we compare the activation
levels of the two cortical hemispheres. Left frontal inactivation is an indicator of a withdrawal response, which is often
linked to a negative emotion. On the other hand, right frontal
inactivation may be associated with an approach response, or
positive emotion [7].
High alpha activity is an indication of low brain activity,
and vice versa. Thus, an increase in alpha activity together
with a decrease in beta activity may be associated with
cortical inactivation. The frontal electrodes of the Emotiv
Insight brain sensor, AF3 and AF4, are the most used
positions for looking at this activity, as the frontal lobe plays
a crucial role in emotion regulation and conscious experience.
We estimate the valence value in a person by computing
and comparing the alpha power α and beta power β in
channels AF3 and AF4, like so:

valence =

αAF 3
αAF 4
−
βAF 4
βAF 3

(4)

III. E XPERIMENTAL S TUDY
The experiment is performed to assess how effective is the
system at finding the mood and memory performance levels
of each participant. It presents part of the results obtained
from performing the experiment and a discussion based on
these results.
A. The System
The system is composed of the following components:
• External sensors, such as the Texas Instrument Sensor
Tag, the Polar H7 heart rate sensor, and the Emotiv Insight
brain sensor.
• The Cloud, where the Dropbox Core Api is used to store
the users’ data and access it anytime needed.

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

B. Subjects
Sixteen subjects (ages 22-80, 12 males and 4 females)
performed the experiment, which consisted in evaluating their
mood and memory performance levels while their heart and
brain data was recorded. Informed consent was obtained from
each subject prior to the study. Ethical approval was obtained
from the Research Ethics Board Office of McGill University.
The reference number is: 306-0116.
C. Stimulus
Both pictures and music were used to be the stimulus to elicit
emotion. To represent good moods such as relaxation, happiness, engagement and arousal, pictures displaying beautiful
nature scenery, people jumping out of joy, beautiful birds,
plants, and animals, were selected. To represent bad moods
such as sadness, anger, and stress, pictures displaying angry
and wild animals, people crying, and children all alone sleeping in the streets, were selected. Three to four music pieces
were chosen to represent each mood. Each lasted 30 seconds.
For example, annoying alarm clock sounds were chosen to
represent stress, bomb siren sounds were selected to represent
anger, ”Don’t Worry be Happy” by Bobby McFerrin was
selected to represent relaxation, ”Chariots of Fire” theme
song was selected to represent arousal, the theme song from
the movie ”Pirates of the Caribbean” was chosen to represent
engagement, ”Happy” by Pharrell Williams was selected to
represent happiness, and ”Very Sad Violin” classical music
was chosen to represent sadness.
This procedure achieved stimulation by increasing and
decreasing the neural activity of the brain. The cerebral
cortex became synchronized at any given moment. The limbic
system’s cingulate gyrus, which connected actions with emotional responses, became synchronized. This synchronization
happened mostly in brain parts responsible of processing
sights, sounds, and emotions.
D. Testing Procedure
The experiment took a total time of 45 minutes. Data
was recorded using a tablet (Samsung Galaxy Tab 4). The
participant was instructed to sit and not to move his/her head
for the entire duration of the experiment. The Polar H7 heart
rate sensor was placed on the participant’s bare chest and the
Emotiv Insight brain sensor was placed on the participant’s
head. The data was stored on a Dropbox account. For added
security, the data in the Dropbox account was encrypted using
Boxcryptor. Boxcryptor features a fast and easy Dropbox
encryption, a state-of-the art AES-256 encryption standard,
and top security for all private and business needs. The
application was launched and the participant was prompted
to create an account. Creating an account requires him/her

65

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

to enter a username, a password, his/her height, his/her
weight, and his/her sex. The participant was prompted to
take a picture of himself/herself. The air temperature, the
air humidity, and the air pressure were recorded using the
Texas Instrument Bluetooth Low Energy Sensor Tag. The
participant was asked if he/she was relaxed or not and if
not, he/she was given a short period of time (2 minutes) to
relax. When relaxed, the participant’s resting heart rate was
recorded. Then, for each stimulus composed of pictures and
sounds (each representing a particular mood such as relaxed,
engaged, stressed, happy, angry, aroused, and sad) which was
displayed on a laptop screen, the data was recorded on a
tablet before evoking the stimulus, the stimulus was evoked,
and the data was recorded on a tablet after evoking the
stimulus. At the end of each stimulus, there was a relaxation
period of 1 minute. The first part of the experiment took 35
minutes. In the second part of the experiment, the subject was
first given a 1-minute resting period. The memory test was
given immediately afterward, and the test subject’s memory
performance level was recorded. For the memory test, the
participant was shown three sets of 4-6 letters displayed
on a laptop screen. After being shown each set of letters,
the participant was given a brief moment (2-5 seconds) to
memorize the set of letters. The participant was then shown
a letter which may or may not be part of the set of letters
previously shown to him/her. The participant was asked to
state whether or not this letter belongs to the set of letters.
There were three sets of letters and three probes in the
memory experiment. EEG data was recorded twice per set
of letters: before showing the set of letters to the participant
and just after showing the set of letters to the participant
while he/she was busy memorizing them. The second part of
the experiment took 10 minutes.

participant is feeling very strongly in that particular mood. A
memory performance level close to 100% may be associated
with strong memory activity, whereas a very low memory
performance level, approaching 0%, may be associated with
no memory activity.

Fig. 1. Relaxation Level before and after Evoking Stimuli for each
Participant

E. Results
Results were gathered from the participants’ brain and
heart data under the following environmental conditions:
the temperature ranged from 60.28 deg/F to 67.57 deg/F,
the humidity ranged from 32.25 %rH to 48.18 %rH, and
the pressure ranged from 999.70 nPA to 1032.32 nPA. All
participants confirmed that they were relaxed at the beginning
of the experiment. All participants remained seated and did
not move their heads for the entire duration of the experiment.
Results for this paper contain relaxation data graphs such as
the relaxation level recorded before evoking the stimulus and
the relaxation level recorded after evoking the stimulus for
each participant, the age, height (in meters), and weight (in
kilograms) of each participant versus the difference in the
relaxation level recorded after evoking the stimulus and the
relaxation level recorded before evoking the stimulus. Mood
and memory performance levels are in percent. A mood level
of 0% suggests that the participant is not feeling at all in that
particular mood, and a mood level of 100% suggests that the

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

Fig. 2. Relaxation Level (after Evoking Stimuli - before Evoking Stimuli)
for each Participant versus their Age

Fig. 3. Relaxation Level (after Evoking Stimuli - before Evoking Stimuli)
for Each Participant versus their Height

66

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Fig. 4. Relaxation Level (after Evoking Stimuli - before Evoking Stimuli)
for each Participant versus their Weight

Fig. 5. Height of Participants versus their Age

F. Discussion
The experiment has been successful at raising the relaxation
levels of the majority of participants. Referring to Figure
1, about 56% of all participants had a higher relaxation
level after the stimulus as compared to before the stimulus. The 44% remaining participants were found to have
varying reactions when exposed to such stimulus: some of
the 44% may have had other thoughts or emotions during
the experiment, and may have been preoccupied with other
matters, thereby negating any effect of the relaxation stimulus
on them. Another problem potentially accounting for the
variation in results is the fact that the brain sensor’s EEG
data had to travel from the brain cortex to the electrodes
of the brain sensor. During its travel, the signal may have
been attenuated or dampened as a result of traveling through
many brain regions. Thus, the quality of the signal using
this method is not optimal, and results in a lower-quality
EEG signal. Figure 2 showing the change in relaxation level
(the relaxation level after the stimulus minus the relaxation
level before the stimulus) was plotted against the age of all
participants. The graph reveals that almost all participants had

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

positive or neutral changes in relaxation levels and that most
participants with the greatest positive changes in relaxation
levels (higher than 40%) are the younger participants, those
aged 22 to 30. The older population, those aged 40 to 80,
had the most participants with negative changes in relaxation
levels (3 participants aged 50-80 versus 1 participant aged
26). The results reveal that the ability of the participants
to relax quickly in response to a conducive stimulus is
greater for younger individuals than for older ones. The
change in relaxation level was plotted against the height
of all participants (Figure 3). The results reveal that the
tallest individuals (heights ranging from 175 to 185 cm) had
the majority of values corresponding to the highest changes
(higher than 40%) in relaxation levels (5 individuals with
heights ranging from 175 to 185 cm versus 1 individual
with a height of 165 cm). The participants with all values
corresponding to negative changes in relaxation levels are
the shortest individuals (4 individuals with heights ranging
from 165 to 175 cm). The results mean that taller participants
are better able to relax quickly than shorter participants.
The graph (Figure 4) showing the change in relaxation level
against the weight of participants reveals that the majority
of individuals with the greatest changes in relaxation levels
are those with weights ranging from 60-90 kg. The graph
also shows that the individuals from the same weight range
have all values associated with negative changes in relaxation
levels. Therefore, the results stating that participants with a
weight range of 60-90 kg are better able to relax quickly
than the other participants are inconclusive. According to the
last graph (Figure 5), the majority of tall participants (those
with height ranging from 175 to 185 cm) are 20 to 30 years
old (7 participants with heights ranging from 175 to 185 cm
versus 2 participants with the same height range who are
50 to 70 years old). The results mean that in general taller
and younger participants are better able to relax quickly than
shorter and older participants.
The first, second, and third trial memory performance
levels before and after memorizing the set of letters for each
participant show that the experiment has been successful at
raising the memory performance levels of the participants.
Almost all participants had higher memory performance
levels after memorizing the set of letters as compared to
before memorizing the set of letters which is associated
with positive memory activity. The success rates of all trials
are 81%. The 19% remaining participants for each trial had
memory performance levels lower or equal after memorizing
the set of letters as compared to before memorizing the set of
letters. An explanation of the variation in results is the fact
that the brain sensor’s EEG data had to travel from the brain
cortex to the electrodes of the brain sensor. During its travel,
the signal may have been attenuated or dampened as a result
of traveling through many brain regions before reaching the
brain sensor’s electrodes. It is very likely that the more head

67

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

hair a participant had, the more attenuated or dampened the
signal was when reaching the electrodes of the brain sensor.
IV. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
This paper has presented a system capable of detecting the
mood and memory performance of humans. A discussion
of the mood and memory performance algorithms, data
processing, resting heart rate, heart rate variability, and the
valence/arousal model, was given in Section 2. Section 3
described the testing procedure and a discussion on only part
of the results of the experiment was formed in order to respect
the paper’s length.

[3] ”New Approach for Sampling Mobile Phone Accelerometer Sensor
Data for Daily Mood Assessment.” New Approach for Sampling
Mobile Phone Accelerometer Sensor Data for Daily Mood Assessment.
Web. 16 Jan. 2016. Available: http://www.academia.edu/5041295/
[4] Feature, Katherine. ”Anger Effects on Your Heart: Heart Disease,
Atherosclerosis, and More.” WebMD. WebMD. Web. 28 Dec. 2015.
Available: http://www.webmd.com/balance/stress-management/
[5] ”Resting Heart Rate.” Measurement. Web. 28 Dec. 2015. Available:
http://www.topendsports.com/testing/heart-rate-resting.htm.
[6] ”Heart
rate
variability.”
Wikipedia.
Wikimedia
Foundation, 09 Feb. 2017. Web. 19 Feb. 2017. Available:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heart rate variability
[7] Ramirez, Rafael, and Zacharias Vamvakousis. ”Detecting Emotion
from EEG Signals Using the Emotive Epoc Device.” Brain Informatics
Lecture Notes in Computer Science: 175-84. Print.

This application can be a first step in mental health
evaluation, and, as we know, it is up to the patient to take
the right decisions so that meaningful changes in health and
lifestyle can be made.
To increase the accuracy of mood and memory detection
in the future, we could use more external sensors such as
skin sensors and infrared sensors (infrared camera to measure
body temperature), all of which are connected via Bluetooth
Low Energy or another protocol to a smartphone, tablet,
or other electronic device. Although mood and memory
evaluation from heart and brain sensors is accurate, it does
not provide enough information on all body activity such
as skin (perspiration), arms and legs (motion), and back
(posture). The algorithms on mood and memory detection
could be more refined and accurate and, when combined with
the multiple external sensors, could be used to detect a bigger
range of emotions. To evaluate memory, we could use more
sophisticated devices such as fMRI (Functional Magnetic
Resonance Imaging) and MEG (Magnetoencephalography)
to get a better view of brain activity. In order to acquire such
devices, experience and funding would be required.
Mood and memory evaluation devices have become very
popular with the expansion and improvement of technology.
The field of mood detection and memory evaluation can
be expected to grow and evolve thanks to researchers and
developers who seek to improve quality of life by introducing
new devices and systems that help raise awareness of individuals’ health and well-being. We hope that our contribution
can make difference in many fields of study, especially in
computer engineering, biomedicine, mental health and other
medical specialties.
R EFERENCES
[1] CNN. Cable News Network, n.d. Web. 19 Feb. 2017. Available: http://edition.cnn.com/2014/02/04/tech/innovation/this-new-techcan-detect-your-mood/
[2] ”Sensor Detects Emotions through the Skin — MIT Technology
Review.” MIT Technology Review. 26 Oct. 2010. Web. 15 Jan. 2016.
Available: http://www.technologyreview.com/news/421316/

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

68

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Cumulative Benefits of Digital Health Investments in Canada
Calculating quality, access and productivity benefits on a national scale

Bobby Gheorghiu, Simon Hagens
Evaluation Services
Canada Health Infoway/Inforoute Santé du Canada
Toronto, Canada
Email: bgheorghiu@infoway-inforoute.ca
shagens@infoway-inforoute.ca

Abstract— Capturing the benefits generated from investments
in digital health is key towards demonstrating accountability to
funders as well as to encouraging widespread adoption by
clinicians and other health care professionals. The cumulative
benefits calculation, developed by Canada Health Infoway, is a
macro-level indicator trended over a period of 10 years. It
represents estimated benefits accruing to various health care
system stakeholders, as driven by component technologies and
their associated adoption across the country. In-depth studies,
validated by external experts in relevant fields, have been
completed for specific technologies, such as diagnostic imaging
systems, ambulatory care Electronic Medical Records (EMR),
and telehealth. The financially quantifiable aspects of each
study are aggregated, trended over time, and indexed to
inflation. From 2007 to 2015 benefits accrued to the Canadian
health care system exceeded $16B.
Keywords-electronic health record (EHR); adoption; digital
health; benefits; telehealth; electronic medical record (EMR).

I.

INTRODUCTION

Efforts to build an interoperable electronic health record
(iEHR) have been underway across Canada for many years.
While deployment progress and rates of user adoption vary
across provinces and territories, the initiative has passed its
tipping point and uptake is now increasing rapidly. The
potential benefits of the iEHR are substantial – improved
quality of care, system efficiencies, improved access to care
and use of health data to better manage the health system and
facilitate ground-breaking research. An iEHR is a secure,
integrated view of a person’s medical records from all
systems in the network; it provides a comprehensive view of
a patient’s medical history [1]. Typically, it integrates data
from diagnostic imaging systems, laboratory information
systems (LIS), as well as drug information systems (DIS), to
provide a longitudinal view of a patient’s clinical history. As
such, it is a similar concept to that of a Health Information
Exchange (HIE) [2]. Across Canada, iEHRs are at various
stages of implementation and maturity and have evolved
according to provincial/territorial strategies and priorities. A
growing number of health care professionals in Canada can
now access important information about their patients
outside of their practice settings through iEHRs [3][4].

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

The iEHR acts as a complement to point of service
systems like electronic medical records (EMR) in physician
offices or clinical information systems (CIS) in hospitals.
Regular measurement of adoption and maturity for these
technologies has made progress easy to follow and manage.
For example, in the 2015 Commonwealth Fund Survey, 73%
of all family physicians reported they do use electronic
records to enter and retrieve clinical notes [5].
In the interest of accountability for the public funds under
its management, and optimizing the value accruing from
investment of those funds, Canada Health Infoway (Infoway)
has developed approaches to evaluate and systematically
model the estimated value of outcomes related to select
digital health solutions nationally [6]. The cumulative
benefits model contains estimates for benefits generated
through the use of diagnostic imaging systems, DIS,
ambulatory and primary care EMRs, and telehealth.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
describes the methods used for calculating cumulative
benefits. Section III describes the most recent results based
on data up to the end of 2015. Section IV addresses the
assumptions and limitations of the model. The conclusion,
Section V closes the article.
II.

METHODS

The cumulative benefits calculation is driven by
individual quantitative estimates obtained from panCanadian studies commissioned by Infoway for each of the
topics mentioned above. The concept of pan-Canadian
studies to estimate national value was developed in 2006 to
summarize results across diverse data domains, settings,
evaluation methods and time periods. The studies aim to
generate estimates, which are as comprehensive as possible,
validated by experts, and reflecting available evidence. The
cumulative benefits cover a subset of digital health solutions,
and as such represent a portion of the value from digital
health at large. They also provide an assessment of gaps and
recommendations for increasing and optimizing the use and
spread of technologies in order to increase value over time
[6]. Estimates are expressed in Canadian dollars realized on
an annual basis and base assumptions to current contexts are
applied and documented. Not all outcomes represent direct
financial savings, but where possible, a value is expressed

69

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

financially to allow comparison of magnitudes. Where the
literature does not provide sufficient evidence to quantify the
current dollar value of a specific outcome, the value is
omitted from quantitative modeling. In instances where a
range of estimated benefits is provided, the mid-point value
was used as a base estimate. The mid-point estimate for each
domain-specific benefit is highlighted in Table 1 and
corresponds to the year in which the study was carried out.
Simplicity is a core principle of the specification of the
quantitative benefits model, with most discrete value
estimates derived by multiplying the magnitude of outcome
observed per unit x value of outcome x extent of adoption
across Canada. Adoption maturity variation (e.g.,
functionalities used, frequency of use, etc.) is an important
driver of value in digital health deployment, so the extent of
the adoption used in the model must be matched to the
maturity required to achieve the magnitude outcome applied.
Adoption is determined by examining data from surveys
of clinicians and patients, usage data from digital health
solutions, and operational data sets collected by Infoway’s
partners. Specific definitions of adoption are designed to suit
distinct kinds of solutions, and trended over time [6].
Adoption is measured differently for each domain or
technology. This is both due to the practicality and feasibility
of collecting the data and the way in which benefits were
initially modelled. For example, telehealth benefits are
driven by the number of clinical sessions—defined as
consultations involving a clinician and a patient [7] whereas
EMR benefits are driven by the number of Canadian
physicians who reported using an EMR to document patient
information as shown in Figure 1. EMR benefits largely
accrue to physicians, and as a result, it is fitting for physician
adoption to be a driving factor.

Benefit estimates for previous and subsequent years are
dependent on the adoption of each technology by health care
professionals in each year as compared to the base years.
Each year’s estimate is adjusted for inflation according to the
Statistics Canada Consumer Price Index for Health Care [8].
III.

RESULTS

Between2007 and 2015, over $16 billion in quantifiable
benefits have accrued to various parts of the Canadian health
care system as shown in Figure 2. These could take the form
of productivity gains for clinicians, such as those seen
through the introduction of diagnostic imaging systems.
Alternatively, they may represent avoided expenses for
consumers, such as avoided travel by substituting an inperson visit to an urban centre with a virtual consultation via
telehealth. In 2015, the estimated value to the healthcare
system exceeded $2.5B.
Figure 2. Cumulative benefits of investments in digital health across

Canada.

TABLE I.

Figure 1. Family physicians in Canada reporting EMR use:
Commonwealth Fund Surveys.

Conversely, telehealth benefits largely accrue to patients
and the health care systems that fund patient expenses, such
as travel costs. As a result, benefits are driven by patient
utilization. Diagnostic imaging benefits are driven by the
adoption of picture archiving and communication systems
(PACS) by radiologists, physician specialists, and
emergency department nurses since they are the professions
who would be the most likely to depend on these systems as
part of their workflow. While other clinicians and health
professionals are likely to benefit, it was preferable to be
conservative in the adoption estimate, in line with the
organization’s overall reporting principles.

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

YEARLY BENEFITS BY DOMAIN

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

DI

$511

$646

$715

$724

$841

$850

$878

$888

$908

DIS

$233

$369

$436

$441

$462

$487

$551

$579

$593

TH

$52

$70

$95

$128

$158

$187

$266

$340

$407

EMR

$131

$162

$193

$227

$270

$302

$347

$414

$419

AMBEMR

$45

$53

$59

$71

$82

$106

$141

$167

$196

TOT.

$973 $1,300 $1,498 $1,590 $1,812 $1,932 $2,183 $2,387 $2,523

It is expected that future pan-Canadian studies,
examining incremental benefits related to other components
of the iEHR such as patient access to health information
and/or electronic prescribing will expand the model
according to the same overarching methods described above.

70

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

IV.

ASSUMPTIONS AND LIMITATIONS

While it would be desirable to calculate return on
investment (ROI), these benefits accrue to multiple
stakeholders and costs are also borne by multiple and
sometimes different stakeholders, making these calculations
complicated, and best assessed on a stakeholder by
stakeholder basis. As an example, productivity gains may
increase access but result in additional costs to the health
system since more clinical procedures and/or patient visits
can be completed with the same inputs. Nonetheless, this is
a useful analysis at a macroeconomic level since it can
demonstrate the positive effects of investing in digital health.
The pan-Canadian studies completed to date, which drive
the cumulative benefits calculation, were completed
independently, over a number of years (2008 to 2015). As
such, benefits calculated as part of one study, may also be
reflected in another. For example, the Generation 2 Drug
Information Systems study tracked patient safety benefits
related to printing out prescriptions from physician EMRs—
this benefit was also included in the EMR pan-Canadian
study. These benefits were included only once when
aggregating totals in order to eliminate double counting.
V.

and-adoption-connecting-people-and-providers-full/viewdocument?Itemid=101. Retrieved: February 2017.
[8] Statistics Canada. Consumer Price Index, health and personal
care, by province. [Online]. Available from:
http://www.statcan.gc.ca/tables-tableaux/sumsom/l01/cst01/econ161a-eng.htm. Retrieved: February 2017.

CONCLUSION

The cumulative benefits calculation has been and
continues to be a useful tool for demonstrating the benefits of
digital health investments for the purpose of accountability to
funders and taxpayers. In addition, it is a useful tool to
persuade clinicians and other health care professional to
adopt new technologies, and to encourage partners, such as
jurisdictions and health care provider organizations to
continue to invest in digital health.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

Interoperable EHRs. Canada Health Infoway.
https://www.infoway-inforoute.ca/index.php/programsservices/investment-programs/interoperable-ehr. Retrieved:
February 2017.
Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society,
HIMSS Dictionary of Healthcare Information Technology
Terms, Acronyms and Organizations, Third Edition, 2013.
B. Gheorghiu and S. Hagens, Measuring interoperable EHR
adoption and maturity: a Canadian example, BMC Med
Inform Decis Mak. Jan. 2016; doi:10.1186/s12911-016-0247x.
Canada Health Infoway. (2016). A conversation about digital
health, Annual Report 2015-2016. https://www.infowayinforoute.ca/en/component/edocman/3098-annualreport-20152016/view-document. Retrieved: February 2017.
R. Osborn et al., “Primary Care Physicians in Ten Countries
Report Challenges in Caring for Patients with Complex
Health Needs,” Health Affairs, vol. 34, no. 12, pp. 2104–
2112, Dec. 2015.
S. Hagens, J. Zelmer, C. Frazer, B. Gheorghiu, and C. Leaver,
“Valuing National Effects of Digital Health Investments: An
Applied Method” ITCH 2015: pp.165-169
Canada Health Infoway. Telehealth Benefits and Adoption:
Connecting People and Providers. 2011 https://www.infowayinforoute.ca/en/component/edocman/333-telehealth-benefits-

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

71

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Leveraging Technology to Advance Patient Engagement in a Mental Health Care
Setting

Wendy Odell, Sanaz Riahi
Ontario Shores Centre for Mental Health Sciences
Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Email: odellw@ontarioshores.ca, riahis@ontarioshores.ca

Abstract— In 2010, Ontario Shores implemented a fully
integrated electronic medical record (EMR) with the aim of
enhancing patient safety and quality of care. The
implementation of the EMR has created opportunities to
leverage health IT to make further improvements to the
quality of care we provide to our patients, including improving
patient engagement through improved access to personal
health information and enabling alternative care delivery
models. This paper will provide an overview of the strategies
Ontario Shores has employed to foster patient adoption and
ongoing engagement including the launch of an EMRintegrated patient portal that enables patient and proxy access
to clinical data, implementation of a mobile (mHealth)
experience for patients to manage their care with actionable
interventions through a secure mobile cloud technology
platform, and the piloting of a virtual clinic, which will utilize
e-therapy that will maximize access and utilization of evidence
informed virtual treatments.
Keywords- mental health; patient engagement; patient portal;
mobile health; virtual health.

I.

INTRODUCTION

The National Alliance on Mental Illness (NAMI) reports
that approximately 1 in 5 adults in the U.S., 1 in 5 youth
(aged 13–18) and 13% of children (aged 8–15) experience a
severe mental disorder at some point during their life [1].
Yet, only about 40% of adults and 50% of children with a
mental health condition received mental health services in
the past year [1]. In the Canadian context, over 650,000
children in Ontario alone suffer from a mental health
disorder, and suicide is cited as the second leading cause of
death among youth aged 10-19 years, according to the
Mental Health Commission of Canada [2].
Ontario Shores Centre for Mental Health Sciences
(Ontario Shores), the first Healthcare Information and
Management Systems Society (HIMSS) Davies Enterprise
Award recipient in Canada and the first HIMSS EMRAM
Stage 7 organization in behavioural health worldwide [3], is
a recognized leader in the assessment and treatment of those
living with complex and serious mental illness. Ontario
Shores supports the belief that it is essential to both the
health of individuals and their communities to more fully
engage patients in their mental health care [4]. Studies have
shown that those suffering from mental illness experience

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

better outcomes and improved quality of life when they
become self-empowered participants in their care [5].
Understanding this, Ontario Shores continuously pursues
new and innovative ways to promote, measure, and improve
patient engagement.
This paper will provide an overview of three strategies
Ontario Shores is employing to advance patient engagement,
including the launch of an EMR-integrated patient portal,
implementation of an offline mobile (mHealth) experience
for patients to manage their care (with actionable
interventions through a secure mobile cloud technology
platform), and the piloting of a virtual clinic, which will
utilize e-therapy.
In section II, we outline the approaches that were
employed to address patient engagement within a mental
health setting. In section III, we highlight some of the
challenges that we experienced with the implementation of
these health IT solutions. Sections IV and V discuss some of
the outcomes and conclusions that have been achieved to
date as a result of implementation of these eHealth solutions
including increased patient satisfaction, improved
treatment/clinical outcomes, improved patient engagement
and savings realized as a result of administrative efficiencies.
II.

THE APPROACH/METHODOLOGY

In early 2014, Ontario Shores launched the HealthCheck
Patient Portal. The implementation of the portal was aimed at
enhancing patient access to their personal health information,
bridging the existing gaps related to active engagement and
partnership between patients, families and health care
providers, evolving current practices and culture from having
the provider as the “keeper of the information” to one where
the provider and the patients are partners in care. It supports
the paradigm shift towards patient-driven care.
Inpatients, outpatients and proxy users are able to access
the portal from any device with an internet connection and
can view, print or share personal health information found
within the portal with other providers in the circle of care [6].
Functionality within the HealthCheck patient portal (Figure
1) includes E-views of reports, discharge summaries,
allergies, and ambulatory medication, E-visits whereby
secure messages can be sent to the patient’s clinician, and Erequests for prescription renewals (Figure 2) [6].

72

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Ontario Shores is also designing and implementing a
virtual clinic as an adjunct to the current ambulatory
Traumatic Stress Clinic following a stepped-care approach.
The virtual clinic is aimed at bridging the long wait times for
this clinic with the goal of maximizing patient access to care,
utilizing evidence-informed virtual treatments, while more
efficiently utilizing clinical resources. The virtual clinic has
the potential to target improved population health, to
optimize the patient experience and increase value for
money.
III.
Figure 1. Healthcheck patient portal main page tabs and functionality

Figure 2. View of e-request prescription renewal in Healthcheck Patient
Portal

Leveraging this engagement solution, Ontario Shores has
continued to drive patient engagement forward by partnering
with a technology based company that offers secure mobile
and cloud technology platforms that will integrate with the
EMR. It will enable a mobile remote-patient-monitoring
health application that delivers personalized interventions to
individuals in support of their care plans, thus supporting
patients through interactive strategies. Not only will this
solution enable patients to be actively engaged in their care
through the completion of various behaviour assessment
scales, meal assessments, and thought/behaviour trackers, it
will also support predictive analytics capabilities, enabling
clinicians to more proactively monitor patients and respond
to changes in behaviours and assist with identifying patterns
and triggers that could prompt early clinical interventions,
the development of effective coping strategies, and possibly
avoid hospital admissions. Figure 3 illustrates Ontario
Shores’ mobile health technology solution.

CHALLENGES/BARRIERS

Transparency is an essential component for a healthcare
organization interested in achieving improved patient
engagement. One of the many benefits of patient portals is
that they promote transparency. With this increased
transparency, however, effectively integrating change
management strategies to support clinicians with the
transition to the use of a patient portal is paramount to how
clinicians perceive the implementation of the portal. Recall
that this is a paradigm shift for both patients and
clinicians, and patient access to records can be a sensitivity
for clinicians who feel that their practice may be called into
question. At Ontario Shores, clinicians required education
and support with shifting their documentation practices to
ensure that it supported the transition from documentation
that focused solely on sharing information with the treatment
team and/or community partners to one which is aimed at
achieving a partnership in care with patients via transparent
and meaningful personal health information.
In addition, limitations related to functionality are also at
play, which can impact adoption by patients and
endorsement by clinicians. Currently, the portal system does
not provide access to the full EMR (progress notes are
currently not viewable, for example) and therefore portal
users may still be required to submit a request for
information to view components of their EMR that are not
currently viewable.
Additional barriers and risks include patient access and
adoption of technology (internet access, mobile tablets or
phones, Personal Computers (PCs), language barrier, visual
and auditory disabilities). Patients with complex health needs
may also experience difficulty in learning or using the
mobile applications. These risks can be managed by
providing training and guidance on content as well as
ensuring a comprehensive accessibility plan.
It is also important to note the role that device selection
plays in adoption. Planning for the availability of devices for
the implementation is integral to the process. Engaging end
users, both patients and clinicians, in device selection is also
essential to successful adoption. Devices that are
cumbersome to use will have a negative impact on patient
adoption and clinician endorsement.

Figure 3. Ontario shores' mobile health technology patient engagement
solution

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

73

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 4. Complexity associated with integrating PHI with the EMR
and mHealth solutions

Finally, overcoming interoperability challenges is central
to a successful implementation. The complexity of
integrating patient health information with the EMR and
mHealth solutions must be well understood. Figure 4
demonstrates the flow of information that needs to occur in
order to interface the eHealth solutions with the EMR.
IV.

OUTCOMES ACHIEVED TO DATE

Following implementation of the patient portal, a
rigorous benefits evaluation research study was conducted to
assess the impact of the portal on patient engagement,
satisfaction, and health outcomes. The results of this
evaluation provide implications for enabling active patient
participation in their care through transparent access to their
Personal Health Information (PHI). They also point to
increased patient activation, improved organizational
productivity, and greater administrative efficiency.
Using the Mental Health Recovery Measure (MHRM), a
robust
self-reporting
instrument
designed
to
comprehensively assess the recovery process for patients
with serious mental illness, along with other systemgenerated reports to evaluate the impact of the patient portal
implementation, Ontario Shores saw a nearly 10% decrease
in missed appointments for portal users, an 86% reduction in
portal users’ release of information requests (Figure 5), and
an administrative time savings of between 10.5 and 40 hours
per portal user. In addition, statistically significant
improvements were seen in portal users in six domains of the
MHRM scores following six months of portal access
including basic functioning, overall well-being, spirituality
and advocacy/ enrichment (Figure 6).
2014 Total ROI
Requests Made
23

2015 Total ROI
Requests Made

The implementation of our mobile technology solution,
currently underway, has the potential to advance and support
areas of patient engagement that do not currently exist at
Ontario Shores, such as tailoring engagement to each
patient’s unique learning style, continued care and therapy
using asynchronous methods that do not rely on traditional
face-to-face interactions, creating a feedback loop to
clinicians that enables predictive monitoring, meeting the
unique needs related to patient instructions, discharge
education needs, and supporting a seamless transfer of care.
Expected outcomes include improved treatment and
medication adherence, decreased missed appointments as a
result of appointment reminders, and improvement in the
quality of care plans that support an increased understanding
of the triggers that lead to behavioural or emotional
difficulty. Additionally, we expect to see improvement in
Recovery Assessment Scale-Revised (RAS-R) Scores, which
measures a patient’s sense of recovery in five domains(1)personal self-confidence and hope, (2) willingness to ask
for help, (3) goal and success orientation, (4) reliance on
others, and (5) life view beyond their symptoms [7]. The tool
is used to facilitate collaborative, recovery-oriented practice
and measure recovery-focused outcomes over time that will
enable clinicians to make data-driven decisions to support
care planning and assist patients in formulating recoveryoriented goals [7]. Figure 7 shows the percentage of patients
that have had an RAS-R score increase by greater than 5 preimplementation on the pilot units/programs.

Total ROI
Percentage
Decrease

3

86%

Figure 5. Portal users total frequency of requests of information (ROI)

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

Figure 6. Mean scores of domains on the Mental Health Recovery
Measure (MHRM) at pre and post-enrolment to the Healthcheck Patient
Portal

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

Figure 7. Pre-implementation % of patients that had an RAS-R score
increase by greater than 5

Likewise, our virtual clinic is also in the implementation
phase and the evaluation will form the basis for
recommendations to expand virtual care delivery.
Ultimately, the aim of this model is to address the growing

74

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

number of patients on the waitlist (currently 247), which will
improve patient flow and access to services as well as
decrease the average wait time for treatment, currently 391
days. Outcome indicators that will be tracked include a
clinically significant change in Post-Traumatic Stress
Disorder (PTSD) Severity, which will be assessed using the
20-item PTSD Checklist (PCL-5) scale which will assess the
20 DSM-V symptoms of PTSD, a change in depression
severity which will be assessed using the Patient Health
Questionnaire 9 (PHQ-9), and in-person services avoided
(i.e., increased efficiency) based on the percentage of
patients that will not require formal, in-person services
because they experienced improvement by using the virtual
clinic.
V.

CONCLUSION

Ontario Shores has made substantive strides towards
improving patient satisfaction. One early adopter of the
portal indicated “[j]ust having my own access has given me
freedom as a patient.” This type of qualitative feedback is
indicative of patients feeling increased autonomy as a result
of having access to their PHI. Additionally, users indicated
that “[t]his system is very helpful for appointment
reminders”, which is supported by the downward trend in
overall missed appointment percentages post-portal
implementation. Missed appointments among portal users
decreased by 9% in comparison to non-users who decreased
by 6%. In 2015, users accounted for 26% of 4948 total
missed appointments compared to non-users who accounted
for 74%. In addition, users accounted for 958.5 hours
planned for appointments that were not fulfilled or 0.5 fulltime equivalent (FTE), while non-users accounted for 2752.5
hours planned for appointments or 1.4 FTE.
In terms of the impacts that these strategies have had on
improved patient outcomes, statistically significant
improvements were seen in portal users within the following
six domains of the MHRM scores following six months of
portal access: overcoming stuckness, basic functioning,
overall well-being, new potentials, spirituality, and
advocacy/enrichment. These results add to the body of
knowledge and literature, as there are currently very limited
studies focusing on the impacts of patient portals on users
among the mental health population.
Given the vital role that predictive analytics can play in
the area of mental health, the collection of application usage
data, self-reported assessments and behavior tracking
through the mHealth app, clinicians can track patient
behaviors, identify triggers and can proactively implement
preventative interventions to avoid hospital admissions and
emergency room visits.

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

Additionally, patients can be directed and prompted with
adaptive behaviours to improve self-care using the app.
Patients can participate in manualized therapies at their
convenience through their mobile device anytime and
anywhere. By incorporating this type of technology into
patient care, we are realizing goals around enhancing access
to quality mental health care.
In terms of additional value for money post portal
implementation, the organization saw a decrease of 86% in
the frequency of ROIs compared to non-users who saw a
decrease of 57%. Users contributed to an organizational time
savings from managing requests of between 10.5-40.0 hours.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Canada Health Infoway,
who provided financial support and the framework and
guidance for the benefits evaluation for the HealthCheck
patient portal implementation.
The authors would also like to acknowledge Ontario
Centres of Excellence who are providing funding for the
mHealth solution project through the AdvancingHealth
program.
REFERENCES
[1]
[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

“National Alliance on Mental Illness,” 2016, URL:
http://www.nami.org/Learn-More/Mental-Health-By-theNumbers [accessed 2017-02-27].
“Working with Children and Youth with Complex Mental
Health Needs. Canadian Mental Health Associations,” 2015,
URL:
http://www.complexneeds.ca/about-the-project/
[accessed 2017-02-27].
HIMSS Transforming Healthcare through IT. 2015.
http://www.himss.org/news/ontario-shores-centre-mentalhealth-sciences-selected-2015-himss-enterprise-davies-awardrecipient [accessed 2017-01-09].
S. Greenfield, S. Kaplan, and JE. Ware Jr, “Expanding
patient involvement in care: Effects on patient outcomes,”
Ann Intern Med, vol. 102, pp. 520-8, 1985,
doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-102-4-520.
M. Farkas, “The vision of recovery today: what it is and what
it means for services,” World Psychiatry, vol. 6, pp.68–74,
2007.
S. Kipping, M. I. Stuckey, A. Hernandez, T. Nguyen, and S.
Riahi, “A Web-Based Patient Portal for Mental Health Care:
Benefits Evaluation,” J Med Internet Res, vol. 18, November
2016. URL: https://www.jmir.org/2016/11/e294 [accessed
2017-02-27].
P. Burgess, J. Pirkis, T. Coombs, and A. Rosen, “Australian
Mental Health Outcomes and Classification Network Sharing
Information to Improve Outcomes- An Australian
Government funded initiative Review of Recovery Measures,
version
1.01,”
February
2010,
URL:
http://www.mentalhealth.va.gov/communityproviders/docs/re
view_recovery_measures.pdf [accessed 2017-02-27].

75

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

An Ultra-Band Study of Pulse Rate Variability for Homecare by Using
Instantaneous Pulse Rate Variability
Po-Hsun Huang

Chia-Chi Chang

Institute of Computer Science and Engineering,
National Chiao Tung University
Hsinchu, Taiwan R.O.C.
e-mail: sdk58927@gmail.com

A-Neuron Electronic Corporation
Institute of Biomedical Engineering,
National Chiao Tung University
Hsinchu, Taiwan R.O.C.
e-mail: ccchang.cs@gmail.com

Tzu-Chien Hsiao
Department of Computer Science, Institute of Biomedical
Engineering, Biomedical Electronics Translational Research Center
National Chiao Tung University
Hsinchu, Taiwan R.O.C.
e-mail: labview@cs.nctu.edu.tw
Abstract—Most of human body regulation is controlled by the
autonomic nervous system (ANS). The activities of ANS
influence the human health, therefore, how to observe the
proper activity of ANS in time is important. Heart rate
variability (HRV) is generally a common and widely noninvasive used method for indicating the activities of ANS.
However, electrocardiography (ECG) used for HRV analysis is
not suitable for homecare. Pulse rate variability (PRV) of
photoplethysmography (PPG) is a surrogate method for HRV
of ECG. Furthermore, PPG is easier and more convenient to
use at home. Whether using HRV or PRV, there still remains
some limitations because of the timescale which causes the
frequency domain analysis restricted to only 0.5 Hz. For
breaking the limitations, a novel method instantaneous pulse
rate variability (iPRV) was proposed. The previous study had
shown the difference between fever patients and normal people
by using iPRV analysis. Nevertheless, it did not compare the
result of iPRV to the conventional method. The aim of this
study is to examine that iPRV can not only indicate the
activities of ANS as PRV but provide more information. The
result of this study shows the conventional indexes have no
significant difference between PRV and iPRV. But the
modified indexes including the very high frequency band (VHF)
computed by PRV are different to the one computed by iPRV.
The power of VHF is much greater in iPRV than PRV. This
band as an indicator may contain more information about the
body regulation. In this study, using iPRV as a method in
homecare has more efficiency.

Heart rate variability (HRV) is generally a common and
widely non-invasive used method for indicating the activities
of ANS [2]. Electrocardiography (ECG) signal is acquired to
calculate the beat-to-beat interval (RRI) for HRV analysis
(Fig 1(a)). But, ECG measurement is too inconvenient to use
in the home. It is not suitable for homecare.
Compared to ECG, photoplethysmography (PPG) is
easier and more convenient to use in the home [3]. It is
called pulse rate variability (PRV) if applying the PPG signal
instead of ECG to calculate the peak-to-peak interval (PPI)
for HRV analysis (Fig 1(b)). Though the ECG signal and
PPG signal have the difference because of the pulse
transition time (PTT) between RRI and PPI, many studies
have determined that PRV can act as a surrogate of HRV
during some conditions [4].
Nevertheless, the timescale of RRI and PPI have a
limitation. It causes the frequency band of HRV or PRV
spectrum analysis to be restricted to about only 0.5 Hz [5].
For breaking the limitation, instantaneous pulse rate
variability (iPRV) was proposed [6]. iPRV adopted PRV
technique and applied the frequency range extension method
based on Hilbert-Huang transform (HHT) [7]. HHT can deal
with the non-stationary and nonlinear data by the pre-process,
called empirical mode decomposition (EMD). However, the
intermittency phenomenon, which called mode mixing

Keywords-Pulse rate variability (PRV); Empirical mode
decomposition (EMD); Instantaneous PRV (iPRV).

I.

INTRODUCTION

There are various mechanisms for regulating the human
body. Many of them are dominated by the autonomic
nervous system (ANS). The ANS contains sympathetic (SNS)
and parasympathetic (PNS). The balance between SNS and
PNS is important to maintain health of human. It influences
the health when the activities of ANS are not stable [1].

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

Figure 1.

The procedure of (a) HRV and RRI, (b) PRV and PPI.

76

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

problem is involved in EMD. The noise-assisted method
called ensemble EMD (EEMD) was proposed to solve this
problem [8].
The previous study had compared the difference between
the fever patients and normal people by iPRV spectrum
analysis [9]. The aim of this study is to compare the iPRV
spectrum result of the previous study [9] to PRV result to
examine iPRV is useful and reliable for observing the
activities of ANS. Besides this, the iPRV has more
information in embedded in higher frequency band than PRV.
II.

MATERIA AND METHOD

A. Subjects and data collection
The experiment was carried out in Yo-Yo Clinic,
Kaohsiung, Taiwan. The body temperature was measured by
ear thermometer (Radiant TH889, Radiant Innovation Inc.)
and the signal was acquired by PPG (Nonin 8500, Nonin
Medical Inc.) with 200 Hz sampling rate.
30 subjects were recruited in this study. 15 subjects
whose body temperature are higher than 37.9 °C serve as
fever group, others serve as normal group. All subjects were
measured the body temperature before acquiring the PPG
signal. The subjects were required to rest quietly in supine
position when the PPG signal acquiring for 10 minutes. This
experiment was approved by the institutional review board
of the National Chiao Tung University. Informed consent
was obtained from all subjects before the experiment.

C. iPRV procedure
There are many steps of the iPRV procedure [6]. First, it
uses EMD to decompose the PPG signal to many intrinsic
mode functions (IMFs) [7]. The algorithm of EMD is shown
in Fig 3. However, because of the mode mixing problem
involve in the EMD, the EEMD was used in this study. The
procedure of EEMD is shown in Fig 4. [8]. After
decomposition, one of the IMFs which was sinusoid-like is
considered as the heartbeats component. This IMF is used
for calculating the instantaneous frequency (IF) by
normalized direct quadrature (NDQ) [10]. The procedure of
NDQ is shown in Fig 5. The iPRV uses the inversion of IF
called iPeriod to calculate the power spectrum by FFT. The
whole procedure of iPRV is shown in Fig 6. The spectral
analysis
programs
in
this
study

Find local extrema of

Mean of upper, lower
envelopes
Compute

B. PRV procedure
The procedure PRV is shown in Fig 2. First, finding out
the peaks in each pulse cycle. Second, calculating the PPI
series by the interval between each peak and interpolating to
200 samples per second. Last, transforming the PPI series to
power spectrum by fast Fourier transform (FFT) and
calculating the power of each band.

No

Is an
IMF?
Yes

Output
Figure 3. The algorithm of EMD.
Input
data

Input PPG
signal

Add white noise

Add white noise

…

Add white noise

EMD

EMD

…

EMD

IMFs

IMFs

…

IMFs

Peak detection

interpolation

PPI series
Ensemble

FFT

Ensemble
IMFs

Power spectrum

Figure 4. The algorithm of EEMD
Figure 2. An example procedure of PRV.

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

77

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

were developed by using a commercial software platform
(LabVIEW version 2013, National Instruments Corp., Austin,
USA).

Input IMF

D. Iindex calculating
The standard of bandwidth of low frequency band (LF) is
between 0.04 Hz and 0.15 Hz and high frequency band (HF)
is between 0.15 Hz and 0.4 Hz [11]. The conventional
indexes of normalized power (nLF and nHF) and LF-HF
ratio are calculated as follows.


nLF = 100% * (LF / (LF + HF)),



Calculating quadrature

nHF = 100% * (HF / (LF + HF)), and

(2)

Instantaneous phase

LF-HF ratio = 100% * (LF / HF).

(3)

Normalized

For calculating including very high frequency band
(VHF), we assume the bandwidth of VHF is from 0.4 Hz to
0.5 Hz in PRV and 0.4 Hz to 0.9 Hz in iPRV. The modified
indexes are calculated as follows.

Differential
IF
Figure 5. Calculate IF by NDQ.

Input PPG
signal

nLFa = 100% * (LF / (LF + HF + VHF)),

(4)

nHFa = 100% * (HF / (LF + HF + VHF)), and

(5)

nVHF = 100% * (VHF / (LF + HF + VHF)).

(6)

EEMD

Each abbreviation, LF, HF and VHF in equations
presents the power of each frequency band.

Heartbeat IMF

E. Statistic analysis
Homogeneity test was used to test the distribution of each
index calculated by PRV and iPRV is homogeneity or not
before independent t-test. Independent t-test was used to
compare the significant difference between each index
calculated by PRV and iPRV. P value of <0.05 was
considered significant. All statistical analysis was performed
by using commercial statistics software (IBM SPSS statistics,
version 22.0.0.0, IBM corp., New York, USA).

NDQ & inverse

iPeriod

FFT

Power spectrum

III.
Figure 6. The procedure of iPRV.

RESULT

The comparison result between PRV and iPRV is shown
in Table 1.

TABLE 1. THE COMPARISION BETWEEN PRV AND IPRV

group
method
nLF
nHF
LF-HF ratio
nLFa
nHFa
nVHF

Normal group
PRV

*

*

46.5±16.4
53.5±16.4*
109.9±86.9*
26.4±10.9
30.5±11.5*
43.1±10.4

49.6±16.6
50.4±16.6*
128.8±112.6*
42.8±15.8*#
43.9±16.6*#
13.2±10.2#
1

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

Fever group
iPRV

PRV

iPRV

67.2±12.4
32.8±12.4
263.6±187.0
56.7±11.9#
27.5±10.1#
15.8±6.8#

62.5±12.8
37.5±12.8
207.5±136.2
32.5±11.7
18.8± 7.4
48.7±13.6

* means p-value <0.05 compared with Fever group, # means p-value<0.05 compared with iPRV

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

78

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

There is no significant difference in nLF and nHF
between PRV and iPRV. If calculating including VHF, each
index in PRV is significantly different to the one in iPRV
whether in normal group or fever group. However, each
index whether computed including VHF or not, they have
the same trend in PRV and iPRV. For example, comparing to
normal group, nLF increased in fever group whether
calculated by PRV or iPRV. Nevertheless, the value of
nVHF is much larger in iPRV than PRV, we discuss it in the
next section.
IV.

DISCUSSION

The conventional indexes, nLF, nHF and LF-HF ratio,
calculating by HRV usually present the activities of ANS
[2][11]. The PRV can be used as an alternative measurement
of the HRV [4]. So, nLF, nHF and LF-HF ratio are useful for
indicating the activities of ANS by PRV. Besides this, the
result of this study also shows the value of nLF, nHF and
LF-HF ratio calculated by iPRV are no significant difference
to PRV. Therefore, nLF, nHF and LF-HF ratio calculated by
iPRV can also indicate the activities of ANS. For modified
indexes in this study, because of the narrow bandwidth of
VHF in PRV, nLFa and nHFa are similar to the conventional
indexes. Otherwise, the power of VHF is much larger in
iPRV. VHF band may contain more information about not
only activity of ANS but more body regulation.
Some studies have assumed that VHF has the possible
meaning of cardiac output or peripheral circulation
[6][12][13]. Another study also shows the VHF band has
potential to evaluate fluid responsiveness [14]. In addition,
the previous study had compared the difference between
normal people and fever patient and discussed the
relationship between some thermoregulation and each index
[9]. However, it still needs more experiments to examine the
meaning of VHF.
V.

CONCLUSION

This study has shown the reliability of the conventional
indexes in iPRV. Moreover, the ultra-band, VHF, computed
by iPRV contains more information about the body
regulation for monitor. iPRV uses the convenient and easy
measurement for signal acquiring, but provide more
information than PRV. iPRV has a potential to be a better
monitor of health status for homecare.

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was fully supported by the Taiwan Ministry of
Science and Technology under grant numbers MOST-1052221-E-009-159, MOST 105-2634-E-009-003, and in part
by ‘Aim for the Top University Plan’ of the National Chiao
Tung University and Ministry of Education, Taiwan, R.O.C.

[13]

[14]

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

REFERENCES
L. K. McCorry, “Physiology of the autonomic nervous
system,” American journal of pharmaceutical education,
Vol. 71(4):78, Aug. 2007, pp. 1-11.
S. Akselrod, et al., “Power spectrum analysis of heart
rate fluctuation: a quantitative probe of beat-to-beat
cardiovascular control,” Science, Vol. 213, 1981, pp.
220-222.
J. Allen, “Photoplethysmography and its application in
clinical physiologicalmeasurement,” Physiological
measurement, Vol 28(3), 2007, pp1-39
E. Gil, et al., “Photoplethysmography pulse rate
variability as a surrogate measurement of heart rate
variability
during
non-stationary
conditions,”
Physiological Measurement, Vol. 31, Aug. 2010, pp.
1271-1290
G. G. Berntson, et al., "Heart rate variability: origins,
methods, and interpretive caveats," Psychophysiology,
Vol. 34, 1997, pp. 623–648.
C. C. Chang, T. C. Hsiao, and H. Y. Hsu, “Frequency
range extension of spectral analysis of pulse rate
variability based on Hilbert–Huang transform,” Medical
& Biological Engineering & Computing, Vol. 52, 2014,
pp. 343-351.
N. E. Huang, et al., “The empirical mode
decomposition and the Hilbert spectrum for nonlinear
and non-stationary time series analysis,” Proceedings of
the Royal Society of London. Series A: Mathematical,
Physical and Engineering Sciences, Vol. 454, Mar.
1998, pp.903-995
Z. Wu and N. E. Huang, “Ensemble empirical mode
decomposition: a noise-assisted data analysis method,”
Advances in Adaptive Data Analysis, Vol. 1, Jan. 2009,
pp. 1-41.
P. H. Huang, C. C. Chang, and T. C. Hsiao, “The
analysis of youngster with fever by using instantaneous
pulse rate variability,” The 8th International Conference
on
eHealth, Telemedicine and Social Medicine,
(eTELEMED 2016) IARIA, 2016, pp. 63-67, ISBN:
978-1-61208-470-1.
N. E. Huang, et al., “On instantaneous frequency,”
Advances in Adaptive Data Analysis, Vol. 1, Apr. 2009,
pp. 177–229.
M. Malik, “Heart rate variability: standards of
measurement, physiological interpretation, and clinical
use,” European Heart Journal, Vol 17, 1996, pp. 354381
C. C. Chang, H. Y. Hsu, and T. C. Hsiao, “The
interpretation of very high frequency band of
instantaneous pulse rate variability during paced
respiration,” Biomedical Engineering Online, Vol. 13,
Apr. 2014, pp. 46-56
P. C. Lin, C. C. Chang, T. C. Hsiao and H. Y. Hsu,
“The circulation assessment of daily e-health by using
instantaneous pulse rate variability during nonstationary
conditions,” The 7th International Conference on
eHealth, Telemedicine and Social Medicine,
(eTELEMED 2015) IARIA, Feb, 2015, pp. 209–212,
ISBN: 978-1-61208-384-1.
P. C. Lin, C. C. Chang, T. C. Hsiao and H. Y. Hsu, “A
short-term assessment of cardiac output by using
instantaneous pulse rate variability ,“The 8th
International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine and
Social Medicine, (eTELEMED 2016) IARIA, 2016, pp.
110-115, ISBN: 978-1-61208-470-1 115

79

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Application of Holo-Hilbert Spectral Analysis on Human Breathing Movement with
Isovolume Maneuver
Jia-Hua Lee

Ya-Chen Chen

Institute of Biomedical Engineering
National Chiao Tung University
Hsinchu, Taiwan R.O.C.
e-mail: jessie1992a@gmail.com

Institute of Computer Science and Engineering
National Chiao Tung University
Hsinchu, Taiwan R.O.C.
e-mail: milktea0623@gmail.com

Tzu-Chien Hsiao*
Department of Computer Science, Institute of Biomedical
Engineering, Biomedical Electronics Translational Research Center
National Chiao Tung University
Hsinchu, Taiwan R.O.C.
e-mail: labview@cs.nctu.edu.tw
Abstract—Breathing is one of essential processes for human to
inhale and exhale air for gas translation. People modulate
respiratory frequency (fast or slow) and depth (deep or shallow)
consciously or unconsciously. Different breathing patterns
perform distinct breathing movement and physiological
mechanism. Breathing movement could be described by
observing thoracoabdominal movement which is a
combination of cooperated muscle contraction from rib cage
and abdomen. Isovolume maneuver (IVM) is a typical
respiratory pattern with different respiratory frequency and
depth. To investigate the effect of respiratory pattern, it is
important to observe the transition state between different
respiratory modulations. In 2016, Huang proposed HoloHilbert spectral analysis (HHSA) for identifying the joint
frequency and amplitude modulation. To obtain the transition
period, HHSA is adopted to investigate time-frequency
modulation (Time-FM) and time-amplitude modulation (TimeAM) during IVM. Simulation and experiment results indicate
that time-AM spectrum and FM-AM spectrum can identify the
time-variate transition period between spontaneous breathing
(0.3 Hz) and paced breathing (0.1 Hz). This achievement could
be helpful for detecting transition state of respiration,
especially during exercises or suffering cardiopulmonary
disease for long-term care.
Keywords-Holo-Hilbert spectral analysis (HHSA); Empirical
mode decomposition (EMD); Isovolume manuver (IVM)

I.

INTRODUCTION

Breathing is an essential and important process for gas
exchange. The mechanism of human breathing is the
pressure gradient of airflow to induce inhaling or exhaling
with a series of cooperation between ribs and muscles [1][2].
People can modulate instantaneous respiratory frequency
(fast or slow) and depth (deep or shallow) consciously or
unconsciously. There are two common breathing types,
thoracic breathing (TB) and abdominal breathing (AB). TB
is implemented by the contraction of intracostal muscles to

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

raise rib cage and to increase lateral and anteroposterior
dimension of thoracic cavity. Most of gas exchange happens
in upper lungs. AB is commonly used during sleep and
mainly implemented by the contraction of abdominal
muscles. It would drive the deeper descending of the
diaphragm and inhale air into the entire lungs. The lung
volume during AB is usually larger than TB and performs
slowly rate and more effective on gas exchange. In addition,
different breathing types, especially AB, could stimulate
parasympathetic nervous system and lead human to feel
relaxed [3][4].
In physiological study, the dynamic function of breathing
can be described by observing thoracoabdominal movement
(TAM) consisting of related muscular contractions and
relaxations between rib cage (RC) and abdomen (ABD) [5].
One of non-invasive methods to measure breathing pattern is
respiratory inductive plethysmograph (RIP). In general, RIP
belts are placed on the RC and ABD to measure the TAM
and quantify the breathing features including respiratory rate,
tilde volume, energy of breathing, and phase shift of TAM
[6]. Literature has reported that patterns of RC and ABD
movements can be used to identify breathing types (TB and
AB) [7][8]. However, breathing pattern is dynamical changes,
it is important to observe the transition state between
different respiratory modulations.
In signal processing, noise reduction with band-pass filter
has time delay problem. Empirical mode decomposition
(EMD) [9] is used to decompose biosignals into oscillatory
modes with different frequencies without introducing any
phase delay [10]. Each component decomposed by EMD is
regarded as a meaningful mode called intrinsic mode
function (IMF). The instantaneous frequency responses of
the IMFs derived through direct quadrature and showed in
Hilbert spectrum [11]. In EMD process, mode mixing has
seemed to be a problem, which is defined as a pattern of
signals whose activities reside within the same frequency of
different IMFs. In a new method, named Holo-Hilbert

80

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

spectral analysis (HHSA) and proposed by Huang et. al. in
2016, there exists a physical phenomenon in the mode
mixing [12]. It extends EMD method and uses nested EMD
with Hilbert-Huang Transform (HHT) to identify the
modulations in nonlinear systems [12]. In addition to
frequency variation, data containing amplitude variation
would influence EMD process. HHSA brings out a highdimensional spectrum called Holo-Hilbert spectrum to see
the variation in frequency and amplitude.
The iso-volume maneuver (IVM), which is widely used
for calibrating respiratory sensors and thoracoabdominal
movement evaluation [13][14], is a typical respiratory
pattern with spontaneous breathing and paced breathing. To
investigate the effect of respiratory pattern, it is important to
observe the transition state between different respiratory
modulations. HHSA has been proposed recently to identify
the frequency and amplitude modulations in nonlinear
systems. This study used HHSA to investigate timefrequency modulation (Time-FM) and time-amplitude
modulation (Time-AM) during IVM.
II.

METHOD AND METERIAL

A. Holo-Hilbert spectral analysis method
HHSA extends current spectral analysis such as Fourier
analysis and Hilbert spectral analysis, which are based on
additive expansion to show the variation on frequency. It
gets the lower frequency envelop as amplitude fluctuation
from the higher carrier frequency oscillations and expands
original time-frequency spectrum into a higher-dimensional
representation of the FM-AM spectrum, with the FM
representing the fast-changing carrier intra-mode frequency
variations and the AM representing the slow-changing
envelope inter-mode frequency variations [12]. A best way
to present the advantage in HHSA as shown in (1). A
multiplicative data would be regarded as the addition from
two terms by using an additively based method. On the other
hand, it could be considered as a cosB term with the
amplitude modulation by cosA term. Therefore, we could
obtain the amplitude variation through HHSA if it exists
amplitude modulation.
x(t) = cosA·cosB = (1/2) [cos(A+B)+cos(A-B)]

(1)

Before introducing HHSA method, realized the EMD
algorithm ahead. The steps of EMD are shown in Fig. 1(a).
First, we can find the local maximum and local minimum to
produce upper envelope and lower envelope by a cubic
spline and calculate the mean of these two envelopes. Then,
subtract the mean envelope from the oringinal data. The
above detrending operation is called sifting process, which is
based on energy-associated extraction in each timescale [9].
After sifting process, we need to determine whether the
result is an intrinsic mode function (IMF). An IMF would
satisfy the following two requirements: (1) the number of
local extrema must be equal or differ at most by one to the
number of zero-crossing; (2) at any point, the value of the
mean envelope must approximately equal to zero. If the

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. Illustration to the procedure of (a) EMD algorithm and (b)
HHSA.

result is an IMF, output the IMF and deduct it from the
original data to get the residue. If not, replace the original
data by the result and perform sifting process again. Last,
determine whether the residue is monotonic. If it is not a
monotonic function, use the residue as original data and
execute above steps. Else, EMD procedure is finished and
gets lots of IMFs decomposed by EMD method.
The steps of HHSA method are shown in Fig. 1(b). Data
would be decomposed by EMD method more than one time.
First, original data execute EMD method and obtain many
IMFs, treating as IMFi that means i-th IMF. We take the
absolute value on each IMFi and identify all the maxima on it
to produce envelope by a natural spline which be viewed as
the time fluctuation of the amplitude function. Then, perform
EMD method on these envelopes and produce another lots of
IMFs, treating as IMFij that means j-th IMF in the envelop of
IMFi. The step, decomposing envelopes by EMD method,
would constantly execute to delineate the amplitude function.
With each additional layer of decomposition on the
envelopes, need additional dimensions to accommodate the
amplitude variations. This study presents two layers EMD
method in HHSA and gets Holo-Hilbert spectrum with four –
dimensional data including time, FM frequency, AM
frequency, and energy density. Besides the FM-AM
spectrum, defined in [12], we show the Time-FM spectrum
and Time-AM spectrum to investigate FM frequency
variation and AM frequency variation on breathing pattern in
timescale.
B. Simulation and IVM data collection
This study simulated breathing pattern by using pure
sinusolid wave and showed two different breathing types
alternating appeared as Fig. 2. One breathing rate is 20 times
per minute (0.3 Hz). The other one is 6 times per minute (0.1
Hz) and has larger amplitude than the amplitude of 0.3 Hz
breathing rate. The breathing pattern executes five times in
simulation.
Procedure of IVM includes alternate spontaneous
breathing (near 0.3 Hz) and paced breathing (0.1 Hz) in

81

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 2. Simulation of spontaneous breathing (0.3 Hz) and paced
breathing (0.1 Hz) with sinusoidal pattern.
(a)

(a)
(b)

(b)
Figure 3. RIP signals from (a) RC movement and (b) ABD
movement during IVM. The dense part is for spontaneous breathing
and the loosely part is for paced breathing.

iso-volume status. Subject (female, 24 years old, 165 cm,
50kg) was instructed to perform IVM as following four steps
for five times. (1) The subject breathed freely for 24 seconds
and prepared to start the IVM. (2) The subject was asked to
inhale deeply and slowly to hold the breath for 6 seconds.
The lung volume kept equivalent during the IVM. (3) The
subject was instructed to move abdominal wall inward for 5
seconds and moved outward for 5 seconds. The abdominal
wall moved inward and outward for three times. (4) The
subject was asked to exhale and take a break for 24 seconds.
During IVM, shift air between RC and ABD as much as
possible with the holding breath.
Fig. 3 illustrates the data, which were be acquired by two
RIP sensors (RIPmate Adult Thorax Alice 5 Inductance Kit,
Ambu Inc., Denmark) during IVM procedure. The RIP
sensor was worn below the axilla to record RC movement as
shown in Fig. 3(a), and the other RIP sensor was placed on
the navel to record ABD movement as shown in Fig. 3(b).
Both RIP signals were acquired by a data acquisition hub (NI
SCB-68, National Instruments, USA) and a data acquisition
card (NI USB 6255, National Instruments, USA) at a
sampling rate of 50 Hz and were subsequently transferred to
a computer (Acer Veriton M2610). The program controlling
the instructions and data acquisition was developed using
LabVIEW platform (LabVIEW 2012, National Instruments,
USA).
III.

RESULTS

Fig. 4(a) illustrates Hilbert spectrum with EMD method
and instantaneous frequency in simulation data. Fig. 4(b),
4(c), and 4(d) illustrate HHSA method including FM-AM

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

(c)

(d)
Figure 4. The spectra for the simulating data consist of (a) Hilbert
spectrum, (b) Time-FM spectrum, (c) Time-AM spectrum, and (d)
FM-AM spectrum.

spectrum, Time-FM spectrum, and Time-AM spectrum
respectively. In Hilbert spectrum, we observe the alternate
frequency, 0.33Hz and 0.1 Hz, in timescale which is
consistent with the condition we gave. Because the
magnitude is calculated by energy density, larger amplitude
indicates as high magnitude and red color in this case. In
FM-AM spectrum, it presents high energy (high magnitude)
when FM frequency is equal to 0.1Hz and 0.33 Hz and
obtain high energy when AM frequency is within the range
of 0.015 to 0.02 Hz. In Time-FM spectrum, the distribution
of frequency is similar to Hilbert spectrum but different in
color. In Time-AM spectrum, we find the high energy at
about 0.015 Hz in AM frequency and appear high frequency
(0.09 Hz) near transition timing.
Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 indicate the results of RIP signals from
RC and ABD movement. We see RC movement first. In
Hilbert spectrum, it appears the floating frequency with time.
The frequency in spontaneous breathing is about 0.2 to 0.4

82

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

(a)

(a)

(b)

(b)

(c)

(c)

(d)

(d)

Figure 5. The spectra for the RIP signal with RC movement consist of
(a) Hilbert spectrum, (b) Time-FM spectrum, (c) Time-AM spectrum, and
(d) FM-AM spectrum.

Figure 6. The spectra for the RIP signal with ABD movement consist
of (a) Hilbert spectrum, (b) Time-FM spectrum, (c) Time-AM
spectrum, and (d) FM-AM spectrum.

Hz with yellow and green color and the frequency in paced
breathing range from 0.05 to 0.15 Hz with red color (higher
energy). In FM-AM spectrum, there are two faint parts in
FM frequency at 0.05 to 0.1 Hz and 0.15 to 0.4Hz
respectively and appears higher energy near 0.02 Hz in AM
frequency. In Time-FM spectrum, more complex than
simulating data, we could recognize three distinct ranges.
One of them is in the range of 0.05 to 0.1 Hz with green and
blue color that is viewed as the frequency of paced breathing.
Another is ranging from 0.2 to 0.4 Hz with yellow and green
colors that refers to the frequency of spontaneous breathing.
The other one is most obvious that joined both of above and
crossed the range from 0.05 to 0.4 Hz. In Time-AM
spectrum, there is a clear orange line in 0.02Hz but others
information is irregular.
The spectra in ABD data compare to RC data, there are
some difference in FM-AM spectrum and Time-FM
spectrum. In FM-AM spectrum, the energy in lower

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

frequency is larger and more centralized than RC in FM
frequency. In Time-FM spectrum, the red region shows
lower frequency than RC.
IV.

DISCUSSION

We performed the simulated breathing data on four-type
spectra and found that the similar distribution of frequency in
Hilbert spectrum and Time-FM spectrum expect of 0.1 Hz
and 0.3 Hz components allocated different colors, implying
different energy densities. Compared to Hilbert spectrum, the
pure frequency variation is clearly displayed in Time-FM
spectrum. This performance could be the effect of 2nd EMD
process, displaying it in another Time-AM spectrum. In
addition, we find two bright points near 0.02Hz in AM
frequency in FM-AM spectrum. AM is the slow changing
envelope frequency variation that presents cyclic
characteristics in the envelopes. In simulation, breathing
pattern executed five times could be regarded as transition

83

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

period with five periods in the envelopes and its frequency is
0.016 Hz. It is close to the higher energy in AM frequency
indicated in FM-AM spectrum and Time-AM spectrum.
Comparing real breathing pattern with simulating
breathing pattern and RC movement with ABD movement,
we find some results. (1) There are two cases under the
highly varied frequency of spontaneous breathing. In
simulating case, we could clearly see the frequency in
Hilbert spectrum and Time-FM spectrum. But in real case,
the energy would spread to adjacent frequency, so the
frequency is ambiguous. (2) In Time-AM spectrum, we find
the higher frequency timing close to the transition timing in
simulating case, but could not find in real case fellow the
same rule. It may owing to the energy of higher frequency
pretty lower than main energy that is difficult to indicate
clearly in dynamical respiration. (3) The main distribution of
frequency on ABD movement is lower than RC movement
in Time-FM spectrum that present higher energy on paced
breathing than spontaneous breathing. It may cause by
performing TB during spontaneous breathing but we need to
more experiment data to prove. (4) There are some
unreasonable distribution of energy in Time-FM spectrum.
As the Fig. 5(b) shows that the main distribution of energy
range from 0.05 to 0.4 Hz, it is composed by two kind of
frequency of breathing pattern. After being decomposed by
EMD method, it should be divided into two different
frequencies.
The IMFs decomposed by EMD on RC data shown as
Fig. 7(a). We find the mode mixing problem in IMF6. We
repeat the same process after removing IMF6 from RC data.
In Time-FM spectrum shown as Fig. 7(c), we can find 0.1
Hz frequency of paced breathing obviously and 0.2 to 0.4 Hz
in spontaneous breathing. Followed by above steps on ABD
data, we can obtain clear frequency in spontaneous breathing
and paced breathing.
V.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was fully supported by the Taiwan Ministry of
Science and Technology under grant numbers MOST 1052634-E-009-003 and MOST 105-2221-E-009-159. This
work was also supported in part by the "Aim for the Top
University Plan" of Biomedical Electronics Translational
Research Center in National Chiao Tung University and
Ministry of Education, Taiwan.

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 7. (a) The IMFs for the real data on RC. (b) The IMFs for the
real data on ABD. (c) Time-FM spectrum of RC data removing IMF6.
(d) Time-FM spectrum of ABD data removing IMF6.

REFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]
[7]

CONCLUSION

In this study, we have used HHSA method on simulation
of breathing pattern and respiratory movement data with
IVM procedure. The frequency of amplitude fluctuation can
be found in both Time-AM spectrum and FM-AM spectrum.
Therefore, the transition period between spontaneous
breathing (0.3 Hz) and paced breathing (0.1 Hz) can be
found in Holo-Hilbert spectrum. Based on the HHSA method,
we got the FM frequency and AM frequency in timescale to
investigate the transition from spontaneous breathing to
paced breathing. Related results are helpful for exploring the
transition state on human breathing and dynamical
respiratory pattern especially when people doing exercises or
suffering cardiopulmonary disease for long-term care.

(a)

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]
[12]

[13]

[14]

B. W. John, Respiratory Physiology: the essentials. Alphen aan den
Rijn: Wolters Kluwer, 2012.
W. F. Ganong, Review of Medical Physiology, 22 ed.: Mcgraw-hill,
2005.
A. Conrad, et al., "Psychophysiological effects of breathing
instructions for stress management," Applied Psychophysiology and
Biofeedback, vol. 32, pp. 89-98, 2007.
R. Kaushik, R. M. Kaushik, S. K. Mahajan, and V. Rajesh,
"Biofeedback assisted diaphragmatic breathing and systematic
relaxation versus propranolol in long term prophylaxis of migraine,"
Complement. Ther. Med., vol. 13, pp. 165-174, 2005.
K. Konno and J. Mead, "Measurement of the separate volume
changes of rib cage and abdomen during breathing," Journal of
Applied Physiology, vol. 22, pp. 407-422, 1967.
J. Hammer and C. J. L. Newth, "Assessment of thoraco-abdominal
asynchrony," Paediatr Respir Rev, vol. 10, pp. 75-80, 2009.
J.-L. Chen, Y.-C. Chen, and T.-C. Hsiao, "Recognizing thoracic
breathing by ensemble empirical mode decomposition," in
Information, Communications and Signal Processing (ICICS) 2013
9th International Conference on, pp. 1-5, 2013.
Y.-C. Chen and T.-C. Hsiao, "Instantaneous phase difference analysis
between thoracic and abdominal movement signals based on
complementary ensemble empirical mode decomposition,"
BioMedical Engineering OnLine, vol. 15, pp. 1-21, 2016.
N. E. Huang, et al., "The empirical mode decomposition and the
Hilbert spectrum for nonlinear and non-stationary time series
analysis," Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A, vol. 454, pp. 903-995, 1998.
C.-C. Chang, S.-C. Kao, T.-C. Hsiao, and H.-Y. Hsu, "Assessment of
autonomic nervous system by using empirical mode decompositionbased reflection wave analysis during non-stationary conditions,"
Physiological measurement, vol. 35, pp. 1873-1883, 2014.
N. E. Huang, et al., "On instantaneous frequency," Adv. Adapt. Data
Anal., vol. 1, pp. 177-229, 2009.
N. E. Huang, et al., "On Holo-Hilbert spectral analysis: a full
informational spectral representation for nonlinear and non-stationary
data," Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A, vol. 374, pp. 1-21, 2016.
R. C. C. Barbosa, C. R. F. d. Carvalho, and H. T. Moriya,
"Respiratory inductive plethysmography: a comparative study
between isovolume maneuver calibration and qualitative diagnostic
calibration in healthy volunteers assessed in different positions,"
Jornal Brasileiro de Pneumologia, vol. 38, pp. 194-201, 2012.
R. Gilbert, J. Auchincloss, and D. Peppi, "Relationship of rib cage
and abdomen motion to diaphragm function during quiet breathing,"
Chest Journal, vol. 80, pp. 607-612, 1981.

84

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Engaged Scholarship as Research Method: a Best Practice for evidence based ITinnovations for People with Severe Dementia
Elles Gyaltsen-Lohuis, Marike Hettinga
Research group IT Innovations in Health Care
Windesheim University of Applied Sciences
Zwolle, The Netherlands
Email: {EGE.Lohuis} {M.Hettinga}@ windesheim.nl

Abstract— Providing evidence for the added value of ITinnovations in health care for people with dementia is most
challenging. Questions on relevant outcome criteria, methods
of measurement, qualitative methods and quantitative, and
correct stakeholder management are some of the issues coming
to the fore. This short paper shares the best practices and
challenges met on two short-term studies on IT-innovations for
people with severe dementia. The paper also includes the topics
and questions to discuss in the workshop EviDem: Evidence
based IT-innovations for People with Dementia, during the
eTelemed, the Ninth International Conference on eHealth,
Telemedicine, and Social Medicine, 2017.
Keywords: engaged scholarship; IT-innovations in health care;
dementia; research method; evidence.

I.

INTRODUCTION

In 2015 and 2016 I conducted two studies on IT
innovation in intramural care for people with severe
dementia. The first study was on the effects of a remote
sensor system as regards to 1. the quality of life and care of
the client and 2. the efficiency of care by the care providers.
The second study was on the effects of a social media
application as regards to 1. the quality of life of the client
and 2. the relationship between client and care provider.
Both studies were small-scale, involving 12 to 24 clients
with severe dementia and lasted six months. This short paper
focusses on the methods used and the challenges met.
II.

ENGAGED SCHOLARSHIP AND ETHNOGRAPHY AS
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY

The study on IT innovation for people with dementia in
an intramural setting focuses on a series of complex issues in
a social setting. The IT innovation is supposed to generate
different results for various stakeholders in the arena of care,
and all stakeholders have different interests. Clients with
dementia are mostly hoping the IT innovation will improve
their quality of life and care. Formal care providers often
want to be able to give better care with the IT innovation.
Boards of management of care providers direct their
attention to efficiency in care while IT innovators and also
financers of the IT innovation have commercial stakes when
it comes to innovation in care practices.
At the same time the study on IT innovations is also
supposed to contribute to the body of scientific knowledge

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

on design and implementation of IT innovation in care. So
the research method used has to serve multiple stakeholders
in both the practice and the science of care. To increase the
capabilities to study complex problems and to create the
kind of knowledge that advances both practice and science
in care, I propose the method of engaged scholarship by Van
de Ven [1]. Engaged scholarship is a participative form of
research for obtaining the views of key stakeholders to
understand a complex problem. By exploiting differences
between the viewpoints of the stakeholders, I found that
engaged scholarship produces knowledge that is more
penetrating and insightful than when researchers work
alone.
Depending on the research purpose Van de Ven
proposes 2 possible research perspectives: the ‘detached
outsider’ and the ‘attached insider’ [1]. The purpose of my
research was two-fold, namely to gain knowledge about the
effects and the adaption of the IT innovation interventions
together with the stakeholders and to gain knowledge about
the complexity of intramural setting in which the IT
innovation is launched. Therefore I chose the ‘attached
insider’ view.
The first aim of studying the effects and adaption of the
IT innovation demanded an action/intervention research.
Developed by Kurt Lewin in 1944 action research is a
reflective process of problem solving whereby researchers
and stakeholders work together to improve the community’s
strategy, practices and knowledge of the settings in which
they practice. The basis of this process is the participation of
stakeholders in problem solving, using systematic methods
of data collection, feedback, reflection and action [1]. By
taking the perspective of the ‘attached insider’, I worked
together with the key stakeholders to design and execute the
research to ensure that all stakeholder’s interests were
served the best possible way.
The second aim, to gain insight in the complexity of the
situation and to contribute to the body of scientific
knowledge, required a collaborative basic research, another
form of engaged scholarship [1]. This form of research
entails sharing of power and joint activities among the
researcher and stakeholders in order to co-produce
knowledge about a complex problem or phenomenon.
Taking again the perspective of the ‘attached insider’, I
shared the daily life with the clients and care providers in

85

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

the intramural setting for a period of time, discussing our
experiences and our viewpoints, their perceived obstacles
and analyzing our findings together. I gathered the
experiences and knowledge of the diverse stakeholders
involved through interviews, conversation, participation and
observation. To get a close and intimate familiarity with the
stakeholders and their practices the key in the research
strategy used here was participant observation, observing
while playing a role within the group observed.
III.

CHALLENGES MET

As Van de Ven notes, practicing engaged scholarship raises
a number of challenges, two of which I also encountered
while doing research in the intramural setting: divergent
viewpoints and building relationships with stakeholders.
Firstly, engagement generates divergent viewpoints that can
be juxtaposing. In my research I incorporated the
stakeholders’ viewpoints and I gathered data from all the
stakeholders involved: the clients, their care providers –
formal and informal -, the board of management, the IT
innovation developers and the financers of the IT
innovation. The viewpoints generated showed different
stances – not only on the IT innovation itself as intervention
but also on the results this IT innovation generated by the
client with dementia.
I found that reconciling these divergent viewpoints
is not the point in this research. The point is to study and
understand when and why these viewpoints are different. I
tried to explain these differences by seeing the
interconnectedness and webs of entanglement between the
different dimensions of the processes in the daily lives of
the clients and their care providers – formal and informal. I
came to a holistic understanding from engaging all the
stakeholders and analyzing their constantly evolving
relationships.
The second challenge was negotiating the research
relationship by establishing and building relationships with
stakeholders. My research was undertaken with all
stakeholders but especially I needed to build a good
relationship with the clients and their formal care providers
with whom I would be working. I experienced that building
this relationship takes time, mutual understanding and a
subordinate position of the researcher. The clients and care
providers in my research were never involved in any sort of
research before. When I suggested this research to them I
made sure that they understood what it entailed from both
sides, coming to work with them, talking and sharing,
explaining, reflecting and exposing personal details.
The majority of the clients involved could not
communicate and understand the implications of being
involved in research. Their interests were represented by the
care providers – formal and informal. The board, informal
and the formal care providers had outlined their priorities as
regards the clients: the wellbeing of the client at all stages of
the research. This meant no intrusion, no upheaval, no
insecurities in the clients’ environment. As soon as it

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

became clear that the client had a negative reaction or was
obstructed in his or her daily life, the research and IT
intervention would be stopped. Keeping the daily routine as
regular as possible was key to the wellbeing of the clients.
We made the agreement that the clients’ wellbeing would
always have precedent over any other issue that could in the
study. All decisions made during the research were always
guided by these principles. This way we made sure that all
parties were contributors in working towards the
development of the IT innovation and partners in the study.
Taking the time to build the relationship, mutual
understanding and a complete subordinate position from the
researcher to the wellbeing of the client made all
stakeholders feel secure and safe, contributing as much as
what was within their reach and therefore ensuring the best
results within the study. It also meant however that the
length of the study and the schedule set was determined by
the clients from day to day. For me as a researcher this
imposed a definite time challenge in the research frame that
was dictated by strict delivery dates and deadlines.
IV.

TOPICS AND QUESTIONS TO DISCUSS

The other challenges that I experienced in my studies on IT
innovations and people with severe dementia are: 1. how to
include the persons with severe dementia in the IT
development and 2. how to take the constantly changing
needs and abilities for persons with severe dementia into
account while ensuring reliable research data.
It is proven that including the persons with dementia in
the development of IT innovations ensures a better
product/service and a higher adaptation of the innovation
[2]. However, people with severe dementia are often not
able to participate in research due to the fact that dementia
in a severe stage restricts their interaction with their
environment. To ensure the best results, what is the best
practice to include the persons with severe dementia in the
IT development?
During the research I experienced that the ability to
interact with people with severe dementia can vary from
hour to hour. One moment the person with severe dementia
is able to interact and use the IT innovation provided, the
next moment he or she is not able to due to the effects of the
illness or the effects of the medication administered. This is
an incredible challenge to both the client and the researcher.
What is the best practice to take the constantly changing
needs and abilities for persons with severe dementia into
account while ensuring reliable research data?
REFERENCES
[1] A.H. Van der Ven, Engaged Scholarship: A Guide for
Organisational and Social Research. Oxford:: University Press,
2007.
[2] M. Span, Developing an Interactive Web Tool to Facilitate
Shared-Decision Making in Dementia Care Networks: A
Participatory
Journey.
[Online].
Available
from:
http://hdl.handle.net/1871/54018

86

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Simulation-Based Learning in Undergraduate Nursing Education in Japan
A review of the literature
Kazuma Takahashi,
Natsuko Miura,
Department of Basic Nursing Science,
Faculty of Nursing, Graduate School of Nursing, Iwate Prefectural University,
Takizawa, Japan.
e-mail: t_kazuma@iwate-pu.ac.jp, natsuko@iwate-pu.ac.jp
Abstract—The use of simulation in health professional
education has increased rapidly in Japan during the past
decade. However, to date, only a limited number of studies
reporting this situation has been published. We, herein,
endeavored to ascertain how simulation has been adopted in
nursing education, reviewing Japanese articles in this field.
Searching a database, Nippon Igaku Chuo Zasshi, identified 86
peer-reviewed research studies published in Japanese between
1986 and 2016. Since 1999, around 5 articles per year have
consistently been published. Simulation was applied
predominantly in basic and medical-surgical nursing areas, to
learn physical assessment, fundamental skills, injection, and
perioperative care. Forty-one percent of the simulation-based
learning was conducted using 3-D-models to provide infection
and cardiopulmonary resuscitation education. Intermediate
and high fidelity patient simulators were applied to teach
physical assessment, fundamental skills, and perioperative care,
only in rare cases. In Japan, much higher importance should
be placed on simulation-based undergraduate nursing
education, and the socioeconomic environment for introducing
more sophisticated simulators must be improved.
Key words- nursing education;
simulators; health care professionals.

I.

nursing;

simulation;

INTRODUCTION

The primary aim of simulation is to improve patient
safety and to help the student nurse achieve competence,
linking their theoretical knowledge with clinical practice [1].
The use of simulation in health professional education has
increased rapidly over the past 2 decades [2]. The current
range of simulation in this field consists of written
simulations, three-dimensional models, screen-based
simulators, standardized patients (SP), intermediate fidelity
patient simulators, and interactive patient simulators (Table
1)[3].
In the current health education system, the demand for
clinical placements is increased, while there is a global social
need for higher quality healthcare services with shorter
hospital stays [4]. In addition, in Japan, clinical practicum
hours have been decreasing remarkably in the recent nursing
education curriculum, as students spend more time in
theoretical classroom learning. Thus, nursing students have
less chance to be involved in patient care and reduced
opportunities to deal with practice situations [4]. This may

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

lead to decreased clinical competencies in nursing school
graduates [5]. Hence, there has been a need to reproduce the
experience by some other means. Indeed, the Japanese
Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare encouraged trainees
to complement skills that could not be experienced during a
practicum using simulation-based learning.
Reflecting a global trend of accelerating use of
simulation in nursing education, the simulation-based
education in our country seems to be spreading recently.
However, a limited number of studies going through this
situation has been published in Japanese, and there have been
none in English. In this study, we endeavored to ascertain
how simulation has been adopted in nursing education in
Japan, reviewing Japanese articles in this field.
II.

METHODS

A. Literature Search Strategies
The research question that informed the search was ‘How
has simulation been used in nursing education in Japan?’
Boolean operators of AND & OR were used in the search. A
Japanese electronic database, Nippon Igaku Chuo Zasshi
(Japana Centra Revuo Medicina), was searched for peerreviewed research studies in the Japanese language published
between the years of 1986 and December 2016, focusing on
simulation and/or simulator use in nursing education. The
search terms used to discover the literature were: Simulation;
Simulators; Nursing; Education; Skills.
B. Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria
Studies were selected if they described an impact of
simulation-based learning in nursing undergraduate
education. Excluded studies were literature reviews, those
reviewing learning theory, qualitative reviews of student or
faculty experience, and those targeting simulation education
for qualified staff.
C. Literature review and analysis
The searches identified a total of 86 articles on simulationbased undergraduate nursing education during the period.
Articles were grouped based on the major and subspecialties of nursing science, types of simulation, and
subjects who were the targets of simulation training. The

87

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

major specialties included basic (fundamental nursing skills),
communities/public, geriatric, medical-surgical, midwifery,
pediatric, and psychiatric and mental health nursing, and the
subspecialties of cardiac, critical care, disaster, emergency,
home, informatics, management, oncology, orthopedic,
perioperative, and wound, ostomy and continence (WOCN)
nursing, in addition to major categories. Studies dealing with
general subjects of major specialties were sub-classified into
the category designated as being as the same as the major
one (Table 2).
III.

B. Spcialities in Simulation-based Nurse Education
Simulation was applied predominantly to basic and
medical-surgical nursing areas; the proportion of the basic
nursing was 57%, and that of medical-surgical nursing 22%

29
1
0
2
6
0
0
0
4

10
8
6
4

0

1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016

2

Year

Figure 1. Annual Change in the Number of Articles Reporting SimulationBased Undergraduate Nursing Education in Japan

(Fig. 2). Among the subspecialties, simulation was primarily
used to learn basic nursing science (Fig. 3).
C. Training Subjects Intended in Simulation-based
Nursing Education
Simulation was mainly implemented to educate trainees
in physical assessment, fundamental skills, injection, and
perioperative care (Fig. 4). The subject “injection” mostly
included venipuncture.

2

0

0

1

0

0

0

3

0
1
0
2
2

0
0
0
0
0

0
0
1
0
0

1
1
0
0
10

3
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0

4
2
1
2
12

0

0

0

0

0

0

3

3

0
49

0
4

1
3

1
19

0
4

0
4

0
3

2
86

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

Basic
Geriatric
Midwifery
Psychiatric and mental health

Communities/public
Medical-surgical
Pediatric

Figure 2. Major Specialties in Simulation-based Nurse Learning
Basic
Perioperative
Emergency
Management
Midwifery
Psychiatric and mental health
WOCN

Major spcialities
Psychiatric
Communities/
MedicalTotal
Geriatric
Midwifery Pediatric and mental
public
surgical
health
0
0
2
0
2
0
33
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
2
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
1
1
0
0
8
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
2
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
1
0
0
2
0
7

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

12

Medical-surgical

TABLE II. NUMBER OF ARTICLES CLASSIFIED BY MAJOR AND
SUB- SPECIALITIES

Basic
Cardiac
Critical care
Disaster
Emergency
Geriatric
Home
Informatics
Management
MedicalSubspecialities
surgical
Midwifery
Oncology
Orthopedic
Pediatric
Perioperative
Psychiatric
and mental
health
WOCN
Total

14

RESULTS

A. Annual Change in the Number of Articles on
Simulation-based Undergraduate Nursing Education in
Japan
The first report on simulation-based learning for nursing
students appeared in 1987. Since 1999, the articles on
simulation-based education for undergraduate nursing
students have been consistently published, around 5 articles
per year on average (Fig. 1).

Basic

16

No of publication

TABLE I. PROPOSED TYPOLOGY OF SIMULATION
METHODOLOGIES BY ALINIER [3]
Simulation Techniques
Examples
Written simulations
Pen and paper simulations, or “Patient
Management Problems”, and latent
images
3-D models
Basic mannequins, low fidelity
simulation models, or part-task
simulators
Screen-based simulators
Computer simulation, simulation
software, videos, DVDs, or Virtual
Reality and surgical simulators
Standardized patients
Real or simulated patients, role playing
Intermediate fidelity patient
Computer controlled, programmable full
simulators
body size patient simulation not fully
interactive
Interactive patient simulators
High fidelity simulation platforms
or computer controlled model
driven patient simulators

Pediatric
Oncology
Informatics
Disaster
Critical care
Orthopedic
Home
Geriatric
Cardiac
0.0

5.0

10.0

15.0

20.0

25.0

30.0

35.0

40.0

45.0

Figure 3. Subspecialties in Simulation-based Nurse Education

88

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Physical assessment
Fundamental skills
Injection
Perioperative care
Safety measures
Communication
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation
Perinatal management
Nursing diagnosis
Tracheal aspiration
Stoma care
Multiple challenge
Information gathering
Genital care
Gastric fistula
Experiencing hallcination
Death education
Critical care
Community assessment
Clinical pharmacology
Bathing
Bandageing
Acute phase management
Accident prevention
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

No of articles
Figure 4. Training Subjects in Simulation-based Nursing Education

In the subspeciality “basic nursing”, which comprised the
main part of the simulation-based education (Fig. 3), the
major training subjects consisted of injection, fundamental
skills, physical assessment, and communication (21, 19, 12,
and 9%, respectively).
D. Types of Simulation in Undergraduate Nursing
Education
Forty-one percent of the simulation-based learning was
conducted using 3-D-models (Fig. 5), to teach infection
management and cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) (Fig.
6). SP were used in communication and fundamental skills
education (Fig. 6). Intermediate and high fidelity patient
simulators were applied to learn physical assessment,
fundamental skills, and perioperative care education, only in
rare cases (Fig. 6). Articles targeting education with these
sophisticated simulators first emerged in 2003, and have
been consistently produced since 2010 (Fig. 7).
IV.

DISCUSSION

To our knowledge, this is a first literature review in
English reporting the simulation-based learning for
undergraduate nurses in Japan.

3-D models

Interactive patient simulators

Intermediate fidelity patient simulators

Screen-based simulators

Standardized patients

Written simulations

Figure 5. Types of Simulation

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

Physical assessment
Fundamental skills
Injection
Perioperative care
Safety measures
Communication
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation
Perinatal management
Nursing diagnosis
Tracheal aspiration
Stoma care
Multiple challenge
Information gathering
Genital care
Gastric fistula
Experiencing hallcination
Death education
Critical care
Community assessment
Clinical pharmacology
Bathing
Bandageing
Acute phase management
Accident prevention
0

2

4

6

8

10 12 14 16

No of articles

3-D models
Interactive patient simulators
Intermediate fidelity patient simulators
Screen-based simulators
Standardized patients
Written simulations
Figure 6. Distribution of Types of Simulation in Training Subjects

Since 2003, the number of articles in this field has
started increasing, possibly highlighted and promoted by
four governmental bulletins. The Japanese Ministry of
Education released a report on the university/college
education for practical nursing skills in 2002, and one on the
attainment target for this education in 2004. In 2003, the
Japanese Ministry of Health, Labour, and Welfare also
issued a report on the desired skill education for
undergraduate nursing students, and one on education in
practical nursing skills for novice nurses. These noted that
nursing students have fewer chances to be involved in
patient care, and to deal with practice situations, because of
a socioeconomic need for shorter hospital stays, and
consideration of the human rights of patients, and medical
safety measures. The bulletin in 2003 suggested applying
role-playing to practical training within the campus, which
may have pioneered simulation-based nursing education in
Japan. Indeed, SD was one of the major issues in the articles
published (Fig. 5), and these studies came out consistently
(Fig. 7).
This literature review revealed that 3-D models,
including basic mannequins, low fidelity simulation models,
or task trainers were prevalently used in pre-licensure
nursing education in Japan, when teaching physical
assessment, general fundamental skills, injection, or CPR.
This observation, although literature based, is in line with an
actual survey by Kuroda et al [7], showing that 61.2 % and
69.3 % of nursing schools possessed task trainers and low
fidelity simulators, respectively.

89

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016

0

Written simulations

Standardized patients

Screen-based simulators

Intermediate fidelity patient simulators

Interactive patient simulators

3-D models

Figure 7. Annual Changes in Types of Simulation

A report reconsidering the teaching contents and methods
in the undergraduate nursing education released by the
Japanese Ministry of Health, Labour, and Welfare in 2012
advised that skills, which could not be experienced during
the practicum training, should be complemented by
simulation, and even referred to introducing more
sophisticated simulators, which may have brought about
emergence of the articles addressing intermediate and high
fidelity simulators (Fig. 7). Multiple studies confirmed that
high fidelity simulation benefited nursing students in terms
of knowledge acquisition and critical thinking, and created a
learning environment that contributed to greater knowledge,
skills, safety, and student confidence [7]. These devices,
however, have not been sufficiently distributed in our
country, to date; the ownership ratio of intermediate fidelity
simulators for physical assessment, that for critical care, and
high fidelity ones for the nursing schools were reportedly
45.2-71.0, 86.5, and 24.2%, respectively [6].
The limitation of this study is that the data are based on a
literature review, rather than on an actual condition survey.
Furthermore, investigations to elucidate the history and the
current status of this subject should be required, and
published in English.
We conclude that, in Japan, much more importance
should be attached to simulation-based undergraduate
nursing education as a teaching methodology, as well as a
research field. The optimal socioeconomic environment to
introduce sophisticated patient simulators must be prepared
by the government.

vol.
54,
pp.
359-39,
May
2006,
doi:
10.1080/01421590701551185.
[5] A. Walker, C. Earl, B. Costa, and L. Cuddihy, “Graduate
nurses' transition and integration into the workplace: a
qualitative comparison of graduate nurses' and Nurse Unit
Managers' perspectives,” Nurse Educ. Today, vol. 33, pp.
291-296, Mar. 2013, doi : 10.1016/j.nedt.2012.06.005.
[6] N. Kuroda, and Y. Orii, Kangokisokyoiku ni okeru shumiieeta
wo mochiita shimumireeshon kyiku no jittaichosa [Acutual
condition survey of simulation-based undergraduate education
in Japan],” J Jap. Assoc. Sim. Educ. in Healthc. Prof, vol. 4,
pp. 22-28, Jun. 2016.
[7] R. P. Cant, and S. J. Cooper, “Use of simulation-based
learning in undergraduate nurse education: An umbrella
systematic review,” Nurse Educ. Today, vol. 49, pp 63-71,
Feb. 2017, doi: 10.1016/j.nedt.2016.11.015.

REFERENCES
B. Ricketts, “The role of simulation for learning within preregistration nursing education - a literature review,” Nurse
Educ. Today, vol. 31, pp. 650-654, Oct. 2011, doi:
10.1016/j.nedt.2010.10.029.
[2] T. Ryall, B. K. Judd, and C. J. Gordon, “Simulation-based
assessments in health professional education: a systematic
review,” J. Multidiscip. Healthc, vol. 22, pp. 69-82, Feb.
2016, doi: 10.2147/JMDH.S92695.
[3] G. Alinier G, “A typology of educationally focused medical
simulation tools,” Med. Teach, vol. 29, pp. 243-250, October
2007.
[4] G. Alinier, B. Hunt, R. Gordon, and C. Harwood,
“Effectiveness of intermediate-fidelity simulation training
technology in undergraduate nursing education,” J. Adv. Nurs,
[1]

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

90

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Effects of a Blended Learning System
on Improving the Physical Assessment Ability of Nursing Students
Machiko Saeki Yagi

Natsuko Miura

Shigeki Tsuzuku

School of Nursing
Jichi Medical University
Shimotsuke, Japan
email: mati-s@umin.ac.jp

School of Nursing
Iwate Prefectural University
Takizawa, Japan
email: natsuko@iwate-pu.ac.jp

Graduate School of Instructional
Systems
Kumamoto University
Kumamoto, Japan
email: tsuzuku@kumamoto-u.ac.jp

Abstract—This study assessed the effects of a blended learning
system—combining e-learning with simulation training—on
improving the physical assessment ability of nursing students
in Japan. Specifically, we evaluated how e-learning improved
physical assessment knowledge and its application in
simulation training. We also reviewed their evaluations of the
blended learning system, comprising e-learning and simulation
training, after they experienced the system and the influence of
blended learning on their desire to learn. We used an
interventional study design with a questionnaire survey. The
results indicated that e-learning improved participants’ ability
of checking vital signs and information gathering skills.
However, e-learning as regards conducting auscultation, and
palpation showed no significant learning effects and simulation
training helped to do auscultation and palpation. Additionally,
e-learning helped participants recognize the relevance of
learning content to their professional practice. In conclusion,
using e-learning to study some physical assessment skills was
effective and it’s necessary to combine e-learning and
simulation to improve physical assessment ability as blended
learning.
Keywords-e-learning; nursing students; physical assessment;
nurse education.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Nurses are increasingly expected to obtain skills related to
grasping their patients’ situations, particularly the ability to
provide advanced and accurate physical assessments [1].
Thus, nurses must begin physical assessment training that is
suitably adapted to clinical practice (e.g., simulation
education) as early as possible, ideally in their basic nursing
education. As physical assessment relies on nurses
appropriately integrating knowledge and technique, such as
conducting an accurate physical examination and judging a
situation based on available information, learning to perform
it is challenging [2]. Optimal methods for teaching
integrative content to large groups of people thereby need to
be examined to improve physical assessment education.
One potentially effective method of ensuring optimal
learning for each individual in group learning situations is elearning. In the context of continuing education for
physicians, e-learning has been demonstrated to be as
effective as conventional teacher-led education [3]. In other
words, e-learning appears to be an effective method of
instruction, as it does not limit the learning environment or

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

time for learning, at least for knowledge-level content. In
recent years, the breadth of the utilization of e-learning in
medical education has been expanding, marking a shift from
mere passive knowledge transmission to active, selfmotivated learning [4]. Indeed, self-motivated learning using
e-learning tools has become a critical feature of nursing
education. Hence, learning that effectively utilizes ICT needs
to be implemented from early on in nurses’ education.
Current students receiving basic nursing education are
known as “digital natives”; they are from a generation for
whom the Internet has existed since birth [5], indicating that
their information literacy is higher than that of past
generations. Thus, they have a high likelihood of readily
taking to e-learning methods in their education.
Although e-learning affords numerous benefits to
learners, it also presents a number of challenges. First, elearning relies on learners’ ability to self-manage their
learning process, and second, e-learning methods must
possess features that help maintain the desire to learn [6]. For
example, massive open online courses (MOOCs) [7] can
theoretically provide instruction to an extremely large
number of participants, but they do not allow learners to selfmanage their learning, and students tend to drop out of these
programs owing to diminished motivation to learn. One
strategy that has been proposed to resolve these problems in
MOOCs is “blended learning,” which combines face-to-face
and e-learning methods. We thus hypothesize that such
blended learning training may help overcome the challenges
of e-learning. This study aimed to investigate the effects and
influence on motivation of a blended learning system to
improve physical assessment ability. The remainder of this
paper is organized as follows. Section II presents the
methods. Section III provides an overview of our results.
Section IV discusses implications and limitations. Finally,
conclusions and future work are detailed in Section V.
II.

METHODS

A. Participants and Data Collection Methods
Of the 82 junior nursing students who had already
completed physical assessment training at A university, we
recruited the 34 students who consented to participate (33
females and 1 male aged 20 to 22 years). A preliminary
testing of the participants’ computer literacy revealed that
they were able to connect to the Internet and could

91

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

effectively use mobile devices (e.g., laptop, smartphones),
but had not had previous e-learning experience.
Additionally, they either did not have any experience with
simulation training or had undergone it once or twice. Data
collection was conducted through objective assessment (i.e.,
correct answer rate on an e-learning test, and a checklist
evaluating simulation results) and subjective evaluation of
the e-learning experience (questionnaire). The investigation
period was from September to October 2012.

respiratory rate was used. During the simulation, learning
achievement was evaluated using the simulation checklist
mentioned previously. In the medical interview, the
patient’s vocal responses were produced by an instructor
with a microphone.

B. Design of the Physical Assessment Training Using Elearning and Simulation
1) Learning Objective
The learning objective of the physical assessment training
was “able to visit the patient’s bedside and comprehend
their condition.” Accordingly, we created a checklist of the
skills that participants should be able to perform at the end
of the training, including visual inspection, performing a
medical interview, measurement of vital signs, and
performing auscultation and palpation. We created a
simulation scenario wherein they carried out a physical
assessment of a breast cancer patient during chemotherapy.
This blended learning was designed to create suitable
educational materials to help nursing students learn realworld clinical situations, by using stories to help them better
anticipate the realities of clinical practice. The characteristic
points of the materials were the use of Japan’s national
nursing examination, modified using scenarios and actual
clinical cases, and story-type e-learning that included
learning opportunities for assessments, clinical thinking,
patient safety, and communication.
2) E-learning Design
An open-source learning management system, Moodle
[8], was used to design the e-learning system. Specifically,
the e-learning system presented patients on a screen, on
which participants were supposed to perform a physical
assessment using the displayed data (Fig 1). The system also
included a test on content related to physical assessment.
The test was conducted before the simulation training to
confirm if the participants possessed the knowledge
necessary to take part in the simulation. As in previous
research [9], the structure of the e-learning system involved
solving test problems within the same account as the
simulation, thus serving as an introduction to the simulation.
The e-learning covered the period of the student’s entry to
the hospital room, conduct of the physical assessment, and
exit from the room. It was configured such that participants
answered 14 multiple choice questions and 2 short-answer
questions, for a total of 16 questions.
3) Simulation Design
The simulation was conducted in a simulated hospital
room (Fig 2). An advanced simulator that enables the
measurement of patients’ blood pressure, pulse, and

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

Figure 1. Flow of e-learning

C. Questionnaire Creation
The questionnaire assessed participants’ opinions of the
e-learning system (including amount of learning material,
difficulty of questions, visibility, and ease of operation) and
its effect on their desire to learn using a five-point Likert
scale (extremely dissatisfied, slightly unsatisfied, neither
satisfied nor dissatisfied, slightly satisfied, and extremely
satisfied) and a free-comment section.
Desire to learn and the influencing factors for the
successful implementation of learning were assessed using
the four-subscale Instructional Materials Motivation Survey
(IMMS), which was created based on the ARCS model [10].
This model contains four components: attention, relevance,
confidence, and satisfaction. The IMMS, comprising 36
items, was designed to measure individuals’ reactions to
self-driven teaching materials, such as e-learning. A fivepoint Likert scale was used to rate each item, with higher
scores indicating a more positive opinion. The IMMS
includes items expressed negatively, which are reverse
scored. In other words, before adding these answers to the
total score, items given a rating of 5 were converted to have
a rating of 1, with 4 being converted to 2, 3 remaining the
same, 2 to 4, and 1 to 5.
After completing the entire training sequence, participants
who gave their consent were interviewed to explore their
thoughts on the e-learning and simulation, and to determine
the influence of the simulation training on learning
effectiveness and desire to learn.
D. Statistical evaluation
For the e-learning, test scores, times, and times of
simulation are expressed as means ± standard deviations. For
the questionnaire, scores are expressed as means and median
values (quartile range). The free-response descriptions were

92

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

listed as written by participants. All statistical analyses were
performed using IBM SPSS Statistics 22 (IBM Corp.,
Armonk, NY). A significance level of 5% was used in the
analysis.
E. Ethical Considerations
This study was conducted with the approval of the
medical ethics committees of Nagoya University, Japan; the
survey was approved in June 2013 (No. 2013-0049).

Figure 2. Simulated hospital room: The instructor watches participants’
performance via video to ensure a safe learning environment.

III.

RESULTS

A. Research Participation
Of the participants, 34 finished the e-learning and
simulation, whereas 25 completed the questionnaire.
Interview data were obtained from four participants; most of
the participants had to attend clinical training.
B. E-learning
The correct answer rate on the test was 91.1% ± 8.5%:
that for the measuring site of temperature and pulse, and the
side effect of chemotherapy were for each 73.8%, 68.5%,
73.8%, less than 75%. Regarding the time taken to complete
the test, the participants had a mean time of 21 min 49 s ± 9
min 15.
C. Simulation
According to the checklist analysis results, all 25
participants were able to greet the patient upon entering
room; measure the patient’s pulse, blood pressure,
respiratory rate, and temperature, and then interpret the
measured values; and exit the room after a polite goodbye.
Confirmation of food intake, sleeping condition, excretion
condition, and side effect of chemotherapy was carried out
by 28, 21, 25, and 30 individuals, respectively; only two
participants used information obtained from touching, such

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

as auscultation and palpation. The mean completion time of
the simulation was 10 min 32 s ± 2 min 12. After the
feedback about simulation from the instructor, all
participants understand the needs of auscultation and
palpation and tried to examine by auscultation and palpation
once again.
D. Questionnaire and Interview Results
1) Evaluation of E-learning and Simulation
The results of the questionnaire assessing the e-learning
characteristics are shown in Table 1. The participants chose
item 3 in the scale as their response for all of the
questionnaire items. From the free-response answers, one
participant reported that the number of questions and
difficulty of the e-learning was “exactly the right number
and difficulty.” Another reported that it was “a little too
much to do in my spare time.” Regarding visibility and
operability, which had the most free-response answers,
participants listed various concrete problems, such as
“difficult to see,” “difficult to use on a cellphone,” “froze
mid-answer,” and “difficult to enter sentences on a smart
phone.”
According to the interviews, participants reported the
following on the simulation: “It was interesting, so I would
like to use this method in classes as well”; “Because it was
done in the e-learning, I could imagine it”; and “Because I
knew what was going to be implemented beforehand [owing
to the e-learning], I was able to do it.” One participant
reported, “Although I understood the content, I became
nervous and forgot it [during the simulation].” Additionally,
participants reported contrasting views, such as “I was able
to reconfirm my knowledge with the test” and “It was
unnecessary because I was able to understand from the
feedback during the simulation.”
TABLE I. THE RESULTS OF THE QUESTIONNAIRE ASSESSING
THE E-LEARNING CHARACTERISTICS
Contents
Number of questions
Time taken
Difficulty
Readability
Character size
Screen design
Operability

Mean, Median; Quartile range
2.9, 3; 3-3
2.9, 3; 3-3
2.8, 3; 3-3
3.3, 3; 3-4
3.4, 3; 3-4
3.7, 3; 3-3
3.0, 3; 3-3

2) Influence on Desire to Learn
Table 2 shows an IMMS item. Items 1 “When I first
looked at this lesson, I had the impression that it would be
easy for me” and 9 “There were stories, pictures, or
examples that showed me how this material could be
important to some people” (included in the Confidence and
Relevance subscale), had a low median (3 points).
According to the free-response answers, a number of
participants expressed wanting more developmental content
included in the e-learning. The participants’ comments

93

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

TABLE II. THE RESULTS OF INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS MOTIVATION
SURVEY

Items

2

8
11

12
15
17
20
22

24

28

29
31

6

9

10
16

18

23

26

Contents

ARCS

There was something
interesting at the beginning
of this lesson that got my
attention.
These materials are eyecatching.
The quality of the writing
helped to hold my
attention.
This lesson is so abstract
that it was hard to keep my
attention on it.
The pages of this lesson
look dry and unappealing.
The way the information is
arranged on the pages
helped keep my attention.
This lesson has things that
stimulated my curiosity.
The amount of repetition in
this lesson caused me to
get bored sometimes.
I learned some things that
were surprising or
unexpected.
The variety of reading
passages, exercises,
illustrations, etc., helped
keep my attention on the
lesson.
The style of writing is
boring.
There are so many words
on each page that it is
irritating.
It is clear to me how the
content of this material is
related to things I already
know.
There were stories,
pictures, or examples that
showed me how this
material could be
important to some people.
Completing this lesson
successfully was important
to me.
The content of this material
is relevant to my interests.
There are explanations or
examples of how people
use the knowledge in this
lesson.
The content and style of
writing in this lesson
convey the impression that
its content is worth
knowing.
This lesson was not
relevant to my needs

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

re
ve
rse

Items

Mean,
Median;
Quartile

A

3.5, 4; 4-4

30

A

3.7, 3; 3-5

33

A

3.5, 3; 3-4

1

A

○

4.2, 4; 4-5

A

○

4.5, 5; 5-5

A

3.7, 3; 3-4

A

4.1, 4; 4-5

A

○

4.1, 4; 4-5

A

3.6, 4; 4-4

A

3.6, 4; 4-4

3

4

7

13
19

25
A

○

4.1, 4; 4-5

A

○

4.4, 5; 5-5

R

3.9, 4; 4-4

R

2.9, 3; 3-3

R

4.3, 4; 4-5

R

4.0, 4; 4-4

R

4.1, 4; 4-5

R

3.6, 4; 4-4

34

35

5

14

21

27

32
36
R

○

Contents
because I already knew
most of it.
I could relate the content of
this lesson to things I have
seen, done, or thought
about in my own life.
The content of this lesson
will be useful to me.
When I first looked at this
lesson, I had the
impression that it would be
easy for me.
This material was more
difficult to understand than
I would like for it to be.
After reading the
introductory information, I
felt confident that I knew
what I was supposed to
learn from this lesson.
Many of the pages had so
much information that it
was hard to pick out and
remember the important
points.
As I worked on this lesson,
I was confident that I could
learn the content.
The exercises in this lesson
were too difficult.
After working on this
lesson for awhile, I was
confident that I would be
able to pass a test on it.
I could not really
understand quite a bit of
the material in this lesson.
The good organization of
the content helped me be
confident that I would
learn this material.
Completing the exercises
in this lesson gave me a
satisfying feeling of
accomplish¬ment.
I enjoyed this lesson so
much that I would like to
know more about this
topic.
I really enjoyed studying
this lesson.
The wording of feedback
after the exercises, or of
other comments in this
lesson, helped me feel
rewarded for my effort.
It felt good to successfully
complete this lesson.
It was a pleasure to work
on such a well-designed
lesson.

ARCS

re
ve
rse

Mean,
Median;
Quartile

R

4.1, 4; 4-5

R

4.6, 5; 5-5

C

2.8, 3; 3-3

C

○

C

C

3.4, 3; 3-4

○

C
C

4.1, 4; 4-5

3.3, 3; 3-4
○

C

C

4.1, 4; 4-5

3.3, 3; 3-4

3.3, 3; 3-4

○

C

4.6, 5; 5-5

4.0, 4; 4-4

S

4.0, 4; 4-4

S

3.8, 4; 4-4

S

3.9, 4; 4-4

S

3.9, 4; 4-4

S
S

○

4.0, 4; 4-4
4.1, 4; 4-5

4.2, 4; 4-5

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

94

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

suggested a desire to use the e-learning system in the future,
such as “In practice, I felt like I would be able to use it”; “I
want to do normal exercises as well as e-learning and
simulation”; and “As long as you know how it works, I
think you could practice simulation similar to this with a
classmate.”
IV.

DISCUSSION

A. Effects of Blended Learning
Although simulation is an effective learning method and
typically provides a greater sense of understanding, it often
causes students to experience significant mental strain, thus
making them require learning support. We developed a presimulation e-learning system to provide such support. The
results showed that, after using the e-learning system, all of
the participants performed the greeting, vitals measurement,
and complete physical assessment based on the gathered
measurements, even if it was their first experience with the
simulation. This success can be attributed to participants’
completion of the skill building and mock training exercises
via e-learning system before the simulation. In other words,
the e-learning program enabled them to imagine the content
of the simulation and thus integrate relevant knowledge and
skills into their simulation experience.
However, participants did not completely learn to
perform auscultation and palpation, according to
information obtained from medical interviews [11].
Therefore, the e-learning items related to this content may
need to be modified. Specifically, the e-learning system can
be modified such that, when repeatedly used, items that
have been completely learned are excluded, thereby
enabling users to focus on items that were not completely
learned. Such a modification would allow for the delivery of
deliberate and effective training aligned with the learning
objectives of nurse education, referred to as deliberate
practice [12][13].
Learning self-management has been identified as a key
factor for continued education via e-learning [6]. To succeed
in remote self-learning, participants may need to receive
adequate explanation on the necessity of post-training tests
in acquiring knowledge related to medical interviews,
auscultation, and palpation, which were areas that remained
challenging after the simulation training.
B. Effects of E-learning and Training on Motivation to
Learn
The ARCS model is a method of organizing the factors
that influence motivation to learn [14], described by Suzuki
as follows: “A) First, attention is captured. ‘This looks
interesting—there’s something to this.’ R) Next, one
realizes the relationship to themselves; knowing the learning
task and realizing that ‘it looks rewarding and it is related to
my values.’ Not only is the future value of the task
significant, but also enjoying the learning process is valued.

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

However, even if one finds significance in their learning,
one can lose motivation when one recognizes that there is
low possibility to accomplish the learning goal. C) On the
contrary, if one has successful experiences in the first
learning stages and can associate the experience with the
endeavor, leading to the perception that ‘I can manage it,’
confidence is facilitated. S) If one can feel fulfillment after
looking back on the learning process and its
accomplishment, it then leads to motivation to learn.” In the
present study, the participants recognized e-learning as
“having an important relationship to themselves,” and they
utilized this recognition as motivation to learn. To improve
learners’ confidence, we propose the following strategies: 1)
Share evaluation criteria and allow learners to tackle tasks
with a prediction of their possibility for success in mind; 2)
adjust the difficulty of the system so that they can have a
meaningful and successful experience; and 3) provide
opportunities and feedback that regulate learning, thus
encouraging them to be aware that they can achieve their
goal by themselves [15]. A number of participants
commented that the training could feasibly be implemented
as peer training and skill review. Repetitive practice through
sharing stories with peers and skill review has been shown
to help learners acquire self-confidence [16]. Further
consideration of task difficulty will also facilitate
continuous learning in this context.
C. Determinants of Successful E-learning
As described above, e-learning relies on independent
learning, which means that it has an inherent risk of dropout.
We thus set learning objectives to help foster learning
motivation and created teaching materials relevant to realworld clinical settings. In this study, the item “The content
of this lesson will be useful to me” was rated 4.6, 5; 5-5
point, indicating that blended learning sustained
participants’ motivation. Additionally, the item “I could not
really understand quite a bit of the material in this lesson”
was reverse scored, also totaling 4.6, 5; 5-5 point. The
difficulty of blended learning and acquisition of confidence
through simulation may be factors that influenced their
motivation. In this respect, the structure of the blended
learning needs to be improved such that it can help
participants gain confidence in their ability to perform the
learning exercises and promote their self-learning through
repetitive practice and detailed explanations for items
identified as their weakness.
Operability is another factor that may have influenced
participation. We expected this tendency in designing the
system, and had tested the teaching material on smartphones
prior to the survey. However, our interview results showed
that when smartphones were used, the participants reported
longer working time and poorer operability. This finding
coincides with previous reports that the physical
environment for online learning, such as Internet and
terminal devices, influences compliance with e-learning [17].

95

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

For example, poor video teaching materials can reduce the
motivation to learn [18]. Future research is needed to
investigate additional factors related to operability, the
differential effects of computers and smartphones, and the
effects of the tendency to use smartphones for mobile
learning, which is common among nursing students.
Recently, an interactive digital simulator for problem
solving and clinical reasoning, both of which require
physical assessment skills, was developed in Europe [19].
The digital simulator was developed for medical students
and clinicians and uses virtual patients. Problem solving and
clinical reasoning are needed in clinical nursing practice
[20]. Future studies are needed to develop learning materials
for nurses to acquire these required competencies
immediately.
V. CONCLUSION
The results of the present study demonstrate that the elearning system we developed was partially effective for
improving physical assessment ability like checking vital
signs and information gathering skills. However, our results
show that e-learning is insufficient for augmenting the
ability of auscultation and palpation, suggesting that
teaching materials related to these skills must be improved
using simulation training. Additionally, e-learning helped
participants recognize the relevance of learning content to
their professional practice. In conclusion, it’s necessary to
combine e-learning and simulation to improve physical
assessment ability as blended learning.
The advancement of remote education provides students
with the opportunity to learn anywhere as opposed to
strictly in classrooms. E-learning systems allow individuals
attempting to learn medical practice to learn effectively and
efficiently in their own environment. Thus, we aim to
continue improving the current e-learning system, by
making it more operable, to ensure that it sustains
motivation to learn, as such, encourages continuous learning.

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Part of this research was supported by Grant-in-Aid for
Young Scientists (B), 25862108, from Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science (JSPS), JAPAN.

[17]

REFERENCES

[18]

J. K. Hayden, R. A. Smiley, M. Alexander, S. KardongEdgren, and P. R. Jeffries, “The NCSBN National Simulation
Study: A longitudinal, randomized, controlled study replacing
clinical hours with simulation in prelicensure nursing
education,” J Nurs Regul, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. S1–S64, 2014.
[2] L. Bickley and P. G. Szilagyi, Bates’ guide to physical
examination and history-taking. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2012.
[3] M. Fordis, J. E. King, C. M. Ballantyne, P. H. Jones, K. H.
Schneider, S. J. Spann, et al., “Comparison of the
instructional efficacy of Internet-based CME with live
interactive CME workshops: a randomized controlled trial,”
JAMA, vol. 294, no. 9, pp. 1043–1051, 2005.
[1]

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

[19]
[20]

J. G. Ruiz, M. J. Mintzer, and R. M. Leipzig, “The impact of
e-learning in medical education,” Acad Med, vol. 81, no. 3,
pp. 207–212, 2006.
C. Jones, R. Ramanau, S. Cross, and G. Healing, “Net
generation or Digital Natives: Is there a distinct new
generation entering university?,” Comput Educ, vol. 54, no 3,
pp. 722–732, 2010.
J. Keller and K. Suzuki, “Learner motivation and e-learning
design: A multinationally validated process,” J Educ
Media, vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 229–239, 2004.
J. Daniel, “Making sense of MOOCs: Musings in a maze of
myth, paradox and possibility,” J Interac Media Educ, vol.
2012, no. 3, 2012.
M. Dougiamas and P. Taylor, “Moodle: Using learning
communities to create an open source course management
system,” World Conference on Educational Media and
Technology, vol. 1, pp. 171–178, 2003.
M. S. Yagi, K. Ikegami, Y. Shibata, S. Shiba, and M. Miyoshi,
“The design of the story-based learning materials to imagine
realistic clinical practice using goal-based scenario theory,”
Japan Journal of Health Professional Development, vol. 3, no.
2, pp. 69–76, 2015.
J. M. Keller, Motivational design for learning and
performance: The ARCS model approach. New York City:
Springer Science & Business Media, 2009.
J. H. Barsuk, W. C.McGaghie, E. R.Cohen, K. J.O’Leary, and
D. B. Wayne, “Simulation-based mastery learning reduces
complications during central venous catheter insertion in a
medical intensive care unit,” Crit Care Med, vol. 37, no. 10,
pp. 2697–2701, 2009.
K. A. Ericsson, K. Nandagopal, and R. W. Roring, “Toward a
science of exceptional achievement,” Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences, vol. 1172, no. 1, pp. 199–217, 2009.
M. H. Oermann, S. Kardong-Edgren, T. Odom-Maryon, B. F
Hallmark, D. Hurd, N. Rogers, et al., “Deliberate practice of
motor skills in nursing education: CPR as exemplar,” Nurs
Educ Perspec, vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 311–315, 2011.
J. M. Keller, Motivational design for learning and
performance: The ARCS model approach. New York City:
Springer Science & Business Media, 2009.
K. Suzuki, “On the Framework of Designing and Developing
‘appealing instruction’: The ARCS Motivation Model,” The
Japan Association for Educational Media Study, vol. 1, no. 1,
pp. 50–61, 1995.
K. M. Lundberg, “Promoting self-confidence in clinical
nursing students.” Nurse Educ, vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 86–89, 2008.
C. Power, H. Petrie, V. Sakharov, and D. Swallow, “Virtual
learning environments: another barrier to blended and elearning,” in International Conference on Computers for
Handicapped Persons, Berlin and Heidelberg: Springer, pp.
519–526, 2010.
M. S. Yagi, N. Kumagai, C. Funakoshi, and M. Masuda,
“Development of e-learning material for sophomore nursing
students to simulate clinical practice,” The Association for
Medical Education in Europe, 270, #4JJ16 (126905), 2016.
Body Interact. http://bodyinteract.com/ [retrieved: Feburary,
2017]
P. E. Benner, P. L. Hooper-Kyriakidis, and D. Stannard,
Clinical wisdom and interventions in acute and critical care:
A thinking-in-action approach. New York City: Springer
Publishing Company, pp. 10–11, 2011.

96

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Development of Educational Medical Equipment Capable of
Displaying Abnormal Value
－To Turn Simulated Patient into Real Patient－

Natsuko Miura, Kazuma Takahashi

Takanori Ito

Faculty of Nursing
Iwate Prefectural University
Takizawa, Japan
e-mail: natsuko@iwate-pu.ac.jp, t_kazuma@iwate-pu.ac.jp

Iwate Monozukuri Software Integration Technology
Iwate Prefectural University
Takizawa, Japan
e-mail: itou_t@ipu-office.iwate-pu.ac.jp

Abstract— In order to acquire clinical practice capability such
as nursing, such a learning is required that assumes a situation
similar to clinical setting. Therefore, simulation education has
been increasingly performed by using simulator and simulated
patients. Even though highly functional simulator is capable of
displaying changes of vital signs on a monitor, any educational
device to measure biological information, such as bloodpressure manometer, thermometer and pulse oximeter, has not
been developed yet. As educational medical equipment capable
of intentionally displaying abnormal value has been developed
in the study, we would like to introduce the equipment.

In our university, a skill test of vital signs measurement
for their first year and the situation-based training is
performed for their second year for patient assessment using
simulated patient prior to clinical training. Visiting
simulated patients to measure their vital signs by using the
skill learned in the first year, conditions of patients are
assessed in the training adding information obtained through
conversation with the patients. In their third year, students
acquire an observation skill in the area of adult nursing
science for general condition of patients including their vital
signs after gastrectomy.
In a conventional situation-based training, our university
contrived to present automatic slide show in Power Point for
reproducing fluctuation in addition to display of a card with
written numerical values and verbal suggestion by teachers
(Figure1). However, these efforts had problems to

Keywords-simulation; Physical
Patient; Clinical reasoning.

I.

Assessment;

Simulated

INTRODUCTION

We developed the equipment which could display an
abnormal value intentionally to practice measurement of
vital signs, we would like to report on the results.
Along with a rapid progress of low birth rate and an aging
population as well as advanced medical treatment in Japan,
scope and opportunities for nursing students to practice
nursing techniques by internship at hospital tend to be
limited due to people’s enhanced consciousness for medical
care safety [1]. Amid such situation, a nursing education
based on simulation equipment is going to be disseminated
widely that allows students to repeatedly experience various
practical scenes without impairing patients’ safety and
provides learner-oriented education, and the equipment has
been introduced to our university [2].
In section 2, we reported simulation in the nursing
education, and the problem. In section 3, we explained
equipment for the education that we developed.
II.

SIMULATION EDUCATION IMPLEMENTED IN OUR
UNIVERSITY, AND THE PROBLEM

There are three types of trainings conducted in the
simulation education, i.e., task training for acquiring
techniques, algorithm training like learning of Basic Life
Support, and situation-based training in which various
clinical situations are reproduced [3].

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

Figure 1. Blood-pressure manometer, thermometer and pulse
oximeter, which we put paper on to reproduce an abnormal value.

discourage students’ concentration and suspend actions due
to the situation different from reality.
Education with a highly functional simulator capable of
controlling vital signs, breath sound and heart sound by a
computer has been practiced in areas such as intensive care
[3] and operation room [4].
In addition, simulated patients who have been trained to
play patient-specific sentiment and personality not only for
clinical history and physical findings as much as possible
have been widely used for medical staff education in
addition to co-medical students [3]. The highly functional

97

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

simulator is unable to make conversation, however, it is said
to have limitation to improve communication capability
since a person speaks through a microphone in case of a
scenario that requires conversation [5]. Further, since
normal values are displayed when vital signs are measured
because simulated patients are healthy people it is required
to show abnormal values with a card [6] or verbally at a
designated timing [2].
The problem in such setting is that nursing in a course of
natural flow cannot be reproduced.
III.

DEVELOPMENT OF EDUCATIONAL VITAL SIGN
MEASURING EQUIPMENT

The equipment newly developed this time is possible not
only to set up numerical values arbitrarily but also to add
and subtract any numerical value from setup value in order
to express fluctuation of vital signs (Figure 2). It works in
such a way that a value near to setup value is displayed for
each measuring by reducing the range of the addition and
subtraction and normal value or abnormal value is displayed
by increasing the range.

to be taken for the scenario depending on the purpose of
simulation education.
Even though the procedures mentioned above are
performed of course by examination on paper-patient or
presentation by a card, it is possible to reproduce
circumstance more similar to clinical front by measuring
vital signs while making conversation with simulated
patient. As it is also possible to set up values to be displayed
and time in a more detailed manner depending on contents
of the scenario of simulation education, readiness of
students and capability of teachers, we believe it is useful.
Further, the equipment is capable of sending setup data to a
server by wireless. It is not required to set up each device
since subsequently multiple devices such as blood-pressure
manometer, thermometer and pulse oximeter may
respectively access to a parameter setting server by an
interval of three seconds during waiting. It becomes also
possible to perform simulation with the same content in
multiple booths at the same time.
We believe it is useful because it results in saving the
effort of a person in charge of training preparation. Even
though it is only at prototype stage as of now, we hear such
impressions from teachers who have practiced the
simulation education at our university that they are
interested and want to use it.
In the future, we have planned to clarify the educational
effect of the newly developed equipment for students by
comparing simulation education using the new equipment
with conventional method.
IV.

CONCLUSION

The equipment we developed strengthens the student's
clinical practice ability. Our problem is downsizing.
REFERENCES

Figure 2. Development of Educational Medical Equipment.
[1]

The ability that a student can get with a new equipment;

Ability for assessment of vital signs

Ability for clinical reasoning

Ability to consider for the patients

Ability to cope with abnormal case
In case of simulation of repeated support for patients
presenting with fever, for example, range of adjustment is
set up smaller to show higher value at each measurement of
body temperature. In case of measuring blood pressure of
patients with a complaint of nausea, as value to be displayed
becomes different each time of measurement by setting the
range of adjustment larger, it may be applied to training of
clinical inference.
Further, time required until display may be set up
arbitrarily by seconds. For example, it is possible to
reproduce time required until displaying measured value of
actual and predict types of measurement thermometer with
different measuring style and it may be also possible either to
set up the time for actual value of measuring device to be
displayed or to set up it shorter aiming at reducing the time

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare, “Investigative
Commission report regarding enhancement of nursing basic
education”
http://www.mhlw.go.jp/shingi/2007/04/dl/s0420-13.pdf,
[retrieved: February, 2017]
Y. Endo, N. Miura, H. Chieda, T. Takeda, “A trial of using
simulation in undergraduate nursing education“，Journal of
the Faculty of Nursing, Iwate Prefectural University, 16,
pp.43-46, 2014.
Y. Abe, “Simulation education in medical care”, Journal of
the Japanese Society of Intensive Care Medicine, 23，pp.1320，2016．.
R. Takashiki, K. Abe, C. Saito, T. Horiguchi,” Effect of
simulation education for operation department nurses to cope
with cases of intubation difficulty”, Journal of Japanese
Association for Operating Room Technology, 37 （ 2 ） ，
pp.39-41, 2016．
Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare, “Investigative
Commission report regarding contents and methods of
nursingeducation”,
http://www.mhlw.go.jp/stf/houdou/2r98520000013l0qatt/2r98520000013l4m.pdf, [retrieved: February, 2017]
M. Nogi, “Temperature check simulation to strengthen
thinking ability of new recruits”, Nursing, pp. 88-92, 2013.

98

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Demonstration of The KINECT-Based Auscultation Practice System

Yoshitoshi Murata, Kazuhiro Yoshida

Natsuko Miura

Faculty of Software and Information Science
Iwate Prefectural University
Takizawa, Japan
e-Mail: y-murata@iwate-pu.ac.jp, kyoshida@ipuoffice.iwate-pu.ac.jp

Faculty of Nursing
Iwate Prefectural University
Takizawa, Japan
e-Mail: natsuko@iwate-pu.ac.jp

Abstract— Students in medical and nursing schools must
practice auscultation. Students usually learn disease sounds,
correct points and order for locating a stethoscope on a body in
the practice. Humanoid-type simulators have been widely
introduced to practice auscultation. However, most humanoidtype simulators cannot detect whether a stethoscope is located
on a body, and on which part of body a stethoscope is placed.
Since they are too expensive, the number of them is not enough
for the number of students in a class. We developed a low-cost
and high performance system for the practice of auscultation.
In this system, students themselves play the role of a patient,
instead of a humanoid, and stethoscope locations on the body
are measured with KINECT. Also, appropriate disease sounds
including normal ones can be assigned at some points on the
upper body. Students listen for such sounds, synchronized with
breathing movements, through an earphone or speaker when a
stethoscope is placed on assigned points. We plan to conduct a
demonstration in which participants will practice auscultation
with the system after it is explained to them.

simulator can both show correct locations on a body and
detect whether a stethoscope is placed on correct points
without patches regardless of the change in body size.
In addition, most existing simulators cannot simulate the
timing of breathing or the synchronized forward and
backward movements of the upper body. However, our
simulator can detect these forward and backward movements
of the front body and provide expiration and inspiration
sounds synchronized with those movements.
We have developed a prototype system and evaluated it
experimentally. The results showed that our system could
detect stethoscope placement on a body. Also, our system
could detect changes of the front body in breathing.
Moreover, we found that all students could set up our
system by themselves. The results of a questionnaire for
nursing students and practicing nurses showed that our
proposed system was useful for them to learn auscultation.
We plan to conduct a demonstration in which participants
will practice auscultation with the system after it is explained
to them.

Keywords-simulator;
demonstration.

auscultation;

physical

assessment;

II.
I.

INTRODUCTION

Generally, practicing auscultation is a required subject
for students in medical and nursing schools. Students usually
learn disease sounds, correct points and order for locating a
stethoscope on the body in the practice. We proposed a new
auscultation practice system to learn auscultation techniques
effectively [1]. Humanoid-type simulators [2][3][4] have
been widely introduced into medical and nursing schools.
These humanoid-type simulators are effective to learn
disease sounds. However, it is impossible to detect whether a
stethoscope is actually placed correctly on a mannequin.
Moreover, correct locations vary among patients according
to their body size. Cardionics provides a hybrid simulator in
which a student plays the role of a patient instead of a
mannequin to solve such problems [5]. In this hybrid
simulator, patches are attached on a body to identify correct
attachment points.
In our simulator, students themselves are the practice
subjects instead of a humanoid model, and the location of a
stethoscope can be detected with KINECT, which is a line of
motion sensing input devices made by Microsoft [6]. The
correct locations are normalized with respect to the positions
of both shoulder joints and both hip joints for each student
playing the role of a patient. Therefore, our proposed

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

SYSTEM CONFIGURATION

As a matter of course, the introduction cost is adequate
for the number of students in a nursing school. Among the
nursing skills that students have to learn are the recognition
of different sounds between different kinds of diseases and
the knowledge about placing correct points and order for
locating a stethoscope on a body. In the case of respiratory
auscultation, students have to listen to respiratory sounds for
more than one cycle. Therefore, an auscultation practice
system requires the following issues:
·
Low cost.
·
Simulating real sounds produced due to certain
diseases at different points on the body.
·
Display correct points for locating a stethoscope.
·
Determining whether a stethoscope is located at
specified points.
·
Determining whether a stethoscope remains on a
body for more than one respiratory cycle.
Our practice system is only composed of a PC and a
KINECT device, as shown in Fig. 1. Students, instead of
mannequins, act as patients to decrease system cost. The
stethoscope locations and forward and backward movement
of a body during breathing are measured with KINECT. The

99

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

students can listen for sounds produced due to certain
diseases that are generated by the PC through earphones.
Therefore, a specific stethoscope and patches are not needed.
These also decrease system cost.

In this application, the upper body is divided to five
areas as shown in Fig. 3. Currently eight sounds are
provided. A teacher can assign a sound from the above eight
sounds to each divided area using the sound-assigning
program shown in Fig. 2 (1). Since respiratory sounds are
different for expiration and inspiration, an expiration-sound
file and inspiration-sound file are assigned for expiration
and inspiration using the sound-management program, as
shown in Fig. 2 (2).
When a stethoscope is placed on a body of a person
playing the role of patient, the area on which a stethoscope
is placed is colored to yellow, as shown in Fig. 3. Students
can listen for such sounds, synchronized with breathing
movements, through an earphone or speaker when a
stethoscope is placed on assigned points.

Figure 1. Terminal equipment in our proposed system

III.

APPLICATION

We developed a simple application for a teacher to
explain practicing auscultation for the lungs:
- Sound assigning program: This program assigns a
sound to each area, dividing the upper body into five
areas. (See Fig. 2)
- Auscultation teaching program: This program detects
on which area a stethoscope should be placed, and it
replays a sound assigned to that area. (See Fig. 3)

Figure 3. Operation window of the auscultation teaching program

IV.

DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM

Since we would like many participants to experience
using our simulation system, we plan to demonstrate our
auscultation system by
(1) introducing the system configuration,
(2) showing how to set up the system,
(3) explaining how to operate the system,
(4) allowing participants to practice auscultation.
V.

(1)

Assigning sound

CONCLUSION

We believe that our proposed system is less expensive
and more useful for practicing auscultation than current
humanoid-type simulators. We plan to provide a trial
version of this system at no charge for medical and nursing
schools to experience our system.
REFERENCES
[1]
[2]

[3]

[4]
[5]
(2)

Management of sounds

Figure 2. Operation window to assign sounds to divided body areas

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

[6]

Y. Murata, N. Miura, and Y. Endo, “Proposal for A KINECT-Based
Auscultation Practice System,” in Proc. eTELEMED, 2016, pp. 86-91.
Lung Sound Auscultation Trainer "LSAT", Kyoto Kagaku Co., Ltd.,
https://www.kyotokagaku.com/products/detail02/m81-s.html
[retrieved: January, 2017]
Sakamoto Model Corporation, Sakamoto auscultation simulator,
http://www.sakamoto-model.com/product/emergency/m164/
[retrieved: January, 2017]
Laerdal, SimMan 3, http://www.laerdal.com/us/SimMan3G
[retrieved: January, 2017].
SimScope
WiFi
(The
Hybrid
simulator),
Cardionics
http://www.cardionics.com/simscope [retrieved: January, 2017].
Meet Kinect for Windows, https://developer.microsoft.com/enus/windows/kinect, [retrieved: January, 2017]

100

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

The Use of Dialectical Dialogues in a Personalized Virtual Coach for Obese
Emotional Eaters
A Research Protocol for a field study among target group
Aranka Dol1, Olga Kulyk2, Hugo Velthuijsen1, Lisette van Gemert-Pijnen2, Tatjana van Strien3
1
Institute for Communication, Media & IT, Hanzehogeschool UAS, Groningen
2
Department of Psychology, Health and Technology, University of Twente, Enschede
3
Behavioural Science Institute and Institute for Gender Studies, Radboud University, Nijmegen
3
Department of Health Sciences and the EMGO Institute for Health and Care Research, VU University, Amsterdam
e-mail: 1{a.dol, h.velthuijsen}@pl.hanze.nl, 2{o.a.kulyk, j.vangemert-pijnen}@utwente.nl, 3t.vanstrien@psych.ru.nl
Abstract—There is a growing number of eHealth interventions
aiming at enhancing lifestyle to address obesity. However, the
existing interventions do not take the emotional aspects of
obesity into account. Forty percent of the overweight
population is an emotional eater. Emotional eaters gain weight
because of poor emotion regulation, not just due to bad eating
habits. We aim at developing a personalized virtual coach
‘Denk je zèlf!’ providing support for self-regulation of
emotions for young obese emotional eaters. This paper
presents an eCoaching model and a research study protocol
aiming at the validation of persuasive coaching strategies based
on behavior change techniques. Ultimately, we aim at
designing a personalized eCoaching framework, allowing us to
optimally translate successful behavior change mechanisms
and techniques, such as dialectical strategies, into personalized
persuasive coaching strategies.
Keywords-personalized virtual coach; obesity; emotional
eaters; persuasive technology; eHealth; mHealth; tailoring
messages; coaching strategies.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Obesity has become a major societal problem worldwide
[1]. The main reason for severe overweight is excessive
intake of energy, in relation to the individual needs of a
human body. Obesity is associated with poor eating habits
and/or a sedentary lifestyle. A significant part of the obese
population (40%) overeat due to negative emotions [2].
There is little attention to the personal needs of emotional
eaters when it comes to existing health interventions [3]-[5].
Current face-to-face treatments are focused on restructuring
cognitions and behavior. There is a need for selfmanagement support and personalized coaching to enhance
emotional eaters in recognising and self-regulating their
emotions [6][7].
II.

RELATED WORK

Virtual coaching systems form a broad and vivid research
area [8]-[11]. Since chatbot Eliza was invented by Joseph
Weizenbaum [12], many new studies have emerged. Over
the last years, virtual coaches have been developed for
behavior change support, healthy lifestyle, and physical
activity support [13]-[17]. Existing virtual coach applications

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

lack systematic evaluation of coaching strategies and usually
function as (tele-)monitoring systems, limited to giving
general feedback to the user on achieved goals and/or
accomplished (online) assignments [18].
This paper presents an eCoaching model and the research
protocol and design rationale for evaluation of persuasive
coaching strategies for emotional eaters based on the
Dialectical Behavior Therapy and Persuasive System Design
model [19].
This research study is a continuation of the previous
study on the design and evaluation of a personalized virtual
coach for emotional eaters [7]. The long-term goal of the
virtual coach is to raise awareness of emotional eaters on
their own emotions, and to enhance a positive change of
attitude towards accepting the negative emotions they
experience.
In the next paragraphs in Section II, we first discuss the
theoretical underpinnings of dialectical behavior therapy,
persuasive coaching strategies and Ecological Momentary
Assessments. Next, we elaborate on the design rationale of a
personalized virtual coach. We then present the design of the
research protocol in Section III. We finish this paper in
Section IV with a discussion on the expected contributions of
this research study, conclusion, and future work.
A. Dialectical Strategies
Dialectical Behavior Therapy (DBT) focuses on getting
more control over one’s own emotions by reinforcing skills
in mindfulness, emotion regulation, and stress tolerance [37].
Emotion regulation is about recognizing and acknowledging
emotions and accepting the fact that they come and go. The
behavior change strategies within DBT are based on
validation and dialectics [20]. Dialectics changes the users’
attitude and behavior by creating incongruence between an
attitude and behavior since stimuli or the given information
contradict with each other. We believe that the integration of
the dialectical behavior change strategies and persuasive
features (PSD model) will enhance the personalization of the
virtual coach for emotional eaters.
Emotional eaters deal with an invalidating daily life
environment. DBT offers powerful “mechanisms of change”
with a well-balanced mix of being validated in their
perception of negative emotions and a confrontation

101

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

(dialectical) with a practical focus on changing problem
behavior. Our eCoaching model translates these mechanisms
into persuasive dialogues and persuasive features.
Validation strategies suggest responding in an empathic
way, by hearing another person’s point of view and
accepting them (and their emotions) without judging.
Dialectical strategies focus on confronting the user with a
practical focus on changing problem behavior; the key is in
finding a balance between acceptance of strong feelings and
emotions and change by adapting feelings and emotions
using emotion regulation and interpersonal effectiveness.
B. Persuasive Technology
Persuasive Technology (PT) is a significant predictor for
adherence and offers strategies to reinforce the validation –
and dialectical strategies’ influence on attitudes and
behaviors. We believe that PT can assist emotional eaters in
attitude change and acceptance of their own emotions. It is
essential to identify the intended outcome or change of the
intervention, prior to determining the design principles and
coaching strategies that would positively contribute to the
persuasiveness in any way. We chose Persuasive Systems
Design (PSD) model [19] for translating behavior change
techniques from DBT into persuasive coaching strategies,
since PSD focuses on persuasion context and easily
implementable persuasive design features.
C. Ecological Momentary Assessments
Ecological Momentary Assessment (EMA) is applied to
systematically collect data about daily experience and
feelings of the users, as well as the context of use, for
instance, through a user-friendly smartphone application.
Experience sampling is widely used in daily psychiatry
practice [21]-[22], nowadays allowing to real-time measure
and record encountered feelings and emotions through
mHealth applications.
D. Design rationale for the personalized virtual coach
‘Denk je zèlf!’
The virtual coach ‘Denk je zèlf!’ (Dutch for ‘Develop a
wise mind and counsel yourself’) is an interactive and selflearning persuasive system that coaches in attitude and/or
long-term behavior change by providing real-time
personalized support [7]. Based on the context (e.g.,
location), emotional state of the user, and natural language
processing, the virtual coach application enables tailoring of
the real-time feedback to the individual user. The coach
application communicates with the user over a chat timeline
and provides personal feedback based on persuasive
coaching strategies, originated from validation and
dialectical strategies of DBT and persuasive features of the
Persuasive System Design model [19].
The open-source natural language parser, Alpino [23] is
self-learning, able to recognize and understand sentences that
contain emotional words or phrases. The emotion-labeled
words will be divided over the basic 6 emotions [24].
The virtual coach system consists of four educational
modules on intake and commitment, mindfulness, emotion
regulation and stress tolerance. The user is guided to set a

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

personal profile, and set preferred moments for daily
reminders via a text message. Users are encouraged to keep
track of the moments they are experiencing cravings or
giving in to a binge, and what emotions they are
experiencing at those moments. The coaching system will be
designed for an Android smartphone platform.
III.

APPROACH AND METHODS

A. Research protocol
For the purpose of this two week field research study, we
design a mockup version of the virtual coach in order to
evaluate validating and dialectical strategies with the target
users.
This research study aims at answering the following
research questions: “Which coaching strategies do users with
a specific type of emotional eating behavior benefit most
from while consulting their personalized virtual coach?;
“Which coaching strategies are optimal for which
emotions?” and “Which coaching approach do users prefer
in which context, e.g., time of the day, before/after a
craving?”
B. Target group and participants
We focus on emotional eaters (N=30), age 18-45 years,
both women and men. Participants will be recruited via a
Dutch franchise organization of dietitian nutritionists, who
are specialized in treating emotional eating behaviors.
C. Procedures
First, a pilot study will be conducted with 2-3
participants to validate the study protocol and to test the
virtual coach prototype application. Participants are ensured
in the anonymity of their participation. Data collected during
this research study will be analyzed for research purposes
only. The data will be stored anonymously and safely on a
local server, using the encrypted secure network connection
(https) only the main researchers have access to.
D. Questionnaires and measures
Participants will be asked to fill out the demographics
data ((nick) name, age, gender, weight, length, place of
residence) and three questionnaires on eating behaviour,
personality and quality of life:
 the Dutch Eating Behavior Questionnaire
(DEBQ) [25]
 Five Factor Personality Inventory (FFPI) [26]
 Positive and Negative Affect Scales (PANAS)
[27].
E. Ecological Momentary Assessments
During the whole time span of the research study, namely
14 days, participants will be reminded by a text message
(SMS) on a daily basis to visit the mobile application and
answer two questions: “Did you have cravings / have a binge
today?’ and “How do you feel at the moment?” The answers
to these questions will allow us to find out what the optimal
coaching moments might be.

102

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

F. Behavioral Chain Analysis
In the behavioral chain analysis (diary), participants will
be asked to fill in what happened before they gave in to a
binge, and which emotions/feelings they were experiencing.
G. Dialectical Dialogues
Participants will be presented with short dialogues
(validating or dialectical) and they will be asked to select the
ones they prefer, according to their (current) emotions. To
trigger a certain emotion (e.g., the affect that fits best with
the chosen coaching strategy), a set of pictures will be shown
to the user that evoke respectively sadness, anger, fear, and
disgust [28]. Then, a user will be asked to select one or more
emotions they are experiencing at the moment they saw the
picture(s). After that, dialogues that fit with the dominating
emotion, will be presented to the user. The questions in the
dialogues are labeled with one of the 4 basic negative
emotions (anger, sadness, fear, disgust) and the answers are
presented in accordance with one of the validating and/or
dialectical (dissonant) strategies.
H. Post-interviews
Participants will be invited to participate in a semistructured post-interview to discuss their experiences with
the presented dialogues and their motivation for picking
specific answers. Post-interviews will be audio recorded with
permission of participants.
IV.

DISCUSSION, CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

This article presents the research study design to evaluate
and validate the coaching strategies that emotional eaters
prefer in a personalized virtual coach, based on their
emotional state and context. The potential contribution of
this research is divided into two fields.
First, a multidisciplinary holistic user centered design
approach provides valuable insights into preferred persuasive
coaching strategies of the target users for developing a
meaningful and persuasive virtual coaching system for selfmanaging emotions. One of the main goals of the
personalized virtual coach for emotional eaters is to raise
awareness of their own emotions and to enhance a positive
change of attitude towards accepting the negative emotions
they experience daily. Ultimately, enhancing emotion
regulation is expected to lead to a better weight management
of emotional eaters.
Second, it will gain more insights into applying the
behavior change techniques from health psychology and
persuasive technology for virtual coaching application. Next
step is to focus on developing virtual coaching systems that
actually coach the user by analyzing real-time behavior and
providing real-time personalized timely feedback based on
user profile, events and context. Coaching based applications
can provide self-management support for patients at times
when a therapist is not available, or in the case that the user
needs personalized anonymous support that is always within
reach, which is the case for emotional eaters who often
experience feelings of shame.

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

To conclude, this study makes two main contributions:
(1) gaining more insights into: a) what coaching strategies
emotional eaters prefer; b) what triggers emotional eaters to
(over)eat and at what times of the day the craving usually
occur; c) emotional states at the moments of experiencing
food cravings and giving into binges, and (2) we aim at
developing a general personalized eCoaching framework,
enabling the optimal translation of successful behavior
change techniques, such as dialectical strategies, into
persuasive coaching strategies implementable for broader
target groups.
REFERENCES
[1]

World Health Organisation WHO | Obesity and Overweight. January
(2015)
Available
at:
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs311/en/
[retrieved:
January 31, 2017]
[2] T. Van Strien, C.P. Herman, and M.W. Verheijden, “Eating style,
overeating and weight gain. A prospective 2-year follow-up study in a
representative Dutch sample,” Appetite, 12;59(3), pp. 782-789, 2012.
[3] J. Harvey-Berino et al. “Internet delivered behavioral obesity
treatment,” Prev Med, 08;51(2), pp. 123-128, 2010.
[4] M.J. Hutchesson et al. “eHealth interventions for the prevention and
treatment of overweight and obesity in adults: a systematic review
with meta-analysis,” Obesity Reviews, 16, 5, pp. 376-392, 2015.
[5] G.M. Manzoni, F. Pagnini, S. Corti, E. Molinari, and G. Castelnuovo,
“Internet-based behavioral interventions for obesity: An updated
systematic review,” Clinical Practice and Epidemiology in Mental
Health, 7, pp. 19-28, 2011.
[6] M.M. Linehan, “Skills training manual for treating borderline
personality disorder,” New York, NY US: Guilford Press, 1993.
[7] A. Dol, O.A. Kulyk, H. Velthuijsen, J.E.W.C. van Gemert-Pijnen,
and T. van Strien, “Developing a Personalised Virtual Coach ‘Denk je
zèlf!’ for Emotional Eaters through the Design of Emotion-enriched
Personas,” International Journal On Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8,
3&4, 2016. accepted for publication
[8] H. Geissler, M. Hasenbein, S. Kanatouri, and R. Wegener, “ECoaching: Conceptual and Empirical Findings of a Virtual Coaching
Programme International,” Journal of Evidence Based Coaching and
Mentoring. Vol 12 (2), pp. 165 – 187, 2014.
[9] S. Kelders, O.A. Kulyk, L. van Gemert-Pijnen, and H. OinasKukkonen, “Selecting effective persuasive strategies in behavior
change support systems,” In: Third International Workshop on
Behavior Change Support Systems (BCSS 2015), In conjunction with
PERSUASIVE 2015, June 3-5, Chicago, USA, 1 – 6, 2015.
[10] N. Beerlage-de Jong, A. Eikelenboom-Boskamp, A. Voss, R.
Sanderman, and J. van Gemert-Pijnen, “Combining User-Centered
Design with the Persuasive Systems Design Model; The Development
Process of a Web-Based Registration and Monitoring System for
Healthcare-Associated Infections in Nursing Homes,” Int. Journal on
Advances in Life Sciences, 6, pp. 262-271, 2014.
[11] O.A. Kulyk, C. den Daas, S. David, and L. van Gemert-Pijnen, “How
Persuasive are Serious Games, Social Media and mHealth
Technologies for Vulnerable Young Adults? Design Factors for
Health Behavior and Lifestyle Change Support: Sexual Health Case,”
In: Proc. of the 3d Int. Workshop on Behavior Change Support
Systems (BCSS 2015). In conjunction with PERSUASIVE 2015,
June 3-5, Chicago, USA, 2015.
[12] J. Weizenbaum, “ELIZA--A Computer Program For the Study of
Natural Language Communication Between Man and Machine,”
Communications of the ACM. Volume 9, Number 1, pp. 36-35, 1966.
[13] T.W. Bickmore, D. Schulman, and C. Sidner, “Automated
interventions for multiple health behaviors using conversational
agents,” Patient education and counseling 92(2), pp. 142-148, 2013.

103

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[14] O.A. Kulyk, H.J.A. op den Akker, R. Klaassen, and J.E.W.C. van
Gemert-Pijnen, “Personalized Virtual Coaching for Lifestyle Support:
Principles for Design and Evaluation,” International Journal on
Advances in Life Sciences, 6;3&4, pp. 300-309, 2014.
[15] A. Van Wissen, C. Vinkers, and A. van Halteren, “Developing a
Virtual Coach for Chronic Patients: A User Study on the Impact of
Similarity, Familiarity and Realism,” Proceedings 11th International
Conference, PERSUASIVE 2016 Salzburg, Austria, April 5–7, 2016.
[16] E. Hudlicka, “Virtual training and coaching of health behavior:
Example from mindfulness meditation training,” Patient Education
and Counseling. 92, pp. 160–166, 2013.
[17] R.J. Beun, et al., “Improving Adherence in Automated e-Coaching. A
case from Insomnia Therapy,” Proceedings 11th International
Conference, PERSUASIVE 2016 Salzburg, Austria, April 5–7, 2016.
[18] A. Lentferink et al., “Self-tracking and Persuasive eCoaching in
Healthy Lifestyle Interventions: Work-in-progress Scoping Review of
Key Components,” Proceedings of the Fourth Int. Workshop on
Behavior Change Support Systems (BCSS16), co-located with the
11th Int. Conference PERSUASIVE 2016, Salzburg, Austria, April 5,
pp. 15-35, 2016.
[19] H. Oinas-Kukkonen, and M. Harjumaa, “Persuasive Systems Design:
Key Issues, Process Model, and System Features. Communications of
the Association for Information Systems,” 24(1), 28, pp. 485-500,
2009.
[20] T.R. Lynch, A.L. Chapman, M.Z. Rosenthal, J.R. Kuo, and M.M.
Linehan, “Mechanisms of change in dialectical behavior therapy:
Theoretical and empirical observations,” J Clin Psychol. 04;62(4), pp.
459-480, 2006.

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

[21] S. Shiffman, A.A., Stone, and M.R. Hufford, “Ecological momentary
assessment,” Annu Rev Clin Psychol, 4:1–3.6, 2008.
[22] I. Myin-Germeys et al., ”Experience sampling research in
psychopathology: opening the black box of daily life,” Psychological
Medicine, 39, pp. 1533-1547, 2009.
[23] “PIONIER Project,” University of Groningen, The Netherlands.
Available at: http://www.let.rug.nl/vannoord/alp/Alpino/ [retrieved:
January 31, 2017].
[24] P. Ekman, “An argument for basic emotions,” Cognition and
Emotion, 6(3-4), pp. 169-200, 1992.
[25] T. Van Strien, J.E.R. Frijters, G.P.A. Bergers, and P.B. Defares, ”The
Dutch Eating Behavior Questionnaire (DEBQ) for Assessment of
Restrained, Emotional, and External Eating Behavior,” International
Journal of Eating Disorders, 5(2), pp. 295-315, 1986.
[26] A.A. Hendriks, K.B. Hofstee, and B. de Raad, “The Five-Factor
Personality Inventory (FFPI),” Personality and Individual
Differences, 27 (2): pp. 307-325, 1999.
[27] D. Watson, L.A. Clark, and A. Tellegen, “Development and
validation of brief measures of positive and negative affect: The
PANAS scales,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, Vol
54(6), pp. 1063-1070, 1988.
[28] K.S. Quigley, K.A. Lindquist, and L.F. Barrett, “Inducing and
measuring emotion: Tips, tricks, and secrets,” Chapter in H. T. Reis
and C. M. Judd (Eds.) Handbook of Research Methods in Social and
Personality Psychology, New York, Cambridge University Press, pp.
220-250,
2013.

104

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Toward a Generic Personalized Virtual Coach for Self-management:
a Proposal for an Architecture

Johan Blok, Aranka Dol, Talko Dijkhuis
School for Communication, Media & IT
Hanze University of Applied Sciences
The Netherlands, Groningen
e-mail: j.blok@pl.hanze.nl, a.dol@pl.hanze.nl, t.b.dijkhuis@pl.hanze.nl
Abstract—The shift toward prevention and self-management in
health hinges upon a massive realization of behavior change,
which involves the use of virtual coaches. Increasing availability
of data from mobile devices and techniques for real time analysis
provide new opportunities for personalizing virtual coaches. We
propose an architecture that takes advantage of those developments. We identify the required knowledge and methods to
develop a flexible ecosystem for rapid prototyping of personalized
virtual coaches.
Keywords–virtual coach; personalization; coaching strategy;
data science; model based software development.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Self-management is widely seen as a viable contribution
to sustainable health-care as it allows to prevent health problems. Virtual coaches are important means to support selfmanagement in order to maintain and increase health and wellbeing.
The wide availability of wearables and new techniques
of data science to deal with big data provide many new
opportunities for the persuasive design of virtual coaches [1].
The variety in health related data is increasing. While motion
trackers have become common, other wearables are becoming
available, such as stress sensors. Yet, many applications are
still at a stage in which the data are simply presented as
graphs. Mostly, data are merely used as input to a monitoring
tool rather than as input for coaching strategies, let alone
that the variety of data is combined in order to personalize
the coaching strategy. While van Gemert-Pijnen et. al. and
Siewiorek et. al. identify these opportunities [1][2], we propose
an architecture for integrating big data in virtual coaches. The
prototype described by Blaauw et al. combines the execution of
ecological momentary assessments (EMA) with the collection
of data from wearables [3]. In our proposal, we embed those
two elements within a coaching strategy. Additionally, we
enrich the notion of EMA by allowing for automatic execuction
and personalization of EMAs. Albaina et al. illustrate the
design process of a persuasive virtual coach for the very
specific purpose of motivating elderly people to walk by using
a pedometer and goalsetting [4].
This paper proposes an architecture for a generic personalized virtual coach. Section 1 introduces the main fields of
knowledge that are required for developing a personalized
virtual coach. Subsequently, we propose an architecture integrating knowledge of these disciplines. Section 3 elaborates
on the required computer science techniques. The next section
shortly describes the kind of process management that is

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

required in order to take the concept of virtual coaching a
step further. A discussion of future work finishes this paper.
II. M ETHODOLOGY
We define a virtual coach as a computational system that
assists the user, either as stand in or merely as supplementary
to a human coach, to support behavior that is desired by
the user to improve health or well-being. This definition is
wider than the definition of eCoaching by Lentferink [5],
even if it is narrowed down with the adjective ’personalized’
as defined below. Contrary to Lentferink’s definition, which
limits eCoaching to goalsetting, our definition is agnostic to
the nature of the coaching strategy. As a result, we are able to
distinguish between the generic nature of the virtual coach and
a wide range of coaching strategies. Although the architecture
as such does not exclude a wider application, it is developed
within the context of eHealth. The intended applications range
from the treatment of emotional eaters [6][7] to support for
maintaining the social network by elderly people. As such, the
virtual coach implements persuasive technology that attempts
to influence the behavior of its users.
According to the behavior model of Fogg, behavior is most
likely to be influenced when the motivation is high and the
triggers to act are easy to execute [8]. Given the intrinsic difficulties of achieving enduring behavior change, our definition
deliberately limits the virtual coach to changes that are desired
by the user. According to Fogg’s behavior model, triggers
become easy to execute when they are adapted to the context of
the user. Fogg’s characterization of triggers straightforwardly
translates into a crucial requirement for the virtual coach,
namely that it must personalize its feedback to the user as
well as the coaching strategies on which this feedback relies.
A particular coaching strategy, or a different focus within a
coaching strategy, might be more effective, depending on the
dispositions, abilities, preferences, and lifestyle of the user.
The architecture proposed in the following section is based
on the integration of three disciplines. The first one belongs to
the therapeutical application of behavioural sciences, sociology
or psychology, or a mix of them, depending on the nature of the
intervention for which one implements the virtual coach. They
provide an evidence based coaching strategy. For example,
if an instantiation of the virtual coach needs to support the
development of learning abilities of children, the coaching
strategy will stem from theories about metacognition and the
manner in which capabilities can be improved. In the case of
emotional eaters, which comprises our first application of the
virtual coach, the coaching strategy stems from existing face-

105

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

to-face therapies [9].
The second discipline is that of data science. The wide
spread use of mobile devices and recent developments in the
field of big data and predictive analytics allows to achieve the
required personalization by gathering, analyzing, and interpreting personal data. Analysis, both on the level of personal data
(n=1) and of aggregated data, provides information to guide
the coaching strategy in adapting its triggers to the specific circumstances of the individual user. Most importantly, streaming
data, predictive analysis, and realtime data processing provide
novel opportunities to achieve an appropriate timing of the
triggers, which is key in the success of persuasive designs [8].
Finally, the third discipline comprises a subfield of software engineering called model driven software development
(MDSD). The application of domain models, especially in the
form of domain specific languages (DSL), entails the development of abstractions that capture the crucial elements of a
domain, in our case coaching strategies [10]. For the purpose
of the virtual coach, a DSL must be designed that allows for an
straightforward implementation of coaching strategies. Such an
implementation consists of a translation of (parts of) a coaching strategy into rules suitable for a computational system.
The virtual coach executes these rules to provide feedback to
the user depending on the outcomes of the analysis of data.
Since there are many ways in which even a single coaching
strategy can be implemented, considerable exploration and
research must be carried out into the most effective ways of
implementing coaching strategies. The application of MDSD
ensures that the rules of a coaching strategy can be changed
easily.
III. A RCHITECTURE
We propose to combine a health data platform (HDP) with
a platform for the implementation of coaching strategies (CSP)
in order to establish an ecosystem for personalized virtual
coaches (see Fig. 1).
A. Health Data Platform
One of the most important aspects of the required personalization of the triggers of a coaching strategy consists in
the trigger’s timing [8]. The real time analysis of personal
data streams as well as the real time self-evaluation of the
virtual coach itself provides new opportunities to establish an
appropriate timing of the triggers.
The HDP employs techniques of data science to gather,
store, query, analyze, classify, and predict health and lifestyle
related data. We distinguish between direct and indirect data
streams. The former stem from mobile devices, while the latter
consist of data that is generated by the coaching strategy itself.
The indirect data streams allow the virtual coach to consult the
coaching history and adapt itself accordingly, for example to
avoid coaching moves that have failed in the past.
B. Coaching Strategy Platform
The other part (CSP) implements the coaching strategy and
consists of the following parts:
• user interaction;
• data processing unit to combine data generated by user
interaction with the output of the health data platform;
• rule engine to provide the user with feedback by
personalizing scheme’s.
First of all, feedback may consist of advice to take educational
modules to improve skills as required by the coaching strategy.

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

It may also consist of the suggestion to set a certain goal. When
accepted by the user, progress will be measured and visualized
in such a way that it motivates the user to achieve this goal.
A third important type of feedback consists of an EMA.
EMAs are often used in eHealth related research. They
provide a convenient way to obtain structured real time information about the behavior and experiences of the user [11][12].
EMAs are used for research purposes as well as treatment. We
propose a way of using EMAs within the virtual coach with
two novel aspects:
• automatic execution;
• personalization.
Depending on the specific state of the individual, the coaching
strategy might involve an EMA at certain stages of the coaching. Schematized EMAs can be used to personalize ecological
momentary interventions, or EMIs. Coaching rules enable the
automatic execution of EMIs that are tailored to individual
situations.
Let us take a simple example to illustrate how this global
architecture supports the implementation of a virtual coach.
Suppose a wearable is used for tracking the movements of
users. Let us take as a very simple coaching strategy that the
virtual coach must be able to support existing good habits.
Pattern detection and predictive analytics learns for example
that a particular user A is usually running on each Friday
morning. Let us assume that the user has entered his holidays
via the user interface or that the virtual coach has access to this
information by other means. and that he spends his Saturdays
such that it is no option to improve movements. This extremely
simplified coaching strategy can be implemented in the rule
engine as follows:
if running is predicted within 5 minutes,
remind the user unless he has a holiday
The user will receive notice in accordance with her or his
preferences (SMS, whatsapp, etc.). An improved version might
take into account the weather and only remind the user when
it has stopped raining.
IV. C OMPUTER S CIENCE T ECHNIQUES
This section identifies the required techniques of the most
innovative aspects of the proposed architecture.
A. Data Science
Widely available mobile devices provide diverse data
streams that are useful for understanding, and possibly predicting, the behavior of the user. The nature of the virtual
coach requires the analysis of these data streams to be automated. Patterns, features, and anomalies need to be discovered
automatically (knowledge discovery). Knowledge discovery
requires:
• the automation of the data analysis process;
• the handling of Big Data in combination with Analytics.
The automation of data analysis involves the preparation,
transformation, and modeling of data in order to become in
the position to discover ’knowledge’, that is, useful information
[13]. The diversity, realtime, and streaming nature of the data
impose Big Data aspects [14] on the automation of data
analysis [15]. Accordingly, the health data platform requires
the latest techniques and frameworks to implement the storage
and real time analysis of data streams, such as Apache Storm.

106

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Coaching Strategy Platform

Data
Storage
Lifestyle & Health Data Platform
Analysis
Clustered
Big Data
Storage
Time
Series

Big Data
Analysis
(Predictive,
Change,
Classification,
…)

Personalized
Feedback
(Advice,
EMA,
Goal)

Collect
Compare
Filter
Summarize
Coaching
Feedback
Rules

Query Engine
(MapReduce)

Feedback/EMA
Templates

LOG
BOOK

Figure 1. Architecture Personalized Virtual Coach

B. Model Driven Software Engineering
The implementation of a coaching strategy requires at
least some techniques that are developed under the label of
artificial intelligence (AI). A common distinction between two
approaches in AI is that between rule based expert systems
and data based machine learning systems. Currently the latter
is quite popular, because of success in applying this approach
to previously unsuccessful cases, such as machine translation
and computer vision. To a large extent, this success is the result
of the availability of a lot of data of sufficient quality, such as
labeled images for computer vision.
Unfortunately, in the case of coaching strategies, this data is
hardly available (or not in the language of the intended users)
and is not likely to become available in the foreseeable future.
Moreover, experts on coaching strategies aim at improvements,
which requires a conceptualization of psychological and/or
social processes. In the case of machine learning, however,
correctly labeled data is used to produce rules for computation
indirectly. These automatically produced rules not only remain
implicit, but also remain almost incomprehensible for human
cognition. Thus, a machine learning solution to the coaching
strategy as a whole tends to obfuscate an understanding of
these processes, which is precisely what domain experts aim

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

to unravel. Although machine learning is invaluable to analyze
the data streams, and can be used in several other parts, such
as natural language processing, we do not regard it as the
first choice for implementing the coaching strategy as a whole.
Nevertheless, once sufficient virtual coaches, using sufficiently
rich data sets, have operated for some time, their data might
be useful to train machine learning modules to improve the
virtual coaches. Currently, however, we are not yet at this
stage, but have to start by implementing coaching strategies
as understood by domain experts.
The field of MDSD provides convenient means, such as
the concept of a DSL, to implement a rule based system. Such
a DSL based system allows to formulate the coaching strategy
in terms that are close to the coaching domain. In the case
of dialectical behavior therapy for emotional eaters, a simple
example of such a rule could be [9]:
if Anger or Fear dominates
follow Dialectical Coaching Strategy
Obviously, such a rule presupposes several software modules,
such as modules that allow to determine the dominating
emotions, for example by means of EMAs, a stress sensor,
or the analysis of expressions in natural language. The DSL

107

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

provides an abstraction level that does not require knowledge
about the way these software modules and the analysis of data
are realized.

[9]

V. D EVELOPMENT PROCESS
Nowadays, agile approaches dominate the development of
software. These approaches ensure a crucial role for all stakeholders at each stage of the development. An agile approach,
especially in the form of scrum, is particularly suitable for a development process that requires the integration of quite diverse
disciplines. By means of an, preferably daily, participation in
the scrum process, the expert on coaching strategies is immediately confronted with the the (im)possibilities of engineering
techniques Conversely, the engineers get immediate feedback
on their interpretation of the coaching strategy. In addition, the
agile approach prepares the virtual coach for adoption by users
and the healthcare sector [16].

[10]

VI. C ONCLUSION
We have identified how knowledge of diverse disciplines
should be integrated, and proposed an architecture for a generic
personalized virtual coach that utilizes recent developments in
wearables and data science. Focusing on the implementation
of the coaching strategy required by the treatment of emotional
eaters, several software modules for both the HDP and CSP
are currently under development. Future work will consist of
the integration of the software modules to show the viability of
our architecture, including the design of an appropriate DSL
for implementing coaching strategies. Planned expansions to
other coaching cases will warrant and demonstrate the generic
nature of our solution.
[1]

[2]
[3]

[4]
[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[11]
[12]

[13]
[14]

[15]
[16]

A. Dol, “Translating dialectic dialogues into persuasive
coaching strategies for personalized virtual coach: A
research protocol for emotional eaters case study,” forthcoming.
M. Voelter, DSL engineering: Designing, implementing
and using domain-specific languages. CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform, 2013, 558 pp.
S. Shiffman, A. A. Stone, and M. R. Hufford, “Ecological momentary assessment,” Annual Review of Clinical
Psychology, vol. 4, pp. 1–32, 2008.
I. Myin-Germeys, M. Oorschot, D. Collip, J. Lataster, P.
Delespaul, and J. v. Os, “Experience sampling research
in psychopathology: Opening the black box of daily
life,” Psychological Medicine, vol. 39, no. 9, pp. 1533–
47, 2009.
J. Shyr and D. Spisic, “Automated data analysis,” Wiley
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Computational Statistics, vol.
6, no. 5, pp. 359–366, 2014.
A. Gandomi and M. Haider, “Beyond the hype: Big data
concepts, methods, and analytics,” International Journal
of Information Management, vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 137–144,
2015.
A. Labrinidis and H. V. Jagadish, Proceedings of the
VLDB Endowment, vol. 5, no. 12, pp. 2032–2033, 2012.
J. Baljé, A. Carter, and H. Velthuijsen, “Agile development as a change management approach in healthcare
innovation projects,” 2015.

R EFERENCES
L. V. Gemert-Pijnen, F. Sieverink, L. Siemons, and
A. Braakman-Jansen, “Big data for personalized and
persuasive coaching via self-monitoring technology,”
2016.
D. Siewiorek, A. Smailagic, and A. Dey, “Architecture
and applications of virtual coaches,” Proceedings of the
IEEE, vol. 100, no. 8, pp. 2472–2488, 2012.
F. J. Blaauw et al., “Let’s get physiqual - an intuitive and
generic method to combine sensor technology with ecological momentary assessments,” Journal of Biomedical
Informatics, vol. 63, pp. 141–149, 2016.
I. M. Albaina, T. Visser, C. v. d. Mast, and M. H. Vastenburg, “Flowie: A persuasive virtual coach to motivate
elderly individuals to walk,” pp. 1–7, 2009.
A. Lentferink et al., “Self-tracking and persuasive
eCoaching in healthy lifestyle interventions: Work-inprogress scoping review of key components,” pp. 15–35,
Apr. 5, 2016.
A. Dol, O. Kulyk, H. Velthuijsen, L. V. GemertPijnen, and T. V. Strien, “Denk je zèlf! developing a
personalised virtual coach for emotional eaters using
personas,” pp. 42–47, 2016.
——, “Developing a personalised virtual coach ’denk
je zèlf!’ for emotional eaters through the design of
emotion-enriched personas,” International Journal On
Advances in Life Sciences, vol. 8, no. 3 & 4, 2016,
accepted.
B. Fogg, “A behavior model for persuasive design,”
Persuasive ’09, 40:1–40:7, 2009.

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

108

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Prediction of Running Injuries from Training Load:
a Machine Learning Approach.

Talko Dijkhuis1,3 , Ruby Otter2,4 , Hugo Velthuijsen1 and Koen Lemmink4
Hanze University of Applied Sciences,Institute for Communication, Media & IT, Groningen, The Netherlands
2
Hanze University of Applied Sciences,Institute of Sport Studies, Groningen, The Netherlands
3
University of Groningen, Johann Bernoulli Institute for Mathematics and Computer Science, Groningen, The Netherlands
4
University of Groningen, Center for Human Movement Sciences, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands
1
{t.b.dijkhuis, t.a.otter, h.velthuijsen}@pl.hanze.nl
4
{k.a.p.m.lemmink}@rug.nl
1

Abstract—The prediction of the running injuries based on selfreported training data on load is difficult. At present, coaches and
researchers have no validated system to predict if a runner has
an increased risk of injuries. We aim to develop an algorithm
to predict the increase of the risk of a runner to sustain an
injury. As a first step Self-reported data on training parameters
and injuries from high-level runners (duration=37 weeks, n=23,
male=16, female=7) were used to identify the most predictive
variables for injuries, and train a machine learning tree algorithm
to predict an injury. The model was validated by splitting the data
in training and a test set. The 10 most important variables were
identified from 85 possible variables using the Random Forest
algorithm. To predict at an earliest stage, so the runner or the
coach is able to intervene, the variables were classified by time to
build tree algorithms up to 7 weeks before the occurrence of an
injury. By building machine learning algorithms using existing
self-reported training data can enable prospective identification
of high-level runners who are likely to develop an injury. Only
the established prediction model needs to be verified as correct.
Keywords–Human Performance; Machine Learning; Predictive
Analysis; Load; Injuries; Monitoring; Endurance Athletes

I.

I NTRODUCTION

In the context of the project ’Groningen Monitoring Athletic Performance Study’(MAPS) [1] two years of data was
gathered about load, and tests on the performance of competitive athletes. The investigation into the factors that influence
performance and injury risk of athletes lead to more insight.
The effect of a change in load on injuries is difficult to predict.
The knowledge on the relationship between load and the effect
on injuries might be improved by matching self-reported training data and injury data using machine learning techniques. At
present, Human Movement Researchers of the project MAPS
have no published findings on the relation between a change
in load and injuries on endurance athletes. To identify the
predictors, a choice has to be made on which information is
to be used for developing an algorithm for the prediction of
injuries. There are two kinds of data available, the daily selfreported training log data and the injury data of high-level
competitive runners. An injury is defined as any musculosketal
problem of the lower extremity or back that lead to an inability
to execute training or competition as planned for at least one
week [2]. The training log data contains information about
the training duration and the training intensity. The intensity
times the duration is the workload of a training. The terms
acute and chronic workload are used to descibe the intensity
of the immediate window of training. Acute workload is the
average workload of the last seven days, chronic workload

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

is the average workload of the last 28 days. [3]. A study to
sustain an injury risk of rugby league players was conducted
with the acute:chronic ratio and concluded that there was
a relation between High Chronical workload, spikes in the
acute workload and the increased risk on injuries [4]. To find
a relation between the workload and injuries for high-level
runners, the data of the training data log is to be converted
to predictors, which are based on the acute:chronic ratio,
derived ratio’s and the workload. Machine Learning is an
appropriate manner for examination of all these predictors [5]
because Machine Learning Techniques can discover complex
high dimensional interactions between predictors and predict
the label of injury/no injury.
II.

M ETHODS

A. Study design
The study design stems out of the MAPS project. A
prospective cohort study was used in which 23 high-level
competitive runners (16 male, 7 female) were followed for
14 months. During this period they reported data on training
parameters and injuries(Table I).
TABLE I. BASELINE CHARACTERISTICS OF RUNNERS
Characteristic
Number
Age(years;mean +- SD)
Height(cm;mean +- SD)
Body weight(kg;mean +- SD)
Perc. body fat(perc.;mean +- SD)
VO2max(ml/min/kg)

Male
16
22.5 +- 6.3
185 +- 5
68.6 +- 6.0
8.5 +- 2.3
66.7 +- 5.9

Female
7
21.4 +- 4.4
172 +- 7
58.3 +- 4.0
17.6 +- 4.2
62.7 +- 7.4

Total
23
22.2 +- 5.7
181 +- 8
65.4 +- 7.2
11.3+- 5.2
65.5+-6.5

B. Dataset description
1) Overall dataset: The runners kept a daily training log,
in which, information about the training duration, the training
intensity and the sustained injuries was reported. The dataset
contains 208 training patterns of 7 weeks, 52 patterns with
injuries and 156 patterns without any injury. To find a relation
between the workload and injuries for high-level runners, the
data of the training data log is converted to features, which
are based on the acute:chronic ratio, monotony, strain and
the workload. For a sliding window of 7 weeks before the
injury, every single week the same ratio’s and workload were
calculated. The final step was to determine the percentage of
change between the features of the identified weeks and add
this to the dataset

109

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

2) Injuries: There were 22 runners, out of 23, injured
during the observed period of 14 months. Only the complete
patterns were selected for the dataset. These are the athletes
who had no missing data in their daily training log in combination with the reported injuries. And only the injuries, which
had a sliding window of 7 weeks of self-report data before the
injury were used.
3) No injuries: The period before the injury has to be
compared with the period in which the workload doesn’t lead
to injuries. Therefore the 7 week period without resulting into
an injury, before the 7 weeks sliding window of the injury
date, was taken for every individual athlete.
C. Model development
For the identification of the most important features Random Forest of Sklearn was used. Random Forest builds trees
on subsets of the data, bagging, and there for applicable for
relative small datasets. [6] Next, the relative importance of the
features can be identified. To intervene as early as possible,
single trees will be assembled based on the moment in time
using the identified features.

IV. C ONCLUSION
The predictive modelling using two steps in the process
seems to be promising. But the accuracy of the tree on 20%
of the feature set is very high, future work is to investigate
the rationale behind the results. The established prediction
model needs to be verified as being correct. When a robust and
accurate prediction model is realized, the model will be added
to an app. The app will get information about the workload per
training session and, using the model, predicts the probability
on sustaining an injury.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Henk van der Worp for
identifying the injuries in the data of the runners and M. Aiello
for suggesting on improving the paper.

[1]

[2]

D. Feature selection
[3]

The features within and between the sliding windows are
correlated with each other. The following features are identified
as the most important, sorted by decreasing importance.
1)
2)
3)
4)
5)
6)
7)
8)
9)
10)

average workload week 2
sum workload week 2
percentage change monotony between week 1 and 2
acute:chronic ratio 7 over 42 week 7
acute:chronic ratio 7 over 28 week 7
percentage change strain between week 1 and 2
percentage change workload between week 2 and 3
acute:chronic ratio 7 over 42 week 2
percentage change strain between week 2 and 3
strain 2

[4]

[5]
[6]

R EFERENCES
S. Raak-Pro, “Belasting en belastbaarheid van topsporters,” 2011.
[Online]. Available: http://www.sia-projecten.nl/projectenbank/project/
belasting-en-belastbaarheid-van-topsporters
S. W. Bredeweg, S. Zijlstra, and I. Buist, “The GRONORUN 2 study:
effectiveness of a preconditioning program on preventing running related
injuries in novice runners. The design of a randomized controlled
trial,” BMC Musculoskelet Disord, vol. 11, 2010, p. 196. [Online].
Available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2936887/pdf/
1471-2474-11-196.pdf
T. J. Gabbett, B. T. Hulin, P. Blanch, and R. Whiteley, “High training
workloads alone do not cause sports injuries: how you get there is the
real issue,” British Journal of Sports Medicine, vol. 50, no. 8, 2016,
pp. 1–2. [Online]. Available: http://bjsm.bmj.com/lookup/doi/10.1136/
bjsports-2015-095567
B. T. Hulin, T. J. Gabbett, D. W. Lawson, P. Caputi, and J. a. Sampson,
“The acute:chronic workload ratio predicts injury: high chronic
workload may decrease injury risk in elite rugby league players,” British
Journal of Sports Medicine, vol. 50, no. 4, 2016, pp. 231–236. [Online]. Available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/265110065Cnhttp:
//bjsm.bmj.com/lookup/doi/10.1136/bjsports-2015-094817
M. Kuhn and K. Johnson, Applied predictive modeling. Springer, 2013,
vol. 26.
L. Breiman, “Random forests,” Machine learning, vol. 45, no. 1, 2001,
pp. 5–32.

The Random Forest is also used to predict on the dataset and
had predicted 67 percent of the injuries correct.
E. Predictive modelling building
The 10 features are used to build individual trees to be
able to identify as early as possible the increase of risk. The
dataset was divided random in a training and a test set in
respectively 75% and 25%. Building a tree on the features
’acute:chronic ratio 7 over 42 week 7’ and ’acute:chronic ratio
7 over 28’ resulted in an accuracy of 75 %. With these ratios
the prediction of the injury was 75% correct. Other trees are
not built yet.
III.

R ESULTS

We selected 10 predictors to predict the occurrence of an
injury in the future over an sliding window of 7 weeks. The
predictive modelling is promising but it is also a bit suspicious
that an tree is more accurate using 20% of the features in
comparison with the Random Forest.

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

110

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Improving The Well-Being of Older People by Reducing Their Energy
Consumption Through Energy-Aware Systems
Jon Robinson Kofi Appiah Raheem Yousaf
Department of Computing & Technology
Nottingham Trent University
Nottingham, UK
email:jon.robinson@ntu.ac.uk
email:kofi.appiah@ntu.ac.uk
email:raheem.yousaf022012@my.ntu.ac.uk
Abstract-Fuel poverty is becoming a problem amongst the
older community in the UK. We propose an assistive
technology for reduced energy consumption in aid of active
aging. We introduce how the well-being of older people
within the community can be improved by reducing anxiety
associated with fuel poverty.
A recommender and
behavioural change system will be introduced, which enables
older people to improve their energy footprint through
energy-aware systems. Using systems to help reduce fuel
poverty will invariably improve their general well-being.
Results show how this technology can be accepted and act as
an enabler in improving the overall well-being of older
people.

Keywordsenergy-efficiency;
energy-awareness;
intelligent sensor systems; recommender systems; wellbeing.
I.

INTRODUCTION

At present, older people within the community face a
host of technological and perceptual problems, which can
inhibit their interaction and well-being while using
information and communications technology (ICT)
solutions to improve their lives. This is especially
relevant when considering Internet of Things (IoT) based
systems to improve their well-being within their home
environment, dealing with heating and reducing costs.
Fuel poverty is a key societal problem that impacts on
large numbers of the older community within the UK [1]
as older people tend to fall into the low-income range due
to low pensions and rising energy costs. The worry and
anxiety concerning their limited financial resources
results in 20,000 – 25,000 deaths in the UK [3]. This is
due to reducing their dependency on heating their homes
as they are not financially secure enough to afford or pay
for their monthly house hold heating or cooling bills [4].
The use of technology to help older people reduce costs is
constrained by their fear and distrust of technology. To
enable older people to accept ICT solutions, the UK
government has a number of initiatives in place to help
reduce this fear (e.g., digital by default [2]), which aims to
provide them with skills to use modern technology.
However, figures show that high numbers of individuals
are still susceptible to fuel poverty which is not only
reducing their well-being but also putting their lives at
risk [3].
Compounding the issue of fuel poverty, older members
of the community also fear the use of technology which
can impact on the successful deployment and adoption of

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

technology to address the issue of fuel poverty. Other
issues relating to the acceptance of technology and the
security of personal information also factor into the distrust of ICT, which is there to help improve their wellbeing.
In this work we intend to provide a prototype system to
show how unobtrusive and intelligent technology can help
reduce the energy consumption of older people and how
this can impact on their behaviour by adopting more
energy conscious patterns through a real-time responsive
recommender system.
We will therefore examine
whether an intelligent recommender system can reduce
the energy consumption of older people by predicting and
modifying their daily patterns and behaviours so that they
minimise their energy needs. The rest of this paper is
structured as follows: Section 2 provides an insight into
existing systems; Section 3 discusses the design
considerations that need to be taken into account when
considering energy-awareness as a whole; Section 4
introduces our proposed system and its key components;
Section 5 discusses user interaction issues and factors that
can deter engagement; Section 6 provides initial results;
and finally, in Section 7, we present our conclusion.
II.

RELATED WORK

Reducing the energy consumption of individuals has
been widely tackled by a variety of commercial and
academic systems.
An approach taken by some
commercial systems is to view each room as a separate
entity and give contextual information regarding the state
of the room. Some systems require user intervention in
the control of the ambient energy consumption. For
example, with the Hive system [10], to adjust or improve
the heating within a room, a separate mobile based
application is required which can lead to problems when
considering older people. Although additional sensors
and smart plugs are available to provide the ability to turn
on and off devices, these still need to have some form of
user intervention. Voice control or a mobile phone
application is required to govern their operation.
However, this forces the user to actively monitor, respond
and modify temperatures rather than allow the system to
proactively shape the energy use of the home. IFTTT (IF
This, Then That) [11] is another system which allows IoT
integration within the home by providing users with a
simple rule-based approach for governing the operation of
smart devices. Devices are linked to a web based system

111

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

which can then control the devices within the home.
Systems like this would fail to address the needs and
anxiety encountered when older people interact with
technology [5] due to mobile technology and applications
not being accessible to all older people which also
increases their fear of technology. Another similar system
is the Honeywell evoHome [12] system provides users
with contextual information about the room temperature
and provides them with a digital thermostat to control
ambient temperatures. The Heat Genius system [13] is
another commercial product which uses motion control to
determine whether heating is required in a particular
room. This system also provides the ability to learn and
adjust room temperatures based on the life style of the
users. However, these commercial systems do not
address the issue of reducing energy consumption as a
whole but instead focus on one specific problem - heating.
Smart energy meters have been used extensively in the
home and in some cases targeting low-income and older
users. In [15], a number of smart energy systems and the
interactions with users are discussed. Here, users used the
Duet and Trio devices in a bid to monitor their real-time
energy consumption over a one year period. Smart home
and assistive technology can also play an important part in
monitoring and adapting the environment to best suit an
older person. Kim et al [14] discuss the U-Health system
for monitoring and supporting the older person within
their home. Wireless sensor technologies embedded
within appliances in the home allow for the collection and
mining of information regarding the habits of the older
user, as well as providing decision-making capabilities to
allow the system to adapt to the users’ needs.
The issue of fuel poverty is a multi-dimensional one
which covers more than just the heating of homes. To
provide a representative picture of how energy-awareness
impacts older people, all aspects of energy consumption
needs to be considered. When looking at the problem of
fuel poverty, any savings of an older person’s energy
expenditure must yield in financial benefits. In turn, for
a technological solution to fully address the issue of fuel
poverty it must holistically look at energy-awareness as a
whole and provide ways in which behaviours and usage
patterns can be altered to improve energy expenditure
through an unobtrusive and proactive system which does
not require constant user interaction to govern the control
of the environment.
III.

DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS

Older people face a number of challenges in today’s
society which can impact their lives and well-being. Fuel
poverty is a major societal challenge which affects
significant proportions of the society. With limited
financial resources available to older people who are
reliant on state pensions, paying for fuel (i.e., electricity
and gas) becomes a major concern for their well-being
[3]. Within the UK alone, a high number of unnecessary
deaths are caused each year due to weather concerns [1].
This can be due to excessively hot weather during the
summer months or excessively low temperatures during
the winter. In circumstances like this, which require a
higher expenditure, it is common for the older person to
go without basic heating or cooling due to limited
financial resources, which enables them to focus on other

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

costs (e.g., food and rent) [4]. However, this has a
detrimental impact on their well-being due to the
suffering involved, and possible death, during low or high
temperature times during the year. Not only does it
impact the older people, but the costs to healthcare for
dealing with emergencies relating to the admission and
care of older patients at these times, places stress on
services which are already over-stretched.
Communities and community care offer care services
where carers or social workers visit the older person to
ensure that they are coping and not suffering. However,
with finite resources, only so much is able to be done. To
help in the care of older people, smart technology has
been employed quite extensively. For example, in [15],
smart devices help monitor the older resident. However,
relying on technology can introduce other challenges.
More specifically, older people distrust and fear the use of
technology [5]. This often leads to technology being
ineffective due to the lack of engagement from the older
person, especially if they are required to interact and
engage with the technology in some way. Davis [5]
introduces the Technology Acceptance Model which
impacts on the perceived usefulness of technology by the
older person which can introduce barriers for adoption.
However, older users also encounter problems with a
general lack of understanding of ICT which introduces
barriers to the user as it impedes them from making
strategic decisions when managing fuel costs [9]. This
lack of understanding needs to be addressed for the
system to be effective and allow seamless interaction with
the user. For instance in [14][15] mobile technology is
used but can introduce problems with engagement due to
the fear of technology whereby the older person has to
interact not only with an unknown and unfamiliar device
but also some form of application and visual interface. If
the interaction between the system and older person is
perceived to be too difficult then a lack of engagement
usually results [5][ 9]. Therefore, intelligent devices need
to be unobtrusive as well as the system offering a less
technological way of interacting with the older person to
minimise the impact of the fear of technology.
Behavioural change is another key consideration for
such systems as the technology would also have to
monitor and determine if there are better behaviour
patterns when interacting with energy-reliant devices
within the home. For example, making a cup of tea or
cooking dinner relies on some form of energy
consumption (either electricity or gas) to complete the
task. However, energy tariffs can change through the day
and can impact on the total expenditure over a month. By
modifying the behaviour of the older person to a more
cost-conscious time can have benefits in the long term.
Therefore, when designing effective systems for
reducing the energy consumption of older people, a
number of design considerations have to be taken into
account. Namely, the use of unobtrusive technology
which is embedded within the environment; simple
interaction devices which promote trust; behaviour
modification and prediction to reduce or better manage
the use of energy reliant devices within the home; and,
systems to recommend changes to patterns.
We propose to address the question of whether an
intelligent recommender system can reduce the energy

112

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

consumption of older people by predicting and modifying
their daily patterns and behaviours so that they minimise
their energy needs to ensure an improvement in their
general well-being by reducing anxiety associated with
fuel poverty. Anxiety has a clear detrimental effect on the
well-being of an older person [8], which will hinder their
interactions and acceptance of technology. Improving the
quality of life of older users is difficult to gauge as
different people assign different values to things [7]. For
that reason, the proposed system aims to reduce the fear
of poverty and improve the quality of life for older users
by providing them with guidance and options on how to
change their behaviour so that they are more energyconscious and aware of what they are doing through a
simple house model interface. More detailed feedback
can be given to those users who feel comfortable with
technology or to carers, or family members who are
actively helping the older user. By providing them with a
more holistic and wide-ranging understanding of the
energy-consumption which takes into account not only
their heating but also their activities during the day can
help them improve their overall energy consumption. By
looking at the whole, more substantial savings can be
made which in turn reduce their chances of falling into the
fuel poverty trap.
Therefore, in summary we intend to address the issue of
the acceptance of technology as well as factors relating to
the trust of intelligent systems and improving well-being
by reducing fuel poverty. This will be through simple,
trusted and unambiguous human-computer interfaces,
behaviour and activity analysis; and, recommender
systems to help promote more informed energy-aware
decisions. This will allow older people to consider all
aspects of their energy consumption, rather than focusing
on one single aspect (e.g., heating) as their overall energyfootprint will be made out of many different components.
For example, heating, cooking, recreation, etc., which
complements their potentially sedentary life-style.
IV.

PROPOSED SYSTEM

From a conceptual perspective, the system (see figure 1)
will process sensor telemetry from devices located within
the environment, determine if the behaviour of the person
can be changed based on the task activity they are
performing, which includes using tariff information
gathered from energy suppliers through IoT and then
facilitate in providing feedback to the older person.

System
Interface

Sensors

System

Energy Suppliers
Figure 1. System overview.

The guiding principle in the design of the prototype is to
determine if the energy consumption of the user can be
reduced by determining the behaviour and patterns they
are exhibiting. The system relies upon a number of key
components that deal with the interactions with energy

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

suppliers to provide information, which informs the
recommender system; activity/task detection and
interfacing with the user through an unobtrusive interface.
A system prototype has been developed which allows the
seamless interaction with an older person, which could
reduce their energy consumption. For this prototype
iteration the full system was implemented but deployed
within an idealised test environment to capture telemetry.
The system was also able to save and playback telemetry
for user evaluation.
A. Sensors
A variety of off-the-shelf sensors have been used to
provide contextual information regarding the state of the
environment, the location of the older person, and what
they are interacting with in the home environment.
Sensors that provide telemetry on light, motion, pressure,
electricity use, sound, as well as other sensors providing
contextual state information of the environment, have
been used. Sensors were typically subsumed within the
appliances which consumed energy. This was mostly
electrical appliances but scope for gas based appliances
will be incorporated in a later iteration. Sensors can be
added seamlessly to the system by simply plugging them
in and informing the software that a particular type of
sensor has been added.
Different sensors can be
dynamically added, along with information which
provides contextual information regarding how telemetry
can be analysed and interpreted during the behavioural
analysis phase. Environmental and power usage sensors
were based on Phidgets’ technology and were used to
record and forward telemetry using an event system that
had been developed (details in section IV. B). For the next
phase of the work, smart Wi-Fi enabled energy plugs and
other Wi-Fi enabled technology, will be used.
B. Behavioural Analysis
To aid in the process of determining how much energy
is being consumed within the house and whether a better
alternative is available, telemetry from sensors are
aggregated and processed within the behavioural analysis
component of the system. An overview of the activity,
behaviour and recommender stages is outlined in figure 2.

Sensors

User
Notification
System

Activity
Manager

Behaviour
Analysis

Recommender
System

Historical
Pattern
Matching

Figure 2. Activity, behavioural and recommender stages.

Activities are used to identify what task the user is
performing within the home. For example, making a meal
would involve using a variety of sensor equipped devices
within the kitchen, each of which will be generating
telemetry. In a typical use case, the oven, along with the

113

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

cooker and supplementary devices (e.g., kettle) could be
used. Combined with environmental state information
originating from embedded sensors in the home,
additionally telemetry regarding light, sound and motion
information would be generated and be contextualised
within the kitchen environment.
Activities are generated by end-users and allow the
association between different telemetry and sensors and a
given activity. The approach that has been taken is to
offer a simple means for users to define an activity and
then to associate sensor combinations to that activity.
These activities will then form the basis of the
behavioural analysis and pattern-matching functionality
whereby the system will be able to determine what type of
activity is being performed by the user.
Raw sensor telemetry is tagged with additional metainformation regarding the sensor type, timestamp and
location and transmitted around the system within an
event message. Events are captured and processed within
the behavioural component during the activity
identification process.
To aid in providing an
environmental snapshot of what is happening within the
environment, a window of applicability is used which
allows events to be received over a short period of time.
This populates activity states which are triggered when all
associated sensor telemetry has been received during a set
period. When this has been satisfied, activities trigger
notifications, which are in turn, processed by the analysis
component. At this point, a decision can be made on what
to do next. The first option is to process an associated
action which causes the system to perform some form of
real-world action which impacts the end-user.
Alternatively, notifications can be used to build up
composite events which provide more complex
combinations of activities to be associated with each
other. This allows the system to provide a richer and
more complex activity detection process.
Historical information regarding past activities is used
to provide the ability to determine if activities have
occurred during similar times in the past. For example,
cooking food at specific times; use of kettle to make
drinks; and activities that relate to their life-styles. This
information is used by the recommender system to
determine if user activity patterns can be modified to help
improve the energy use within the home based on their
occurrences. For instance, when coupled with tariff
information, the recommender would be able to inform
the user that by changing their pattern to do a particular
activity by a few minutes could result in a tangible energy
cost saving over a period of time.
C. Recommender System
The purpose of the recommender system is to provide
end-users with feedback on their energy consumption
performance or provide alternative actions. To best
inform end-users of any energy cost savings, tariff
information is used from the electricity supplier that they
are signed up with. By analysing their past behavioural
patterns, the recommender system will determine if any
energy savings can be made by suggesting to the end-user
how best to alter their habits. For instance, as a profile of
the user is generated, any patterns or behaviours they
exhibit will be identified and any improvements will be

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

suggested. This information can be conveyed in a number
of ways to the end-user. Notification messages detailing
the current cost and potential savings can be shown to the
user, whilst real-time feedback is given through a physical
prototype system, which allows users to instantly see how
much energy they are consuming within different rooms
in the house.
An administrative component is provided which allows
carers or family members to configure the system and
provide guidance on what levels of energy expenditure
the older user should use on average. This information is
used to inform the older user that targets are not being met
and to keep the carer or family member informed and
involved in the care of the user. Additionally, these set
targets also allow carers/family members to closely
monitor that the older user is using a minimum threshold
amount of energy, thereby ensuring that they are not
suffering from the lack of heating or cooling.
V.

USER INTERACTION

Compounding the problem of fuel poverty, older users
also suffer from technology acceptance. This adds
additional constraints in which electronic systems
subsumed within the home impact the experience and
engagement of the older user. If the technology with
which the older user has to interact is complicated or nonintuitive, this can lead to users disengaging with the
system put there to improve their well-being and causes
an opposite effect so that the user is even more isolated
and stuck within the fuel poverty trap. The issue of
reducing a lack of understanding and purpose of the
system [9] needs to be considered to allow the prototype
to be effective with users. In turn, Leonardi [6] highlights
that the interactive medium needs to take into account the
“motor and cognitive capabilities” [6] of the older user.
When considering the perceived usefulness of the system
[5] to promote older users to engage and trust the system
and recommendations, a clear simple interface is required.
These issues are important when considering how the
older person interacts with the prototype system.
However, it does pose challenges when considering the
acceptance of the interface as it must not rely on
something that might cause confusion or anxiety when
interacting with the system. Therefore, some form of
mobile device or interface would pose significant
challenges to older people.
Different interfaces were constructed and evaluated to
determine which one offered the older user with the best
way to interpret energy usage information. One method of
conveying information was through a clock metaphor
whereLED’s
indicated the general energy usage within
the home. However, this did not prove to be too useful or
popular with older-users.
The approach, which ended up being taken, was to
provide the older user with a simple, non-technical
interface which does not rely on any interactive
technology (e.g., mobile phones or smart televisions) but
instead uses a simple traffic light metaphor. A mock-up
miniature house was provided which uses a traffic light
system located in each of the rooms within the model.
Instant visual feedback is provided to the older end-user
by indicating their power consumption in each room. Red
indicates that they are excessively using energy within

114

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

that room, amber indicates they are using more than they
should but there is room for improvement with a few
recommendations, while green indicates that they are
using energy within the guidelines, or what the
carer/family member might have specified.
Figure 3 shows the model house prototype interface.
Eachroom ofthehousecontainsasetofLED ’swhich
indicates the real-time use of energy within that room.
This was found to be the more successful of the
prototypes for conveying straight forward energy usage
information to older users.

information can be presented to end-users regarding the
total costs incurred and by activity.

Figure 5. Monthly energy costs.

Recommendation notifications were also provided to
end-users and carers/family members to allow them to
determine where savings could be made by changing
habits. For example, recommendations could be made to
change the time of morning snacks and eating times to
make best use of energy costs by moving these
occurrences by a few minutes.
Figure 3. Model house prototype.

A. Administrative interfaces
The administrative interface provides carers or family
members with cost saving’s information either on a dayby-day basis or over a projected month. If older users felt
comfortable with the technology they were also provided
access to this information, rather than simply relying on
the model house. For example, figure 4 shows the costs
incurred for a number of monitored appliances within the
home environment. Information is outlined, based on the
activities that have been detected during the day and
shows a comparison of their energy use.
Both
carers/family members and the more technically confident
older user can utilise this information to determine how
many times a day they perform specific activities with a
view to reducing the frequency over time or to more
suitable times which reduces their energy costs.

Figure 4. Savings graph.

Another way in which financial information can be
conveyed to the user is through a monthly chart outlining
the costs that have been incurred for each of the activities
during that particular time period. Figure 5 shows how

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

VI.

INITIAL RESULTS

To combat fuel poverty, older users have to overcome
issues with anxiety caused from the distress of lack of
finance to pay for energy bills and also the fear of
technology, which impedes the adoption of technology to
help them become more energy efficient. Data was
collected from an idealised test environment and played
back through the system for evaluation purposes. The
prototype was evaluated by 10 older users, whose ages
ranged between 50 and 70 and were used to measure their
technological fear and acceptance of using this
technology. This was to determine whether monitoring
energy use and recommending more efficient use of
energy through modifying activity patterns, would
improve their well-being by reducing their overall energy
costs.
Preliminary testing has been conducted using 10 users
to determine the effectiveness of the model house
prototype.
Older users were asked to answer a
questionnaire after evaluating the usefulness of the
interface. The data collected represented activities spread
over several days from the test environment and was
played in compressed form for them to evaluate the
prototype. Activities were highlighted and explained
during the playback of telemetry to help identify what was
being done. 100% of the respondents identified with what
the model house prototype was attempting to do by
making them more aware of their energy consumption
patterns. It was found that 80% of users were able to
interpret the real-time information with ease while 20% of
the respondents experienced difficulty at times when the
system detected an increase or decrease in the energy use
and notified them through flashing L E D ’s. W hen
addressing the question of technology acceptance and the
fear of using new technology which can beset an older
user, 100% of respondents said that they did not feel

115

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

anxiety or fear regarding accepting information generated
through the model house prototype. When asked if the
prototype provided them with a way to monitor and adjust
their habits during the day to make better use of energy,
all respondents replied favourably (100%). In fact, it was
discovered at this point that a number of users would like
even more information presented to them on improving
their energy expenditure. This proved to be encouraging
and a validation that the model house improved their
energy awareness and reduced their anxiety from
worrying about fuel costs. Another group of 10 users
(aged between 20 and 50) were used to evaluate the
usability and functionality of the backend functionality of
the system. This type of functionality would be used by
carers or family members to help advise the older enduser on how to improve their energy-use by exposing
them to fine-grained data regarding which activities were
done and how potential savings could be made. The type
of questions asked to these participants were
predominantly focused on activity management, savings
information, monthly projections and recommendations.
The results from this evaluation showed that 100% of
participants understood what the activities were and how
they related to the system and data while 70% of
participants were able to deal with, and manage, activity
related features. The remaining 30% required extra
guidance before they felt fully comfortable with the backend system. When addressing the usefulness of the
recommendations and potential financial savings, all
participants agreed that the system was easy to use and
offered important and helpful information on how to
improve energy usage.
VII.

CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

Our intention was to produce a simple ICT system
which would attempt to reduce the anxiety that older
people experience in relation to fuel poverty as well as
address the issue of accepting technology. It was found
that the prototype system promoted the perceived
usefulness of the system to older users. This is in addition
to other areas of our research into energy-aware
programming languages and runtime systems.
By focusing on the energy-awareness of everyday use
from the start, the prototype system was able to
successfully improve the energy use of a user over the
initial trial period.
The behavioural analysis and
recommender systems were found to accurately identify
activities which in turn aided in recognising and
highlighting the cost awareness of what users were doing
in association to their activities. By increasing this cost
awareness of their actions, users were found to be more
aware of how to reduce their energy costs by changing
times or common activities to more cost effective times of
the day. Carers/family members would be able to help by
raising awareness of what the older user was doing on a
day-to-day basis by showing them how simple changes to
their daily patterns could result in tangible cost savings as
well as improved health.
Following on from our preliminary results and
prototype system we intend to expand trials for longer
periods of time as well as integrating other technology
dealing with energy-conservation within IoT devices

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

populating these homes. Experiments on how the system
affects the overall well-being of the older person will also
be conducted as well as the impact of gender, disability
(both physical and cognitive related), living status and age
on their acceptance and use of the technology.
REFERENCES
[1] Department of Energy & Climate Change, “Fuel Poverty
Report 2015.” Available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/
uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/468011/Fuel_Pove
rty_Report_2015.pdf [retrieved: November, 2016]
[2] G. Flood, (2013). “British government's 'Digital By Default'
plans challenged”, Information Weekly (Online), available at:
http://search.proquest.com/docview/1319367398?accountid=146
93 [retrieved: November, 2016]
[3] The Poverty site, “UK: excess winter deaths”, The Poverty
Site. Available at: http://www.poverty.org.uk /67/index.shtml
[retrieved: November, 2016]
[4] Greenseniors.eu,”Green Seniors In The European Union |
Ageing Is Nothing For Cowards (May West)”. Available at:
http://www.greenseniors.eu [retrieved: November, 2016]
[5] F. Davis, “Perceived Usefulness, Perceived Ease of Use, and
User Acceptance of Information Technology”, MIS Quarterly,
vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 319, 1989.
[6] C. Leonardi, C. Mennecozzi, E. Not, F. Pianesi, and M.
Zancanaro, “Designing a familiar technology for elderly
people”, Gerontechnology, vol. 7, no. 2, 2008.
[7] M. Farquhar, “Elderly people's definitions of quality of life”,
Social Science & Medicine, vol. 41, no. 10, pp. 1439-1446,
1995.
[8] E. De Beurs, A. Beekman, A. Van Balkom, D. Deeg, and W.
Van Tilburg, “Consequences Of Anxiety In Older Persons: Its
Effect On Disability, Well-Being And Use Of Health Services”,
Psychological Medicine, vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 583-593, 1999.
[9] R. Ellis, J. Allaire, “Modeling Computer Interest in Older
Adults: The Role of Age, Education”, Computer Knowledge,
and Computer Anxiety. Human factors, vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 345355, 1999.
[10] Hivehome.com. “Hive”, Available at: https://www.hive
home .com, [retrieved: November, 2016]
[11] IFTTT.com, IFTTT”, Available at: https://ifttt.com/
[retrieved: November, 2016]
[12] Honeywelluk.com, “evohome - Honeywell UK Heating
Controls”, Available at: http://www.honeywelluk.com/products
/Underfloor-Heating/evohome-Main/ [retrieved: November,
2016]
[13] Heat Genius, “Heat Genius remote heating control benefits:
save m oney, save energy, save tim e”,
Available at:
https://www.heatgenius.co.uk/benefits/ [retrieved: November,
2016]
[14] J. Kim, H. Choi, H. Wang, N. Agoulmine, J. Deerv, and W.
Hong, “POSTECH's U-Health Smart Home for elderly
monitoring and support”, IEEE International Symposium on a
World of Wireless Mobile and Multimedia Networks
(WoWMoM), pp. 1-6, 2010.
[15] T. Hargreaves, M. Nye, and J. Burgess, “Making energy
visible: A qualitative field study of how householders interact
with feedback from smart energy monitors”, Energy Policy,
Volume 38, Issue 10, pp. 6111-6119, ISSN 0301-4215, October
2010.

116

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Tele-Rehabilitation Platform for Upper and Lower Limb in Elderly Patients,
the HEAD Project.

Franco Molteni∗ , Cristina Gramigna∗ , Samuela Canobbio∗ , Milena Peverelli∗ , Silvia Aggujaro∗ ,
Mauro Rossini∗ , Giovanna Palumbo∗ , Giandomenico Caruso† , Mario Covarrubias† , and HEAD consortium
∗ Valduce
† Politecnico

Hospital, Villa Beretta, Rehabilitation Centre, Costa Masnaga, Lecco, Italy.
di Milano, Department of Mechanical Engineering. Via G. la Masa 1, 20156, Milano, Italy
Email: mario.covarrubias@polimi.it

Abstract—Tele-rehabilitation systems have been increasingly studied, becoming an important complement to traditional therapy
as they can provide high-intensity, repetitive and interactive
treatments of the injured extremities. Several systems have been
developed in research projects and some of these have become
products mainly for being used at hospitals and care centers.
After the initial rehabilitation performed at rehabilitation centers,
patients are obliged to go to the centers, with many consequences,
as costs, loss of time, discomfort and demotivation. However, it has
been demonstrated that patients recovering at home heal faster
because surrounded by the love of their relatives and with the
community support. So, there is a strong need for rehabilitation
systems to use at home. There are already some devices available
on the market for home care: their main weakness is the limited
strategy for motor learning. The ambition of the Human Empowerment Aging and Disability (HEAD) project is to combine
assistance with appropriate feedback to close the loop in motor
learning strategy for the home. HEAD platform challenging
objective is to develop a novel tele-rehabilitation system and
related provision services for a holistic rehabilitation aiming at
restoring limb motor functional abilities, and at launching both
system and services at home. The tele-rehabilitation system is
based on the use of low cost sensors, connected with a gaming
module for cognitive-motor rehabilitation, and integrated with an
infrastructure connecting the patient at home with therapists at
hospitals who monitor the rehabilitation exercises.

of diseases and disabilities. Strictly related to the ageing of the
population, stroke is the most common cause of adult disability
in Europe. Currently, the European incidence is equal to 2
every 1000 persons (that is, around 1M people), but also in
this case, it is foreseen that this number will double in the
next 50 years. Due to the improvement on the medical stroke
treatment, the 75% of people who have been affected by a
stroke can survive, however about the 50% of those survivors
suffer from serious disabilities, thus being not able anymore
to live independently at home. It is, therefore, possible to
state that with a population that more and more gets old, thus
encountering more disabilities, there is the need to find new
solutions for improving the quality of life of these people,
by helping them in recovering their motor and cognitive
skills. Today, approximately half of stroke survivors access
some form of rehabilitation on discharge from acute services.
Moreover, it has to be taken into account that the rate of people
with disabilities or long-term health problems all over the
EU Member States is estimated at 15.7% of the working-age
population (around 49 Millions of the EU’s overall workingage population). Thus, disability is one of the main challenges
to be faced at different levels (EU Communication European
Disability Strategy 2010-2020: A Renewed Commitment to a
Barrier-Free Europe).

Keywords–Tele-rehabilitation; Gaming; LeapMotion; Kinect.

I.

I NTRODUCTION

According to the World Health Organization (WHO),
within the context of the action plan 2014-2021 entitled ’Better
health for persons with disabilities’, currently there are 150
million adults, i.e., 1 out 7, worldwide who are experiencing
significant difficulties functioning. Not only, it is foreseen that
the disability prevalence will increase more and more. As
stated by the EC communication on Disability Action Plan
(2006 2007), ageing is strictly interconnected with disability
prevalence. 30% of people aged between 55-64 suffer of some
form of disability, and 63% of the people with special needs
are older than 45. According to the European Disability Forum
(EDF), there are 80 million Europeans with disabilities. This is
over 15% of the whole population. According to the European
DG Health and Consumers, ageing is one of the greatest social
and economic challenges of the 21st century for European
societies. It will affect all EU countries and most policy areas.
Let us consider that according to The World Bank Database,
today the European population aged 65 or over is 18%, (90
M people), and it is expected that by 2025, more than 20% of
Europeans will be 65 or over, with a rapid increase in numbers
of over-80s. Unfortunately, ageing is also related to an increase

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

In order to improve the quality of life of the people with
special needs, the WHO has drafted some recommendations: make health care affordable; - invest in specific services such
as rehabilitation. Specifically, the ambition of HEAD Platform
is to strengthen and extend rehabilitation services, including community-based rehabilitation, and assistive technology.
Because patients with disabilities have different healthcare
requirements, the HEAD platform will be adapted to patients
needs so as to provide adequate care and remain financially
sustainable. There are also reasons related to the social rights,
which urgently require EU to address rehabilitation issues. A
study by the European Foundation for the Improvement of
Living and Working Conditions has highlighted that there are
ten risk factors for social exclusion. Among them we have: the
disability, long-term unemployment, low quality employment
or absence of employment record, health. Moreover, people
with disabilities have often to stay in hospitals or residential
houses, in order to be able to perform the rehabilitation. In
Europe, hundreds of thousands of people with disabilities,
mental health problems, older people live in large institutions.
There they are alone, not connected with the society. And
also, according to the European Disability Forum, more than
200.000 disabled persons in Europe are forced to live in
closed institutions deprived of the most fundamental social

117

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

rights. The Europe 2020 strategy has set ambitious targets
for inclusive growth requiring action to be taken to promote
integration and adequate livelihood of people with special
needs. The HEAD results will be fundamental to contribute to
the enhancement of the possibilities of people with disability
to do the rehabilitation at home, surrounded by the love of
their relatives, and also with the support of the community
where they live.
A. Main ideas, models and assumptions involved
On the basis of the considerations discussed in the introduction, it follows that the society needs new rehabilitation
systems dedicated to upper and lower limbs with additional
capabilities, features and related services that have a more
holistic approach to rehabilitation:
•

•

•

offering a more effective and customized therapy for
the rehabilitation of upper and lower limbs, which
address cognitive and motor deficiencies, allowing
for an easy customization and definition of exercises
tailored on specific patients and specific rehabilitation targets, enhancing human-computer interaction
through gaming, and engaging the patients in a more
motivated and long-term rehabilitation program by
focusing on complex, global and rewarding exercises;
offering the possibility of performing rehabilitation
programs in autonomy, without the need of the continuous presence of therapists, but under their continuous
monitoring, and which can be performed quietly at
home;
allowing therapists to use a complete and rich set
of data recorded from the exercises executed by the
patients to improve knowledge on rehabilitation and
therapies.

B. The innovation potential of HEAD Platform
The innovation potential of the HEAD Platform is:
•

•

•

at technological level: novelty of the integration of
low cost tracking devices (kinect, LeapMotion, etc.),
combined with games, in the rehabilitation sector;
at rehabilitation therapy level: more effective therapy
that is customised to patients, motivating, rewarding,
monitored, plus a novel knowledge based system for
therapists and physicians;
at socio-economic level: better quality of life for
impaired patients and their family, thanks to a better
rehabilitation service, and decrease of social costs of
the rehabilitation practices; better exploitation of therapists skills and time, which also means an increased
number of patients they are able to assist.

The HEAD Platform system features have an innovation
potential on the kind of rehabilitation therapy that it will be
possible to perform. Patients will be able to make the rehabilitation at home, on a regular basis, enjoying themselves and
with more motivation and consciousness of the improvements,
and being remotely monitored by the therapists. This will
have an important effect on the patients. It is foreseen that
patients will be able to reacquire the lost motor skills in shorter
time because they can practice more often, for longer time,
executing dedicated and customised exercises. Besides, it is

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

expected a lower abandonment of the therapy, as it will be
more pleasant and motivating. Extremely important is the fact
that the rehabilitation will be performed in a family context.
It has been demonstrated that patients recovering at home
after a period spent in hospital, being with their loved ones
and with their belongings, heal faster. So, being at home is
very important from the psychological point of view, and this
impacts on the quality and time of the recovery. Therefore,
we can say that the innovation potential of HEAD Platform
will bring benefits for patients, and consequently, there will
be also important effects on society and societal costs. First,
family members won’t be obliged any more to absent work to
accompany the patients to care centers. Then, if the skills will
be reacquired more rapidly and completely (or very close to)
the persons can improve their general quality of life, reacquire
their independence and eventually can be re-integrated in the
workplace.
C. Main outcomes
Therefore, HEAD Platform aims at addressing rehabilitation problems and shortcomings as listed in the Introduction:
1)

2)

3)

Patients will be more motivated to do therapy following the prescription of the therapist thanks to the
playful and entertainment character of the system.
The hospitals participating to the project expect that
along the rehabilitation treatment at least 60% of
patients perform therapy in a more exactly and individual adapted way than now (with habitual rehabilitation treatment), and also that after the neuromotor
stabilization rehabilitation (when patients usually are
discharged from rehabilitation centers), 70% of patients will continue rehabilitation activities at home,
on a regular basis. This would be a higher percentage
compared to the present figure of 10%.
The clinic partners make the assumption that patients
will be more motivated to perform the exercises when
using the HEAD platform, so they are expected to
exercising on a regular basis as prescribed by therapists, and also that the system will allow therapists
to customize exercises to be more focused to the
specific psycho-motor problems of a single patient.
Consequently, it is expected that the recovery of the
skills that one can get is in a shorter time compared
to those obtained through the rehabilitative practice
currently in use. The estimate is that the time is
shortened by 20%.
As a result of the fact that the patient will be more
relaxed during the sessions of rehabilitation, which
can be made using a modality entertainment and
even at home, the patient’s psychological state and
well-being will certainly increase considerably. In
order to assess if the HEAD platform will definitively
improve the general well-being of the patients, a set
of ’quality life questionnaire’ will be prepared. It
will be administered to the patients at the beginning
of the rehabilitation treatment, at an intermediate
period (according to the length of the rehabilitation
treatment) and at the end. The questionnaire will be
also administered to the caregivers of the patients, so
as to gather a larger perspective on the issue.

118

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents
an overview of related about gesture interaction systems.
Section 3 presents the HEAD Platform architecture. Section
4 describes one example of the HEAD rehabilitation exercise.
Section 5 describes user study approach and its preliminary
validation. Finally, Section 6 draws some discussion and
conclusions.
II. G ESTURE I NTERACTION
We have developed a visualization and interaction system
integrated with the gaming module that visually renders the
virtual environment for rehabilitation and also the user’s virtual hands and body in real-time. This functionality requires
tracking the user’s hands and body in the physical space.
In order to provide a realistic immersiveness, the tracking
and the representation of the user’s hands and body in the
virtual environment should be accurate and timely. In fact,
some studies have shown that if the users are able to see the
virtual rendering of their hands and legs and their movements
relative to the movements of other objects there is a much
better chance that they will feel that the virtual hands embodies
their intentions and actions [1].
In designing the system, we have considered the new generation of so-called ‘natural user interfaces’ (NUI) technologies
[2], which track the user’s hands, fingers, or entire body in
3D, without wearing any kind of invasive device. Free-hand
gestures can provide effective and natural methods for 3D
interaction with virtual shapes, which can provide fluidity in
the interaction.
Traditional haptic systems [3][4] and desktop interaction
approaches, typically based on devices, such as keyboard and
mouse and touch pad interfaces, are often designed for 2D
interfaces and consequently are less effective and usable for
3D interaction [5]. In addition, many of the techniques that are
used for 3D interaction require the user to wear or hold 3D
tracking devices and also require several markers attached to
the user’s hand or body. The use of markers can make the system more difficult to configure and is inappropriate for some
scenarios. Reasonably precise 3D sensing techniques, which
can recognize freehand movements, are now available at low
cost (e.g., Microsoft Kinect, Asus Xtion, and Leap Motion).
These types of devices do not require on-body attachments or
hands-on tracked devices, thus enabling very low configuration
interaction. In this way, users can interact with the system
naturally through their hands or body movements, without
using complex commands.
However, simply because the interface is based on ’natural’
gestures, this does not reduce the need for careful interface
design [8].
Gestural interaction techniques have been investigated for
a long time and different gesture types have been designed
and evaluated. For example, for the selection of occluded
targets on small touch screens using a finger [9]. Gestural
selection has been explored in order to select distant targets on
large displays [10]. Early freehand interaction systems needed
fiducial markers on the users or data gloves in order to track
the user’s gestures. For example, the authors in [11] used
the movements of fingers to simulate ”mouse-clicking” and
also to investigate freehand gestural interaction with ambient
displays [12] developing design principles and an interaction
framework for interactive public ambient displays. Bimanual

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

marking menu selection [13] used a kinect system at clese
range to track the finger’s pose and movement to select from
a marking menu. However, this method requires setting up
the camera under the desktop at a specific angle, so losing
the convenience of free hand interaction. In [14] is presented
a Kinect One sensor-based protocol for the evaluation of the
motor-performances of the upper limb of neurological patients
during rehabilitative sessions. Freehand gestural input has also
been explored for virtual object manipulation [15] including
on curved surfaces [16] and projected directly on to everyday
objets [17]. In this research, it is illustrated the importance
and immediacy of freehand gestural interaction in daily life
use cases. Participants felt that freehand pointing is intuitive
but needs more precise operation. There is a lot of previous
research on object and option selection in both 2D and 3D
interfaces, however, most previous research used hand-held
tracked devices or fiducial markers to enable camera-based
tracking [5].
III. T HE HEAD PLATFORM
The HEAD platform allows us to implement a set of
exercises for upper-limb and lower-limb rehabilitation. The
interaction with virtual objects is performed through hand and
body movements and gestures. The most innovative aspect of
the platform is that the interaction is performed by using the
LeapMotion and the Kinect sensors in a unique platform. The
following section describes the HEAD platform components
in detail.
A. Hardware components and software modules
The system is easily customizable and provides a simple
environment for project deployment to use with multiple platforms, with no need for additional configuration. The HEAD
platform consists of the following hardware components:
•
•
•
•
•

a computer;
Leap Motion controller, used to track the users’ hand
movements and to detect gestures;
Kinect controller, used to track the users’ body movements and to detect gestures;
FITBIT bracelet which measures the amount of physical activity.
PC speakers or headphones, used to render sounds.

For what concerns the software modules, after comparing
several gaming engines, Unity3D R5 environment [6] has
been selected for the implementation of the visualization and
interaction. The main reason for selecting Unity3D is that it has
a powerful interface that allows visual object placement and
property modification during the interaction. In particular, the
required features of Unity3D for the development of the games
application are as follows: 3D rendering of virtual shapes;
Graphical User Interface (GUI); Physics engine (used for
handling collision detection); Collision detection; Integration
with Leap Motion and KINECT (used for user’s gesture
recognition).
B. Head Platform Architecture
The HEAD platform is used by the patients, by the neurologist in charge of the patient and by other clinical specialists
(e.g., by the neuropsychologists and physiotherapists). Each

119

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

of the users has proper functions: the patient can see the
daily exercises therapy, the neurologist can assign, modify or
evaluate the therapeutic plans, the medical personnel can check
how the rehabilitation is going. The main characteristic of the
HEAD platform are related to the possibility for the clinicians
to assign rehabilitation plans to be performed at home, and
the holistic approach to rehabilitation, as the plan includes
physical, cognitive and behavioural therapies/exercises. The
interaction of the different users and the logical architecture
of the platform are showed in Figure 1.

Neurologist,
Physiotherapist
Neuropsychologist
Telemedicine
platform
Exercise,
Results

Feedback
(Results)

Film,
Game (Level,
Repetitions),
Kinect,
LeapMotion

Internet

Exercise
list

Patient
platform
Indoor Unit

Figure 1. Head Platform Architecture.

The Indoor Unity represents the patient’s interaction with
the platform. The patient might be equipped with different
devices that can be provided with the HEAD platform: a
dedicated PC, used by the patient to see the daily activity exercises; an activity tracker (FITIBIT c ) to measure the amount
of physical activity of the patient. The platform foresees also
other devices, which are used only at the hospital (e.g., an EEG
portable helmet to measure variations in the brain activity of
the patients during specific cognitive or attentive tests). All
the patients data is stored in a clinical based certified database
which is managed by TELBIOS [7] a local industrial partner
of the HEAD Project.
IV. H EAD R EHABILITATION E XERCISES
The HEAD exercise database consists of three different
categories which are connected through a film database and a
picture database. A film is used in order to catch the attention
of the patient.
• Category 1: Film =⇒ Exercise =⇒ Film: All the
exercises which are inside this category starts with
the visualization of a film, after a few seconds the
film stops and the rehabilitation exercise starts using
a picture keyframe of the film. Once the rehabilitation
exercise has been completed, the film is enabled and
the patient can see again the next part of the film. After
few seconds the film stops again and the rehabilitation
exercise starts again, and so on. This category has been
designed for motor-limb rehabilitation.
• Category 2: Film =⇒ Exercise: In this category, the
exercises have been designed in order to start with a

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

film without stopping or pausing the film visualization.
The rehabilitation exercise starts once the film is
completed. This category of exercises allows neuromotor rehabilitation.
Category 3: Exercise =⇒ Film: This category of
exercises starts directly with the rehabilitation exercise
and the video is seen by the patient only if the exercise
has been completed. The film is used as an award.

•

V. U SERS S TUDY
A tele-rehabilitation system should be validated in order to
demonstrate its usefulness. Before a rehabilitation environment
can be used in a rehabilitation protocol it is necessary to
perform several tests and see if the proposed exercises are
usable and potentially effective.
In our research, a user study has been carried out in order
to test the tele-rehabilitation platform initially with healthy
people. In particular, we were interested in checking if any
issues may arise during the use of the HEAD application, in
particular any issues related to gesture interactions.
A. User study with healthy subjects
10 healthy users, 6 female and 4 male, aged between 18
and 23 participated to the preliminary tests. Before the test,
the participants were asked to fill in a pre-test questionnaire
with their data, confidence to use games and also hand gestural
technologies. In addition, we asked the participants to compile
a symptoms check-list related to the sense of sight.
Figure 2-a shows part of the HEAD platform in which the
clinical team is able to select the different parameters for the
rehabilitation exercise. It is possible to select the video, the
level, the device and the arm/hand side which will be involved
in the exercise therapy.
a)

Attività: ABBINA SIMBOLO (1:2)(VIDEO:ANIMAZIONE-7_CALIMERO_3188433,
DEVICE:LEAP MOTION, LATO: ENTRAMBE LE MANI, LIVELLO:2)
Livello

Video

b)

PRI

RISULTATI

Device

Lato

VALUTAZIONI

OBIETTIVI/TERAPIE GENERICHE

area: Riabilitazione neuro-motoria
Riscaldamento arti superiori
Azione precisa arti superiori
Riscaldamento arti inferiori
Esercizio di memoria
Categorizzazione problem solving; equilibrio
Azione precisa tronco

Figure 2. HEAD Platform for the clinical side.

Figure 2-b shows the general therapy and all the different
rehabilitation areas.
Participants were instructed about the task, and they were
allowed to use the hand gestural approach until they felt
sufficiently confident. The task consisted in using the ‘match

120

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

the symbols’ exercise. Two tests were performed, in different
conditions.
First test. The participants were asked to perform the
‘match the symbols’ exercise and to use the non dominant
hand to interact with the virtual objects. This was made to
introduce in the users some difficulties typical of patients with
upper limb disabilities.
Second test. The participants were asked to complete again
the task using the dominant hand.
The two tests lasted approximately 8 minutes (4 minutes
per each test). Figure 3-a shows the HEAD platform once
is started by the patient and after performed the login via
user-name and password. The patient selects the rehabilitation
exercise, in this case the ‘match the symbols’, which consist
in matching the three similar figures (Figure 3-b). The system
counts as an error if the patient does not match properly the
figures. If the three figures are matched accordingly, the main
figure changes its color to green and the patient is able to grab
the three pictures group in to the blue container (Figure 3-c).
Once all the pictures groups are matched the patient is able to
see the film as an award. When the film finished the system
shows the final score in form of stars (Figure 3-d). Then, the
results are immediately stored to the collector database.

The questionnaire was organized in a 6 points Likert-scale,
from 1 (which is the most negative value) to 6 (which is the
most positive value).
B. Analysis of the results
The charts on Figure 4 show the results of the questionnaires.
The HEAD application achieved a high evaluation rate
relatively to the aspects concerning the system in general, a
quite positive evaluation of the easiness in using it as a whole
(chart a in Figure 4).
The knowledge acquisition section of the test intended to
go more in details in understanding and evaluating the system
from the user’s perspective. Chart b in Figure 4 shows the
results. Overall, the collected data show a positive evaluation.
Only one user assigned a very low rate for what concerned
the easiness of using the system the first time. But the same
user was convinced that the following time it would have been
easier and more natural to use it.
c) Functionalities

a) General Impresion
Did you like the concept?

5,5

Did you like the system?

a)

b)

If you could, would you use it
again?

5,8

Was it easy to use?

How do you judge the visual
feedback?

4,8

How do you judge the sound
feedback?

4,3
0

1

2

3

4

5

Was it easy to start using the
system?

5

Did you perceive the
information you expected?

5,4

6

b) Knowledge acquisition

How do you judge the
finger/hand interaction
modality?

5,2

How do you judge the
interaction modality through
Kinect?

5,2

5,4

Do you think that the next
time will be easier to use the
system?

5,8

0

d)

4,8

5

Your virtual hand moves and
act accordingly to your real
one

c)

How do you judge the
graphic user interface?

5,3

1

2

3

4

5

6

How do you judge the
interaction modality through
LeapMotion?

4

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Figure 4. Results of tests performed by the healthy subjects.

Figure 3. ‘Match the symbols exercise’.

After completing the two tests, participants were asked
to fill in a post-test questionnaire aimed at evaluating the
following aspects:
• general impression of the exercise, including the proposed concept, the system as a whole, the willingness
to use it again, its easiness of use;
• knowledge acquired in using the scenario, including
the easiness when started using the rehabilitation exercise, the effectiveness of the information displayed,
and the willingness to use the system again in the
future;
• evaluation of the system functionalities, including the
quality of the graphic user interface, the perceived
quality of the exercise, and sound feedbacks, and
finally the ability of the hand/finger interaction modality.

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

It is possible to observe from chart c in Figure 4, that
the participants have judged interesting the gesture interaction
modalities proposed (finger/hand gestures) through the LeapMotion and Kinect sensors. A positive evaluation has been
given also to the visual and sound feedbacks which were
coherent with the user’s interaction.
All the objects (images and films) in the exercise are clearly
recognised by the participants. All participants agreed to feel
more confident in using the hand gesture interaction system
towards the end of the test than at the beginning, and they felt
to be able to improve their performance after using it for a
longer period.
Five participants reported some incongruence between their
real hand movements and the virtual hand avatar. This is
due the Leap Motion controller, which sometimes produces
anomaly reading data, such as reporting identical position
although the finger had moved, or reporting false positions far
away from the actual fingers [18]. These anomalies however,

121

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

were usually short-termed and did not represent a significant
impact in the user’s performance, and in general in the overall
results. Nevertheless, these anomalies were known to happen
[19] and therefore expected. This preliminary study was designed to cope with these issues.
Additionally, in this study we evaluated only the process
of selection of the objects (e.g., images through the gesture
interaction) in the rehabilitation exercise. These two conditions
were performed separately. In general, more sophisticated
actions can be performed while interacting with a different
rehabilitation exercise, such as advanced manipulation (e.g.,
changing position and orientation of virtual objects, activating
some interactions through the pinch gestures), which will be
considered in future works.
VI. D ISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
The use of tele-rehabiliattion systems for upper and lower
limb rehabilitation has been demonstrated in literature to be a
valid approach.
In this view, the paper describes a tele-rehabilitation based
on hand and body gesture interaction. We have performed
some preliminary tests in order to prove the HEAD approach.
The preliminary test results reported in the paper are positive
for what concerns the quality of the hand and body gesture
interaction while executing the rehabilitation exercise. On this
basis, we conclude that the gestural interaction system provides
users with an effective and natural method to interact with the
rehabilitation exercises.
The clinical protocol implies that each patient is able to use
the HEAD platform 12 times in the rehabilitation center and
60 times at home. The total patients involved in the HEAD
project are 100. All of them are using the HEAD platform in
the rehabilitation center and at least 30 at home.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research has been partially developed within the
context of the project HEAD: Human Empowerment Aging
and Disability, Funded by CARIPLO Foundation. The authors
are grateful to the HEAD Consortium for the unconditional
support for the HEAD Project.

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

F. Bacim, M. Nabiyouni, and D. A. Bowman, “Slice-n-swipe: A freehand gesture user interface for 3d point cloud annotation,” in 3D User
Interfaces (3DUI), 2014 IEEE Symposium on, March 2014, pp. 185–
186.
K. Yatani, K. Partridge, M. Bern, and M. Newman, “Escape: A target
selection technique using visually-cued gestures,” in Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings, 2008, pp. 285–
294.
A. Bragdon and H.-S. Ko, “Gesture select: Acquiring remote targets
on large displays without pointing,” Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems - Proceedings, 2011, pp. 187–196.
D. Vogel and R. Balakrishnan, “Distant freehand pointing and clicking
on very large, high resolution displays,” UIST: Proceedings of the
Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Softaware and Technology,
2005, pp. 33–42.
R. Balakrishnan and D. Vogel, “Interactive public ambient displays:
Transitioning from implicit to explicit, public to personal, interaction
with multiple users,” UIST: Proceedings of the Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Softaware and Technology, 2004, pp. 137–146.
F. Guimbretière and C. Nguyen, “Bimanual marking menu for near
surface interactions,” Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, 2012, pp. 825–828.
M. Caimmi, A. Chiavenna, M. Malosio, L.M. Tosatti, “Kinect Onebased biomechanical assessment of upper-limb performance compared
to clinical scales in post-stroke patients,” Proceedings of the Annual
International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and
Biology Society, EMBS., 2015. pp. 5720-3.
P. Song, W. Goh, W. Hutama, C.-W. Fu, and X. Liu, “A handle
bar metaphor for virtual object manipulation with mid-air interaction,”
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2012, pp. 1297–
1306.
H. Benko, R. Jota, and A. D. Wilson, “Miragetable: freehand interaction
on a projected augmented reality tabletop,” Proc. of CHI’12, 2012, pp.
199–208.
C. Harrison, H. Benko, and A. Wilson, “Omnitouch: Wearable multitouch interaction everywhere,” UIST’11 - Proceedings of the 24th
Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology,
2011, pp. 441–450.
V. K. Adhikarla, J. Sodnik, P. Szolgay, and G. Jakus, “Exploring direct
3d interaction for full horizontal parallax light field displays using leap
motion controller,” Sensors, vol. 15, 2015, pp. 8642–8663.
J. Guna, G. Jakus, M. Pogacnik, S. Tomazic, and J. Sodnik, “An
analisis of the precision and reliability of the leap motion sensor and
its suitability for static and diynamic tracking,” Sensors, vol. 14, 2014,
pp. 3702–3720.

R EFERENCES
[1]
[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]
[7]

C. Cameron et al. “Hand tracking and visualization in a virtual reality
simulation,” April 2011, pp. 127–132.
D. Wigdor and D. Wixon, “Brave NUI World: Designing Natural User
Interfaces for Touch and Gesture,” 1st ed. San Francisco, CA, USA:
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 2011.
M. Covarrubias, M. Rossini, G. Caruso, G. Samali, C. Giovanzana,
F. Molteni, M. Bordegoni, “Sound Feedback Assessment for Upper
Limb Rehabilitation Using a Multimodal Guidance System,” in International Conference on Computers Helping People with Special Needs.
ICCHP 2016 - Proceedings, July 2016, pp. 529–536.
M. Covarrubias, M. Bordegoni, U. Cugini, E. Gatti, “Supporting Unskilled People in Manual Tasks through Haptic-Based Guidance, Information Systems Research and Exploring Social Artifacts: Approaches
and Methodologies. Edited by IGI Global, 2012. pp. 355–378.
G. Ren and E. O’Neill, “3d selection with freehand gesture,” Computers
& Graphics, vol. 37, no. 3, 2013, pp. 101 – 120. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0097849312001823
[retrieved: February, 2017]
[Online]. Available: http://http://unity3d.com [retrieved: February, 2017]
[Online]. Available: http://www.telbios.com/telbiosconnect/ [retrieved:
February, 2017]

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

122

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

A Novel Kinematic Model for Wearable Gait Analysis

Marcello Fusca, Paolo Perego, Giuseppe Andreoni
Design Dept. – E4Sport Lab
Politecnico di Milano
Milan, Italy
e-mail marcello.fusca@polimi.it
Abstract— The work studies the acceleration of a single triaxial accelerometer fixed at the sacrum position on the back of
subject next to the COM (Center of Mass). The correlation
between the cycle of the COM and the cycle of the walking is
analyzed by using a harmonic oscillator as a model for human
locomotion. The COM position is calculated without any
integration of its acceleration. A double integration of raw
accelerometer data can result in an accumulation of drift error
resulting in wrong position and distance or step length
evaluation. The acceleration of a harmonic oscillator is directly
proportional to the position. We evaluate the COM position
and translation into a sinusoidal pattern. For every step cycle,
the maximum of COM amplitude is used to give the relative S
step length. This kinematic model generates the properly
attended values; all steps are detected and the absolute
accuracy error in the measurement of the step length, ranges
from 0.32% to 3.33% with a mean value 2.17%. In the model,
many output parameters are processed to study the subject
movement analysis, but all that parameters should be
compared with the gold standard values using appropriate
protocols. We use data of Swedish adult people to obtain
coefficients C to evaluate Smean (mean anthropometric step
length). Smean is used only as a reference, but is not the S value
measured by the model. New protocols and data verification
are carried out. The expectation is to develop a dedicated tool
to support diagnosis and rehabilitation.
Keywords-wearable device; wearable sensors; gait analysis;
human kinematics; clinical application; algorithms.

I. INTRODUCTION
Gait analysis is a complex and expensive technology.
The setup of a limited working area in laboratory, the use of
markers on the subject and the data analysis are not simple
to approach. Outside the laboratory, the use of the system is
not artless. Healthcare requires a novel ecologic approach to
the movement analysis in order to make it friendly and
designed under ergonomic constraints as well as the
performance assessment in agonistic sports and/or clinical
follow up in home monitoring. The wearable sensors are a
possible solution to this problem. They are easy to use and
not intrusive, so that it is possible to monitor subjects
everywhere [1][2]. The introduction of smart fabrics and
wearable sensors improves and simplifies the development
of these sensors, the evaluation of the movements and also
the rehabilitation of patients in their clinical pathway. In
fact, the possibility to embed sensors directly into the user’s

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

garments becomes real [3][4]. In this way, their use allows
for a natural walk while monitoring is in progress. Clinical
tests are often conducted with manual counting of times,
steps and distances; their confirmation is carried out through
the support of concurrent video analysis. The use of
wearable devices for the gait analysis without optoelectronic
analysis is possible. This matter is still under investigation.
The need to monitor health status of patients drives an
improvement and an evolution to use remote control
systems for analyzing data through a trained medical center.
Transmission and storage of clinical data is driven by
attention to the security and privacy [1][5]. On the research
side, more accurate biomechanical models are being
implemented, the improvement of signal processing and
advanced analysis algorithms are a focus of development so
to enhance the interpretation of the output data of wearable
sensors for decision making [2][6][7]. Every new wearable
analysis tool for gait analysis is a strong target; better results
need to be introduced into the clinical practice in order to
exploit for example a wearable 6MWT (Six Minutes
Walking Test), or a wearable TUG (Timed Up and Go), or
other trials, without the particular limitations of a
laboratory. Our work goes into this direction: we developed
a novel kinematic model and related method to process 3D
inertial accelerometer data and to compute parameters of
gait analysis. The structure of the paper is as follows:
section 2.1 the Biomechanical model; section 2.2 the
experimental setup; sections 2.3 and 2.4 the Methods A and
B to analyze raw data; sections 3.1 and 3.2 the Data
Analysis with Method A and B; section 4 the conclusions.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
This section reports the description of the methodology
used for the kinematic model. We divided the section in four
subsections in which we explain the Biomechanical model,
the experimental setup, the processing methods for bot the
parts.
2.1 Biomechanical Model
Describing the movement of a subject, we have to
consider the external forces and, therefore, the accelerations
acting on his/her body. In absence of other forces, we
always have the action of the gravity force, and then the
subject has to produce a counterbalanced force to remain in

123

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

equilibrium even when stationary. The COM (Center of
Mass) is a single point where we can think that the whole
mass of the body is concentrated, so that it is equivalent to
the entire considered object, where the external forces act
according to the Newton’s laws of motion. In a standing
posture, its position is typically about 10 cm lower than the
navel, in the sagittal plane and in correspondence of the
anterior superior iliac crests (the top of the hip bones). To
know as the COM moves, it means to know how the object
moves. For this reason, we studied human walking by
evaluating the acceleration signals of a single tri-axial
accelerometer fixed on the pelvis of subjects next to the
COM, i.e. in correspondence of the second sacral vertebra.
In the FIGURE 1 a subject walk and the positions in time of
the COM are presented with circles and a trajectory. L is the
leg length, θ is the hip angle in the sagittal plane and S is the
step length. While the subject moves a step S, the COM
moves vertically along an oscillating path; the maximum
oscillation amplitude is hCOM. When the subject moves the
next steps, the cycle repeats. While walking, the COM
oscillation pattern is considered sinusoidal in the vertical
and mediolateral directions [8]. In this work we describe the
COM vertical oscillation, but the same method is applicable
to the COM mediolateral oscillation. To describe human
locomotion, it is analyzed the correlation between the cycle
of COM and the cycle of walking, by using a harmonic
oscillator model. The legs are considered rigid bodies. The
swinging movement is described by a pendulum model [9].

Figure 1. Representation of the Center of Mass oscillation path during walk

According to this model, we can define:
• S = the length of the step;
• L = the length of a lower limb;
• hCOM = the maximum amplitude of the vertical
variation of COM trajectory (distance between the
maximum and the minimum height of the COM);
• θ = the hip angle in the sagittal plane;
S = 2 * 2 * L * hCOM - hCOM 2 .

The COM position must be calculated. A direct double
integration of raw accelerometer data gives the position
which can result in an accumulation of drift error giving
wrong position and wrong distance or wrong step length.
Other studies chose to double integrate and report solution
to solve the drift error [6]. We do not carry out a double

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

integration. Some information may be obtained using the
property that the acceleration of a harmonic oscillator is
directly proportional to the position. For every step cycle,
the maximum of COM amplitude is used to give the relative
S step length and distance.
2.2 Experimental setup
We used a wearable 3D accelerometer (Protheo SXT
s.r.l., Lecco, Italy) [10]. Protheo technical details are: 85 (l)
x 53 (w) x 16 (h) mm of size, 70 g of weight, 4 digits LCD,
on board ARM7 microprocessor and raw acceleration
sampling frequency of 128 Hz. This device is able to log triaxial accelerometer signals into the internal memory (up to
three days of continuous monitoring) which can be
downloaded at the end of the acquisition by Bluetooth®
data transmission. The data storage allows for recording
different tests in sequence. When we carry out different tests
in sequence, we have no way to monitor over the data
recording until the recording is downloaded. We calibrated
the output raw signals when the data processing is carry out.
Protheo could record also an electrocardiogram of the
subject while he is making the test, but this option is not
used for this study. The system is worn at sacrum position
on the back of the subject, by means of an elastic band with
a pocket for fixing the device firmly to the body. We
recorded six independent walking tests of a single subject.
In the test protocol the subject walked with shoes at selfselected speed over a linear path of 31.2 m; the walking
time is not a constant. To control the test, the step length
was kept fixed at 60 cm, so that 52 steps were necessary to
complete the path. These values are the true imposed values
used for accuracy assessment. For this purpose, a linear set
of 60 cm interspaced lines was drawn to drive the position
of the tip of the foot at each step. This step value is very
close to the subject natural one that has the anthropometric
estimated value of Smean = 61.9 cm (mean anthropometric
step length). We evaluate Smean using data of Swedish adult
people but different values are possible compared with
different cultural background [11][12]. From this data we
obtain the C coefficients depending on gender, speed and H
(height) of the subject as in TABLE I.
S mean = C * H

Smean is a reference and S the measured step length. C
permits the evaluation of the mean anthropometric step
length depending on gender, heigth and speed. Gender, age,
weight and following anthropometric measurements of the
subject under analysis were taken to complete the
biomechanical model: a) lower limb (ground-greater
trochanter); b) ground-malleolus; c) lateral condyle-greater
trochanter; d) malleolus-lateral condyle; e) fifth metatarsalmalleolus; f) width of the foot; g) length of the foot to the
ground; h) outer distance between the feet. The subject is a
healthy male (w = 80 kg, h = 181 cm, age = 51 years) with
normal BMI (Body Mass Index) 24.4. TABLE II reports his
anthropometric measures. In the model, we use the Tanaka

124

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

formula [13] to compute the HRmax (maximum Heart Rate)
in bpm unit and the HRR (Heart Rate Reserve); we need the
heartbeat as an input value at the beginning of the test with
the resting subject and at the end of the test to compute the
cardiac effort during exercise. The energy expenditure is
evaluated in [METS]. Raw accelerometer data processing
was implemented in Matlab© software suite. Two different
processing methods were compared (Method A and B).
TABLE I. THE C COEFFICIENT CALCULATED USING SWEDISH REFERENCE
DATA FOR NORMAL SUBJECTS;
Speed

Low < 0.90 m/s

Normal [0.90-1.40] m/s

Fast >1.40 m/s

Man

0.2928

0.3422

0.3956

Woman

0.3102

0.3539

0.3994

TABLE II. ANTHROPOMETRIC MEASURES OF THE SUBJECT UNDER
ANALYSIS.
Body Segment

Value [cm]

Body Segment

Value [cm]

a

96

e

14.5

b

12

f

9

c

41

g

30

d

43

h

32

2.3. The Processing Method A
The peaks in raw data were detected by peakdet.m
function [14], using a 5th order pass-band Butterworth filter
(band: 0.5 - 4 Hz). To identify S, we used the peak positions
detected by the previous peakdet routine, applying the
harmonic oscillator model to the original raw signals filtered
with a low-pass 19th order Butterworth filter, with these
cut-off frequencies for each acceleration:
• Antero Posterior acceleration: 6 Hz;
• Vertical acceleration: 7 Hz;
• Medio Lateral acceleration: 8 Hz.
The evaluation of hCOM was carried out by applying a cutoff threshold of 6 cm to the double of maxima amplitude of
COM sinusoidal pattern. The amplitude to be considered in
the model is the length between the maximum and the
minimum for every COM oscillation. The time between two
consecutive vertical peaks is the single step time. In order to
identify the starting step (left or right), the analysis of
mediolateral acceleration was made. The same analysis can
be applied in order to extract the asymmetry of right and left
steps [15]. The kinematic model can extract the following
parameters:
• BMI [kg/m^2];
• cadence [step/min] and frequency [step/s];
• stepping time [s];
• stride's periods [s];
• right and left step's periods [s];
• displacement of COM [m];
• speed [m/s];
• speed for the right and left steps [m/s];
• right and left step lengths [m];
• length of steps [m];

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

incremental distance traveled at each step [m];
pace distances [m];
pace angles [degrees];
pace coefficients of walking efficiency;
number of steps and strides;
sagittal hip angle [degrees];
the first right or left leg support;
base of support both with aids that without [m^2];
width of steps [m];
acceleration peaks at ground support phase [g];
step and stride indices of regularity and symmetry;
total and incremental energy expenditure [METS];
the power spectrum of the accelerometer signal;
maximum heart rate and heart rate reserve;
6MWT predicted normal distance value [m];
report with office format.

2.4. The Processing Method B
Method A is consistent if subject walks with a constant
step, but this is not a normal constrain; if there is a velocity
variation for external causes or other voluntary choices, a
new set of processing filters has to be applied to the
acquired data for the research of peak acceleration and the
relative values. To verify this hypothesis, we carried out a
set of experiments by asking the subject to walk on a
treadmill and progressively increasing its speed (from 0.5 to
1.7 m/s). The same concept could be applied to pathological
patients, walking slower and asymmetrically, such as stroke
patients (walking speed < 0.5 m/s).
This issue was faced in the second approach here proposed
(Method B), as an evolution of Method A.
The peaks of raw signals that identify steps, were detected
by peakdet.m function; the low-pass filter used is different
according to the walking speed:
• at high velocity, a 5th order low-pass Butterworth
filter is applied with the following cut-off
frequencies:
o Antero Posterior acceleration: 1.8 Hz;
o Vertical acceleration: 1.8 Hz;
o Medio Lateral acceleration: 0.9 Hz;
• at low velocity, a 4th order low-pass Butterworth
filter:
o Antero Posterior acceleration: 35 Hz;
o Vertical acceleration: 5 Hz;
o Medio Lateral acceleration: 3 Hz.
To identify S, we used the previous peak identification,
applying the harmonic oscillator model to the original raw
signals filtered by a 19th order Butterworth filter with the
following cut-off frequencies:
o Antero Posterior acceleration: 6 Hz;
o Vertical acceleration: 35 Hz;
o Medio Lateral acceleration: 8 Hz.
We used six different approaches to define hCOM
threshold:

125

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Mode 0: if we do not know S, the length of the expected
step, hCOM threshold is estimated by the median
of twice the absolute value of the COM amplitude
trend; this value is multiplied by weights that
depend on the average walking speed;
Mode 1: if we know the expected step S, we impose the
hCOM threshold equal to the expected hCOM

TABLE III. METHOD A: REAL AND CALCULATED STEPS AND DISTANCES
VALUES FOR THE SIX TESTS. § ONE STEP IS MISSED.
Steps Step Length
[cm]

Step Length
Accuracy Error %

Distance
[m]

Test

Real
= 52

Real
= 60

Relative

Absolute

Real
= 31.20

Rel.

Abs.

hCOM exp ected = L - L2 - (S / 2)

1

52

59.8 ± 7.6

-0.37%

0.37%

31.08

-0.37

0.37

2

52

56.3 ± 8.4

-6.15%

6.15%

29.28

-6.15

6.15

Mode 2: as in mode 1, but the expected hCOM threshold is
increased of the 20%;
Mode 3: the hCOM threshold is the product of hCOM value
evaluated by linear interpolation and a set of
weight correction factors depending on speeds, so
to matching the value of COM displacement
measured by Orendurff [8], with the expected
COM displacement of the model;
Mode 4: the hCOM threshold is the Lulic’s COM amplitude
[16] with the weights of Mode 3;
Mode 5: the hCOM threshold is 0.6 m.
Through the proper choice of the mode according to
subject’s feature in his/her different scenarios, the model
calculates the correct length values and the number of
strides and steps.

3

52

57.8 ± 8.2

-3.64%

3.64%

30.07

-3.64

3.64

4

51

57.6 ± 6.9

-4.06%

4.06%

29.36 §

-5.91

5.91

5

52

53.5 ± 8.3

-10.78%

10.78%

27.84

-10.8

10.8

2

Distance Length
Accuracy Error %

6

51

57.2 ± 8.1

-4.65%

4.65%

29.18 §

-6.48

6.48

mean

52

57.0

-4.94%

4.94%

29,50

-5,22

5,22

min

51

53.5

-10.78%

0.37%

27,84

-10,78

0,37

max

52

59.8

-0.37%

10.78%

31,08

-0,37

10,78

TABLE IV. MODIFIED METHOD A. THE DATA ARE REAL AND CALCULATED
STEPS AND DISTANCES VALUES FOR THE SIX TESTS. FOR * THE DISTANCE BY
MODEL IS CORRECTED FOR THE ONE STEP MISSED.
Step Length [cm]

Distance [m]
a) Real 31.20
b) Anthropometric 32.21

Step Length
Accuracy Error %

III. RESULTS

Test

Real

Model

c) Model

Relative

Absolute

The step counting obtained from the device was
compared with the true reference value i.e. that one taken
manually by the observing operator.

1

60.00

61.49

31.98

2.49

2.49

2

60.00

58.00

30.16

-3.33

3.33

3

60.00

59.81

31.10

-0.32

0.32

4

60.00

58.08

30.78 *

-3.21

3.21

5

60.00

58.95

30.66

-1.75

1.75

6

60.00

58.84

31.17 *

-1.94

1.94

mean

60.00

59.20

30.78

-1.34

2.17

min

60.00

58.00

30.16

-3.33

0.32

max

60.00

61.49

31.98

2.49

3.33

3.1 The Data Analysis with Method A
The Method A (TABLE III) detected all 52 steps in the test
(1, 2, 3, 5). In the tests (4, 6), 51 steps are detected. The
absolute accuracy error in the measurement of the step
length, ranges from 0.37% to 10.78% with a mean value
4.94%; the absolute accuracy error in the measurement of
the walking total path, ranges from 0.37% to 10.78% with a
mean value 5.22%. The subject covers the path from a
standing start; the first steps are not regular because the
subject is still not in a steady state. If we replace the initial
steps with the next ones, we have a steady state for all the
path. If the high frequencies contribute in the oscillator
modeling, the removal of the low-pass filter during the step
evaluation, should give a better result. The analysis with the
Modified Method A is presented in TABLE IV. The
absolute accuracy error in the measurement of the step
length, ranges from 0.32% to 3.33% with a mean value
2.17%. The error is less that in the original Method A. The
anthropometric distance is evaluated with C coefficient of
TABLE I. With the Method A (TABLE V), the absolute
accuracy error in the walking speed ranges from 0.37% to
10.77% with a mean value 5.55%. The stride and step
frequencies measured are presented in the same table. With
the modified method, A (TABLE VI), the absolute accuracy
error in the walking speed ranges from 0.52% to 3.31% with
a mean value 1.70%.

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

The stride and step frequencies measured are presented in
the same table. The error is less that in the original Method
A. In the Method A (TABLE VII), the absolute error in the
COM amplitude versus expected ranges from 1.04% to
18.92% with a mean value 11.05%. In the Modified Method
A (TABLE VIII), the absolute error in the COM amplitude
versus expected ranges from 0.18% to 5.92% with a mean
value 3.88%. The Modified Method A is good: all steps are
detected, except in some tests where one is missed, and the
accuracy error is acceptable. We have the need for a
development of this method for a better detection of all
steps and for a more flexible tool to analyze data: the
Method B.

126

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

TABLE V. METHOD A. TIMES, VELOCITIES, STRIDES, STEPS AND
ACCURACY VELOCITY ERROR ARE PRESENTED FOR THE SIX TESTS.

TABLE VIII. MODIFIED METHOD A. EVALUATION OF THE COM AMPLITUDE
DURING THE SIX TESTS.

§ FAILURE RECOGNITION OF ONE STEP.
Time [s]
Test

Speed [m/s]

COM Amplitude [cm]

Accuracy Speed
Error %

Frequency

Mean Versus Expected Error %

Test

Min

Max

Mean

Expected

Relative

Absolute

3.35

6.00

5.09

4.81

5.92

5.92

Real

Model

Rel.

Abs.

[Stride/s]

[Step/s
]

1
2

2.04

6.00

4.55

4.81

-5.39

5.39

1

32.68

0.9547

0.9512

-0.37

0.37

0.80

1.59

3

2.50

6.00

4.82

4.81

0.18

0.18

2

31.49

0.9907

0.9298

-6.15

6.15

0.83

1.65

4

2.57

6.00

4.54

4.81

-5.63

5.63

3

30.56

1.0209

0.9837

-3.64

3.64

0.85

1.70

5

3.67

6.00

4.66

4.81

-3.10

3.10

4

31.06

1.0044

0.9451 §

-5.90

5.90

0.80

1.64

6

2.84

6.00

4.66

4.81

-3.03

3.03

5

31.95

0.9764

0.8712

-10.77

10.77

0.81

1.63

mean

2.83

6.00

4.72

4.81

-1.84

3.88

6

29.84

1.0455

0.9777 §

-6.48

6.48

0.84

1.71

min

2.04

6.00

4.54

4.81

-5.63

0.18

mean

31.26

0.9988

0.9431

-5.55

5.55

0.82

1.65

max

3.67

6.00

5.09

4.81

5.92

5.92

min

29.84

0.9547

0.8712

-10.77

0.37

0.80

1.59

max

32.68

1.0455

0.9837

-0.37

10.77

0.85

1.71

TABLE VI. MODIFIED METHOD A. TIMES, VELOCITIES, STRIDES, STEPS
AND ACCURACY VELOCITY ERROR ARE PRESENTED FOR THE SIX TESTS.
Time [s]
Test

Speed [m/s]

Accuracy Speed Error %

Frequency

Real

Model

Rel.

Abs.

[Stride/s]

[Step/s]

1

33.77

0.9240

0.9546

3.31

3.31

0.77

1.54

2

32.78

0.9518

0.9331

-1.96

1.96

0.79

1.59

3

32.35

0.9644

0.9712

0.71

0.71

0.80

1.61

4

32.09

0.9724

0.9475

-2.56

2.56

0.81

1.62

5

33.05

0.9439

0.9390

-0.52

0.52

0.79

1.57

6

31.69

0.9846

0.9732

-1.16

1.16

0.82

1.64

mean

32.62

0.9568

0.9531

-0.36

1.70

0.80

1.60

min

31.69

0.9240

0.9331

-2.56

0.52

0.77

max

33.77

0.9846

0.9732

3.31

3.31

0.82

Test

Min

Max

Mean

Step Length
[cm]

Test

Real
= 52

1.54

1

1.64

2

Mean Versus Expected Error %

Expected

Relative

Absolute

1

1.50

6.00

4.86

4.81

1.04

1.04

2

0.82

6.00

4.32

4.81

-10.19

10.19

3

1.25

6.00

4.55

4.81

-5.41

5.41

4

0.91

6.00

4.49

4.81

-6.65

6.65

5

0.39

6.00

3.90

4.81

-18.92

18.92

6

0.61

6.00

4.46

4.81

-7.28

7.28

mean

0.91

6.00

4.30

4.81

-10.71

11.05

min

0.39

6.00

3.09

4.81

-18.92

1.04

max

1.50

6.00

4.86

4.81

1.04

18.92

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

TABLE IX. METHOD B. MODE 5. REAL AND CALCULATED STEPS AND
DISTANCES VALUES FOR THE SIX TESTS. THE METHOD B WITH MODE 5 IS
USED FOR DATA PROCESSING.
Steps

TABLE VII. METHOD A. EVALUATION OF THE COM AMPLITUDE DURING
THE SIX TESTS.
COM Amplitude [cm]

3.2 The Data Analysis with Method B
The Method B (TABLE XI) detected all 52 steps in every
test. We do not yet used the correction for steady state but if
we did, the results will be better. By using Mode 5, the
absolute accuracy error in the measurement of the walking
total path, as well as the step length (error is the same),
ranges from 0.27% to 6.31% with a mean value 3.00%.
With this modality, the relative values are both positives and
negatives.

Step (and Distance) Length
Accuracy Error %

Distance
[m]

Real
= 60

Relative

Absolute

Real
= 31.20

52

63.8 ± 5.2

6.31

6.31

33.17

52

60.2 ± 7.5

0.27

0.27

31.28

3

52

60.9 ± 7.8

1.52

1.52

31.67

4

52

60.4 ± 6.2

0.71

0.71

31.42

5

52

57.0 ± 7.5

-4.98

4.98

29.65

6

52

62.5 ± 7.5

4.22

4.22

32.52

mean

52

60,8

1,34

3,00

31.62

min

52

57,0

-4,98

0,27

29.65

max

52

63,8

6,31

6,31

33.17

By using Mode 1 (TABLE X), the absolute accuracy error
in the measurement of the walking total path, as well as the
step length (error is the same), ranges from 1.58% to 6.80%
with a mean value 3.72%. The Mode 1 underestimates the
step length in every test. We can think of using a special
correction factor to correct this underestimation to have
more accuracy. This allows the definition of the proper
filtering to be adopted by the two processing methods.

127

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

TABLE X. METHOD B. MODE 1. REAL AND CALCULATED STEPS AND
DISTANCES VALUES FOR THE SIX TESTS.
Steps

Step Lenght
[cm]

Step (and Distance) Length
Accuracy Error %

Distance
[m]

Test

Real= 52

Real= 60

Relative

Absolute

Real=
31.20

1

52

59.1 ± 3.4

-1.58

1.58%

30.71

2

52

57.1 ± 5.5

-4.84

4.84%

29.69

3

52

58.0 ± 6.4

-3.32

3.32%

30.17

4

52

58.1 ± 4.7

-3.21

3.21%

30.20

5

52

55.9 ± 6.5

-6.80

6.80%

29.08

6

52

58.5 ± 6.1

-2.55

2.55%

30.40

mean

52

57.8

-3.72

3.72%

30.04

min

52

55.9

-6.80

1.58%

29.08

max

52

59.1

-1.58

6.80%

30.71

In the two conditions 1) and 2) the BMI of the subject was
very different. In the trial repetitions of the first protocol
(six tests of a single healthy subject) and their data
processing, is demonstrated that the model produced the
expected values with very good accuracy. The use of
coefficients C for evaluating Smean (mean anthropometric
step length) carry out a good reference, but is not the
measured value S by the model. In the Method A, non-all
the steps are detected (one step is lost in two tests), but if the
filter is changed as in the Method B, the 100% of the 52
steps are detected. In the Modified Method A, the absolute
accuracy error in the measurement of the step length, ranges
from a minimum 0.32% to a maximum 3.33% with a mean
value 2.17%; in the Method B, it ranges from a minimum
0.27% to a maximum 6.31% with a mean value 3.00%.
These values do not yet use the correction for the steady
state (used by Modified Method A), but if we did, the
results should be better, so the equivalent values of the
Method A to be compared are the minimum 0.37%, the
maximum 10.77% and the mean value 5.55%. The Method
B is better and more flexible. The parameters extracted by
the model are very complete, but should be compared with
the gold standard values using appropriate protocols.
Preliminary reliability of both methods is more than good.
This first validation is now followed by a protocol
application on a wider population of healthy subjects and
post stroke patients, to validate also its clinical application.
The tests with an electronically controlled treadmill are
carried out on healthy subjects following the dedicated
protocol. We are also investigating the clinical applicability
of the approach on a group of stroke patients undergoing
rehabilitation programs. The tests performed are the 10m
test at low and high walking speed, the 6MWT and the
TUG. A control group of healthy subjects is considered. The
expectation is to develop a dedicated tool for supporting
diagnosis and rehabilitation. This will also allow for
investigation of model sensitivity in detecting the gait
parameters improvements.

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

REFERENCES
[1]
[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]
[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

W. Tao, T. Liu, R. Zheng and H. Feng, “Gait Analysis Using
Wearable Sensors”, Sensors (2012) 12: pp. 2255-2283;
A. Muro-de-la-Herran, B. Garcia-Zapirain and A.MendezZorrilla, “Gait Analysis Methods: An Overview of Wearable
and Non-Wearable Systems, Highlighting Clinical
Applications”, Sensors (2014) 14: pp. 3362-3394;
S. Patel, H. Park, P. Bonato, L. Chan and M. Rodgers, “A
review of wearable sensors and systems with application in
rehabilitation”,
Journal
of
NeuroEngineering
and
Rehabilitation (2012) 9:21;
I. Spulber, E. Papi, Y.-M. Chen, S. Anastasova-Ivanova, J.
Bergmann, P. Georgiou and A.H. McGregor, “Development
of a wireless multi-functional body sensing platform for smart
garment integration”, Biomedical Circuits and Systems
Conference (BioCAS), 22-24 Oct. 2014 IEEE;
A.Pantelopoulos, N. G. Bourbakis, “A Survey on Wearable
Sensor-Based Systems for Health Monitoring and Prognosis”,
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, Part C
(Applications and Reviews), (2010) 40 (1): pp. 1-12;
W. Zijlstra and A. L. Hof, “Assessment of spatio-temporal
gait parameters from trunk accelerations during human
walking”, Gait and Posture (2003) 18: pp. 1-10;
N. A. Capela , E. D. Lemaire and N. Baddour, “Novel
algorithm for a smartphone-based 6-minute walk test
application: algorithm, application development, and
evaluation”, Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation
(2015) 12:19;
M. S. Orendurff, A. D. Segal, G. K. Klute, J. S. Berge, E. S.
Rohr and N.J. Kadel, “The effect of walking speed on center
of mass displacement”, J Rehabil Res Dev, Nov-Dec (2004)
41 (6A): pp. 829-834;
K. G. Holt, J. Hamill and R. O. Andres, “The force-driven
harmonic oscillator as a model for human locomotion”,
Human Movement Science (1990) 9: pp. 55-68;
http://www.sxt-telemed.it/Products/Protheo/Protheo.aspx, last
accessed 22 february 2017;
T. Oberg, A. Karsznia and K. Oberg, “Basic gait parameters:
reference data for normal subjects, 10-79 years of age”,
Journal of rehabilitation research and development (1993) 30
(2): pp. 210-223;
S. Al-Obaidi, J. C. Wall, A. Al-Yaqoub, M. Al-Ghanim,
“Basic gait parameters: A comparison of reference data for
normal subjects 20 to 29 years of age from Kuwait and
Scandinavia.” Journal of rehabilitation research and
development (2003) 40 (4): pp.361-366;
H. Tanaka, K. D. Monahan, D. R. Seals, “Age-predicted
maximal heart rate revisited”, J Am Coll Cardiol. (2001) 37
(1): pp. 153-156;
E.
Billauer,
Peak
detect
using
Matlab,
http://www.billauer.co.il/peakdet.html, last accessed 22
february 2017;
R. Moe-Nilssen and J. L. Helbostad, “Estimation of gait cycle
characteristics by trunk accelerometry”, Journal of
Biomechanics (2004) 37: pp. 121-126;
T. Jurcevic Lulic and O. Muftic, “Trajectory of the human
body mass centre during walking at different speed”, DS 30:
Proceedings of DESIGN 2002, the 7th International Design
Conference, Dubrovnik (2002).

128

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Proposal of a Validation Protocol for Wearable Systems Reliability Assessment
Application to PEGASO sensors’ system

Giuseppe Andreoni, Paolo Perego, Marcello Fusca
Design dept. – E4Sport Lab
Politecnico di Milano
Milan, Italy
email:{giuseppe.andreoni, paolo.perego,
marcello.fusca}@polimi.it

Abstract—This paper describes the proposal of a validation
procedure to assess the reliability of wearables systems.
According to the two main categories of devices we have defined
an integrated experimental protocol composed by two parts: the
first one applies to sensorized garments or similar devices (also
including belts or patches) while the second part is dedicated to
body worn activity trackers like smart bracelets or smart
watches, belt-worn devices, sensors embedded in necklace or
other garment accessories. This protocol applied a sequence of
real life activities and posture changes to be properly identified
in value and in time. It has been applied to the case study of the
sensors developed and used in the frame of the Pegaso Fit 4
Future EU project. This test has demonstrated the protocol
feasibility, applicability, easy to use and easy data processing
and its sensitivity. We are adopting this protocol as standard
procedure in any further study regarding the reliability
assessment of wearable devices.
Keywords-wearable systems; validation protocol; reliability;
accuracy; real life testing.

I.

INTRODUCTION

In the last years, a worldwide spreading category of
devices used in sport, fitness and also healthcare are wearable
systems [6]. Wearable devices are a popular and growing
market for monitoring physical activity, sleep, and other
behaviors [2]. In particular, for healthcare applications,
activity trackers like wrist-worn systems (bracelets) or similar
devices are now in progress, but this requires a deep and
structured reliability analysis of their performances before
their deployment into clinical practice. Several studies are
ongoing [2], each using its own protocol. For this reason, and
to methodologically have the opportunity to compare
homogeneously these technologies, we have decided to study
and propose a dedicated standard protocol for reliability
assessment here described.
The paper is divided into two sections: Section 2 highlight
the experimental protocol underlining the difference between
the first part (static test) and the second one (dynamic test).
Section 2 continues with the explanation of the wearable
sensors tested and closes with reporting the validation
procedure and parameters. Section 3 reports the results on
both testing procedure and the application of this on specific

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

Martina Caramenti, Fabio Rastelli, Claudio L.
Lafortuna
Istituto di Bioimmagini e Fisiologia Molecolare
CNR
Segrate (Milan), Italy
email:{martina.caramenti, fabio.rastelli,
claudio.lafortuna}@cnr.it
wearable device. Then Section 4 ends the paper with the
conclusion and future development.
II.

MATERIALS & METHODS

A. Experimental protocol
The experimental protocol is methodologically based onto
a paired video and bio-signal acquisition during different
postural tasks in controlled environment and locomotion
(walking and running) at different velocities on treadmill
(Woodway Inc., USA). The video is recorded by a digital
camera with lateral acquisition of subject. The subjects
followed a supervised protocol divided in two parts (protocol
part I and part II), with the aim of testing the capability of the
sensor to recognize body position changes and transitions
from rest to activity and vice-versa (protocol part I) and to
detect gait and speed of locomotion together with kinematic
parameters, during activities on treadmill ranging from
sedentary to vigorous intensity physical activity (part II).
The experimental activity is to be conducted in controlled
conditions during different postural tasks and locomotion on
treadmill with simultaneous video-recording.
A methodologically coherent subject sample, different in
age, sex and anthropometry, has to be properly selected.
a) Part I
The first part of the protocol (Part I) is specifically
dedicated to assess the capability of the systems to detect
posture, its transitions and the related activity level through
HR (heart rate). The first part of the protocol (Part I) consists
of 10 postural tasks (phase from 1 to 10). More precisely, there
is a sequence of postural transitions alternating phases of
resting (lying, standing and sitting) and walking/running
phases. The overall Part I protocol is described in the
following table I.
Contextually, the video of the experiment is recorded by a
digital camera with lateral acquisition of the subject.
The assessments indexes are activity recognition, posture
recognition and computational time.
a) Part II
Instead, the second part of the protocol (Part II) is
specifically designed for assessing the reliability of systems

129

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

during the progressively increase of activity level. It consists
of 10 stages (phase from 1 to 10).
TABLE I.
Phase
no.

PROTOCOL PART I

Wearable validation protocol – Part I
Activity description

Posture

1

20 seconds sitting

2

20 seconds resting with arms at the sides

standing

3

20 seconds walking onto a treadmill

standing

4

30 seconds running onto a treadmill

standing

5

10 seconds sitting

6

20 seconds lying onto the back

7

20 seconds lying onto the right side

8

20 seconds lying onto the left side

9

20 seconds lying onto the belly

10

20 seconds resting with arms at the sides

TABLE II.
Phase
no.

sitting

sitting

PEGASO Fit 4 Future [3]. In the PEGASO project, the sensors
system is composed by 2 elements (Figure 1):
• a sensorized t-shirt (male version) or bra (female
version) including a pair of textile electrodes and
mounting at the chest level a device named WES
capable of recording and/or transmitting 1 ECG lead
and 3D accelerations of the trunk.
• an activity tracker consisting in a smart bracelet
named WWAT and integrating a 3D accelerometer to
monito human kinetics. The WWAT embedded
algorithm computes the steps number, the activity
(resting, walking, cycling, running, swimming and
sleeping) through. Energy expenditure is estimated
too.

lying (supine)
lying (right)
lying (left)
lying (prone)
standing

PROTOCOL PART II

Wearable validation protocol – Part II
Activity description

Posture

1

Rest sitting for 30 seconds

sitting

2

Rest standing for 30 seconds.

standing

3

Walking at 2 km/h for 30 seconds

walking

4

Walking at 3 km/h for 30 seconds

walking

5

Walking at 4 km/h for 30 seconds

walking

6

Walking at 5 km/h for 30 seconds

walking

7

Walking at 6 km/h for 30 seconds

walking

8

Running at 6 km/h for 30 seconds

running

9

Running at 7 km/h for 30 seconds

running

10

Running at 8 km/h for 30 seconds

running

11

Running at 9 km/h for 30 seconds

running

More precisely, it consisted of 120s of resting (standing
and sitting), 150s of walking and 120s of running. The subject
carries out the following experimental procedure on a
treadmill: from standing to running at 9 km/m then stop and
recovery. The overall Part II protocol is described in table II.
Also in this case, contextually, the video of the experiment
is recorded by a digital camera with lateral acquisition of the
subject. The video of the subject’s trial allows for the retrieval
of the true values of the computed parameters (activity, steps,
cadence, etc.) along with the acquisition.
B. Wearable system
To apply the protocol on a specific healthcare application we
decided to adopt the sensors developed in the EU project

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

Figure 1: The PEGASO sensor system
.

C. Validation parameters, citeria and indexes
According to the device differences, we have identified to
different analyses that can be conducted on corresponding
data.
a) Part I and Part II, devices with ECG/Heart Rate
measurement
All the signals have to be processed to compute the
following three values for each phase:
- Activity recognition (0=N, 1=Y),
- Posture recognition (0=N, 1=Y),
- Computational time (0 = time > 3 sec for activity and
posture recognition, 1 = time <= 3 sec for activity and
posture recognition).
The test is passed if the overall score is equal or greater
than 90% during the complete test.
All the signals have to be processed to compute the beatto-beat HR with standard algorithms. The values of HR
recognition are 0=N and 1=Y. METs (Metabolic Equivalent
of Task) estimated from sensor, are compared with values
obtained with ACSM (American College of Sports Medicine)
metabolic equations for walking/running [4]. The test is
passed if the overall score is equal or greater than 90% during
the whole test.
Analysis of video-recording, is carried out through
Advene, an open source software (Advene, Lyon, France) [5],
providing a model and a format to share annotations about
digital video documents, as well as tools to edit and visualize

130

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 2. Example of the video-recording data visualization and values together with relative annotations in the Advene software.

the hyper videos generated from both the annotations and the
audiovisual documents [7]. An example of the processing
procedure of the video-recordings is shown in Figure 2.
b) Part I and Part II, devices with human kinetics
measurement only
All the signals have to be processed to compute the
following three values for each phase:
- Activity recognition (0=N, 1=Y),
- Posture recognition (0=N, 1=Y),
- Computational time (0 if time > 3 sec for activity and
posture recognition, 1 if time <= 3 sec for activity and
posture recognition).

raw ECG (blue) and zero-phase FIR filtered ECG (red)

This general test is passed if the overall score is equal or
greater than 90% during the complete test.
More in detail data are processed in order to verify the
correct step identification, count and categorization according
to the different activities and/or speed. Also in this case, the
test is passed if the overall score is equal or greater than 90%
during the complete test. The analysis of video-recording,
through Advene, provides the true and reference values.
The experimental activity was conducted in the
Laboratory of Biomechanics "Franco Saibene" (Istituto di
Bioimmagini e Fisiologia Molecolare del CNR, Segrate,
Milan, Italy) in controlled conditions during different postural
tasks and locomotion on treadmill with simultaneous videorecording.
Heart-rate

20160307_155346_PegasoWES141_0x00040009

140

120

100

heartRate

ECG wit R-peaks (black) and S-points (green) over ECG
80

60

40

RR intervals
20

0

a

0

50

100

150

200

Time(s)
Time
(sec)

250

300

350

b

Figure 3: Data comparison for indexes computation: (a) raw signals and related offline processing with standard algorithms, (b) 5-sec average HR computed
by WES system.

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

131

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

10 subjects took part in the Part I and Part II experiments
for the test of the sensorized garment and the WES device.
Their anthropometric data are reported in Table III. Three
subjects applied the Part II of the protocol to assess its proper
feasibility and reliability on the WWAT device (smart
bracelet): they are the subjects no. 1, 8, and 9 in the same
Table III.
The study was approved by the competent Institutional
Review Board. Subjects were properly informed about testing
procedures, personal data treating, and aims of the research,
and they provided informed written consent before
participation.
III.

steps. These data show that WES sensors are reliable and
accurate in their measurements, appropriately for the
applications they are design to be used for.
TABLE IV.

VALIDATION

Percentual Accuracy
Condition

RESULTS

The results of this study can be divided into two sections:
the first one relates to the assessment of the method itself in
terms of its sensitivity, feasibility and robustness; the second
set of results is about the reliability assessment of the sensors
used in the PEGASO project.
TABLE III.

DATA OF SUBJECTS PARTICIPATING IN WEARABLE DEVICE
VALIDATION

Subj.
no.

sex

Subjects recruited in the validation protocol
Age
heigth
weigth
(yrs)
(m)
(kg)
garment
BMI

1

M

47

1,860

105,2

t-shirt

30,41

2

F

33

1,555

56,2

bra

23,24

3

F

33

1,665

52,9

bra

19,08

4

F

34

1,570

53

bra

21,50

5

F

33

1,685

68,9

bra

24,27

6

M

53

1,730

68,8

t-shirt

22,99

7

M

33

1,780

85,6

t-shirt

27,02

8

F

29

1,710

64,5

bra

22,06

9

M

51

1,815

79,6

t-shirt

24,16

10

M

63

1,745

68,7

t-shirt

22,56

A. Methodological results
The protocol we designed try to answer in an integrated
test to all the parameters a wearable device is usually designed
for. It is robust and sensitive to raw and processed temporal,
kinematic and cardiac data. The validation indexed and
intuitive and easy to be computed, as well as they are
representative of the needed accuracy assessment.
The application case study demonstrated its good
applicability and repeatability in a standard sample size of 10
subjects.
B. Results of the protocol on the reliability of the PEGASO
Sensors system
The WES sensors have a mean accuracy of 99%±2% in
the first part and 93%±7% in the second part; moreover 7
subjects on 10 had an accuracy of 100% in the detection of

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

DATA OF SUBJECTS PARTICIPATING IN WEARABLE DEVICE

Speed
(km/h)

Total

walk/run

walk

2

65,85%

45,05%

walk

3

18,00%

9,36%

walk

4

10,54%

3,45%

walk

5

12,08%

3,54%

walk

6

12,98%

3,54%

run

6

9,23%

0,97%

run

7

9,26%

0,88%

run

8

9,23%

0,80%

run

9

8,55%

7,26%

Average

17,30%

8,32%

St.Dev

0,18

0,14

The WWAT bracelets presented the results shown in table
IV. Algorithms refinement for low speed step detection was
identified as needed.
IV.

CONCLUSIONS

This study aims at setting up a standard protocol for
wearable sensor validation before their introduction in
research projects. This has particular relevance when clinical
applications of wearable sensors have been carried out. The
protocol we have defined is up-to-date with current
technologies and their applications. The results showed both
methodologically and for its application a good performance
in usability and outcomes. Further application will confirm
these findings and other developments could be done for
specific detail of garments or activity trackers depending on
peculiar applications.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been partially funded by the European
Commission: FP7-ICT-2013.5.1—Grant Agreement n ̋
610727. The Authors would like to thank all the partners of
the PEGASO consortium for their proactive collaboration in
the project.
REFERENCES
K. R. Evenson, M. M. Goto, and R. D. Furberg, “Systematic
review of the validity and reliability of consumer-wearable
activity trackers,” International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition
and Physical Activity. Vol. 12:159, pp.68–73, 2015.
[2] P. Perego, M. Tarabini, M. Bocciolone, and G. Andreoni,
“SMARTA: Smart Ambiente and Wearable Home Monitoring
for Elderly,” Internet of Things. IoT Infrastructures, Second
International Summit, IoT 360° 2015, Rome, Italy, October 27[1]

132

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[3]

[4]

[5]
[6]

[7]

29, 2015. Revised Selected Papers, Part I, Lecture Notes of the
Institute for Computer Sciences, Social Informatics and
Telecommunications Engineering, vol. 169, pp 502-507, 18
November 2016.
M. R. Guarneri and G. Andreoni, “PEGASO Fit for Future,”
In: Antonello Rizzi and Antonio Pedotti (eds): European
Project Space on Computational Intelligence, Knowledge
Discovery and Systems Engineering for Health and Sports,
SCITEPRESS Publications. Lda, pp. 77-96, 2015.
ACSM certification, “Metabolic Equations for Gross VO2 in
Metric Units,” https://certification.acsm.org/metabolic-calcs,
last access 27 february 2017.
Advene, “Advene Software, ” http://liris.cnrs.fr/advene/, last
access 27 february 2017.
R. Nensli, E. Gunnarson, and T. Gundersenm, “Wearable
medical devices for tele-home healthcare,” Proceedings of The
26th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering
in Medicine and Biology Society, 2004, pp. 5384-5387.
O. Aubert and Y. Prié, “Advene: active reading O.
hypervideo,” Proceedings of ACM Hypertext'05, Sep 2005, pp.
235-244.

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

133

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

134

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

FrailSafe eCRF
Clinical Data collection tool

Luca Bianconi, Cristiana Degano, Matteo Toma, Fabio Podda
Research Business Unit
Gruppo SIGLA S.r.l.
Genova, Italy
e-mail: frailsafe@grupposigla.it

Abstract—In the context of European funded FrailSafe project,
to enhance the clinical data collection processes in
geographically distributed trials centers, an eCRF software
platform has been designed and implemented. The most
important features are synthetically described.
Keywords: eCRF; Cloud; eHealth; Monitoring; Data
collection.

I.

INTRODUCTION

The Case Report Form (CRF) may be defined as “a
printed, optical or electronic document designed to record all
of the protocol” [1]. Extending this definition, a CRF could
be described as a tool designed to collect data about a patient
state during a clinical trial, e.g., the patient information, the
measurements and others. It represents a significant
instrument for the performance of a clinical trial and its
efficiency could positively affect the success of a medical
research.
CRF is designed for improving the collection of data in
compliance with a research protocol and with regulatory
requirements. Moreover, the researchers should be able to
test the hypothesis or answer the trial related questions. A
CRF represents suitably the essential contents of the defined
research and study protocol.
A flexible eCRF has been implemented for FrailSafe
project to provide the partners devoted to clinical research of
such features.
II.

FRAILSAFE ECRF

In the current global scenario of FrailSafe project, the
development of an electronic CRF (also known as eCRF) has
been preferred over a usual paper CRF for the following
benefits:
• Eliminate unnecessary duplication of data.
• Reduce the possibility for transcription errors.
• Encourage entering source data during a subject’s
visit, where appropriate.
• Eliminate transcription of source data prior to entry
into an eCRF.
• Facilitate remote monitoring of data.
• Promote real-time access for data review.

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

•
•
•

Facilitate the collection of accurate and complete
data.
Possibility to have auto generated data (test results,
calculate formulas, etc.).
Easier data export and data analysis.

As mentioned above, the eCRF aims to support the
clinical researchers during the trials by providing them a web
application (appearing in this case as a plain website)
through which tracking and managing the process of visiting
the participants and enhancing the related data collection, as
depicted in Figure 1.
With the objective of supporting the trial processes in
mind some functional features are needed.
These are:
• Users Management.
• Participants Management.
• Trials Management.
• Devices Management.
• Data Collection.
For enhancing the quality, the reliability, the usability
and the security to reach the common goal, some other
aspects of the application have been taken into consideration
while designing the software.
They are detailed in the following sub-paragraphs.
A. Cross-platform and Multi-device
The eCRF is a web application. This means it behaves
and looks like a common website and that it can be used
through any simple web browser (e.g., Chrome, Firefox,
Internet Explorer, Safari and Opera); thanks to that, it is
immediately available on every device providing a web
browser and an Internet connection (laptop, smartphone,
tablet, etc.), not needing any further technical requirements.
A mobile-first approach has been followed in the design of
the UIs.
B. Authentication and Encryption of Data
Security is guaranteed through the usage of
authentication means, i.e., a username and a password are
needed for accessing to the application and its resources –
and through data encryption. Data is encrypted before being
stored on database and, in communication, a standard

135

eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

protocol for secure communication over a computer network
is adopted to protect the privacy and the integrity of
exchanged data.
C. Data quality
In the eCRF, the clinical staff collects the patient
information during the trial in the same ways and means as if
doing it on paper - that is through questionnaires, forms, etc.
– but displayed instead on a device screen. During the data
addition or before saving, the system checks the coherence of
the data and in case something is not correct it helps the user
with feedbacks. For example, the participant information
cannot be inserted in the system if all the mandatory fields
are not filled or it is not allowed to type characters in a field
that is a measurement value, etc.
D. Multilanguage
The eCRF system, for the FrailSafe project, is used in
three different countries (France, Greece, Cyprus); so the
system can support the different languages to help the
clinical staff and the participants to avoid translation errors
or misunderstandings during the trials execution.
III.

CLOUD INFRASTRUCTURE

For guaranteeing a perpetual availability of the system to
the clinical staff, the eCRF is hosted on remote servers. On
these latter the collected data, thus, are stored securely and
can be used by the system and by the researchers to succeed
in the medical research carried on by FrailSafe.

Moreover, the efficiency and the security of the system
rely on a number of Cloud services and features.
IV.

CONCLUSIONS

In conclusion, this web application is designed and
implemented for assessing correctly the objectives of the
project and of the related medical research. Moreover, it is
worthy to add that the designing and the implementation of
the eCRF has been an important experience for those having
contributed to its design and implementation. It proved to be
a good example of interdisciplinary and collaborative
production of a technological tool. It has seen the close
participation of clinical and ICT partners, from different
countries, making them willingly and passionately working
together to reach a common goal, i.e., implementing the
clinical trial protocol by the mean of an ICT instrument –
showing evidently the benefits of sharing different
backgrounds and skills.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Gruppo SIGLA Research Team thanks the FrailSafe
Consortium for the commitment and energy in the
collaboration whose, the eCRF is the successful outcome.
FrailSafe is funded by the European Commission under
H2020 - PHC-21-2015 - Advancing active and healthy
ageing with ICT: Early risk detection and intervention.
Project ID: 690140.
For further details, refer to [2].

Figure 1. Main Clinical Staff dashboard

REFERENCES
[1] Guideline for Good Clinical Practice, ICH Harmonised
Tripartite Guideline, 1996.
[2] www.frailsafe-project.eu

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)

ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1

136

