Edinburgh Research Explorer
SOPHIA: Soft Orthotic Physiotherapy Hand Interactive Aid
Citation for published version:
Mcconnell, AC, Vallejo, M, Moioli, RC, Brasil, FL, Secciani, N, Nemitz, MP, Riquart, CP, Corne, DW,
Vargas, PA & Stokes, AA 2017, 'SOPHIA: Soft Orthotic Physiotherapy Hand Interactive Aid' Frontiers in
Mechanical Engineering, vol 3. DOI: 10.3389/fmech.2017.00003

Digital Object Identifier (DOI):
10.3389/fmech.2017.00003
Link:
Link to publication record in Edinburgh Research Explorer
Document Version:
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record

Published In:
Frontiers in Mechanical Engineering

General rights
Copyright for the publications made accessible via the Edinburgh Research Explorer is retained by the author(s)
and / or other copyright owners and it is a condition of accessing these publications that users recognise and
abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
Take down policy
The University of Edinburgh has made every reasonable effort to ensure that Edinburgh Research Explorer
content complies with UK legislation. If you believe that the public display of this file breaches copyright please
contact openaccess@ed.ac.uk providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately and
investigate your claim.

Download date: 22. Jul. 2018

Original Research
published: 02 June 2017
doi: 10.3389/fmech.2017.00003

S
Alistair C. McConnell 1,2, Marta Vallejo 1, Renan Cipriano Moioli 3, Fabricio L. Brasil 3,
Nicola Secciani 2, Markus P. Nemitz 2, Cecile P. Riquart 1, David W. Corne 1,
Patricia A. Vargas 1 and Adam A. Stokes2*
Robotics Lab, School of Mathematical and Computer Sciences, Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh, United Kingdom,
Stokes Research Group, School of Engineering, Institute for Integrated Micro and Nano Systems, The University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 3 Graduate Program in Neuroengineering, Edmond and Lily Safra International
Institute of Neuroscience, Santos Dumont Institute, Macaiba, Brazil
1
2

Edited by:
Thrishantha Nanayakkara,
Imperial College London,
United Kingdom
Reviewed by:
Marcello Calisti,
Sant’Anna School of Advanced
Studies, Italy
Xinyu Liu,
McGill University, Canada
*Correspondence:
Adam A. Stokes
a.a.stokes@ed.ac.uk
Specialty section:
This article was submitted
to Mechatronics,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Mechanical Engineering
Received: 10 February 2017
Accepted: 04 May 2017
Published: 02 June 2017
Citation:
McConnell AC, Vallejo M, Moioli RC,
Brasil FL, Secciani N, Nemitz MP,
Riquart CP, Corne DW, Vargas PA
and Stokes AA (2017) SOPHIA: Soft
Orthotic Physiotherapy
Hand Interactive Aid.
Front. Mech. Eng. 3:3.
doi: 10.3389/fmech.2017.00003

This work describes the design, fabrication, and initial testing of a Soft Orthotic
Physiotherapy Hand Interactive Aid (SOPHIA) for stroke rehabilitation. SOPHIA consists
of (1) a soft robotic exoskeleton, (2) a microcontroller-based control system driven by
a brain–machine interface (BMI), and (3) a sensorized glove for passive rehabilitation.
In contrast to other rehabilitation devices, SOPHIA is the first modular prototype of a
rehabilitation system that is capable of three tasks: aiding extension based assistive
rehabilitation, monitoring patient exercises, and guiding passive rehabilitation. Our results
show that this prototype of the device is capable of helping healthy subjects to open their
hand. Finger extension is triggered by a command from the BMI, while using a variety of
sensors to ensure a safe motion. All data gathered from the device will be used to guide
further improvements to the prototype, aiming at developing specifications for the next
generation device, which could be used in future clinical trials.
Keywords: brain–machine interface, soft robotics, rehabilitation, stroke, exoskeleton

INTRODUCTION
Overview

Strokes are an increasing problem, affecting all ages, genders, and ethnicities (Stroke Helpline
Scotland, 2013; Mozaffarian et al., 2015; Scottish Stroke Association, 2016). A lack of resources in
providing and monitoring physiotherapy limits the efficacy of conventional rehabilitation techniques
(Duncan et al., 2005).
The Soft Orthotic Physiotherapy Hand Interactive Aid (SOPHIA) project focuses on developing
systems that can be used for rehabilitation of a patient’s hand after a stroke. We explore the combination of soft robotics and brain–machine interfaces (BMIs), and we have designed this system to be
used both in hospital and at home. This new modular interactive tool uses a BMI for control, and
soft robotics for actuation, and shows potential for assisting in both passive and assistive (Basteris
et al., 2014) stroke rehabilitation.
In contrast to other rehabilitation devices, SOPHIA is the first modular prototype of a rehabilitation system that is capable of three tasks: aiding extension-based assistive rehabilitation, monitoring
patient exercises, and guiding passive rehabilitation.

Frontiers in Mechanical Engineering | www.frontiersin.org

1

June 2017 | Volume 3 | Article 3

McConnell et al.

SOPHIA: Soft Orthotic Rehabilitation Aid

Background

lower body movement, such as walking through gait relearning.
Therefore, when the rehabilitation of the hand begins, it is often
after the acute stage—treatment during the first 2 weeks has been
shown to hold the greatest potential for recovery (Nakayama
et al., 1994; Jørgensen et al., 1995; Feys et al., 1998). Due to this
missed window of opportunity, only minor additional measurable
improvement occurs after the 6 months following stroke onset
(Hussein and Staines, 2013; Bruno-Petrina, 2014; Edwardson
and Dromerick, 2016), leading to “less-than-satisfactory results”
(Triandafilou and Kamper, 2012).
One way of counteracting these three issues—lack of patient
exercise data, incorrect exercise motions, and reduced frequency
of exercise—is to use a robotic device to assist with the rehabilitation process (Prange et al., 2006). Robotic rehabilitation can guide
the patient’s motions during exercise and ensure that the full
movement has been performed. Robotic systems can also display
the patient’s progress and, using interactive games or virtual reality, encourage participation (Colombo et al., 2007).
A novel range of technologies—showing great potential in
the area of medical robotics—are BMI systems. BMIs have been
proposed for motor neurorehabilitation, motor replacement
and assistive technologies (de Almeida Ribeiro et al., 2013), and
wheelchair control (Li et al., 2013). Previous work by RamosMurguialday et al. (2013) with chronic (post 2 weeks) stroke
patients showed that patients using-BMIs recovered a wider
range of movements than the placebo group. These systems
use physiological signals, originating in the brain, to activate or
deactivate external devices or computers.
An electroencephalogram (EEG) can record sensorimotor
rhythm activities (Yuan and He, 2014; Edelman et al., 2016)
and show clear functional specificity during planned, actual, or
imagined movements. These imagined movements of extremities
cause specific EEG patterns, such as a desynchronization of mu
and central beta rhythms at the contralateral sensorimotor area
(Pfurtscheller et al., 2006). By using an EEG pattern classifier,
it is possible to identify these patterns. There are multiple techniques for designing such classifiers and the choice of algorithm
can significantly affect the final level of performance achieved
(Bashashati et al., 2007).
Robotic rehabilitation allows the physiotherapist to collect
previously unavailable data. These data can allow for greater
knowledge of the patient’s progress and can be used to highlight
whether any changes are required in their rehabilitation program,
such as frequency and duration of the exercises performed.
Kwakkel et al. (2003) reported that the length of time from a
stroke to full recovery is much longer than was previously thought
and that collecting more data gives a better prediction of patient
outcomes.

There are approximately 1.2 million stroke survivors in the UK,
with this number increasing by over 150,000 annually (Scottish
Stroke Association, 2016). Globally, over 20 million people per year
suffer a cerebrovascular accident (World Health Organisation,
2011), of which strokes are one of the primary causes (Ward and
Cohen, 2004; Strong and Mathers, 2011). Typically, 1 year on
from a stroke 65% of those patients remain severely handicapped
and dependent on assistance in daily life (Wolfe, 2000). After a
stroke occurs, and once the patient has been stabilized, they will
begin rehabilitation. Rehabilitation sessions are conducted by a
physiotherapist and take the form of supervised daily exercises
(Jauch et al., 2013).
Figure 1 shows the sequence of hand motions required to
complete two basic grip motions as needed to complete many
daily living tasks such as buttoning a shirt or holding a cup: the
cylindrical grip (Figure 1A) and the pinch grip (Figure 1B). In
some stroke patients, these movements are hindered by involuntary clawing of the hand where the hand is restricted by muscle
tension to a tight grasp, which limits full extension of the fingers.
Physiotherapy exercises used in rehabilitation seeks to restore
these two functions.
The likelihood that a full recovery will be made is greater if the
intensity of the exercises is increased (Sivenius et al., 1985) and
the time taken to start the rehabilitation is decreased (Kwakkel
et al., 2006).
Once the patient leaves the hospital, they will see a physiotherapist initially between two and four times a week. When they are
not with the physiotherapist they are given a variety of rehabilitation exercises to perform unsupervised, leading to motions being
performed incorrectly, infrequently, or not at all, thus reducing
the chance of full recovery (Schaechter, 2004). Currently, the
physiotherapist relies on the patient for information on how
many exercises were performed and this self-reporting can lead
to inaccurate data being collected.
Hand rehabilitation is considered to be a lower priority than
the recovery of motion in the upper arm, which itself is secondary
to the restoration of the motion of the trunk of the body and

Current Robotic Rehabilitation Systems

There are two main types of robotic system used for rehabilitation: exoskeletons and end effectors. Exoskeleton-based systems
are mounted on the patient and control their motion directly.
End effector-based systems rely on the patient interacting with
the robot through a pointing device, such as a knob in the
ReHapticKnob developed by Metzger et al. (2011), or a ball
from the SPIDAR-8 developed by Walairacht et al. (2002). These

Figure 1 | Two exercises people need to perform to complete daily
living tasks are cylindrical and pinch grasps, the range of motions
required for these tasks are shown in these two sequences for: (A) a
cylindrical grasp and (B) a pinch grasp. Rehabilitation exercises for stroke
patients aim to help restore these functions.

Frontiers in Mechanical Engineering | www.frontiersin.org

2

June 2017 | Volume 3 | Article 3

McConnell et al.

SOPHIA: Soft Orthotic Rehabilitation Aid

systems are often paired with virtual reality games to allow for
greater immersion by the patient.
Following multiple small-scale trials conducted on different
robotic rehabilitation systems, the evidence gathered shows all
trials produced either an equal or a greater level of recovery
of motion than normal non-robotic rehabilitation exercises
(Connelly et al., 2009; Stein et al., 2011); the most recent and
comprehensive clinical trial involving 127 patients was conducted
by Lo et al. (2010).
There are four problems with current robotic rehabilitation
systems: (1) intimidating esthetics can discourage a patient from
using them; (2) not all devices collect the full range of data available; (3) predominantly only physical motion is tracked and not
any neural information; and (4) most systems are only deployable
in clinics and require supervised use.

weight of the glove we were aware that adding any extra weight to
a stroke patient’s arm during rehabilitation could prove a burden,
therefore, the weight was kept to a minimum with the total glove
weighing under 0.4 kg and the control system (not mounted on
patient) under 0.5 kg.
The motions and layout of the human hand can be seen clearly
in work done by Taylor and Schwarz (1955) where the joint layout is illustrated clearly. The human finger has three degrees of
motion per finger, one at the distal interphalangeal (DIP), one
at the proximal interphalangeal (PIP), and one at the metacarpophalangeal (MCP). The full extension of the finger and its joint
locations is shown by Figure S2 in Supplementary Material. In
Figure S2A in Supplementary Material, the finger is shown in a
“claw shape” with θ1 at max 45°, θ2 at max 90°, and θ3 at max 90°.
When a full extension is performed as shown in Figure S2B in
Supplementary Material, all of the joints are in alignment and θ1,
θ2, and θ3 should be equal to 0°.
For human hand to complete an extension motion, it requires
a torque from the whole finger of 0.94 Nm; this is broken down
into 0.03 Nm at the (DIP), 0.75 Nm at the (PIP), and 0.16 Nm
at the (MCP) (Milner and Franklin, 1998). This data was from
non-stroke individuals. From testing the fiber-reinforced actuators where a force gage was mounted on the distal phalanx and a
torque of 1.6 Nm was generated providing a sufficient torque to
extend the finger.

Using Soft Robotics in Rehabilitation
Systems

To alleviate known problems with existing devices, one approach
is to move away from “hard” robotics where the exoskeleton—consists of rigid linkages that can struggle—to mimic human motion,
toward “soft” robotics where—through the use of compliant soft
material—a more natural and safer motion can be performed.
Polygerinos et al. (2015) developed a hydraulic soft robotic
glove to aid grasping tasks in the home environment, their
design incorporated fiber-controlled actuators to provide force
for the grasping motion. A recently reported soft-rehabilitation
system is A Helping Hand (Zhao et al., 2016). A Helping Hand
is formed of a single soft exoskeleton and contains individual air
chambers for each finger to allow for grasping; in addition, each
finger incorporates a novel optical monitoring system. A system
that blends both “soft” and “hard” robotics is the Exo-Glove that
replaces the inflatable soft sections with a tendon cable system
that runs through the soft sections providing the motive force
(In et al., 2015).
For further information on stroke rehabilitation systems, an
in-depth analysis of the current state of the art and progress is
reported by McConnell et al. (2017).

Design of the Soft Exoskeleton Glove

For the SOPHIA device, we decided to use multiple pneunet
actuators, which build upon the work by Shepherd et al. (2013),
in combination with fiber-reinforced actuators (Connolly et al.,
2015) to allow for ease of section replacement if one part fails. The
SOPHIA device also incorporates BMI technologies. To enhance
the patient’s recovery, the inclusion of a BMI in robotic rehabilitation systems has been trialed with positive results (Prasad et al.,
2010; Pichiorri et al., 2015).
Figure 2C shows the completed exoskeleton glove, and Figure
S3 in Supplementary Material shows a schematic of the actuators.

Design of the Fiber-Reinforced Actuators

We designed the mold in a modeling program (solid edge) and
then fabricated it by fused deposition manufacturing using an
uPrint SE in acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS). We used soft
lithography techniques to cast the pneunets in Ecoflex 00-50
(Bentley Advanced Materials), and we used polydimethylsiloxane
(PDMS) to form the bottom layer. We wrapped each actuator in
Kevlar thread (Tex 40) using a double-helical pattern to control
the expansion of the soft section and to allow primarily axial
expansion. Each of the four fiber-reinforced actuators was 110 mm
long by 20 mm wide to allow for full coverage of each finger. Full
technical drawings are provided in Supplementary Material.

DESIGN OF SOPHIA
Exploration of Design Specification

We consulted with physiotherapists, both for design consideration relating to the esthetics and functionality of the device, and
for the capability of the testing apparatus. We chose this usercentric design approach because Holt et al. (2007) and Blabe et al.
(2015) reported that by including patients and physiotherapists
in the design process, the chance of devices being used was
increased. The two main points found in our consultations were
that: (1) the system should leave as much of the palm and fingers
exposed as possible to allow for direct interaction with objects
and (2) the exoskeleton must be unobtrusive and lightweight.
The SOPHIA glove design was required to fit a variety of
hand sizes; thus, we used the ergonomic data from BSI Standards
Publication (BSI Standards, 2011). The BSI data guided our
design in terms of the size of the glove and adjustability, for the

Frontiers in Mechanical Engineering | www.frontiersin.org

Design of the Glove

The glove fully encloses the soft actuators, which reduces the
chances of damage, and reduces distraction to the patient. We
used a non-elastic textile to create the finger caps and straps for
the wrist and palm. The glove securely holds the actuators while
leaving the majority of the palm exposed.

3

June 2017 | Volume 3 | Article 3

McConnell et al.

SOPHIA: Soft Orthotic Rehabilitation Aid

layer is shown and labeled in (Figure 2C) and the completed
modular electropneumatic system is shown by Figure 2B.

Design of the Flexible Sensors

We used piezoresistive flex sensors (Sparkfun; SEN-08606),
inside the glove, and we fixed them in place using Ecoflex 00-50.

Design of the Wearable Module for the
Passive System

Design of the Electropneumatic Control
System for the Soft Exoskeleton

This section covers the design and fabrication of the material
sections for the passive system, the block diagram for this system
is shown by Figure S1 in Supplementary Material.

The control system for the exoskeleton required integration of the
pressure sensors, flex sensors, diaphragm pumps, and solenoid
valves. A compact design was required to allow for ease of storage
and transportation.

Glove Module

We designed the glove to fit an average adult’s hand and we used a
modified sports glove to provide both comfort and the durability
to have components mounted on to it. The glove fully encloses the
hand and has specific mounting sections affixed to the back of the
fingers for the flex sensors (Sparkfun; SEN-08606) to be inserted,
and a mounting pouch on the back of the hand to hold the PCB.

Electronic System

To allow for redundancy, we chose a modular design that uses
three printed circuit board (PCB) layers. Figures 2A,B shows the
complete electrical subsystem, described below:
(1) Control layer: to provide electrical power, digital/analog
inputs, and outputs we used a microcontroller (Arduino
Mega 2560).
(2) Power regulation layer: we designed a PCB that incorporates
a voltage regulator and interconnections for the subsequent
layers.
(3) Pneumatic valve and flex sensor layer: we designed this layer
to provide electrical connections to the flex sensors, and
we used pneumatic check valves to control the actuators
(Longykj; LY0520GC).
(4) Pump layer: we use diaphragm pumps (RS Components; 7026898) and SPI pressure sensors (Mouser; 785-HSCDANN1.
6BASA5) in this layer to provide the pneumatic power.

Lower Arm Module

The wrist module was mounted on top of a lycra layer and held in
place with adjustable straps.

Design of the Electronics and Display for
the Passive System

The passive control system required integration of flex sensors,
IMUs, a bluetooth transmission module, and a battery pack. A
compact and lightweight design was required to minimize any
restrictions that the user would feel when wearing the device.

Glove Module

Each layer is 80 mm × 80 mm and the system has a total
stacked height of 120 mm. We built a compact box to reduce the
chance of damage, and the noise from pumps and valves. Each

We designed this module to gather the motion of the fingers
and of the hand by having a flex sensor mounted to each finger
and thumb, which were connected to a flexible PCB that is

Figure 2 | The electropneumatic controller for the Soft Orthotic Physiotherapy Hand Interactive Aid system consists of a modular series of
components that connect via a tether to a soft robotic glove. This system is capable of extending a subject’s hand from a closed grasp to an open grasp.
This figure shows: (A) the three layers in the electropneumatic control system; (B) the assembled, modular, electropneumatic control system; and (C) the
pneunet-based soft exoskeletal glove system mounted on a subject’s hand.

Frontiers in Mechanical Engineering | www.frontiersin.org

4

June 2017 | Volume 3 | Article 3

McConnell et al.

SOPHIA: Soft Orthotic Rehabilitation Aid

mounted directly to the back of the glove. The PCB also contains
an IMU placed centrally to the hand. Each of the flex sensors was
coated in Ecoflex 00-50 to reduce the change of damage.

Following the EEG 10-20 standard for electrode placement
(Klem et al., 1999), MI-specific brain signals, corresponding to
upper limbs, register mainly in two specific areas: C3 and C4
located in the motor cortex. It is common that commercial low
cost BMI systems do not cover C3 and C4 specifically, often leading to lower accuracy in the final results of the classifier. EEG
signals are user dependent, causing variations in EEG patterns
in different subjects. These variations can be seen in the same
specific mental tasks (Karthikeyan et al., 2009) and restricting the
C3 and C4 electrodes could result in significant data loss (Dias
et al., 2009; Arvaneh et al., 2011).
One of the most consumer-oriented devices is the neuroheadset Emotiv Epoc+ (Liu et al., 2012; Duvinage et al., 2013), shown in
(Figure 3A), which includes 14 electrodes distributed in the four
lobules (Lang, 2012) electrode configuration shown (Figure 3B).
In this paper, we compare the Epoc+ with the actiCAP (V-Amp
and Easy Cap) from Brain Products, see (Figure 3C) with electrode configuration shown in (Figure 3D). The ActiCap system
is best suited for a professional use and has been used in previous
healthcare studies (Sefer et al., 2009; Roy et al., 2013). Epoc+
has the advantage of being wireless and easier to place, thus
reducing setup time. ActiCAP, by comparison, is wired, bulky,
and requires a conductive gel to decrease impedance. These are
important aspects that we considered when reviewing the final
system design.

Lower Arm Module

This module collects data about the arm motion, it has bluetooth wireless communications and a battery. It includes an
Arduino, bluetooth transmitter, IMU, and a Li-Po battery
module.
The passive monitoring system connects to a computer via
bluetooth, and this computer is used to record and display the
data. We used the Processing IDE both as our compiler, and for
our graphical interface (shown by Figure S1C in Supplementary
Material). Our embedded microcontroller code implements a
complementary filter on the data it receives from the accelerometer and gyroscope data to create a stable signal that is then
displayed by the animation of the hand and forearm.

Selection of the BMI System

Recording EEG signals usually requires costly devices along with
specialized software to gather the data. Currently, in the market,
there are several low cost devices that can be used with opensource software like OpenViBE (Renard et al., 2010). One of the
limitations of these systems is that, in general, they only provide
data-recording using a limited number of electrodes.

Figure 3 | The two brain–machine interface headsets evaluated for use with the Soft Orthotic Physiotherapy Hand Interactive Aid system were: (A)
the Emotiv Epoc+ headset and (C) the actiCAP. Insets (B,D) show the number of electrodes in each system, and circled in red are the reference electrodes.

Frontiers in Mechanical Engineering | www.frontiersin.org

5

June 2017 | Volume 3 | Article 3

McConnell et al.

SOPHIA: Soft Orthotic Rehabilitation Aid

Design of the Software Control System

and side position to allow for an ergonomic resting position. We
created an adjustable mount for the top of the frame to hold the
video camera. To enable positional accuracy, and to act as a point
of reference for the camera, we attached a reference grid to the
bottom of the area. We enclosed the sides of the frame to create
a contained environment. The screen is also adjustable to allow
for an ergonomic viewing height for each participant. All of these
features create a controlled environment for each participant. A
physiotherapist checked that our frame was safe and would not
cause any harm or stress to the participants.
The experimental procedure was approved by the School of
Mathematical and Computer Science at Heriot-Watt University
Ethics Board. All participants signed the informed consent forms
before participating in the experiments.

We integrated the Arduino IDE with OpenViBE using a bespoke
communication protocol implemented in C++. Our embedded
microcontroller code implements a software proportional–
integral–derivative controller loop to control the valve and pump
array using feedback from the pressure sensors, the flex sensors,
and the received signals from OpenViBE. The embedded software
acts as the overall control module that engages and disengages
actuation of the rehabilitation system.
The OpenViBE pipeline requires the implementation of
different signal processing and machine learning techniques
to optimize the interaction between the user and a specific
system/software. The raw EEG signals were captured by the BMI
system and processed (digitized and amplified), then classified
into different movements in OpenViBE, and finally sent to the
microcontoller via the C++ communication protocol. For later
analysis, all of the sensor data from the glove were saved in real
time as well as the raw EEG data. Complete control system for
hardware and software shown in (Figure 4).

Exoskeleton Preparation

Both the glove and the soft robotic actuators were inspected
before use and, if there was no damage, then the soft actuators
were inserted into the glove and connected to the control system.

BMI Preparation

EXPERIMENTAL

Each cap requires a different setup procedure as follows.
Epoc+: the sponges that are attached to the sensors are
moistened with a saline solution. Then the device is placed on
the subject’s head. The Epoc+ software provides a visual display
of the contact quality of each electrode and is represented in different colors: absent (black), poor (red), unstable (yellow), and
good (green).
ActiCAP: the device is placed on the subject’s head. The calibration of the sensors is carried out by inserting conductive gel into each
electrode with a syringe until a low-impedance signal is received.
Green LEDs correspond to a correct sensor contact and red LEDs
to an insufficient contact between the sensor and the scalp.
Achieving good contact quality of the sensors in both neuroheadsets is a critical requirement for performing successful
recordings.

The experiments were conducted within a specifically designed
arena, shown in (Figure 5A). This area ensured the participant
was comfortable and able to perform the required exercises
with no external influence, while allowing for the motions to be
videorecorded for complete data analysis. The area consists of
an adjustable aluminum frame. The armrest has variable height

Test Environment

Figure 5B shows the test environment and control boards, also
shown are the exoskeleton on the subject’s hand, and the BMI
system mounted on the subject’s head.

Figure 4 | A block diagram showing the hardware and software used
in this system. The data flow in the Soft Orthotic Physiotherapy Hand
Interactive Aid system begins with the brain–machine interface (BMI) as the
initial trigger, the data from is then passed to the software running on the
computer, and the outputs are sent to the display and to the
electropneumatic controller, and finally the soft robotic glove system applies
torque to the fingers.

Frontiers in Mechanical Engineering | www.frontiersin.org

Figure 5 | (A) The test environment, which is fully enclosed at either side to
avoid distraction, and the glove lying on the arm rest, we have overlayed the
arrow from the OpenViBE software to show what the subject would see on
the screen. (B) A subject performing the initial training phase.

6

June 2017 | Volume 3 | Article 3

McConnell et al.

SOPHIA: Soft Orthotic Rehabilitation Aid

should only be generated when the subject thinks about closing
their hand, or should be negative when they provide a neutral
thought. Figure 7A shows the ideal pattern of the pressure,
classification output versus time that should be generated from
the experiments. Under ideal conditions, the pressure should
increase to its safe maximum when the classification output is
positive or until the exercise time is complete. On receiving a
negative signal, the pressure should rapidly drop to the initial
state and remain in this state until a positive signal is detected
again.
Figure 7B shows an example of the data collected. We mapped
the classification output into two categories by thresholding. 0
and 1 represent the subject thinking of opening their hand or
not. In Figure 7B, the signal showing applied pressure clearly
correlates well with the classifier output for this subject. To put
an objective figure of merit on these data, we developed a metric
called “average reliability,” this is a percentage score to show the
relationship between the BMI signal received from the headset
and the correct response resulting in actuation of the electropneumatic system. We analyzed the datasets from five subjects,
three with large hands, and two with medium-sized hands. For
each, we thresholded the classifier data to give a binary response,
positive (1) and negative (0); we then thresholded the pressure
data to ensure that the output response was above the noise
level. We compared these two pieces of information to compare
the number of times the system responded correctly (system
actuates when patient intends to open their hand and system
does not actuate when the patient does not intend to open
their hand) versus the number of times the system responded
incorrectly. For these five patients, the average reliability was
83.8%. Future studies will be clinically validated with a larger
sample size.

Protocol for EEG Testing

The BMI system was tested with both the actiCAP and Epoc+
headsets. The experiment was based on the motor imagery task
developed by the Graz BCI group (Pfurtscheller and Neuper,
2001), where subjects, in the training phase, were instructed only
to imagine open their right hand whenever they saw an arrow
pointing to the right side of the screen, or thinking “nothing”
when the arrow pointed to the left side. After the training phase,
the subjects were able to send the commands to the SOPHIA
device to actively open their right hand.

OpenViBE Process

The OpenViBE software was used to map the data from its raw
format to a set of numerical clusters that correspond to the different movements being analyzed. Using a series of configurable
scenarios, OpenViBE offers a pipeline to perform the acquisition,
preprocessing, and classification of raw EEG signals associated
with hand motor imagery tasks.
After sampling the data, the next step involves training the
linear discriminant analysis (LDA) classifier using the common
spatial pattern filter to emphasize the distinction between EEG
recordings associated with the right or left hand. Finally, when
the training phase is concluded, online sessions can be then run,
where the rehabilitation tasks are performed. In this type of session, visual feedback cues (shown in Figure 6A) are shown to the
subject while they perform mental tasks.

Experimental Protocol
1.
2.

The subject reads and signs ethical and safety forms.
The subject sits at the experimental apparatus, which can
be adjusted to ensure the correct ergonomic positioning
setup.
3. The exoskeleton is affixed to the subject’s hand by the researcher.
4. The BMI is placed on the subject’s head and the connections
are all checked by the researcher.
5. OpenViBE is run in training mode for the subject’s data to be
gathered and configured to the individual.
6. Once completed, the C++ client and Arduino IDE is run and
the OpenViBE test protocol is engaged.
7. The subject is required to visualize the opening of their
right hand when the corresponding signal is given on the
display and the soft actuators will inflate in response when
the threshold signal from the BMI is received.
8. When the opposite signal is shown to the subject, they are
required to relax and think of nothing.
9. A brief pause is given between each signal.
10. Points 7, 8, and 9 are repeated for 8 min using 40 random
combinations of points 8 and 9.
11. After the test has been completed the system is closed down
and the BMI and exoskeleton are removed.

Comparison of Simulated Motion with
Directed Motion of the Hand by the
Exoskeleton

Figure 6A–C show the display that the subject follows as the
experiment takes place. Four simulations of the intended motion
of the subject’s hand are displayed on the video screen, and a
corresponding photograph shows the directed motion of the subject’s hand as a result of pressure being applied by the SOPHIA
device. The time (T) starting at 0 s, classifier data (C), and the
change in pressure (P) are provided in each case. The directed
hand extension clearly matches the simulated hand motion,
and this visual feedback gives the subject confidence that the
rehabilitation exercise was performed correctly.

Comparison between Epoc+ and ActiCAP
Choice of BMI Headset

When selecting an appropriate BMI headset, we evaluated the
following points: setup time, cost, and comfort.
The Epoc+ headset required approximately 10 min to set up,
while the actiCAP could take 20 min. This shorter setup time
was due to the Epoc+ requiring only the pads to be moistened
in a saline solution first before being placed on the device, and
mounted on the subject’s head. The actiCAP required careful

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Results of Training Experiments Testing
EEG Signals and Applied Pressure

This section illustrates the results from the online testing of
the different participants. The positive classification output

Frontiers in Mechanical Engineering | www.frontiersin.org

7

June 2017 | Volume 3 | Article 3

McConnell et al.

SOPHIA: Soft Orthotic Rehabilitation Aid

Figure 6 | (A) Samples of the Graz Visualization that the subject will see on the display and proceeds from (i) where the arrow indicates the subject should think
“open hand” (ii) and (iii) show the classifier signal level (before the binary thresholding), which in this example should stay to the right of the axis, (iv) indicates that the
subject should relax and think of “nothing.” (B) An example of the simulated motion the patient should be performing while the exercise is proceeding. (C) Shows
the subjects hand, while wearing the glove, and the corresponding time (T), thresholded classifier value (C), and the change in pressure (ΔP) as the exercise
proceeds from (i) to (iv).

placement of each sensor and, once mounted, a conductive gel
injected between the scalp and the sensor, the impedance level
checked and then more gel injected if required. The Epoc+ sensors cannot be adjusted to cover other parts of the head and are
fixed in their mountings, while the actiCAP has greater flexibility
and its sensor placement can be adjusted depending on the sensor
requirements.
There is a substantial cost difference between the systems, and
this difference could be a key point for use in a clinical setting
with the Epoc+ retailing for approximately £600 and the actiCAP
system for £10,000.
Subjects noted less discomfort with the Epoc+ as its wireless
design gave reduced weight and less pull on the subject’s head as
compared to the actiCAP.

of providing the required signals. We found notable differences
in the quality of the signals from the two caps; the positive and
negative values for each test should be equal, i.e., −10 to 10 or
−3.5 to 3.5 for an ideal test. These values are unitless. For the
actiCAP, the blank signal ranged between −3.29 to −12.77 and
the “open” signal range was 4.05 to 11.29. These small differences
at either end of the range (Δ0.76 and Δ1.49) led to little noticeable
control loss.
While using the Epoc+ system the blank signal range was
−4.12 to −9.60 and the “open” signal range was 8.02–5.10. These
large differences at either end of the range (Δ3.90 and Δ4.5)
illustrate a strong bias toward either the positive or the negative
end of the range, leading to false positives or negatives in applied
pressure.

Analysis of Standard OpenViBE Classifier for the
ActiCAP and Epoc+ System

Improving the Classification Accuracy of Epoc+ and
ActiCAP Devices

We found a noticeable difference between the accuracy of the
classifier generated from the different systems, the results of these
experiments are shown in Figure 8. The actiCAP had an average
cross validated accuracy of 82.5% over the tests performed, as
compared to 66.8% from the Epoc+. OpenViBE recommend that
any experiments resulting in an accuracy of less than 65% are
redone until a suitable accuracy is achieved (Renard et al., 2010).
Although the standard Epoc+ classifier accuracy is low, it is still
above the minimum acceptable level.
During testing, we used both a wireless Epoc+ and a wired
actiCAP to test the system, and we found that both were capable

Frontiers in Mechanical Engineering | www.frontiersin.org

Comparing the performance of different neuroheadsets is a
challenging task, since no exhaustive classification-based assessments that quantitatively compare medical devices exist so far. In
a survey released in 2010, Stamps and Hamam (2010) claimed
that, in terms of usability, the best low cost EEG recorder was the
Emotiv Epoc headset.
van Vliet et al. (2012) assessed actiCAP and Epoc headsets
by gathering steady-state visually evoked potential signals and
using these data to control a tactical video-game. After limiting
the number of nodes in the actiCAP device to eight, located over
the occipital area and under sitting conditions, the researchers

8

June 2017 | Volume 3 | Article 3

McConnell et al.

SOPHIA: Soft Orthotic Rehabilitation Aid

Figure 7 | (A) Model data showing the electroencephalogram data generated from a brain–machine interface (BMI) device linked to the Soft Orthotic
Physiotherapy Hand Interactive Aid system and the pneumatic pressure in one of the soft actuators. The pneumatic pressure increases (to a safe maximum) when
the classifier is positive, and this pressure is released by opening a valve when the classifier is zero. (B) Example experimentally collected data showing how the BMI
classifier data correlates to the increase in pneumatic pressure. T(0) to T(2) shows the pressure increase while the classifier is positive, and T(2) to T(3) shows the
drop in pressure when the classifier is zero.

showed that the Emotiv Epoc headset provides decreased performance compared to the actiCAP system, but the performance
achieved was good enough to robustly detect the signals. The

Frontiers in Mechanical Engineering | www.frontiersin.org

study did not give details of the software or algorithms used
in the classification, which are also critical aspects to take into
account.

9

June 2017 | Volume 3 | Article 3

McConnell et al.

SOPHIA: Soft Orthotic Rehabilitation Aid

We performed proof-of-concept experiments using five healthy
subjects. Due to the small sample size, the results showed here
should not be considered statistically significant and future work
will focus on increasing the sample size. Our preliminary data,
however, do give some information about expected performance
in larger scale experiments. Our results are shown by Figure 8,
where the final classification accuracy is depicted according to
the different algorithms used (k-NN and SVM). Figure 8 illustrates the results from each of the algorithms, applying both the
OpenViBE preprocessing steps and our improved pipeline. The
figure shows that the use of the actiCAP, with sensors allocated
in the motor cortex, achieves marginally higher performance
(82.5%) than the Epoc+, with our modified OpenViBE preprocessing and SVM (81%), as was concluded in previous studies. The
difference in performance between both BMI systems, however, is
not quantitatively significant and therefore, we conclude that the
low cost Epoc+ is able to distinguish between two states—open
and relaxed—with comparable accuracy to the high-cost actiCAP
system.

Figure 8 | The results of using the actiCAP and Epoc+ brain–
machine interface systems. The average cross validated accuracy for four
tests is shown. The actiCAP and raw Epoc+ data [with standard openViBE
preprocessing and linear discriminant analysis (LDA) classifier] show that the
actiCAP gives 82.5% accuracy versus 66.8% for the Epoc+. On applying the
preprocessing procedure (detailed in section 4) with two different classifiers,
then the percentage cross-validated accuracy for the Epoc+ system was
improved to 76.8% (1-NN) and 81.0% (SVM). These results show that with
appropriate preprocessing and classifier techniques then the cheaper Epoc+
system can return data which is comparable to the much more expensive
actiCAP system.

Monitoring of Passive Exercises

We tested the passive system on three subjects and found that it
works consistently on each person when interfaced with a laptop
computer. The GUI on the laptop displays the motions that are
being performed, and an example image of the CAD representation is shown by Figure S1C in Supplementary Material. The joint
angle between the wrist and the hand is computed by taking a
differential measurement of the data from the two IMUs, and the
finger flexion data come from monitoring the outputs from the
flex sensors.
We explored the possibility of running the GUI on a low
cost computer with a small display. We tried a Rapsberry Pi
3 and we found that even with the Raspberry Pi 3’s increased
GPU power over its predecessors the CAD output from the GUI
lagged behind the actual real-time motion, and this lag created
frustration in the subjects. Future work will focus on improving
the 3D-performance of a low cost mobile display unit.

Other studies also corroborate this enhancement in the classification accuracy of the actiCAP. In the comparative research
conducted again with both devices, focusing on the distinction
of patterns of brain activity formed by imagining pictures
(Bobrov et al., 2011), the percentage of correctly recognized
states was always higher in the case of actiCAP but with a difference less than 10%. The application of advanced machine
learning algorithms can notably increase the performance of
the Epoc+ system. Following this approach, for stroke rehabilitation, Munoz et al. (2014) claimed to reach 98% of accuracy
applying a type of support vector machine (SVM) algorithm to
distinguish between two states (open and close the hand) using
Epoc+ headset.
Knowing these differences in the quality of the signal recorded
by both devices, the question is if improvements to the default
OpenViBE pipeline can sufficiently aid in enhancing the final
classification performance.
We applied further signal processing and machine learning
techniques, including filtering using the non-recursive finite
impulse response, electrooculographic artifacts removal based
on a second-order blind inference method, and extraction of
features with the discrete wavelet transform approach. Afterward,
two advanced classification techniques were applied to distinguish hand movements: k-nearest neighbor (k-NN) and SVM.
These types of techniques have been used previously to classify
signals for stroke rehabilitation (Munoz et al., 2014; Zhang et al.,
2015). We provide links to our software that implements these
algorithms in Supplementary Material.

Frontiers in Mechanical Engineering | www.frontiersin.org

Challenges and Scope for Future Designs

We created a prototype of a soft robotic system that is capable of
safely opening a human hand using a BMI system. We note four
challenges and scope for iteration in future designs:
(1) We designed the glove for a large hand, meaning that for
people of a smaller hand size the device did not function
optimally.
(2) The noise and “feel” of the exoskeleton proved to be a distraction for the participants, and these factors lead to initial
difficulties in concentration.
(3) We demonstrated results using either the actiCAP and
Epoc+, initially the stability of the EEG signal from the actiCAP generated less instabilities and false positives. This was
partially corrected when our modified pipeline was applied
to the Epoc+.
(4) When using the passive exercise system, the feedback from
the study group reported that the 3D representation of the
hand was not as lifelike as the subjects would have liked.

10

June 2017 | Volume 3 | Article 3

McConnell et al.

SOPHIA: Soft Orthotic Rehabilitation Aid

CONCLUSION

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

Soft Orthotic Physiotherapy Hand Interactive Aid consists
of (1) a soft robotic exoskeleton, (2) a microcontroller-based
control system driven by a BMI, and (3) a sensorized glove for
passive rehabilitation. This first prototype of our modular soft
robotic exoskeleton system can provide guided rehabilitation
exercises, and we have demonstrated how it assists a subject
to extend their hand from the claw shape using information
received from a BMI. We show that by collecting data from
EEG, pressure, and video, we can quantify the performance of
the system, and we have identified areas that are important for
future development.
There were issues with our system, such as (1) the variety
of hand sizes when testing the system on multiple people and
(2) the Epoc+ system could not provide as stable readings as
the actiCAP using the standard openViBE workflow, leading to
issues of a bias in the motion of the exoskeleton (opening when
no motion should happen). This issue was reduced but not fully
removed when we implemented preprocessing and the k-NN and
SVN algorithms.
Taking into account the extra time that is required to use the
£10,000 actiCAP arrangement, and the cost difference, the £600
Epoc+ proves to be a suitable alternative. We note that there is
a market opportunity for an adjustable electrode, wireless BMI
system that covers the motor cortex, and which is priced similar
to the Epoc+.
The work shown illustrates the potential for further development in the expansion of the soft system to other body areas while
using BMI to complement the rehabilitation. This paper reports
on a proof-of-concept system that will enable us to develop
specifications for a subsequent device, which could be used in
future clinical trials.

AM created the system and is the lead author of all sections of
the work. MV is an expert on the data analysis and classifier
work done in the project and for this manuscript. RM and FB
are experts in the BMI field of research providing the insight and
direct contribution to the BMI setup, protocol, and experimental
work. NS directly contributed to the design and build of the
sensorized glove and the 3D rendering of its motion and the corresponding sections of this paper. CR directly contributed to the
classifier and modified BMI testing section. DC contributed to
the data analysis and document formation. PV advised on document style, document formation, and overviewed the project. AS
is an expert in soft robotics contributing to the fabrication of the
soft glove as well as advising on paper construction, layout, and
contributed directly to all sections as primary editor.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Iain Gold of the Edinburgh
University for his expertise in electronics fabrication, the members
of The Stokes Research Group at The University of Edinburgh, the
members of the Edmond and Lily Safra International Institute of
Neuroscience, and the members of the Heriot-Watt Robotics Lab.

FUNDING
We would like to thank The Royal Society (Newton International
Exchange Award, NI140250) for funding, ERASMUS+ for
allowing Nicola Secciani to be a part of this work, and support
from the EPSRC via a Studentship Award (1373260) for Alistair
McConnell, the Robotarium Capital Equipment and CDT Capital
Equipment Grants (EP/L016834/1). Markus Nemitz gratefully
acknowledges support from the CDT in Integrative Sensing and
Measurement (EP/L016753/1). Fabricio Brasil and Renan Moioli
acknowledge the support from the Santos Dumont Institute and
the Brazilian Ministry of Education (MEC).

ETHICS STATEMENT
This study was carried out in accordance with the recommendations of “Research Ethics Policy and Procedures, School of
Mathematical and Computer Science, Heriot-Watt University
Ethics Board” with written informed consent from all subjects.
All subjects gave written informed consent in accordance with
the Declaration of Helsinki. The protocol was approved by the
“School of Mathematical and Computer Science at Heriot-Watt
University Ethics Board.”

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at
http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fmech.2017.00003/
full#supplementary-material.

REFERENCES

perspective of people with paralysis. J. Neural Eng. 12, 43002. doi:10.1088/
1741-2560/12/4/043002
Bobrov, P., Frolov, A., Cantor, C., Fedulova, I., Bakhnyan, M., and Zhavoronkov, A.
(2011). Brain-computer interface based on generation of visual images. PLoS
ONE 6:e20674. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0020674
Bruno-Petrina, A. (2014). Motor Recovery in Stroke: Recovery Considerations,
Theories of Recovery, Mechanisms of Recovery. Available at: http://emedicine.
medscape.com/article/324386-overview
BSI Standards. (2011). Basic Human Body Measurements for Technological Design
Part 1: Body Measurement Definitions and Landmarks. Brussels, Belgium: BSI.
Colombo, R., Pisano, F., Mazzone, A., Delconte, C., Micera, S., Carrozza, M.
C., et al. (2007). Design strategies to improve patient motivation during
robot-aided rehabilitation. J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. 4, 3. doi:10.1186/17430003-4-3

Arvaneh, M., Guan, C., Ang, K. K., and Quek, C. (2011). Optimizing the channel
selection and classification accuracy in EEG-based BCI. IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng. 58, 1865–1873. doi:10.1109/TBME.2011.2131142
Bashashati, A., Fatourechi, M., Ward, R. K., and Birch, G. E. (2007). A survey of
signal processing algorithms in brain–computer interfaces based on electrical
brain signals. J. Neural Eng. 4, R32–R57. doi:10.1088/1741-2560/4/2/R03
Basteris, A., Nijenhuis, S. M., Stienen, A. H. A., Buurke, J. H., Prange, G. B., and
Amirabdollahian, F. (2014). Training modalities in robot-mediated upper limb
rehabilitation in stroke: a framework for classification based on a systematic
review. J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. 11, 111. doi:10.1186/1743-0003-11-111
Blabe, C. H., Gilja, V., Chestek, C. A., Shenoy, K. V., Anderson, K. D., and
Henderson, J. M. (2015). Assessment of brain–machine interfaces from the

Frontiers in Mechanical Engineering | www.frontiersin.org

11

June 2017 | Volume 3 | Article 3

McConnell et al.

SOPHIA: Soft Orthotic Rehabilitation Aid

Connelly, L., Stoykov, M. E., Jia, Y., Toro, M. L., Kenyon, R. V., and Kamper, D. G.
(2009). Use of a pneumatic glove for hand rehabilitation following stroke. Conf.
Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. 2009, 2434–2437. doi:10.1109/IEMBS.2009.5335400
Connolly, F., Polygerinos, P., Walsh, C. J., and Bertoldi, K. (2015). Mechanical
programming of soft actuators by varying fiber angle. Soft Robot. 2, 26–32.
doi:10.1089/soro.2015.0001
de Almeida Ribeiro, P. R., Brasil, F. L., Witkowski, M., Shiman, F., Cipriani, C.,
Vitiello, N., et al. (2013). Controlling assistive machines in paralysis using
brain waves and other biosignals. Adv. Hum. Comput. Interact. 2013, 1–9.
doi:10.1155/2013/369425
Dias, N. S., Mendes, P. M., and Correia, J. H. (2009). “Feature selection for
brain-computer interface,” in 4th European Conference of the International
Federation for Medical and Biological Engineering, 318–321.
Duncan, P. W., Zorowitz, R., Bates, B., Choi, J. Y., Glasberg, J. J., Graham, G. D.,
et al. (2005). Management of adult stroke rehabilitation care: a clinical practice
guideline. Stroke 36, e100–e143. doi:10.1161/01.STR.0000180861.54180.FF
Duvinage, M., Castermans, T., Petieau, M., Hoellinger, T., Cheron, G., and Dutoit, T.
(2013). Performance of the Emotiv Epoc headset for P300-based applications.
Biomed. Eng. Online 12, 56. doi:10.1186/1475-925X-12-56
Edelman, B. J., Baxter, B., and He, B. (2016). EEG source imaging enhances the
decoding of complex right-hand motor imagery tasks. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.
63, 4–14. doi:10.1109/TBME.2015.2467312
Edwardson, M. A., and Dromerick, A. W. (2016). Ischemic Stroke Prognosis in
Adults, ed. T. W. Post (UpToDate). Available at: http://www.uptodate.com/
contents/ischemic-stroke-prognosis-in-adults
Feys, H. M., De Weerdt, W. J., Selz, B. E., Cox Steck, G. A., Spichiger, R., Vereeck, L. E.,
et al. (1998). Effect of a therapeutic intervention for the hemiplegic upper limb
in the acute phase after stroke: a single-blind, randomized, controlled multicenter trial. Stroke 29, 785–792. doi:10.1161/01.STR.29.4.785
Holt, R., Makower, S., Jackson, A., Culmer, P., Levesley, M., Richardson, R., et al.
(2007). “User involvement in developing rehabilitation robotic devices: an
essential requirement,” in IEEE 10th International Conference on Rehabilitation
Robotics (IEEE), 196–204.
Hussein, N., and Staines, E. (2013). “The rehabilitation of younger stroke patients,”
in Evidence-Based Review of Stroke Rehabilitation, eds R. Teasell, N. Hussein,
N. C. Foley, and A. Cotoi 17th ed. (London: Evidence-Based Review of Stroke
Rehabilitation), 1–63.
In, H., Kang, B. B., Sin, M. K., and Cho, K.-J. (2015). Exo-glove: a wearable robot
for the hand with a soft tendon routing system. IEEE Robot. Autom. Mag. 22,
97–105. doi:10.1109/MRA.2014.2362863
Jauch, E. C., Saver, J. L., Adams, H. P. Jr., Bruno, A., Connors, J. J., Demaerschalk, B. M.,
et al. (2013). Guidelines for the early management of patients with acute ischemic stroke: a guideline for healthcare professionals from the American Heart
Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke 44, 870–947. doi:10.1161/
STR.0b013e318284056a
Jørgensen, H. S., Nakayama, H., Raaschou, H. O., Vive-Larsen, J., Støier, M., and
Olsen, T. S. (1995). Outcome and time course of recovery in stroke. Part II: time
course of recovery. The Copenhagen Stroke Study. Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 76,
406–412. doi:10.1016/S0003-9993(95)80568-0
Karthikeyan, G., Sheet, D., and Manjunatha, M. (2009). “An electroencephalogram
signal based triggering circuit for controlling hand grasp in neuroprosthetics,”
in 13th International Conference on Biomedical Engineering (Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer Berlin Heidelberg), 691–693.
Klem, G. H., Lüders, H. O., Jasper, H. H., and Elger, C. (1999). The ten-twenty
electrode system of the International Federation. The International Federation
of Clinical Neurophysiology. Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol. Suppl.
52, 3–6.
Kwakkel, G., Kollen, B., and Twisk, J. (2006). Impact of time on improvement of outcome after stroke. Stroke 37, 2348–2353. doi:10.1161/01.
STR.0000238594.91938.1e
Kwakkel, G., Kollen, B. J., van der Grond, J., and Prevo, A. J. (2003). Probability
of regaining dexterity in the flaccid upper limb: impact of severity of paresis
and time since onset in acute stroke. Stroke 34, 2181–2186. doi:10.1161/01.
STR.0000087172.16305.CD
Lang, M. (2012). Investigating the Emotiv EPOC for Cognitive Control in Limited
Training Time. University of Canterbury.
Li, Y., Pan, J., Wang, F., and Yu, Z. (2013). A hybrid BCI system combining P300
and SSVEP and its application to wheelchair control. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.
60, 3156–3166. doi:10.1109/TBME.2013.2270283

Frontiers in Mechanical Engineering | www.frontiersin.org

Liu, Y., Jiang, X., Cao, T., Wan, F., Mak, P. U., Mak, P.-I., et al. (2012).
“Implementation of SSVEP based BCI with Emotiv EPOC,” in 2012 IEEE
International Conference on Virtual Environments Human-Computer
Interfaces and Measurement Systems (VECIMS) Proceedings (IEEE),
34–37.
Lo, A. C., Guarino, P. D., Richards, L. G., Haselkorn, J. K., Wittenberg, G. F.,
Federman, D. G., et al. (2010). Robot-assisted therapy for long-term upperlimb impairment after stroke. N. Engl. J. Med. 362, 1772–1783. doi:10.1056/
NEJMoa0911341
McConnell, A. C., Moioli, R. C., Brasil, F. L., Vallejo, M., Corne, D. W., Vargas, P. A.,
et al. (2017). Robotic devices and brain machine interfaces for hand rehabilitation post-stroke: current state and future potentials. J. Rehabil. Med.
Metzger, J.-C., Lambercy, O., Chapuis, D., and Gassert, R. (2011). “Design and
characterization of the ReHapticKnob, a robot for assessment and therapy of
hand function,” in IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems, 3074–3080.
Milner, T. E., and Franklin, D. W. (1998). Characterization of multijoint finger
stiffness: dependence on finger posture and force direction. IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng. 45, 1363–1375. doi:10.1109/10.725333
Mozaffarian, D., Benjamin, E. J., Go, A. S., Arnett, D. K., Blaha, M. J., Cushman, M.,
et al. (2015). Heart disease and stroke statistics: 2015 update: a report from
the American Heart Association. Circulation 131, e29–e322. doi:10.1161/
CIR.0000000000000157
Munoz, J. E., Rios, L. H., and Henao, O. A. (2014). Low cost implementation of
a motor imagery experiment with BCI system and its use in neurorehabilitation. Conf. Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. 2014, 1230–1233. doi:10.1109/
EMBC.2014.6943819
Nakayama, H., Jørgensen, H. S., Raaschou, H. O., and Olsen, T. S. (1994). Recovery
of upper extremity function in stroke patients: the Copenhagen Stroke
Study. Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 75, 394–398. doi:10.1016/0003-9993(94)
90161-9
Pfurtscheller, G., Brunner, C., Schlögl, A., and da Silva, F. H. L. (2006).
Mu rhythm (de)synchronization and EEG single-trial classification of different motor imagery tasks. Neuroimage 31, 153–159. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.
2005.12.003
Pfurtscheller, G., and Neuper, C. (2001). Motor imagery and direct brain-computer
communication. Proc. IEEE 89, 1123–1134. doi:10.1109/5.939829
Pichiorri, F., Morone, G., Petti, M., Toppi, J., Pisotta, I., Molinari, M., et al. (2015).
Brain-computer interface boosts motor imagery practice during stroke recovery. Ann. Neurol. 77, 851–865. doi:10.1002/ana.24390
Polygerinos, P., Wang, Z., Galloway, K. C., Wood, R. J., and Walsh, C. J. (2015). Soft
robotic glove for combined assistance and at-home rehabilitation. Rob. Auton.
Syst. 73, 135–143. doi:10.1016/j.robot.2014.08.014
Prange, G. B., Jannink, M. J., Groothuis-Oudshoorn, C. G., Hermens, H. J., and
IJzerman, M. J. (2006). Systematic review of the effect of robot-aided therapy on
recovery of the hemiparetic arm after stroke. J. Rehabil. Res. Dev. 43, 171–184.
doi:10.1682/JRRD.2005.04.0076
Prasad, G. B., Herman, P., Coyle, D., McDonough, S., and Crosbie, J. (2010).
Applying a brain-computer interface to support motor imagery practice in
people with stroke for upper limb recovery: a feasibility study. J. Neuroeng.
Rehabil. 7, 60. doi:10.1186/1743-0003-7-60
Ramos-Murguialday, A., Broetz, D., Rea, M., Läer, L., Yilmaz, Ö, Brasil, F. L., et al.
(2013). Brain-machine interface in chronic stroke rehabilitation: a controlled
study. Ann. Neurol. 74, 100–108. doi:10.1002/ana.23879
Renard, Y., Lotte, F., Gibert, G., Congedo, M., Maby, E., Delannoy, V., et al. (2010).
OpenViBE: an open-source software platform to design, test, and use brain–
computer interfaces in real and virtual environments. Presence Teleoper. Virtual
Environ. 19, 35–53. doi:10.1162/pres.19.1.35
Roy, R. N., Bonnet, S., Charbonnier, S., and Campagne, A. (2013). Mental fatigue
and working memory load estimation: interaction and implications for EEGbased passive BCI. Conf. Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. 2013, 6607–6610.
doi:10.1109/EMBC.2013.6611070
Schaechter, J. D. (2004). Motor rehabilitation and brain plasticity after hemiparetic stroke. Prog. Neurobiol. 73, 61–72. doi:10.1016/j.pneurobio.2004.
04.001
Scottish Stroke Association. (2016). State of the Nation: Stroke Statistics. London:
Stroke Association.
Sefer, A. B., Krbot, M., Isgum, V., and Cifrek, M. (2009). “Movement related
evoked potentials in Parkinson’s disease patients and healthy controls,” in

12

June 2017 | Volume 3 | Article 3

McConnell et al.

SOPHIA: Soft Orthotic Rehabilitation Aid

IFMBE Proceedings, eds W. C. Schlegel and O. Dössel (Munich: Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg), 2158–2161. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-03882-2_573
Shepherd, R. F., Stokes, A. A., Nunes, R. M., and Whitesides, G. M. (2013). Soft
machines that are resistant to puncture and that self seal. Adv. Mater. 25,
6709–6713. doi:10.1002/adma.201303175
Sivenius, J., Pyorala, K., Heinonen, O. P., Salonen, J. T., and Riekkinen, P. (1985).
The significance of intensity of rehabilitation of stroke. A controlled trial. Stroke
16, 928–931. doi:10.1161/01.STR.16.6.928
Stamps, K., and Hamam, Y. (2010). “Towards inexpensive BCI control for
wheelchair navigation in the enabled environment – a hardware survey,”
in Proceedings International Conference on Brain Informatics, Toronto,
ON, Canada, August 28–30, 2010, eds Y. Yao, R. Sun, T. Poggio, J. Liu,
N. Zhong, and J. Huang (Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg),
336–345.
Stein, J., Bishop, J., Gillen, G., and Helbok, R. (2011). A pilot study of roboticassisted exercise for hand weakness after stroke. IEEE Int. Conf. Rehabil. Robot.
2011, 1–4. doi:10.1109/ICORR.2011.5975426
Stroke Helpline Scotland. (2013). “Stroke statistics,” in Stroke Association.
London, UK.
Strong, K., and Mathers, C. (2011). “The global burden of stroke,” in Stroke, ed.
H. J. M. Barnett 279–89. (Saunders, Saint Louis: Elsevier), 279–289. doi:10.1016/
B978-1-4160-5478-8.10019-3
Taylor, C. L., and Schwarz, R. J. (1955). The anatomy and mechanics of the human
hand. Artif. Limbs 2, 22–35.
Triandafilou, K. M., and Kamper, D. G. (2012). Investigation of hand muscle atrophy in stroke survivors. Clin. Biomech. (Bristol, Avon) 27, 268–272. doi:10.1016/
j.clinbiomech.2011.10.002
van Vliet, M., Robben, A., Chumerin, N., Manyakov, N. V., Combaz, A., and
Van Hulle, M. M. (2012). “Designing a brain-computer interface controlled
video-game using consumer grade EEG hardware,” in Proceedings Biosignals
and Biorobotics Conference (BRC) (IEEE), 1–6.

Frontiers in Mechanical Engineering | www.frontiersin.org

Walairacht, S., Yamada, K., Hasegawa, S., Koike, Y., and Sato, M. (2002). 4 + 4
fingers manipulating virtual objects in mixed-reality environment. Presence
Teleoper. Virtual Environ. 11, 134–143. doi:10.1162/1054746021470586
Ward, N. S., and Cohen, L. G. (2004). Mechanisms underlying recovery of motor function after stroke. Arch. Neurol. 61, 1844–1848. doi:10.1001/archneur.61.12.1844
Wolfe, C. D. (2000). The impact of stroke. Br. Med. Bull. 56, 275–286.
doi:10.1258/0007142001903120
World Health Organisation. (2011). World Report on Disability. Geneva,
Switzerland: World Health Organization. doi:10.1136/ip.2007.018143
Yuan, H., and He, B. (2014). Brain-computer interfaces using sensorimotor
rhythms: current state and future perspectives. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 61,
1425–35. doi:10.1109/TBME.2014.2312397
Zhang, Z., Fang, Q., and Xudong, G. (2015). Objective assessment of upper limb
mobility for post-stroke rehabilitation. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 63, 859–868.
doi:10.1109/TBME.2015.2477095
Zhao, H., Jalving, J., Huang, R., Knepper, R., Ruina, A., and Shepherd, R.
(2016). A helping hand: soft orthosis with integrated optical strain sensors and EMG control. IEEE Robot. Autom. Mag. 23, 55–64. doi:10.1109/
MRA.2016.2582216
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be
construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2017 McConnell, Vallejo, Moioli, Brasil, Secciani, Nemitz, Riquart,
Corne, Vargas and Stokes. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms
of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or
reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) or licensor
are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance
with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted
which does not comply with these terms.

13

June 2017 | Volume 3 | Article 3

