REVIEW
published: 03 June 2020
doi: 10.3389/fnbot.2020.00025

Current Status, Challenges, and
Possible Solutions of EEG-Based
Brain-Computer Interface: A
Comprehensive Review
Mamunur Rashid 1*, Norizam Sulaiman 1 , Anwar P. P. Abdul Majeed 2 , Rabiu Muazu Musa 3 ,
Ahmad Fakhri Ab. Nasir 2 , Bifta Sama Bari 1 and Sabira Khatun 1
1

Faculty of Electrical & Electronics Engineering Technology, Universiti Malaysia Pahang, Pekan, Malaysia, 2 Innovative
Manufacturing, Mechatronics and Sports Laboratory, Faculty of Manufacturing and Mechatronic Engineering Technology,
Universiti Malaysia Pahang, Pekan, Malaysia, 3 Centre for Fundamental and Continuing Education, Universiti Malaysia
Terengganu, Kuala Nerus, Malaysia

Edited by:
Alois C. Knoll,
Technical University of
Munich, Germany
Reviewed by:
Jing Jin,
East China University of Science and
Technology, China
Feng Duan,
Nankai University, China
*Correspondence:
Mamunur Rashid
mamun110218@gmail.com
Received: 26 November 2019
Accepted: 08 April 2020
Published: 03 June 2020
Citation:
Rashid M, Sulaiman N, P. P. Abdul
Majeed A, Musa RM, Ab. Nasir AF,
Bari BS and Khatun S (2020) Current
Status, Challenges, and Possible
Solutions of EEG-Based
Brain-Computer Interface: A
Comprehensive Review.
Front. Neurorobot. 14:25.
doi: 10.3389/fnbot.2020.00025

Brain-Computer Interface (BCI), in essence, aims at controlling different assistive devices
through the utilization of brain waves. It is worth noting that the application of BCI is
not limited to medical applications, and hence, the research in this field has gained
due attention. Moreover, the significant number of related publications over the past
two decades further indicates the consistent improvements and breakthroughs that
have been made in this particular field. Nonetheless, it is also worth mentioning
that with these improvements, new challenges are constantly discovered. This article
provides a comprehensive review of the state-of-the-art of a complete BCI system.
First, a brief overview of electroencephalogram (EEG)-based BCI systems is given.
Secondly, a considerable number of popular BCI applications are reviewed in terms
of electrophysiological control signals, feature extraction, classification algorithms, and
performance evaluation metrics. Finally, the challenges to the recent BCI systems are
discussed, and possible solutions to mitigate the issues are recommended.
Keywords: brain-computer interface (BCI), electroencephalogram (EEG), machine learning, classification, feature
extraction

INTRODUCTION
Communication, or social interaction, is one of the key principles of human civilization. This
quality enables one to share emotions, expectations, and creative thoughts amongst human
beings. In the event that this communication is established through speech, gesture, or writing,
human communication becomes easier and devoid of constraints. Nonetheless, people who are
suffering from locked-in syndrome do not have the aforementioned options for interaction.
Patients with locked-in syndrome could not interact or express themselves, although they
are well-cognizant of things around them (Ashok, 2017). Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS),
cerebral palsy, brain stem stroke, multiple sclerosis, cerebral palsy, and spinal cord injury
are the main causes of locked-in syndrome (Holz et al., 2013). It is almost impossible for
a person who is affected by the locked-in syndrome to communicate with other persons,
and hence, Brain–Computer Interface (BCI) is a promising means to furnish them with
basic communication abilities. Fundamentally, the human brain and devices are interfaced
through the concept of BCI in which the users will have to generate a variety of brain waves

Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org

1

June 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 25

Rashid et al.

EEG-Based BCI Technology: A Review

that will be recognized and converted into commands to the
devices (Volosyak et al., 2017). In its earlier days, researchers
intended to use this technology to develop assistive devices for
medical purposes only. Nonetheless, the employment of this
technology has expanded, and it has found its way into nonmedical applications. It is discernible that over the last 15 years,
a considerable number of original articles as well as reviews
have been published on BCI. An excellent review article on BCI
spelling systems was published in Rezeika et al. (2018), giving
a concise description of some successful recent BCI spelling
models, including their categories, methodologies, and results.
The authors also listed some limitations of the current systems
as well as making recommendations for directions that could be
pursued to overcome the issues. However, it is worth mentioning
that the content of the review emphasized and was restricted
to only BCI spellers. There are other notable BCI reviews that
cater to specific applications, for instance, wheelchair control
(Fernández-Rodríguez et al., 2016; Al-qaysi et al., 2018), BCI
mobile robot (Bi et al., 2013), emotion recognition using EEG
(Al-Nafjan et al., 2017), biometrics (Del Pozo-Banos et al., 2014;
Alariki et al., 2018), and virtual reality and gaming (Kaplan
et al., 2013; Ahn et al., 2014; Cattan et al., 2018). Nevertheless,
some pertinent information was missing or not duly reported,
for instance, descriptions of methodology and evaluation metrics
employed, and/or future directions of the research.
Electroencephalogram (EEG) control signals and their
classifications have been briefly discussed in an excellent review
(Ramadan and Vasilakos, 2017). The authors reviewed stateof-the-art BCI solutions with regards to both hardware and
software; however, it was noticeable that the applications, as
well as the signal processing methods, were not taken into
consideration. Likewise, Hwang et al. (2013) have summarized
articles related to EEG-based BCI systems published from 2007
to 2011. Notwithstanding, the review did not entirely reflect the
current state-of-the-art and did not provide any future directions
for the research. Conversely, in Abdulkader et al. (2015), the
fundamental aspects that cover the wide spectrum of EEG-based
BCI systems were reviewed; however, the number of articles
reviewed was rather limited. Lotte et al. (2007) provided a review
of the classification algorithms used in EEG-based BCI systems
up to 2006. In their second review (Lotte et al., 2018), the
application of machine learning algorithms used on BCI systems
from 2007 to 2017 was reviewed. In both articles, the authors
surveyed EEG control signals, features, classification methods,
and classification accuracy. Moreover, the authors provided some
guidelines on selecting the appropriate classification algorithms;
nonetheless, the articles lacked evaluation of the performance
metrics. A review on portable and non-invasive modalities such
as EEG-, functional transcranial Doppler (fTCD)-, and nearinfrared spectroscopy (NIRS)-based hybrid BCI was reported in
Banville and Falk (2016). Twenty-two items were investigated
from 55 journal articles published between 2008 and 2014.
The authors reviewed non-invasive modalities, EEG control
signal, experiment protocol, signal processing methods, and
system evaluation, as well as shedding some light on future
directions for EEG-based BCI research. However, a comparison
of the experimental results between the BCI applications or EEG

Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org

modalities were not made available, and a similar observation was
also noticed in Abiri et al. (2019).
Therefore, the objectives of this article are to review EEGbased BCI systems with regards to the different brain control
signals, feature extraction methods, classification algorithms, and
evaluation metrics utilized. Moreover, a concise overview of
EEG-based BCI systems is presented here so that the reader(s)
may select the most appropriate method for a specific BCI
system. In addition, related research gaps that warrant further
exploration are also presented in this paper. Of note, salient
problems associated with EEG-based BCI systems are listed in
terms of its applications, and possible solutions to mitigate the
issues are also recommended. Moreover, this review, unlike other
published review articles with regards to EEG-based BCI systems
that were specific in nature, particularly with respect to either
its specific applications or part of the methodology employed
(e.g., feature extraction, signal processing, and classification,
amongst others), provides a more comprehensive overview that
can easily be comprehended by the readers to identify the
gaps in the body of knowledge. This article is structured in
the following manner: section Essential Components of BCI
Technology presents a brief discussion on BCI overview, section
Popular EEG Based BCI Applications Aspect illustrates the
review of popular EEG-based BCI applications, section Current
Challenges and Directions discusses the challenges, giving
recommendations, section Conclusion draws the conclusion of
the present review paper.

ESSENTIAL COMPONENTS OF BCI
TECHNOLOGY
Brain–Computer Interface (BCI) is an effective as well as
a powerful tool for user-system communication. Through
this system, from the issuance of the commands to the
completion of the interaction, no external devices or muscle
intervention is required (Van Erp et al., 2012). NicolasAlonso and Gomez-Gil (2012) defined brain–computer interface
(BCI) or brain–machine interface (BMI) as a hardware and
software communications strategy that empowers humans to
interact with their surroundings with no inclusion of peripheral
nerves or muscles by utilizing control signals produced from
electroencephalographic activity. Every BCI system essentially
consists of five components: brain activity measurement,
preprocessing, feature extraction, classification, and translation
into a command (Mason and Birch, 2003). Figure 1 depicts a
typical block diagram that illustrates the different stages of EEG
signal processing for BCI. In the brain activity acquisition phase,
the brain activity from the targeted user is captured through
the various types of EEG sensors (Wolpaw et al., 2006). The
raw EEG data includes a variety of artifacts, and these artifacts
are eliminated in the pre-processing phase (Bashashati et al.,
2007a). Feature extraction aims at describing the signals by a
few relevant values called “features;” often, at this stage, the
selection of significant features is also investigated (Bashashati
et al., 2007a). The extracted features are then classified through
different machine learning and deep learning algorithms in the

2

June 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 25

Rashid et al.

EEG-Based BCI Technology: A Review

FIGURE 1 | General architecture of a brain-computer interface.

Brain Activity Measurement Modalities

classification phase (Lotte et al., 2007). Finally, the classified
outcomes are translated into device commands to develop reallife BCI application (Kubler et al., 2006).

To avoid the risk of surgery, most BCI researchers prefer the
non-invasive approach. EEG, MEG, PET, fMRI, and fNIRS are
among the non-invasive modalities that are often utilized. The
selection of the measurement method depends on a variety of
parameters, for instance, spatial resolution, temporal resolution,
invasiveness, measured activity, cost, and portability, amongst
others. Owing to its desirable traits, namely high temporal
resolution, low cost, ease of portability, and non-invasiveness,
EEG is the most commonly employed neuroimaging modality
among BCI researchers.
EEG records voltage fluctuations due to the flow of ionic
current during synaptic excitations in the neurons of the brain
(Baillet et al., 2001). In this modality, electrodes are attached to
the scalp to obtain brain signals. Its non-invasive and inexpensive
characteristics have made EEG the most popular modality among
the BCI research community. The electrode number varies from
1 to 256 for different EEG headsets. The measured EEG signal is
the voltage difference between the active and reference electrode
over time, with its amplitude in micro-volts (µV). Generally, the
EEG amplitude ranges from −100 to +100 microvolts. The EEG
signals can be categorized according to frequency bands, and
each of these bands has specific biological significance. The EEG
frequency bands with relevant characteristics are listed in Table 1
(Wang et al., 2016).

Branches of BCI Technology
Generally, BCI frameworks may be separated into a number
of classes. Figure 2 illustrates the three categorization schemes,
namely by dependability, recording technique, and method of
operation (Lotte et al., 2015). Regarding dependability, BCI can
be classed as either dependent or independent BCI. Dependent
BCIs require some form of motor control by the user or healthy
subjects, for instance, gaze control (Lalor et al., 2005). MIbased BCIs are an ideal example of dependent BCI systems and
have been extensively utilized. Conversely, independent BCIs
do not require any form of motor control by the user; this
type of BCI is ideal for stroke patients or severely impaired
patients. In Tello et al. (2016), an SSVEP-based independent BCI
system was proposed to identify two different targets, and it was
demonstrated to be successful.
With regard to recording method, BCI can be categorized
into invasive and non-invasive. Microelectrode arrays are often
required to be implanted inside the skull for invasive BCIs.
Two common invasive modalities that have been reported in
BCI research are intracortical recording and electrocorticography
(ECoG). Conversely, if the brain signals are acquired by means
of sensors placed on the scalp, it is known as non-invasive BCI.
Amongst the non-invasive modalities often utilized are EEG,
MEG, PET, fMRI, and fNIRS. In BCIs, EEG is the most widely
employed non-invasive modality, where a variety of control
signals, including SCP, SSVEP, MI, ErrP, and P300, can be evoked.
Finally, BCI can have either a synchronous or asynchronous
mode of operation. The interaction between the user and the
system may be either time-dependent or time-independent. In
the event that the interaction is carried out within a certain period
of time upon a cue imposed by the system, then the system is
known as synchronous BCI. In contrast, in asynchronous BCI,
the subject can generate a mental task at any period of time to
interact with the application. In comparison with asynchronous
BCI, synchronous BCIs are not user-friendly, but designing such
a system is much easier than for asynchronous BCI (Bashashati
et al., 2007b).

Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org

EEG Control Signals Used in BCI
Applications
Some neurophysiological EEG signals have been decoded to
enable the BCI to understand the subject’s intentions, and these
signals are known as EEG control signals. BCI aims to identify
the specific neurophysiological signals of a given subject in order
to associate a command to each of these signals. Some of these
control signals are relatively easy to identify, as well as being
relatively easy to control by the user. The extensively utilized
EEG control signals include SCP, P300, MI, MRCP, ErrP, SSVEP,
SSAEP, and SSSEP.
The movement-related cortical potential (MRCP) is a lowfrequency negative shift in the EEG recording that takes place
∼2 s prior to the production of voluntary movement. MRCP
replicates the cortical processes employed in the planning and

3

June 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 25

Rashid et al.

EEG-Based BCI Technology: A Review

FIGURE 2 | Classification of BCI systems in terms of dependability, recording method, and mode of operation.

preparation of the movement (Shakeel et al., 2015). It is mainly
beneficial for those BCI applications where the delay between the
intention to act and the feedback from the system is crucial to
induce plasticity.
The error-related potential (ErrP) has recently been utilized
as an ERP component that can be used to correct BCI errors.
The ErrP occurs when there is a mismatch between a subject’s
intention to perform a given task and the response provided by
the BCI (Abiri et al., 2019). For instance, if a user wishes to move
a cursor from the middle of a monitor to the left side of the
monitor but the cursor erroneously moves to the right, an errorrelated potential will be generated. The ErrP is most pronounced
at the frontal and central lobes. The delay and non-stationarity
characteristics of this signal are still a challenge for real-time BCI
implementation (Abiri et al., 2019).
Spontaneous signals are generated voluntarily by the
user, without external stimulation, following an internal

Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org

cognitive process. The most typical spontaneous signals used
are undoubtedly sensorimotor rhythms. However, other
neurophysiological signals have been used, such as slow cortical
potentials or non-motor cognitive signals.
Slow Cortical Potentials (SCP) are very slow variations in
cortical activity that can last from hundreds of milliseconds
(ms) to several seconds (s) (Kleber and Birbaumer, 2005). It is
possible to make these variations positive or negative via operant
conditioning. As the control of SCP is achieved by operant
conditioning, mastering such a signal generally requires a very
long training time. This training by operant conditioning is
even longer for SCP than for motor rhythms (Birbaumer, 2006).
However, it seems that SCP would be a more stable signal.
Non-motor cognitive processing tasks are also extensively
used to operate a BCI. These tasks are, for instance, mental
mathematical computations, mental rotation of geometric
figures, visual counting, mental generation of words, and music

4

June 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 25

Rashid et al.

EEG-Based BCI Technology: A Review

TABLE 1 | EEG frequency bands with properties.
Band

Frequency (Hz)

Amplitude (µV)

Delta

0.5–4 Hz

100–200

Frontal

Deep sleep

Theta

4–8 Hz

5–10

Various

Drowsiness, light sleep

Alpha

8–13 Hz

20–80

Posterior region of head

Relaxed

Beta

13–30 Hz

1–5

Left and right side,
symmetrical distribution,
most evident frontally

Active thinking, alert

>30 Hz

0.5–2

Somatosensory cortex

Hyperactivity

Gamma

imagination, amongst others (Chiappa and Bengio, 2004). All
of these mental tasks generate specific EEG signal variations in
specific cortical regions and frequency bands, which make them
relatively easy to identify.

Activity

SSSEP have been published. This is primarily due to the lack of
a well-designed standard tactile stimulator with which to extract
the SSSEP signals.

P300
BCI systems with P300 rely upon stimuli that flash in succession.
These stimuli may be symbols or letters and are used for different
BCI applications, for instance, controlling a robot arm, cursor,
or mobile robot. P300 is generated in the Pz areas of the brain,
∼300 ms after the stimulus is presented (Farwell and Donchin,
1988). It has been reported in the literature that the response’s
peak amplitude is much larger, even with less probable stimulus
(John et al., 1996). Amongst the advantageous features of P300based BCIs is that they do not require any form of training.
However, it is worth mentioning that in the event that infrequent
stimulus decreases the amplitude of P300 that, in turn, reduces
the overall performance of the system.

Steady-State Evoked Potentials (SSEP)
SSEP appears when the user perceives a periodic stimulus
like a flickering photo or an amplitude-modulated sound. An
important characteristic of SSEP is that the stimulation frequency
or harmonics is equivalent to the EEG signal frequencies (GouyPailler et al., 2007). The stimulation of a fixed frequency evokes
SSEP by yielding EEG activity of the identical frequency as
the stimulation is generated (Maye et al., 2011). According
to visual, auditory, and somatosensory stimulation, SSEP can
be further divided into Steady-State Visually Evoked Potentials
(SSVEP) (Valbuena et al., 2010), Steady-State Auditory Evoked
Potentials (SSAEP) (Fairclough and Gilleade, 2014), and SteadyState Somatosensory Evoked Potentials (SSSEP) (Muller-Putz
et al., 2006).
Every SSVEP-based BCI needs a specific number of visual
stimuli that indicate specific BCI output commands. These
stimuli flicker continuously, with distinguishable frequency
bands ranging from 6 to 30 Hz. In the event that a subject
concentrates on a particular flickering stimulus, an SSVEP with
an identical frequency to that of the target flicker is generated.
For example, if the frequency of the targeted stimulus is 15 Hz,
the frequency of the generated SSVEP will also be 15 Hz.
Therefore, the user pays attention visually to a target, and the BCI
determines the target through analyzing the SSVEP features.
SSAEP are commonly extracted by trains of click stimuli,
tone pulses, or amplitude-modulated tones, with a repetition or
modulation rate between 20 and 100 Hz. The resulting brain
response can be localized at the primary auditory cortex (Hill and
Schölkopf, 2012). Although the SSAEP-based BCI system yielded
promising results, only highly experienced users could maintain
the high level of attention needed in order to obtain high accuracy
(Punsawad and Wongsawat, 2017).
In the SSSEP paradigm, vibrotactile sensors are placed at
pre-determined parts of the body, and these sensors generate
stimulations at different frequencies (Hamada et al., 2014). The
stimulations of these sensors will then be reflected in EEG
signals recorded from the scalp. In comparison to visual- or
sensorimotor rhythm-based BCI research, limited studies of

Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org

Location

Motor Imagery
Moving a limb or even contracting a single muscle changes brain
activity in the cortex. Preparation for the movement or imagining
movement [also known as motor imagery (MI)] generates
oscillations in the brain motor areas known as sensorimotor
rhythms (SMR). Increase and decrease of oscillatory activity
in a particular frequency band are referred to as event-related
synchronization (ERS) and event-related desynchronization
(ERD), respectively. The most influential frequency bands for
motor imagery are the alpha and beta brain waves. Activity
invoked by the left and right hand MI is generated from the
C3 and C4 areas of the brain, respectively, whereas the foot
movement imagery is originated from Cz. Left and right foot
movements are almost impossible to distinguish in EEG due to
the fact that the corresponding cortical regions are extremely
close. The cortical areas must be large enough to produce
detectable patterns in the background EEG. The cortical areas
of the left hand, right hand, tongue, and foot, are large and
distinguishable. Thus, the movement of those body limbs via
imagination can be controlled by BCI applications (Schlögl et al.,
2005).

EEG Acquisition Framework for BCI
Application
The human brain consists of two main parts, i.e., the
cerebral cortex and subcortical regions. The essential and vital

5

June 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 25

Rashid et al.

EEG-Based BCI Technology: A Review

FIGURE 3 | Standardized electrode placement scheme.

10 or 20% of the total front-back or right-left distance of the
skull. In each site, a letter is used to denote the lobe, whereas
the hemisphere location is represented by a number. In the 10/20
system, the frontal, parietal, temporal, and occipital lobes can be
denoted by the letters F, P, T, and O, respectively, as depicted in
Figure 3. The central lobe is not included; the letter C is utilized
only for identification purposes. Z (zero) implies that an electrode
is placed on the midline. Even numbers (2, 4, 6, 8) are utilized to
indicate the right hemispheres electrode positions, whereas lefthemisphere electrode positions are denoted by odd numbers (1,
3, 5, 7) (Rojas et al., 2018).

functions, including body temperature, respiration, heart rate,
and emotional responses, including reflexes, fear, learning, and
memory, are controlled by the subcortical regions. Conversely,
the cerebral cortex, commonly known as the cerebrum, regulates
sensory and motor processing as well as higher-level functions,
for example, language processing, pattern recognition, reasoning,
and planning. The cerebral cortex is partitioned into two
hemispheres, in which every hemisphere is classified into four
lobes, namely the parietal, occipital, frontal, and temporal lobes.
The parietal lobe is in charge of numerous functions, for
instance, spelling, objects, manipulation, perception, and spatial
awareness. Conversely, the language, memory, recognizing
faces, and generating emotions are the main functions of the
temporal lobe. The third lobe, i.e., the frontal lobe, involves
organizing, social skills, planning, flexible thinking, problemsolving, conscious movement, attention, and emotional and
behavioral control. The occipital lobe is related to interpreting
visual stimuli. Additionally, another essential system of the
human body is the nervous system, which is classified into two
main parts: the central and peripheral systems. The spinal cord
and the brain are the two parts of the central nervous system. In
contrast, the peripheral nervous system includes the autonomic
nervous system, which controls functions such as digestion,
secretion of hormones, breathing, and heart rate.
The 10/20 system is a universally recognized method that
indicates the locations of electrodes on the scalp. The system
depends on the connection between the electrode location and
the underlying area of the cerebral cortex. The numbers 10 and 20
indicate that the distances among adjacent electrodes are either

Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org

Hardware Technology for EEG Signal Acquisition
There are two main methods of acquiring EEG signals: wireless
or wired. Typically, EEG signal measurements are performed
using a number of electrodes varying from 1 to about 256. These
electrodes are generally attached using an elastic cap. The contact
between the electrodes and the skin is commonly enhanced
through the utilization of a conductive gel or paste. However, this
makes the electrode embedding procedure a generally tedious
and lengthy operation. Nonetheless, it is worth noting that the
use of dry electrodes, which do not require conductive gels or
pastes, has been proposed and validated (Popescu et al., 2007). In
spite of this success, it is worth pointing out that the performance
of this method in terms of maximum information rate is, on
average, 30% lower than that obtained with a BCI based on
electrodes that employ conductive gels or pastes. Though the
wired system is well-established, it has some notable limitations.
It is evident that connection using wires between the electrodes

6

June 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 25

Rashid et al.

EEG-Based BCI Technology: A Review

TABLE 2 | Summary table of recent EEG devices.
Device name

No. of channels

Sampling frequency

SynAmps:64
Grael:32
NuAmps:40
Siesta:32

SynAmps:20 kHz
Grael:4,096 Hz
NuAmps:1,000 Hz
Siesta:1,024 Hz

LiveAmp: 8/16/32

Between 250, 500, and
1,000 Hz

16, 32, or 64

2/4/8/16 KHz

INSIGHT: 5
EPOC+: 14
EPOC FLEX: 32

128 Hz

NeuroScan

Brain Products
BioSemi
Emotiv

NeuroSky

Communication

No. of publications

Wired

12,300

Wireless

6,690

Wired

5,750

Wireless

3,990

1

512 Hz

Wireless

2,290

ABM B-Alert X24: 24

256 Hz

Wireless

790

g.tec nautilus

64

500 Hz

Wireless

430

AntNeuro eego

64

2,048 Hz

Wireless

340

Neuroelectrics Enobio 32

32

500 Hz

Wireless

317
207

Advanced brain monitoring

Muse

4

256 Hz

Wireless

Up to 16 channels

256 Hz

Wireless

201

Cognionics Mobile

72

500–1,000 Hz

Wireless

128

mBrainTrain

24

250–500 Hz

Wireless

38

MyndBand EEG headset

3

512 Hz

Wireless

8, 20, or 32

500 Hz

Wireless

OpenBCI

Enobio

electromyographic activity (EMG, muscle), ballistocardiographic
activity (heart-related pulsatile motion), and respiration (Somers
et al., 2018).
Pre-processing is a non-trivial process, as it is carried out
to remove any unwanted components embedded within the
EEG signal. Good preprocessing leads to an increase in the
signal quality, which in turn results in better feature separability
and classification performance. Simple low, high, and bandpass filters are the primary attempts to attenuate artifacts in
the measured EEG. However, these are only effective when
the frequency bands of the signal do not overlap (Sweeney
et al., 2012). In case of spectral overlap, where artifacts are
recorded with the EEG, alternative artifact removal techniques
are required such as adaptive filtering, Wiener filtering, Bayes
filtering (Sweeney et al., 2012), surface Laplacian transforms
(Fitzgibbon et al., 2013), regression (Gratton et al., 1983),
Common Average Referencing (CAR) (Zaizu Ilyas et al.,
2015), EOG correction (Croft and Barry, 2000), and blind
source separation (BSS) (Oosugi et al., 2017), as well as
more modern attempts, for instance, the wavelet transform
(WT) method (Punsawad and Wongsawat, 2017), empirical
mode decomposition (EMD) (Zhang et al., 2008), Canonical
Correlation Analysis (CCA) (de Clercq et al., 2006), and nonlinear mode decomposition (NMD) (Iatsenko et al., 2015). It is
worth noting that the BSS methods are also called componentbased techniques, as they employ principal component analysis
(PCA) or independent component analysis (ICA). Kilicarslan
et al. (1976) proposed a quick artifact segment identification
technique through the combination of dynamic time warping
(DTW) and temporal motifs. Chavez et al. (2018) proposed a

and the acquisition part is often complicated, as it is a rather
time-consuming procedure. Moreover, the user’s movement is
restricted owing to the tethered nature of cable constraints.
Hence, wireless BCI systems have gained due attention, primarily
owing to their ability to mitigate the aforesaid restrictions. One of
the attractive natures of the wireless EEG headset is that it is noninvasive. Moreover, it does not hinder the motion of the user.
Table 2 lists the types of EEG devices that have been reported
in the literature with their specifications. It is evident that the
selection of the type of EEG headset or device is dependent on
the BCI application itself1 .

EEG Data Pre-processing Strategies
A small SNR and different noise sources are amongst the greatest
challenges in EEG-based BCI application studies. Unwanted
signals contained in the main signal can be termed noise,
artifacts, or interference. There are two sources of EEG artifacts:
external or environmental source and physiological source. The
external sources of noise include AC power lines, lighting, and a
large array of electronic equipment (from computers, displays,
and TVs to wireless routers, notebooks, and mobile phones,
amongst others). Physiological noise arises from an assortment
of body activities due to movement, other bioelectrical
potentials, or skin resistance fluctuations. The predominant
physiological noises include electrooculographic activity (EOG,
eye), electrocardiographic activity (ECG, heart), scalp-recorded
1 Top 14 EEG Hardware Companies [Ranked]. Available online at: https://
imotions.com/blog/top-14-eeg-hardware-companies-ranked/ (accessed February
03, 2019).

Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org

7

June 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 25

Rashid et al.

EEG-Based BCI Technology: A Review

supervised machine learning approach to detect artifacts from
a single channel, and the approach outperformed statistical
thresholding for EEG artifact rejection due to its ability to
identify small artifacts in the presence of high-amplitude
EEG. Mohammadpour and Rahmani (2017) have utilized an
HMM architecture to remove eyeblink artifacts. Contrary to
conventional algorithms, machine learning-based approaches
have gained due attention, particularly for their ability to
identify artifacts. To attenuate eye blink artifacts, a multichannel
Weighted Weiner filter has been proposed (Manojprabu and
Sarma Dhulipala, 2020), where Hierarchical Fully Connected
Topology (HFCT) and Ad-hoc Nearest-Neighbor Topology
(ANNT) are utilized. The proposed approach provides 5% better
results for artifact attenuation when compared with the other
existing approaches like PCA and ICA. However, it should be
noted that the proposed approach has not been employed in real
medical devices.

data-driven algorithm, namely surrogate-based artifact removal
(SuBAR), to remove muscular and ocular artifacts effectively
from EEG. A joint approach combining BSS and REG, the online
EEG artifact attenuation technique, has also been proposed for
BCI applications (Guarnieri et al., 2018). Although there is no
single gold standard in EEG artifact removal algorithms, the
authors of Urigüen and Garcia-Zapirain (2015) recommend
using an ICA algorithm based upon second-order blind
identification (SOBI) due to its success in removing different
types of EEG contaminants.
Real-time BCI applications require artifact removal methods
that are automatic and of low computational cost. Regression
and filtering approaches can be executed automatically when
they have a reference signal. Moreover, BSS methods will be
automatic when there is a subsequent procedure. Although
ICA is the most commonly used technique among these BSS
methods, it disregards the temporal or spatial relations within
sources, which will result in the loss of relevant information.
Nevertheless, a CCA algorithm can mitigate this problem as
it takes little computational time, which makes the algorithm
applicable for real-time performance. Another factor that should
be taken into account is the number of measurement channels.
It should be noted that for home healthcare environments,
fewer channels are often expected. BBS algorithms cannot be
utilized in such a situation, due to the principle of BSS that
it requires more channels in order to allow it to be more
accurate. However, it should be noted that wavelet transform
and EMD-based methods can be executed with a single channel,
as they can decompose from a single record into multiple
components (Chen et al., 2014). However, a reduction in
the number of measurement channels will cause an increase
in computational complexity, which will not be suitable for
BCI applications.
In addition, it is worth noting that automatic methods are not
commonly used for artifact removal, as there are multiple types
of artifacts that exist in the recordings. Hence, the availability
of reference signals will improve the accuracy and robustness
of artifact removal by providing satisfactory complementary
information. Also, the information on the artifact epochs
obtained by the reference channel will reduce the computational
cost. However, having a reference channel for each muscle
contributing to EEG muscle artifacts is not feasible. Apart from
the aforementioned methods, there are plenty of innovative and
efficient approaches for artifact removal that have been recently
proposed. One recently emerging BSS algorithm, independent
vector analysis (IVA), integrates the advantages of CCA and
ICA into one single framework. This technique could remove
muscle artifacts by synchronously extracting the sources with
maximal independence and maximal autocorrelation (Chen
et al., 2017a,b). In addition, the combination of EEMD and
IVA has been demonstrated to outperform other existing
methods in a situation where there are few channels (Xu X.
et al., 2018). More recently, a modified joint BSS approach
and quadrature regression IVA (q-IVA) provided a more
effective artifact removal technique in both the time and
frequency domains, paving the way for future research (Lee
S. et al., 2019). Dhindsa (2017) proposed a filter-bank-based

Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org

Feature Extraction Approaches in
EEG-Based BCI Systems
After the noise removal phase, the most discriminative and nonredundant information within the EEG is extracted through
different feature extraction techniques. Time-domain, frequencydomain, time-frequency domain, and spatial domain are
the popular types of feature extraction techniques in EEGbased BCIs.
A typical time-domain-based feature extraction approach,
autoregressive (AR) modeling, is a linear regression of the current
observation of the series against one or more earlier observations.
A combination strategy of feature extraction, where each feature
vector consists of AR coefficients and approximate entropies, was
also proposed. In many recent articles (Lawhern et al., 2012;
Zhang and Xiaomin, 2015; Chai et al., 2017b), the AR model
has been implemented as the strategy of feature extraction in
EEG-based BCI systems. AR models are preferred by researchers
due to their resolution, smoother spectra, and applicability to
short segments of data. Lower model orders represent the signal
poorly, while higher orders increase noise. Hence, identifying
the appropriate AR modeling order is an open challenge.
Conventional ways of modeling order estimation incorporate a
Bayesian information criterion, Final prediction error, or Akaike
Information Criterion (AIC). It was hypothesized in Atyabi
et al. (2016) that an adequate mixture of AR features derived
from various AR modeling orders is a better representative
of the underlying signal compared with any fixed modeling
order. For the detection of drowsiness state from EEG signals,
the analysis of respiratory rate variability from EEG (GuedeFernández et al., 2019), adaptive Hermite decomposition (Taran
and Bajaj, 2018), and RR time series (Tripathy and Rajendra
Acharya, 2018) have been employed to extract features. In
emotion recognition using an EEG signal, the fractal dimension
of raw signals has been implemented to extract the feature by
using the Higuchi technique (Anh et al., 2012; Kaur et al., 2018).
In AydIn et al. (2009), the authors proposed the use of log
energy entropy to extract EEG features; this approach could
investigate how much randomness is captured in the signal. A

8

June 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 25

Rashid et al.

EEG-Based BCI Technology: A Review

map, generated through beamforming and CWT, was utilized
as input to the CNN. Decomposition techniques, for instance,
DWT and WPD, are efficacious because significant information
is carried in different EEG bands (Kevric and Subasi, 2017), and
these approaches are capable of decomposing the brain waves at
multiresolution and multiscale (Li et al., 2016a). Moreover, they
are able to extract dynamic features, which is crucial for EEG
signals due to their non-stationary and non-linear characteristics
(Kevric and Subasi, 2017). In Kevric and Subasi (2017), three
distinct decomposition techniques, namely, WPD, EMD, and
DWT, have been investigated to gain optimum accuracy.
Higher-order statistics (HOS) features have been extracted from
the decomposed EEG sub-bands. The frequency resolution of
DWT coefficients is comparatively lower than that of WPD,
and the deficiencies of wavelet strategies could be neutralized
by HOS.
Zhou et al. (2018) combined the utilization of DWT and
Hilbert transform (HT) for feature extraction. The EEG signal
is decomposed through DWT, and the wavelet envelope of the
decomposed sub-bands was computed through HT. They utilized
both time-series and envelope information, which assisted in
obtaining optimum accuracy. Göksu (2018) proposed wavelet
packet analysis (WPA) to extract features from an EEG-SCP
response. The WPA sub-images were further studied through
log energy entropy. Yang et al. (2016), proposed Fisher wavelet
packet decomposition (WPD)-CSP for extracting features, in
which EEG channels are decomposed by WPA, the average power
of each subband is calculated, and then, finally, CSP is employed
to the selected subbands.
Another powerful feature extraction approach known as the
common spatial pattern is extensively utilized in EEG-based BCI
(Zhang R. et al., 2019). This technique utilizes a spatial filtering
method that converts brain waves into a unique space where
the variance of one group is magnified, while lower variance is
seen in the remaining group. The pure CSP approach sometimes
cannot achieve sufficient performance due to the subject-specific
optimal frequency band. Hence, the choice of an optimized filter
band may enhance performance, but the selection of the optimal
sub-band through pure CSP takes a large amount of time. To
overcome this issue, numerous changes have been applied to
the CSP. The common spatio-spectral pattern approach (CSSP)
combines an FIR filter with a CSP algorithm and was observed to
improve performance relative to pure CSP (Reddy et al., 2019).
Common sparse spatio-spectral patterns (CSSSP) (Dornhege
et al., 2006) are a comparatively more advanced procedure where
the common spectral patterns across channels are investigated.
In sub-band common spatial pattern (SBCSP) (Khan et al.,
2019), EEG is first filtered at different sub-bands, and then
CSP features are calculated for each of the bands. Frequency
bands of the CSP, for instance, filter bank CSP (FBCSP), were
implemented in Korik et al. (2019), whereas wavelet CSP (WCSP)
has been implemented (Lin et al., 2019) by considering the
effect of frequency resolutions. However, these strategies are not
significantly relevant to EEG data from selected electrodes. To
mitigate this issue, a new technique for feature extraction from
selected channels known as regularized CSP (RCSP) has been
proposed (Jin et al., 2019).

hybrid feature extraction technique consists of PCA, and the
cross-covariance technique has been developed in Zarei et al.
(2017) to excerpt discriminatory information from the mental
states of EEG.
Frequency-domain analysis has also been employed to extract
features from different EEG-based BCIs. Among frequencydomain-based techniques, there are those that use fast Fourier
transform (FFT) (Hortal et al., 2015; Djamal et al., 2017; Bousseta
et al., 2018; Yang C. et al., 2018), power spectral density (PSD)
(Chiappa and Bengio, 2004; Carlson and Millan, 2013; Mara
et al., 2013; Pham et al., 2013; Bascil et al., 2016; Liu Y. et al.,
2017; Nguyen et al., 2017; Chakladar and Chakraborty, 2018b),
band power (Mandel et al., 2009; Serdar Bascil et al., 2015;
Kreilinger et al., 2016), and spectral centroid (Murugappan et al.,
2014). The PSD of a signal can be calculated through the FFT
and Welch’s method (Oikonomou et al., 2017). Welch’s method
reduces the artifacts in the PSD, in contrast to FFT, but produces
a poorer frequency resolution. Another frequency domainbased feature extraction technique that does not require FFT
to compute the PSD is local characteristic-scale decomposition
(Liu A. et al., 2017). This procedure disintegrates the raw
data into inherent segments that convey the properties of the
primary signal. Fourier analysis decomposes the signal into its
frequency components and determines their relative strengths.
Due to the non-stationarity and non-Gaussianity properties of
the EEG signals, classic spectral analysis techniques are not
suitable for extracting useful and important information. Gursel
Ozmen et al. (2018) introduced a biologically inspired frequency
domain-based feature extraction approach that extracts the
most discriminative spectral features from the PSD of the
EEG signals. Meziani et al. (2019) presented novel spectral
estimators, namely the quantile periodogram, and the lasso
quantile periodogram, which are based on quantile regression
and L1-norm regularization, respectively.
The use of spectral characteristics for feature extraction
is sometimes ineffective due to the absence of temporal
characteristics.
Similarly,
time-domain
interpretation
occasionally neglects spectral characteristics that may be
important to the classifier. To overcome the shortcomings of a
single domain that is either time domain or frequency domain,
time-frequency analysis is assumed to be able to mitigate the issue
as it leverages both domains. This approach could be promising
for EEG-based BCIs. A variety of time-frequency-based feature
extraction approaches have been employed in EEG-based
BCIs. The most widespread approaches are short-time Fourier
transform (STFT) (Tabar and Halici, 2017; Chaudhary et al.,
2019; Ha and Jeong, 2019; Tian and Liu, 2019), continuous
wavelet transform (CWT) (Borisoff et al., 2004; Lee and Choi,
2019; Ieracitano et al., 2020), discrete wavelet transform (DWT)
(Guo et al., 2015; Bajwa and Dantu, 2016; Djamal and Lodaya,
2017; Ji et al., 2019; Lin and She, 2020), and wavelet packet
decomposition (WPD) (Bong et al., 2017; Dhiman et al., 2018;
Wang et al., 2019). CWT (Ortiz-Echeverri et al., 2019; Mammone
et al., 2020), and STFT (Dai et al., 2019) have been utilized to
generate spectral images that can be classified through deep
learning approaches. An EEG-based motor planning exercise was
investigated by Mammone et al. (2020), where a time-frequency

Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org

9

June 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 25

Rashid et al.

EEG-Based BCI Technology: A Review

The efficient frequency recognition algorithm in SSVEP-based
BCIs performs a crucial role in overall system performance.
Among these algorithms, the most prevalent are based
on multivariate statistical algorithms, for instance, canonical
correlation analysis (CCA) (Chen et al., 2015) and multivariate
synchronization index (MSI) (Zhang Y. et al., 2016). Recently,
another MSI-based frequency recognition approach known as
CORRCA, which is based on correlated component analysis
(COCA), has been proposed (Zhang et al., 2018). The CORRCA
approach performs substantially better than the state-of-art
CCA process. Authors in Zhang Y. et al. (2019) proposed
a hierarchical feature fusion architecture that consists of
the spatial dimension and frequency dimension to improve
the performance of frequency identification techniques in
SSVEP-based BCI.
Batres-Mendoza et al. (2016) proposed a novel feature
extraction approach based on quaternions, which represent
objects within a three-dimensional space with regards to
their orientation and rotation. Islam et al. (2018) proposed
a multiband tangent space mapping with sub-band selection
(MTSMS) approach to improve EEG-MI classification accuracy,
and the authors claim that the proposed framework outperforms
state-of-the-art methods. Authors in Lee S. B. et al. (2019)
investigated the comparative analysis of EEG features in
three different domains, namely spectral, temporal, and
spatial, to classify multi-class MI data. According to their
investigation, the time-domain parameter (TDP) has been
observed to be superior as compared to the CSP and PSD.
Another study explored the use of tunable Q-factor wavelet
transform (TQWT) for the identification of drowsiness EEG
signals (Al Ghayab et al., 2019). With this approach, TQWT
decomposes the EEG signals into band-limited sub-bands,
and the drowsiness and alertness EEG signal characteristics
from TQWT-provided sub-bands are extracted using timedomain measures. These measures are based on the statistics
of Hjorth mobility. Moreover, a novel hybrid feature extraction
technique has been proposed (Asadur Rahman et al., 2019),
which consists of PCA and t-statistics. In Guede-Fernández
et al. (2019), the analysis of respiratory rate variability of
EEG has been utilized to monitor the state of drowsiness in
a driver.

briefly, and their essential properties for BCI applications
are highlighted.

Conventional Machine Learning Approaches in
EEG-Based BCIs
The k-NN algorithm depends on the principle that the features
corresponding to the several classes will form individual clusters
in feature space. The features that are closer to each other are
recognized as neighbors and are therefore grouped together.
This classifier takes k metric distances into account between
the test sample features and those of the nearest classes in
order to classify a test feature vector. The metric distances are a
measure of the similarities between the features of the test vector
and the features of each class (Nicolas-Alonso and Gomez-Gil,
2012). It is worth highlighting that the k-NN algorithms are not
exceptionally popular in the BCI community because they are
known to be very sensitive to the dimensionality of the feature
vector (Borisoff et al., 2004). Nonetheless, when the algorithm
is utilized in BCI systems with low-dimensional feature vectors,
the algorithm could be useful. Thus, the k-NN algorithm can
provide good results when it is combined with other efficient
feature selection and reduction algorithms. In k-NN architecture,
the number of neighbors and the type of distance metrics are the
key factors.
LDA is employed to find the linear combinations of feature
vectors that describe the characteristics of the corresponding
signal. The LDA seeks to separate two or more classes of objects
or events representing different classes. It utilizes hyperplanes to
accomplish this mission. The isolating hyperplane is achieved
by searching for the projection that maximizes the distance
among the classes’ means and minimizes the interclass variance
(Abdulkader et al., 2015). This technique has a very low
computational requirement, and it is simple to use. The LDA
has been successfully applied in a variety of BCI systems, for
example, motor imagery-based BCI, P300 speller, multiclass,
or asynchronous BCI (Long et al., 2012a). However, while
it provides expected outcomes due to its immunity to nonstationary issues, its linearity can cause performance degradation
in a few circumstances containing complex non-linear EEG data.
Moreover, numerous updated algorithms have been presented
depending on LDA, for example, Fisher LDA (FLDA) as well as
Bayesian LDA (BLDA) (Hoffmann et al., 2008). FLDA does not
work well if the number of features becomes too large in relation
to the number of training examples. This issue is called the small
sample size problem (Hoffmann et al., 2008). On the other hand,
the BLDA is considered as an expansion of FLDA that mitigates
the small sample size problem through the incorporation of
a statistical method called regularization. The regularization is
estimated through Bayesian analysis of training data and is
utilized to prevent the overfitting problem of high-dimensional
as well as possibly noisy datasets. Overfitting means that the
classifier has lost generality and is therefore undesirable in a
classifier. If a classifier is overfitted, it is only able to classify the
training data or similar data. Unlike FLDA, the BLDA algorithm
gives higher classification accuracy and bitrates, particularly in
those situations where the size of the training sample is large
(Hoffmann et al., 2008). Furthermore, BLDA requires slightly

Classification Methods
To operate a BCI system, the subject needs to create various
brain activity patterns that can be identified by the system
and translated into commands. It is worth noting that either
regression or classification algorithms could be utilized to
achieve the said objective. However, the usage of classification
algorithms is presently reported to be the most popular
approach (Lotte et al., 2007). The design of the classification
step includes the choice of one or several classification
algorithms from many alternatives. Numerous classification
algorithms have been presented in the published EEG-based
BCI literature, for instance, support vector machine (SVM),
neural network (NN), linear discriminant analysis (LDA),
Bayesian classifier, k-nearest neighbor (k-NN), as well as deep
learning and its iterations. The aforesaid classifiers are described

Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org

10

June 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 25

Rashid et al.

EEG-Based BCI Technology: A Review

Learning Vector Quantization (LVQ) Neural Networks,
Bayesian Logistic Regression Neural Networks (BLRNN),
RBF Neural Networks, and Adaptive Logic Networks (ALN),
amongst others.
A Hidden Markov Model (HMM) is a Bayesian classifier
that produces non-linear decision boundaries. An HMM is a
sort of probabilistic automaton that gives the likelihood of
observing a given sequence of feature vectors (Rabiner, 1989).
For BCI, generally, these probabilities are Gaussian Mixture
Models (GMM) (Obermaier et al., 2001). HMMs are perfectly
appropriate algorithms for the classification of time series
(Rabiner, 1989). As the EEG components that are used to
operate BCI have specific time courses, HMM is applicable to the
classification of temporal sequences of BCI features (Obermaier
et al., 2001; Cincotti et al., 2003), even for classifying raw
EEG signals.

more computational time, which is a crucial constraint in real
BCI systems.
SVM is a classifier that builds a hyperplane or set of
hyperplanes for separating the feature vectors into several classes.
However, in contrast to LDA, SVM selects the hyperplanes
that maximize the margins, that is, the distance between the
nearest training samples and the hyperplanes (Burges, 1998).
SVM that empowers classification by utilizing linear decision
boundaries is called linear SVM. This type of classifier has
been applied successfully to a moderately large number of
synchronous BCI problems (Garrett et al., 2003; Rakotomamonjy
et al., 2005). However, it is advantageous to make non-linear
decision boundaries with a low increment of the classifier’s
complexity by utilizing the “kernel trick.” The kernel usually
utilized for BCI research is the Gaussian or Radial Basis Function
(RBF) kernel. The corresponding SVM is called Gaussian SVM
or RBF SVM. The RBF SVM has also shown to be robust for
achieving good results in BCI applications (Garrett et al., 2003;
Kaper et al., 2004; Rakotomamonjy et al., 2005). Generally, the
SVM has been broadly recognized as the simpler algorithm used
in BCI applications. In addition, the algorithm is shown to be
robust with a high-dimensional dataset, which implies that a large
training set is not required for good outcomes, even with highdimensional feature vectors (Kaper et al., 2004). It is worth noting
that these favorable circumstances do not hinder the execution
speed during the integration of real-time BCIs (Thulasidas et al.,
2006).
The neural network (NN) has the special capacity to extract
patterns and identify trends that seem to be complicated, either
by humans or by computerized techniques. A trained NN
system can be considered as an “expert” in the classification of
information that it has been provided to analyze. This algorithm
is one of the fundamental tools utilized in machine learning. The
term “neural” denotes that it is considered to be a brain-inspired
system that is intended to replicate the way that humans learn.
A NN consists of input, output, and hidden layers. A hidden
layer consists of units that transform the input into something
that the output layer can utilize. It is an excellent tool for
discovering patterns that are too complex or numerous for a
human programmer to extract and to teach the machine to
perceive. One of the most well-known ANN structures is the
multilayer perceptron (MLP) introduced by Rumelhart et al.
(1986). MLPs are flexible classifiers with the ability to classify
any number of classes as well as to adapt to various different sets
of problems. In BCIs, the MLP has been applied to classify two,
three, and five tasks and to design synchronous (Haselsteiner
and Pfurtscheller, 2000) as well as asynchronous (Millan and
Mourino, 2003) BCIs. Additionally, the MLP has been utilized
to preprocess EEG signals prior to the feature extraction step
rather than the classification step to improve the separability of
EEG features (Coyle et al., 2010). Other than MLP, numerous
sorts of NN architecture have been utilized in the design of BCI
systems, including Fuzzy ARTMAP Neural Networks, Finite
Impulse Response Neural Networks (FIRNN) or Probability
estimating Guarded Neural Classifiers (PeGNC), Probabilistic
Neural Networks (PNN), Time-Delay Neural Networks
(TDNN) or Gamma dynamic Neural Networks (GDNN),

Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org

Deep Learning Approaches in EEG-Based BCIs
The ability to acquire a robust automatic classification of EEG
signals is an essential step toward making the use of EEG
more practical in many applications and less reliant on trained
professionals (Alexander et al., 2018). It is worth noting that
although conventional BCI systems have made tremendous
advances in the past few decades, nonetheless, the research still
faces significant challenges in EEG classification. The challenges
include various biological and environmental artifacts in EEG,
a low SNR, and dependency on human expertise for extracting
meaningful features. In addition, most existing machine learning
research, if not all, centers on static data and, hence, is not able
to classify rapidly changing brain signals accurately (Lotte et al.,
2018). Of late, the availability of large EEG data sets has led to
the utilization of Deep Learning (DL) architectures, especially
to uncover relevant information from the signals that were not
possible to acquire via conventional approaches and has shown
success in addressing the aforesaid challenges. Fundamentally,
DL is a specific machine learning algorithm in which the
features and the classifier are jointly learned directly from data
(Zhang X. et al., 2019). DL algorithms have been explored for
almost all major types of EEG-based BCI systems, namely P300,
SSVEP, motor imagery (MI), SCP, and passive BCI (for emotions
and workload detection). Here, a number of prevalent DL
models including convolutional neural networks (CNN), deep
belief networks (DBN) restricted Boltzmann machines (RBM),
recurrent neural networks (RNN), a stacked autoencoder (SAE),
and generative adversarial networks (GAN) will be discussed
briefly with regards to their employment in BCI research.
A Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) is a special
type of neural network architecture that is specialized in
spatial information exploration. CNN contains at least one
convolutional layer, and this layer maps input to an output
through a convolution operator (Fan et al., 2019; Zhang X.
et al., 2019). In BCI research, CNN is assumed to capture
the distinctive dependencies amongst the patterns associated
with different brain signals (Lotte et al., 2018). Recently, a
considerable amount of studies (Tang et al., 2017; Aznan et al.,
2018; Dose et al., 2018; El-Fiqi et al., 2018; Shojaedini et al.,
2018; Wang et al., 2018; Waytowich et al., 2018; Amber et al.,

11

June 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 25

Rashid et al.

EEG-Based BCI Technology: A Review

2019; Amin et al., 2019; Nguyen and Chung, 2019; Olivas-Padilla
and Chacon-Murguia, 2019; Tayeb et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2019)
on the employment of CNN architecture in EEG-based BCI
systems have been published. In Olivas-Padilla and ChaconMurguia (2019), the classification of multiple MI using CNN
was explored, with the features being extracted by a variety of
Discriminative Filter Bank Common Spatial Patterns (DFBCSP).
Conversely, the authors in Xu et al. (2019) presented a wavelet
transform time-frequency image coupled with a CNN-based
approach in classifying EEG MI, and a classification accuracy
of 92.75% was attained. Tayeb et al. (2019) classified raw EEG
MI signals using a CNN architecture, achieving an accuracy of
84%, and this model has been successfully adopted in a realtime robotic arm control system. A CNN-based multilevel feature
fusion model was proposed in Amin et al. (2019) for motor
imagery EEG classification. Three other studies also employed
CNN for EEG MI classification with reported the classification
accuracies of 80, 93, and 86%, respectively (Tang et al., 2017;
Dose et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2018). It should also be noted
that the CNN model has also been employed in SSVEP-based
BCI systems. A novel CNN approach for the classification of
raw SSVEP EEG signals was proposed in Aznan et al. (2018).
Here, the CNN architecture achieved a classification accuracy
of 96%, which is significantly better than other competing
DL approaches. In El-Fiqi et al. (2018), raw SSVEPs were
classified using CNN for person identification and verification.
In addition, a 1-D CNN was employed for SSVEP frequency
detection with an average accuracy of 97.4% (Nguyen and Chung,
2019). A compact-CNN approach was proposed in Waytowich
et al. (2018), and it was able to decode signals from a 12-class
SSVEP dataset with a mean accuracy of ∼80%. With regard
to the use of CNN on P300, Amber et al. (2019) presented a
lie detection system from the P300 signals with an accuracy
of 99.6%. In addition, a new adaptive hyperparameter-tuning
method is proposed in Shojaedini et al. (2018) to improve the
training of CNN in P300 signal detection. It was established
from the study that the proposed method is able to improve the
classification accuracy by 6.44% against the conventional Naive
hyperparameter tuning method.
A deep belief network (DBN) is a probabilistic generative
model consisting of a sequence of restricted Boltzmann machine
(RBM) architectures (Abbas et al., 2019). The top two layers in
DBN are connected without directions, while the lower layers
are connected with directions. The RBM consists of a visible
layer and a hidden layer, and the connection lines between
these two layers are undirectional (Abbas et al., 2019). Several
studies have explored MI classification with DBN (An et al., 2014;
Tang et al., 2015; Lu et al., 2017; Ortega et al., 2017). In Lu
et al. (2017), a novel deep learning scheme based on RBM was
proposed for EEG MI classification in which FFT and wavelet
package decomposition are obtained to train three RBMs. These
RBMs are then stacked up with an extra output layer to form
a four-layer frequential DBN. The authors of Tang et al. (2015)
proposed an EEG MI data recognition technique using DBN.
The findings from the study showed that the recognition rate
of EEG MI data based on a DBN is better than that with the
conventional SVM model. A novel technique of classification of

Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org

imagined speech in EEG was proposed in Lee and Sim (2015),
where the classification accuracy obtained was 87.96% with DBN.
A P300-based Guilty Knowledge Test system was proposed in
Kulasingham et al. (2016). Here, the DBN architecture was used
to classify the P300 wave with an accuracy of 86.9%, and the input
to this classifier was the filtered EEG signal without any feature
extraction. Another P300 potential detection method based on
DBN has been proposed in Lu et al. (2018), where the average
accuracy attained was 84.3%. A DBN architecture has also
been exploited successfully for EEG-based emotion recognition
(Zheng and Lu, 2015; Huang et al., 2017). An EEG-based emotion
classification framework based on combining emotional patches
and a DBN model was proposed in Huang et al. (2017), and it was
reported that a classification accuracy of 94.92% was achieved,
outperforming other traditional methods. The authors of Kawde
and Verma (2017) implemented an effective recognition system
to examine the emotional state of a human being based on
DBN. The experiment was performed on a benchmark DEAP
database, and the accuracies achieved were 78.28, 70.33, and
70.16% for valence, arousal, and dominance, respectively. In
Bablani et al. (2018), a system for identifying deceit from EEG
has also been proposed. A DBN was developed with four RBMs
stacked together, and EEG data in the form of time-frequency was
fed to this DBN. The accuracy of this system was recorded at 81%.
In Chai et al. (2017a), an EEG-based driver fatigue classification
between fatigue and alert states was investigated. The system
employs an AR model as the feature extraction algorithm and a
sparse-DBN as the classification algorithm. It was shown from
the study that a classification accuracy of 93.1% was attained.
RNN architecture is a powerful deep learning classification
method that is specifically applied to sequential data. This type
of DL architecture is able to analyze the overall logical sequence
between the input information. These logical sequences are rich
in content and possess a complex time relationship with each
other. The key concept of RNN is that the hidden state of the
current network will retain the previous input information, and
it is used for the next current network (Li et al., 2019). There are
two typical RNN architectures that have attracted much attention
and achieved great success: long short-term memory (LSTM)
and gated recurrent units (GRU). Two notable studies have been
carried out to recognize the EEG-based sleep stage using RNN
architecture (Michielli et al., 2019; Wang and Wu, 2019; Zhang T.
et al., 2019). A novel cascaded RNN architecture based on LSTM
blocks was proposed in (Michielli et al., 2019) for the automated
scoring of sleep stages using EEG, and an average classification
accuracy of 86.7% was achieved. The authors of Wang and Wu
(2019) also developed an automatic sleep stage classification
system where they proposed an RNN based on the attention
mechanism and bidirectional LSTM. This architecture provided
better performance than the C-CNN model but requires more
training time. A novel DL framework called spatial-temporal
RNN (STRNN) was proposed in Zhang T. et al. (2019), where
both spatial and temporal information were integrated for feature
learning. The authors claimed that the experimental results based
on STRNN were more competitive than the state-of-the-art
methods for emotion recognition. In another study (Liu et al.,
2018), the combination of temporal attention and band attention

12

June 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 25

Rashid et al.

EEG-Based BCI Technology: A Review

2019). An adaptive Stacked Denoising Auto Encoder (SDAE)
was developed in Attia et al. (2018) to tackle cross-session MW
classification from EEG, and it was reported that the proposed
classifier achieved an accuracy of 95.5%.
Apart from the aforesaid standalone DL models, researchers
have attempted to hybridize different DL models in EEG-based
BCI investigations (Narejo et al., 2016; Attia et al., 2018; Yang J.
et al., 2018; Dai et al., 2019; Kanjo et al., 2019), with encouraging
classification accuracies. In Narejo et al. (2016), the authors
developed a system for predicting eye state from EEG signals
using a hybrid DL architecture consisting of DBN and SAE. The
accuracy of this hybrid model was reported to be as high as
98.9%. Another hybrid DL architecture based on CNN-RNN was
proposed in Attia et al. (2018) to classify SSVEP signals in the
time domain directly, and it achieved an accuracy of 93.59%.
Kanjo et al. (2019) proposed a hybrid approach that applied CNN
and LSTM-RNN on the raw sensor data. Through this method,
the need for manual feature extraction is eliminated. The results
show that the adoption of DL approaches is effective in human
emotion classification when a large number of sensor inputs are
utilized (with an average classification accuracy of 95%). Dai et al.
(2019) proposed a hybrid DL model where a CNN architecture
was combined with a VAE for EEG MI classification. In addition,
an LSTM-CNN-based hybrid model has also been proposed by
Yang J. et al. (2018) for EEG MI classification.
The fundamental idea of a Riemannian geometry classifier
(RGC) is to map the data directly onto a geometrical space
equipped with a suitable metric (Lotte et al., 2018). In such
a space, data can be easily manipulated for several purposes,
such as averaging, smoothing, interpolating, extrapolating, and
classifying. In the case of EEG data, the power and the spatial
distribution of EEG sources can be considered fixed for a given
mental state, and such information can be coded by a covariance
matrix (Lotte et al., 2018). Riemannian geometry studies smooth
curved spaces that can be locally and linearly approximated. The
curved space is named manifold, and its linear approximation
at each point is known as the tangent space (Lotte et al., 2018).
Riemannian geometry has been successfully utilized in many BCI
classification problems (Kalunga et al., 2016; Congedo et al., 2017;
Wu et al., 2017; Yger et al., 2017; Gaur et al., 2018; Guan et al.,
2019; Han et al., 2019; Majidov and Whangbo, 2019) and has
demonstrated superior performance. In Han et al. (2019), the
authors implemented an EEG-based endogenous BCI system for
online binary communication by a completely paralyzed patient.
An online classification accuracy of 87.5% was achieved when the
Riemannian geometry-based classification was applied to realtime EEG data. A number of investigations (Gaur et al., 2018;
Guan et al., 2019; Majidov and Whangbo, 2019) have employed
Riemannian geometry for EEG MI classification purposes. The
authors of Majidov and Whangbo (2019) proposed a Riemannian
geometry-based architecture for EEG MI classification. They
combined the PSD features with covariance matrices mapped
onto the tangent space of a Riemannian manifold, and an average
classification accuracy of 87.94% was obtained. The use of a
Riemannian geometry framework for EEG MI classification has
also been presented in Gaur et al. (2018), where the EEG signals
were preprocessed using a subject-specific multivariate empirical

mechanisms based on multi-layer LSTM-RNN architecture was
proposed for emotion recognition. Another study (Jawed et al.,
2018) distinguished visual and non-visual learners by considering
the wavelet features of EEG alpha and beta bands. The LSTMbased RNN framework was also used for classification purposes,
and the mean training accuracy was 87.5 and 86% for beta and
alpha bands, respectively. In relation to EEG MI classification,
Ma et al. (2018) proposed a pure RNN-based parallel method for
encoding spatial and temporal raw data with bidirectional LSTM
and standard LSTM, respectively, reporting an average accuracy
of 68.20%. A deep RNN with a sliding window cropping strategy
(SWCS) to classify EEG MI signals was investigated in Luo et al.
(2018). In addition, an LSTM-RNN architecture for an EEG MI
classification model was proposed in Li et al. (2016b), where
DWT was applied to extract the time-frequency features. A novel
system for cross-day workload estimation using EEG has also
been proposed by Hefron et al. (2017), where the authors applied
an LSTM-based RNN architecture, and the average classification
accuracy achieved was 93.0%.
An autoencoder (AE) is a DL approach used for unsupervised
feature learning with efficient data encoding and decoding.
In the encoding phase, the input samples are often mapped
in the lower dimensional feature space with a constructive
feature representation (Alom et al., 2019). This approach can
be repeated until the desired feature dimensional space is
reached. Conversely, in the decoding phase, actual features are
regenerated from the lower-dimensional features with reverse
processing (Alom et al., 2019). It should be pointed out that
the target output of the autoencoder is the autoencoder input
itself. There are a number of notable AE architectures, i.e.,
Stacked Autoencoder (SAE), Variational Autoencoder (VAE),
and Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN), that have been
employed in EEG signal processing investigations (Tsinalis
et al., 2016; Vareka and Mautner, 2017; Yin and Zhang, 2017;
Ditthapron et al., 2018; Idowu et al., 2018; Nair et al., 2018; Rundo
et al., 2019). The authors of Rundo et al. (2019) developed a
drowsiness detection system from EEG using stacked AE and
achieved an accuracy of 100% in discriminating drowsy from
wakeful. Idowu et al. (2018) proposed a DL-based classification
of EEG signals for given visual stimuli by showing familiar and
unfamiliar faces. The preprocessed signal was fed to an AE that
yielded a mean accuracy of 82.21%. In Nair et al. (2018), five-class
EEG MI data was classified, where SAE was applied to generate
the features, and a softmax layer was then used for classification
purposes. The proposed method produced an overall accuracy
of 98.9%. In Ditthapron et al. (2018), the authors proposed a
multitask autoencoder-based model known as the ERP encoder
network (ERPENet) that can be applied to any ERP-related
tasks. In Vareka and Mautner (2017), an SAE architecture was
proposed for P300 wave detection, and the trained SAE achieved
a classification accuracy of 69.2%. An automatic sleep stage
scoring model that uses a single channel of EEG was proposed
in Tsinalis et al. (2016). Here, the methodology is based on timefrequency analysis and stacked sparse autoencoders (SSAEs).
The overall accuracy attained was 78%. With regard to the
mental workload (MW) classification, several studies have been
carried out (Yin and Zhang, 2017; Yang et al., 2019; Yin et al.,

Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org

13

June 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 25

Rashid et al.

EEG-Based BCI Technology: A Review

mode decomposition (SS-MEMD)-based filtering method. They
achieved a mean Kappa value of 0.60. Kalunga et al. (2016)
investigated the efficiency of Riemannian geometry on SSVEP
wave classification for a four-class BCI application. In the study,
the minimum distance to Riemannian mean (MDRM) algorithm
achieved an average classification accuracy of 90.47+/7.8% and
an ITR of 16.37 ± 5.3 bits/min. A novel feature extraction
approach based on Riemannian geometry was proposed in Wu
et al. (2017), in which a spatial filter is first used to increase
the EEG signal quality and to reduce the dimensionality of the
covariance matrix, and then, finally, the Riemannian tangent
space features are extracted. Moreover, it is worth noting that
there are two review articles (Congedo et al., 2017; Yger et al.,
2017) on the application of Riemannian geometry for BCI
systems, which may be an excellent source of information for
interested readers.

environment control, driver fatigue monitoring, biometrics
system, and emotion recognition.

BCI Wheelchair Control
One of the essential objectives of a BCI wheelchair is to upgrade
the life quality as well as the autonomy of people affected
by motor neuron diseases (MND), for instance, amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis (ALS). This innovation assists the disabled users
to operate the wheelchair using their brain activity, granting
autonomy to travel through an experimental environment. In
2013, Bi et al. (2013) conducted a survey of BCI-controlled
mobile robots, which is partially connected to this field. However,
two articles (Fernández-Rodríguez et al., 2016; Al-qaysi et al.,
2018; Tariq et al., 2018) have been published that contain
extensive reviews on BCI wheelchairs. Four types of EEG control
signal are used to handle BCI wheelchairs, which are MI (Li
J. et al., 2013; Varona-Moya et al., 2015; Tang et al., 2018),
P300 (Rebsamen et al., 2007; Iturrate et al., 2009a; Alqasemi and
Dubey, 2010; Shin et al., 2010; Lopes et al., 2013), SSVEP (Mandel
et al., 2009; Xu et al., 2012; Mara et al., 2013; Duan et al., 2014;
Ng et al., 2014), and hybrid (Li Y. et al., 2013; Cao et al., 2014)
signals. The feature extraction methods are quite heterogeneous;
however, CSP is the most used EEG feature in BCI wheelchair
applications (Li J. et al., 2013; Li Z. et al., 2013; Cao et al., 2014;
Wang H. et al., 2014; Zhang R. et al., 2016). Other researchers
used methods such as PSD (Varona-Moya et al., 2015; Tang et al.,
2018), FFT (Duan et al., 2014), logarithmic band power (Arabnia
and Tran, 2011; Duan et al., 2014), signal averaging techniques
(Alqasemi and Dubey, 2010; Shin et al., 2010; Zhang R. et al.,
2016), the amplitude of the target frequency (Mandel et al., 2009;
Mara et al., 2013; Ng et al., 2014), CCA (Xu et al., 2012; Duan
et al., 2014), and other methods (Rebsamen et al., 2007; Iturrate
et al., 2009a; Lopes et al., 2013). With regard to the classification
techniques, the most widely used algorithm is SVM (Rebsamen
et al., 2007; Shin et al., 2010; Li J. et al., 2013; Li Y. et al., 2013;
Zhang R. et al., 2016), followed by LDA (Iturrate et al., 2009a; Cao
et al., 2014). Performance evaluation is the most challenging part
in BCI research, as it is the most heterogeneous area. However,
the most common metrics reported are success rate, classification
accuracy, information transfer rate, path length, time required,
path length optimality ratio, time optimality ratio, number of
user commands, and number of collisions. Cao et al. (2014) used
the highest number of metrics, namely ITR, CA, Collision, Time
Required, Useful Command, Useless Command, and Stopping
Task Time to evaluate their research. Table 3 shows a summary
of some articles regarding EEG-based wheelchair BCI.

Performance Evaluation of BCI Systems
Overall, BCI performance depends entirely on classifier
performance (Nicolas-Alonso et al., 2015). For the classification
algorithm, the most basic performance measure is classification
accuracy. Sometimes, the Kappa metric or the confusion matrix
are also used to provide further information on the performance
of a classifier (Fatourechi et al., 2008). The sensitivity-specificity
pair or precision can be calculated from the confusion matrix.
When the classification relies on a continuous parameter, the
Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve, as well as
the Area Under the Curve (AUC), is often utilized. Classifier
performance is generally computed offline on pre-recorded data
utilizing a hold-out strategy: some datasets are set aside to be
utilized for the evaluation and are not part of the training dataset.
However, some authors also reported cross-validation measures
estimated on training data, which may over-rate the performance
(Lotte et al., 2018; Raschka, 2018). A number of researchers
(Farwell and Donchin, 1988; Iturrate et al., 2009a; Yeom et al.,
2014; Obeidat et al., 2015; Ansari and Singla, 2016; Chang et al.,
2016; Cao et al., 2017) also reported either the information
transfer rate (ITR) or the practical bit rate (PBR) (Farwell and
Donchin, 1988). Many articles (Allison et al., 2012; Long et al.,
2012a; Li Y. et al., 2013; Cao et al., 2014; Wang H. et al., 2014)
used task-specific metrics, including task completion time and
the number of successful trials. These metrics are tailored for
each BCI paradigm and/or application, and therefore do not
allow comparisons between studies.

POPULAR EEG-BASED BCI
APPLICATIONS

BCI Cursor Control
The first attempt to control a cursor by EEG signal was described
in Wolpaw et al. (1991). Here, vertical movement of a cursor
on a video screen was maintained by changing mu-rhythm
amplitude such that the cursor was moved upward by large
amplitude mu-rhythm, while downward movement required
small mu-rhythm amplitudes. The second experiment conducted
by some of the same authors (McFarland et al., 1993) achieved
a target hit rate of 54.85%. The promising result obtained
encouraged other researchers to develop this research further.

In BCI technology, human brain signals can be detected
and translated into device commands for controlling assistive
devices. Besides medical applications, the area of this technology
has been expanded to non-medical applications. Recently, the
possibility of a variety of BCI applications is being investigated by
researchers around the world. The most important achievements
in EEG-based BCIs include spelling systems, wheelchair control,
robot control, mental workload, virtual reality, and gaming,

Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org

14

June 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 25

Rashid et al.

EEG-Based BCI Technology: A Review

TABLE 3 | Summary of EEG-based BCI wheelchair studies.
References

No. of subjects

EEG control
signal

No. and types of
control command

EEG features

Classification
algorithm

Performance evaluation

Cao et al. (2014)

3

MI+SSVEP

8; Left, Right, Forward,
Acceleration,
Deceleration, Uniform
Velocity, Turn ON,
Turn OFF

CSP for MI;
CCA for SSVEP

RBF SVM

ITR: 295.20;
CA: 90.63%;
Collision: 0;
Time required: 370 ± 41;
Useful command: 5 ± 3;
Useless command: 2 ± 2;
Stopping task time: 35 ± 4;

Iturrate et al.
(2009a)

5

P300

18; Fifteen Locations,
Left, Right,
Validate selection

Moving average
technique

Stepwise LDA
(SWLDA)

Success rate: 100%,
Time: 659 s,
Path length: 39.3 m.

Long et al. (2012a)

2

MI+P300

4; Left, Right,
Acceleration, Deceleration

CSP

LDA

Accuracy: 100%,
Path length (pixel): 2843.46
± 105.41,
Time: 84.42 ± 4.63 s,
Collisions: 0.

Mara et al. (2013)

9

SSVEP

4; Right, left,
Forward, Stop

PSD

Decision tree

Success rate: 83 ± 15%,
ITR: 70.3 ± 28.8 bits/min.

Li J. et al. (2013)

3

MI

3; Right, Left, Forward

CSP

SVM

Success rate: 82.56%

Li Y. et al. (2013)

5

P300+SSVEP

4; Forward, Stop, Turn
ON, Turn OFF

Statistic average
Minimum
energy combination

SVM

Task duration: 4.30
s/command;
TPR: 14.18 event/min, FPR:
0.49 event/min, ITR:
21.11 bit/min.

TABLE 4 | Summary of EEG-based BCI cursor control studies.
Performance
evaluation

References

No. of
subjects

Control
signal

No. and types of
control command

EEG
features

Classification
algorithm
(CA)

Serdar Bascil
et al. (2015)

2

MI

2; Left/Right

BP

PNN

CA: PNN: 93.05%

Long et al.
(2012b)

11

MI+P300

4; Left, Right, Up,
Down

CSP

SVM

Success rate: 93.99%
Duration per
trial: 18.19 s

Bascil et al.
(2016)

5

MI

4; Left, Right, Up,
Down

PSD

SVM

CA: 81.22%;

1

MI

4; Left, Right, Up,
Down

PSD

DB-Scan

Chakladar
and
Chakraborty
(2018b)

not continuous. Allison et al. (2012), meanwhile, introduced
MI/SSVEP-based hybrid BCI for simultaneous cursor control
in two dimensions. The features and classification techniques
utilized in this application are heterogeneous. Table 4 shows a
summary of some recent investigations in the domain of BCI
cursor control.

Single control signals and hybrid control signals have both
been suggested. Li et al. (2010) presented a BCI that enabled
the subjects to control vertical movement as well as horizontal
movement through P300 and ERD activity, respectively. The
subjects could hit one of the four targets with hit rates between
82 and 96%, with average selection times between 25 and 26 s. In
their second (Long et al., 2012b) experiment, the trial duration
and average accuracy of the target selection were 18.19 s and
93.99%, respectively. The overall outcomes of the experiments
were excellent, and the subjects could move the cursor
diagonally by executing both sorts of activities simultaneously.
However, the cursor control achieved by this system is

Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org

Execution time:
4.663 min,
Success rate: 70.36%

BCI Spellers
An excellent review article (Rezeika et al., 2018) have been
published where almost all types of recent BCI spellers have
been summarized. Table 5 tabulates the methodology that has

15

June 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 25

Rashid et al.

EEG-Based BCI Technology: A Review

TABLE 5 | Summary of EEG-based BCI speller studies.
References

No. of
subjects

Obeidat et al.
(2015)

14

Control
signal

Method

Classification
algorithm

Typing speed

Success RATE

P300

Stimuli variation

Bayesian BLDA

13.7 bits/min

93.3%

Cao et al. (2017)

3

MI

Oct-O-spell

SVM

67.33 bits/min

98.23%

Ansari and Singla
(2016)

20

SSVEP

Multi-phase spellers

SVM

13 chars/min

96.04%

Chang et al. (2016)

10

SSVEP+P300

Hybrid speller

CCA, SWLDA

31.8 bits/min

93%

Käthner et al.
(2015)

19

P300

Familiar faces and
symbols

SWLDA

15.85 bits/min

95%

been applied along with the performance of some recent EEGbased BCI speller system. In 1988, Farwell and Donchin (1988)
presented a P300 speller is known as the matrix speller. It was
the first BCI speller and had a maximum accuracy of 95% and
a speed of 12 bits/min. An adjacency problem arises in the
matrix speller, in that it is difficult to identify a target with a
lot of similar objects surrounding it. This problem was avoided
by a random-set representation and edges paradigm (Obeidat
et al., 2015). Another sort of P300 base speller flashed up a
familiar face over a character to improve the speed of spelling
(Kaufmann and Kübler, 2014). The checkerboard paradigm
(CBP) was presented in Townsend et al. (2010) for avoiding
the adjacency-distraction problem and double flash issues. This
paradigm achieved better accuracy and was more comfortable
than a row-column paradigm (RCP) in ALS patients. A different
sort of P300 base paradigm, namely a gaze-independent block
speller, was also introduced (Pires et al., 2011), which has the
ability to be utilized without ocular movement. Additionally,
this paradigm creates almost the same information transfer
rates as standard to a row-column speller. Acqualagnav et al.
(2010) proposed rapid serial visual presentation (RSVP) with
the aim of forming an efficient gaze-independent ERP speller.
The subject showed better performance with the colored letters
than with monochrome ones. The accuracy of the RSUP speller
is better than that of the matrix speller. It is worth noting
that one of the earliest high-speed SSVEP-based BCI spellers
is the Bremen BCI speller (Volosyak et al., 2009). The efficacy
of this speller was examined on both healthy and disabled
people. The average ITR reported was 25.67 bits/min, with an
accuracy of 93.27%. Furthermore, Cao et al. (2011) proposed a
multi-phage SSVEP-based speller system that allows the input
of 42 characters comprising letters, digits, and symbols. The
mean ITR and mean accuracy of this speller are 61.64 bits/min
and 98.78%, respectively. However, this speller did not include
MND patients as subjects to test the system. In the same
vein, Nakanishi et al. (2018) proposed a multi-target onephase SSVEP speller by achieving an 89.83% accuracy and
325.33 bits/min ITR. In general, it is worth noting that a
higher number of targets in SSVEP-based BCI is shown to
increase the spelling speed but also to increase eye fatigue and
target misclassification.

Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org

A Hex-O-Spell, which depends on imaginary movement, has
also been reported on Blankertz et al. (2006). The speller was
demonstrated to offer higher performance than the conventional
matrix speller. A recent MI-based speller, namely Oct-O-Spell,
was introduced in Cao et al. (2017), involving an octagon
divided equally into eight sections. These sections contained a
total of 26 letters, characters, digits, or symbols. The interface
showed a similar performance to hybrid BCI spellers. Similarly,
a hybrid BCI speller based on SSVEP and P300 was presented
in Chang et al. (2016), again featuring an octagon divided
equally into eight sections. Each section consisted of a total of
26 letters, characters, digits, or symbols. The interface showed
a similar performance to hybrid BCI spellers. The authors
of Nguyen et al. (2018) proposed a high-speed BCI spelling
system using eye closure and double-blink EEG by means of
an SVM classification algorithm. It was demonstrated from the
investigation that the proposed system is able to achieve an
average classification accuracy of 92.5% with an ITR of five letters
per minute.

BCI Biometrics
Biometrics is the process of identifying one individual among
others by biological means. Biometrics, including iris, face, and
fingerprint recognition, is frequently applied to avoid security
breaches. Nonetheless, the possibility of imitating, replicating,
or stealing original information has made these tools unreliable.
As a result, there has been a growing interest in finding a
better biometric system and brain activity-based biometrics. An
EEG system-based biometric has been identified to have the
advantage of being quite impossible to mimic (Alariki et al.,
2018). Using 15 human participants, Ruiz Blondet et al. (2015)
studied the stability of EEG brainwaves over a 6-month period.
Based on their findings, it was shown that the accuracy of
EEG signals for biometric systems and the stability of human
brain activities could remain stable over a long time. Bashar
et al. (2016) proposed a method for human identification
using EEG signals. The authors used a bandpass FIR filter
to remove noise and then divided the EEG signals into two
sections. Multi-scale Wavelet Packet Statistics (WPS), Multiscale Shape Description (MSD), and multi-scale Wavelet Packet
Energy Statistics (WPES) were utilized as the features in this

16

June 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 25

Rashid et al.

EEG-Based BCI Technology: A Review

TABLE 6 | Summary of EEG-based BCI biometrics research.
References

Application

No. of
subject

EEG features

Classification
algorithm

Performance
evaluation

Pham et al. (2013)

Person authentication
system

9

PSD

SVM

Multiple matched policy
is highly secured

Bajwa and Dantu
(2016)

Cancelable
biometrics-based key
generation

Data-1: 7,
Data-2: 120

DFT, DWT

SVM

CA: Data-set-1:
98.46%;
Data-set-2: 91.05%

Hu (2018)

EEG-based gender
recognition

28

Fuzzy entropy

Vote classifier

Average accuracy:
99.8%

Nguyen et al.
(2017)

Cryptographic key
generation

125

PSD

Enroll and KeyGen

Success rate: 99%

Bashar et al.
(2016)

Human identification

9

MSD, WPS, WPES

SVM

The highest accuracy:
94.44%

Ruiz-Blondet et al.
(2016)

Biometric identification

50

Average ERP

SVM

Accuracy: 100%

64.73%. Chakladar and Chakraborty (2018a) introduced a
correlation-based subset selection technique for dimensional
reduction and used higher-order statistical features (mean,
skewness, kurtosis, etc.) for classification. The authors classified
four classes of emotion through employing an LDA algorithm,
and an overall accuracy of 82% was attained. Moreover, Anh
et al. (2012) proposed an emotion identification scheme to
identify 2 valence classes and 2 arousal classes, which resulted
in a combination of 4 fundamental emotions (happy, sorrowful,
angry, and relaxed) and the neutral state. The authors affirmed
the fractal dimension for feature selection and SVM as a classifier,
where the average accuracy across all subjects was 70.5%. Liu Y.
et al. (2017) designed a movie-induced feelings recognizer using
EEG. This framework reached 92.26% accuracy in recognizing
neutrality from high arousal with valence emotions and 86.63%
to classify negative from positive emotions. The authors similarly
classified 3 positive emotions and 4 negative emotions with
86.43 and 65.09% accuracy, respectively. Here, STFT was for
feature extraction and SVM for classification. Another study
reported the recognition of three classes of human emotion,
namely sorrowful, excited, and relaxed, in real time using
Wavelet and Learning Vector Quantization (LVQ) with an
accuracy of 72–87% (Djamal and Lodaya, 2017). Moreover, a
group of features, namely power, standard deviation, variance,
and entropy, were classified by utilizing the k-NN algorithm.
Happiness, anger, and calm were categorized in Kaur et al. (2018).
Here, the fractal dimension feature was classified by utilizing
RBF SVM with 60% accuracy. In another study, a human-vehicle
collaborative driving (HVCD) simulation system was designed by
integrating visual information and human intentions to achieve
a comfortable and safe driving experience (Li et al., 2018).
The average accuracy and ITR achieved were 91.1% and 85.80
bit/min, respectively.

method, which were in the time-frequency domain, and SVM
was the classifier. A true positive rate of 94.44% in the aforesaid
method was achieved using nine subjects in an experiment.
Ruiz-Blondet et al. (2016) proposed an ERP-based highly
accurate biometric recognition system designed to extract unique
individual responses from the brain. The authors reportedly
achieved 100% identification accuracy using 50 subjects. Table 6
shows a summary of some BC-based biometrics and other
related research.

BCI Emotion Recognition
Data acquisition from brain signals connected to human emotion
is one of the core steps toward emotional intelligence. Picard
stated that emotions play a vital role in rational decision-making,
learning, and perception, as well as in a variety of functions
(Picard, 2003). The identification of emotion changes from EEG
signals has recently achieved attention among BCI researchers in
the process of developing different BCI devices. There are three
excellent review articles (Al-Nafjan et al., 2017; Soroush et al.,
2018; Xu T. et al., 2018) on EEG-based emotion recognition.
These articles might be of help to the interested readers to further
have an insight of the EEG-based emotion recognition.
A number of emotion-recognition studies have been carried
out by BCI researchers in the last 20 years. Table 7 summarizes
some recent emotion recognition approaches in terms of
the number of subjects, stimulation, emotion types, feature
extraction, classification method, and performance. Mu Li
and Bao-Liang Lu (2009) utilized EEG signals for emotion
recognition in response to emotional pictures. Their study
gained a recognition rate of 93.5% for two emotional states.
Petrantonakis and Hadjileontiadis (2010) presented a userindependent emotion recognition strategy that achieved an
83.33% recognition rate for six emotion categories. Wei et al.
(2017) proposed a combination of features for achieving
higher accuracy. The experimental outcomes showed that the
combination of Power Spectral Density (PSD), Signal Power (SP),
and Common Spatial Pattern (CSP) as the features achieved
the highest accuracy of 86.83% with LDA as the classification
algorithm, whereas, the accuracy of individual features was

Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org

BCI Virtual Reality and Gaming
This section has been inspired by some excellent review articles
on BCI-based VR and games that are reported in Cattan
et al. (2018), Ahn et al. (2014), and Kaplan et al. (2013).
The research on BCI systems for healthy subjects has attracted

17

June 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 25

Rashid et al.

EEG-Based BCI Technology: A Review

TABLE 7 | Summary of EEG-based BCI emotion recognition studies.
References

No. of subjects

Stimulation

Emotion types

EEG
features

Classification
algorithm

Performance evaluation

Wei et al.
(2017)

12

Pictures

Positive and negative

PSD, SP, CSP

LDA

Average accuracy:
86.83%

Wang X.-W.
et al. (2014)

6

Movie clips

Positive and negative

PSD

LDA

CA: 91.77%

Liu Y. et al.
(2017)

30

Movie clips

Joy, anger, fear, sadness,
disgust, and neutrality

PSD

LIBSVM

Kaur et al.
(2018)

10

Video clips

Calm, angry, and happy

FD

RBF SVM

Özerdem and
Polat (2017)

32

Music clips

Positive and negative

DWT

MLPNN

CA: 77.14%

Pan et al.
(2016)

6

Photos

Happiness and sadness

CSP

SVM

CA: 74.17%

Djamal and
Lodaya
(2017)

10

Music

Excited, relaxed, and sad

WT

LVQ

CA: 87%

Murugappan
(2011)

20

Video clips

Disgust, happiness, fear,
surprise, and neutral

Entropy

K-NN

Average accuracy:
89.45%
CA: 60%

CA: 82.87%

TABLE 8 | Summary of EEG-based BCI gaming and VR studies.
References

No. of
subjects

Control
signal

EEG feature

Classification
algorithm

Kreilinger et al.
(2016)

10

MI

BP

LDA

“Upper 10%” MI
detection rates: >70%

Bonnet et al.
(2013)

10

MI

CSP

LDA

CA: >70%

Maby et al. (2012)

2

P300

Shannon
entropy

LDA

Average accuracy:
82%

Djamal et al.
(2017)

10

MI

FFT

LVQ

Average accuracy:
70%

considerable interest. The prototypes of BCI-based video games
in existence are based on three BCI paradigms: steady-state
evoked potential (SSVEP), P300 event-related potential (ERP),
and mental imagery (MI). Table 8 shows a summary of some
recent EEG-based virtual reality and gaming systems. Finke et al.
presented a P300-based BCI game known as Mind Game in
which the user moves a character from one field to another on
a game board (Finke et al., 2009). For Mind Game, the authors
reported a 66% mean accuracy (specifically, this was the rate at
which the correct target was selected out of 12 possible targets).
Other P300-based BCI games have also been proposed (Mühl
et al., 2010; Congedo et al., 2011; Angeloni et al., 2012; Ganin
et al., 2013).
Some famous video games, including Pong, Pacman, and
similar games, can be played with motor imagery (Krepki et al.,
2007). The Pacman produces one step every 1.5–2 s with the aim
of giving the gamer enough time to perform a control command.
In another study, a pinball game was developed in order to
illustrate that it is possible to successfully apply non-invasive
recording techniques for complex control tasks (Krauledat et al.,
2009).

Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org

Performance
evaluation

Moreover, external evoked potentials have been utilized for
game implementations. Middendorf et al. (2000) designed a
simple flight simulator that is controlled by a BCI based on
Steady-State Visual-Evoked Response (SSVER). This simulator
was very modest, and only two control actions were possible.
The position could only be moved to the left or right.
Two methods were tested over the airplane control trials.
On the other hand, the control command (right or left)
was detected according to the strength of the SSVERs. The
selection was identified by reference to the frequency of
SSVER. The results of the trials with able-bodied participants
showed that the last one was preferred because it required
little or no training since the system capitalized on naturally
occurring responses. Lalor et al. (2005) proposed a game named
Mind Balance in which healthy subjects needed to hold a
tightrope walker in balance. The application was based on
SSVEP, which is generated as a response to phase-reversing
checkerboard patterns.
A final interesting example of this application was recently
presented at the Cybathlon 2016, a competition for participants
with disabilities who compete against each other using assistive

18

June 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 25

Rashid et al.

EEG-Based BCI Technology: A Review

TABLE 9 | Summary of EEG-based BCI robotic arm studies.
References

No. of
subjects

Control
signal

EEG feature

Classification
algorithm

Performance
evaluation

Yang C. et al.
(2018)

2

SSVEP

FFT

CCA

Five tasks performed

Hortal et al.
(2015)

2

MI

FFT

SVM

CA: 70%

Bhattacharyya
et al. (2015)

11

MI

MFDFA

ANFIS

Success rate: >60%

Bousseta
et al. (2018)

4

MI

FFT

RBF SVM

Success rate: 85.45%

Roy et al.
(2016)

5

MI

WT, PSD

SVM

CA: 75.77%

mental tasks. Spectral analysis with FFT transform was combined
with a PCA strategy to produce optimal features to feed into
an RBF Kernel SVM classifier aimed at distinguishing the four
movements. The experiments performed by four volunteers
produced an average accuracy of 85.45%. A hybrid BCI system
consisting of SSVEP and MI was proposed in Duan et al. (2015) to
provide control commands to a brain-actuated robot. The SSVEP
responses were utilized to tell the robot to move forward, turn
left, and turn right, whereas the MI was utilized to perform the
grasp motion. The authors also developed a visual servo module
to perform the grasping with higher accuracy.

technologies. In the BCI discipline, 11 participants with
tetraplegia competed against each other in a virtual environment
where their avatars raced along a virtual obstacle course (Novak
et al., 2018). Since external visual stimuli were not allowed
at the Cybathlon, the participants could not make use of
SSVEPs and P300; instead, they relied on motor control and/or
mental imagery to control their avatars. As expected, the
results varied strongly between the 11 participants, with the
best participant completing the race in the 90 s and the worst
completing it in 196 s. In this competition, every team used
gelled electrodes, indicating that they did not consider dry or
water-based electrodes reliable enough for use in uncontrolled
environments. Similarly, every team used laboratory-grade EEG
amplifiers, suggesting that no team trusted consumer-grade
devices to provide sufficiently good performance. Furthermore,
the competition emphasized the importance of effective BCI
training for the users, as the teams all had very different
participant-training strategies and the winning team stated that
their effective BCI training regimen likely had a major effect on
their success.

BCI Environmental Control
An important application of EEG-based BCIs is environmental
control, which can improve the quality of life and increase
the independence of paralyzed patients. Various EEG-based
environmental control systems have been developed in
recent years.
Aloise et al. developed a P300-based BCI home electronics
control system that included a DVD player, electric lights, etc.
(Aydin et al., 2018) where the subjects suffered from chronic
neurological disorders. Shyu et al. (2010) proposed a steadystate visual evoked potential (SSVEP)-based BCI multimedia
control system. Specifically, four flickering buttons were utilized
to perform four different control commands: play or pause the
selected multimedia file, scroll through displayed items, stop the
multimedia system, and adjust the volume up and down. In
another study, the authors proposed the application of an SSVEPbased BCI hospital bed nursing system (Kleber and Birbaumer,
2005) that enabled the users to move the entire bed up and
down and control the power of the massaging cushion. In a
study carried out by Corralejo et al. (2014), several patients
with different degrees of motor impairment were able to operate
home electronics, including a TV, DVD player, and lights, via
a P300-based BCI. Edlinger and Guger (2012) suggested a noninvasive subject dependent P300 stimulus-based BCI system that
provides the subject with a stimulus and records his reaction as
an input. The user is provided with a GUI with various icons
representing different tasks like turning a light on/off, opening
a door/window, switching TV channels, etc. In the worst-case
scenario, this system obtained 30% accuracy with 12 participants,

BCI Robotic Arm
Because of the advances in robot control (RC) systems, they
are playing an increasingly important role in a wide range of
fields. The relationship between humans and robots has become
increasingly intimate, and many human-robot collaboration
systems have been developed. However, it is hard for a disabled
person to operate a robot because of their loss of motion capacity
or reduced sensing ability (Yang C. et al., 2018). Many studies
have been dedicated to solving this problem (see Table 9). Yang
C. et al. (2018) presented a shared control system by combining
an SSVEP-based BCI and visual servoing (VS) technology
to enable mind control of a robot manipulator. To enhance
the intelligence and accuracy of the shared control system,
the authors proposed an adaptive color adjustment for object
detection, the least squares method (LSM) for camera calibration,
and the coordination of task motion and self-motion (CTS) for
obstacle avoidance. However, the authors tested the system using
only two healthy subjects. Furthermore, Bousseta et al. (2018)
proposed a preliminary outcome for the movement control of a
robot arm for four directions: left, right, up, and down through

Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org

19

June 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 25

Rashid et al.

EEG-Based BCI Technology: A Review

TABLE 10 | Summary of EEG-based BCI environmental control studies.
References

BCI application

Control signal

No. of subject

Shyu et al.
(2013)

Hospital bed nursing
system

Zhang et al.
(2017)

Method

Performance
evaluation

SSVEP

15

FPGA

Accuracy: 92.5%,
ITR: 5.22 s/command

Environmental
control system

ERP

3

Classifier: BLDA

Accuracy: 89.2%

Aydin et al.
(2018)

Environmental
control system

P300

10

Classifier: LDA

Accuracy: 93.71%

Kosmyna
et al. (2016)

Control of a smart
home with a BCI

P300, SSVEP

12

Minimum Distance
Classifiers

Average accuracy:
81–77%

Recent Achievements and Innovations in
EEG-Based BCIs

whereas, in the best-case scenario, a 100% accuracy was achieved
from one of the subjects.
In another perspective, Carabalona et al. (2010) suggested
a non-invasive visual P300-based BCI system for physically
impaired users to control a smart home environment. The
user is provided with a 6 × 6 matrix of icons. Each icon
represents a command related to an everyday device. The icons
flash on the computer screen one by one. Once the desired
icon is reached, a peak is observed in the neural signals of
the user. This peak is considered to be icon selection. The
system was tested using four participants, and the accuracy rate
observed varied from 33 to 100% among different users. Kim
et al. (2013) also suggested a non-invasive P300 stimulus-based
BCI system to switch TV channels from a viewing distance of
3 meters and a 46-inch TV screen. A total of eight subjects
were provided with a visual stimulus in the form of a flashing
green cursor in the top left corner of each channel icon.
Once the desired channel was reached, a peak in the subject’s
neural signals was considered as input for channel selection.
An average of 92.3% accuracy was attained from the system.
In two other studies (Edlinger and Guger, 2012; Lin et al.,
2014), the authors proposed non-invasive subject-dependent BCI
to control electrical home appliances. Two physiological states
(drowsiness or alertness) of users were used and translated
into commands to interact with different electronic appliances.
Similarly, Akman Aydin et al. (2015) suggested a regionbased selection paradigm for a smart home control system
for physically impaired users. The proposed system is a noninvasive P300 stimulus-based BCI system that flashes each
region five times on the screen to invoke a response from
the user. Upon acquiring a peak in the neural signals of the
subject, the system considers it as a selection command for that
particular region. The proposed system was able to achieve 95%
accuracy for 49 household tasks using five subjects without any
physical impairment. Masood et al. (2016) suggested a noninvasive BCI that uses the blink of an eye as a control input
to interact with home appliances. The selection and control
of the device are performed using a GUI. The system has the
potential to be enhanced by adding more devices. However,
the currently proposed system has only 70% accuracy. Table 10
summarizes some recent findings with regard to EEG-based BCI
environmental control.

Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org

In its early days, BCI technology was regarded as unattractive for
genuine scientific investigation, primarily owing to its restricted
resolution and the unreliability of the information from the brain
as well as its high variability. Furthermore, the data acquisition
of such technology was somewhat expensive. Therefore, brain
activity research was typically constrained to medical use or
exploration of brain functions in the laboratory. However, this
scenario has changed dramatically over the past two decades
due to advances in technology, which have brought down its
associated costs to some degree. Meanwhile, BCI research has
expanded to non-medical applications as well. Over the last
15 years, the number of studies regarding BCI has increased
substantially. Figure 4 depicts the number of companies that
manufacture BCI-based products around the globe2 . The two
most well-known technology providers for BCI devices are
Neurosky and Emotive.
The leading social media platform, Facebook, funded a
research project at UCSF that aims to restore the communication
ability of disabled people through their thoughts at a speed of
100 words per minute. Eventually, this company is planning to
launch an EEG headset that lets users control music or interact
in virtual reality using their thoughts. Some findings of this
project were published in Moses et al. (2019), where the authors
demonstrated that high-resolution recordings directly from the
cortical surface can be used to decode both perceived and
produced speech in real time. By integrating what participants
hear and say, they leveraged an interactive question-andanswer behavioral paradigm that can be used in a real-world
assistive communication setting. Together, these results represent
an important step in the development of a clinically viable
speech neuroprosthesis.
SpaceX and Tesla CEO Elon Musk founded Neuralink, which
is aiming to design ultrafine threads (more tenuous than a
human hair) that can be embedded into the brain to recognize
neural activity. It builds arrays of small and flexible electrode
“threads,” with as many as 3,072 electrodes per array distributed
across 96 threads Musk (2019). This company has also built
2 Companies - BNCI Horizon 2020 Available online at: at: http://bnci-horizon-2020.
eu/community/companies (accessed February 02, 2019).

20

June 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 25

Rashid et al.

EEG-Based BCI Technology: A Review

FIGURE 4 | Distribution of BCI companies around the world.

three human subjects, successfully used BrainNet to perform the
collaborative task, with an average accuracy of 81.25%. This result
points the way to future brain-to-brain interfaces that enable
cooperative problem solving by humans using a “social network”
of connected brains.
Boston area company Neurable has created a brain-controlled
game called Awakening, the central character of which is a child
with telekinetic powers. The character is set the task of escaping
from a laboratory by using mind power to pick up toys such
as a balloon dog and rainbow rings. Players wear a headband
studded with electrodes that connect to a virtual reality headset.
Their brain signals are picked up and analyzed by software that
determines how the character will move. Players are then able to
train their brains to produce the right signals to pick up the toys
(iHuman, 2019).
Over the last two decades, evidence has accumulated on the
capacity of neural interfaces such as those using transcranial
direct current stimulation (tDCS) to enhance performance in
cognitive areas such as working memory and attention as
well as in physical activities such as cycling (Ke et al., 2019).
tDCS involves the use of a headset and electrodes that are
typically contained in sponge bags, with saline solution used
to conduct electricity from the electrodes to the scalp (Cincotti
et al., 2003). Adverse effects are rare—users have reported mild
tingling sensations and occasionally headaches or fatigue. One
study showed how tDCS improved the ability of US Air Force
personnel to “multitask” (Nelson et al., 2016). The participants,
all stationed at the Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in Ohio,
USA, were asked to monitor and respond to four independent
tasks on one computer screen. Their tasks were to: keep dial

a neurosurgical robot that is capable of inserting six threads
(192 electrodes) per minute. Each thread can be individually
inserted into the brain with micron precision for the avoidance
of surface vasculature and to target specific brain regions. The
electrode array is packaged into a small implantable device that
contains custom chips for low-power onboard amplification
and digitization: the package for 3,072 channels occupies <23
× 18.5 × 2 mm3 . The size and composition of the thin-film
probes are a better match for the material properties of brain
tissue than commonly used silicon probes and may, therefore,
exhibit enhanced biocompatibility (Chung et al., 2019). A single
USB-C cable provides full-bandwidth data streaming from the
device, recording from all channels simultaneously. This system
has achieved a spiking yield of up to 70% in chronically
implanted electrodes.
Jiang et al. (2019) have presented BrainNet, which is the
first multi-person non-invasive direct brain-to-brain interface
for collaborative problem-solving. The interface combines EEG
to record brain signals and transcranial magnetic stimulation
(TMS) to deliver information non-invasively to the brain.
Among the three human subjects, two subjects are designated
as “Senders” whose brain signals are decoded using real-time
EEG data analysis. The decoding process extracts each Sender’s
decision about whether to rotate a block in a Tetris-like game
before it is dropped to fill a line. The Senders’ decisions are
transmitted via the Internet to the brain of a third subject,
the “Receiver,” who cannot see the game screen. The Receiver
integrates the information received from the two Senders and
uses an EEG interface to make a decision about either turning the
block or keeping it in the same orientation. Five groups, each with

Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org

21

June 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 25

Rashid et al.

EEG-Based BCI Technology: A Review

to reduce the calibration period and enhance P300-based BCI
system performance together with consumer satisfaction (Jin
et al., 2020). The SSVEP approach obviates the calibration or
subject training. Hence, this type of speller should be faster in
comparison with P300 spellers. However, a certain number of
individuals generate extremely poor SSVEP responses, which
is tough to explore. Therefore, a hybrid approach could be
an excellent alternative to the use of a single EEG modality.
Further investigations are necessary in order to identify which
EEG modality is the most appropriate type for BCI application.
For instance, MI-based approaches are considered the most
appropriate to handle a prosthetic arm or leg. However, in the
operation of digital radio, an SSVEP-based approach with a 4option menu including volume-up, volume down, station-up,
and station-down options may be much intuitive than an MIbased technique with imagined movements being associated with
television controls. Intuitiveness should be a crucial factor at the
time of the initial decision stage when selections of technology
and BCI category are being made. Additional investigations are
also needed to figure out the more appropriate feature set and
classification frameworks for specific EEG modalities. Research
with regards to features and classifiers also need emphasize
figuring out the optimal options to be employed for individuals
affected by CNS injury.

markers centered in a “system monitoring” box; change the
communications channel frequencies as requested by an audible
prompt; keep a target centered in a “targeting” box, and keep
fluids moving in a “resource management” box by turning
tanks on and off. The 10 participants who received active
tDCS stimulation from the headsets, provided by Wales-based
company Magstim, performed about 30% better than those
who did not.

CURRENT CHALLENGES AND
DIRECTIONS
In the past few years, substantial BCI research has been
performed to invent some potential assistive technologies. From
the current status of BCIs, it can be predicted unquestionably
that BCI technology will very soon be launched in the market.
In fact, a few commercial BCI appliances have already been
launched in the market. A remarkable program, namely the BNCI
Horizon 2020 project, has proposed a future agenda regarding
BCIs. However, some crucial issues and challenges exist in every
component of the BCI paradigm, and these issues should be
addressed by the BCI community to make further advances
in BCIs.

Issues in EEG Modalities for BCI
Applications

Issues With EEG Headsets
The quality of EEG data for BCI application mostly depends
on the EEG headset. There are some issues regarding EEG
headsets that need to be resolved. First of all, most of the
EEG headsets require gel or liquid on electrodes, which are
very uncomfortable to the user. For practical applications,
users prefer dry electrodes, as it is not mandatory to use
any conductive gel between the scalp skin and electrode pad.
However, it is a matter of open debate as to whether this
type of electrode offers identical signal properties. It has
been reported that the EEG from dry electrodes contains
considerably more artifacts and noise than wet electrodes,
whereas another study reported that the signal properties are
almost identical for wet and dry electrodes. Hence, an indepth investigation should be carried out to further validate
the efficacy of dry electrodes. It is worth noting that newly
proposed water-based EEG electrodes are now being investigated.
In Mihajlovi and Peuscher (2012), the authors pointed out
that the performance of dry and water-based electrodes with
shorter hair is comparably superior to gel-based electrodes.
They also recommended continuing further investigation for
the refinement of electrodes to make them applicable with
longer hair and further suggested that dry and water-based
electrodes have the potential to replace gel electrodes. To date,
headsets with dry electrodes are available in the market, but
these contain very few electrodes, and the procedure has not
yet been standardized. There are thousands of EEG headsets
that have already been launched by different companies for
BCI applications. The number of electrodes (for example, 1,
3, 4, 8, 14, 16, 20, 24, 32, or 64) is varied from headset to
headset, and these headsets are not compatible with each other.
Hence, the minimum number of electrodes for specific EEG

The most preferred EEG modalities, namely MI, SSVEP, and
P300, are continuously facing signal processing issues, especially
the identification of the most applicable approaches for feature
extraction and feature reduction. This is primarily owing to the
nature of the EEG signals, namely extremely non-linear, nonstationary, and artifact-prone. Other notable issues involve data
fusion, in particular how the data from numerous electrodes are
merged to be able to lessen the data dimensionality as well as
to make improvements to the classification results. It is evident
that once individuals have been taught properly, MI strategies
often deliver remarkable outcomes. For an MI-based BCI to be
handled by a targeted user, plenty of training trials are needed
from the targeted user, causing the calibration period to be
unacceptably long for a realistic model. Thus, investigations
should be concentrated on cutting down the calibration period
as well as effective training strategies. P300 shows greater average
ITRs, and it does not call for a training process, although the
degree of severity and variety of the disease may considerably
affect the performance of this modality. Nevertheless, a good
number of studies have also found that even individuals with LIS
are capable of handling a P300-based BCI for long durations.
However, with regards to ITR, it is worth noting that the
healthy individual group yields higher bit rates than disabled
subjects in practically all the previous findings regarding P300BCI (Lazarou et al., 2018). The method of stimulation is so
difficult that the experimental process could not be carried out
by the patients. Moreover, a wide range of instructions in a P300based BCI system increases the number of trials, which, in turn,
causes reduced overall performance. The coupling of the generic
models with online training could be an excellent alternative

Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org

22

June 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 25

Rashid et al.

EEG-Based BCI Technology: A Review

computational complexity, a low-dimensional feature vector
should be preferred. However, feature reduction or selection
algorithms could be considered in the case of high-dimensional
feature sets. Several deep learning approaches have been
implemented to classify MI, SSVEP, emotion recognition, and
ERP data. The architecture of deep networks entirely depends
on network structure and input formalization. Previous studies
showed that CNN- and RNN-based deep learning approaches
outperformed other deep learning methods. Moreover, CNN
offered optimum accuracy when time-series values or spectral
images were utilized as inputs. Hence, it has been suggested
that there should be comprehensive study of the combination
of network architectures, especially the structure and number
of distinctive layers, for example, RBMs, convolutional layers,
fully connected layers, and recurrent layers. Besides network
structure, further studies need to be conducted to distinguish
how deep learning approaches interpret raw EEG against artifactprone EEG, as these sorts of studies have not yet been explicitly
conducted. In this article, a wide range of classifiers have been
surveyed that are evaluated in an offline manner. As every BCI
application is essentially an online scenario, the classifiers should
be validated online. Moreover, the classifier model should be
tested to assure lower computational complexity and calibrated
quickly in real-time operation. To design calibration-free BCIs,
domain adaptation, and transfer learning can be an effective
alternative where the combination of superior feature sets, for
example, covariance matrices and domain adaptation algorithms,
may enhance the invariance capability of BCIs. The design of a
stable estimator of the Riemannian median is an open challenge.
This property could make the Riemannian geometry classifiers
more robust.

modalities should be standardized. High ownership cost of an
EEG headset is another challenge in allowing BCI technology
to become affordable for the general public around the world
(Abiyev et al., 2016). Hence, the reduction of the price of such
EEG headsets is much lauded. The portability of the BCI model is
also a crucial matter: headsets that transfer data wirelessly permit
individuals to move freely, whereas a wired headset somewhat
limits movements.

Lack of Ideal Data Analysis Methods
Although most of the artifact removal algorithms offer good
performance, the methods listed in section EEG Data Preprocessing Strategies suffer from different limitations when
utilized in a particular EEG-based application. Indeed, some
methods are only focused on the detection and removal of
particular artifacts. Some methods need reference channels to
enhance the accuracy of artifact removal, which is not feasible for
some specific applications. ICA-based algorithms can deal with
all kinds of artifacts occurring in EEG recordings. Regression
and adaptive filters are more feasible choices when the reference
channels for specific artifacts are available. Apart from ICA, CCA
and its combination with other methods seem to be a good
choice for the removal of muscle artifacts. For application to a
few channels, EMD, IVA, and its hybrid methods with BSS or
WT can be an ideal choice. Moreover, EMD can significantly
improve the signal quality by eliminating noise with fewer
data (Zhang Z. et al., 2019). However, the requirement for a
reference signal limits adaptive filter or regression methods to
the removal of particular types of artifact. Wavelet transform
fails to completely identify artifacts that overlap with spectral
properties. EMD also suffers from the drawback of modemixing. Therefore, it is quite difficult to find a single method
that is both efficient and accurate enough to satisfy all the
conditions perfectly. Thus, one of the future objectives of the
effective attenuation of artifacts is to develop an applicationspecific algorithm with better time-efficiency and accuracy.
Also, from the current trend of artifact removal, it can be
concluded that future directions will combine machine learning
and traditional approaches for effective automatic artifact
removal. Apart from that, new artifact removal algorithms for
numerous types of artifacts in multiple scenarios still need to
be identified.
Regarding feature extraction techniques, a wide range of
features have been extracted to figure out the significant
information from the EEG. From previous studies, it has
been seen that the performance of CSP and its modified
algorithms is comparatively encouraging when applied to EEG
motor imagery data. In the case of emotion recognition
or mental workload classification, spectral features are more
suitable, whereas frequency-domain based features perform
better with SSVEP data. However, it is too early to state the
optimum feature extraction technique for a specific EEG control
signal modality.
Based on previous studies, SVM is the most robust classifier
for classifying high-dimensionality feature vectors. Sometimes,
HMM may deal with a high-dimensionality feature set by
analyzing the sequence of feature vectors. In order to avoid

Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org

Performance Evaluation Metrics
It is evident from the previous studies that a variety of
performance evaluation metrics are employed to evaluate BCI
systems. It is almost impossible to compare the same types of
BCI systems when they are evaluated by dissimilar performance
metrics. Hence, the BCI research community should recommend
a standard and systematic approach or a single metric to
quantify a specific BCI application. For example, number
of control commands, types of control commands, distance
covered, time required, number of collisions, classification
accuracy, average success rate, amongst others, should be
utilized to evaluate the performance of a BCI wheelchair
control. If the same performance metrics are used for a
given BCI application, then a direct comparison between
different BCI experiments is possible. Not only are training
models not liable to limit the overall performance of the
system, but testing data can also be utilized. A large number
of BCIs are designed to substitute CNS functionality, and
these BCIs are actually assessed on healthy individuals inside
a controlled laboratory environment. This may misguide to
defective outcomes if the targeted users of these systems
would be disabled patients; for example, BCI performance
seems to be poorer for patients affected by spinal cord
injuries when compared with healthy subjects. Thus, researchers
should emphasize specifying similar performance evaluation

23

June 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 25

Rashid et al.

EEG-Based BCI Technology: A Review

metrics and, in the meantime, ensure system assessment by
valid data.

TABLE 11 | Essential features for BCI systems.
Key feature

Trends in Lab-Based BCI Technology
One of the major concerns regarding BCIs is that almost
all of BCI experiments have been conducted in a controlled
lab, regardless of the realistic environment of the targeted
users. Therefore, these EEG data are a crucial factor in the
initial evaluation of signal processing approaches as well as the
advancement of considerably more robust systems. As pointed
out before, heart rate and cortisol may considerably affect the
characteristics of brain waves. Outside the lab, different sensory
stimulations found in the surroundings, like sounds, movements,
and smells, may affect the quality of EEG signals. Hence, during
the design of any BCI system, engineers should consider the
particular environment where the proposed technology will be
employed. For example, the design criteria may not be identical
for the operation of home appliances in a home environment
as compared to the detection of the attention level of a pilot
using EEG while flying a plane. Thus, at the time of system
design, it is important to examine the basic criteria of the system,
environmental aspects, situation, and target users in-depth.

Effectiveness

The BCI system should be really helpful to users

Robustness

The system must be stable during regular use and robust
with respect to anomalies

Quick operation

Task execution time should be as low as possible

More functionality

The system should allow the user to perform as many
tasks as possible to increase the autonomy of the user

Safety

The system must pose no danger to user health

Comfort

The EEG cap should be comfortable to wear for several
hours

Mobility

To ensure mobility, the BCI system should be wireless,
lightweight, and compact

User-friendliness

The system should be simple to operate and need no
expert help for daily use

Cost-effectiveness

The price should be affordable for all kinds of users

obstacles that are preventing the commercialization of BCI
technology, Vansteensel et al. (2017) supplied a set of questions
to more than 3,500 BCI researchers in the field of EEG or
EMG technologies throughout the world. Almost all of the
experts were confident that a particular BCI application would
be launched to the market within the next 5–10 years. This
survey suggests that upcoming research ought to concentrate on
sensor development as well as the overall system performance
of non-invasive BCIs. Kristo et al. (2013) also concluded that
the BCI research community should focus on boosting ITR
(Speier et al., 2013) and exploring the signal processing platform.
In addition to these, there are also some major issues that
prevent the commercialization of an EEG-based BCI system
among the targeted users. First of all, existing BCIs cannot be
handled by disabled patients. Expert assistance is mandatory to
set up the signal-receiving electrodes of current BCIs. Moreover,
almost all of the BCI devices are still under investigation and,
hence, are not readily available for home-usage. Therefore, future
BCI systems should cater for disabled patients lacking any
assistance from experts. BCI illiteracy is an additional barrier
to the widespread use of EEG-based BCI systems. When an
individual is unable to operate the BCI device due to low-quality
brain signals being produced, this phenomenon is regarded as
BCI illiteracy. EEG signal quality may be improved with the
aid of a collaborative co-learning strategy that gives the enduser audio or visual feedback. Continuous use of BCIs makes
frequent use of specific neural pathways (Padfield et al., 2019),
and additional study needs to figure out the possible health
risks or variations in brain functionality due to such prolonged
exposure. The BCI system should be similar to other ideal offthe-shelf technologies with regards to its ease-of-use. The BCI
devices should also be user-friendly and have in-built safeguards
to prevent untoward situations. Furthermore, advanced BCI
technology should also be capable of providing stable results
when it is used in multisensory environments such as in a noisy
family home. Table 11 lists the essential features that enable the
commercialization of BCI systems. These features are deemed

Low ITR of BCI Systems
Higher ITR is the primary requirement of any effective BCI
system. ITR is the metric that is most employed in the BCI
community to assess the performance of BCI prototypes. The
ITR of a given BCI system depends upon three criteria: the
number of classes, target detection accuracy, and target detection
time (Wolpaw et al., 2002; Ramadan and Vasilakos, 2017).
The target detection accuracy can be boosted with the aid of
the enhancement of the Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR). Several
strategies are usually employed in the preprocessing phase in
order to increase the SNR, as described in section EEG Control
Signals Used in BCI Applications. Once high ITR is achieved,
more sophisticated applications may be developed by increasing
the variety of classes. A variety of stimulus coding strategies,
for instance, CDMA, TDMA, and FDMA, have already been
adapted for BCI systems (Bin et al., 2011; Jin et al., 2011). In
order to code the intended stimuli, TDMA has been utilized
with P300, whereas CDMA and FDMA have been employed
in those BCIs that deal with VEP. Finally, minimizing the
target recognition period, which assists in boosting the ITR, is
another crucial aspect of BCIs. To accomplish this, adaptive
approaches, namely “dynamic stopping,” may be an excellent
alternative. Moreover, single-trail classifications using machine
learning frameworks and optimized stimulus demonstrations
can also contribute to reducing the target recognition period
(Schreuder et al., 2013).

Commercialization of EEG-Based BCI
Technology
The main consumer of BCI technology is this particular group
of disabled patients, and commercialization is the only way to
spread this technology all over the world. Hence, the BCI research
community should identify the actual causes that prevent the
commercialization of this technology. To further illustrate the

Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org

Description

24

June 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 25

Rashid et al.

EEG-Based BCI Technology: A Review

Hence, for conducting a comparison between different BCI
spellers, the first step should be that the identical hardware
and software must be used. Hitherto, to operate a BCI speller,
users require expert help to set up electrodes at specific
positions. Portability is another challenge to the current BCI
spellers. Typing errors are another issue, as it necessitates a
correction period and influences the spelling rate. Hence, further
enhancements should be made to provide faster, accurate, and
user-friendly spellers.
Some constituents, including data preprocessing strategy,
classification model design, have a considerable impact on the
performance of BCI-based person identification. Although a
variety of features and classifiers have been employed to figure
out the superior approach, the optimum technique has not
been explored. Hence, more experiments should be carried
out to identify the most appropriate technique. Moreover,
more attention should be given to removing artifacts from
EMG, EOG, and ECG. In an EEG-based authentication system,
different paradigms like P300, SSVEP, and MI can be used,
although each paradigm has its own merits and demerits.
Thus, the best paradigm for EEG should be identified based
on the person’s authentication. Moreover, the EEG acquisition
protocols should be user-friendly. Brain activity acquisition
for biometric usage is a crucial matter that has not received
enough attention from researchers (Campisi and La Rocca,
2014). Few partial studies have been conducted, and these
studies emphasized session-wise EEG stability. Moreover, in
these studies, the variation in data acquisition time lay
between 1 week and 5 months (La Rocca et al., 2013; Lee
et al., 2013; Palaniappan and Revett, 2014). Additionally,
the human brain is very sensitive to emotion (Marcel and
Millan, 2007; Lee et al., 2013). No publication has clarified
the stability of EEG regarding the emotional diversity of
BCI-based biometrics. Hence, the emotional diversity of the
human mind should be carefully considered for a realistic BCI
biometric system. Moreover, permanence in terms of elicitation
strategy, applied protocol, and feature selection should also be
investigated critically.
Researchers have attempted to recognize human emotion
or mental state using EEG. However, there are still many
challenges in this particular research domain. The EEG signal
is very weak and is easily disturbed by external factors, such
as subjects’ movements and environment noise. Noise-free
and accurate EEG is the greatest challenge in recognizing
emotional states. The way in which emotions are evoked
contributes significantly in emotion recognition systems. There
are numerous methods of stimulation, i.e., pictures, video clips,
music, memories, self-induction, environmental elicitation like
light, humidity, and temperature, and games, amongst others.
By using good and strong stimulation, emotion recognition is
more likely to be performed with better results and higher
accuracy. A number of emotion types also sometimes affect the
system’s performance. Another crucial matter that significantly
influences the performance of the system is the signal processing
platform, which includes data denoising, filtering, suitable
feature set selection, and classification model design. A variety
of feature extraction and classification algorithms have been

necessary to increase the quality of BCI systems (Miralles et al.,
2015).

Issues in Specific EEG-Based BCI
Applications
The use of P300 in a BCI wheelchair has numerous drawbacks,
for example, when a patient suffers from a neural disease,
specifically ALS (Bashashati et al., 2007a; Kodi et al., 2013).
Usually, BCIs that use a P300 modality have a poor ITR.
Additionally, several studies have stated in their findings that
performance may drop after a long period owing to the
reduction of the P300 amplitude due to familiarization (Iturrate
et al., 2009a; Choi, 2012; Amiri et al., 2013). In a real-time
system, the user needs to concentrate on the mission without
interruption (Iturrate et al., 2009b), which is another weakness
of such a scheme. If users focus on such visual stimuli for
a significant period, they feel fatigued or suffer from sore
eyes (Puanhvuan and Wongsawat, 2012; Chai et al., 2014).
Therefore, such physiological control signals are neither suitable
nor effective for wheelchair operation. Despite the advantages
of using navigation systems that assist the control of the
wheelchair with shared control, limited findings have been
reported. However, it is worth noting that several cases, for
instance, wheelchair operation in a corridor or a free area with
unfamiliar impediments, need to be addressed. In such cases,
a complete wheelchair control system with its main navigation
components including mapping, localization, path planning, and
obstacle avoidance is highly recommended (Widyotriatmo and
Suprijanto, 2015).
With regards to BCI cursor control, only three articles
have reported a success rate of above 90% (Long et al.,
2012b). This information somewhat suggests that an insufficient
number of experiments have yet been carried out in this
area. Therefore, more experiments are needed to explore the
exact limitation behind the low success rate. Although MI,
P300, and hybrid approaches (MI+P300, MI+SSVEP) have
been used in BCI cursor control, it was observed that the
hybrid approach yields the best results (Long et al., 2012b).
However, it is too early to remark on which hybrid strategy
is optimal for multidimensional cursor control, and, hence,
more experiments are needed to evaluate efficacy. Different
factors should be taken into consideration to make a robust
system, such as literacy rate, target size, timeout interval, user
preferences, volume of electrodes, training period, invasiveness,
and movement time.
Most of the previous studies of BCI spellers have been carried
out utilizing the P300 modality owing to its credibility among
researchers. Hence, there are more development opportunities in
the other BCI paradigms, for example, MI, SSVEP, and hybrid.
Almost all of the studies employed mean accuracy and ITR
to evaluate their experiments. Nonetheless, it is noteworthy to
mention that amongst a selected paradigm, the performance
of one study varies from another owing to the utilization
of different experimental resources. The aforesaid resources
include EEG caps, electrodes, GUI, software, and data from
healthy or disabled subjects, as well as the number of subjects.

Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org

25

June 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 25

Rashid et al.

EEG-Based BCI Technology: A Review

CONCLUSION

carried out by the researchers, but it is still difficult to
identify which model is optimal. However, PSD and SVM
have been most widely used for feature extraction and
classification, respectively.
Most BCI games demonstrate very low accuracy and speed
as compared to conventional interfaces, suggesting that there
are issues that must be addressed to facilitate the acceptance of
BCI games. One of the most prevalent issues is the selection
of the EEG control signal. Among SSVEP, P300, and MI, the
P300 paradigm is favored by researchers for BCI-based games.
With regards to tagging problems and hardware impediments,
an optimal setup should be employed, for instance, an EEG
headset, VR machine, and motion sensor can be integrated,
and this joint system may able to trace the rotation together
with the position of the targeted users (De Vos et al., 2014). A
number of notable BCI-based games have been recommended
in Marshall et al. (2013). Although the P300 modality has
been employed to good effect in puzzle games, this system
may be upgraded by motion-based technology. A turn-based
strategy allows the users to pick options at their own pace,
whereas a variety of simulation and adventure games are
more relevant for a BCI+VR game. The performance of realtime BCI with moving users is a controversial issue. When
the users are walking or moving, the P300 modality can be
stimulated, but the overall performance drops (Debener et al.,
2012). A camera and accelerators can be used for identifying
user movement as well as removing the corresponding EEG
signal from the analysis (Ahn et al., 2014). To ensure noisefree EEG, a real-time artifact elimination strategy has been
recommended (Barachant et al., 2013). Additionally, some
novel features, including the weighted phase lag index, can be
employed when the subjects are walking (Lau et al., 2012).
However, we have noticed that there is still a lack of studies
outside of a controlled environment, such as Debener et al.
(2012).
A limited number of studies have reported on the use of
BCI in robotic arm control, suggesting that there is more room
for exploration. Moreover, it is apparent that the performance
of these reported systems is still at an unsatisfactory level,
indicating that more experiments should be carried out. Due to
a lack of necessary adaptation and training, the time taken for
such activity to transpire is somewhat lengthened; nonetheless,
this problem can be mitigated through proper training. Some
BCI-based home appliances may able to handle only one
application a time, which does not reflect effectiveness in reallife scenarios. Hence, the activities of daily living (ADL) of
paralyzed patients will be easier when many home appliances
at a time can be utilized through an independent system.
Most of the proposed environmental control systems have been
assessed on healthy users. Thus, there is a crucial question as
to whether the performance of healthy users is identical to
that of disabled people. Until now, the possibility of the use
of environmental control systems by severely disabled people
has been investigated in very few studies, and, hence, more
effort should be applied to evaluating data obtained from
disabled patients.

Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org

A thorough review analysis has been carried out in this article
on EEG-based BCI, particularly to investigate its methodological
advantages and disadvantages and the essential contributions
required in this field of research. Each BCI application has been
explored in terms of data acquisition technique, control signals,
EEG feature extraction, classification methods, and performance
evaluation metrics. Finally, potential complications with EEGbased BCI systems have been addressed, and promising
alternative options have been recommended. Patients with CNS
injury may be able to rehabilitate their motor function through
the progress of emerging BCIs. Owing to wireless recording,
portability of EEG headsets, cost-effective amplifiers, significant
temporal resolution, and proficient signal analysis strategies,
there is keen attention on EEG-based BCI technology for such
purposes. In spite of the many outstanding breakthroughs that
have been achieved in BCI research, some issues still need to
be resolved. First of all, a general BCI standard is currently
the main issue. The BCI community should declare a general
BCI standard that must be adhered to by BCI researchers.
Secondly, the existing BCIs offer somewhat poor ITR for
any type of effectual BCI application. Hence, future research
should concentrate on increasing the ITR of BCI systems.
Moreover, matching the most relevant EEG control signal with
the intended BCI application is another important issue in
EEG-based BCI research. Owing to the present accessibility of
computational resources, researchers have begun to move away
from conventional machine learning models to deep learning
approaches. The use of such contemporary techniques allows
for the classification of non-stationary EEG. Most of the studies
on BCI have used different evaluation metrics on their own
as per their convenience without any uniformity, which makes
it difficult to choose the most efficient method, especially for
new researchers in this field. Hence, it could be of interest
to establish standardized BCI metrics so that all related works
may follow the standard. These metrics would be formed based
on BCI application or EEG modalities. Through this, a fair
comparison could be made between related works accurately
and conveniently, which would help new researchers to pursue
their intended research direction. Finally, the majority of BCI
applications are at the investigative phase, and they are not
readily available for the ADL of the general populace. In addition,
the lack of commercialization of BCI technology is also partly
responsible for impeding its popularity around the world. If the
abovementioned concerns can be addressed, BCI systems could
be an emerging means of human-machine interaction in the
foreseeable near-future.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
MR and NS: conceptualization. MR and BB: methodology. MR:
investigation and writing—original draft preparation. MR, AA,
and BB: resources. MR, AP, RM, BB, and SK: writing—review and
editing. NS: supervision and project administration. NS, AP, AA,
RM, and SK: funding acquisition.

26

June 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 25

Rashid et al.

EEG-Based BCI Technology: A Review

FUNDING

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This
work
was
supported
by
the
Universiti
Malaysia Pahang, Malaysia, through research grant
FRGS/1/2018/TK04/UMP/02/3 (RDU190109).

The authors would like to acknowledge support from the Faculty
of Electrical & Electronics Engineering Technology, Universiti
Malaysia Pahang, Malaysia.

REFERENCES

Conference on Communication, Computing and Digital Systems (C-CODE)
(Islamabad: IEEE), 201–204. doi: 10.1109/C-CODE.2019.8681025
Amin, S. U., Alsulaiman, M., Muhammad, G., Bencherif, M. A., and Hossain,
M. S. (2019). Multilevel weighted feature fusion using convolutional neural
networks for EEG motor imagery classification. IEEE Access 7, 18940–18950.
doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2895688
Amiri, S., Fazel-Rezai, R., and Asadpour, V. (2013). A review of hybrid braincomputer interface systems. Adv. Human-Computer Interact.2013:187024.
doi: 10.1155/2013/187024
An, X., Kuang, D., Guo, X., Zhao, Y., and He, L. (2014). A deep learning
method for classification of EEG data based on motor imagery,” in Intelligent
Computing in Bioinformatics. ICIC 2014. Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
Vol. 8590, D. S. Huang, K. Han, and M. Gromiha (Cham: Springer), 203–210.
doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-09330-7_25
Angeloni, C., Salter, D., Corbit, V., Lorence, T., Yu, Y.-C., and Gabel, L. A. (2012).
“P300-based brain-computer interface memory game to improve motivation
and performance,” in 2012 38th Annual Northeast Bioengineering Conference
(NEBEC) (Philadelphia, PA: IEEE), 35–36. doi: 10.1109/NEBC.2012.6206949
Anh, V. H., Van, M. N., Ha, B. B., and Quyet, T. H. (2012).” A real-time model
based Support Vector Machine for emotion recognition through EEG,” in 2012
International Conference on Control, Automation and Information Sciences
(ICCAIS) (Ho Chi Minh City: IEEE), 191–196. doi: 10.1109/ICCAIS.2012.
6466585
Ansari, I. A., and Singla, R. (2016). BCI: an optimised speller using SSVEP. Int. J.
Biomed. Eng. Technol. 22:31. doi: 10.1504/IJBET.2016.078988
Arabnia, H. R., and Tran, Q.-N. (eds.). (2011). Software Tools and Algorithms for
Biological Systems. New York, NY: Springer. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4419-7046-6
Asadur Rahman, M., Foisal Hossain, M., Hossain, M., and Ahmmed, R.
(2019). Employing PCA and t-statistical approach for feature extraction and
classification of emotion from multichannel EEG signal. Egypt. Inform. J. 21,
23-45. doi: 10.1016/j.eij.2019.10.002
Ashok, S. (2017). High-level hands-free control of wheelchair–a review. J. Med.
Eng. Technol. 41, 46-64. doi: 10.1080/03091902.2016.1210685
Attia, M., Hettiarachchi, I., Hossny, M., and Nahavandi, S. (2018). “A time
domain classification of steady-state visual evoked potentials using deep
recurrent-convolutional neural networks,” in 2018 IEEE 15th International
Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI 2018) (Washington, DC: IEEE),
766–769. doi: 10.1109/ISBI.2018.8363685
Atyabi, A., Shic, F., and Naples, A. (2016). Mixture of autoregressive modeling
orders and its implication on single trial EEG classification. Expert Syst. Appl.
65, 164–180. doi: 10.1016/J.ESWA.2016.08.044
Aydin, E. A., Bay, O. F., and Guler, I. (2018). P300-based asynchronous brain
computer interface for environmental control system. IEEE J. Biomed. Heal.
Inform. 22, 653–663. doi: 10.1109/JBHI.2017.2690801
AydIn, S., Saraoglu, H. M., and Kara, S. (2009). Log energy entropy-Based EEG
classification with multilayer neural networks in seizure. Ann. Biomed. Eng. 37,
2626–2630. doi: 10.1007/s10439-009-9795-x
Aznan, N. K. N., Bonner, S., Connolly, J. D., Al Moubayed, N., and Breckon,
T. P. (2018). “On the classification of SSVEP-based dry-EEG signals via
convolutional neural networks,” in 2018 IEEE International Conference on
Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC2018) (Miyazaki; Piscataway, NJ: IEEE),
3726–3731. doi: 10.1109/SMC.2018.00631
Bablani, A., Edla, D. R., and Kuppili, V. (2018). “Deceit identification test on
EEG data using deep belief network,” in 2018 9th International Conference
on Computing, Communication and Networking Technologies (ICCCNT)
(Bangalore: IEEE), 1–6. doi: 10.1109/ICCCNT.2018.8494124
Baillet, S., Mosher, J. C., and Leahy, R. M. (2001). Electromagnetic brain mapping.
IEEE Signal Process. Mag. 18, 14–30. doi: 10.1109/79.962275

Abbas, Q., Ibrahim, M. E. A., and Jaffar, M. A. (2019). A comprehensive review
of recent advances on deep vision systems. Artif. Intell. Rev. 52, 39–76.
doi: 10.1007/s10462-018-9633-3
Abdulkader, S. N., Atia, A., and Mostafa, M. S. M. (2015). Brain computer
interfacing: applications and challenges. Egypt. Informatics J. 16, 213–230.
doi: 10.1016/j.eij.2015.06.002
Abiri, R., Borhani, S., Sellers, E. W., Jiang, Y., and Zhao, X. (2019). A
comprehensive review of EEG-based brain–computer interface paradigms. J.
Neural Eng. 16:011001. doi: 10.1088/1741-2552/aaf12e
Abiyev, R. H., Akkaya, N., Aytac, E., Günsel, I., and Çagman, A. (2016). Braincomputer interface for control of wheelchair using fuzzy neural networks.
Biomed Res. Int. 2016:9359868. doi: 10.1155/2016/9359868
Acqualagnav, L., Treder, M. S., Schreuder, M., and Blankertz, B. (2010).
“A novel brain-computer interface based on the rapid serial visual
presentation paradigm,” in 2010 Annual International Conference of the
IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology (Buenos Aires: IEEE), 2686–2689.
doi: 10.1109/IEMBS.2010.5626548
Ahn, M., Lee, M., Choi, J., and Jun, S. (2014). A review of brain-computer interface
games and an opinion survey from researchers, developers and users. Sensors
14, 14601–14633. doi: 10.3390/s140814601
Akman Aydin, E., Bay, O. F., and Guler, I. (2015). “Region based Brain
Computer Interface for a home control application,” in 2015 37th Annual
International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology
Society (EMBC) (Milan: IEEE), 1075–1078. doi: 10.1109/EMBC.2015.
7318551
Al Ghayab, H. R., Li, Y., Siuly, S., and Abdulla, S. (2019). A feature
extraction technique based on tunable Q-factor wavelet transform
for brain signal classification. J. Neurosci. Methods 312, 43–52.
doi: 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2018.11.014
Alariki, A. A., Ibrahimi, A. W., Wardak, M., and Wall, J. (2018). A review study
of brian activity-based biometric authentication. J. Comput. Sci. 14, 173–181.
doi: 10.3844/jcssp.2018.173.181
Alexander, C., Yongtian, H., and Jose, L., C.-V. (2018). Deep learning for
electroencephalogram (EEG) classification tasks: a review. J. Neural Eng.
16:031001. doi: 10.1016/S0165-0114(98)00202-4
Allison, B. Z., Brunner, C., Altstätter, C., Wagner, I. C., Grissmann, S., and
Neuper, C. (2012). A hybrid ERD/SSVEP BCI for continuous simultaneous
two dimensional cursor control. J. Neurosci. Methods 209, 299–307.
doi: 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2012.06.022
Al-Nafjan, A., Hosny, M., Al-Ohali, Y., Al-Wabil, A., Al-Nafjan, A., Hosny,
M., et al. (2017). Review and classification of emotion recognition based on
EEG brain-computer interface system research: a systematic review. Appl. Sci.
7:1239. doi: 10.3390/app7121239
Alom, M. Z., Taha, T. M., Yakopcic, C., Westberg, S., Sidike, P., Nasrin,
M. S., et al. (2019). A state-of-the-art survey on deep learning
theory and architectures. Electronics 8:292. doi: 10.3390/electronics80
30292
Alqasemi, R., and Dubey, R. (2010). “A 9-DoF wheelchair-mounted robotic arm
system: design, control, brain-computer interfacing, and testing,” in Advances
in Robot Manipulators (InTech). doi: 10.5772/9678
Al-qaysi, Z. T., Zaidan, B. B., Zaidan, A. A., and Suzani, M. S. (2018). A
review of disability EEG based wheelchair control system: coherent taxonomy,
open challenges and recommendations. Comput. Methods Progr. Biomed. 164,
221–237. doi: 10.1016/J.CMPB.2018.06.012
Amber, F., Yousaf, A., Imran, M., and Khurshid, K. (2019). “P300 based deception
detection using convolutional neural network,” in 2019 2nd International

Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org

27

June 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 25

Rashid et al.

EEG-Based BCI Technology: A Review

brain-actuated switch for wheelchair control. J. Neurosci. Methods. 229,
33–43.doi: 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2014.03.011
Cao, L., Xia, B., Maysam, O., Li, J., Xie, H., and Birbaumer, N. (2017).
A synchronous motor imagery based neural physiological paradigm
for brain computer interface speller. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 11:274.
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2017.00274
Cao, T., Wang, X., Wang, B., Wong, C. M., Wan, F., Mak, P. U., et al. (2011). “A
high rate online SSVEP based brain-computer interface speller,” in 2011 5th
International IEEE/EMBS Conference on Neural Engineering (Cancun: IEEE),
465–468. doi: 10.1109/NER.2011.5910587
Carabalona, R., Grossi, F., Tessadri, A., Caracciolo, A., Castiglioni, P., and
Don Carlo Gnocchi Onlus, I. D. M. F. (2010). “Home smart home: braincomputer interface control for real smart home environments,” in International
Convention on Rehabilitation Engineering and Assistive Technology (Shanghai).
Carlson, T., and Millan, J. D. R. (2013). Brain-controlled wheelchairs:
a robotic architecture. IEEE Robot. Autom. Mag. 20, 65–73.
doi: 10.1109/MRA.2012.2229936
Cattan, G., Mendoza, C., Andreev, A., and Congedo, M. (2018). Recommendations
for integrating a P300-based brain computer interface in virtual reality
environments for gaming. Computers 7:34. doi: 10.3390/computers7020034
Chai, R., Ling, S. H., Hunter, G. P., Tran, Y., and Nguyen, H. T. (2014). Braincomputer interface classifier for wheelchair commands using neural network
with fuzzy particle swarm optimization. IEEE J. Biomed. Heal. Informatics. 18,
1614-1624. doi: 10.1109/JBHI.2013.2295006
Chai, R., Ling, S. H., San, P. P., Naik, G. R., Nguyen, T. N., Tran, Y., et al.
(2017a). Improving EEG-based driver fatigue classification using sparse-deep
belief networks. Front. Neurosci. 11:103. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2017.00103
Chai, R., Naik, G. R., Nguyen, T. N., Ling, S. H., Tran, Y., Craig, A., et al.
(2017b). Driver fatigue classification with independent component by entropy
rate bound minimization analysis in an EEG-based system. IEEE J. Biomed.
Heal. Informatics 21, 715–724. doi: 10.1109/JBHI.2016.2532354
Chakladar, D. D., and Chakraborty, S. (2018a). EEG based emotion classification
using “correlation based subset selection.” Biol. Inspired Cogn. Archit. 24,
98–106. doi: 10.1016/j.bica.2018.04.012
Chakladar, D. D., and Chakraborty, S. (2018b). Multi-target way of cursor
movement in brain computer interface using unsupervised learning. Biol.
Inspired Cogn. Archit. 25, 88–100. doi: 10.1016/J.BICA.2018.06.001
Chang, M. H., Lee, J. S., Heo, J., and Park, K. S. (2016). Eliciting dual-frequency
SSVEP using a hybrid SSVEP-P300 BCI. J. Neurosci. Methods 258, 104–113.
doi: 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2015.11.001
Chaudhary, S., Taran, S., Bajaj, V., and Sengur, A. (2019). Convolutional
neural network based approach towards motor imagery tasks EEG signals
classification. IEEE Sens. J. 19, 4494–4500. doi: 10.1109/JSEN.2019.2899645
Chavez, M., Grosselin, F., Bussalb, A., de Vico Fallani, F., and Navarro-Sune,
X. (2018). Surrogate-based artifact removal from single-channel EEG. IEEE
Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 26, 540–550. doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2018.
2794184
Chen, X., Liu, A., Chen, Q., Liu, Y., Zou, L., and McKeown, M. J.
(2017a). Simultaneous ocular and muscle artifact removal from EEG
data by exploiting diverse statistics. Comput. Biol. Med. 88, 1–10.
doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2017.06.013
Chen, X., Liu, A., Peng, H., and Ward, R. K. (2014). A preliminary study of
muscular artifact cancellation in single-channel EEG. Sensors 14, 18370–18389.
doi: 10.3390/s141018370
Chen, X., Peng, H., Yu, F., and Wang, K. (2017b). Independent vector analysis
applied to remove muscle artifacts in EEG data. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 66,
1770–1779. doi: 10.1109/TIM.2016.2608479
Chen, X., Wang, Y., Gao, S., Jung, T.-P., and Gao, X. (2015). Filter
bank canonical correlation analysis for implementing a high-speed
SSVEP-based brain-computer interface. J. Neural Eng. 12:046008.
doi: 10.1088/1741-2560/12/4/046008
Chiappa, S., and Bengio, S. (2004). “HMM and IOHMM modeling of EEG rhythms
for asynchronous BCI systems,” in European Symposium on Artificial Neural
Networks (Bruges), 199–204.
Choi, K. (2012). Control of a vehicle with EEG signals in real-time and system
evaluation. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 112, 755–766. doi: 10.1007/s00421-011-2029-6
Chung, J. E., Joo, H. R., Fan, J. L., Liu, D. F., Barnett, A. H., Chen, S., et al.
(2019). High-density, long-lasting, and multi-region electrophysiological

Bajwa, G., and Dantu, R. (2016). Neurokey: towards a new paradigm of cancelable
biometrics-based key generation using electroencephalograms. Comput. Secur.
62, 95–113. doi: 10.1016/J.COSE.2016.06.001
Banville, H., and Falk, T. H. (2016). Recent advances and open challenges in hybrid
brain-computer interfacing: a technological review of non-invasive human
research. Brain Comput. Interf. 3, 9–46. doi: 10.1080/2326263X.2015.1134958
Barachant, A., Andreev, A., Congedo, M., Barachant, A., Andreev, A., and
Congedo, M. (2013). “The riemannian potato: an automatic and adaptive
artifact detection method for online experiments using Riemannian geometry,”
in TOBI Workshop lV (Sion), 19–20.
Bascil, M. S., Tesneli, A. Y., and Temurtas, F. (2016). Spectral feature extraction
of EEG signals and pattern recognition during mental tasks of 2-D cursor
movements for BCI using SVM and ANN. Australas. Phys. Eng. Sci. Med. 39,
665–676. doi: 10.1007/s13246-016-0462-x
Bashar, M. K., Chiaki, I., and Yoshida, H. (2016). “Human identification from brain
EEG signals using advanced machine learning method EEG-based biometrics,”
in 2016 IEEE EMBS Conference on Biomedical Engineering and Sciences
(IECBES) (Kuala Lumpur: IEEE), 475–479. doi: 10.1109/IECBES.2016.7843496
Bashashati, A., Fatourechi, M., Ward, R. K., and Birch, G. E. (2007a). A survey of
signal processing algorithms in brain–computer interfaces based on electrical
brain signals. J. Neural Eng. 4, R32–R57. doi: 10.1088/1741-2560/4/2/R03
Bashashati, A., Ward, R. K., and Birch, G. E. (2007b). Towards development of a 3state self-paced brain-computer interface. Comput. Intell. Neurosci. 2007:84386.
doi: 10.1155/2007/84386
Batres-Mendoza, P., Montoro-Sanjose, C. R., Guerra-Hernandez, E. I., AlmanzaOjeda, D. L., Rostro-Gonzalez, H., Romero-Troncoso, R. J., et al. (2016).
Quaternion-based signal analysis for motor imagery classification from
electroencephalographic signals. Sensors 16:336. doi: 10.3390/s16030336
Bhattacharyya, S., Basu, D., Konar, A., and Tibarewala, D. N. (2015). Interval
type-2 fuzzy logic based multiclass ANFIS algorithm for real-time EEG
based movement control of a robot arm. Rob. Auton. Syst. 68, 104–115.
doi: 10.1016/J.ROBOT.2015.01.007
Bi, L., Fan, X.-A., and Liu, Y. (2013). EEG-based brain-controlled
mobile robots: a Survey. IEEE Trans. Hum. Mach. Syst. 43, 161–176.
doi: 10.1109/TSMCC.2012.2219046
Bin, G., Gao, X., Wang, Y., Li, Y., Hong, B., and Gao, S. (2011). A highspeed BCI based on code modulation VEP. J. Neural Eng. 8:025015.
doi: 10.1088/1741-2560/8/2/025015
Birbaumer, N. (2006). Breaking the silence: brain?computer interfaces (BCI)
for communication and motor control. Psychophysiology 43, 517–532.
doi: 10.1111/j.1469-8986.2006.00456.x
Blankertz, B., Dornhege, G., Krauledat, M., Schröder, M., Williamson, J., MurraySmith, R., et al. (2006). “The berlin brain-computer interface presents the
novel mental typewriter Hex-O-Spell,” in Proceedings of the 3rd International
Brain-Computer Interface Workshop and Training Course (Graz).
Bong, S. Z., Wan, K., Murugappan, M., Ibrahim, N. M., Rajamanickam, Y., and
Mohamad, K. (2017). Implementation of wavelet packet transform and non
linear analysis for emotion classification in stroke patient using brain signals.
Biomed. Signal Process. Control 36, 102–112. doi: 10.1016/J.BSPC.2017.03.016
Bonnet, L., Lotte, F., and Lécuyer, A. (2013). Two brains, one game: design
and evaluation of a multiuser bci video game based on motor imagery. IEEE
Trans. Comput. Intell. AI Games 5, 185–198. doi: 10.1109/TCIAIG.2012.22
37173
Borisoff, J. F., Mason, S. G., Bashashati, A., and Birch, G. E. (2004). Brain–computer
interface design for asynchronous control applications: improvements to the
LF-ASD asynchronous brain switch. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 51, 985–992.
doi: 10.1109/TBME.2004.827078
Bousseta, R., El Ouakouak, I., Gharbi, M., and Regragui, F. (2018). EEG based brain
computer interface for controlling a robot arm movement through thought.
IRBM 39, 129–135. doi: 10.1016/J.IRBM.2018.02.001
Burges, C. J. C. (1998). A tutorial on support vector machines
for pattern recognition. Data Min. Knowl. Discov. 2, 121–167.
doi: 10.1023/A:1009715923555
Campisi, P., and La Rocca, D. (2014). Brain waves for automatic biometricbased user recognition. IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 9, 782–800.
doi: 10.1109/TIFS.2014.2308640
Cao, L., Li, J., Ji, H., and Jiang, C. (2014). A hybrid brain computer
interface system based on the neurophysiological protocol and

Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org

28

June 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 25

Rashid et al.

EEG-Based BCI Technology: A Review

Duan, F., Lin, D., Li, W., and Zhang, Z. (2015). Design of a multimodal EEG-based
hybrid BCI system with visual servo module. IEEE Trans. Auton. Ment. Dev. 7,
332–341. doi: 10.1109/TAMD.2015.2434951
Duan, J., Li, Z., Yang, C., and Xu, P. (2014). “Shared control of a
brain-actuated intelligent wheelchair,” in Proceeding of the 11th World
Congress on Intelligent Control and Automation (Shenyang: IEEE), 341–346.
doi: 10.1109/WCICA.2014.7052737
Edlinger, G., and Guger, C. (2012). “A hybrid Brain-Computer Interface for
improving the usability of a smart home control,” in 2012 ICME International
Conference on Complex Medical Engineering (CME) (Kobe: IEEE), 182–185.
doi: 10.1109/ICCME.2012.6275714
El-Fiqi, H., Wang, M., Salimi, N., Kasmarik, K., Barlow, M., and Abbass, H. (2018).
“Convolution neural networks for person identification and verification using
steady state visual evoked potential,” in 2018 IEEE International Conference
on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC) (Miyazaki: IEEE), 1062–1069.
doi: 10.1109/SMC.2018.00188
Fairclough, S. H., and Gilleade, K. (eds.). (2014). Advances in Physiological
Computing. London: Springer. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4471-6392-3
Fan, J., Ma, C., and Zhong, Y. (2019). A Selective Overview of Deep Learning.
Available online at: http://arxiv.org/abs/1904.05526 (accessed July 15, 2019).
Farwell, L. A., and Donchin, E. (1988). Talking off the top of your head: toward
a mental prosthesis utilizing event-related brain potentials. Electroencephalogr.
Clin. Neurophysiol. 70, 510–523.
Fatourechi, M., Ward, R. K., Mason, S. G., Huggins, J., Schlögl, A., and Birch,
G. E. (2008). “Comparison of evaluation metrics in classification applications
with imbalanced datasets,” in 2008 Seventh International Conference on
Machine Learning and Applications (San Diego, CA: IEEE), 777–782.
doi: 10.1109/ICMLA.2008.34
Fernández-Rodríguez, Á., Velasco-Álvarez, F., and Ron-Angevin, R. (2016).
Review of real brain-controlled wheelchairs. J. Neural Eng. 13:061001.
doi: 10.1088/1741-2560/13/6/061001
Finke, A., Lenhardt, A., and Ritter, H. (2009). The mindgame: a P300based brain–computer interface game. Neural Netw. 22, 1329–1333.
doi: 10.1016/J.NEUNET.2009.07.003
Fitzgibbon, S. P., Lewis, T. W., Powers, D. M. W., Whitham, E. W., Willoughby, J.
O., and Pope, K. J. (2013). Surface laplacian of central scalp electrical signals
is insensitive to muscle contamination. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 60, 4–9.
doi: 10.1109/TBME.2012.2195662
Ganin, I. P., Shishkin, S. L., and Kaplan, A. Y. (2013). A P300-based braincomputer interface with Stimuli on moving objects: four-session single-trial
and triple-trial tests with a game-like task design. PLoS ONE 8:e77755.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0077755
Garrett, D., Peterson, D. A., Anderson, C. W., and Thaut, M. H. (2003).
Comparison of linear, nonlinear, and feature selection methods for eeg
signal classification. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 11, 141–144.
doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2003.814441
Gaur, P., Pachori, R. B., Wang, H., and Prasad, G. (2018). A multi-class EEGbased BCI classification using multivariate empirical mode decomposition
based filtering and Riemannian geometry. Expert Syst. Appl. 95, 201–211.
doi: 10.1016/J.ESWA.2017.11.007
Göksu, H. (2018). BCI Oriented EEG analysis using log energy entropy
of wavelet packets. Biomed. Signal Process. Control 44, 101–109.
doi: 10.1016/j.bspc.2018.04.002
Gouy-Pailler, C., Achard, S., Rivet, B., Jutten, C., Maby, E., Souloumiac, A.,
et al. (2007). “Topographical dynamics of brain connections for the design of
asynchronous brain-computer interfaces,” in 2007 29th Annual International
Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (Lyon:
IEEE), 2520–2523. doi: 10.1109/IEMBS.2007.4352841
Gratton, G., Coles, M. G., and Donchin, E. (1983). A new method for off-line
removal of ocular artifact. Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol. 55, 468–484.
doi: 10.1016/0013-4694(83)90135-9
Guan, S., Zhao, K., and Yang, S. (2019). Motor imagery EEG classification based on
decision tree framework and riemannian geometry. Comput. Intell. Neurosci.
2019:5627156. doi: 10.1155/2019/5627156
Guarnieri, R., Marino, M., Barban, F., Ganzetti, M., and Mantini, D. (2018). Online
EEG artifact removal for BCI applications by adaptive spatial filtering. J. Neural
Eng. 15:056009. doi: 10.1088/1741-2552/aacfdf

recordings using polymer electrode arrays. Neurona 101, 21-31.e5.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2018.11.002
Cincotti, F., Scipione, A., Timperi, A., Mattia, D., Marciani, A. G., Millan, J.,
et al. (2003). “Comparison of different feature classifiers for brain computer
interfaces,” in Proceedings of Conference on First International IEEE EMBS
Conference on Neural Engineering, 2003 (Capri Island: IEEE), 645–647.
doi: 10.1109/CNE.2003.1196911
Congedo, M., Barachant, A., and Bhatia, R. (2017). Riemannian geometry for EEGbased brain-computer interfaces; a primer and a review. Brain Comput. Interf.
4, 155–174. doi: 10.1080/2326263X.2017.1297192
Congedo, M., Goyat, M., Tarrin, N., Ionescu, G., Varnet, L., Rivet, B., et al.
(2011). “Brain invaders: a prototype of an open-source P300- based video game
working with the OpenViBE platform,” in 5th International Brain-Computer
Interface Conference (Graz), 280–283.
Corralejo, R., Nicolás-Alonso, L. F., Álvarez, D., and Hornero, R. (2014). A
P300-based brain–computer interface aimed at operating electronic devices
at home for severely disabled people. Med. Biol. Eng. Comput. 52, 861–872.
doi: 10.1007/s11517-014-1191-5
Coyle, D., McGinnity, T. M., and Prasad, G. (2010). Improving the
separability of multiple EEG features for a BCI by neural-time-seriesprediction-preprocessing. Biomed. Signal Process. Control 5, 196–204.
doi: 10.1016/J.BSPC.2010.03.004
Croft, R. J., and Barry, R. J. (2000). Removal of ocular artifact from
the EEG: a review. Neurophysiol. Clin. Neurophysiol. 30, 5–19.
doi: 10.1016/S0987-7053(00)00055-1
Dai, M., Zheng, D., Na, R., Wang, S., Zhang, S., Dai, M., et al. (2019). EEG
classification of motor imagery using a novel deep learning framework. Sensors
19:551. doi: 10.3390/s19030551
de Clercq, W., Vergult, A., Vanrumste, B., van Paesschen, W., and van Huffel,
S. (2006). Canonical correlation analysis applied to remove muscle artifacts
from the electroencephalogram. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 53, 2583–2587.
doi: 10.1109/TBME.2006.879459
De Vos, M., Kroesen, M., Emkes, R., and Debener, S. (2014). P300 speller BCI
with a mobile EEG system: comparison to a traditional amplifier. J. Neural Eng.
11:036008. doi: 10.1088/1741-2560/11/3/036008
Debener, S., Minow, F., Emkes, R., Gandras, K., and de Vos, M. (2012). How about
taking a low-cost, small, and wireless EEG for a walk? Psychophysiology 49,
1617–1621. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-8986.2012.01471.x
Del Pozo-Banos, M., Alonso, J. B., Ticay-Rivas, J. R., and Travieso, C. M. (2014).
Electroencephalogram subject identification: a review. Expert Syst. Appl. 41,
6537–6554. doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2014.05.013
Dhiman, R., Priyanka, N. A., and Saini, J. S. (2018). Motor imagery classification
from human EEG signatures. Int. J. Biomed. Eng. Technol. 26, 101–110.
doi: 10.1504/IJBET.2018.089265
Dhindsa, K. (2017). Filter-bank artifact rejection: high performance real-time
single-channel artifact detection for EEG. Biomed. Signal Process. Control 38,
224–235. doi: 10.1016/j.bspc.2017.06.012
Ditthapron, A., Banluesombatkul, N., Ketrat, S., Chuangsuwanich, E.,
and Wilaiprasitporn, T. (2018). Universal joint feature extraction for
P300 EEG classification using multi-task. Autoencoder 2019:2919143.
doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2919143
Djamal, E. C., Abdullah, M. Y., and Renaldi, F. (2017). Brain computer interface
game controlling using fast fourier transform and learning vector quantization.
J. Telecommun. Electron. Comput. Eng. 9, 71–74.
Djamal, E. C., and Lodaya, P. (2017). “EEG based emotion monitoring
using wavelet and learning vector quantization” in 2017 4th
International Conference on Electrical Engineering, Computer Science
and Informatics (EECSI) (Yogyakarta: IEEE). doi: 10.1109/EECSI.2017.82
39090
Dornhege, G., Blankertz, B., Krauledat, M., Losch, F., Curio, G., and Müller, K. R.
(2006). Combined optimization of spatial and temporal filters for improving
brain-computer interfacing. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 53, 2274–2281.
doi: 10.1109/TBME.2006.883649
Dose, H., Møller, J. S., Iversen, H. K., and Puthusserypady, S. (2018).
An end-to-end deep learning approach to MI-EEG signal classification
for BCIs. Expert Syst. Appl. 114, 532–542. doi: 10.1016/J.ESWA.2018.
08.031

Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org

29

June 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 25

Rashid et al.

EEG-Based BCI Technology: A Review

Iturrate, I., Antelis, J., and Minguez, J. (2009b).” Synchronous EEG brainactuated wheelchair with automated navigation,” in 2009 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (Kobe: IEEE), 2318–2325.
doi: 10.1109/ROBOT.2009.5152580
Iturrate, I., Antelis, J. M., Kubler, A., and Minguez, J. (2009a). A
noninvasive brain-actuated wheelchair based on a P300 neurophysiological
protocol and automated navigation. IEEE Trans. Robot. 25, 614–627.
doi: 10.1109/TRO.2009.2020347
Jawed, S., Amin, H. U., Malik, A. S., and Faye, I. (2018). “EEG visual and non-visual
learner classification using LSTM recurrent neural networks,” in 2018 IEEEEMBS Conference on Biomedical Engineering and Sciences (IECBES) (Sarawak:
IEEE), 467–471. doi: 10.1109/IECBES.2018.8626711
Ji, N., Ma, L., Dong, H., and Zhang, X. (2019). EEG signals feature extraction
based on DWT and EMD combined with approximate entropy. Brain Sci. 9:201.
doi: 10.3390/brainsci9080201
Jiang, L., Stocco, A., Losey, D. M., Abernethy, J. A., Prat, C. S., and Rao, R.
P. N. (2019). BrainNet: a multi-person brain-to-brain interface for direct
collaboration between brains. Sci. Rep. 9:7. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-41895-7
Jin, J., Allison, B. Z., Sellers, E. W., Brunner, C., Horki, P., Wang, X., et al.
(2011). Optimized stimulus presentation patterns for an event-related potential
EEG-based brain-computer interface. Med. Biol. Eng. Comput. 49, 181–191.
doi: 10.1007/s11517-010-0689-8
Jin, J., Li, S., Daly, I., Miao, Y., Liu, C., Wang, X., et al. (2020). The
study of generic model set for reducing calibration time in P300-based
brain-computer interface. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 28, 3–12.
doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2019.2956488
Jin, J., Miao, Y., Daly, I., Zuo, C., Hu, D., and Cichocki, A. (2019). Correlationbased channel selection and regularized feature optimization for MI-based BCI.
Neural Networks 118, 262–270. doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.2019.07.008
John, P., Ellerson, P. C., and Cohen, J. C. (1996). P300, stimulus intensity, modality,
and probability. Int. J. Psychophysiol. 23, 55–62.
Kalunga, E. K., Chevallier, S., Barthélemy, Q., Djouani, K., Monacelli, E., and
Hamam, Y. (2016). Online SSVEP-based BCI using Riemannian geometry.
Neurocomputing 191, 55–68. doi: 10.1016/J.NEUCOM.2016.01.007
Kanjo, E., Younis, E. M. G., and Ang, C. S. (2019). Deep learning analysis of mobile
physiological, environmental and location sensor data for emotion detection.
Inf. Fusion 49, 46–56. doi: 10.1016/J.INFFUS.2018.09.001
Kaper, M., Meinicke, P., Grossekathoefer, U., Lingner, T., and Ritter, H.
(2004). BCI competition 2003—data set IIb: support vector machines for
the P300 speller paradigm. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 51, 1073–1076.
doi: 10.1109/TBME.2004.826698
Kaplan, A. Y., Shishkin, S. L., Ganin, I. P., Basyul, I. A., and Zhigalov,
A. Y. (2013). Adapting the P300-based brain–computer interface for
gaming: a review. IEEE Trans. Comput. Intell. AI Games 5, 141–149.
doi: 10.1109/TCIAIG.2012.2237517
Käthner, I., Kübler, A., and Halder, S. (2015). Rapid P300 brain-computer
interface communication with a head-mounted display. Front. Neurosci. 9:207.
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2015.00207
Kaufmann, T., and Kübler, A. (2014). Beyond maximum speed—a
novel two-stimulus paradigm for brain–computer interfaces based
on event-related potentials (P300-BCI). J. Neural Eng. 11:056004.
doi: 10.1088/1741-2560/11/5/056004
Kaur, B., Singh, D., and Roy, P. P. (2018). EEG based emotion
classification mechanism in BCI. Proc. Comput. Sci. 132, 752–758.
doi: 10.1016/J.PROCS.2018.05.087
Kawde, P., and Verma, G. K. (2017). “Deep belief network based affect
recognition from physiological signals,” in 2017 4th IEEE Uttar Pradesh Section
International Conference on Electrical, Computer and Electronics (UPCON)
(Mathura: IEEE), 587–592. doi: 10.1109/UPCON.2017.8251115
Ke, Y., Wang, N., Du, J., Kong, L., Liu, S., Xu, M., et al. (2019). The
effects of transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) on working
memory training in healthy young adults. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 13:19.
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2019.00019
Kevric, J., and Subasi, A. (2017). Comparison of signal decomposition
methods in classification of EEG signals for motor-imagery BCI system.
Biomed. Signal Process. Control 31, 398–406. doi: 10.1016/j.bspc.2016.
09.007

Guede-Fernández, F., Fernández-Chimeno, M., Ramos-Castro, J., and GarcíaGonzález, M. A. (2019). Driver drowsiness detection based on respiratory signal
analysis. IEEE Access 7, 81826–81838. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2924481
Guo, S., Lin, S., and Huang, Z. (2015). “Feature extraction of P300s in EEG signal
with discrete wavelet transform and fisher criterion,” in 2015 8th International
Conference on Biomedical Engineering and Informatics (BMEI) (Shenyang:
IEEE), 200–204. doi: 10.1109/BMEI.2015.7401500
Gursel Ozmen, N., Gumusel, L., and Yang, Y. (2018). A biologically inspired
approach to frequency domain feature extraction for EEG classification.
Comput. Math. Methods Med. 2018, 19–24. doi: 10.1155/2018/9890132
Ha, K. W., and Jeong, J. W. (2019). Motor imagery EEG classification using capsule
networks. Sensors 19 19:2854. doi: 10.3390/s19132854
Hamada, K., Mori, H., Shinoda, H., and Rutkowski, T. M. (2014). Airborne
ultrasonic tactile display brain-computer interface paradigm. Front. Hum.
Neurosci. 9:18. doi: 10.3217/978-3-85125-378-8-18
Han, C.-H., Kim, Y.-W., Kim, D. Y., Kim, S. H., Nenadic, Z., and Im, C.-H.
(2019). Electroencephalography-based endogenous brain–computer interface
for online communication with a completely locked-in patient. J. Neuroeng.
Rehabil. 16:18. doi: 10.1186/s12984-019-0493-0
Haselsteiner, E., and Pfurtscheller, G. (2000). Using time-dependent neural
networks for EEG classification. IEEE Trans. Rehabil. Eng. 8, 457–463.
doi: 10.1109/86.895948
Hefron, R. G., Borghetti, B. J., Christensen, J. C., and Kabban, C. M. S.
(2017). Deep long short-term memory structures model temporal dependencies
improving cognitive workload estimation. Pattern Recognit. Lett. 94, 96–104.
doi: 10.1016/J.PATREC.2017.05.020
Hill, N. J., and Schölkopf, B. (2012). An online brain–computer interface based
on shifting attention to concurrent streams of auditory stimuli. J. Neural Eng.
9:026011. doi: 10.1088/1741-2560/9/2/026011
Hoffmann, U., Vesin, J.-M., Ebrahimi, T., and Diserens, K. (2008). An efficient
P300-based brain–computer interface for disabled subjects. J. Neurosci.
Methods 167, 115–125. doi: 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2007.03.005
Holz, E. M., Höhne, J., Staiger-Sälzer, P., Tangermann, M., and Kübler, A.
(2013). Brain-computer interface-controlled gaming: evaluation of usability
by severely motor restricted end-users. Artif. Intell. Med. 59, 111-120.
doi: 10.1016/j.artmed.2013.08.001
Hortal, E., Planelles, D., Costa, A., Iáñez, E., Úbeda, A., Azorín, J. M.,
et al. (2015). SVM-based brain–machine interface for controlling a
robot arm through four mental tasks. Neurocomputing 151, 116–121.
doi: 10.1016/J.NEUCOM.2014.09.078
Hu, J. (2018). An approach to EEG-based gender recognition using
entropy measurement methods. Knowledge Based Syst. 140, 134–141.
doi: 10.1016/J.KNOSYS.2017.10.032
Huang, J., Xu, X., and Zhang, T. (2017). “Emotion classification using deep neural
networks and emotional patches,” in 2017 IEEE International Conference on
Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM) (Kansas City, MO: IEEE), 958–962.
doi: 10.1109/BIBM.2017.8217786
Hwang, H. J., Kim, S., Choi, S., and Im, C. H. (2013). EEG-based brain-computer
interfaces: a thorough literature survey. Int. J. Hum. Comput. Interact. 29,
814–826.doi: 10.1080/10447318.2013.780869
Iatsenko, D., McClintock, P. V. E., and Stefanovska, A. (2015). Nonlinear mode
decomposition: a noise-robust, adaptive decomposition method. Phys. Rev. E
92:032916. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.92.032916
Idowu, O. P., Fang, P., Li, X., Xia, Z., Xiong, J., and Li, G. (2018). “Towards control
of EEG-based robotic arm using deep learning via stacked sparse autoencoder,”
in 2018 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics (ROBIO)
(Kuala Lumpur: IEEE), 1053–1057. doi: 10.1109/ROBIO.2018.8665089
Ieracitano, C., Mammone, N., Hussain, A., and Morabito, F. C. (2020).
A novel multi-modal machine learning based approach for automatic
classification of EEG recordings in dementia. Neural Netw. 123, 176–190.
doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.2019.12.006
iHuman (2019). Blurring Lines between Mind and Machine. London. Available
at:
https://royalsociety.org/-/media/policy/projects/ihuman/report-neuralinterfaces.pdf (accessed November 05, 2019).
Islam, M. R., Tanaka, T., and Molla, M. K. I. (2018). Multiband tangent space
mapping and feature selection for classification of EEG during motor imagery.
J. Neural Eng. 15:046021. doi: 10.1088/1741-2552/aac313

Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org

30

June 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 25

Rashid et al.

EEG-Based BCI Technology: A Review

International IEEE/EMBS Conference on Neural Engineering (NER) (San Diego,
CA: IEEE), 13–16. doi: 10.1109/NER.2013.6695859
Lee, H. K., and Choi, Y.-S. (2019). Application of continuous wavelet transform
and convolutional neural network in decoding motor imagery brain-computer
interface. Entropy 21:1199. doi: 10.3390/e21121199
Lee, S., McKeown, M. J., Wang, Z. J., and Chen, X. (2019). Removal of high-voltage
brain stimulation artifacts from simultaneous EEG recordings. IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng. 66, 50–60. doi: 10.1109/TBME.2018.2828808
Lee, S. B., Kim, H. J., Kim, H., Jeong, J. H., Lee, S. W., and Kim, D. J. (2019).
Comparative analysis of features extracted from EEG spatial, spectral and
temporal domains for binary and multiclass motor imagery classification. Inf.
Sci. (Ny). 502, 190–200. doi: 10.1016/j.ins.2019.06.008
Lee, T.-J., and Sim, K.-B. (2015). Vowel classification of imagined speech in an
electroencephalogram using the deep belief network. J. Inst. Control. Robot.
Syst. 21, 59–64. doi: 10.5302/J.ICROS.2015.14.0073
Li, G., Lee, C. H., Jung, J. J., Youn, Y. C., and Camacho, D. (2019). Deep
learning for EEG data analytics: a survey. Concurr. Comput. Pract. Exp. e5199.
doi: 10.1002/cpe.5199
Li, J., Liang, J., Zhao, Q., Li, J., Hong, K., and Zhang, L. (2013). Design of assistive
wheelchair system directly steered by human thoughts. Int. J. Neural Syst.
23:1350013. doi: 10.1142/S0129065713500135
Li, M., Luo, X., Yang, J., and Sun, Y. (2016a). Applying a locally linear
embedding algorithm for feature extraction and visualization of MI-EEG. J.
Sens. 2016:7481946. doi: 10.1155/2016/7481946
Li, M., Zhang, M., Luo, X., and Yang, J. (2016b). “Combined long shortterm memory based network employing wavelet coefficients for MI-EEG
recognition,” in 2016 IEEE International Conference on Mechatronics and
Automation (Harbin: IEEE), 1971–1976. doi: 10.1109/ICMA.2016.7558868
Li, W., Duan, F., Sheng, S., Xu, C., Liu, R., Zhang, Z., et al. (2018). A humanvehicle collaborative simulated driving system based on hybrid brain-computer
interfaces and computer vision. IEEE Trans. Cogn. Dev. Syst. 10, 810–822.
doi: 10.1109/TCDS.2017.2766258
Li, Y., Long, J., Yu, T., Yu, Z., Wang, C., Zhang, H., et al. (2010).
An EEG-based BCI system for 2-D cursor control by combining
Mu/Beta rhythm and P300 potential. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 57,
2495-2505.doi: 10.1109/TBME.2010.2055564
Li, Y., Pan, J., Wang, F., and Yu, Z. (2013). A hybrid BCI system combining P300
and SSVEP and its application to wheelchair control. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.
60, 3156–3166. doi: 10.1109/TBME.2013.2270283
Li, Z., Lei, S., Su, C.-Y., and Li, G. (2013). “Hybrid brain/muscle-actuated
control of an intelligent wheelchair,” in 2013 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics (ROBIO) (Shenzhen: IEEE), 19–25.
doi: 10.1109/ROBIO.2013.6739429
Lin, C.-T., Lin, B.-S., Lin, F.-C., and Chang, C.-J. (2014). Brain computer interfacebased smart living environmental auto-adjustment control system in UPnP
home networking. IEEE Syst. J. 8, 363–370. doi: 10.1109/JSYST.2012.2192756
Lin, J., Liu, S., Huang, G., Zhang, Z., and Huang, K. (2019). “The recognition
of driving action based on EEG signals using wavelet-CSP algorithm,” in
International Conference on Digital Signal Processing, DSP (Shanghai: Institute
of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc.). doi: 10.1109/ICDSP.2018.8631540
Lin, J. S., and She, B. H. (2020). A BCI system with motor imagery based
on bidirectional long-short term memory. IOP Conf. Ser. Mater. Sci. Eng.
719:012026. doi: 10.1088/1757-899X/719/1/012026
Liu, A., Chen, K., Liu, Q., Ai, Q., Xie, Y., and Chen, A. (2017). Feature selection
for motor imagery EEG classification based on firefly algorithm and learning
automata. Sensors 17:2576. doi: 10.3390/s17112576
Liu, J., Su, Y., and Liu, Y. (2018). Multi-Modal Emotion Recognition with
Temporal-Band Attention Based on LSTM-RNN,” in Advances in Multimedia
Information Processing – PCM 2017. PCM 2017. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, Vol. 10735, eds B. Zeng, Q. Huang, A. El Saddik, H. Li, S. Jiang, and
X. Fan (Cham: Springer), 194–204. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-77380-3_19
Liu, Y., Yu, M., Zhao, G., Song, J., Ge, Y., and Shi, Y. (2017). Real-time movieinduced discrete emotion recognition from EEG signals.. IEEE Trans. Affect.
Comput. 9:2660485. doi: 10.1109/TAFFC.2017.2660485
Long, J., Li, Y., Wang, H., Yu, T., Pan, J., and Li, F. (2012a). A hybrid
brain computer interface to control the direction and speed of a simulated
or real wheelchair. IEEE Trans. Neural. Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 20, 720–729.
doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2012.2197221

Khan, J., Bhatti, M. H., Khan, U. G., and Iqbal, R. (2019). Multiclass EEG motorimagery classification with sub-band common spatial patterns. Eurasip J. Wirel.
Commun. Netw. 2019:174. doi: 10.1186/s13638-019-1497-y
Kilicarslan, A., Grossman, R. G., and Contreras-vidal, J. L. (1976). A robust motifs
based artifacts removal technique from EEG. Biomed. Phys. Eng. Express 3,
1–18.
Kim, M., Hwang, T., Oh, E., and Hwangbo, M. (2013). “Toward realistic
implementation of brain-computer interface for TV channel control,” in 2013
IEEE 2nd Global Conference on Consumer Electronics (GCCE) (Tokyo: IEEE),
394–396. doi: 10.1109/GCCE.2013.6664868
Kleber, B., and Birbaumer, N. (2005). Direct brain communication:
neuroelectric and metabolic approaches at Tübingen. Cogn. Process. 6,
65–74. doi: 10.1007/s10339-004-0045-8
Kodi, A., Kumar, D., Kodali, D., and Pasha, I. A. (2013). “EEG-controlled
wheelchair for ALS patients,” in 2013 International Conference on
Communication Systems and Network Technologies (Gwalior: IEEE), 879–883.
doi: 10.1109/CSNT.2013.190
Korik, A., Sosnik, R., Siddique, N., and Coyle, D. (2019). Decoding imagined 3D
arm movement trajectories from EEG to control two virtual arms—a pilot
study. Front. Neurorobot. 13: 94. doi: 10.3389/fnbot.2019.00094
Kosmyna, N., Tarpin-Bernard, F., Bonnefond, N., and Rivet, B. (2016). Feasibility
of BCI Control in a Realistic Smart Home Environment. Front. Hum. Neurosci.
10:416. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2016.00416
Krauledat, M., Grzeska, K., Sagebaum, M., Blankertz, B., Vidaurre, C., Müller,
K.-R., et al. (2009). “Playing Pinball with non-invasive BCI,” in 21st
International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (Vancouver,
BC), 1641–1648.
Kreilinger, A., Hiebel, H., and Muller-Putz, G. R. (2016). Single versus
multiple events error potential detection in a BCI-controlled car game with
continuous and discrete feedback. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 63, 519–529.
doi: 10.1109/TBME.2015.2465866
Krepki, R., Blankertz, B., Curio, G., and Müller, K.-R. (2007). The Berlin braincomputer interface (BBCI) – towards a new communication channel for
online control in gaming applications. Multimed. Tools Appl. 33, 73–90.
doi: 10.1007/s11042-006-0094-3
Kristo, G., Real, R., Blefari, M. L., Brunner, C., Blankertz, B., Höhne, J., et al. (2013).
Contribution to Roadmap. Available online at: https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/
5cb4/11de3db4941d5c7ecfc19de8af9243fb63d5.pdf (accessed November 12,
2019).
Kubler, A., Mushahwar, V. K., Hochberg, L. R., and Donoghue, J. P. (2006).
BCI meeting 2005—workshop on clinical issues and applications. IEEE Trans.
Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 14, 131–134. doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2006.875585
Kulasingham, J. P., Vibujithan, V., and De Silva, A. C. (2016). “Deep belief
networks and stacked autoencoders for the P300 Guilty Knowledge Test,” in
2016 IEEE EMBS Conference on Biomedical Engineering and Sciences (IECBES)
(Kuala Lumpur: IEEE), 127–132. doi: 10.1109/IECBES.2016.7843428
La Rocca, D., Campisi, P., and Scarano, G. (2013). “On the repeatability of EEG
features in a biometric recognition framework using a resting state protocol,”
in 6th International Conference on Bio-inspired Systems and Signal Processing
BIOSIGNALS 2013.
Lalor, E. C., Kelly, S. P., Finucane, C., Burke, R., Smith, R., Reilly, R. B., et al. (2005).
Steady-state VEP-based brain-computer interface control in an immersive
3D gaming environment. EURASIP J. Adv. Signal Process. 2005, 3156–3164.
doi: 10.1155/ASP.2005.3156
Lau, T. M., Gwin, J. T., McDowell, K. G., and Ferris, D. P. (2012).
Weighted phase lag index stability as an artifact resistant measure to
detect cognitive EEG activity during locomotion. J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. 9:47.
doi: 10.1186/1743-0003-9-47
Lawhern, V., Hairston, W. D., McDowell, K., Westerfield, M., and Robbins,
K. (2012). Detection and classification of subject-generated artifacts in EEG
signals using autoregressive models. J. Neurosci. Methods 208, 181–189.
doi: 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2012.05.017
Lazarou, I., Nikolopoulos, S., and Petrantonakis, P. C. (2018). EEG-based brain
– computer interfaces for communication and rehabilitation of people with
motor impairment: a novel approach of the 21 st Century. Front. Hum.
Neurosci. 12:14. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2018.00014
Lee, H. J., Kim, H. S., and Park, K. S. (2013). “A study on the reproducibility of
biometric authentication based on electroencephalogram (EEG),” in 2013 6th

Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org

31

June 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 25

Rashid et al.

EEG-Based BCI Technology: A Review

Maye, A., Zhang, D., Wang, Y., Gao, S., and Engel, A. K. (2011).
Multimodal brain-computer interfaces. Tsinghua Sci. Technol. 16, 133–139.
doi: 10.1016/S1007-0214(11)70020-7
McFarland, D. J., Neat, G. W., Read, R. F., and Wolpaw, J. R. (1993). An
EEG-based method for graded cursor control. Psychobiology 21, 77–81.
doi: 10.3758/bf03327130
Meziani, A., Djouani, K., Medkour, T., and Chibani, A. (2019). A Lasso quantile
periodogram based feature extraction for EEG-based motor imagery. J.
Neurosci. Methods 328:108434. doi: 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2019.108434
Michielli, N., Acharya, U. R., and Molinari, F. (2019). Cascaded LSTM
recurrent neural network for automated sleep stage classification
using single-channel EEG signals. Comput. Biol. Med. 106, 71–81.
doi: 10.1016/J.COMPBIOMED.2019.01.013
Middendorf, M., McMillan, G., Calhoun, G., and Jones, K. S. (2000). Braincomputer interfaces based on the steady-state visual-evoked response. IEEE
Trans. Rehabil. Eng. 8, 211–214. doi: 10.1109/86.847819
Mihajlovi, V., and Peuscher, J. (2012). To What Extent Can Dry and
Water-Based EEG Electrodes Replace Conductive Gel Ones? A Steady
State Visual Evoked Potential Brain-Computer Interface Case Study, 14–26.
doi: 10.5220/0003726000140026
Millan, J. D. R., and Mourino, J. (2003). Asynchronous bci and local neural
classifiers: an overview of the adaptive brain interface project. IEEE Trans.
Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 11, 159–161. doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2003.814435
Miralles, F., Vargiu, E., Dauwalder, S., Sol,à, M., Müller-Putz, G., Wriessnegger,
S. C., et al. (2015). Brain computer interface on track to home. Sci. World J.
2015:623896. doi: 10.1155/2015/623896
Mohammadpour, M., and Rahmani, V. (2017). “A hidden markov model-based
approach to removing EEG artifact,” in 5th Iranian Joint Congress on Fuzzy and
Intelligent Systems - 16th Conference on Fuzzy Systems and 14th Conference on
Intelligent Systems, CFIS 2017 (Qazvin: Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers Inc.), 46–49. doi: 10.1109/CFIS.2017.8003655
Moses, D. A., Leonard, M. K., Makin, J. G., and Chang, E. F. (2019). Realtime decoding of question-and-answer speech dialogue using human
cortical activity. Nat. Commun. 10:3096. doi: 10.1038/s41467-01910994-4
Mu Li, M., and Bao-Liang Lu, B.-L. (2009). “Emotion classification based on
gamma-band EEG,” in 2009 Annual International Conference of the IEEE
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (Minneapolis, MN: IEEE),
1223–1226. doi: 10.1109/IEMBS.2009.5334139
Mühl, C., Gürkök, H., Bos, D. P.-O., Thurlings, M. E., Scherffig, L., Duvinage, M.,
et al. (2010). “Bacteria hunt: a multimodal, multiparadigm BCI game,” in 5th
International Summer Workshop on Multimodal Interfaces, eNTERFACE 2009
(Genova: University of Genua), 41–62.
Muller-Putz, G., Scherer, R., Neuper, C., and Pfurtscheller, G. (2006). Steadystate somatosensory evoked potentials: suitable brain signals for brain–
computer interfaces? IEEE Trans. Neurol. Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 14, 30–37.
doi: 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780198528272.003.0001
Murugappan, M. (2011). “Human emotion classification using wavelet transform
and KNN,” in Proceedings of the 2011 International Conference Pattern
Analysis. Intelligence Robot ICPAIR 2011 Vol. 1 (Putrajaya), 148–153.
doi: 10.1109/ICPAIR.2011.5976886
Murugappan, M., Murugappan, S., Balaganapathy, B., and Gerard, C. (2014).
“Wireless EEG signals based neuromarketing system using Fast Fourier
Transform (FFT),” in Proceedings - 2014 IEEE 10th International Colloquium
on Signal Processing and Its Applications, CSPA 2014 (Kuala Lumpur), 25–30.
doi: 10.1109/CSPA.2014.6805714
Musk, E. (2019). An integrated brain-machine interface platform with
thousands of channels. J. Med. Internet Res. 21:e16194. doi: 10.2196/
16194
Nair, A. V., Kumar, K. M., and Mathew, J. (2018). An improved approach for EEG
signal classification using autoencoder,” in 2018 8th International Symposium
on Embedded Computing and System Design (ISED) (Cochin: IEEE), 6–10.
doi: 10.1109/ISED.2018.8704011
Nakanishi, M., Wang, Y., Chen, X., Wang, Y.-T., Gao, X., and Jung, T.-P.
(2018). Enhancing detection of SSVEPs for a high-speed brain speller using
task-related component analysis. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 65, 104–112.
doi: 10.1109/TBME.2017.2694818

Long, J., Li, Y., Yu, T., and Gu, Z. (2012b). Target selection with hybrid feature
for BCI-based 2-D cursor control. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 59, 132–140.
doi: 10.1109/TBME.2011.2167718
Lopes, A. C., Pires, G., and Nunes, U. (2013). Assisted navigation for
a brain-actuated intelligent wheelchair. Rob. Auton. Syst. 61, 245-258.
doi: 10.1016/j.robot.2012.11.002
Lotte, F., Bougrain, L., Cichocki, A., Clerc, M., Congedo, M., Rakotomamonjy,
A., et al. (2018). A review of classification algorithms for EEG-based
brain-computer interfaces: a 10-year update. J. Neural Eng. 15:031005.
doi: 10.1088/1741-2552/aab2f2
Lotte, F., Bougrain, L., and Clerc, M. (2015). “Electroencephalography (EEG)based brain-computer interfaces,” in Wiley Encyclopedia of Electrical and
Electronics Engineering, ed J. Webster (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons,
Inc.), 1–20. doi: 10.1002/047134608X.W8278
Lotte, F., Congedo, M., Lécuyer, A., Lamarche, F., and Arnaldi, B. (2007). A review
of classification algorithms for EEG-based brain–computer interfaces. J. Neural
Eng. 4, R1–R13. doi: 10.1088/1741-2560/4/2/R01
Lu, N., Li, T., Ren, X., and Miao, H. (2017). A deep learning scheme for motor
imagery classification based on restricted boltzmann machines. IEEE Trans.
Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 25, 566–576. doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2016.2601240
Lu, Z., Gao, N., Liu, Y., and Li, Q. (2018). “The detection of P300 potential
based on deep belief network,” in 2018 11th International Congress on Image
and Signal Processing, BioMedical Engineering and Informatics (CISP-BMEI)
(Beijing: IEEE), 1–5. doi: 10.1109/CISP-BMEI.2018.8633147
Luo, T., Zhou, C., and Chao, F. (2018). Exploring spatial-frequency-sequential
relationships for motor imagery classification with recurrent neural network.
BMC Bioinform. 19:344. doi: 10.1186/s12859-018-2365-1
Ma, X., Qiu, S., Du, C., Xing, J., and He, H. (2018). “Improving EEG-based motor
imagery classification via spatial and temporal recurrent neural networks,”
in 2018 40th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in
Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC) (Honolulu, HI: IEEE), 1903–1906.
doi: 10.1109/EMBC.2018.8512590
Maby, E., Perrin, M., Bertrand, O., Sanchez, G., and Mattout, J. (2012). BCI could
make old two-player games even more fun: a proof of concept with “connect
Four.” Adv. Hum.Comput. Interact. 2012:124728. doi: 10.1155/2012/124728
Majidov, I., and Whangbo, T. (2019). Efficient classification of motor imagery
electroencephalography signals using deep learning methods. Sensors 19:1736.
doi: 10.3390/s19071736
Mammone, N., Ieracitano, C., and Morabito, F. C. (2020). A deep CNN
approach to decode motor preparation of upper limbs from time–frequency
maps of EEG signals at source level. Neural Networks 124, 357–372.
doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.2020.01.027
Mandel, C., Luth, T., Laue, T., Rofer, T., Graser, A., and Krieg-Bruckner, B.
(2009). “Navigating a smart wheelchair with a brain-computer interface
interpreting steady-state visual evoked potentials,” in 2009 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IEEE), 1118–1125.
doi: 10.1109/IROS.2009.5354534
Manojprabu, M., and Sarma Dhulipala, V. R. (2020). Improved energy efficient
design in software defined wireless electroencephalography sensor networks
(WESN) using distributed architecture to remove artifact. Comput. Commun.
152, 266–271. doi: 10.1016/j.comcom.2019.12.056
Mara, S., Müller, T., Freire, T., Mário, B., and Filho, S. (2013). Proposal of a SSVEPBCI to Command a Robotic Wheelchair. J. Control Autom. Electr. Syst. 24,
97–105. doi: 10.1007/s40313-013-0002-9
Marcel, S., and Millan, J. D. R. (2007). Person Authentication Using Brainwaves
(EEG) and maximum a posteriori model adaptation. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
Mach. Intell. 29, 743–752. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2007.1012
Marshall, D., Coyle, D., Wilson, S., and Callaghan, M. (2013). Games, gameplay,
and BCI: the state of the Art. IEEE Trans. Comput. Intell. AI Games 5, 82–99.
doi: 10.1109/TCIAIG.2013.2263555
Mason, S. G., and Birch, G. E. (2003). A general framework for braincomputer interface design. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 11, 70–85.
doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2003.810426
Masood, M. H., Ahmad, M., Kathia, M. A., Zafar, R. Z., and Zahid, A. N.
(2016). “Brain Computer Interface Based Smart Home Control,” in 2013 IEEE
International Symposium on Consumer Electronics (ISCE) (Hsinchu), 35–36,
doi: 10.1109/ISCE.2013.6570240

Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org

32

June 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 25

Rashid et al.

EEG-Based BCI Technology: A Review

Petrantonakis, P. C., and Hadjileontiadis, L. J. (2010). Emotion recognition from
EEG using higher order crossings. IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed. 14,
186–197. doi: 10.1109/TITB.2009.2034649
Pham, T., Ma, W., Tran, D., Nguyen, P., and Phung, D. (2013). “EEG-based user
authentication in multilevel security systems” in Advanced Data Mining and
Applications. ADMA 2013. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol 8347, eds H.
Motoda, Z. Wu., L. Cao, O. Zaiane, M. Yao, and W. Wang (Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer), 513–523. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-53917-6_46
Picard, R. W. (2003). Affective computing: challenges. Int. J. Hum. Comput. Stud.
59, 55–64. doi: 10.1016/S1071-5819(03)00052-1
Pires, G., Nunes, U., and Castelo-Branco, M. (2011). “GIBS block speller: toward
a gaze-independent P300-based BCI,” in 2011 Annual International Conference
of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (Boston, MA: IEEE),
6360–6364. doi: 10.1109/IEMBS.2011.6091570
Popescu, F., Fazli, S., Badower, Y., Blankertz, B., and Müller, K.-R. (2007). Single
trial classification of motor imagination using 6 dry EEG electrodes. PLoS ONE
2:e637. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0000637
Puanhvuan, D., and Wongsawat, Y. (2012). “Semi-automatic P300-based
brain-controlled wheelchair,” in 2012 ICME International Conference
on Complex Medical Engineering (CME) (Kobe: IEEE), 455–460.
doi: 10.1109/ICCME.2012.6275713
Punsawad, Y., and Wongsawat, Y. (2017). Multi-command SSAEP-based BCI
system with training sessions for SSVEP during an eye fatigue state. IEEJ Trans.
Electr. Electron. Eng. 12, S72–S78. doi: 10.1002/tee.22441
Rabiner, L. R. (1989). A tutorial on hidden Markov models and
selected applications in speech recognition. Proc. IEEE 77, 257–286.
doi: 10.1109/5.18626
Rakotomamonjy, A., Guigue, V., Mallet, G., and Alvarado, V. (2005). “Ensemble
of SVMs For Improving Brain Computer Interface P300 Speller Performances,”
in Artificial Neural Networks: Biological Inspirations – ICANN 2005. ICANN
2005. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol 3696, eds W. Duch, J.
Kacprzyk, E. Oja and S. Zadrozny (Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer), 45–50.
doi: 10.1007/11550822_8
Ramadan, R. A., and Vasilakos, A. V. (2017). Brain computer interface: control
signals review. Neurocomputing 223, 26–44. doi: 10.1016/j.neucom.2016.10.024
Raschka, S. (2018). Model Evaluation, Model Selection, and Algorithm Selection
in Machine Learning. Available online at: http://arxiv.org/abs/1811.12808
(accessed November 17, 2019).
Rebsamen, B., Burdet, E., Guan, C., Teo, C. L., Zeng, Q., Ang, M., et al.
(2007). “Controlling a wheelchair using a BCI with low information transfer
rate,” in 2007 IEEE 10th International Conference on Rehabilitation Robotics
(Noordwijk: IEEE), 1003–1008. doi: 10.1109/ICORR.2007.4428546
Reddy, T. K., Arora, V., Behera, L., Wang, Y. K., and Lin, C. T. (2019).
Multiclass fuzzy time-delay common spatio-spectral patterns with fuzzy
information theoretic optimization for EEG-based regression problems in
Brain-Computer Interface (BCI). IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst. 27, 1943–1951.
doi: 10.1109/TFUZZ.2019.2892921
Rezeika, A., Benda, M., Stawicki, P., Gembler, F., Saboor, A., and Volosyak,
I. (2018). Brain–computer interface spellers: a review. Brain Sci. 8:57.
doi: 10.3390/brainsci8040057
Rojas, G. M., Alvarez, C., Montoya, C. E., de la Iglesia-Vay,á, M., Cisternas,
J. E., and Gálvez, M. (2018). Study of resting-state functional connectivity
networks using EEG electrodes position as seed. Front. Neurosci. 12:235.
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2018.00235
Roy, R., Mahadevappa, M., and Kumar, C. S. (2016). Trajectory path planning
of EEG controlled robotic arm using GA. Procedia Comput. Sci. 84, 147–151.
doi: 10.1016/J.PROCS.2016.04.080
Ruiz Blondet, M. V., Laszlo, S., and Jin, Z. (2015). “Assessment of permanence
of non-volitional EEG brainwaves as a biometric,” in IEEE International
Conference on Identity, Security and Behavior Analysis (ISBA 2015) (IEEE), 1–6.
doi: 10.1109/ISBA.2015.7126359
Ruiz-Blondet, M. V., Jin, Z., and Laszlo, S. (2016). CEREBRE: a novel
method for very high accuracy event-related potential biometric identification.
IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 11, 1618–1629. doi: 10.1109/TIFS.2016.
2543524
Rumelhart, D. E., Hinton, G. E., and Williams, R. J. (1986). “Learning internal
representations by error propagation,” in Parallel Distributed Processing:

Narejo, S., Pasero, E., and Kulsoom, F. (2016). EEG based eye state classification
using deep belief network and stacked autoEncoder. Int. J. Electr. Comput. Eng.
6:3131. doi: 10.11591/ijece.v6i6.12967
Nelson, J., McKinley, R. A., Phillips, C., McLntire, U., Goodyear, C., Kreiner,
A., et al. (2016). The effects of transcranial direct current stimulation
(tDCS) on multitasking throughput capacity. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 10:589.
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2016.00589
Ng, D. W.-K., Soh, Y.-W., and Goh, S.-Y. (2014). “Development of an
Autonomous BCI Wheelchair,” in 2014 IEEE Symposium on Computational
Intelligence in Brain Computer Interfaces (CIBCI) (Orlando, FL: IEEE), 1–4.
doi: 10.1109/CIBCI.2014.7007784
Nguyen, D., Tran, D., Sharma, D., and Ma, W. (2017). On the study of
EEG-based cryptographic key generation. Proc. Comput. Sci. 112, 936–945.
doi: 10.1016/JPROCS.2017.08.126
Nguyen, T.-H., and Chung, W.-Y. (2019). A single-channel SSVEPbased BCI speller using deep learning. IEEE Access 7, 1752–1763.
doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2886759
Nguyen, T.-H., Yang, D.-L., and Chung, W.-Y. (2018). A high-rate BCI
speller based on eye-closed EEG signal. IEEE Access 6, 33995–34003.
doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2849358
Nicolas-Alonso, L. F., Corralejo, R., Gomez-Pilar, J., Álvarez, D., and Hornero,
R. (2015). Adaptive semi-supervised classification to reduce intersession nonstationarity in multiclass motor imagery-based brain-computer interfaces.
Neurocomputing 159, 186–196. doi: 10.1016/j.neucom.2015.02.005
Nicolas-Alonso, L. F., and Gomez-Gil, J. (2012). Brain computer interfaces, a
review. Sensors 12, 1211–1279. doi: 10.3390/s120201211
Novak, D., Sigrist, R., Gerig, N. J., Wyss, D., Bauer, R., Götz, U., et al. (2018).
Benchmarking brain-computer interfaces outside the laboratory: the cybathlon
2016. Front. Neurosci. 11:756. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2017.00756
Obeidat, Q. T., Campbell, T. A., and Kong, J. (2015). Introducing the edges
paradigm: a P300 brain–computer interface for spelling written words. IEEE
Trans. Hum. Mach. Syst. 45, 727–738. doi: 10.1109/THMS.2015.2456017
Obermaier, B., Guger, C., Neuper, C., and Pfurtscheller, G. (2001). Hidden Markov
models for online classification of single trial EEG data. Pattern Recognit. Lett.
22, 1299–1309. doi: 10.1016/S0167-8655(01)00075-7
Oikonomou, V. P., Georgiadis, K., Liaros, G., Nikolopoulos, S., and Kompatsiaris,
I. (2017). “A comparison study on EEG signal processing techniques using
motor imagery EEG data,” in Proceedings - IEEE Symposium on ComputerBased Medical Systems (Thessaloniki: Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers Inc.), 781–786. doi: 10.1109/CBMS.2017.113
Olivas-Padilla, B. E., and Chacon-Murguia, M. I. (2019). Classification of multiple
motor imagery using deep convolutional neural networks and spatial filters.
Appl. Soft Comput. 75, 461–472. doi: 10.1016/J.ASOC.2018.11.031
Oosugi, N., Kitajo, K., Hasegawa, N., Nagasaka, Y., Okanoya, K., and Fujii, N.
(2017). A new method for quantifying the performance of EEG blind source
separation algorithms by referencing a simultaneously recorded ECoG signal.
Neural Netw. 93, 1–6. doi: 10.1016/J.NEUNET.2017.01.005
Ortega, J., Ortiz, A., Martín-Smith, P., Gan, J. Q., and González-Peñalver, J. (2017)
“Advances in computational intelligence,” in IWANN 2017. Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, Vol. 10305, eds I. Rojas, G. Joya, and A. Catala (Cham:
Springer), 28-39. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-59153-7_3
Ortiz-Echeverri, C. J., Salazar-Colores, S., Rodríguez-Reséndiz, J., and GómezLoenzo, R. A. (2019). A new approach for motor imagery classification
based on sorted blind source separation, continuous wavelet transform, and
convolutional neural network. Sensors 19:4541. doi: 10.3390/s19204541
Özerdem, M. S., and Polat, H. (2017). Emotion recognition based on EEG
features in movie clips with channel selection. Brain Inform. 4, 241–252.
doi: 10.1007/s40708-017-0069-3
Padfield, N., Zabalza, J., Zhao, H., Masero, V., Ren, J., Padfield, N., et al. (2019).
EEG-based brain-computer interfaces using motor-imagery: techniques and
challenges. Sensors 19:1423. doi: 10.3390/s19061423
Palaniappan, R., and Revett, K. (2014). PIN generation using EEG: a stability study.
Int. J. Biometrics 6, 95–105. doi: 10.1504/IJBM.2014.060960
Pan, J., Li, Y., and Wang, J. (2016). “An EEG-Based brain-computer
interface for emotion recognition,” in 2016 International Joint Conference
on Neural Networks (IJCNN) (Vancouver, BC: IEEE), 2063–2067.
doi: 10.1109/IJCNN.2016.7727453

Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org

33

June 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 25

Rashid et al.

EEG-Based BCI Technology: A Review

Tello, R. M. G., Müller, S. M. T., Hasan, M. A., Ferreira, A., Krishnan,
S., and Bastos, T. F. (2016). An independent-BCI based on SSVEP using
Figure-Ground Perception (FGP). Biomed. Signal Process. Control 26, 69–79.
doi: 10.1016/J.BSPC.2015.12.010
Thulasidas, M., Guan, C., and Wu, J. (2006). Robust classification of EEG signal
for brain–computer interface. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 14, 24–29.
doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2005.862695
Tian, G., and Liu, Y. (2019). Simple convolutional neural network for left-right
hands motor imagery EEG signals classification. Int. J. Cogn. Informatics Nat.
Intell. 13, 36–49. doi: 10.4018/IJCINI.2019070103
Townsend, G., LaPallo, B. K., Boulay, C. B., Krusienski, D. J., Frye, G. E., Hauser,
C. K., et al. (2010). A novel P300-based brain–computer interface stimulus
presentation paradigm: moving beyond rows and columns. Clin. Neurophysiol.
121, 1109–1120. doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2010.01.030
Tripathy, R. K., and Rajendra Acharya, U. (2018). Use of features from RRtime series and EEG signals for automated classification of sleep stages
in deep neural network framework. Biocybern. Biomed. Eng. 38, 890–902.
doi: 10.1016/j.bbe.2018.05.005
Tsinalis, O., Matthews, P. M., and Guo, Y. (2016). Automatic sleep stage scoring
using time-frequency analysis and stacked sparse autoencoders. Ann. Biomed.
Eng. 44, 1587–1597. doi: 10.1007/s10439-015-1444-y
Urigüen, J. A., and Garcia-Zapirain, B. (2015). EEG artifact
removal—state-of-the-art and guidelines. J. Neural Eng. 12:031001.
doi: 10.1088/1741-2560/12/3/031001
Valbuena, D., Volosyak, I., and Gräser, A. (2010). “SBCI: fast detection of steadystate visual evoked potentials,” 2007 29th Annual International Conference of
the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (Buenos Aires: IEEE),
2010:3966–3969. doi: 10.1109/IEMBS.2010.5627990
Van Erp, J. B. F., Lotte, F., and Tangermann, M. (2012). Brain-computer interfaces:
beyond medical applications. Computer 45, 26–34. doi: 10.1109/MC.2012.107
Vansteensel, M. J., Kristo, G., Aarnoutse, E. J., and Ramsey, N. F. (2017). The braincomputer interface researcher’s questionnaire: from research to application.
Brain Comput. Interf. 4, 236-247. doi: 10.1080/2326263X.2017.1366237
Vareka, L., and Mautner, P. (2017). Stacked autoencoders for the P300 component
detection. Front. Neurosci. 11:302. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2017.00302
Varona-Moya, S., Velasco-Alvarez, F., Sancha-Ros, S., Fernandez-Rodriguez, A.,
Blanca, M. J., and Ron-Angevin, R. (2015). “Wheelchair navigation with an
audio-cued, two-class motor imagery-based brain-computer interface system,”
in 2015 7th International IEEE/EMBS Conference on Neural Engineering (NER)
(Montpellier: IEEE), 174–177. doi: 10.1109/NER.2015.7146588
Volosyak, I., Cecotti, H., Valbuena, D., and Graser, A. (2009). “Evaluation of
the Bremen SSVEP based BCI in real world conditions,” in 2009 IEEE
International Conference on Rehabilitation Robotics (Kyoto: IEEE), 322–331.
doi: 10.1109/ICORR.2009.5209543
Volosyak, I., Gembler, F., and Stawicki, P. (2017). Age-related differences
in SSVEP-based BCI performance. Neurocomputing 250, 57–64.
doi: 10.1016/j.neucom.2016.08.121
Wang, H., Li, Y., Long, J., Yu, T., and Gu, Z. (2014). An asynchronous wheelchair
control by hybrid EEG–EOG brain–computer interface. Cogn. Neurodyn. 8,
399-409. doi: 10.1007/s11571-014-9296-y
Wang, L., Lan, Z., Wang, Q., Yang, R., and Li, H. (2019). ELM_kernel and wavelet
packet decomposition based EEG classification algorithm. Autom. Control
Comput. Sci. 53, 452–460. doi: 10.3103/S0146411619050079
Wang, M., Abbass, H. A., Hu, J., and Merrick, K. (2016). “Detecting rare visual
and auditory events from EEG using pairwise-comparison neural networks,”
in Advances in Brain Inspired Cognitive Systems. BICS 2016. Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, Vol. 1002, eds C. L. Liu, A. Hussain, B. Luo, K.Tan,
Y. Zeng, and Z. Zhang (Cham: Springer), 90–101. doi: 10.1007/978-3-31949685-6_9
Wang, X.-W., Nie, D., and Lu, B.-L. (2014). Emotional state classification from
EEG data using machine learning approach. Neurocomputing 129, 94–106.
doi: 10.1016/J.NEUCOM.2013.06.046
Wang, Y., and Wu, D. (2019). “Deep Learning for sleep stage classification,” in
Proceedings 2018 Chinese Automation Congress, CAC 2018 (Xi’an), 3833–3838.
doi: 10.1109/CAC.2018.8623637
Wang, Z., Cao, L., Zhang, Z., Gong, X., Sun, Y., and Wang, H. (2018). Short
time fourier transformation and deep neural networks for motor imagery
brain computer interface recognition. Concurr. Comput. Pract. Exp. 30:e4413.
doi: 10.1002/cpe.4413

Explorations in the Microstructure of Cognition. Vol. 1, eds D. E. Rumelhart,
J. L. McClelland, and the PDP Research Group (MIT Press).
Rundo, F., Rinella, S., Massimino, S., Coco, M., Fallica, G., Parenti, R., et al. (2019).
An innovative deep learning algorithm for drowsiness detection from EEG
signal. Computation 7:13. doi: 10.3390/computation7010013
Schlögl, A., Lee, F., Bischof, H., and Pfurtscheller, G. (2005). Characterization of
four-class motor imagery EEG data for the BCI-competition 2005. J. Neural
Eng. 2, L14–L22. doi: 10.1088/1741-2560/2/4/L02
Schreuder, M., Höhne, J., Blankertz, B., Haufe, S., Dickhaus, T., and Tangermann,
M. (2013). Optimizing event-related potential based brain-computer interfaces:
a systematic evaluation of dynamic stopping methods. J. Neural Eng. 10:036025.
doi: 10.1088/1741-2560/10/3/036025
Serdar Bascil, M., Tesneli, A. Y., and Temurtas, F. (2015). Multi-channel
EEG signal feature extraction and pattern recognition on horizontal mental
imagination task of 1-D cursor movement for brain computer interface.
Australas. Phys. Eng. Sci. Med. 38, 229–239. doi: 10.1007/s13246-015-0345-6
Shakeel, A., Navid, M. S., Anwar, M. N., Mazhar, S., Jochumsen, M., and Niazi,
I. K. (2015). A review of techniques for detection of movement intention
using movement-related cortical potentials. Comput. Math. Methods Med.
2015:346217. doi: 10.1155/2015/346217
Shin, B.-G., Kim, T., and Jo, S. (2010). “Non-invasive brain signal
interface for a wheelchair navigation,” in International Conference on
Control Automation and Systems (ICCAS) (Gyeonggi-do), 2257–2260.
doi: 10.1109/ICCAS.2010.5669830
Shojaedini, S., Morabbi, S., and Keyvanpour, M. (2018). A new method for
detecting P300 signals by using deep learning: hyperparameter tuning in highdimensional space by minimizing nonconvex error function. J. Med. Signals
Sens. 8, 205–214. doi: 10.4103/jmss.JMSS_7_18
Shyu, K.-K., Chiu, Y.-J., Lee, P.-L., Lee, M.-H., Sie, J.-J., Wu, C.-H., et al.
(2013). Total design of an FPGA-based brain–computer interface control
hospital bed nursing system. IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. 60, 2731–2739.
doi: 10.1109/TIE.2012.2196897
Shyu, K.-K., Lee, P.-L., Lee, M.-H., Lin, M.-H., Lai, R.-J., and Chiu,
Y.-J. (2010). Development of a low-cost FPGA-based SSVEP BCI
multimedia control system. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circ. Syst. 4, 125–132.
doi: 10.1109/TBCAS.2010.2042595
Somers, B., Francart, T., and Bertrand, A. (2018). A generic EEG artifact removal
algorithm based on the multi-channel Wiener filter. J. Neural Eng. 15:036007.
doi: 10.1088/1741-2552/aaac92
Soroush, M. Z., Maghooli, K., Setarehdan, S. K., and Nasrabadi, A. M. (2018).
A review on EEG signals based emotion recognition. Int. Clin. Neurosci. J. 4,
118–129. doi: 10.15171/icnj.2017.01
Speier, W., Fried, I., and Pouratian, N. (2013). Improved P300 speller performance
using electrocorticography, spectral features, and natural language processing.
Clin. Neurophysiol. 124, 1321–1328. doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2013.02.002
Sweeney, K. T., Ward, T. E., and McLoone, S. F. (2012). Artifact removal in
physiological signals—practices and possibilities. IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol.
Biomed. 16, 488–500. doi: 10.1109/TITB.2012.2188536
Tabar, Y. R., and Halici, U. (2017). A novel deep learning approach for
classification of EEG motor imagery signals. J. Neural Eng. 14:016003.
doi: 10.1088/1741-2560/14/1/016003
Tang, J., Liu, Y., Hu, D., and Zhou, Z. (2018). Towards BCIactuated
smart
wheelchair
system.
Biomed.
Eng.
Online
17:111. doi: 10.1186/s12938-018-0545-x
Tang, X., Zhou, J., Zhang, N., and Liu, L. (2015). Recognition of motor
imagery EEG based on deep belief network. Inf. Control 44, 717–721.
doi: 10.13976/j.cnki.xk.2015.0717
Tang, Z., Li, C., and Sun, S. (2017). Single-trial EEG classification of motor
imagery using deep convolutional neural networks. Optik 130, 11–18.
doi: 10.1016/J.IJLEO.2016.10.117
Taran, S., and Bajaj, V. (2018). Drowsiness detection using adaptive hermite
decomposition and extreme learning machine for electroencephalogram
signals. IEEE Sens. J. 18, 8855–8862. doi: 10.1109/JSEN.2018.2869775
Tariq, M., Trivailo, P. M., and Simic, M. (2018). EEG-based BCI control
schemes for lower-limb assistive-robots. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 12:312.
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2018.00312
Tayeb, Z., Fedjaev, J., Ghaboosi, N., Richter, C., Everding, L., Qu, X., et al.
(2019). Validating deep neural networks for online decoding of motor imagery
movements from EEG signals. Sensors 19:210. doi: 10.3390/s19010210

Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org

34

June 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 25

Rashid et al.

EEG-Based BCI Technology: A Review

Zaizu Ilyas, M., Saad, P., and Imran Ahmad, M. (2015). “A survey of analysis
and classification of EEG signals for brain-computer interfaces,” in 2nd
International Conference on Biomedical Engineering (ICoBE) (Penang), 1–6.
doi: 10.1109/ICoBE.2015.7235129
Zarei, R., He, J., Siuly, S., and Zhang, Y. (2017). A PCA aided cross-covariance
scheme for discriminative feature extraction from EEG signals. Comput.
Methods Programs Biomed. doi: 10.1016/j.cmpb.2017.05.009
Zhang, D.-X., Wu, X.-P., and Guo, X. (2008). “The EEG signal preprocessing
based on empirical mode decomposition,” in 2008 2nd International Conference
on Bioinformatics and Biomedical Engineering (Shanghai: IEEE), 2131–2134.
doi: 10.1109/ICBBE.2008.862
Zhang, R., Li, X., Wang, Y., Liu, B., Shi, L., Chen, M., et al. (2019). Using brain
network features to increase the classification accuracy of MI-BCI inefficiency
subject. IEEE Access 7, 74490–74499. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2917327
Zhang, R., Li, Y., Yan, Y., Zhang, H., Wu, S., Yu, T., et al. (2016). Control of
a wheelchair in an indoor environment based on a brain-computer interface
and automated navigation. IEEE Trans. Neural. Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 24, 128–39.
doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2015.2439298
Zhang, R., Wang, Q., Li, K., He, S., Qin, S., Feng, Z., et al. (2017). A BCI-based
environmental control system for patients with severe spinal cord injuries. IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng. 64, 1959–1971. doi: 10.1109/TBME.2016.2628861
Zhang, T., Zheng, W., Cui, Z., Zong, Y., and Li, Y. (2019). Spatial–temporal
recurrent neural network for emotion recognition. IEEE Trans. Cybern. 49,
839–847. doi: 10.1109/TCYB.2017.2788081
Zhang, X., Yao, L., Wang, X., Monaghan, J., Mcalpine, D., and Zhang, Y. (2019). A
Survey on Deep Learning based Brain Computer Interface: Recent Advances and
New Frontiers. Available online at: http://arxiv.org/abs/1905.04149 (accessed
July 15, 2019).
Zhang, Y., Guo, D., Xu, P., Zhang, Y., and Yao, D. (2016). Robust
frequency recognition for SSVEP-based BCI with temporally local
multivariate synchronization index. Cogn. Neurodyn. 10, 505–511.
doi: 10.1007/s11571-016-9398-9
Zhang, Y., Xiaomin, J., and Zhang, Y. (2015). “Classification of EEG signals
based on AR model and approximate entropy,” in 2015 International
Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN) (Killarney: IEEE), 1–6.
doi: 10.1109/IJCNN.2015.7280840
Zhang, Y., Yin, E., Li, F., Zhang, Y., Guo, D., Yao, D., et al. (2019). Hierarchical
feature fusion framework for frequency recognition in SSVEP-based BCIs.
Neural Netw. 119, 1–9. doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.2019.07.007
Zhang, Y., Yin, E., Li, F., Zhang, Y., Tanaka, T., Zhao, Q., et al. (2018). Twostage frequency recognition method based on correlated component analysis
for SSVEP-based BCI. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 26, 1314–1323.
doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2018.2848222
Zhang, Z., Duan, F., Sole-Casals, J., Dinares-Ferran, J., Cichocki, A.,
Yang, Z., et al. (2019). A novel deep learning approach with data
augmentation to classify motor imagery signals. IEEE Access 7, 15945–15954.
doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2895133
Zheng, W. L., and Lu, B. L. (2015). Investigating critical frequency bands and
channels for EEG-based emotion recognition with deep neural networks. IEEE
Trans. Auton. Ment. Dev. 7, 162–175. doi: 10.1109/TAMD.2015.2431497
Zhou, J., Meng, M., Gao, Y., Ma, Y., and Zhang, Q. (2018). “Classification of
motor imagery EEG using wavelet envelope analysis and LSTM networks,” in
Proceedings of the 30th Chinese Control and Decision Conference, CCDC 2018
(Shenyang: Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc.), 5600–5605.
doi: 10.1109/CCDC.2018.8408108

Waytowich, N. R., Lawhern, V., Garcia, J. O., Cummings, J., Faller, J., Sajda,
P., et al. (2018). Compact convolutional neural networks for classification of
asynchronous steady-state visual evoked potentials. J. Neural Eng. 15:aae5d8.
doi: 10.1088/1741-2552/aae5d8
Wei, Y., Wu, Y., and Tudor, J. (2017). A real-time wearable emotion detection
headband based on EEG measurement. Sensors Actuators A Phys. 263, 614–621.
doi: 10.1016/J.SNA.2017.07.012
Widyotriatmo, A., Suprijanto, and Andronicus, S. (2015). “A collaborative
control of brain computer interface and robotic wheelchair,” in 2015
10th Asian Control Conference (ASCC) (Kota Kinabalu: IEEE), 1–6.
doi: 10.1109/ASCC.2015.7244838
Wolpaw, J. R., Birbaumer, N., Mcfarland, D. J., Pfurtscheller, G., and Vaughan,
T. M. (2002). Brain-computer interfaces for communication and control. Clin.
Neurophysiol. 113, 767–791. doi: 10.1016/S1388-2457(02)00057-3
Wolpaw, J. R., Loeb, G. E., Allison, B. Z., Donchin, E., Do Nascimento, O.
F., Heetderks, W. J., et al. (2006). BCI meeting 2005—workshop on signals
and recording methods. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 14, 138–141.
doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2006.875583
Wolpaw, J. R., Mcfarland, D. J., Neat, G. W., and Forneris, C. A. (1991). An EEGbased brain-computer interface for cursor control. Electroencephalogr. Clin.
Neurophysiol. 78, 252–259. doi: 10.1016/0013-4694(91)90040-B
Wu, D., Lance, B. J., Lawhern, V. J., Gordon, S., Jung, T.-P., and Lin,
C.-T. (2017). EEG-based user reaction time estimation using Riemannian
geometry features. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 25, 2157–2168.
doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2017.2699784
Xu, B., Zhang, L., Song, A., Wu, C., Li, W., Zhang, D., et al. (2019).
Wavelet transform time-frequency image and convolutional networkbased motor imagery EEG classification. IEEE Access 7, 6084–6093.
doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2889093
Xu, T., Zhou, Y., Wang, Z., and Peng, Y. (2018). Learning emotions EEG-based
recognition and brain activity: a survey study on BCI for intelligent tutoring
system. Procedia Comput. Sci. 130, 376–382. doi: 10.1016/j.procs.2018.04.056
Xu, X., Chen, X., and Yu, Z. (2018). Removal of muscle artefacts from
few-channel EEG recordings based on multivariate empirical mode
decomposition and independent vector analysis. Electron. Lett. 54, 866–868.
doi: 10.1049/el.2018.0191
Xu, Z., Li, J., Gu, R., and Xia, B. (2012). “Steady-State Visually Evoked
Potential (SSVEP)-Based Brain-Computer Interface (BCI): A Low-Delayed
Asynchronous Wheelchair Control System (Berlin; Heidelberg: Springer),
305–314. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-34475-6_37
Yang, B., Li, H., Wang, Q., and Zhang, Y. (2016). Subject-based feature extraction
by using fisher WPD-CSP in brain-computer interfaces. Comput. Methods
Progr. Biomed. 129, 21–28. doi: 10.1016/j.cmpb.2016.02.020
Yang, C., Wu, H., Li, Z., He, W., Wang, N., and Su, C.-Y. (2018). Mind control of
a robotic arm with visual fusion technology. IEEE Trans. Ind. Informatics 14,
3822–3830. doi: 10.1109/TII.2017.2785415
Yang, J., Yao, S., and Wang, J. (2018). Deep fusion feature learning
network for MI-EEG classification. IEEE Access 6, 79050–79059.
doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2877452
Yang, S., Yin, Z., Wang, Y., Zhang, W., Wang, Y., and Zhang, J. (2019). Assessing
cognitive mental workload via EEG signals and an ensemble deep learning
classifier based on denoising autoencoders. Comput. Biol. Med. 109, 159–170.
doi: 10.1016/J.COMPBIOMED.2019.04.034
Yeom, S.-K., Fazli, S., and Lee, S.-W. (2014). “P300 visual speller based
on random set presentation,” in 2014 International Winter Workshop
on Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) (Jeongsun-kun: IEEE), 1–2.
doi: 10.1109/iww-BCI.2014.6782567
Yger, F., Berar, M., and Lotte, F. (2017). Riemannian approaches in brain-computer
interfaces: a review. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 25, 1753–1762.
doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2016.2627016
Yin, Z., and Zhang, J. (2017). Cross-session classification of mental workload
levels using EEG and an adaptive deep learning model. Biomed. Signal Process.
Control 33, 30–47. doi: 10.1016/J.BSPC.2016.11.013
Yin, Z., Zhao, M., Zhang, W., Wang, Y., Wang, Y., and Zhang, J. (2019).
Physiological-signal-based mental workload estimation via transfer dynamical
autoencoders in a deep learning framework. Neurocomputing 347, 212–229.
doi: 10.1016/J.NEUCOM.2019.02.061

Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org

Conflict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2020 Rashid, Sulaiman, P. P. Abdul Majeed, Musa, Ab. Nasir, Bari and
Khatun. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in
other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s)
are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance
with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted
which does not comply with these terms.

35

June 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 25

