PERSPECTIVE
published: 03 December 2020
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2020.593883

Advancing Brain-Computer Interface
Applications for Severely Disabled
Children Through a Multidisciplinary
National Network: Summary of the
Inaugural Pediatric BCI Canada
Meeting
Edited by:
Mariska J. Vansteensel,
UMC Utrecht, Netherlands
Reviewed by:
Reinhold Scherer,
University of Essex, United Kingdom
Bradley Jay Edelman,
Max Planck Institute of Neurobiology
(MPIN), Germany
*Correspondence:
Eli Kinney-Lang
eli.kinneylang@ucalgary.ca
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Brain-Computer Interfaces,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience
Received: 11 August 2020
Accepted: 10 November 2020
Published: 03 December 2020
Citation:
Kinney-Lang E, Kelly D, Floreani ED,
Jadavji Z, Rowley D, Zewdie ET,
Anaraki JR, Bahari H, Beckers K,
Castelane K, Crawford L, House S,
Rauh CA, Michaud A, Mussi M,
Silver J, Tuck C, Adams K,
Andersen J, Chau T and Kirton A
(2020) Advancing Brain-Computer
Interface Applications for Severely
Disabled Children Through a
Multidisciplinary National Network:
Summary of the Inaugural Pediatric
BCI Canada Meeting.
Front. Hum. Neurosci. 14:593883.
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2020.593883

Eli Kinney-Lang 1,2,3 *, Dion Kelly 1,2,3 , Erica D. Floreani 1,2,3 , Zeanna Jadavji 1,2,3 ,
Danette Rowley 1,2,3 , Ephrem Takele Zewdie 1,2,3 , Javad R. Anaraki 4,5 , Hosein Bahari 6 ,
Kim Beckers 1,2,3 , Karen Castelane 5 , Lindsey Crawford 5 , Sarah House 5 , Chelsea A. Rauh 5 ,
Amber Michaud 6 , Matheus Mussi 7 , Jessica Silver 5 , Corinne Tuck 6 , Kim Adams 7 ,
John Andersen 6,7 , Tom Chau 4,5 and Adam Kirton 1,2,3
1

Department of Pediatrics and Clinical Neurosciences, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB,
Canada, 2 Cumming School of Medicine, Alberta Children’s Hospital Research Institute, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB,
Canada, 3 Cumming School of Medicine, Hotchkiss Brain Institute, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada, 4 Department
of Rehabilitation Science, Institute of Biomedical Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 5 PRISM
Laboratory, Bloorview Research Institute, Holland Bloorview Kids Rehabilitation Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada, 6 I CAN
Centre, Glenrose Rehabilitation Hospital, Alberta Health Services, Edmonton, AB, Canada, 7 Assistive Technology Laboratory,
Faculty of Rehabilitation Medicine, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada

Thousands of youth suffering from acquired brain injury or other early-life neurological
disease live, mature, and learn with only limited communication and interaction with
their world. Such cognitively capable children are ideal candidates for brain-computer
interfaces (BCI). While BCI systems are rapidly evolving, a fundamental gap exists
between technological innovators and the patients and families who stand to benefit.
Forays into translating BCI systems to children in recent years have revealed that kids
can learn to operate simple BCI with proficiency akin to adults. BCI could bring significant
boons to the lives of many children with severe physical impairment, supporting their
complex physical and social needs. However, children have been neglected in BCI
research and a collaborative BCI research community is required to unite and push
pediatric BCI development forward. To this end, the pediatric BCI Canada collaborative
network (BCI-CAN) was formed, under a unified goal to cooperatively drive forward
pediatric BCI innovation and impact. This article reflects on the topics and discussions
raised in the foundational BCI-CAN meeting held in Toronto, ON, Canada in November
2019 and suggests the next steps required to see BCI impact the lives of children with
severe neurological disease and their families.
Keywords: brain-computer interface, pediatrics, developmental neuroscience, brain-machine interface, clinical
neuroscience, neurology, cerebral palsy

Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

1

December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 593883

Kinney-Lang et al.

Summary of Inaugural BCI-CAN Meeting

brain-based control using a variety of different communication
interfaces with a broad range of mental tasks and self-regulation
approaches, with both young adults and children. With
improvements in EEG instrumentation, we have been investing
more energy into EEG BCIs and NIRS-EEG hybrids. In addition
to the usual evoked potential; e.g., P300 oddball response,
Steady-State Visual Evoked Potentials (SSVEPs), or Auditory
Steady-State Responses and motor imagery-based BCIs, one
of our most promising developments include an auditorytactile BCI that can allow children with visual impairments
to use a BCI. With concomitant motor impairments, these
children currently have very few options for communication
(e.g., painstakingly slow and unforgiving auditory scanning).
Some of our current efforts include the development of more
intuitive communication interfaces (e.g., using human factor
principles and methods), mental speech BCIs, and training
protocols that accelerate the acquisition of BCI control.
Our research program is closely integrated with our BCI
clinic, which was founded in 2019. Our BCI clinic team
comprises clinical expertise in assistive technology, Therapeutic
Recreation (TR), and biomedical engineering. The program is
driven to make BCIs accessible to children with disabilities, a
population often excluded from BCI research. Children with
restricted control over movements and who face challenges
finding a reliable assistive device for communication and
environmental control are targeted to participate in this program.
The main goal of the program is to provide access to BCI for
recreation. Toys and games are ideal first activities when learning
how to use BCI as it provides a motivating and engaging activity
to master a mental task.
Our BCI clinic is divided into two streams: training and
recreation. The training stream is where our participants first
begin with BCI. They learn what BCI is, practice performing
mental tasks, and explore a wide variety of toys and video
games. Once the child demonstrates consistent control of the
BCI over multiple sessions, they enter the recreation stream. The
recreation stream allows the child to have continued access to
BCI activities and provides the opportunity for experienced BCI
users to engage in group BCI activities such as playing multiplayer video games.
The two BCI clinic streams are extremely interconnected with
each other as well as with the research program. Advancements
in signal processing and machine learning elucidated in research
are applied to the BCI clinic. Practical experience in the BCI
clinic informs the development of research projects. Children
move freely between the recreation stream and training stream
as needed and engage in research projects aimed to improve their
BCI performance.

INTRODUCTION
Pediatric brain-computer interface (BCI) is a rapidly developing
subfield of BCI research, with its unique challenges, barriers, and
advantages (Mikoajewska and Mikoajewski, 2014; Alves et al.,
2016; Chau and Fairley, 2016; Kinney-Lang et al., 2016; Norton
et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2019). As awareness of the technology
continues to grow in both research and clinical spheres (KinneyLang et al., 2016; Letourneau et al., 2020), so does the need
for connecting pediatric BCI expertise. Building up cooperation
between researchers, clinicians and stakeholders will be critical in
the coming years to raise pediatric BCI to its full potential.
To this end, the initial BCI-CAN meeting brought together
a bulk of the world’s leading experts in pediatric BCI alongside
associated stakeholders, including families, advocates, and
hospital foundation representatives, to the Holland Bloorview
Kids Rehabilitation Hospital on November 15, 2019. The meeting
focused on accomplishing a collective mission: establishing a
formal, inclusive partnership across pediatric BCI experts and
stakeholders to create a Canada-wide framework for advancing
pediatric BCI to realize new opportunities for children with
severe neurological disabilities.
Presentations from experts, sponsors, and families provided
a holistic overview and insights into current pediatric BCI
practices, goals, and challenges across the network. Paired
with presentations were opportunities for both large group
discussions and smaller group break-out sessions. This
collaboration marks the first-of-its-kind for pediatric BCI
research, engaging stakeholders across the spectrum to combine
resources and spur innovation streams. The remainder of this
article aims to summarize the topics discussed at the BCI-CAN
meeting and directions for progress.

OVERVIEW OF EXISTING PEDIATRIC BCI
PROGRAMS IN CANADA
Holland Bloorview’s PRISM Lab
The BCI program at Holland Bloorview is motivated by the
unmet, pining need for communication and environmental
interaction among many children and youth who present
without expressive communication via speech or functional
movements [e.g., individuals with cerebral palsy (CP) at Gross
Motor Function Classification System (GMFCS) level 5; severe
neuromuscular conditions such as congenital myopathies;
childhood stroke; demyelinating leukodystrophies]. We have
seen over the last decade an increasing number and diversity
of children and youth for whom the search for a single
motoric pathway of control is intractably elusive. The BCI
program arose to fill this gap and complements on-going
efforts to devise novel somatic controls (e.g., smile switch,
dysarthric speech decoding, non-contact tongue switch,
mechanomyographic switch).
Our BCI research deploys three modalities of brain
interrogation, near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS), transcranial
Doppler ultrasound (tCD), and electroencephalography (EEG).
The majority of our early work focused on the hemodynamic
modalities (NIRS and tCD), where we demonstrated viable

Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

Alberta Children’s Hospital—A Clinical BCI
Program
A clinical pediatric BCI program was founded at the Alberta
Children’s Hospital (ACH) in 2017. The mission was to provide
children with severe neurological disabilities and their families
the opportunity to access and inform the development of
practical BCI systems that could enhance their independence and
quality of life.

2

December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 593883

Kinney-Lang et al.

Summary of Inaugural BCI-CAN Meeting

integration of technology tools, as well as highly skilled experts
in rehabilitation, assistive technology, engineering, and robotics.
Patient-centered translational research is a core element of
the GRH BCI program vision, building on Glenrose’s strength
of existing multidisciplinary academic partnerships from the
Faculties of Rehabilitation Medicine, Engineering, and Medicine
and Dentistry at the University of Alberta.
Our program’s initial phases have been focused on the
acquisition and integration of BCI technologies, obtaining pilot
funding, and establishing collaborative relationships with our
provincial partners in Calgary (ACH), and participating in the
establishment of the BCI-CAN national network. Our initial
clinical focus has been to work with children and their parents to
build skills, inform quality improvement, and to develop a BCI
activity library that includes tasks that are engaging, motivating,
and fun. The GRH team has been actively working to recruit and
support a variety of clinical populations who could benefit from
BCI ranging from children with quadriplegic CP (GMFCS levels
4 and 5) and childhood stroke to Rett Syndrome, posterior fossa
syndrome, and traumatic brain injury.

The roots of the program lay in existing, complementary
clinical
research
programs,
specifically
successful
neurotechnology applications in CP populations including
non-invasive neuromodulation clinical trials. This familiarity
with clinical populations and applied neurotechnology combined
with the existing highly skilled personnel including experts
in neurology, rehabilitation, neuroscience, and biomedical
engineering led to establishing a foundational pediatric
BCI program.
In 3 years, the program has achieved multiple early aims.
A recruitment program was developed that has connected
10–12 individuals and their families with the team and program,
each with unique needs and goals. These participants encompass
a broad range of clinical diagnosis but share an underlying
phenotype of severe physical impairment (e.g., GMFCS level 5),
minimal hand function (MACS level 5), either non-verbal
or significant communication impairment, and evidence of
at least a grade 1 cognitive capacity as assessed by parents,
caregivers and clinicians. Initial recruitment has largely
included participants with quadriplegic CP resulting from a
variety of causes (perinatal stroke, hypoxic-ischemic injury,
prematurity, brain malformations, and genetic/metabolic
conditions) with other children and families fitting the
general inclusion criteria also recruited. Multiple BCI
technologies have been acquired and tested, ranging from simple
EEG-based headsets to advanced control, communication, and
rehabilitation systems.
Informed by the patients and families themselves, a growing
number of applications have been developed, ranging from video
games and recreational activities to communication systems,
computer control, and art programs.
With a patient-centered focus, the program is ready to
integrate with leading partners from industry, biomedical
engineering, rehabilitation, and broader clinical centers to better
realize the potential of BCI to improve the lives of children with
a severe disability.

TECHNOLOGY AND RESEARCH
Pediatric BCI Technology: A Promising
Outlook for the Future of Childhood
Disability
The future of BCI technology is promising. Pediatric BCI
technology in particular is seeing a surge of interest, with
possible improvements in therapeutic outcomes already reported
for various patient populations. Early research has suggested
that through the assistance of a BCI, neurofeedback based
rehabilitation in children with CP may help encourage early
neuro-plastic changes which could improve the acquisition of
motor control, which would otherwise be more challenging
(Daly et al., 2014). As this field moves forward, collectively we
should strive to improve the quality of life for both those with
a documented history of motor control, as well as for those
whose movement patterns and motor control may not have been
previously apparent.
Varied future applications for BCI technology are on the
horizon. These include a range of projects from improving
the information transfer rate of speech and communicationbased BCIs to evolving current pediatric BCI systems to include
multi-modal data and input streams. These goals aim to
meet the complex needs of individuals who will benefit the
most from these systems while improving their autonomous
communication, social responsiveness, and movement fluidity.
Events like the Cybathlon are providing unique, competitive
environments that help promote longer BCI use and practice
with through BCI end-user (Perdikis et al., 2018). BCI teams
across the world are invested in transforming lives which might
benefit from the development and synthesis of BCI yet almost
none are focused on the needs of disabled children.
The development of pediatric BCI systems faces its own
set of unique challenges. BCIs depend on controllable, evoked
patterns of brain activity for analysis. Due to the current

Glenrose Rehabilitation Hospital—A
Burgeoning Pediatric BCI Lab
A clinical pediatric BCI program was founded at the Glenrose
Rehabilitation Hospital (GRH) as part of the I CAN Centre for
Assistive Technology in spring 2019. The mission, aligned with
provincial partners at the ACH Pediatric BCI Program, is to
provide an opportunity for individuals with a severe neurological
disability to access and inform the development of non-invasive
BCI technologies to achieve greater independence and quality of
life. The initial aim is to provide access to BCI as a ‘‘just try it’’
opportunity for children, as well as the exploration of BCI as an
alternative technology access method to help meet goals around
the use of technology for play/leisure, environmental control,
communication, and mobility.
The BCI program at the Glenrose has at its core an
existing foundation in cutting edge rehabilitation and assistive
technologies, prioritizing patient and family engagement in
all stages of development. The Glenrose I CAN Centre and
Glenrose Rehabilitation Research Innovation and Technology
(GRRIT) program has a long history of successful clinical

Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

3

December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 593883

Kinney-Lang et al.

Summary of Inaugural BCI-CAN Meeting

occurs when a user knowingly observes an erroneous selection
occurring, permitting a BCI system to self-regulate when a
prediction was incorrect (Schalk et al., 2000). Techniques such
as these appear to be applicable in youth and might be expanded
and trialed across a pediatric BCI network.
In addition to improving classification accuracy, hybrid BCIs
can extend the control capacity of BCI systems. Hybrid BCIs can
be used to initiate asynchronous control, with one of the systems
used to activate the other. This is highlighted in Pfurtscheller
et al. (2010) ‘‘brain switch’’ device, where motor imagery was
used to turn on flashing LED lights for an SSVEP—controlled
hand orthosis. Similarly, hybrid BCIs can be used to separate
target identification and target selection, with one system used
to guide the user towards the desired target and the other to
select the target, such as in combined eye-gaze and EEG BCIs
(Kim et al., 2015). Hybrid BCIs can also be used to increase
the dimensionality of target selection, combining motor imagery
with visual evoked potentials to achieve two-dimensional cursor
control (Ma et al., 2017). Whether improving classification
accuracy or increasing functionality, hybrid BCIs facilitate the
utilization of the strengths of different BCI modalities while
mitigating their limitations. This approach may be fruitful
in designing BCI systems that address the unique needs of
pediatric users.

dearth of pediatric BCI research, however, evoked activity in the
developing brains of children has yet to be well characterized
for BCI. Many existing BCI paradigms involve dry, repetitive
tasks that do not take into consideration the shorter attention
spans of children, prompting the need for more engaging BCI
paradigms. Children are also likely to be more sensitive to fatigue
and discomfort from wearing BCI hardware for long periods.
Improvements in BCI hardware, signal processing methods, and
classification algorithms can all contribute to reducing the overall
amount of data that need to be collected, thus reducing the
likelihood of fatigue and discomfort (Kinney-Lang et al., 2016).
The underlying conditions will certainly differ in children (CP
rather than ALS) where unique brain injuries, neurophysiology,
and the effects of ongoing development must all be considered.
Perhaps most importantly, the needs and goals of individual
users will be different in children and youth, and patientdriven development of BCI technologies and applications is
essential. These challenges, while prevalent and clear limitations
for modern BCI systems should not be seen as insurmountable.
Rather, they should serve as areas of focus for those motivated to
advance BCI applications for children, with the understanding
that overcoming these existing barriers will require extensive
collaboration among BCI stakeholders across the spectrum.

Hybrid Brain-Computer Interfaces
Tapping Into Play: Games and Play in BCI

If BCIs are to be accepted clinically, it is critically important
that the system can accurately predict user intent (Wolpaw,
2007; Daly and Wolpaw, 2008; Wolpaw and Wolpaw, 2012). Due
to current hardware and software limitations, the classification
accuracy of predictions is less than 100%. Even for typically
developing individuals, accuracy ranges from 50 to 98 (Lee and
Choi, 2018; Wang et al., 2018) and drops further for individuals
with disabilities (Daly et al., 2014; Lazarou et al., 2018). Studies
with children are few with variable results, some reporting lower
performance (Mikoajewska and Mikoajewski, 2014; KinneyLang et al., 2016) while others suggest comparable results to
adults (Zhang et al., 2019). Hybrid-BCIs may be one approach
to help improve BCI accuracy.
Hybrid-BCIs combine different types of brain signals with
other physiological measures or another access method to
improve classification accuracy by increasing the confidence in
the predictions made by the system (Wolpaw and Wolpaw,
2012; Choi et al., 2017). Researchers at Holland Bloorview
Kids Rehabilitation Hospital have already begun research in
this area. For example, classification accuracy improved in
a covert speech task using a hybrid functional near-infrared
spectroscopy (fNIRS) and EEG-BCI rather than using either
alone (Rezazadeh Sereshkeh et al., 2019). Similarly, classification
accuracy improved in a verbal fluency task using a hybrid fNIRS
and transcranial Doppler ultrasonography (TCD) BCI rather
than either alone (Faress and Chau, 2013). Also, researchers
have looked at readiness potentials as a cue for identifying
when movements are voluntary rather than unintentional,
such as those seen in persons with athetoid CP. These
techniques could be used to determine if a switch selection was
accidental or intentional (Zeid et al., 2017). Another area to be
explored is monitoring the brain’s error-related potential, which

Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

Play is a critical part of learning and development for all
children. Both neurotypical and neurodivergent children benefit
more from participating in tasks that keep them interested,
engaged, and provide embedded learning opportunities. Current
BCI software, however, tends to focus on simple, utilitydriven applications, such as spelling grids or moving a mouse
cursor. While useful, such applications are limited in an appeal
for sustained use, particularly for young BCI-users. Evidence
indicates that increasing engagement in BCI through gamified
learning may result in longer adoption of the technology while
helping promote the practice of BCI control schemes (Powers
et al., 2015; De Oliveira et al., 2016; Kinney-Lang et al., 2016;
Mullins, 2017). A growing trend across BCI research endeavors
reveal that more engaging, user-friendly activities may be able
to promote a variety of tangible boons in BCI use—both in
short-term task learning and long-term BCI accuracy (Perdikis
et al., 2018; Edelman et al., 2019; Faller et al., 2019). Thus, there is
a clear need to promote developing more captivating, accessible
BCI software which incorporates essential elements of play into
pediatric BCI.
BCI systems offer unique and attractive opportunities for
novel approaches to both virtual plays (e.g., videogames and
digital mediums) and physical play (e.g., manipulation of toy
robots, cars, et cetera). By tapping into the non-muscular nature
of BCI, such systems may be able to provide previously excluded
populations the opportunity to explore and learn through play.
Previous research has demonstrated such mediums as important
avenues that encourage continued learning and rehabilitation
in children with disabilities (Harris and Reid, 2005; Howcroft
et al., 2012; Hernandez et al., 2013; van den Heuvel et al.,
2016). Advancements in BCI research furthering the interaction

4

December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 593883

Kinney-Lang et al.

Summary of Inaugural BCI-CAN Meeting

between BCI systems and play thus represent a promising
untapped potential for pediatric BCI end-users.

Patients and Families First: Engagement to
Inform Aims and Progress

Current Technological and Practical
Limitations of Modern BCIs

Patient-centered approaches are essential to ensure the
translation of research efforts into a meaningful benefit for
affected children and their families. There are likely many
benefits to this approach including recruiting interest in,
and informing about, BCI capabilities for patients. These
benefits in turn can inform more accurate and achievable goals
driven by patients and families. A patient-centered frame of
reference emphasizes the goal of independent participation
in meaningful activities for the child and may help support
increased engagement when using BCI technology as an access
method. Looking at how patient-first perspectives at the ACH
have helped shape the successful implementation of a pediatric
BCI clinical program may help provide insights for other newly
developing pediatric BCI collectives.
The ACH BCI program is relatively new and methods
are evolving. Potential candidates are identified by surveying
related clinicians and specialists (neurologists, physiatrists,
occupational, physical, and speech therapists) for children
with specific characteristics. To begin with, a relatively simple
inclusion criterion was sought of a school-aged child with severe
neuromotor impairment (GMFCS level V, no or minimal hand
use), impaired communication (non-verbal or very limited), and
high suspicion by family and/or clinicians of at least a grade
1 level cognitive capacity. Potential candidates are then further
screened by the lead neurologist regarding underlying diagnosis,
results of neuroimaging and electroencephalographic testing,
and other variables that might affect their candidacy. As spaces
become available, the top candidates are then invited to the
neurology clinic for an assessment where a general introduction
to BCI and the program is carefully explained before enrollment
is offered.
The intake process uses concepts from The Canadian Model
of Occupational Performance and Engagement (CMOP-E;
Polatajko et al., 2007) and the SETT Framework (Student,
Environment, Task, Tools; Zabala, 1995; Bryans-Bongey, 2018)
to gather information about the child, their occupation (play
and academia), their environment (home and school) and the
current and past tasks and tools (assistive technology) used.
A holistic gathering of the child’s functional level including
physical, cognitive, sensory, academic goals, and preferred/nonpreferred tasks is obtained from a medical file review, parent
report, and community/school liaison. The intake information
is used to set up the room environment and choose initial
session activity choices to meet the needs of the child. The
children participate in their typical mobility and/or positioning
device that is used at home and school. Alternative positioning
equipment is offered to the child if they desire to continue
participating in an activity but would benefit from a more
supportive position to perform the BCI task (visual imagery or
attention to visual stimulus), promoting a positive outcome for
the child.
The child’s key role and participation in the development
of the BCI program are seen through their provided input
and perspective in preparation of, and during, a session.
Parent involvement is encouraged to assist their child’s

Despite its significant potential, modern BCI systems and
applications suffer from several limitations, which are only
compounded when implementing programs with pediatric
populations (Mikoajewska and Mikoajewski, 2014; Kinney-Lang
et al., 2016; Letourneau et al., 2020). Such barriers exist across the
BCI experience: from technological limitations, through design
issues affecting user-experience, to long-term implementation
challenges (Millán et al., 2010; Powers et al., 2015; Lazarou
et al., 2018; Lotte et al., 2018). Highlighting some of these
existing limitations may help shed light on potential pathways
to investigate. At the technological level, currently, available
BCI systems can be limited by their trade-off between accuracy,
speed, and degrees of freedom for selection. Moreover, these
systems are designed without consideration for children as
potential end-users, leading to preconfigured signal processing
and analysis schemes which may neglect neurophysiological
differences between adults and children (Cowan et al., 2006;
Vuckovic et al., 2014; Kinney-Lang et al., 2018a,b), At the user
experience level, BCI may be limited in the comfort of headsets,
slow ‘‘set-up’’ times, as well as difficulties in maintaining
attention and control for extended periods due to fatigability.
Finally, at the implementation level, relevant applications of
interest may be limited for end-users, particularly children, as
few long-term engagement applications have been explored with
BCI systems leading to a potential drop in motivation and an
increase in frustration as time is invested in learning the BCI
control system.

CLINICAL SYSTEMS AND TARGETS
There is a paucity of literature regarding the use of BCI in
children with complex motor and sensory issues (Kinney-Lang
et al., 2016). BCI exploration, trial, and intervention in this
national network, with interdisciplinary communication and
collaboration, may be able to overcome this. This in turn may
facilitate guideline development (Brumberg et al., 2018), with
procedures to introduce BCI as an alternate access option across a
broad clinical spectrum. Early clinical implementation will allow
software and hardware features to be identified that contribute
to successful implementation as well as better identify which
children may benefit most from BCI technology access through
clinical case studies and generation of research questions. The
clinical implementation also allows clinicians to provide valuable
feedback to researchers about practical issues that children with
complex neurological and motor challenges face that may not be
captured in trials with typically developing children. Clinicians
will be able to share and provide strategies around areas such as
positioning, tolerability of headsets/electrodes, timing issues, and
ways to communicate/engage with this client population. Most
importantly, a patient- and family-centered approach will ensure
the needs of those most affected are informing the research
questions and driving progress in relevant directions.

Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

5

December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 593883

Kinney-Lang et al.

Summary of Inaugural BCI-CAN Meeting

Outcome measures from a clinical BCI program should be
first and foremost patient- and family-oriented. Our vision
is to bridge the gap between emerging BCI technologies and
the patients and families who stand to benefit from their
use by creating an environment that engages patients and
families to inform and drive technological progress. Primary
outcomes in this environment are defined as subjectively
meaningful goal achievement which may include improvement
in functional abilities, independence, or otherwise enhanced
quality of life for the child and/or family. Measurements
from these outcomes rely on continuous active engagement
from both patients and families in which they can relay
their needs, goals, perceived successes, and failures, etc.,
from the program. Validated approaches in other forms
of childhood neurorehabilitation include tools such as the
Canadian Occupational Performance Measure (COPM) and
goal attainment scaling (Kiresuk and Sherman, 1968; Law
et al., 1990; Polatajko et al., 2007). Acquiring such subjective
outcome measures might be facilitated through the use of regular
semi-structured interviews in addition to the development
of a BCI-support group. Secondary outcomes may focus on
the technological aspects of improving the BCI technology
for pediatric use, through concepts like personalization and
optimization of the BCI schemes for unique participants. Within
these secondary outcomes, priority should focus on developing
well-defined, validated screening programs to assess and gauge
the suitability of various BCI paradigms and control systems for
potential candidates, customizable home-based BCI solutions for
the realization of individual goals, and integration with other
assistive technologies to create new opportunities for individual
success and functional use.

participation. The patient-centered practice is implemented
during both the initial session(s) and as homework. For
example, both the child and parent are integral in helping
direct the child’s ‘‘personalized’’ visual imagery task to be
used in the introductory BCI session. In this example, the
homework aspect would require the child and parent to
explore, and consequently practice, one of the agreed-upon
imagery paradigms (e.g., imagined actions) at home. This
practice may take the form of repeatedly imagining the
designated action without a typical research-grade BCI system
providing feedback. Anecdotally, such homework encourages the
consistent practice of designated motor imagery and aims to
improve familiarity with the BCI-control requirements. Ongoing
efforts are underway to provide commercial-grade systems to
families to facilitate such potential homework activities. It is
important to note that such at-home systems are considered
as supplemental tools to facilitate engagement with BCI for
the pediatric population, not necessarily to replace existing
at-home assistive technology solutions. The many challenges of
transitioning BCI systems to the home that have been shown
in adult populations may also require special consideration
for children.
As successful visual imagery can be different for everyone,
working with the families and children to choose an effective
scheme is of high priority. Input from participants is also
used to determine their preference, enjoyment, and views on
trialed activities as well as the level of difficulty perceived and
other challenges during a session. Feedback is incorporated and
discussed with the families and children to determine if they
would like to perform such activities again, reset their goals, or
try something new.
The importance of a patient-first practice cannot be
understated. The children who have participated in the above
program have reported strong feelings of self-identification and
a sense that they are a part of the ‘‘research team’’ for developing
pediatric BCI technology. These responses magnify their level of
engagement in the program. How all of the above elements are
accurately measured and tracked over time to evaluate outcomes
and quality improvement are currently being studied.

Augmentative and Alternative
Communication
Clinical BCI programs can provide access to innovative
non-invasive BCI technologies that might allow children to
participate in meaningful communication activities for greater
well-being and improved quality of life. Brumberg et al. (2018)
highlight the importance of interdisciplinary collaboration
along with clinical research to adapt protocols to support
BCI intervention. A pan-Canadian clinical collaboration
allows clinicians to consider BCI as alternate access means
to address assistive technology and augmentative and
alternative communication (AAC) goals. The Augmentative
Communication and Educational Technology Service (ACETS)
in Calgary, the I CAN Centre for Assistive Technology (ICAN)
in Edmonton, and PRISM lab at Holland Bloorview in Toronto
represent teams which support excellence in communication and
assistive technology for meaningful living. Team missions are
aligned across sites, promoting evidence-informed practice and
collaboration to support opportunities for children and youth
living with severe neurological disabilities. Through a ‘‘just try
it’’ approach, BCI can be accessible to children and youth with
severe motor and sensory impairments.
The centers use a variety of commercially available systems
with communication capacities ranging from very basic headsets
such as the Emotiv EPOC (Nijboer et al., 2015) to more

Establishing Ground Truth: Baseline
Performance and Outcome Measures
As an emerging field, we must first establish how well typically
developing children can operate BCI systems. A primary goal
of the network is to evaluate baseline levels of performance
across leading EEG-BCI systems and paradigms that are
well-established in adults. Baseline measures to consider include
classification accuracy of established systems, as well as scores
for the agreement between the requested task and the performed
task by the children, often measured by Cohen’s kappa.
The evaluation of user experience is also essential including
measures of tolerability and motivation—factors that are likely
to affect performance. Studies are required to determine how
to best improve the measurement of these factors, thereby
advancing pediatric BCI performance and contributing to the
advancement of our clinical pediatric BCI program for children
with disabilities.

Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

6

December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 593883

Kinney-Lang et al.

Summary of Inaugural BCI-CAN Meeting

at each site to facilitate multi-site studies and increase
the number of clients that could be engaged in a single
research study with standardized methods. Also, it was
proposed to create a multisite ethics application to reduce
the amount of time spent on gaining ethics board approvals
for multi-site studies. Through seeking multi-site ethics
approval, the collaboration will reduce the amount of time
spent on individual research ethics applications for proposed
collaborative studies. Developing data and code repositories
were also considered to encourage sites to build upon each
other’s progress, promoting open science, reproducibility, and
large datasets amenable to advanced analytic techniques. Finally,
establishing effective communication channels for cross-site
updates was deemed important to strengthen the coalition and
encourage collaboration.
Of particular interest was the topic of which technology
(hardware/software/approaches) would need to be common
across sites and which BCI technology might be more flexible.
Participants agreed it was imperative to match the quality
of signal acquisition for BCI across sites, but not necessarily
exact amplifiers or BCI brand names. For example, if each site
has a medical-grade EEG system, but these were produced by
different manufacturers, the quality should remain comparable
enough for multi-site data collection. Consistent data quality
would allow the network to share BCI algorithms and
progress their development and evaluation. Legal agreements
would need to be put in place before sharing such codes
and data but were not considered a significant barrier. The
development of a representative coalition was proposed to
institute channels for communication and sharing of information
across the network.

sophisticated BCI systems. Each can be modified and paired with
customized software to create personalized BCI solutions with
multiple possible communication applications. New equipment
and software applications are evolving rapidly and can be
tested and evaluated across centers to explore alternative
and innovative approaches. Individual children’s needs and
preferences can inform and generate an inventory of equipment
and technology solutions to meet these varied needs. It is
essential that BCI programs engage with, and recruit the
expertise of, colleagues in AAC whose clinical and technological
experience is invaluable in defining and developing patientspecific solutions.

Recreational Therapy
TR provides experiences of meaningful engagement,
empowerment, and identity formation (Carruthers and Hood,
2007; Hood and Carruthers, 2007). This in turn can impact the
subjective experience of well-being, in the context of leisure
pursuits, and brings with it the opportunity to learn and develop
skills (Carruthers and Hood, 2007; Hood and Carruthers, 2007).
BCI facilitation can support the fruition of these outcomes
for clients who require adaptation and enhanced activity
engagement. A collaborative TR/BCI technology approach has
the potential to enhance functional capacity, connectivity, and
provide meaningful leisure engagement that might strengthen
health, wellness, and quality of life for both children and
adults as well as their families and social networks. Across our
fledgling network, there are already many highly meaningful
examples including kids playing video games, controlling
social media, driving remote control cars, and creating original
works of art; all things they had never previously been able to
do themselves.
Independently engaging in leisure for the first time can be
life-changing for a child with severe neurological impairment.
BCI technology creates ability and possibility, opening up
legions of new activity prospects. In the context of leisure, BCI
creates opportunities for independent control of games, toys,
and activities that would otherwise require hand-over-hand or
partner assistance. Through BCI, freedom in choice and action
are reclaimed by individuals who may have lost, or never had
such capabilities. We cannot underestimate the impact such
independence and choice can have on an individual’s ability to
flourish in leisure and life.

Promoting the Next Generation of
Pediatric BCI Researchers
A trainee ‘‘pre-conference’’ meeting was held to generate
discussion and gain insights into the key topics important to
trainees and early-career researchers interested in pursuing
pediatric BCI technology and applications. The trainees
developed their thoughts through a series of brainstorming
sessions in the form of small-group discussions on designated
topics. This environment provided space for these researchers
to contribute suggestions for realizing the multi-site
collaboration and to express their opinions on key related
topics. The most prevalent suggestions are summarized
in Table 1.
One important outcome in supporting the next generation of
trainees is to promote standardization in scientific practice
and BCI implementation across all network members.
To promote such scientific unity, senior trainees put
together a series of online workshops from early April to
June 2020 focused on foundational topics in BCI. These
workshops were developed with the primary goal of facilitating
trainee learning across the network (Table 1, column 2)
during the COVID-19 pandemic. The topics included a
general introduction to BCI, an in-depth dive into currently
available hardware including systems currently used at each
center, and a technical introduction to processing EEG

BUILDING THE COLLABORATIVE BCI-CAN
NETWORK: GROUP DISCUSSIONS
How to Synchronize Technical
Advancements Across the BCI-CAN
To create a unified coalition across pediatric research sites,
it was deemed important to outline goals that guide our
teams concerning technological advancements and data
sharing. A primary aim was to identify which mechanisms
could be leveraged to push research forward at each site
quickly while maintaining enough similarity to promote easy
sharing of resources, methods, and knowledge across sites.
Participants discussed establishing common BCI hardware

Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

7

December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 593883

Kinney-Lang et al.

Summary of Inaugural BCI-CAN Meeting

TABLE 1 | Suggestions from the group discussion on formalizing support for the BCI-CAN network.
Communication across
network

Cross-site leadership

Cross-site collaboration

Participation in BCI events

Primary goal

Facilitate continued
communication across teams.

Facilitate trainee learning and
professional development.

Tangible outcome

Arrange a monthly virtual meeting
across the sites.
Organized by trainees and
research staff.
Opportunity to present trainee
ideas and updates.

Establish teaching and learning
opportunities for all trainees.
Develop an on-boarding BCI
crash course.
Provide an opportunity for
mentoring and mentorship.

Allow time for support and
feedback requests.

Share available resources and
courses.

Develop opportunities for
trainees to contribute to
collaborative research
Develop pathways required for
multi-site collaboration.
Encourage trainee participation
in multi-site studies.
Establish an internship program
for trainees to visit, learn and
teach at each site.
Implement resource sharing
among trainees for data, codes,
protocols, etc.

Encourage trainees to attend,
host and discuss BCI-related
events.
Build collaboration across the
network through BCI events.
Organize and/or compete in
BCI-related competitions.
Present alongside other
trainees at BCI based
conferences.
Organize and attend BCI
specific workshops and
seminars.

Key
considerations

signals. Additional workshops were held to provide trainees
an essential understanding of the MATLAB and Python
coding languages. These workshops will be repeated annually,
with additional workshops added if they can effectively
support skill development and standardization across
the network.

from a biomedical engineering perspective is providing key
developments in various signal acquisition and processing
modalities and is now complemented by a parallel clinical
program. ACH’s clinical orientation is emphasizing patientcentered care and research within an environment experienced
in applying advanced neurotechnologies in experimental clinical
trials. Glenrose’s focus on the integration of BCI within their
wide breadth of clinical assistive technologies for AAC is leading
to new implementation schemes for less experienced BCI users
and teams. To grow as a network, we will utilize and expand
these respective existing strengths to support individual and
collaborative projects spanning across the network. To support

Growing the Network: Opportunities and
Pathways to Build Better Pediatric BCI
Each current site affiliated within the BCI-CAN network
has unique strengths to contribute to the collaborative
network. Holland Bloorview’s research in furthering BCI

FIGURE 1 | Photo of participants from the first annual brain-computer interfaces (BCI) Kids Canada Meeting held on Nov. 15th at Holland Bloorview Kids
Rehabilitation Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada.

Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

8

December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 593883

Kinney-Lang et al.

Summary of Inaugural BCI-CAN Meeting

collaborations and growth, monthly meetings are held with
attendance from the network as a whole. Also, more niche
communications within and between each program are held
to discuss ways to best support collective goals at the sites.
Such meetings can include engineering teams (e.g., members
focused on BCI software and hardware development) or clinical
teams (e.g., members focused on user experience and BCI
implementation). The primary goal for the collective network
over the coming years is the establishment of structured
BCI programs at each site with clear pathways for support
across sites.
Another unique potential advantage for our network is
the opportunity for exchanges, knowledge translation and
recruitment between the sites, and future expansion. Affiliation
with the network will be beneficial for research sites by providing
interdisciplinary training opportunities, shared resources, and
facilitated growth of trainees in various aspects of pediatric BCI
research. While the original members in the network have been
Canadian-based (with new national centers expressing interest),
we have recently engaged other North American groups, such as
the NCAN Centre (New York, NY, USA), and envision growing
as an international coalition of pediatric BCI groups across the
globe. To join our network, please contact the corresponding
author (EKL).

which was presented at the international IEEE Engineering
in Medicine and Biology Conference 2020 (Kelly et al., 2020;
Kinney-Lang et al., 2020). Additionally, we have collaboratively
organized pediatric-focused BCI workshops for international
meetings (8th International BCI Meeting, Brussels, Belgium)
and recently established a seminar series with guest speakers
from other BCI groups across the globe. Upcoming activities
include both in-person and virtual conference meetings rotated
across sites, cross-center technical development of novel BCI
technologies with testing with participants in different cities,
patient and family engagement across centers including online
social networking, and many more in pursuit of our primary
aim of helping severely disabled youth realize new opportunities
with BCI.

ETHICS STATEMENT
Written informed consent was obtained from individuals in
Figure 1 for the publication of any potentially identifiable images
or data included in this article.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
This work represents a collective contribution and summary
from all authors on this manuscript. EKL collated the
accounts and descriptions together, with supervision from
AK. All authors contributed to the article and approved the
submitted version.

DISCUSSION
The first BCI-CAN network meeting concluded with a clearer
vision of our collective short-term aims: (1) to organize efficient
communication schemes that promote continued conversations,
collaborations, and relationships across the network; (2) to
establish a trainee and research team network that can promote
learning experiences, knowledge and data sharing, career
development, and the education of all stakeholders; and (3) to
collectively pursue opportunities for network growth via both
national and international collaborations.
Since this foundational meeting, we have had consistent,
positive engagement from across the network. We have hosted
over a dozen meetings between the sites, organized multiple
learning opportunities on topics ranging from an introduction
to core concepts in pediatric BCI to introductory programming
basics in MATLAB and Python. We have initiated a multi-site
study across our network to evaluate and develop BCI-driven
video games for children with severe neurological disabilities

FUNDING
This work was supported by several funding streams. The
work was supported in part by Mitacs through the Mitacs
Elevate program and Holland Bloorview Kids Rehabilitation
Hospital Foundation. Additional funding for this work was
provided by the Glenrose Clinical Research Fund, the Alberta
Children’s Hospital Foundation, and the Canadian Institutes of
Health Research.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
BCI Kids Canada would not exist without the continued support,
enthusiasm, and inspiration from the children, families, and staff
across Canada.

REFERENCES

Carruthers, C., and Hood, C. D. (2007). Building a life of meaning through
therapeutic recreation: the leisure and well-being model, Part I. Ther.
Recreation J. 41, 276–297.
Chau, T., and Fairley, J. (2016). Paediatric Rehabilitation Engineering: From
Disability to Possibility. Abingdon: Taylor & Francis Group.
Choi, I., Rhiu, I., Lee, Y., Yun, M. H., and Nam, C. S. (2017). A
systematic review of hybrid brain-computer interfaces: taxonomy and
usability perspectives. PLoS One 12:e0176674. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.
0176674
Cowan, N., Fristoe, N. M., Elliott, E. M., Brunner, R. P., and Saults, J. S.
(2006). Scope of attention, control of attention and intelligence
in children and adults. Mem. Cogn. 34, 1754–1768. doi: 10.3758/
bf03195936

Alves, N., Blain, S., Falk, T., Leung, B., Memarian, N., and Chau, T. (2016).
‘‘Access technologies for children and youth with severe motor disabilities,’’
in Paediatric Rehabilitation Engineering: From Disability to Possibility,
eds T. Chau and J. Fairley (Abingdon: Taylor & Francis Group), 46–86
Brumberg, J. S., Pitt, K. M., Mantie-Kozlowski, A., and Burnison, J. D. (2018).
Brain-computer interfaces for augmentative and alternative communication:
a tutorial. Am. J. Speech Lang. Pathol. 27, 1–12. doi: 10.1044/2017_AJSLP-160244
Bryans-Bongey, S. E. (2018). Tech-based approaches to supporting and engaging
diverse learners: visual strategies for success. Contemp. Issues Educ. Res. 11,
45–56. doi: 10.19030/cier.v11i2.10146

Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

9

December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 593883

Kinney-Lang et al.

Summary of Inaugural BCI-CAN Meeting

Daly, I., Faller, J., Scherer, R., Sweeney-Reed, C. M., Nasuto, S. J., Billinger, M., et al.
(2014). Exploration of the neural correlates of cerebral palsy for sensorimotor
BCI control. Front. Neuroeng. 7:20. doi: 10.3389/fneng.2014.00020
Daly, J. J., and Wolpaw, J. R. (2008). Brain-computer interfaces in
neurological rehabilitation. Lancet Neurol. 7, 1032–1043. doi: 10.1016/S14744422(08)70223-0
De Oliveira, J. M., Fernandes, R. C. G., Pinto, C. S., Pinheiro, P. R., Ribeiro, S.,
and De Albuquerque, V. H. C. (2016). Novel virtual environment for
alternative treatment of children with cerebral palsy. Comput. Intell. Neurosci.
2016:8984379. doi: 10.1155/2016/8984379
Edelman, B. J., Meng, J., Suma, D., Zurn, C., Nagarajan, E., Baxter, B. S.,
et al. (2019). Noninvasive neuroimaging enhances continuous neural tracking
for robotic device control. Sci. Robot. 4:eaaw6844. doi: 10.1126/scirobotics.
aaw6844
Faller, J., Cummings, J., Saproo, S., and Sajda, P. (2019). Regulation of arousal via
online neurofeedback improves human performance in a demanding sensorymotor task. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 116, 6482–6490. doi: 10.1073/pnas.
1817207116
Faress, A., and Chau, T. (2013). Towards a multimodal brain-computer interface:
combining fNIRS and fTCD measurements to enable higher classification
accuracy. NeuroImage 77, 186–194. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.03.028
Harris, K., and Reid, D. (2005). The influence of virtual reality play on children’s
motivation. Can. J. Occup. Ther. 72, 21–29. doi: 10.1177/000841740507200107
Hernandez, H. A., Ye, Z., Graham, T. C. N., Fehlings, D., and Switzer, L.
(2013). ‘‘Designing action-based exergames for children with cerebral palsy,’’
in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems—CHI ’13, (New York, NY: ACM Press), 1261.
Hood, C. D., and Carruthers, C. (2007). Enhancing leisure experience and
developing resources: the leisure and well-being model, Part II. Ther. Recreation
J. 41, 298–325.
Howcroft, J., Klejman, S., Fehlings, D., Wright, V., Zabjek, K., Andrysek, J.,
et al. (2012). Active video game play in children with cerebral palsy: potential
for physical activity promotion and rehabilitation therapies. Arch. Phys. Med.
Rehabil. 93, 1448–1456. doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2012.02.033
Kelly, D., Jadavji, Z., Zewdie, E., Mitchell, E., Summerfield, K., Kirton, A., et al.
(2020). ‘‘A child’s right to play: results from the brain-computer interface
game jam 2019 (calgary competition),’’ in Proceedings of the 2020 42nd Annual
International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology
Society (EMBC), (IEEE), 6099–6102.
Kim, M., Kim, B. H., and Jo, S. (2015). Quantitative evaluation of a low-cost
noninvasive hybrid interface based on EEG and eye movement. IEEE Trans.
Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 23, 159–168. doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2014.2365834
Kinney-Lang, E., Auyeung, B., and Escudero, J. (2016). Expanding the
(kaleido)scope: exploring current literature trends for translating
electroencephalography (EEG) based brain-computer interfaces for motor
rehabilitation in children. J. Neural Eng. 13:061002. doi: 10.1088/17412560/13/6/061002
Kinney-Lang, E., Ebied, A., and Escudero, J. (2018a). ‘‘Building a tensor framework
for the analysis and classification of steady-state visual evoked potentials
in children,’’ in Proceedings of the 2018 26th European Signal Processing
Conference (EUSIPCO), (Rome, Italy: IEEE), 296–300.
Kinney-Lang, E., Spyrou, L., Ebied, A., Chin, R. F. M., and Escudero, J. (2018b).
Tensor-driven extraction of developmental features from varying paediatric
EEG datasets. J. Neural Eng. 15:046024. doi: 10.1088/1741-2552/aac664
Kinney-Lang, E., Murji, S., Kelly, D., Paffrath, B., Zewdie, E., and Kirton, A.
(2020). ‘‘Designing a flexible tool for rapid implementation of brain-computer
interfaces (BCI) in game development,’’ in Proceedings of the 2020 42nd Annual
International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology
Society (EMBC), (IEEE), 6078–6081.
Kiresuk, T. J., and Sherman, R. E. (1968). Goal attainment scaling: a general
method for evaluating comprehensive community mental health programs.
Community Ment. Health J. 4, 443–453. doi: 10.1007/BF01530764
Law, M., Baptiste, S., McColl, M., Opzoomer, A., Polatajko, H., and
Pollock, N. (1990). The canadian occupational performance measure: an
outcome measure for occupational therapy. Can. J. Occup. Ther. 57, 82–87.
doi: 10.1177/000841749005700207
Lazarou, I., Nikolopoulos, S., Petrantonakis, P. C., Kompatsiaris, I., and
Tsolaki, M. (2018). EEG-based brain-computer interfaces for communication

Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

and rehabilitation of people with motor impairment: a novel approach of
the 21st century. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 12:14. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2018.
00014
Lee, H. K., and Choi, Y.-S. (2018). ‘‘A convolution neural networks scheme for
classification of motor imagery EEG based on wavelet time-frequecy image,’’
in 2018 International Conference on Information Networking (ICOIN), (Chiang
Mai, Thailand: IEEE), 906–909.
Letourneau, S., Zewdie, E. T., Jadavji, Z., Andersen, J., Burkholder, L. M., and
Kirton, A. (2020). Clinician awareness of brain computer interfaces: a Canadian
national survey. J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. 17:2. doi: 10.1186/s12984-019-0624-7
Lotte, F., Bougrain, L., Cichocki, A., Clerc, M., Congedo, M., Rakotomamonjy, A.,
et al. (2018). A review of classification algorithms for EEG-based
brain-computer interfaces: a 10 year update. J. Neural Eng. 15:031005.
doi: 10.1088/1741-2552/aab2f2
Ma, T., Li, H., Deng, L., Yang, H., Lv, X., Li, P., et al. (2017). The hybrid
BCI system for movement control by combining motor imagery and moving
onset visual evoked potential. J. Neural Eng. 14:026015. doi: 10.1088/
1741-2552/aa5d5f
Mikoajewska, E., and Mikoajewski, D. (2014). The prospects of brain — computer
interface applications in children. Open Med. 9, 74–79. doi: 10.2478/s11536013-0249-3
Millán, J. D. R., Rupp, R., Müller-Putz, G. R., Murray-Smith, R., Giugliemma, C.,
Tangermann, M., et al. (2010). Combining brain-computer interfaces and
assistive technologies: state-of-the-art and challenges. Front. Neurosci. 4:161.
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2010.00161
Mullins, J. L. (2017). SSVEP-Based BCI Performance in Children. Available online
at: https://www.ideals.illinois.edu/bitstream/handle/2142/88086/MULLINSTHESIS-2015.pdf?sequence=1andisAllowed=y. Accessed June 5, 2018.
Nijboer, F., van de Laar, B., Gerritsen, S., Nijholt, A., and Poel, M. (2015). Usability
of three electroencephalogram headsets for brain-computer interfaces: a
within subject comparison. Interact. Comput. 27, 500–511. doi: 10.1093/
iwc/iwv023
Norton, J. J. S., Mullins, J., Alitz, B. E., and Bretl, T. (2018). The performance of
9–11-year-old children using an SSVEP-based BCI for target selection. J. Neural
Eng. 15:056012. doi: 10.1088/1741-2552/aacfdd
Perdikis, S., Tonin, L., Saeedi, S., Schneider, C., and del Millán, J. R. (2018).
The Cybathlon BCI race: successful longitudinal mutual learning with
two tetraplegic users. PLoS Biol. 16:e2003787. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.
2003787
Pfurtscheller, G., Solis-Escalante, T., Ortner, R., Linortner, P., and MullerPutz, G. R. (2010). Self-paced operation of an SSVEP-based orthosis with and
without an imagery-based ‘‘brain switch’’: a feasibility study towards a hybrid
BCI. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 18, 409–414. doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.
2010.2040837
Polatajko, H. J., Townsend, E. A., and Craik, J. (2007). ‘‘The Canadian
model of occupational performance amnd engagement (CMOP-E),’’ in
Enabling Occupation II: Advancing an Occupational Therapy Vision of Health,
Well-being and Justice Through Occupation, eds E. Townsend and H. Polatajko
(Ottawa, Canada: Canadian Association of Occupational Therapists (CAOT)
Publications ACE), 22–36.
Powers, J. C., Bieliaieva, K., Wu, S., Nam, C. S., and Meriney, S. D. (2015). The
human factors and ergonomics of P300-based brain-computer interfaces. Brain
Sci. 5, 318–354. doi: 10.3390/brainsci5030318
Rezazadeh Sereshkeh, A., Yousefi, R., Wong, A. T., Rudzicz, F., and Chau, T.
(2019). Development of a ternary hybrid fNIRS-EEG brain-computer
interface based on imagined speech. Brain Comp. Inter. 6, 128–140.
doi: 10.1080/2326263x.2019.1698928
Schalk, G., Wolpaw, J. R., McFarland, D. J., and Pfurtscheller, G. (2000). EEGbased communication: presence of an error potential. Clin. Neurophysiol. 111,
2138–2144. doi: 10.1016/s1388-2457(00)00457-0
van den Heuvel, R. J. F., Lexis, M. A. S., Gelderblom, G. J., Jansens, R. M. L., and
de Witte, L. P. (2016). Robots and ICT to support play in children with severe
physical disabilities: a systematic review. Disabil. Rehabil. Assist. Technol. 11,
103–116. doi: 10.3109/17483107.2015.1079268
Vuckovic, A., Pineda, J. A., LaMarca, K., Gupta, D., and Guger, C.
(2014). Interaction of BCI with the underlying neurological conditions in
patients: pros and cons. Front. Neuroeng. 7:42. doi: 10.3389/fneng.2014.
00042

10

December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 593883

Kinney-Lang et al.

Summary of Inaugural BCI-CAN Meeting

Wang, Z., Cao, L., Zhang, Z., Gong, X., Sun, Y., and Wang, H. (2018). Short
time Fourier transformation and deep neural networks for motor imagery
brain computer interface recognition. Concurr. Comput. Pract. Exp. 30:e4413.
doi: 10.1002/cpe.4413
Wolpaw, J. R. (2007). Brain-computer interfaces as new brain output pathways.
J. Physiol. 579, 613–619. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2006.125948
Wolpaw, J., and Wolpaw, E. W. (2012). Brain-Computer Interfaces: Principles and
Practice. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Zabala, J. (1995). ‘‘The SETT Framework: critical areas to consider when making
informed assistive technology decisions,’’ in Paper Presented at the Florida
Assistive Technology Impact Conference and Technology and Media Division of
Council for Exceptional Children, Orlando, FL.
Zeid, E. A., Sereshkeh, A. R., Schultz, B., and Chau, T. (2017). A ternary braincomputer interface based on single-trial readiness potentials of self-initiated
fine movements: a diversified classification scheme. Front. Hum. Neurosci.
11:254. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2017.00254

Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

Zhang, J., Jadavji, Z., Zewdie, E., and Kirton, A. (2019). Evaluating if children
can use simple brain computer interfaces. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 13:24.
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2019.00024
Conflict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2020 Kinney-Lang, Kelly, Floreani, Jadavji, Rowley, Zewdie, Anaraki,
Bahari, Beckers, Castelane, Crawford, House, Rauh, Michaud, Mussi, Silver, Tuck,
Adams, Andersen, Chau and Kirton. This is an open-access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use,
distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original
author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication
in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use,
distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.

11

December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 593883

