813541
research-article2018

CNS0010.1177/1179573518813541Journal of Central Nervous System DiseaseMassetti et al

The Clinical Utility of Virtual Reality in
Neurorehabilitation: A Systematic Review
Thais Massetti1, Talita Dias da Silva2*, Tânia Brusque Crocetta3,
Regiani Guarnieri3, Bruna Leal de Freitas1,4, Priscila Bianchi Lopes5,
Suzanna Watson6, James Tonks7,8 and
Carlos Bandeira de Mello Monteiro1

Journal of Central Nervous System Disease
Volume 10: 1–18
© The Author(s) 2018
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI:
10.1177/1179573518813541
https://doi.org/10.1177/1179573518813541

1Graduate

Program in Rehabilitation Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of São Paulo, São
Paulo, Brazil. 2School of Arts, Sciences and Humanities (EACH), University of São Paulo (USP),
São Paulo, Brazil. 3Faculty of Medicine of ABC, Santo André, Brazil. 4Israelite Hospital Albert
Einstein, São Paulo, Brazil. 5Paulista School of Medicine, Federal University of São Paulo, São
Paulo, Brazil. 6The Cambridge Centre for Paediatric Neurorehabilitation, Cambridge, UK.
7Medical School, University of Exeter, Exeter, UK. 8 Haven Clinical Psychology Practice,
Cornwall, UK.

ABSTRACT
Background: Virtual reality (VR) experiences (through games and virtual environments) are increasingly being used in physical, cognitive, and psychological interventions. However, the impact of VR as an approach to rehabilitation is not fully understood, and its advantages
over traditional rehabilitation techniques are yet to be established.
Method: We present a systematic review which was conducted according to Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and MetaAnalyses (PRISMA). During February and March of 2018, we conducted searches on PubMed (Medline), Virtual Health Library Search Portal
databases (BVS), Web of Science (WOS), and Embase for all VR-related publications in the past 4 years (2015, 2016, 2017, and 2018). The
keywords used in the search were “neurorehabilitation” AND “Virtual Reality” AND “devices.”
Results: We summarize the literature which highlights that a range of effective VR approaches are available. Studies identified were conducted with poststroke patients, patients with cerebral palsy, spinal cord injuries, and other pathologies. Healthy populations have been
used in the development and testing of VR approaches meant to be used in the future by people with neurological disorders. A range of
benefits were associated with VR interventions, including improvement in motor functions, greater community participation, and improved
psychological and cognitive function.
Conclusions: The results from this review provide support for the use of VR as part of a neurorehabilitation program in maximizing
recovery.
Keywords: Devices, neurorehabilitation, virtual reality
RECEIVED: June 7, 2018. ACCEPTED: October 19, 2018.
Type: Systematic Review

Declaration of conflicting interests: The author(s) declared no potential
conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this
article.

Funding: The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the
research, authorship, and/ or publication of this article: This work was supported by the
Brazilian agency CNPq (Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico)
process number 442456/2016-6 and 8887.091039/2014-01.

CORRESPONDING AUTHOR: Thais Massetti, Graduate Program in Rehabilitation
Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of São Paulo, Rua Cipotânea, 51, São Paulo
05360-000, Brazil. Email: thaismassetti@gmail.com

Introduction

are much needed.7 Stasieńko and Sarzyńska-Długosz,8 for
example, report that constant repetition of the same movements will result in the patient being less engaged and resistant
to treatment, which will affect involvement in exercise and ultimately reduce effectiveness of the therapy. The success of many
conventional therapy treatment plans requires both attendance
at treatment sessions and adherence to exercises that are to be
completed. The majority of activity required is unsupervised
and in the individual’s own time. A paucity of studies has
sought to establish how therapists can optimize on adherence
to prescribed exercises and physical activity guidelines.9
It is reasonably well-established that the rehabilitation process can become unnecessarily prolonged if the patient loses
interest and if there is a paucity of human and technological
resources.3 In this context, combining traditional rehabilitation

Neurological disorders (characterized by impaired function)
affect a significant amount of people worldwide.1 Such disorders are typically associated with reduced daily function, and a
negative impact on quality of life is common.2
A range of rehabilitation programs may be offered to individuals with such difficulties, to improve abilities in activities of
daily living and increase social participation.3 Such programs
are frequently delivered to patients with a range of conditions
including patients recovering from stroke,4 living with cerebral
palsy (CP),5 or spinal cord injury (SCI).6
It has been suggested that traditional therapy is not without
limitations in aiding recovery, and that more radical approaches
* T.D.d.S. is co-first author.

Creative Commons Non Commercial CC BY-NC: This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial
4.0 License (http://www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/) which permits non-commercial use, reproduction and distribution of the work without
further permission provided the original work is attributed as specified on the SAGE and Open Access pages (https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).

2

techniques with the use of new technologies (eg, robotics,
brain-computer interfaces, noninvasive brain stimulators, neuroprostheses, and wearable devices for movement analysis) may
positively impact on rehabilitation of cognitive and motor
functions.3,10 However, there may be obvious barriers in terms
of additional costs, access, and usability of such technology
which means that rehabilitation teams may not ultimately
adopt such approaches.
An intriguing (emerging) and novel possibility for rehabilitation of neurological disorders in individuals may lie in the use
of virtual reality (VR).
Virtual reality is essentially a way for humans to visually
connect with, manipulate, and interact with computers.11,12
Virtual reality can be seen as an advanced form of humancomputer interaction that allows users to become immersed
within synthetic computer-generated virtual environments.13
The creation of an engaged VR user experience can be accomplished using combinations of a wide variety of interaction
devices, sensory display systems, and content presented in the
virtual environment.
Virtual reality can be a totally immersive experience in computer-generated environments with 3-dimensional (3D)
images or objects. In VR paradigms, participants can explore
with a perception of reality.14 We therefore note that the
demand characteristics of such VR settings can facilitate the
activities required by rehabilitation programs, but as part of a
more engaging experience.15 The VR-based experimental
approaches have been found to offer advantages for individuals
with severe motor impairment,16 and studies have demonstrated improved motivation.17
In considering the VR characteristics of current systems
and how these systems may be useful in engaging patients,
studies have indicated that VR provides the possibility of
creating real 3D environments capable of eliciting realistic
perceptions and reactions in the patient, whereas the observer
may monitor and record the performance of the proposed
task, allowing the progress of the patient to be tracked and
further developed.3
A number of systematic reviews provide evidence of the
positive benefits of such systems. Smith,18 for example, provides a summary of the positive effects on physical functioning
and motivational aspects in older adults. Benefits have also
been reported in reviews with patients poststroke, in terms of
functional recovery of the upper extremities,19–21 and in increasing mobility and quality of life in individuals living with
Parkinson disease (PD).22 However, the impact of VR-based
approaches on recovery is not fully understood and its advantages compared with traditional neurorehabilitation methods
have not yet been established.20,23
With the above literature in mind, our group conducted
review studies using VR with focus on (1) which mechanism of injury, illness, or disease has been most commonly
used/sampled in investigating VR treatment; (2) how VR
has been applied; (3) potential benefits; and (4) limits of

Journal of Central Nervous System Disease ﻿
the procedures available in the use of VR in neurorehabilitation programs.

Methods
Search strategy
A systematic search was conducted in March 2018 of published articles available on PubMed (Medline), Virtual Health
Library Search Portal databases (BVS), Web of Science
(WOS), and Embase.
Virtual reality is a rapidly developing and novel field. To
maintain focus on more recent studies, we limited searches to
studies published in the past 4 years (2015, 2016, 2017, and
2018). The review was conducted according to the Preferred
Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses
(PRISMA) guidelines.24 The use of checklists of the kind
offered in PRISMA improves the reporting quality of systematic reviews and provides substantial transparency in the article
selection process.25–27 The search was undertaken using the
keywords “neurorehabilitation” AND “Virtual Reality” AND
“devices” (Table 1). Applicable articles were identified through
screening reference lists of relevant articles.
To select the articles, we used 3 steps. The first step was
looking for articles in databases and reading the titles and
abstracts. The second step was the exclusion of works using the
title or abstract and inclusion criteria analysis. The third and
final step was to analyze the full text of the eligible works.23,27,28

Inclusion criteria
Studies were eligible for inclusion if they were written in
English. Only studies that included technology devices for
evaluation or rehabilitation were accepted.

Exclusion criteria
Review articles, meta-analyses, and editorials were excluded,
and published clinical trial protocols were also excluded as they
do not provide data for analysis.

Study selection
Studies published in English were eligible if they met the following criteria: (1) analysis of VR devices and (2) discussion of/ evaluation of neurorehabilitation treatments. There were no restrictions
regarding sample size. Articles were excluded if they (1) were not
databased (eg, books, theoretical papers, or secondary reviews), (2)
were not in the English language, (3) studies that did not explicitly
identify neurorehabilitation, (4) did not emphasize VR devices as
therapeutic intervention, or (5) the studies were not published in
the past 4 years (2015, 2016, 2017, and 2018). We pooled statistical
data from quantitative studies within meta-analyses.
After the removal of duplicates, 3 authors evaluated titles,
abstracts, and the inclusion criteria independently. All identified
studies were collected in EndNote Web (Thomson Reuters).

Massetti et al

3

Table 1. Search methods for identification of studies in databases.
Search syntax

No. of articles

PUBMED
((“neurological rehabilitation”[MeSH Terms] OR (“neurological”[All Fields] AND “rehabilitation”[All Fields])
OR “neurological rehabilitation”[All Fields] OR “neurorehabilitation”[All Fields]) AND (“virtual reality”[MeSH
Terms] OR (“virtual”[All Fields] AND “reality”[All Fields]) OR “virtual reality”[All Fields])) AND
(“instrumentation”[Subheading] OR “instrumentation”[All Fields] OR “devices”[All Fields] OR “equipment
and supplies”[MeSH Terms] OR (“equipment”[All Fields] AND “supplies”[All Fields]) OR “equipment and
supplies”[All Fields]) AND (“2013/02/17”[PDat]: “2018/02/15”[PDat])

50

BVS
(tw:(neurorehabilitation)) AND (tw:(virtual reality)) AND (tw:(devices)) AND (instance: “regional”)
(tw:(neurorehabilitation)) AND (tw:(virtual reality)) AND (tw:(devices)) AND (instance: “regional”) AND
(instance: “regional”)

25

EMBASE
((neurorehabilitation [Title/Abstract]) AND virtual reality [Title/Abstract]) AND devices [Title/Abstract]

19

WOS
((neurorehabilitation [Title/Abstract]) AND virtual reality [Title/Abstract]) AND devices [Title/Abstract]

19

Discussion

Rehabilitation programs are increasingly using VR environments to simulate natural events and social interactions. Bohil
et al58 show that VR creates interactive, multimodal sensory
stimuli that offer unique advantages over other approaches in
research and clinical practice. Our results show that several
studies have demonstrated the effectiveness of VR in therapeutic interventions even considering 8 studies that selected
healthy participants to explore the efficacy of innovative devices
to contribute toward the neurorehabilitation field. To understand how practices using VR are being implemented and their
contributions to the neurorehabilitation field, we present our
discussion focussed on in the available studies according to (1)
which mechanism of injury, illness, or disease has been most
commonly used/sampled in investigating VR treatment(populations investigated); (2) how VR has been applied; (3)
potential benefits; and (4) limits of the procedures available in
the use of VR in neurorehabilitation programs.

Populations investigated

Figure 1. Procedures for determination of eligibility.
Adapted from Moher et al84.

Results

The initial search strategy yielded 113 references (including
duplicates) from the 4 electronic databases. After duplicates
were removed, 79 references were assessed by 2 authors. Based
on titles and abstracts, 41 manuscripts were considered relevant
and the full texts were analyzed. The search results are shown
in Figure 1.
A summary of characteristics of included studies is presented in Tables 2 and 3.

Studies have investigated populations with stroke, CP, and
SCI, among other diseases. Most of the studies presented were
performed with poststroke patients.14,29–36,38–42,46,56,57,59 We
hypothesize that stroke has been predominantly investigated
due to the high incidence of this disease in developed countries
(affecting 1/500 individuals every year). Most of the studies
which explore the use of VR evaluated its effectiveness in facilitating improvement of upper-limb function.
After stroke, CP was the most studied neurological disorder
in VR rehabilitation. Four studies identified in our review have
explored the effectiveness of VR in individuals with CP using
immersive VR,44 nonimmersive VR,43 and dedicated devices,
such as robotics.45,46 Similarly, to its use with stroke patients,
VR was used only for upper limbs rehabilitation, demonstrating positive results for individuals with CP, promoting motor

Webcam
love
rojection screen
(NeuroR system)

Lokomat
42-in flat screen
Dolby surround system
(—)

Force plate
3D camera Kinect
TV screen
(REWIRE autonomous
telerehabilitation platform)
Small plastic cup with color
marker
Overhead camera LifeCam
(—)

A low-friction symmetrical
table that was wheelchair
accessible and electrically
lifted or lowered to
accommodate different body
types. (BrightArm Duo system)

Stroke (upper limbs)

Stroke (lower limbs)

Stroke (posture
rehabilitation)

Stroke (cognitive and
motor rehabilitation)

Stroke (cognitive and
bimanual upper
extremity
rehabilitation)

Assis et al29

Calabro et al30

Held et al31

Mousavi Hondori
et al32

House et al33

Devices (name)

Pathology
involved
(rehabilitation
focus)

Reference

Table 2. Characteristics of included studies ordered by pathology most investigated.

BrightArm Duo simulations allow to adapt to each
participant each day. The adaptation was based on
arm reach and grasp strength baselines performed at
the start of each rehabilitation session. Each of the
custom games had some settings that required reach
and grasp dual tasking

A version of Fruit Ninja video game. A fruit target would
then appear in 1 of the 4 corners of the tabletop and
start moving around the desktop workspace. The
subject was to use the stroke-affected hand to move
the cursor onto the fruit (which would slice the fruit in
half, make a noise, and score 1 point) before the fruit
disappeared (which would score 0 points). Once the
fruit was sliced, or disappeared, or unsliced, a new fruit
target would appear in 1 of the 4 corners, the sequence
of which was pseudo-randomized. Subjects were
instructed to slice as many fruits as possible within the
allotted time. The score was presented throughout each
game. One round of each game was 90 seconds long.

Exergames where the patient sees himself as an
avatar moving and interacting in real time with the
virtual game environment

The 2D VR presented visual feedback showing a VR
run game where the patient had to collect or avoid
objects, to motivate himor her to walk actively
The Lokomat device served as a multimodal feedback
system: the human-machine interaction forces
measured from the Lokomat device were used as an
input device for the patient’s movements into the VR

Two visual tracking approaches for NeuroR system were
developed. (1) Participants wore a glove on the injured
arm and physical markers were adjusted to each
participant’s shoulder. (2) The computer system
identified the injured arm and tracked it without the glove
(markerless tracking). In both cases, the participants are
not facing the screen displaying the injured arm wearing
the glove. Instead, they see a virtual 3-dimensional arm
replacing the actual limb on the screen

VR environment

The results showed clinical benefits in the motor,
emotive, and cognitive domains, as well as good
technology acceptance by the participants.
There was a large impact on attention/working
memory following training on the BrightArm Duo
system

The optimal choice of human-computer interface
likely varies across individuals, over time, and
according to specific goals. This study provides
insights into how choice of human-computer
interface affects motor performance and thus
might influence stroke rehabilitation and motor
recovery

Autonomous telerehabilitation for balance and
gait training with the REWIRE system is safe,
feasible and can help to intensive rehabilitative
therapy at home

The robotic-based rehabilitation combined with
VR in patients with chronic hemiparesis induced
an improvement in gait and balance. EEG data
suggest that the use of VR may entrain several
brain areas (probably encompassing the mirror
neuron system) involved in motor planning and
learning, thus leading to an enhanced motor
performance

NeuroR system provides a mental practice
method combined with visual feedback for motor
rehabilitation of chronic stroke patients, giving the
illusion of injured upper-limb (UL) movements
while the affected UL is resting. Its application is
feasible and safe. This system can be used to
improve UL rehabilitation, an additional treatment
past the traditional period of the stroke patient
hospitalization and rehabilitation

Main outcomes

4

Journal of Central Nervous System Disease ﻿

Vibration-assisted glove
(—)

Robot system (PUPArm)

Microsoft Kinect for Xbox 360
Microsoft Kinect’s skeleton
tracking
(—)

Nintendo Wii
Multimedia projector
(—)

Stroke (fine motor
impairment in finger
movement)

Stroke (upper-limb
neurorehabilitation)

Stroke (upper body
joints)

Stroke (sensorimotor
function)

Lin et al34

Lledo et al14

Mobini et al35

da Silva et al36

Devices (name)

Pathology
involved
(rehabilitation
focus)

Reference

Table 2. (Continued)

The Tennis and Hula hoop games were applied during
the first session; the Soccer and Boxing games were
applied during the second session

In the program, they were instructed to move their
hands to intercept and catch several approaching
balls. All of the targets are on a plane parallel to the
frontal plane but reaching them requires movements in
the 3D space. The program also provided audio
feedback to the patients based on their performance

The virtual task with the VR environment consists on a
roulette formed by a central target and 8 peripheral
targets. These targets were circles with a radius of
1 cm. The 8 peripheral targets were distributed
uniformly on the circumference of the circle and
placed 10 cm from the center target. The main purpose
of this task was to reach 1 of the 8 peripheral targets
from central target by controlling the robot end-effector
attached to the subject’s hand

The virtual environment consisted of 2 games. Gopher
hitting game: 4 individual gopher-like cartoon
characters correspond to the 4 fingers of a patient and
randomly appear in a virtual environment. When a
gopher appears on the computer screen, the vibration
motor stimulates the assigned finger inducing the
patient to use that particular finger to hit a designated
click region on the table. Musical note hitting game:
the musical note hitting game with balls in 4 regions.
To enable patients who are familiar with musical
instruments to play this game and receive effective
therapeutic evaluation, a random and nonrepeating
melody consisting of 7 fundamental notes is played
through a computer speaker. A ball in a virtual
environment is programmed to rise depending on
simultaneous vibrotactile and acoustic stimulation. In
each trial, the patient presses the tip of the
corresponding finger on the correct click region

VR environment

(Continued)

Virtual rehabilitation using the Nintendo Wii and
conventional physical therapy both effectively
treat poststroke hemiparetic patients by
improving passive movement and pain scores,
motor function of the upper limb, balance,
physical functioning, vitality, and the physical
and emotional aspects of role functioning

The results are promising for the development of
home-based rehabilitation systems, which can
analyze patient’s movements using Kinect as an
affordable motion capture sensor

The hypothesis that consists of showing a
visualization environment more natural (3D)
increasing the immersion level did not provide
many improvements regarding an environment
simpler (2D). Using 2D environments in virtual
therapy may be a more appropriate and
comfortable way to perform tasks for upper limb
rehabilitation of poststroke patients, in terms of
accuracy to effectuate optimal kinematic
trajectories

The preliminary test results of using healthy
people elucidated the potential use and benefits
of adding vibrotactile stimulation in practical
haptic training. Design concerns related to the
mechatronic design and clinical trials were
presented to enable optimizing the performance
of the proposed system. Future studies could
apply this system on stroke patients and
investigate the rehabilitation performance by
following comparative clinical protocols

Main outcomes

Massetti et al
5

Nintendo Wii
(—)

Two-armed robot, 14-DOF
exoskeleton termed the
EXO-UL7
50-in flat screen monitor
(—)

Passive robotic device
(Trackhold)
22-in LCD
(—)

Actuated glove PneuGlove
(Actuated virtual keypad—AVK
system)

Stroke (motor
recovery of upper
extremity)

Stroke

Stroke (neuromotor
rehabilitation of
upper limbs)

Stroke (fine motor
control)

Saposnik et al37

Simkins et al38

Steinisch et al39

Thielbar et al40

Devices (name)

Pathology
involved
(rehabilitation
focus)

Reference

Table 2. (Continued)

The AVK system combines a custom actuated glove,
the PneuGlove, with a virtual scene consisting of a
hand and 5 keys. The PneuGlove provides both
independent measurement and actuation of each digit.
Air pressure controlled through servovalves is used to
extend (or prevent flexion of) a specified digit by
inflating an air chamber located on the palmar side of
the digit. Evacuation of the air chamber permits almost
unrestricted movement of the digit

The VR training applications (Sponge, Bug Hunt, Grab
2D, Grab 3D) simulate ADLs and/or reproduce simple
visuomotor coordination tasks. Subjects interact
online with the VR training applications by moving the
Trackhold’s end-effector and observe the changes
occurring in the virtual environments in real time

The virtual games were controlled using the joint
angles of the robot. Full-arm movements in flower,
paint, reach, and handball were generated using a
forward kinematic model of the avatar arms. The
Pinball game was unique in that the paddles were
simply actuated by wrist flexion and extension. The
Pong and Circle games used a paddle that was
constrained to a linear path

Wii Sports and Game Party 3

VR environment

Actively assisted individuation therapy
comprised nontask-specific modalities, such as
can be achieved with virtual platforms like the
AVK described here, may prove to be valuable
clinical tools for increasing the effectiveness and
efficiency of therapy following stroke. Stroke
survivors with chronic impairment were able to
successfully use the system to improve hand
motor control. Thus, repetitive movement
therapy for independent finger movements, such
as with AVK system, may be beneficial and
warrants further exploration

Results from kinematic and EEG data analysis
are in line with knowledge from currently
available literature and theoretical predictions
and demonstrate the feasibility and potential
usefulness of the proposed rehabilitation system
to monitor neuro-motor recovery

After 12 training sessions (90 minutes/session),
the bilateral training group had the greatest
intensity of movement training. They also had
the greatest improvement in range of motion at
the shoulder. The unilateral training group
showed the greatest reduction in spasticity

This study suggests that the type of task used in
motor rehabilitation poststroke might be less
relevant, as long as it is intensive enough and
task specific. Simple, low-cost, and widely
available recreational activities might be as
effective as innovative nonimmersive VR
technologies

Main outcomes

6

Journal of Central Nervous System Disease ﻿

HMD Oculus Rift and HTC
Vive
Kinect for Windows SDK 2.0
Unity game engine to create
the game interface
Support for stereoscopic
visualization
Smart TV 3D
(Motion Rehab AVE 3D)

Nintendo Wii Balance board
Sacral Belt holding an android
phone
(VR-based balance training—
VBaT platform)

Xbox with Kinect
(—)

Stroke (upper limb
motor and balance
rehabilitation)

Stroke (lower limbs)

Cerebral palsy
(upper limbs)

Trombetta et al41

Verma et al42

Zoccolillo et al43

Devices (name)

Pathology
involved
(rehabilitation
focus)

Reference

Table 2. (Continued)

Three games were included into the Kinect
Adventures Package. In “Space pops,” the subject is
asked to pop bubbles appearing in the virtual
environment by touching them. Subject should flap
arms for flying around the virtual environment and put
arms back down for descending. In “20.000 Leaks,”
the child is asked to stop the water from filling the tank
by placing a hand, or a foot, or any other body parts
over a leak opened on a wall of an underwater glass
tank. In “Rally Ball,” balls will shoot down a lane
toward the avatar, and the child must hit the balls back
with a part of body and destroy targets at the end of
the lane. Other 3 games were included into the Kinect
Sports Package and were virtual simulation of 3
sports: boxe and volley mainly (but not only) involving
bimanual movements, and bowling in which the child
was asked to throw the virtual ball toward the pins with
the paretic upper limb

A database of 30 unique combinations of VR-based
environments and virtual objects related to tasks of
daily living and entertainment. The task required
participants to shift their weight in different directions
from the central hold state in the VR environment to a
predefined target position, with various target images
(chosen randomly from a database)

The game contemplates different exercises in a 3D
space: flexion, abduction, shoulder adduction,
horizontal shoulder adduction and abduction, elbow
extension, wrist extension, knee flexion, and hip
flexion and abduction. The aim is to simulate 6
activities in which the patient must move his or her
hands, upper limbs, lower limbs, and trunk, to get the
objects and score. All activities developed for the
game contemplates exercises used in conventional
physiotherapy sessions

VR environment

(Continued)

Video game–based therapy resulted effective in
improving the motor functions of upper limb
extremities in children with cerebral palsy,
conceivably for the increased quantity of limb
movements, but failed in improving the manual
abilities for performing activities of daily living
which benefited more from conventional therapy

Results indicate the potential of the VBaT
system to cause improvement in overall average
task performance over the course of training
while using the VBaT. Thus, the VBaT system is
proposed to be a step toward an effective
balance training platform for people with balance
disorder

Our evaluation showed that the game could be
used as a useful tool to motivate the patients
during rehabilitation sessions. All participants
classified as an interesting and excellent
experience for elderly age. We also suggested to
use the game in sessions with poststroke
patients, initially, with a most popular
visualization device (Smart TV 3D), in third
person as the participants felt little bit
comfortable during the interaction process
Next step is to evaluate its effectiveness for
stroke patients, to verify whether the interface
and game exercises contribute into the motor
rehabilitation treatment progress

Main outcomes

Massetti et al
7

HMD Oculus Rift DK2
Optical tracking systems
Wearable haptic devices
(Moneybox Game and
Labyrinth Game)

Adaptable exoskeleton
Position sensors
(Armeo Spring)

Arm robot
(ChARMin robot)

Tactile shirt
HMD Oculus Rift
(—)

Cerebral palsy and
developmental
dyspraxia (upper
limbs)

Cerebral palsy
(motor learning)

Cerebral palsy,
stroke, and traumatic
brain injury (arm
rehabilitation)

Spinal cord injury
(lower limb
somatosensory
feedback)

Bortone et al44

Keller and Van
Hedel45

Keller et al46

Shokur et al47

Devices (name)

Pathology
involved
(rehabilitation
focus)

Reference

Table 2. (Continued)

Missing haptic sensation from the lower limbs was
replaced by rich tactile stimulation on the skin of SCI
patients’ forearms. This feedback was integrated with
an immersive VR environment where a 3D human
avatar was simulated. The 3D human avatar projected
in the HMD could stand and walk and as it performed
these movements, tactile feedback, reproducing the
touch of the avatar feet on the ground, was delivered
on the skin of the patients’ forearm through the
employment of a haptic display (eg, the tactile shirt:
see Integration of the virtual body avatars with the
tactile shirt)

The ChARMin platform is characterized by a hardware
that is safe and highly adjustable and a patientcooperative controller that supports arm movements in
game-like scenarios (Tornalino, Airplane, Diver,
Whack-a-Mole, and Spaceship Game) with an
integrated audiovisual interface

Moorhuhn (Crazy Chicken) is an exergame with the
goal of hunting birds of various sizes (and thereby
various points). It requires the player to move and
position the arm and hand quickly and accurately in
the virtual environment and timely grasp the joystick to
shoot at a chicken

The Moneybox Game focuses on grasp and reaching
tasks with pronation/supination of the hand. The
player is asked to grasp a golden coin and to insert it
in a floating piggy bank.
In the Labyrinth Game, a sliding token has to be driven
through a maze by dragging it with the fingertip

VR environment

The addition of tactile feedback to
neuroprosthetic devices is essential to restore a
full lower limb perceptual experience in spinal
cord injury patients, and will ultimately lead to a
higher rate of prosthetic acceptance/use and a
better level of motor proficiency.
Interestingly, patients were never instructed on
what the tactile feedback displayed or
represented. As totally naïve subjects, they
acquired vivid tactile/proprioceptive sensations
after exposure to 1 minute of synchronous
visuo-tactile stimulation (patients observed the
3D human avatar walking and received the
tactile stimulation on their forearm). This
suggests that such tactile feedback became
intuitive to the subjects rather quickly. As such,
we propose that our haptic display paradigm was
capable of inducing patients to experience a
proprioceptive illusion that allowed them to
deduce the position of the virtual avatar legs
relying solely on the tactile feedback

These preliminary tests suggest that the
ChARMin setup can be used as an advanced
exercise tool for arm neurorehabilitation that
optimally challenges children and adolescents
with severely to moderately affected arm motor
functions

The results showed the successful acquisition,
transfer, and retention of upper extremity skills.
The motor learning occurred when children
trained their more affected arm with weight
support in a playful, virtual environment

All the subjects completed the rehabilitation
session, including both the gaming scenarios,
without interrupting the treatment due to fatigue
or other reasons. Together with positive
comments reported after the rehabilitation
session, results are encouraging for application
of the method in a prolonged rehabilitation
treatment

Main outcomes

8

Journal of Central Nervous System Disease ﻿

CyberTouch™
CyberGlove
(—)

HMD Oculus Rift DK2
(—)

Microsoft Kinect
(—)

Spinal cord injury
Motion capture
systems to train
activities of daily
living

Parkinson disease
(neurorehabilitation)

Attention deficit
hyperactivity
disorder (attention)

Dimbwadyo-Terrer
et al48

Kim et al49

(Rohani and
Puthusserypady50

Devices (name)

Pathology
involved
(rehabilitation
focus)

Reference

Table 2. (Continued)

The classroom includes 6 pupil desks each having 2
seats, projection screen, posters, a soccer ball,
several hula hoops, a wall clock, book shelves, and a
first aid kit. Two windows in the left side of the room
are facing out onto a road. The ceiling of the
classroom contains a fan, projector, and 6 fluorescent
lights. Also is seen a female teacher, her desk, as well
as a computer on the desk, and a blackboard behind
her

The virtual environment consisted of a cityscape with
buildings, animated avatars, and an 800-m straight
sidewalk. The avatars were added to provide a
dynamic element to the virtual environment, and they
were the only animated features of the environment.
Movements through the environment were constrained
to the forward direction, but participants were able to
freely look around the scene while walking. The
environment did not include any turns, doorways, or
crossing of thresholds. The velocity of the simulation
was synchronized to the speed of the treadmill, and
the orientation of the participants’ viewpoint was
synchronized with head orientation using an inertial
measurement unit embedded in the HMD

The virtual scene consists of 1 room, 2 shelves and a
trench. The user is able to see her or his virtual hand
in the scene, as well as virtual objects. A set of virtual
geometric elements was created and can be randomly
presented in different parts of the upper shelving for
each trial

VR environment

(Continued)

This work has successfully demonstrated a
nonintrusive, low-cost, and portable system
targeting attention in a motivating and engaging
environment. The authors found the low-cost
system to be good enough in practice, as the
major limitation of BCI feedback system were
related to the reliability and minimization of false
classifications by their P300 speller, which they
solved by a better and faster machine learning
classifier based on support vector machines
(SVM)

Older adults and individuals with PD were able
to successfully use immersive VR during walking
without adverse effects. This provides
systematic evidence supporting the safety of
immersive VR for gait training in these
populations

The first findings showed the possibility to
conduct a training based on functional reaching
movements in a virtual environment in people
with spinal cord injury using a data glove and to
obtain objective data through 2 functional
parameters

Main outcomes

Massetti et al
9

HMD Emagin, Z800
LCD screen
Two magneto-inertial
measurement units
(—)

Haptic device equipped with a
custom-made handle
instrumented with 3 force
sensors
(Virtual Peg Insertion Test—
VPIT)
360° VR apparatus, OctaVis
Throttle joystick
LCD touchscreens
(—)

Multiple sclerosis
(dual-task walking)

Autosomal-recessive
spastic ataxia of
CharlevoixSaguenay (measures
of upper limb
coordination)

Focal epilepsy
(cognitive
neurorehabilitation)

Peruzzi et al52

Gagnon et al53

Grewe et al54

Virtual medium-sized supermarket, which had a
structure comparable with that of a real supermarket

VR environment displaying a pegboard tasks. Pegs
can be grasped in the virtual environment by precisely
aligning a cursor representing the position of the
handle of the haptic device with 1 of the 9 pegs (distal
coordination) and grasping the handle over a force
threshold of 2 N (prehension strength)

Participants walked on the treadmill while watching a
VR environment representing a tree-lined trail.
Subjects were required to pass obstacles (puddles
and logs) appearing on the trail. The specific
simulation was chosen to address specific gait
problems, common in multiple sclerosis (ie, decreased
foot clearance, obstacle avoidance, and problems with
planning). Successful and unsuccessful passes, as
determined by the inertial measurements, were
rendered to the subject during the trial with visual and
auditory feedbacks. A cognitive concurrent task was
added by asking subject to memorize the route to
follow, which was shown to them prior to the trial.
Several dynamic distractors were also added to the
virtual environment to challenge subject’s attention

The tasks took place in the same Virtual Classroom,
where patients were sitting at a desk and looking at
the blackboard. All the visual stimuli were shown on
the blackboard and the tasks were explained by a
voice. All the instructions were presented before the
tasks and repeated until the child understood. To
respond to a target, the children had to raise 1
extended arm laterally and stop when the hand
reached shoulder height

VR environment

Abbreviations: BCI, Brain Computer Interface, EEG, electroencephalography, PD, Parkinson disease; VR, virtual reality.

Microsoft Kinect
Audio system
(—)

Dyslexia (reading
abilities)

Pedroli et al51

Devices (name)

Pathology
involved
(rehabilitation
focus)

Reference

Table 2. (Continued)

A novel 360° VR environment demands
real-world–like visual-spatial and motor actions
and thus allows for the training of the respective
cognitive abilities

The results demonstrate the potential to evaluate
upper limb impairment, in particular impaired
coordination, and monitor its progression over
time

VR-based treadmill training program is feasible
and safe for multiple sclerosis subjects with
moderate disabilities and may positively affect
gait under complex conditions, such as dual
tasking and obstacle negotiation

The results do not demonstrate an immediate
effect on reading performance, suggesting that a
more prolonged protocol may be a future
direction, the presence of a significant decrease
in the time of reading low frequency longwords
supports the possible validity of the proposed
approach. The protocol is innovative because it
uses VR to improve attentional skills in children
with dyslexia. This technology is able to involve
children in nonconventional tasks and allow
them to work in a virtual environment similar to
the real one

Main outcomes

10

Journal of Central Nervous System Disease ﻿

HMD Oculus Rift DK2
3D glasses Crystaleyes 3
CAVE system
(—)

Joystick
Wheelchair with a custom designed
motion capture unit
(VRNChair)

Novint Falcon haptic device
Video screen
(—)

Wireless chargers for sensors
Ankle accelerometers with
Gyroscopes
Android phone to monitor walking and
cycling
Force sensor
Stretch band to monitor resistance
exercises
LEAP motion
(RIoT—Rehabilitation-Internet-ofThings)

Lower limbs

Motion sickness

Dexterity in
planning and
generating the
multijoint
visuomotor tasks

Directions for
research

Borrego et al80

Byagowi et al81

Cappa et al79

Dobkin55

Devices (name)

Rehabilitation
focus

Reference

Collect data from real life

The 2D scenario was the
representation of New York City’s
Bronx Zoo, where a predefined path
The selection of a 2D scenario was
motivated by future use of the system
with clinical population with reduced
visuo-spatial abilities

VR navigational environment that is
operated using a wheelchair
experiment consisted of a first-person
view, traversing a lawn of a 3-story
building, entering the building, and
approaching a specified target window
on the second floor. The target window
was shown to the participant from
outside the building by rotating the
entire building in VR. Then, the
participant was instructed to go inside
and find the target

The environment represented an aisle
of a grocery store, defined by 2
shelves with different kind of sodas.
Each shelf consisted of 6 racks with 72
different items. The price of each soda
was indicated in the shelf

VR environment

Table 3. Characteristics of included studies that used the new virtual reality environment in healthy participants.

(Continued)

The sensors are charged wirelessly overnight as the raw
data for walking (the accelerations and decelerations of
each gait cycle for each leg, including heel strike, foot flat,
heel-off, toe-off, swing, and single- and double-limb stance
duration) are sent to a server. All signal processing is
performed automatically, providing a therapist with a record
of every bout of walking with its time of day, duration, speed,
distance, and aspects of quality. The coaching therapist and
patient can use the feedback to lessen sedentary time,
summated on an hourly basis, and to increase the number,
duration, and speed of walking bouts

Preliminary evidence that using educational content
increases subjects’ satisfaction. Improving the level of
interest through the inclusion of learning elements can
increase the time spent performing rehabilitation tasks and
promote learning in a new context

The designed VRNChair technology successfully provides
an input device to receive navigational commands,
providing a more naturalistic input method for VR navigation
experiments, reducing the kinetosis effect

The marker-based solution provided accurate, robust, and
fast head tracking to allow navigation in the VR system by
walking without causing relevant sickness and promoting
higher sense of presence than CAVE systems, thus
enabling natural walking in full-scale environments, which
can enhance the ecological validity of VR-based
rehabilitation applications

Main outcomes

Massetti et al
11

Haptic MASTER ROBOT
CyberGlove
CyberGrasp
(—)

Television
Goniometers
Accelerometers
Electroencephalography
Electrooculogram
(—)

Force platform
Projection screen
3D depth-sensing camera
Middleware
High-performance real-time 3D engine
(—)

Directions for
research
Arm and finger
rehabilitation
activities

Human bipedal
locomotion

Maintenance of the
postural balance

Fluet et al56

Luu et al82

Basso Moro
et al77

Devices (name)

Rehabilitation
focus

Reference

Table 3. (Continued)

The subject, standing on the force
platform, observes his body model and
the virtual swing board on the screen
when performing a semi-immersive
virtual reality incremental swing
balance task in the forward and
backward direction

A television monitor was placed in front
of the treadmill, displaying an avatar of
the subjects standing/walking in a
virtual environment. The screen only
showed movement of body parts below
the waist of the avatar because this
study focused on lower limb
movements. The avatar followed the
subject’s lower limb movements
precisely in real time by matching the
joint angles (hip, knee, and ankle) on
both legs

Virtual environments with haptic
guidance in 3D space provided by a
robot: Performing hand simulations
emphasizing hand opening and
individual finger movement; arm
simulations emphasizing 3D reaching,
and forearm pronation with the arm
elevated away from the trunk;
simulated functional movements
(hammering a peg, pressing piano
keys, and placing cups on a shelf) and
game-based activities (pong, piloting a
space ship and blowing up targets)

VR environment

The use of the depth-sensing camera for capturing the
whole subject’s motion (which preserves the geometry of
the movement with respect to the body and the
environment) allowed an accurate mapping of the center of
mass movements of the subject into a semi-immersive VR
environment (the subject’s movements were not suggested
by the system), which was confirmed using a standard force
platform. Considering the adaptability of this virtual balance
task to specific neurological disorders, the absence of
motion sensing devices, and the motivating/safe semiimmersive VR environment, the incremental swing balance
task adopted in this study could be considered valuable for
diagnostic testing and for assessing the effectiveness of
functional neurorehabilitation

Our results demonstrate the feasibility of using a closedloop brain-computer interfaces to learn to control a walking
avatar under normal and altered visuomotor perturbations,
which involved cortical adaptations

The results demonstrated that improvements in motor
function elicited by practicing simulated activities might
transfer to real-world task performance as well as training in
the real world

Main outcomes

12

Journal of Central Nervous System Disease ﻿

LEAP motion controller (visuomotor
task—VMT)

Wii Balance Board
Portable EEG device Emotiv EPOC
(—)

HMD Oculus Rift DK1
LEAP Motion Control
(—)

Neurorehabilitation
of the upper limb
motor function

Lower limb motor
task

Upper limbs

Moro et al78

Pacheco et al83

Vourvopoulos
and
Bermudez57

Devices (name)

Rehabilitation
focus

Reference

Table 3. (Continued)

The motor execution task, a “virtual
garage,” involved the rotation of a
virtual lever through circular
movements for opening a large garage
door. The virtual environment included
spatial sounds related to the
movement of the door and the lever.
The sounds generated by the chain
mechanism and other mechanical
sounds were activated through the
rotation of a handle that controls the
opening of a virtual garage door

The virtual game was “Basic Step,”
which aims to make the avatar move
up and down the Wii Balance Board in
the antero-posterior and lateral
direction, according to the auditory and
visual feedback provided by the game

Customized version of Marble Motion
game. At the beginning of the task, the
subjects had to guide the virtual
sphere (VS) over the virtual path using
4 commands. The first command
(flexion) allowed the VS to proceed
forward; the second command
(extension) allowed the VS to decrease
the speed (up to stop the VS) and to
proceed backward; the third and the
fourth commands (rotations of the
wrist, for a maximum of about 80°, in
the clockwise and counter-clockwise
direction, starting from pronation)
moved the VS to the left or to the right
side, respectively

VR environment

Our data suggest that both VR and particularly MP can
enhance the activation of brain patterns present during
overt motor execution. Furthermore, we show changes in
the interhemispheric EEG balance, which might play an
important role in the promotion of neural activation and
neuroplastic changes in stroke patients in a motor imagery
neurofeedback paradigm

Theta, alpha, beta, and gamma activity during the execution
of a motor task differs according to the environment that the
individual is exposed—real or virtual—and may have
varying size effects if brain area activation and frequency
spectrum in each environment are taken into consideration

This study has revealed a particular involvement of the
ventrolateral prefrontal cortex in the execution of the novel
proposed semi-immersive VMT adoptable in the
neurorehabilitation field

Main outcomes

Massetti et al
13

14

learning and improvement in performance for both immersive
and nonimmersive environments. However, we note here the
work of Zoccolillo et al43 who found that although the VR
improved the quantity of movements of upper limbs, the quality of hands and finger movements improved more in the real
environment, ie, using conventional rehabilitation.
de Mello Monteiro et al60 similarly report findings from a
cross-sectional randomized study evaluating transfer of motor
learning from virtual to natural environments in individuals
with CP. The authors showed that these individuals improved
performance in virtual and natural environments; however,
there was no transfer of learning between environments and
their performance was less accurate in an abstract task than in
the more real task, thus a rehabilitation team should be careful
in implementing virtual environments when attempting to
enhance motor functioning of individuals with CP.
Not all studies align in these findings however. A recent
meta-analysis61 showed that VR rehabilitation programs focused
on motor control, balance, gait, and strength are, overall, more
effective than traditional rehabilitation programs. The authors
speculated that this may be due to the excitement, physical fidelity, and cognitive fidelity provided by the virtual environment.
Moreover, another review and meta-analysis that assessed the
effectiveness of VR in children with CP demonstrated that VR
is a viable intervention in improving arm function, gait, and postural control. The authors also emphasize that the repetition of
therapeutic exercises should be performed in the VR home environment to maximize the positive benefits of intervention.62
The third neurological disease most studied was SCI. Two
studies have focused on this population. One of the studies
demonstrated a new and interesting approach in reproducing
lower-limb somatosensory feedback in paraplegics, in restoring
a full lower-limb perceptual experience in patients with SCI.
They provide feedback integrated with an immersive VR environment where a 3D human avatar was simulated. The authors
reported some positive sensation from participants. The second
study looked at the patient’s functional performance through
the use of a glove, with a training based on functional range
movements in a virtual environment.48 Training of people with
SCI is demonstrated based on functional reaching movements
in a virtual environment using a data glove.
Among the remaining studies of VR in neurorehabilitation,
some pathologies are only recently being explored, probably
due to the lower incidence of these pathologies and greater difficulty in recruiting populations given the heterogeneous nature
of impairments these groups present with.
In relation to multiple sclerosis, the study we identified
focused on the performance of this population walking in complex conditions. The participants walked on a treadmill while
watching a VR environment representing a wooded trail. The
subjects were encouraged to pass obstacles (puddles and trunks)
appearing on the trail. The authors concluded that the treadmill training program is feasible and safe for training of gait
with obstacles in individuals with multiple sclerosis.52

Journal of Central Nervous System Disease ﻿
In PD, independence related to gait in individuals with PD
was focused on and the authors demonstrated that the patients
with PD were able to use the immersive VR during the walk
successfully and without adverse effects.49
Participants with ataxia were evaluated with a VR tool
developed for assessing impaired coordination and monitoring
progression over time.53 In another study of coordination disorders, the participants performed rehabilitation sessions
focused on grasping and reaching tasks with pronation/supination of the hand. The authors report positive results in a prolonged rehabilitation treatment, which usually is necessary in
this population.44 Four further studies are addressed: autosomal recessive spastic ataxia of Charlevoix-Saguenay, focal epilepsy, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and
dyslexia. These studies focused on the cognitive aspects of neurorehabilitation and have indicated the effectiveness of devices
used during the VR interventions for evaluating and monitoring upper limb impairment, in particular impaired coordination,53 for training cognitive abilities54 and for promoting
attention in a motivating and engaging environment.50,51

How VR has been applied
From our review, we note that VR can be considered a computer technology that provides 3D artificial sensory feedback,
whereby the user engages in experiences similar to real-life
activities and events. Commercial games have some limitations, for example, the calibration of a game’s difficulty is conducted with healthy players and does not consider individuals
with disabilities. In studies of the commercial games currently
available, a rehabilitation team might often rely on adapted
versions of the game to improve performance.63 In considering the work by Crocetta et al,63 we advocate that the development of platforms with tasks that are adapted to the needs
of people with disabilities is the future of the use of VR in
rehabilitation. It is certainly the case that research involving
specific platforms for rehabilitation should be developed that
would consider user experience (the kind of experience the
games create for the individual who uses it how virtual experience then informs specific skill sets in the real world).64
Indeed, engagement with online communities, including a
community of people with neurological diseases, would
depend on the usability and adaptability of platforms for
games (see the work by Crossley et al64). We therefore consider that the factors that can influence user experience should
be carefully observed when designing games.
It is difficult to extrapolate directions that innovative hardware of the future may take for people with neurological disorders. Virtual reality is an emergent technology that is still being
constructed and expanded on by science and research. However,
this work has given an overview of how scientists and researchers are working toward development of new devices that
address the needs of this population. Studies have pointed out
relevant and strategic approaches that attest to how future

Massetti et al
advances may support the development of innovative devices
that are more specifically effective for this population.
In considering the work by Pichierri et al,65 VR can result in
an optimal solution for the rehabilitation of cognitive and
motor functions and we note that VR interactive devices are
precious tools in the process of inclusion and actual interfacing
with people with some type of disability.
The potential benefits reported in the current literature are
commonly noted in a context where VR devices have been
customized for people with neurological disabilities. To this
extent, we advocate that it would be important to increase
accessibility to this technology through developing and maintaining low-cost products on the market. According to
Crocetta et al,63 there are different VR devices that can be
efficiently used to provide the user with greater control over
the VR experience and associated actions through a remote
input device, such as a keyboard or a mouse,32,63 or by more
advanced VR devices such as a Kinect sensor, special gloves,66
and new hardware that may be adapted to provide a patientcompatible controller that supports arm movements in different game scenarios with an integrated audiovisual interface.46
It is important to emphasize that because each VR device has
a potential function, a multidisciplinary evaluation of each
person’s needs is important to provide a functional interaction
and identify the best bespoke device.55

Potential benefits
Several benefits were widely reported in relation to motor
function: upper limb and postacute treatment beyond the initial period of hospitalization and rehabilitation, improvement
in balance and gait,31,42 neuromotor monitoring of recovery,39
improvement of strength fitness,67 skills,68 improvement in the
range of movement of shoulder and reduction in spasticity,38
and also the improvement of the levels of participation in both
domestic and community environments.38 Furthermore, there
were psychological and cognitive benefits reported when the
VR device is adapted to the patient, such as improvement in
attention, or memory stimulation and decrease in depression
symptomology in elderly participants. This was evident even
several years after stroke.14,29,33,36 Therefore, VR devices could
be used as effective tool to motivate patients during rehabilitation sessions,41 to improve spatial orientation and attention in
daily life activities,59 and to improve pain relief scores and emotional aspects related to functionality.36
Additional benefits of using VR environments in neurological rehabilitation were also reported, such as safety/security,
multitask possibilities, patient’s adherence, and lower cost.
According to Lange et al,69 a real and safe VR training environment will provide subjects with task-specific training, accurate sensory and tactile feedback, and motivation. Furthermore,
to develop an individualized rehabilitation program targeted to
different dysfunctions, and to keep patient’s interests, an active
participation can be achieved using telerehabilitation, which

15

can be remotely controlled by the therapist and can cost significantly less compared with traditional face-to-face
interventions.29,32,55
Moreover, Saposnik et al,37 comparing real intervention
(simple recreational activities, eg, play cards and ball game) and
nonimmersive VR intervention (Nintendo Wii gaming system) in a randomized, multicenter, single-blind, controlled trial
with poststroke patients, reported that both interventions provide improvement and benefits to participants. However, they
emphasized that combined therapy (real and VR) presented
better outcomes. These results align with Aminov et al70 who
also emphasized that the use of combined therapy is effective
in patients with neurological disorders.
Regarding children, more research is clearly needed, and we
are yet to understand whether VR holds any implications for
brain development. Keller et al46 report that VR is an excellent
way of offering optimal challenges to children and adolescents
with severe-to-moderate arm motor function difficulties.
Pulay71 demonstrate that eye-tracking and EMG-supported
3D VR combination devices worked well in terms of efficiency
in children with spastic tetraparesis. Again, the accessible
environment that is motivating will reportedly empower children with disabilities to take an active role in their rehabilitation.72 It is important to also highlight (as in Table 2) the use
of eye trackers, which are expected to become popular in near
future.47 The manufacturers are hoping to be able to create
high-resolution, foveated (level-of-detail) rendering, thus
increasing the realism of VR environments with less hardware
power. This general trend is expected to increase utility in
increasing medical applications with development of pervasive
eye-tracking VR headsets, expanding the number of developers available who may be familiar with integrating eye tracking
with VR.
It is also important to note how the use of VR applications
in the future may benefit from larger pooled automated data
and artificial intelligence. For example, if eye trackers become a
standard feature of VR in every headset, this could generate
data from healthy controls and individuals with disability. This
may be to the effect that results may allow for equality of performance, where people with disabilities could interact competitively with people with typical development—we advocate
that this should be further explored in future studies.

Limitations
Despite the increasing enthusiasm for VR, and evidence of its
use in clinical applications, the recent literature has highlighted
some limitations:
1. In the work by Lin et al,34 preliminary tests were conducted to assess the feasibility of the developed haptic
rehabilitation system and they identified design concerns
that should be considered regarding the practical use in
future clinical testing.

Journal of Central Nervous System Disease ﻿

16

2. In addition, the use of immersive and semi-immersive
VR can and does cause unwanted effects, and typical
symptoms such as sickness, dizziness, headache, nausea,
and vomiting are frequently reported.73 From our own
VR experience, we consider that it could be due to the
visual perception of movement and motion while the
person is still. The mixed messages on the brain can
cause a “motion sickness” effect. This needs careful consideration where there may be vestibular effects of injury.
We have found that computers with increased processing
capacity that enable smoother visual experiences can
minimize such motion sickness effects, but more research
is needed here. This paired with the fact that some
devices are already considered expensive and may need
some specific training to use74 and can be considered as a
technology or marked limitation.
3. There are many elements to be considered in discussing
limiting factors that prevent mainstream VR applications
being sufficient for neurorehabilitation purposes. The literature has highlighted that VR for neurorehabilitation can
provide modern tools for increasing efficiency. However,
despite the full potential of VR approaches, the technology
is in early development and there is further development
needed before this technology can be fully integrated into
the routine rehabilitation.75 We consider that VR should
be used only as a tool in the hands of neurorehabilitation
teams or therapists in the framework of a rehabilitative
program and not as a rehabilitative approach per se.
Therefore, VR should be used to boost certain specific
aspects of rehabilitation such us intensity, participation,
engagement, and feedback, but here we recognize that we
need more studies to establish generalizability of benefits.
4. New technological devices and some applications for
computers and mobile phone (different start-ups created
specific tasks) have been commercialized despite the lack
of a clear proof of their effectiveness and/or a clear definition of user guidelines.76 Public policies that ensure
scientific scrutiny of this new technology should be in
place to protect the interests of individuals with disability. According to Morone et al,76 it is important to establish proof of the effectiveness of VR and to generate
clearly defined user guidelines before new devices are
made available commercially.
5. From a financial perspective, the high cost of new VR
technology needs to be considered as a limitation. For
this reason, video game–based therapy and nonimmersive VR systems are playing an important role in costeffective rehabilitation. Cost-saving approaches include
using commercial gaming systems and augmenting the
involvement of patients’ attention and participation to
the exercise/game.75
6. As a limitation of this review, it is important to acknowledge that our interpretation of the studies was directed at

VR use in rehabilitation team settings, and so our specific interpretation focused on the development and
technological engineering and software development
that may be developed in future work.

Final considerations
The results from this review provide evidence that VR can and
does have beneficial effects on rehabilitation of patients with
neurological disorders. In our view, future developments in VR
will lead to improved motor, psychological, and cognitive functions in this population and are likely to be an increasingly
important option to complement traditional therapies. Based
on our findings, we advocate for the relevance of innovative,
functional, and interactive VR devices and the importance of
availability and accessibility for individuals with neurological
disorders. Moreover, we emphasize the need for studies that
prove the effectiveness of existing technologies and greater scientific support for future proposals.

Author Contributions

TM structured the script and directed the work; TM, TDS and
TBC performed the data collection and organized the data;
RG and BLF performed the data collection and organized the
data; The PBL structured the method and data analysis; SW
and JT structured the discussion and conclusion; TM and TDS
performed the data analysis and assembled the results work;
PBL and JT adapted the work to the English language; SW
and TM helped build the discussion; The CBMM reviewed
and organized the manuscript in general.
References
1.

2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.

Shishov N, Melzer I, Bar-Haim S. Parameters and measures in assessment of
motor learning in neurorehabilitation; a systematic review of the literature. Front
Hum Neurosci. 2017;11:82.
Cincotti F, Mattia D, Aloise F, et al. Non-invasive brain-computer interface
system: towards its application as assistive technology. Brain Res Bull. 2008;
75:796–803.
Tieri G, Morone G, Paolucci S, Iosa M. Virtual reality in cognitive and motor
rehabilitation: facts, fiction and fallacies. Expert Rev Med Devices. 2018;15:
107–117.
Coleman ER, Moudgal R, Lang K, et al. Early rehabilitation after stroke: a narrative review. Curr Atheroscler Rep. 2017;19:59.
Gagliardi C, Turconi AC, Biffi E, et al. Immersive virtual reality to improve walking abilities in cerebral palsy: a pilot study. Ann Biomed Eng. 2018;46:1376–1384.
An CM, Park YH. The effects of semi-immersive virtual reality therapy on standing balance and upright mobility function in individuals with chronic incomplete
spinal cord injury: a preliminary study. J Spinal Cord Med. 2018;41:223–229.
Liao YY, Yang YR, Cheng SJ, Wu YR, Fuh JL, Wang RY. Virtual reality-based
training to improve obstacle-crossing performance and dynamic balance in
patients with Parkinson’s disease. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2015;29:658–667.
Stasieńko A, Sarzyńska-Długosz I. Virtual reality in neurorehabilitation. Adv
Rehabil. 2016;30:67–75.
McGrane N, Galvin R, Cusack T, Stokes E. Addition of motivational interventions to exercise and traditional physiotherapy: a review and meta-analysis. Physiotherapy. 2015;101:1–12.
Iosa M, Morone G, Fusco A, et al. Leap motion controlled videogame-based
therapy for rehabilitation of elderly patients with subacute stroke: a feasibility
pilot study. Top Stroke Rehabil. 2015;22:306–316.
Aukstakalnis S, Blatner D. Silicon Mirage; the Art and Science of Virtual Reality.
Berkeley, CA: Peachpit Press; 1992.

Massetti et al
12.

13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.

25.
26.

27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.

Massetti T, Favero FM, Menezes LDC, et al. Achievement of virtual and real
objects using a short-term motor learning protocol in people with Duchenne
muscular dystrophy: a crossover randomized controlled trial. Games Health J.
2018;7:107–115.
Rizzo AS, Shilling R. Clinical virtual reality tools to advance the prevention,
assessment, and treatment of PTSD. Eur J Psychotraumatol. 2017;8:1414560.
Lledo LD, Diez JA, Bertomeu-Motos A, et al. A comparative analysis of 2D and
3D tasks for virtual reality therapies based on robotic-assisted neurorehabilitation for post-stroke patients. Front Aging Neurosci. 2016;8:205.
Fernani DCGL, Prado MTA, Fell RF, et al. Motor intervention on children
with school learning difficulties. J Hum Growth Dev. 2013;23:209–214.
Ferreira Dos Santos L, Christ O, Mate K, Schmidt H, Krüger J, Dohle C. Movement visualisation in virtual reality rehabilitation of the lower limb: a systematic
review. Biomed Eng Online. 2016;15:144.
Teo W-P, Muthalib M, Yamin S, et al. Does a combination of virtual reality, neuromodulation and neuroimaging provide a comprehensive platform for neurorehabilitation? a narrative review of the literature. Front Hum Neurosci. 2016;10:284.
Smith JW. Immersive virtual environment technology to supplement environmental perception, preference and behavior research: a review with applications.
Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2015;12:11486–11505.
Cameirao MS, Badia SB, Oller ED, Verschure PF. Neurorehabilitation using the
virtual reality based Rehabilitation Gaming System: methodology, design, psychometrics, usability and validation. J Neuroeng Rehabil. 2010;7:48.
Lucca LF. Virtual reality and motor rehabilitation of the upper limb after stroke:
a generation of progress? J Rehabil Med. 2009;41:1003–1006.
Viñas-Diz S, Sobrido-Prieto M. Realidad virtual con fines terapéuticos en pacientes con ictus: revisión sistemática. Neurología. 2016;31:255–277.
Alves PDR, McClelland J, Morris M. Complementary physical therapies for
movement disorders in Parkinson’s disease: a systematic review. Eur J Phys Rehabil Med 2015;51:693–704.
Massetti T, da Silva TD, Ribeiro DC, et al. Motor learning through virtual reality in cerebral palsy—a literature review. Med Exp. 2014;1:302–306.
Hutton B, Salanti G, Caldwell DM, et al. The PRISMA extension statement
for reporting of systematic reviews incorporating network meta-analyses
of health care interventions: checklist and explanations. Ann Intern Med.
2015;162:777–784.
Knobloch K, Yoon U, Vogt PM. Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews
and meta-analyses (PRISMA) statement and publication bias. J Craniomaxillofac
Surg. 2011;39:91–92.
Panic N, Leoncini E, de Belvis G, Ricciardi W, Boccia S. Evaluation of the
endorsement of the preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and metaanalysis (PRISMA) statement on the quality of published systematic review and
meta-analyses. PLoS ONE. 2013;8:e83138.
Massetti T, Trevizan IL, Arab C, Favero FM, Ribeiro-Papa DC, de Mello Monteiro CB. Virtual reality in multiple sclerosis—a systematic review. Mult Scler
Relat Disord. 2016;8:107–112.
Menezes LDC, Massetti T, Oliveira FR, et al. Motor learning and virtual reality
in Down syndrome; a literature review. Int Arch Med. 2015;8:119.
Assis GA, Correa AG, Martins MB, Pedrozo WG, Lopes Rde D. An augmented reality system for upper-limb post-stroke motor rehabilitation: a feasibility study. Disabil Rehabil Assist Technol. 2016;11:521–528.
Calabro RS, Naro A, Russo M, et al. The role of virtual reality in improving
motor performance as revealed by EEG: a randomized clinical trial. J Neuroeng
Rehabil. 2017;14:53.
Held JP, Ferrer B, Mainetti R, et al. Autonomous rehabilitation at stroke patients
home for balance and gait: safety, usability and compliance of a virtual reality
system. Eur J Phys Rehabil Med. 2018;54:545–553.
Mousavi Hondori H, Khademi M, Dodakian L, McKenzie A, Lopes CV, Cramer SC. Choice of human-computer interaction mode in stroke rehabilitation.
Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2016;30:258–265.
House G, Burdea G, Polistico K, et al. Integrative rehabilitation of residents
chronic post-stroke in skilled nursing facilities: the design and evaluation of the
BrightArm Duo. Disabil Rehabil Assist Technol. 2016;11:683–694.
Lin CY, Tsai CM, Shih PC, Wu HC. Development of a novel haptic glove for
improving finger dexterity in poststroke rehabilitation. Technol Health Care.
2015;24:S97–S103.
Mobini A, Behzadipour S, Saadat M. Test-retest reliability of Kinect’s measurements for the evaluation of upper body recovery of stroke patients. Biomed Eng
Online. 2015;14:75.
da Silva RNM, Ferraz DD, Pedreira E, et al. Virtual rehabilitation via Nintendo
Wii® and conventional physical therapy effectively treat post-stroke hemiparetic
patients. Top Stroke Rehabil. 2015;22:299–305.
Saposnik G, Cohen LG, Mamdani M, et al. Efficacy and safety of nonimmersive virtual reality exercising in stroke rehabilitation (EVREST): a
randomised, multicentre, single-blind, controlled trial. Lancet Neurol. 2016;15:
1019–1027.

17
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.

44.

45.
46.
47.
48.

49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.

55.
56.

57.
58.
59.
60.
61.
62.

Simkins M, Byl N, Kim H, Abrams G, Rosen J. Upper limb bilateral symmetric
training with robotic assistance and clinical outcomes for stroke: a pilot study. Int
J Intell Comput Cyber. 2016;9:83–104.
Steinisch M, Tana MG, Comani S. A post-stroke rehabilitation system integrating robotics, VR and high-resolution EEG imaging. IEEE T Neural Syst Rehabil
Eng. 2013;21:849–859.
Thielbar KO, Lord TJ, Fischer HC, et al. Training finger individuation with a
mechatronic-virtual reality system leads to improved fine motor control poststroke. J Neuroeng Rehabil. 2014;11:171.
Trombetta M, Bazzanello Henrique PP, Brum MR, Colussi EL, De Marchi
ACB, Rieder R. Motion Rehab AVE 3D: a VR-based exergame for post-stroke
rehabilitation. Comput Methods Programs Biomed. 2017;151:15–20.
Verma S, Kumar D, Kumawat A, Dutta A, Lahiri U. A low-cost adaptive balance training platform for stroke patients: a usability study. IEEE T Neural Syst
Rehabil Eng. 2017;25:935–944.
Zoccolillo L, Morelli D, Cincotti F, et al. Video-game based therapy performed
by children with cerebral palsy: a cross-over randomized controlled trial and a
cross-sectional quantitative measure of physical activity. Eur J Phys Rehabil Med.
2015;51:669–676.
Bortone I, Leonardis D, Solazzi M, et al. Integration of serious games and
wearable haptic interfaces for Neuro Rehabilitation of children with movement disorders: a feasibility study. IEEE Int Conf Rehabil Robot. 2017;2017:
1094–1099.
Keller JW, van Hedel HJA. Weight-supported training of the upper extremity in
children with cerebral palsy: a motor learning study. J Neuroeng Rehabil.
2017;14:87.
Keller U, van Hedel HJ, Klamroth-Marganska V, Riener R. ChARMin: the first
actuated exoskeleton robot for pediatric arm rehabilitation. IEEE/ASME T
Mechatron. 2016;21:2201–2213.
Shokur S, Gallo S, Moioli RC, et al. Assimilation of virtual legs and perception
of floor texture by complete paraplegic patients receiving artificial tactile feedback. Sci Rep. 2016;6:32293.
Dimbwadyo-Terrer I, Trincado-Alonso F, de Los Reyes-Guzman A, et al. Upper
limb rehabilitation after spinal cord injury: a treatment based on a data glove and
an immersive virtual reality environment. Disabil Rehabil Assist Technol.
2016;11:462–467.
Kim A, Darakjian N, Finley JM. Walking in fully immersive virtual environments: an evaluation of potential adverse effects in older adults and individuals
with Parkinson’s disease. J Neuroeng Rehabil. 2017;14:16.
Rohani DA, Puthusserypady S. BCI inside a virtual reality classroom: a potential training tool for attention. EPJ Nonlin Biomed Phys. 2015;3:12.
Pedroli E, Padula P, Guala A, Meardi MT, Riva G, Albani G. A psychometric
tool for a virtual reality rehabilitation approach for dyslexia. Comput Math
Method M 2017;2017:7048676.
Peruzzi A, Cereatti A, Della Croce U, Mirelman A. Effects of a virtual reality
and treadmill training on gait of subjects with multiple sclerosis: a pilot study.
Mult Scler Relat Disord. 2016;5:91–96.
Gagnon C, Lavoie C, Lessard I, et al. The Virtual Peg Insertion Test as an
assessment of upper limb coordination in ARSACS patients: a pilot study. J Neurol Sci. 2014;347:341–344.
Grewe P, Kohsik A, Flentge D, et al. Learning real-life cognitive abilities in
a novel 360-virtual reality supermarket: a neuropsychological study of
healthy participants and patients with epilepsy. J Neuroeng Rehabil. 2013;
10:42.
Dobkin BH. A rehabilitation-Internet-of-things in the home to augment motor
skills and exercise training. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2017;31:217–227.
Fluet GG, Merians AS, Qiu Q , Rohafaza M, VanWingerden AM, Adamovich
SV. Does training with traditionally presented and virtually simulated tasks
elicit differing changes in object interaction kinematics in persons with upper
extremity hemiparesis? Top Stroke Rehabil. 2015;22:176–184.
Vourvopoulos A, Bermudez IBS. Motor priming in virtual reality can augment
motor-imagery training efficacy in restorative brain-computer interaction: a
within-subject analysis. J Neuroeng Rehabil. 2016;13:69.
Bohil CJ, Alicea B, Biocca FA. Virtual reality in neuroscience research and therapy. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2011;12:752–762.
Fordell H, Bodin K, Eklund A, Malm J. RehAtt—scanning training for neglect
enhanced by multi-sensory stimulation in virtual reality. Top Stroke Rehabil.
2016;23:191–199.
de Mello Monteiro CB, Massetti T, da Silva TD, et al. Transfer of motor learning from virtual to natural environments in individuals with cerebral palsy. Res
Dev Disabil. 2014;35:2430–2437.
Howard MC. A meta-analysis and systematic literature review of virtual reality
rehabilitation programs. Comput Hum Behav 2017;70:317–327.
Chen Y, Fanchiang HD, Howard A. Effectiveness of virtual reality in children
with cerebral palsy: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Phys Ther. 2017;98:63–77.

Journal of Central Nervous System Disease ﻿

18
63.
64.

65.
66.
67.
68.
69.
70.

71.
72.
73.
74.

Crocetta TB, de Araújo LV, Guarnieri R, et al. Virtual reality software package
for implementing motor learning and rehabilitation experiments. Virtual Real.
2018;22:199–209.
Crossley C, Fanfarelli JR, McDaniel R. User experience design considerations
for healthcare games and applications. Paper presented at: IEEE International
Conference on Serious Games and Applications for Health (SeGAH); May
11-13, 2016; Orlando, FL. New York, NY: IEEE.
Pichierri G, Wolf P, Murer K, de Bruin ED. Cognitive and cognitive-motor
interventions affecting physical functioning: a systematic review. BMC Geriatr.
2011;11:29.
Yanovich E, Ronen O. The use of virtual reality in motor learning: a multiple
pilot study review. Adv Phys Educ. 2015;5:188–193.
Lotan M, Yalon-Chamovitz S, Weiss PLT. Improving physical fitness of individuals with intellectual and developmental disability through a Virtual Reality
Intervention Program. Res Dev Disabil. 2009;30:229–239.
Monteiro CBD, da Silva TD, de Abreu LC, et al. Short-term motor learning
through non-immersive virtual reality task in individuals with Down syndrome.
BMC Neurol 2017;17:71.
Lange BS, Requejo P, Flynn SM, et al. The potential of virtual reality and gaming to assist successful aging with disability. Phys Med Rehabil Clin N Am.
2010;21:339–356.
Aminov A, Rogers JM, Middleton S, Caeyenberghs K, Wilson PH. What do
randomized controlled trials say about virtual rehabilitation in stroke? a systematic literature review and meta-analysis of upper-limb and cognitive outcomes.
J Neuroeng Rehabil. 2018;15:29.
Pulay MA. Eye-tracking and EMG supported 3D virtual reality—an integrated
tool for perceptual and motor development of children with severe physical disabilities: a research concept. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2015;217:840–846.
Caroux L, Isbister K, Le Bigot L, Vibert N. Player-video game interaction: a systematic review of current concepts. Comput Hum Behav. 2015;48:366–381.
LaViola JJ Jr. A discussion of cybersickness in virtual environments. ACM SIGCHI Bull. 2000;32:47–56.
Gutierrez RO, Galan Del Rio F, Cano de la Cuerda R, Alguacil Diego IM,
Gonzalez RA, Page JC. A telerehabilitation program by virtual reality-video

75.
76.
77.

78.
79.

80.
81.
82.
83.
84.

games improves balance and postural control in multiple sclerosis patients. Neurorehabilitation. 2013;33:545–554.
Morone G, Tramontano M, Iosa M, et al. The efficacy of balance training with
video game-based therapy in subacute stroke patients: a randomized controlled
trial. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:580861.
Morone G, Paolucci S, Mattia D, Pichiorri F, Tramontano M, Iosa M. The 3Ts
of the new millennium neurorehabilitation gym: therapy, technology, translationality. Expert Rev Med Devices. 2016;13:785–787.
Basso Moro S, Bisconti S, Muthalib M, et al. A semi-immersive virtual
reality incremental swing balance task activates prefrontal cortex: a
functional near-infrared spectroscopy study. Neuroimage. 2014;85 Pt 1:
451–460.
Moro SB, Carrieri M, Avola D, et al. A novel semi-immersive virtual reality
visuo-motor task activates ventrolateral prefrontal cortex: a functional nearinfrared spectroscopy study. J Neural Eng. 2016;13(3):036002.
Cappa P, Clerico A, Nov O, Porfiri M. Can force feedback and science learning
enhance the effectiveness of neuro-rehabilitation? An experimental study on
using a low-cost 3D joystick and a virtual visit to a zoo. PLoS One. 2013;
8(12):e83945.
Borrego A, Latorre J, Llorens R, Alcaniz M, Noe E. Feasibility of a walking
virtual reality system for rehabilitation: objective and subjective parameters.
J Neuroeng Rehabil. 2016;13(1):68.
Byagowi A, Mohaddes D, Moussavi Z. Design and Application of a Novel
Virtual Reality Navigational Technology (VRNChair). J Exp Neurosci. 2014;8:
7–14.
Luu TP, He Y, Brown S, Nakagame S, Contreras-Vidal JL. Gait adaptation to
visual kinematic perturbations using a real-time closed-loop brain-computer
interface to a virtual reality avatar. J Neural Eng. 2016;13(3):036006.
Pacheco TBF, Oliveira Rego IA, Campos TF, Cavalcanti F. Brain activity
during a lower limb functional task in a real and virtual environment: A comparative study. NeuroRehabilitation. 2017;40(3):391-400.
Moher D, Liberati A, Tetzlaff J, Altman DG. Preferred reporting items for
systematic reviews and meta-analyses: the PRISMA statement. Int J Surg.
2010;8(5):336–341.

