ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 27 January 2020
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02894

Video Game Addiction and Emotional
States: Possible Confusion Between
Pleasure and Happiness?
Lucio Gros 1,2* , Nicolas Debue 1 , Jonathan Lete 1 and Cécile van de Leemput 1
1

Research Center for Work and Consumer Psychology, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium, 2 Department
of Psychiatry and Neurosciences, Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands

Edited by:
Adriano Schimmenti,
Kore University of Enna, Italy
Reviewed by:
Kai Müller,
Johannes Gutenberg University
Mainz, Germany
Valentina Boursier,
University of Naples Federico II, Italy
*Correspondence:
Lucio Gros
lucgros@gmail.com
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Cognition,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychology
Received: 03 July 2019
Accepted: 06 December 2019
Published: 27 January 2020
Citation:
Gros L, Debue N, Lete J and
van de Leemput C (2020) Video
Game Addiction and Emotional
States: Possible Confusion Between
Pleasure and Happiness?
Front. Psychol. 10:2894.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02894

Internet gaming disorder is characterized by a severely reduced control over gaming,
resulting in an increasing gaming time and leading to negative consequences in many
aspects of the individual life: personal, family, social, occupational and other relevant
areas of functioning (World Health Organization). In the last years, the significant boom in
using video games has been raising health issues that remain insufficiently understood.
The extent of this phenomenon (the estimated prevalence is between 1.7 and 10% of the
general population) has led the mentioned Organization to include gaming disorders in
the list of mental health conditions (2018). Several studies show converging findings that
highlight the common brain activities between substance use disorders and behavioral
addictions (i.e., gaming disorders). Addiction specialists observed that addict subjects
tend to confuse pleasure with happiness when linking emotional states to their addictive
activities. As far as we know, beyond the mentioned observations, distinguishing the
perception of these two emotional states in the frame of an addiction has not been
yet the object of formal research. This study aims at examining the possible confusion
between pleasure and happiness within the addiction sphere. Video game addiction
has been chosen to explore the possible occurrence of this perceptional distortion.
A mixed design lab-based study was carried out to compare between video games
addicts and non-addicts (between-subjects), and video games-related activities and
neutral activities (within-subject). Emotional reactions were gauged by self-reported
scales and physiological data acquired through a range of biosensors: Relaxation and
Hearth Rate. From a therapeutic standpoint, this research intends to explore alternatives
to deal with this sort of disorders. More specifically, at the cognitive level, the idea
is elaborating guidelines to develop patients’ insights into these emotional states and
thus increasing their ability to handle them. Overall, several indices resulting from this
study constitute a bundle of arguments that argue in favor of the confusion between
pleasure and happiness made by addict users when associating their affective states
to video gaming. Furthermore, this approach illustrates how reappraising emotions may
contribute to reducing the perceptional distortion of these emotional states.
Keywords: video games, addiction, confusion, pleasure and happiness, emotional states

Abbreviations: AU, addict users; EEG, Electroencephalogram; ETR, Emotions Regulation Therapy; GAS, Gaming Addiction
Scale; H, happiness; HR, heart rate; I.G.D., Internet Gaming Disorders; NAU, non-addict users; OHQ, Oxford Happiness
Questionnaire; P, pleasure; SHAPS, Snaith-Hamilton Pleasure Scale; VG, video games.

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

1

January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 2894

Gros et al.

Video Game Addiction and Emotional States

According to Lustig (2017), addictions together with
depression are two rampant afflictions in the last decades and
constitute the harmful extremes of pleasure (associated with
the dopaminergic system) and happiness (associated with the
serotoninergic system) respectively (Üstün et al., 2004; Lepine
and Briley, 2011; Szalavitz, 2011; Whiteford et al., 2013; Gowing
et al., 2015; Keyes et al., 2015). Based on his long practice on
addiction issues, this author argues that confusing pleasure (in
the sense of longing, craving, strongly driven by a short term
reward) with happiness is linked with SUD and with behavioral
addictions (i.e., gambling, eating disorders, excessive use of
technology like for example social media and VG, etc.), which
could lead to depression (Lawrence et al., 2014). According to
the author, confusing pleasure with happiness is related to the
growth rate of this disorder insofar as it would encourage seeking
immediate gratifications perceived as sources of happiness,
which in turn triggers the reward system with the risk to sink
into the vicious circle of addiction (Pollard, 2003). Besides,
the significant industrial development, through its commercial
campaigns, probably tended to lead individuals to equate
consumption with happiness (Schmidt, 2016; Lustig, 2017).
From a physiological standpoint, the author highlights that an
over excited reward system engenders an excess of dopamine
(DA) release from the ventral tegmental area, which in return
decreases serotonin (5HT) level (associated with depression)
(Pollard, 2003; MacNicol, 2016).
Moreover, Lustig underlines that DA and 5HT amino acids
(needed for the production of DA and 5HT) share the amino acid
transporters, which poses a problem in case of DA amino acid
over presence: that is to say, the more amino acids for DA, the
less amino acids transporters are available for 5HT amino acids.
In short, this DA-5HT unbalance illustrates one of the facets of
the DA-5HT interaction in which the low 5HT level, associated
with depression, prevents the serotoninergic system to exert its
inhibitory role to imped the over drive of the dopaminergic
system (Esposito et al., 2008).
Chronic stress and anxiety may further aggravate this problem
by increasing the cortisol level and thus creating a loop
with dopamine activating the sympathetic nerve system and
reinforcing the reward seeking behavior while down-regulating
5HT -1a receptor, which decreases the serotonin signaling
and increases the depression likelihood (Lustig, 2017). These
findings are in line with studies that associate stress, anxiety and
depression with Internet gaming disorders (Wenzel et al., 2009;
Griffiths et al., 2012).
Fundamentally, from a phylogenetic standpoint, it is likely
that pleasure has contributed more than happiness (Pollard,
2003; Lustig, 2017), which could explain the stronger drive
of the short term gratifications over the quest for medium
and long term euthymia. In sum, this suggests that identifying
the possible confusion between the mentioned emotional states
associated with the addictive activities may contribute to deepen
the understanding of this sort of disorders and consequently to
explore new therapeutic options.
The emotional states (and their consequences) associated with
VG as felt and perceived by chronic users led to thorough
interrogations of health professionals. Several studies intended

INTRODUCTION
In the last years, the significant boom in using video
games (VG) has been raising health issues that remain
insufficiently understood (Khazaal et al., 2016). The World
Health Organization [WHO] (2018) has recently included
“gaming disorders” in the list of mental health conditions.
According to WHO this affliction is a “persistent or recurrent
behavior pattern of sufficient severity to result in significant
impairment in personal, family, social, educational, occupational
or other important areas of functioning.”
The fifth revision of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) considers the ‘Internet Gaming
Disorder’ as a potential new diagnosis that requires further
research (Petry et al., 2015). The prevalence of problematic
gaming is estimated to range from 1.7% to over 10% among
general population (Griffiths et al., 2012).
Compared to the core topics of research in neuroscience such
as stress, depression, etc., the chronic use of VG is a rather recent
field of investigation. Yet, a growing number of studies have been
produced in this field in the last two decades (Andreassen et al.,
2016). Indeed, several research projects have been exploring VG
addiction from a behavioral, emotional, brain circuits and genetic
perspectives (Griffiths et al., 2012; Dong et al., 2017).
There seems to be converging findings that highlight the
common brain activities between VG disorders (belonging to
the cluster of behavioral addictions) and substance use disorders
(SUD). It has been shown that the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex,
orbital frontal cortex, para-hippocampal gyrus and thalamus
were activated in both disorders (Han et al., 2011). The limbic
structures appear to be the key circuits linked with reward
and addiction (Cooper et al., 2017). In subjects suffering from
these disorders, cues associated with SUD and with behavioral
addiction can trigger craving, which is connected with the
dopamine reward system (Ko et al., 2009; Han et al., 2011). In
addition, it has been observed that the level of dopamine released
in the ventral striatum when playing a competition like video
game is comparable to that provoked by psycho-stimulant drugs
(Koepp et al., 1998; Yau et al., 2012). Few studies have been carried
out on the genetic aspects of this topic. Some of them indicate that
there would be genetic background similarities between these two
disorders. For example, the homozygous short allelic variant of
the 5HTTLPR gene (encoding the serotonin transporter) is more
prevalent among the excessive Internet user, which is also linked
with increased drug consumption (Serretti et al., 2006, as cited in
Yau et al., 2012; Lee et al., 2008, as cited in Yau et al., 2012).
As described later, studying the confusion between pleasure
and happiness in the frame of addiction requires as clear a
demarcation as possible between these two emotional states.
Although a consensus among scientists on how to define and
distinguish pleasure and happiness remains to be reached (see
next section Pleasure and Happiness), in this research we have
adopted the following distinctive traits to describe and to work
with these two emotional states: pleasure relates to a transient
emotional state resulting from the satisfaction of a desire, a
craving, and happiness refers to a lasting emotional state of
contentment, euthymia (Pollard, 2003; Lustig, 2017).

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

2

January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 2894

Gros et al.

Video Game Addiction and Emotional States

and dopamine; on the other hand the unconscious liking
would relate to a sensory hedonic dimension associated
with the nucleus accumbens, ventral pallidum, periaqueductal
gray, amygdala, opioids and cannabinoids (Kringelbach and
Berridge, 2009; Berridge and Kringelbach, 2013). The same
studies show that conscious wanting would relate to cognitive
incentives, subjective desires and dopamine whereas conscious
liking would be linked with subjective pleasures, opioids and
cannabinoids; both would involve the orbitofrontal cortex,
anterior cingulate and insular.
It has been shown that the level of activation of some of
the mentioned areas would be altered in subjects with Internet
gaming disorders: sensing craving for gaming is associated with
an increased activation of the left orbitofrontal cortex (correlated
with desire for VG play) and with a decreased activation in
the anterior cingulate cortex (probably linked with the reduced
capacity to inhibit craving for gaming) (Wang et al., 2017).
There might be a relation between the complexity of these
brain circuits linked to these emotional states and the polysemy
of these two terms, happiness and pleasure, which may contribute
to the possible confusion between them. Indeed, the intense
interrelation between them finds expression in subtle distinctive
features and in some connotations with vague borders, to the
extent that these words might be regarded as almost synonyms.
The semantic analysis of these two terms produced in this
research intends to show their core meanings, their nuances
and the possible intersections between them (Procter, 1985).
Trying to unravel and to understand these two emotional
states is not a recent endeavor. For instance, Greek thinkers
approached the notion of happiness as a state constituted by
two components: Hedonia (pleasure) and Eudaimonia (a life well
lived) (Kringelbach and Berridge, 2009).
Due to its nature, defining and studying happiness is a quite
uneasy task. Although progress has been made on this rather
recent area of study, there is still a lack of consensus when
it comes to defining this concept. Some authors distinguish
fluctuating happiness (self centered) from durable, authentic
happiness (self-transcendent) (Dambrun et al., 2012). Another
study uses the value-arousal model on emotions to define it,
according to which happiness results from a positive valence,
high arousal and engaged and satisfied in life (Cipresso et al.,
2014). Lustig (2017) emphasizes the time perspective as one of
the distinguishing traits between these two emotional states by
opposing the short-term logic of pleasure to the longer-term
characteristics of happiness.
These last two studies are quite illustrative of the differences
with regard to defining happiness, in particular when it comes
to including or not pleasure in it. Whilst there seems to be a
consensus on “life satisfaction,” “connecting with others” and
“contentment” as the main traits of happiness, it is less clear
whether pleasure is part of it. Usually, in the literature there are
two understandings to articulate these emotional states: either
both (happiness and pleasure) are seen as inseparable concepts
or happiness is regarded as a state free from distress (‘liking’
without ‘wanting’) (Kringelbach and Berridge, 2010; Berridge
and Kringelbach, 2011; Loonen and Ivanova, 2016; Lustig, 2017).
Whether or not pleasure is included in the definition of happiness,

to explore this issue by focusing on the individual characteristics
of addict players. For instance, the general level of happiness
appears to be a firm candidate to predict addiction to VG playing
(Hull et al., 2013). In effect, it has been shown that gaming
disorders are positively correlated with depression and loneliness
and negatively correlated with well-being (Lemmens et al., 2011;
Sarda et al., 2016). These two studies relied on a eudaimonic
notion of well-being (i.e., life satisfaction, a life well lived). Thus,
based on the mentioned definitions of pleasure and happiness, on
the semantic net (see Annex) and on the analysis made in the next
section (Pleasure and Happiness), in this research well-being is
assimilated to happiness due to the considerable common ground
shared between these two concepts. In line with these findings,
another study highlights the association between high frequency
of online gaming with depression and social phobia (Wei et al.,
2012). Similar results were found in a study in which, compared
with no addict Internet user, Internet addict subjects used to play
online games reported significantly more depressive symptoms
(Geisel et al., 2015).
From a psychological symptoms standpoint, it has also been
observed that when playing VG, addict gamers have a sense
of well being or euphoria while playing VG, inability to stop
the activity, craving more time at playing VG, feeling empty,
depressed, irritable when not playing VG, with all the pernicious
consequences these symptoms have on the private, social and
professional life (Griffiths, 2008). At glance, the coexistence
of well being and craving might come across as paradoxical,
although the mentioned work (Lustig, 2017) on this issue
provides some elements of answer to this finding.
Using a video game clip as a stimulation trial, it has been
studied (Kim et al., 2018) the craving state of chronic users
when playing VG through measures resulting from addiction
questionnaires and several bio signals such as eye blinking, eye
saccadic movements, skin conductance and respiratory rate. The
results of this work showed that during the stimulation trial video
game there was a decrease of eye blinking rate, eye saccadic
movement rate and mean amplitude of the skin conductance
response whereas there was a significant increase of the mean
respiratory rate.
Another study (Lu et al., 2010; as cited in Kim et al., 2018)
focused on a group of individuals with high risks of developing
Internet gaming disorders (IGD) and their sympathetic nervous
system responses. When using Internet in this experiment,
increases were observed in blood volume, body temperature and
respiratory rate. Heart rate (HR) has also been used as a reliable
indicator of craving in subjects with SUD (Kennedy et al., 2015).

Pleasure and Happiness
The psychophysiological and brain mechanisms of pleasure
and happiness are quite complex and probably more research
is required to better discerning these processes. Some studies
have underlined that the hedonic system includes wanting
and liking and each of these two emotional states may
operate in a conscious and unconscious mode (Berridge
and Kringelbach, 2011). Studies indicate that unconscious
wanting would function as a conditioned desire involving
the nucleus accumbens, ventral tegmental area, hypothalamus

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

3

January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 2894

Gros et al.

Video Game Addiction and Emotional States

to the best of our knowledge there is no study that includes
craving (intense desire, longing) as a trait of happiness.
Thus, based on the mentioned definitions and on the
association between craving and arousal (Kennedy et al., 2015),
craving for playing VG may subscribe itself within the realm of
pleasure, but stands outside of the happiness’ sphere.
Within the frame of this research, Pleasure refers to the
hedonic reward processes driven by a desire to obtain a
gratification that can lead to craving in certain circumstances
(Berridge and Kringelbach, 2011). Pleasure has been
associated with the dopaminergic circuit which can, in certain
circumstances, function in an addictive mode and can affect also
habits, conditioning, motivation and executives functions such
as decision making, inhibitory control, etc. (Volkow et al., 2011).
Happiness is understood as contentment and euthymic state,
in line with a happy emotional state defined by a positive valence
and low arousal (Jatupaiboon et al., 2013). Physiologically,
this state implies a reposed mind; akin to the relaxation state
measured through the brain electrical activity (Teplan and
Krakovskà, 2009). In the literature this mood is related to the
serotoninergic circuit (Lustig, 2017).
To the best of our knowledge, there is no existing
questionnaire focusing on the association between VG and
pleasure/happiness. Thus, our study required a preliminary
phase to design such self-report tool whose aim is to
explore the perceived emotional states (pleasure/happiness)
associated with VG play.
As far as we know, distinguishing the perception of these two
emotional states in the frame of an addiction has not been yet
the object of formal research, hence the reduced literature on this
specific issue, in particular the experimental one.
Consequently this research may be seen as a preliminary study,
which aims at examining the possible confusion between pleasure
and happiness within the addiction sphere. VG addiction
has been chosen to explore the possible occurrence of this
perceptional distortion. Emotional reactions of VG addicts
and VG non-addicts were gauged via self-report scales and
physiological data (Heart rate and Relaxation state) acquired by a
range of biosensors.
Resulting from the mentioned background, it is hypothesized
that addict VG users:

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Preliminary Phase: Design of the
“Pleasure and/or Happiness and VG”
Questionnaire
Participants
In total 105 VG players participated in this survey, out of which
61 filled all the questionnaires required for the design of the
“Pleasure and/or Happiness and VG” questionnaire. The mean
age of these 61 participants was 24.28 and the standard deviation
5.48. There were 33 males (54.1%) and 28 females (45.9%).
The mean of playtime during working days was 4.49 h and the
standard deviation 6.82, and during holidays and weekends 4.68 h
and the standard deviation 3.13.

Procedure
An online survey was run via video game forum and Reddit
site (network of communities with common interests).
The purpose of this survey was to evaluate the internal
coherence of our self-report tool (Pleasure and/or Happiness
and VG) relative to two validated questionnaires (on
Hedonic tone and Happiness). Thus the survey consisted
in filling the three questionnaires. Participants completed
anonymously and voluntarily the questionnaires through their
online gamers groups.

Measures
Two validated and known questionnaires were used to construct
the ‘Pleasure and/or Happiness and VG’ questionnaire through
which the emotional states associated with VG activities were
evaluated: the Snaith-Hamilton Pleasure Scale (SHAPS) (Snaith
et al., 1995), an assessment tool of hedonic tone, and the Oxford
Happiness Questionnaire (OHQ) (Hills and Argyle, 2002). The
French version of these two questionnaires was used (Loas et al.,
1997; Bruchon-Schweitzer and Boujut, 2014).
The abbreviated SHAPS is composed of 14 items to assess
the hedonic tone and the absence of it. The answer scale for
each item offers four possible options ranging from ‘Definitely
agree’ to ‘Strongly disagree.’ The OHQ is extensively used to
evaluate the individual level of happiness. For each of its 29 items,
the answer scale has 6 options going from ‘Strongly disagree’ to
‘Strongly agree.’
Several items of the SHAPS and the OHQ are quite adapted to
the VG paradigm and lend themselves to be contextualized. For
example, the first item of the SHAPS questionnaire is formulated
as: “I would enjoy my favorite television or radio program.” In
this case “television or radio program” is replaced by “video
game.” An example of OHQ concerns the item “I am very
happy,” which became “I am very happy when playing VG.”
So, these kinds of items constitute the questionnaire whose
aim is identifying the emotional states that users associate with
VG. Initially, eight items were adapted to VG from these two
questionnaires: four items from SHAPS and four items from
OHQ. The answer scale provides with six possible options
ranging from ‘fully disagree’ to ‘fully agree.’

Are likely to confuse the notions of pleasure with that of happiness
when associating their emotional states to VG play.

The results of this study are expected to show that addict VG
users associate happiness with VG activities while feeling craving
for playing accompanied by an increased HR and a low relaxation
level. Given the shortage of previous researches on the specific
issue related to the confusion between pleasure and happiness
in VG addiction, the outcome of this study is approached in an
exploratory manner.
From a therapy standpoint, this project intends to explore
alternatives to deal with this kind of scenarios. More specifically,
at the cognitive level, the idea is finding means to develop
patients’ insights into these emotional states and thus increasing
their ability to handle them.

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

4

January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 2894

Gros et al.

Video Game Addiction and Emotional States

informed consent form. Once the form was read and signed, the
study procedure was explained. Then, the Electroencephalogram
(EEG) headset was placed onto the participant’s head and an
impedance check was run.
Before the beginning of the experiment, each participant chose
his/her favorite VG he/she uses to play among the five initially
proposed. During the experiment, the examiner observed the
participant through a one-way-glass, avoiding interference.
Finally, participants were thanked for their participation,
compensated and given information on obtaining the results of
the study. The whole experimental run took around 1 h.
Prior to starting the operational phases of the experiment,
all devices are set to initiate the baseline recording of all the
physiological signals.
Six phases compose this experiment (Figure 1). In each
phase of the experiment the emotional states associated with
VG were examined either through self-report questionnaires or
via physiological measures. The physiological measures were
recorded during the visioning of two sorts of video clips: VG
clips whose aim was to induce craving and neutral video clips
(documentaries on nature) intending to reduce craving.
The six experimental phases:

Statistical Analysis
In order to ensure the usefulness of the designed self-report
tool, an Alpha Cronbach test was run on the results of this
survey to measure the internal coherence between the ‘VG and
Pleasure/Happiness’ and the two other questionnaires (SHAPS
and OHQ). Moreover, it has been examined whether there is
a correlation between VG play frequency and the two areas
explored in this survey: the general happiness level (OHQ)
and the emotional states associated with VG (‘Pleasure and/or
Happiness and VG’).

The Experiment
Participants
The study was announced through the Université Libre de
Bruxelles (ULB) scientific social media as well as via leaflets
available in public cyber games centers in Brussels. Gamers
interested to participate in this study had to answer an on-line
survey (N = 163), in which the following data was gathered: age,
play frequency, name of VG played and a validated test to assess
the gaming addiction level (Gaming Addiction Scale, Lemmens
et al., 2009). The French version of this scale was used (Gaetan
et al., 2014). Being used to play to at least one of these five
popular VG (Fornite, Overwatch, League of Legends, CounterStrike or Rocket League) and an age ranging from 18 to 70 years
old were the inclusion criteria. Competing against another team
and playing in groups are the common characteristics of these
VG. The exclusion criteria were having vision impairments and
neurological problems.
Two groups of gamers were invited to participate in this study:
addict users (AU) and non-addict users (NAU). None of the
invitees met the exclusion criteria. The selection and recruitment
were based on the score obtained in the test on gaming addiction,
resulting in: AU (N = 12) and NAU (N = 17) (7 females and 22
males, ranging from 19 to 29 years old). They were all French
speakers Belgian residents. The mean age was 23 and the standard
deviation of 3. The difference between sexes in terms of VG
addiction is not statistically significant (3/7 AU females and
9/22 AU males, U 45.5, p = 0.130).

(1) “Pleasure and/or Happiness and VG” (six items):
Participants were invited to fill the self-report
questionnaire designed in the preliminary phase.
(2) Watching a neutral clip during 2 min while recording
physiological signals related the mentioned two
emotional states. This phase intends to decrease craving
in participants.
(3) Craving score: Participants were asked to express their
craving state to play their favorite VG via a one item
self-report questionnaire.
(4) Watching a VG clip during 2 min while recording the
same physiological signals as in phase two related to the
mentioned emotional states. The objective of this phase is
to increase craving in participants.
(5) Craving score: the same procedure and self-report tool as
in phase 3 were applied.
(6) Submission of three self-report questionnaires:

Procedure
This experiment took place within the frame in the usability
laboratory of the Research Centre of Work and Consumer
Psychology, Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB).
Before the experiment all the procedures were explained to
participants and their consent was asked on formal basis. They
were informed that:

(6.1) “Pleasure and/or Happiness and VG” (Three bipolar
items).
(6.2) “Key words and VG”: participants were invited to
associate a list of words to VG activities.
(6.3) “Pleasure and VG or Happiness and VG” (one
bipolar item): participants were asked to associate
one of the two emotional states to VG play.

– This experiment aims at better understanding the video
game phenomenon (without mentioning the issue relative
to the emotional states and VG).
– They have to fill several questionnaires (in French).
– Some non-invasive artifacts are set to gather measurements
on physiological signals while they watch video clips.
– The Ethical Committee of ULB approved this study in
accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.

The cycle from the 2nd phase to the 5th phase was repeated
five times for each participant. In each of these five cycles,
different episodes of video clips (the chosen VG and the neutral
clip) were shown randomly so as to avoid the habituation
phenomenon and minimize the influence that the order of the
sequence of episodes could have on participants’ responses.

Measures

The participants were welcome into the testing room of the
laboratory by the examiner. They were seated and given an

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

– Experimental groups: AU and NAU

5

January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 2894

Gros et al.

Video Game Addiction and Emotional States

FIGURE 1 | Synthetic view of the experimental phases.

In the first phase, participants were asked to fill the “Pleasure
and/or Happiness and VG” questionnaire composed by six items:
three items that tie Pleasure (P) and VG, three items that tie
Happiness (H) and VG (six-items in total).
The answer scale for each item was composed of six options
ranging from ‘Fully disagree’ to ‘fully agree.’ Each of these six
items is answered separately, thus the overall possible results of
this questionnaire can be: (1) P and VG > H and VG or (2) H
and VG < P and VG or, (3) P and VG = H and VG.
In the second phase (Neutral video clip), two physiological
signals related to Pleasure and Happiness were recorded.
Based on the correlates found between HR and craving,
this physiological signal is used as an indicator of arousal
(Kennedy et al., 2015).
Despite the difficulty in defining and in measuring happiness,
the brain electrical activity is recorded (Electroencephalogram,
EEG) mainly to detect the relaxation state. This state appears
close to the notion of happiness; in the literature it is accepted that
the increase of alpha waves is correlated with mental and physical
rest (Teplan and Krakovskà, 2009).
In the third phase, participants were asked to express
their craving state to play his/her favorite VG. The statement
employed in this self-report tool was: “State your present
craving for gaming.” Participants have to choose the answer
that best fitted their self-assessment among six possible
answers offered by the scale ranging from “I do not feel
any craving for gaming” to “I feel a very strong craving
for gaming.”
In the fourth phase (VG clip), the same physiological signals
as in the second phase were measured.
In the fifth phase, the same procedure to assess craving for
gaming as in the third phase was employed.

The Gaming Addiction Scale (GAS) (Lemmens et al., 2009;
Gaetan et al., 2014) was used to constitute these groups. As
a tool to measure game addiction, GAS possesses significant
assets. Lemmens et al. (2009) showed the validity of this
scale from a cross population point of view and its onedimensional characteristic resulting from the factorial analysis.
In addition, in the same study it has been shown the concurrent
validity of GAS insofar as this scale is associated with play
frequency as well as with psychological features related with
game addiction, namely decreased level of social competence
and of well being, and high level of aggression and of
loneliness. Moreover, high scores in GAS are also linked with
attentional deficiencies in response inhibition when perceiving
game cues (van Holst et al., 2012; in Khazaal et al., 2016),
which converges with results produced by other researches
associating impulsivity and cue reactivity with other addictive
behaviors (Billieux et al., 2011; Khazaal et al., 2012; Torres
et al., 2013). Relative to other game addiction measurements,
GAS has the most complete covering of the Internet gaming
disorder criteria of the DSM-5 (Petry et al., 2014). Although
it was initially designed for adolescents, there are substantial
evidences to state that GAS is applicable for young adults too
(Khazaal et al., 2016).
Each of the seven items of this scale starts with the question
“How often in the last 6 months. . .?” to explore the impact of
video gaming on different aspects of the subject’s life. The possible
answers are: never, rarely, sometimes, often and very often. The
first two answers score 0, the last three answers score 1. If the total
sum of these scores is 4 or higher, the subject is considered an AU
according to this scale.
– The experiment

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

6

January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 2894

Gros et al.

Video Game Addiction and Emotional States

that opposes “Pleasure and VG” vs. “Happiness and VG.”
Unlike in the three-bipolar items questionnaire, the answer
scale between these this bipolar item has an even number
of options (six). This time is an “either/or” choice they
are faced with, therefore the possible results are: P and
VG < H and VG or P and VG > H and VG. Basically
this questionnaire intends to strengthen consistency in
participants’ insights into this issue by inviting them
to confront their perception of their emotional states
associated with VG play with the mentioned formal
definitions, comparable to an emotions reappraisal process
(Seay and Kraut, 2007).

In the sixth phase, three other self-report questionnaires were
submitted to participants and used to evaluate the association
between the mentioned emotional states and VG:
– “Pleasure and/or Happiness and VG” (three bipolar items).
The same six items of the “Pleasure and/or Happiness
and VG” questionnaire used in phase 1 were presented
in a bipolar structure: three items opposing “Pleasure
and VG” vs. “Happiness and VG.” For example, if in
the six items questionnaire the items “I would enjoy my
favorite VG” (Pleasure/VG) and “I am happy when playing
VG” (Happiness/VG) are presented separately, in this
questionnaire they are part of the same item: “I would
enjoy my favorite VG” vs. “I am happy when playing
VG.” By doing so, participants are encouraged to choose
which of their emotional states (Pleasure, Happiness) is
associated with VG playing. That said, the scale has an
uneven number of options (five) between the two extremes,
the central option representing the equal association of
Pleasure and Happiness with VG play. Thus, the overall
possible results are identical as in phase 1.
– “Key words and VG”. Participants were asked to choose
three words (out of ten) that they associate most with their
VG activities. These 10 key words come from the semantic
mapping elaborated in this research of the terms used in
the formal statements defining pleasure and happiness in
this study. For example, some words from the happiness
sphere are contentment and well being, whereas desire and
joy relate to pleasure. Besides, they are in line with both
definitions Lustig’s (2017). Only the ten words (French
version) were shown to participants. Although the possible
results are similar to those of six-item “Pleasure and/or
Happiness and VG” questionnaire and three-bipolar item
“Pleasure and/or Happiness and VG” questionnaire, this
time the same association (emotional states and VG)
is tackled via key words directly linked to the two
studied emotional states (Pleasure, Happiness) but without
mentioning them. This self-report format intends to gain
accuracy in the identification of gamers’ emotional states
associated with VG.
– “Pleasure and VG or Happiness and VG”. The written
definitions of both pleasure and happiness, based on work
Lustig’s (2017), were shown to participants. Then they
were asked to read carefully these definitions and to take
them into account when answering one bi-polar item

In short, four self-report questionnaires (see Annex) aim at
exploring this dependent variable (association between these two
emotional states and VG play) by looking at the consistency of
participants’ answers to the different formats of questions. The
questions’ formats are:
– Pleasure and/or happiness can be associated with VG (six
independent items);
– Pleasure and/or happiness can be associated to VG (three
bipolar items);
– Pleasure and/or happiness can be associated to VG through
key words defining the two emotional states (without
mentioning the words pleasure and happiness);
– Pleasure or happiness can be associated to VG (written
explicit definitions of pleasure and happiness are given to
participants).
This approach aims at exploring the coherence between the
self-reported answers and the physiological signals, as a means
to objectivize the perceived emotional states associated with VG
play by the two mentioned groups of participants (addict gamers
and non-addict gamers).
The previously mentioned theoretical framework indicates
that the notion of craving relates to an arousal state that could
lead to an addictive pattern and consequently stands out of the
realm of happiness.

Expected Results
Based on the analysis made on this issue previously as well as
on the hypothesis of this study, the expected results could be
synthesized as shown in Table 1.
– Self-Report Questionnaires

TABLE 1 | Summary of the expected results.
Expected
results × group ×
measurement

Happiness and/or
Pleasure associated
to VG (6-items)

Self-report Craving and physiological
signals (interaction between the two
independent variables on the
dependent variable)

Happiness and/or
Pleasure associated
to VG (3 bipolar
items)

Key words
(Happiness and
Pleasure)
associated to VG

Happiness or Pleasure
associated with VG
(1 bipolar item with
definitions)

Addict Users (AU

Happiness and VG >
Pleasure and VG

– VG clip increasing effect on craving
– VG clip increasing effect on HR
– VG clip decreasing effect on relaxation

Happiness and VG >
Pleasure and VG

Happiness and VG >
Pleasure and VG

Pleasure and VG >
Happiness and VG

Non Addict Users
(NAU)

Pleasure and VG >
Happiness and VG

Pleasure and VG >
Happiness and VG

Pleasure and VG >
Happiness and VG

Pleasure and VG >
Happiness and VG

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

7

January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 2894

Gros et al.

Video Game Addiction and Emotional States

TABLE 2 | Synthetic view of independent and dependent variables.

– Addict Users (AU)
– Non-Addict Users (NAU)

Phase 1: Self-report

Phases 2 to 5: Visioning video clips (Neutral and VG) x
Craving score and physiological signals

Phase 6: Self-report

– Happiness and/or Pleasure
associated to VG (6-items)

– Heart Rate and Relaxation
– Craving score

– Happiness and/or Pleasure
associated to VG (3-bipolar items)
– Key words associated to VG
– Happiness or Pleasure associated
to VG (1 bipolar item)

The relaxation state was measured by one of the composite
metrics of the Emotiv software. HR was measured by using
Schimer 3 (Photoplethysmography). The I. Motions software
version 7.1 (Imotions Inc. 2018) was used to recording the
mentioned data and presenting stimuli to participants. The
statistical analysis was conducted with IBM SPSS statistics v.25.

For the self-report questionnaires, it is expected that,
compared to NAU, the AU group:
– In “Pleasure and/or happiness associated with VG”
(six independent items) associates more happiness than
pleasure with VG play.
– Reports more craving for playing after watching VG clip.
– In “Pleasure and/or happiness associated to VG” (three
bipolar items) associates more happiness than pleasure with
VG play.
– Associates VG play with key words more related to
happiness category than to those of pleasure.
– In “Pleasure or happiness associated to VG” associates VG
play with pleasure (like NAU).

RESULTS
Design of the “Pleasure and/or
Happiness and VG” Questionnaire
The Cronbach’s alpha (0.859) showed a high internal coherence
between the SHAPS and three items (out of four) of the “Pleasure
and VG” within the “Pleasure and/or Happiness and VG”
questionnaire. The fourth item has been disregarded; its presence
would have dropped the Cronbach’s alpha to 0.685. The internal
coherence obtained between the OHQ and the “Happiness and
VG” items within the “Pleasure and/or Happiness and VG”
questionnaire was quite high for the four items concerned (alpha
0.901). However, the internal coherence between these four items
was too weak due to one item (alpha 0.407). The exclusion of this
item raised the alpha significantly (0.836). Consequently, only
the consistent items have been kept (six out of the initial eight
items: three on “Pleasure and VG,” and three on “Happiness and
VG,” see Annex).
Moreover, it has been examined whether there is an
association between VG play frequency and the two areas
explored in this survey: the general happiness level (OHQ)
and the emotional states associated with VG via the “Pleasure
and/or Happiness and VG” questionnaire. The constitution of
the group of frequent gamers and that of non-frequent gamers
was determined by calculated median (18 h per week). In line
with several studies linking problematic gaming and well-being
and life satisfaction, a moderate negative correlation (R = −0.249;
p = 0.056) was found between VG high play frequency and the
OHQ scores (Griffiths, 2008; Lemmens et al., 2011). In addition,
there is a marginal significant difference [T(58) = 1.923; p = 0.059]
between frequent VG users and non-frequent VG users relative
to the OHQ scores.

– Physiological Signals
It is expected to observe an interaction between the groups
(AU, NAU) and the conditions (VG clip, Neutral clip). Namely,
it is assumed that visioning the VG clips has an effect on AU
increasing HR while decreasing Relaxation.

Statistical Analysis
After verifying the normality of distributions (Kolmogorov–
Smirnov), the means comparison between the two groups (NAU,
AU) was calculated for self-report questionnaires measuring
the association between VG and Pleasure/Happiness (Mann–
Whitney U) for the six-items “Pleasure and/or Happiness and
VG,” the three-bipolar items “Pleasure and/or Happiness and
VG” and the one-bipolar item “Pleasure and VG or Happiness
and VG.” The Chi square was used for “Key words and
VG.” In order to determine whether there are differences
between independent groups over time and to identify possible
interactions between the two independent variables on the
dependent variables, a two-way mixed ANOVA (within and
between subjects) was used for the craving scores and the
physiological signals recorded (Table 2).

Material
The experiment was run on a desktop computer with an Intel
Core i7 quad processor and 8 GB RAM, running Windows 10.
Stimuli were displayed on a 22-inch monitor and resolution
was set to 1680 × 1050. Participants used standard mouse and
keyboard as input devices. EEG measurement includes detecting
the fluctuation of voltage potential generated by large group of
neurons in the brain. The EEG signal was obtained through the
use of EPOC headset. This device allows to remotely getting
data of brain activity using a wireless set of fourteen electrodes
(AF3, AF4, F3, F4, F7, F8, FC5, FC6, T7, T8, P7, P8, O1, O2)
sampled at 128 hertz.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

The Experiment
The “Pleasure and/or Happiness and VG” Six-Items
Questionnaire
The Kolmogorov–Smirnov outcome indicates the need for using
a non-parametric test to compare the two groups. The Mann–
Whitney test shows that there was no significant difference
observed between the AU and NAU relative to association
8

January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 2894

Gros et al.

Video Game Addiction and Emotional States

Concerning the other physiological variable (HR) (Table 6
and Figure 4), there is an effect of VG clips on both groups
[F(1,15) = 20.802; p < 0.001]. Nevertheless, there was no
statistically significant interaction [F(1,15) = 0.028; p = 0.86], nor
an effect of addiction on VG clip condition [F(1,15) = 0.083;
p = 0.777]. It is important noting that due to corrupted
data the number of valid subjects taken into account was 17
(8 AU and 9 NAU).

TABLE 3 | Descriptive statistics of “Pleasure and/or Happiness associated with
VG” (6-items): [Pleasure (P), Happiness (H) associated with VG].
Addiction Bool

N

Mean Rank

Sum of Ranks

NAU

17

13.69

231.00

AU

12

17.00

294.00

Item 2 H/VG

NAU

17

11.35

193.00

AU

12

20.17

242.00

Item 3 P/VG

NAU

17

13.41

228.00

AU

12

17.25

207.00

Item 4 H/VG

NAU

17

12.18

207.00

AU

12

19.00

228.00

Item 5 P/VG

NAU

17

14.06

239.00

AU

12

16.33

196.00

Item 6 H/VG

NAU

17

11.03

187.50

AU

12

20.63

247.50

Mean P/VG

NAU

17

12.88

219.00

AU

12

18.00

216.00

Mean H/VG

NAU

17

10.59

180.00

AU

12

21.25

255.00

Item 1 P/VG

The “Pleasure and/or Happiness and VG”
Three-Bipolar Items Questionnaire
The descriptive statistics of this three-bipolar items questionnaire
(Table 7), indicate that the AU group linked VG activities more
with happiness than the NAU group. The Mann–Whitney test
shows a significant difference between these two associations
(U = 47; p = 0.013).

Key Words and VG
Results state the absence of significant difference between AU and
NAU in associating the key words from the Pleasure cluster with
VG play, and words from the Happiness cluster with VG (Chi
square, p = 0.942) (Table 8). When taking words separately, the
biggest gap between the two groups relates to the word well-being
(belonging to the happiness cluster) associated to VG play (AU:
25%, NAU: 0%).

between VG play and pleasure (item 1. U = 78, p = 0.30; item
3. U = 75, p = 0.24 and item 5 U = 86, p = 0.49) (Table 3).
In contrast, there is a significant statistical difference in the
three items where AU associate VG play with happiness (item 2.
U = 40, p = 0.005; item 4. U = 54, p = 0.034 and item 6. U = 34,
p = 0.002) more than NAU.

“Pleasure and VG or Happiness and VG” (One Bipolar
Item Questionnaire With Written Definitions)
The outcome of this questionnaire indicates that there is no
significant difference between AU and NAU (U = 102, p = 1). Both
groups have clearly associated VG play with pleasure (Table 9).
The following scheme summarizes the outcomes of the
self-report tools used to evaluate the association between
the emotional states (Pleasure and Happiness) with VG
play (Table 10).
The following table indicates the mean, standard deviation
and Skewness and Kurtosis values of the self-report craving,
the HR and the relaxation level for both groups in the two
conditions (Table 11).

Craving Scores
Results in craving (Table 4 and Figure 2) show a statistically
significant interaction F(1,25) = 4.78 (p = 0.038). Indeed, relative
to the neutral clip, the VG clip condition has significantly
amplified the reported craving difference between the two groups
(AU craving score > NAU craving scores).

Physiological Signals Measurements
The AU’s relaxation is significantly lower [F(1,24) = 8.616;
p = 0.007] than NAU’s in both conditions (Between-Subjects
Effects). The relaxation level decreases in both groups during
the VG clip. On the other hand, conditions do not influence the
relaxation difference between the two groups [F(1,24) = 0.001;
p = 0.98] (Table 5 and Figure 3). Furthermore, there is
a significant statistical gender difference in both conditions
(Neutral clip: Male 17.36, Female 7.57. U = 25, p = 0.008 – VG
clip: Male 17.09, Female 8.43. U = 31, p = 0.019).

DISCUSSION
Overall, the results of this study show that AU associate happiness
to VG while reporting craving for VG play and having a low
relaxation level. These outcomes observed in this experiment
constitute a bundle of arguments that argue in favor of the
hypothesis of this study (Lustig, 2017). Indeed, in AU, the high
self-report craving score and low Relaxation level during VG
clips visioning do contrast with their association of VG more
with happiness than with pleasure in the mentioned “Pleasure
and/or Happiness and VG” questionnaires (six-items and threebipolar-items) relative to NAU. Consistent with previous findings
in this area, these four measurements highlight the coexistence
of the perception of happiness linked with VG play combined
with elements related to pleasure such as craving (strong desire,
wanting) (Pollard, 2003; Griffiths, 2008; Waterman et al., 2008).
Since craving and low Relaxation are rather incompatible with the

TABLE 4 | Descriptive statistics for self-report Craving.
Craving/
Clips
Neutral
clips

VG clips

Addiction
Bool

Mean
Craving

Standard
Deviation

NAU

2.27

1.09

0.222

−0.954

17

AU

2.02

0.98

1.617

2.567

10

Total

2.17

1.03

1.062

1.248

27

NAU

4.11

0.82

−0.169

0.135

17

AU

4.96

0.52

−2.523

7.414

10

Total

4.42

0.82

−1.271

2.528

27

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

Skewness Kurtosis

N

9

January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 2894

Gros et al.

Video Game Addiction and Emotional States

FIGURE 2 | Self-report craving (groups: AU, NAU; conditions: Neutral clips, VG clips).

mentioned notion of happiness (Pollard, 2003; Waterman et al.,
2008; Lustig, 2017), these indices may raise the question as to how
accurate are AU’s insights into their emotional states associated
to VG play and may support the idea that AU’s perception of
their emotional states is somewhat distorted. In the literature, VG
addiction would be linked with impairment in the self-regulation
process, this finding may be linked with the difficulties AU have
to observe and evaluate their own behavior (Seay and Kraut,
2007). Besides, the mentioned results suggest that VG clip effect
on self-report craving would depend on the addiction level.
Considering that sensing happiness and craving are probably
experienced as positive emotions by AU, and that usually negative
and positive emotional events are reported to last longer and
shorter respectively (Gil and Droit-Volet, 2012; Tian et al., 2018),
the arousal triggered by motivating stimuli, may modify the
time perception and could mediate the effect of emotions on
behavior (Gil and Droit-Volet, 2012). In other words, the level of
excitement produced by VG play could make AU underestimate
the time spent at this activity, which may be perceived as an
alleviating evasion free from stressors and possibly assimilated
with the notion of happiness. This hypothetic mechanism
would match one of the possible motives for online gaming

(Demetrovics et al., 2011). In this sort of precognitive process,
several studies mentioned the involvement of the amygdala in
interaction with the thalamus together with the dopaminergic
system and a poor inhibitory control (Gil and Droit-Volet, 2012;
Petry et al., 2015).
It is noteworthy underlining that the bipolar structure of
the three-items questionnaire increases the relevance of this
outcome. In effect, although participants were incited to choose
between the two emotional states opposing each other (VG
and pleasure vs. VG and happiness), like in the six-items
questionnaire, AU again did choose happiness as the main
emotional state linked with VG play. This outcome would further
state the difference between these two groups when it comes to
associating the two emotional states to VG play. Besides, this
would reveal to an important extent that the possibility whereby
pleasure and happiness were regarded as synonyms could be
overcome. In other words, this outcome shows that the similarity
of meanings of these two concepts did not prevent these groups
to make a clear choice. Finally, the similar scores obtained in the
two questionnaires (six-items and three-bipolar items “Pleasure
and/or Happiness and VG”), in spite of the different disposition
of the same items in these two instances, strengthen the value of
the designed scale (“Pleasure and/or Happiness and VG play”).
The absence of interaction between the two independent
variables on HR may be explained by the fact that a higher
arousal would take place in AU when playing VG rather than
when watching at VG clips. Moreover, the reduced number
of valid subjects when measuring this physiological parameter
(due to technical recording problems) could have contributed
to this outcome too. The fact that the independent variables
did not produce the expected different HR effects on AU and
NAU could also be linked with one of the limitations of this
study: the difficulty in integrating in this research the interaction
between HR and depression (as mentioned, VG addiction is

TABLE 5 | Descriptive statistics: Relaxation index (EEG EPOC, Emotiv software).
Relaxation/
Clips
Neutral clips

VG clips

Addiction
Mean
Std.
Skewness Kurtosis N
Bool
Relaxation Deviation
NAU

0.33

0.07

−0.873

1.095

15

AU

0.24

0.09

1.256

3.303

11

Total

0.29

0.08

0.292

0.460

26

NAU

0.31

0.05

−1.380

1.390

15

AU

0.23

0.07

1.633

4.688

11

Total

0.28

0.07

0.292

2.630

26

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

10

January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 2894

Gros et al.

Video Game Addiction and Emotional States

FIGURE 3 | Relaxation [groups: AU, NAU; Conditions: (1) Neutral clips, (2) VG clips].

positively correlated with depression) (Griffiths et al., 2012) that
may lead to HR index modifications (Cipresso et al., 2014). In
sum, this issue illustrates that the difficulty to circumscribe the
notion of happiness is also reflected in the complexity to establish
physiological correlates so as to objectify this emotional state
(Cipresso et al., 2014).
Associating the clusters of key words with VG did not produce
the expected results. Since AU linked VG with both pleasure
and happiness, may be these words played a clarification role
and facilitated Au’s insights into their emotional states when
playing VG. It could also suggest the inadequacy of this selfreport tool. However, it is probably worthwhile mentioning an
index related our hypothesis: when taking words separately, the
word “well-being” associated with VG play was chosen by 25% of
AU and by 0% of NAU.
The outcome of the binary question in the “Pleasure and
VG or Happiness and VG” one-item questionnaire with the
definitions of pleasure and happiness (Pollard, 2003; Deci and
Ryan, 2008; Waterman et al., 2008; Kashdan et al., 2008; Lustig,
2017) shows that AU ceased associating happiness to VG play and
instead, like NAU, clearly linked pleasure to their cyber activity.

Caution is required in the analysis of these results because
the validity of this questionnaire remains to be demonstrated.
Having instructed participants to answer the bipolar question by
taking into account the written definitions of the two measured
emotional states, did modify the result of AU group relative
to both questionnaires (“Pleasure and/or Happiness and VG”
six-items and three bipolar items). Within the framework of
this careful approach, it could be hypothesized that explicit
definitions of the two emotional states induced AU to adopting
an introspection mode through a more pronounced involvement
of cortical brain structures, akin to a therapeutic process in which
the appropriate verbalization of pleasure and happiness facilitates
the clarification of one own feeling as a prerequisite to elaborate
more adaptive behavior in spite of the constraining psychological
characteristics usually associated with VG addicts (Kim et al.,
2007; Kashdan et al., 2008; Wenzel et al., 2009).
This may be regarded as an example of emotions reappraisal
which would increase accuracy of insights into one-self, reduce
distorted perception of emotions and assess the adequacy of
the behavioral response to a given stimulus (Compare et al.,
2014). In other words, it could be posited that the mentioned
explicit definitions have somewhat constrained AU to use a
cognitive approach to examine their emotional states related to
VG play rather than merely relying on the sensory information
as it tends to occur when sensing craving for video gaming
(Wang et al., 2017).
Moreover, the result of this one-item binary questionnaire
would further support the hypothesis. In effect, the studied
interrelation between hedonia and eudaimonia suggests that a
highly rated hedonic activity (VG play in this case) is usually
related with low rating in eudaimonia (Waterman et al., 2008).
This interpretation would fit with the resounding association
between depression and gaming disorders (Lemmens et al., 2011;

TABLE 6 | Descriptive statistics: Heart Rate (HR).
Heart
Rate/Clips

Addiction
Bool

Neutral clips

NAU

78.36

7.94

0.054

−0.292

AU

79.51

8.36

2.130

5.013

8

Total

78.90

7.90

0.972

1.530

17
9

VG clips

Mean
HR

Standard
Deviation

Skewness Kurtosis N

9

NAU

80.29

9.20

−0.502

0.219

AU

81.58

9.34

2.037

4.661

8

Total

80.89

8.99

0.614

1.535

17

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

11

January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 2894

Gros et al.

Video Game Addiction and Emotional States

FIGURE 4 | Heart Rate [groups: AU, NAU; Conditions: Neutral clips (1), VG clips (2)].

emotional states with VG play. Unlike NAU, the significantly
higher association between VG play and happiness expressed
by AU matches the perceived level of well being reported by
individuals with Internet gaming disorders (Griffiths, 2008). On
the other hand, apart from well-being, the same author cites
euphoria as the other main emotional state that addict gamers
may report when playing VG. Whilst happiness and well-being
rely on each other to define themselves, euphoria would convey
the notion of intense excitement, which would rather stand
in the pleasure sphere. Moreover, in medical terms, euphoria
refers to a feeling of great elation, not necessarily founded
(especially when resulting from substances consumption). Since
AU also associated VG with pleasure although they did it
to a lesser extent than with happiness, it could hypothesized
that the feeling of intense excitement derives, at least partially,
from satisfying the craving for VG play, which in turn
could engender relieve experienced as a sense of well-being
(Loonen and Ivanova, 2016).
The impact of VG clips on AU craving and relaxation
scores underlines relevant aspects of this study, which support
the hypothesis of this research. First of all, it highlights the
incongruent perception of AU’s emotional states whereby both
craving and happiness coexist as emotional states associated with
VG play. Thus, this finding constitutes a relevant component
of the confusion that consists in placing a short-term pleasure
(VG play) within the sphere of happiness. Besides, the low
relaxation state of AU would correspond with their self-reported
craving and, therefore, further highlights the contrast between the
perceived happiness associated with VG play and the indicators
measured during the VG clip visioning (high craving level and
low relaxation state level). Finally, it is noteworthy mentioning
that relaxation was the only measure in this study where gender
differences were observed. The lower relaxation level in female

TABLE 7 | Descriptive Statistics: Pleasure/VG vs. Happiness/VG (3 bipolar items).
Addiction Bool
Mean

N

Mean Rank

Sum of Ranks
200.00

NAU

17

11.76

AU

12

19.58

235.00

Bipolar item 1

NAU

17

13.29

226.00

AU

12

17.42

209.00

Bipolar item 2

NAU

17

13.91

236.50

AU

12

16.54

198.50

Bipolar item 3

NAU

17

13.3

221.50

AU

12

17.79

213.50

Hull et al., 2013; Sarda et al., 2016; Bonnaire and Baptista, 2019)
together with the confusion between pleasure and happiness
occurring in addictive activities (AU associated VG with
happiness in the first two self-report questionnaires and ended
linking pleasure with VG in the last one-item questionnaire)
(Pollard, 2003; Lustig, 2017).
Overall, the more explicit the definition of pleasure and
happiness and the narrower the choice offered by the self-report
questionnaires, the less confusion of emotional states associated
with VG occurred in AU group members whereas NAU
invariably associated pleasure to VG as illustrated in Figure 5.
Based on these results, it could be postulated that the tendency
of AU to perceive happiness when feeling craving and pleasure
linked to VG play, might be moderated by a clarifying cognitive
process on the meaning of these studied emotional sates, which
would interfere with the behavioral habits linked to the urge of
gaming (Ko et al., 2009).
The findings resulting from “Pleasure and/or Happiness and
VG” six-items questionnaire could be regarded as an illustration
of the confusion that AU might have when linking the studied

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

12

January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 2894

Gros et al.

Video Game Addiction and Emotional States

TABLE 8 | Descriptive statistics: number of words per category (Pleasure, Happiness) associated to VG play chosen by NAU and AU.
% of words × category

Addiction Bool

Words × subject

Pleasure governed by desire

Pleasure governing desire

Happiness

Total

%

NAU (N17)

17 × 3 words = 51

19.60

47.05

33.33

100

%

AU (12)

12 × 3 words = 36

22.22

47.22

30.55

100

described in the mentioned study, experiencing flow implies not
only losing the notion of time but also merging oneself with
the VG actions. In these conditions, the gamer’s senses and
attention are in the here and now, with little or no awareness
about sources of stress relative to past, present or future
events. In this line, the motivation to experience immersion
has been associated with problematic gaming (Billieux et al.,
2011). Considering the fact that loneliness and depression have
been identified as predictors of VG addiction and of Internet
Gaming Disorders (Hull et al., 2013; Sarda et al., 2016), it is
understandable why in gamers’ mind experiencing flow could
equate this feeling with a relieving emotional state (Loonen
and Ivanova, 2016). This sense of alleviation could match the
notion of happiness as free from distress (Kringelbach and
Berridge, 2010; Loonen and Ivanova, 2016) if it resulted from
the quality of real life being lived. Instead, in AU, this relieving
and enjoyable emotional state would be engendered by a virtual
activity (VG), possibly used as a means to escape from stress
and to forget tensions (Demetrovics et al., 2011; Bonnaire and
Baptista, 2019). In the literature, the escaping strategy is a way to
find relieve from stressors through the engagement in a pleasant
activity, which may end up representing a space of happiness
(Seay and Kraut, 2007).
In sum, the incongruence lies in the coexistence of regarding
VG as a space of happiness while using VG to get quick pleasures
and relief. Individuals suffering from this disorder tend to
pursuit short-term pleasures rather than long-term gains (Dong
and Potenza, 2015). Being driven by short-term gratifications
rather belongs to the reward-seeking realm (Waterman et al.,
2008; Lustig, 2017). Thus, this pleasant emotional state could
be associated with the arousal linked to a reward seeking
behavior through which quick and positive results are obtained,
which in turn reinforce the mentioned behavior. Probably, this
intense arousal situates itself within the sphere of pleasure as a
dysfunction in the rewarding system (Pollard, 2003; Berridge and
Kringelbach, 2013; Lustig, 2017) and not in that of happiness in
spite of the relieving benefits it provides.
Another possible reading on why the emotional states
generated by these cyber activities are linked with happiness
may be related to the way in interpreting the experienced
sensations. This representation is probably shaped by the
individual background, experiences, culture, etc. From a brain
mechanism stand point, conscious liking does not limit it self to
a sensory outcome, it is also translated into a subjective liking
through the recruitment of cognitive processes (Berridge and
Kringelbach, 2013). Indeed, these authors state that conscious
pleasure rating is sometimes detached from affective reactions
as people can elaborate reasons to themselves for how they
should feel. Therefore, associating VG with happiness may be
the result of a rationalization process to reduce the cognitive

TABLE 9 | Descriptive statistics: Happiness/VG or Pleasure/VG (1 bipolar item,
with Definitions of Pleasure and Happiness shown to subjects).
H/VG or P/VG

Addiction Bool

Mean

Standard Deviation

N

NAU

4.82

0.636

17

AU

4.58

1.379

12

gamers in both conditions might be related to the gender
expectation about playing VG in society at large and in the
gamers’ community in particular (Shen et al., 2016). Indeed, since
female gamers are a minority in these sorts of VG (Shen et al.,
2016) (in line with our sample: 7 females, 22 males), it could
be posited that they feel under scrutiny in an activity regarded
as male oriented.

Putative Reasons of Distorted
Perceptions of Emotional States
Associated With VG Addiction
The social dimension of popular VG has been identified as
one of the factors that may explain the addiction pattern (Hull
et al., 2013). In this kind of competitive games, improving the
required abilities and obtaining better results would be part of
the key motives for VG play (Demetrovics et al., 2011), that
usually generates the appreciation and the acceptance of the other
group players. Getting this sort of feedback from others can
be motivating indeed, especially when taking into account the
correlation between IGD and social isolation, low self-esteem,
traumatic experiences, depression and low life satisfaction (Petry
et al., 2015; Schimmenti et al., 2017; Bonnaire and Baptista,
2019). In turn, these psychosocial characteristics are probably
related also with the high impulsivity level in VG addicts (Billieux
et al., 2011), which has been found to be associated with
difficulties in interpersonal relationships (Ryu et al., 2018). Thus,
it would seem that VG activities are, at least partially, sating the
mentioned social and psychological deficiencies. This suggests
that AU’s emotional states related to VG play may be quite
contrasting, in which components of happiness (i.e., interacting
with others, fellowship and belonging to a group) are intertwined
with those of short-term pleasure (i.e., craving for getting quick
results, praise from others, etc.) (Loonen and Ivanova, 2016).
Now, craving for undertaking these cyber activities to respond
to the mentioned social isolation issues places this emotional
state much closer to the ‘pleasure governed by desire’ than to
‘atmosphere of good fellowship’ (Happiness) (Lawrence et al.,
2014; Lustig, 2017).
The flow, defined as the emotional state embracing perception
distortion and enjoyment produced by VG activities, is another
element that can create confusion in gamers’ insights into their
emotional states (Chou and Ting, 2003; Hull et al., 2013). As

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

13

January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 2894

Gros et al.

Video Game Addiction and Emotional States

TABLE 10 | Synthetic view of self-report results (Emotional states associated with VG play).

Results

Pleasure and/or Happiness
linked with VG (6-items)

Pleasure/VG vs. Happiness/
VG (3 bipolar items)

Key words associated
with VG

Pleasure/VG or Happiness/
VG (1 bipolar item)

AU associated more Happiness
to VG than NAU (Significant
difference)

AU associated more Happiness
to VG than NAU (Significant
difference)

Both groups associated
Pleasure and Happiness to VG
(No significant difference)

Both groups associated
Pleasure to VG (No significant
difference)

unable to master the yearning for VG, perceiving VG activities
as a source of well being may reduce the mentioned pressures
insofar as the notion of happiness usually suggests a socially
acceptable mood, a legitimate aim and a safe emotional state. In
this perspective, equating happiness with satisfying craving and
with short-term pleasure might contribute to feed the addictive
pattern (Lustig, 2017).
In a broader perspective, the rationalization process described
in the previous paragraph may be also related with coping
strategies to deal with adversity. For instance, it has been observed
that problematic gamers may use VG play as a means to cope
with stressors and to enhance mood (Demetrovics et al., 2011).
An association has been found between stressful life events and
addiction to Internet activities (Schimmenti et al., 2017), with
the mediating role of psychological needs satisfaction and the
moderating role of coping styles (Dongping et al., 2016). Several
theories and studies support this approach that strives for a
more holistic understanding of this issue. The self-determination
theory postulates that humans share three universal psychological
needs (Deci and Ryan, 2000; in Dongping et al., 2016): autonomy
(i.e., feeling of being self-determining in one’s behavior),
relatedness (i.e., the feeling of connectedness to others) and
competence (i.e., the feeling of dealing with issues in a competent
manner). Besides, individuals can adopt different strategies to
cope with adversity (Lazarus and Folkman, 1984; in Dongping
et al., 2016). According to Zheng et al. (2012; in Dongping et al.,
2016), the positive coping approach is the set of strategies aiming
at problem solving, support seeking and cognitive restructuring
to address the stressors. On the other hand, according to the
same authors, the negative coping consists in strategies such as
blaming, social withdrawing, denial and disengagement so as to
avoid the stressful situations. Now, a parallel can be established

TABLE 11 | Descriptive statistics for self-report Craving, Relaxation, Heart Rate.
Addiction Mean
Standard Skewness Kurtosis N
Bool
Craving Deviation
Craving/ Clips
Neutral clips

VG clips

NAU

2.27

1.09

0.222

−0.954

17

AU

2.02

0.98

1.617

2.567

10

Total

2.17

1.03

1.062

1.248

27

NAU

4.11

0.82

−0.169

0.135

17

AU

4.96

0.52

−2.523

7.414

10

Total

4.42

0.82

−1.271

2.528

27

NAU

0.33

0.07

−0.873

1.095

15

AU

0.24

0.09

1.256

3.303

11

Total

0.29

0.08

0.292

0.460

26

NAU

0.31

0.05

−1.380

1.390

15

AU

0.23

0.07

1.633

4.688

11

Total

0.28

0.07

0.292

2.630

26

NAU

78.36

7.94

0.054

−0.292

9

AU

79.51

8.36

2.130

5.013

8

Total

78.90

7.90

0.972

1.530

17

NAU

80.29

9.20

−0.502

0.219

9

AU

81.58

9.34

2.037

4.661

8

Total

80.89

8.99

0.614

1.535

17

Relaxation/Clips
Neutral clips

VG clips

Heart Rate/Clips
Neutral clips

VG clips

dissonance. In other words, the unwished consequences of the
VG addiction pattern (increased stress, problems at working,
studying, socializing, etc.) (Griffiths et al., 2012) probably
produce an increasing amount of pressure (due to the difficulty
to reduce gaming time, guilt, etc.) that can become overwhelming
if it lasts too long. Consequently, if the affected individuals are

FIGURE 5 | Shift of AU perception of their emotional states associated with VG according to the self-report tools.

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

14

January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 2894

Gros et al.

Video Game Addiction and Emotional States

experience immersion in a virtual world would increase the
likelihood of IGD and Internet addiction (Billieux et al., 2011;
Schimmenti et al., 2017).
In sum, it would seem as if for AU the mentioned behavioral
pattern is a manner to mitigate the difficulties to deal with
stressors. This interpretation would be in line with the motives for
play in problematic gaming (Demetrovics et al., 2011). Through
a massive survey these authors observed seven dimensions that
would cover the entire spectrum of motives for VG play in
all sort of on line games: escape (from reality), cope (with
stressors, playing as a way to improve mood), fantasy (trying
new identities/things in a virtual world), skills development
(improving concentration, coordination, new skills) recreation
(relaxing aspects of gaming), competing (sense of achievement),
and social (knowing/being/playing with others). This study
suggests that there would be positive and beneficial motives
for playing (entertaining gaming) as well as harmful ones
(problematic gaming). The correlations between these factors
appear to shed light on the positive and negative aspects of
gaming. Whilst the weakest correlation is between escape and
recreation (also low correlation was found between escape
and both, skills development and competition), the strongest
correlations were observed between escape and cope and fantasy.
These results would indicate that escape and coping are motives
associated with problematic gaming, however, the authors argue
that escapism would facilitate the coping efforts to deal with
stressors and negative moods. Moreover, it is noteworthy
underlining that escapism had the lowest mean score in this
study among the seven dimensions, which would match with
the prevalence level of problematic gaming mentioned previously
(Griffiths et al., 2012).
Probably, regarding AU, the accuracy in perceiving emotional
states, the ability to deal with stressors and the quality of insights
into oneself are dimensions that deserve much attention in the
therapeutic processes.

between these two coping styles and the brain activities involved
in the goal-directed learning and the habit learning.
The goal-directed learning would correspond to the positive
coping style insofar as it focuses on the relationship between
an action and the motivational value of the outcome, and
is associated with the activation of the prefrontal cortex, the
dorsomedial striatum and the dorsomedial thalamus (Ballaine
and Dickinson, 1998; in Schwabe et al., 2012). On the other
hand, habit learning, would be linked with the avoidant coping
style. This learning process encodes the relationship between a
response and preceding stimuli without taking into account the
outcome caused by the response and is related to the activation of
the dorsolateral striatum (Yin et al., 2004; Tricomi et al., 2009; in
Schwabe et al., 2012). According to Schwabe et al. (2012), stressful
situations may modulate the processes involved in instrumental
learning in a way that may produce the shift from goal-directed
learning to habitual learning.
In line with these findings, it has been observed that, like
cocaine cues, psychological stress induction can generate the
same craving response in a cocaine abusers population (Bradley
et al., 1989; Wallace, 1989; in Sinha et al., 2000). The relevance of
these observations lies in the fact that both SUD and behavioral
addictions (including gaming disorders, Han et al., 2011) recruit
to an important extent common brain regions and produce
similar physiological patterns, as quoted in the introduction
of this document.
Considering the association between unhappiness and VG
disorders mentioned earlier, it could be posited that the gamers
concerned could not overcome the causes of their unhappiness.
Indeed, studies suggest that subjects with Internet gaming
disorders embark in VG play more to deal with negative
affect than to achieve a good performance in the game
(Schimmenti and Caretti, 2010; Billieux et al., 2013; both in
Bonnaire and Baptista, 2019). In this scenario, based on the
mentioned studies, a low level of happiness would imply that
psychological needs are somewhat unmet and associated with
the avoidant coping style together with the habit learning.
Furthermore, this pattern is supported by compensatory Internet
use theory, which postulates that adversity can operate as
a stimulus to seek psychological comfort (i.e., satisfying the
psychological needs via the cyberspace) (Kardefelt-Winther,
2014; in Dongping et al., 2016).
In other words, the psychological comfort engendered by
the VG activities in this population of gamers, combined
with the characteristics of the avoidant coping style (denial,
social withdrawal, avoiding stressful situation, etc.) and with
the traits of the habitual learning (actions’ outcomes are
disregarded, with little or no awareness of actions’ consequences),
might explain, at least partially, the biased perception of the
emotional states in AU (happiness associated to VG) and of
their causes of craving for VG. This assumption suggests
that online gaming might not be the cause of VG addiction,
but rather that VG excessive use could be a compensatory
strategy to deal with pre-existing psychological characteristics
and deleterious social context (Kowert et al., 2015). For instance,
some studies suggest that traumatic experiences, poor emotions
regulation, elements of impulsivity and the motivation to

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

Therapeutic Implications
A cognitive-behavioral approach may contribute to the recovery
process by enabling problematic gamers to explore the motives
that lead them to abuse of VG play (Orzack et al., 2006;
in Griffiths, 2008). Developing strategies to tackle stressors
appears to be a therapeutic priority for treating this disorder.
Consequently, this axis of work includes the understanding of
the environmental demands that are perceived as exceeding the
individual abilities to handle them. In this line, ensuring the
accuracy of the individual’s insights into the emotional states
linked to the sources of stress as well as to the game habit could
increase the awareness of the underlying issues to be addressed.
In particular, deciphering the conditioned desires (unconscious
wanting) and the hedonic dimension (unconscious liking)
(Kringelbach and Berridge, 2009; Berridge and Kringelbach,
2013) linked to VG play may produce added value information
for understanding and overcoming the problematic gaming
pattern. Within this frame, it could be hypothesized that
distinguishing between happiness and feeling alleviated could
be beneficial to the therapeutic process, although it remains to
be demonstrated.

15

January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 2894

Gros et al.

Video Game Addiction and Emotional States

Reappraising emotions is associated with the involvement of
the medial prefrontal cortex, which attenuates the amygdala
activation and, thus, reduces the intensity of negative affect;
these two areas being coordinated by the orbitofrontal cortex
(Compare et al., 2014). Since AU would be prone to associate
happiness with VG play, ERT might facilitate the perceptional
change enabling to link VG play with pleasure [Caretti and
Craparo, 2009; in Craparo (2011) consider Internet addiction
(including VG) “as a syndromic condition characterized by
a recurrent and reiterated search for pleasure derived from
dependence behavior, associated with abuse, craving, clinically
significant stress, and compulsive dependence actions despite the
possible negative consequences”]. Within this approach, it may be
postulated that enabling problematic gamers to familiarize with
and to see the self-transcendent notion of happiness could favor
the distinction between pleasure and happiness and would render
them less vulnerable from impulses and from environmental
circumstances (Dambrun et al., 2012). The idea is to facilitate
the shift from wanting more than liking (or even without
liking) toward liking with little or without wanting (Berridge
and Kringelbach, 2011). Furthermore, regarding motives for
playing, it could be posited that helping problematic gamers to
identify and distinguish the emotions tied to escaping/coping
from those related to recreational gaming (Demetrovics et al.,
2011), would be a necessary condition to orient effectively the
ERT toward the escaping issues and targeted emotional states
requiring therapeutic input. In this line, based on the previously
mentioned studies in this section, it might be useful exploring
the possible link that the excessive time spent in cyber activity
could have with past traumatic experiences, insecure attachment,
impulsivity, anxiety and depression.
In conclusion, this study suggests that the mentioned
confusion of emotional states (pleasure and happiness) associated
with addiction (Lustig, 2017), could take place in subjects
with VG addiction, and potentially in the entire spectrum of
addictions. Moreover, from a cognitive therapeutic perspective, it
shows the potential benefits of reappraising emotions as a means
to contribute to the emotional distortion reduction.

Overall, this sort of therapeutic approach may contribute
to reduce the alexithymia, usually associated with this kind of
disorders (Kandri et al., 2014).
In problematic internet/gaming several studies have explored
and highlighted to role of alexithymia and its links with
other therapeutic issues. For instance, it has been shown
that alexithymic individuals are more associated with Internet
addiction than non-alexthymic ones (Baysan-Arslan et al.,
2016). In this research, the authors consider that the difficulty
in identifying and differentiating emotions that characterizes
alexithymia may lead individuals with this affliction to regulate
their emotional states via their addictive activities.
Another
study
showed
that
IGD
would
be
related
with
alexithymia,
anxiety
and
depression
(Bonnaire and Baptista, 2019).
Schimmenti et al. (2017) observed that traumatic experiences
(mainly in males) and traits of alexithymia (mainly in females)
were associated with Internet addiction symptoms, which may
enable a tailored prevention and treatment approach. Besides,
Internet addiction (including online role-playing) would be
correlated with alexithymia, dissociation (protecting one-self in
a more pleasant created reality as a means to deal with traumatic
experiences) and insecure attachment (Craparo, 2011).
However, the causal link in the association between
alexithymia and Internet addiction would still need to be verified,
as indicated by Mahapatra and Sharma (2018). Moreover,
discerning the nature of alexithymia remains an uneasy task: this
emotional identification and differentiation disorder might be
regarded as a stable personality trait that could increase risks of
mental disorder development, and also may be seen as a defense
mechanism to cope with psychological stressors (Mikolajczak
and Luminet, 2006; in Mahapatra and Sharma, 2018).
Apart from alexithymia and traumatic memories, high
urgency (a dimension of impulsivity defined by the proneness to
have strong reactions usually tied with negative affect) and being
motivated to experience immersion in a virtual world would be
psychological predictors of problematic multiplayer online games
(Billieux et al., 2011). These findings led the authors to posit that
individuals with the two mentioned traits are more likely to use
the immersion in the virtual world as a means to avoiding facing
real life adverse issues. According to the authors, this behavior
will lead to a deleterious outcome (culpability and embarrassment
as a result of feeling unable to deal with problems), which in
turn is experienced as a pernicious condition likely to activate
behaviors related to high urgency and immersion.
Like the previously mentioned clinical issues, this vicious loop
reinforcing escapism also appears to be a therapeutic target.
Considering the possible association between alexithymia and
problematic gaming as a manner to regulate emotions (BaysanArslan et al., 2016; Bonnaire and Baptista, 2019), the Emotion
Regulation Therapy (ERT) might strengthen the therapeutic
process. The aim being that the observed difficulties in Internet
(including VG) addicts to identifying emotions and regulating
affects (Caretti et al., 2010; in Craparo, 2011) could be, at least
partially, overcome through the ERT process. In effect, Compare
et al. (2014), show that ERT operates as a means to reappraise
emotions that trigger actions leading to negative consequences.

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

Limitations
The small sample of this study demands cautiousness when
making generalizations from its results. Besides, watching VG
clips rather than actually playing VG might be less stimulating
for chronic gamers and could have influenced the physiological
values recorded during the clip visioning phases. That said, many
gamers do attend to public competitions to watch other gamers
playing VG. Although, to the best of our knowledge, there is
no information available to affirm that there are VG addicts in
these audiences.
We also faced the usual paradox when assessing craving via
self-report tools. Indeed, participants were asked to judge their
craving intensity for VG play whereas sensing craving often
may imply a compromised self-awareness level and thus a selfassessment whose value needs to be interpreted carefully.
Although the GAS is a validated tool, which has shown its
usefulness in screening addict gamers, having complemented this
measurement with thorough diagnostic-driven interviews run by

16

January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 2894

Gros et al.

Video Game Addiction and Emotional States

specialists when choosing participants to form the AU and the
NAU groups would have strengthened the selection process.
The participants’ selection was centered on the gamer
status (gaming addiction/non-addiction and names of games
usually played) rather than on the cultural and/or educational
background of the persons. Future researches could complete this
approach by assessing the possible cultural and educational bias
in perceiving the studied emotional states.
Moreover, including more physiological parameters related to
pleasure and happiness could further complete the self-reported
information and may enable reaching more robust results.

The patients/participants provided their written informed
consent to participate in this study.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
LG developed the proposal and the conception of the original
project research, searched and articulated the theoretical
background, participated in the study and protocol design,
elaborated the results interpretation, assembled all the chapters
of the study, and in charge of the manuscript writing. ND
was involved in the scientific and publication management,
participated – as the Research Center Manager – in the study
and protocol design, and in charge of the configuration and
writing of the physiological measures. JL, as a member of
the Research Center, was involved in the study and protocol
design, also involved in the configuration of physiological
measures, managed the experimental phases in the laboratory,
and elaborated the data analysis. CL, as a full Professor at
the Faculty of Psychology and Director of the Research Center
for Work and Consumer Psychology, assured the scientific
and publication management, participated in the study and
protocol design, in charge of making the critical reviews
of the manuscript along the process, and involved in the
manuscript writing.

Prospective Research
Further research is required to better understand the relationship
between the studied emotional states and this addiction.
For instance, since VG addiction decreases with age (Wittek
et al., 2016) a longitudinal study could reveal the factors
(psychophysiological, environmental, etc.) that operate that
change. Moreover, VG addiction is only one area of the spectrum
of addictions. Undertaking similar researches on other addictions
and with larger samples could also contribute to deepening the
comprehension of this issue. Finally, keep enhancing the scales
that measure pleasure and happiness may provide with more
accurate information about the range of nuances intrinsic to these
two emotional states.

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

All datasets generated for this study are included in the
article/supplementary material.

We would like to express our gratitude to Maastricht University
(Department of Psychiatry and Neuropsychology) as well as
Université Libre de Bruxelles (Faculty of Psychological Sciences
and of Education – Research Center for Work and Consumer
Psychology). This work was performed as a partial fulfillment
toward the International Master in Affective Neuroscience of
Maastricht University and the University of Florence.

ETHICS STATEMENT
The studies involving human participants were reviewed and
approved by the Université Libre de Bruxelles Ethical Committee.

REFERENCES

Billieux, J., Van der Linden, M., Achab, S., Khazaal, Y., Paraskevopoulos, L., Zullino,
D., et al. (2013). Why do you play Warcraft? An in-depth exploration of selfreported motivation to play online and in the game behaviors in the virtual
world of Azeroth. Compt. Hum. Behav. 29, 103–109. doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2012.
07.021
Bonnaire, C., and Baptista, D. (2019). Internet gaming disorder in male and female
young adults: the role of alexithymia, depression, anxiety and gaming type.
Psychiatry Res. 272, 521–530. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2018.12.158
Bradley, B. P., Phillips, G., Green, L., and Gossop, M. (1989). Circumstances
surrounding the initial lapse to opiate use following detoxification. Br. J.
Psychiatry 154, 354–359. doi: 10.1192/bjp.154.3.354
Bruchon-Schweitzer, M., and Boujut, E. (2014). Psychologie de la Santé: Concepts,
Methods et Modèles. Paris: Dunod, doi: 10.3917/dunod.bruch.2014.01
Caretti, V., and Craparo, G. (2009). “Psychological issues of technological
addiction. New diagnostic criteria for addiction,” in Annual Review of
Cybertherapy and Telemedicine 2009. Advanced Technologies in the Behavioural,
Social and Neurosciences, eds B. K. Wiederhold, and G. Riva, (Amsterdam: IOS
Press), 227–280.
Caretti, V., Craparo, G., and Schimmenti, A. (2010). “Alcune evidenze empireche
sul construtto di trance dissi-ociativa da videoterminale,” in Addiction, eds V.
Caretti, and D. La Barbera, (Milano: Rafaelo Cortina), 167–182.

Andreassen, C. S., Billieux, J., Griffiths, M. D., Kuss, D. J., Demetrovics, Z.,
Mazzoni, E., et al. (2016). The relationship between addictive use of social
media and video games and symptoms of psychiatric disorders: a large-scale
cross-sectional study. Psychol. Behav. 30, 252–262. doi: 10.1037/adb0000160
Ballaine, B. W., and Dickinson, A. (1998). Goal-directed instrumental
action: contingency and incentive learning and their cortical substrates.
Neuropharmacology 37, 407–419. doi: 10.1016/s0028-3908(98)00033-1
Baysan-Arslan, S., Cebeci, S., Kaya, M., and Canbal, M. (2016). Relationship
between Internet addiction and alexithymia among university students. Clin.
Invest. Med. 39, S111–S115.
Berridge, K., and Kringelbach, M. (2011). Building a neuroscience of pleasure and
well being. Psychol. Well Being 1, 1–3.
Berridge, K. C., and Kringelbach, M. L. (2013). Neuroscience of affect: brain
mechanisms of pleasure and displeasure. Current Opin. Neurobiol. 23, 294–303.
doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2013.01.017
Billieux, J., Chanal, J., Khazaal, Y., Rochat, L., Gay, P., Zullino, D., et al. (2011).
Psychological predictors of problematic involvement in massively multiplayer
online role-playing games: illustration in a sample of male cybercafé players.
Psychopathology 44, 165–171. doi: 10.1159/000322525

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

17

January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 2894

Gros et al.

Video Game Addiction and Emotional States

Chou, T., and Ting, C. H. (2003). The role of flow experience in cyber-game
addiction. Cyber Psychol. Behav. 6, 663–675. doi: 10.1089/109493103322725469
Cipresso, P., Serino, S., and Riva, G. (2014). The pursuit of happiness measurement:
a psychometric model based on psychological correlates. Sci. World J.
2014:139128.
Compare, A., Zarbo, C., Shonin, E., van Gordon, W., and Marconi, C. (2014).
Emotional regulation and depression: a potential mediator between heart and
mind. Cardiovasc. Psychiatry Neurol. 2014:324374. doi: 10.1155/2014/324374
Cooper, S., Robinson, A. J., and Mazei-Robinson, M. (2017). Reward circuitry in
addiction. Neurotherapeutics 14, 687–697. doi: 10.1007/s13311-017-0525-z
Craparo, G. (2011). Internet addiction, dissociation and alexithymia. Proc. Soc.
Behav. Sci. 30, 1051–1056. doi: 10.1016/j.sbspro.2011.10.205
Dambrun, M., Ricard, M., Després, G., Drelon, E., Gibelin, E., Gibelin, M., et al.
(2012). Measuring happiness: from fluctuating happiness to authentic, durable
happiness. Front. Psychol. 3:16. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00016
Deci, E. L., and Ryan, R. M. (2000). The “what” and “why” of goal pursuits: human
needs and the self-determination of behaviour. Psychol. Inq. 11, 227–668.
Deci, E. L., and Ryan, R. M. (2008). Hedonia, eudamonia, and well-being: an
introduction. J. Happiness Stud. 9, 1–11. doi: 10.1007/s10902-006-9018-1
Demetrovics, Z., Urbán, R., Nagygyörgy, K., Farkas, J., Zilahy, D., Mervó, B., et al.
(2011). Why do you play? The development of the motives for online gaming
questionnaire (MOGQ). Behav. Res. Methods 43, 814–825. doi: 10.3758/s13428011-0091-y
Dong, G., Li, H., and Potenza, M. (2017). Cognitive control and reward/loss
processing in Internet gaming disorders: results from a comparison with
recreational Internet game users. Eur. Psychiatry 44:3038.
Dong, G., and Potenza, M. (2015). A cognitive-behavioural model of Internet
gaming disorders: theoretical underpinnings and clinical implications.
J. Psychiatry Res. 58, 7–11. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2014.07.005
Dongping, L., Wenhau, Z., Xian, L., Yueyue, Z., Liyan, Z., and Yanhui, W. (2016).
Stressful life events and adolescent Internet addiction: the mediating role of
psychological needs satisfaction and the moderating role of coping style. Comp.
Hum. Behav. 63, 408–415. doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2016.05.070
Esposito, E., Di Matteo, V., and Di Giovanni, G. (2008). Serotonin-dopamine
interaction: an overview. Prog. Brain Res. 172, 3–6. doi: 10.1016/S0079-6123(08)
00901-1
Gaetan, S., Bonnet, A., Brejard, V., and Cury, F. (2014). French validation of
the 7-item Game Addiction Scale for adolescents. Rev. Eur. Psychol. Appl. 64,
161–168. doi: 10.1016/j.erap.2014.04.004
Geisel, O., Panneck, P., Stickel, A., Schneider, M., and Müller, C. A. (2015).
Characteristics of social network gamers: results of an online survey. Front.
Psychiatry 6:69. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2015.00069
Gil, S., and Droit-Volet, S. (2012). Emotion time distortions: the fundamental role
of arousal. Cogn. Emot. 26, 847–862. doi: 10.1080/02699931.2011.625401
Gowing, L., Ali, R. L., Allsop, S., Marsden, J., Turf, E. E., West, R., et al. (2015).
Global statistics on addictive behaviours: 2014 status report. Society for the
study of addiction. Addiction 110, 904–919. doi: 10.1111/add.12899
Griffiths, M. (2008). Diagnosis and management of video game addiction. New
Direct. Addict. Treat. Prevent. 12, 27–41.
Griffiths, M., Kuss, D., and King, D. (2012). Video game addiction: past. Present
and future. Curr. Psychiatry Rev. 8, 308–318. doi: 10.2174/157340012803520414
Han, D. H., Bolo, N., Daniels, M. A., Arenella, L., Lyoo, I. K., and Renshaw, P. F.
(2011). Brain activity and desire for Internet video game play. Comprehen.
Psychiatry 52, 88–95. doi: 10.1016/j.comppsych.2010.04.004
Hills, P., and Argyle, M. (2002). The oxford happiness questionnaire: a compact
scale for the measurement of psychological well-being. Pers. Individ. Differ. 33,
1073–1082. doi: 10.1016/s0191-8869(01)00213-6
Hull, D., William, G. A., and Griffiths, M. D. (2013). Video game characteristics,
happiness and flow as predictors of addiction among video game players: a pilot
study. J. Behav. Addict. 2, 145–152. doi: 10.1556/JBA.2.2013.005
Jatupaiboon, N., Pan-ngum, S., and Israsena, P. (2013). Real-time EEG-based
happiness detection system. Sci. World J. 2013:618649. doi: 10.1155/2013/
618649
Kandri, T. A., Bonotis, K. S., Floros, G. D., and Zafiropoulou, M. M. (2014).
Alexithymia components in excessive internet users: a multi-factorial analysis.
Psychiatry Res. 220, 348–355. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2014.07.066
Kardefelt-Winther, D. (2014). A conceptual and methodological critique of
Internet addiction research: towards a model of compensatory Internet use.
Comput. Hum. Behav. 31, 351–354. doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2013.10.059

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

Kashdan, T., Bsiwas-Diener, R., and King, L. (2008). ”Reconsidering Happiness:
the cost of distinguishing between hedonics and eudemonia”. .J. Posit. Psychol.
3, 219–233. doi: 10.1080/17439760802303044
Kennedy, A., Epstein, D. H., Jobes, M. L., Agage, D., Tyburski, M., Phillips, K. A.,
et al. (2015). Continuous in-the-field measurement of heart rate: correlates of
drug use, craving, stress and mood in polydrug users. Drug Alcohol Depend.
151, 159–166. doi: 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2015.03.024
Keyes, K. M., Jager, J., Hamilton, A., O’Malley, P. M., Miech, R., and Schulenberg,
J. (2015). National multi-cohort time trends in adolescent risk preference
and relation with substance use and problem behavior from 1976 to
2011. Drug Alcohol Depend. 155, 267–274. doi: 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2015.
06.031
Khazaal, Y., Chatton, A., Rothen, S., Achab, S., Thorens, G., Zullino, D., et al.
(2016). Psychometric properties of the 7-item game addiction scale among
French and German adults. BMC Psychiatry 16:132.
Khazaal, Y., Zullino, D., and Billieux, J. (2012). The Geneva smoking pictures:
development and preliminary validation. Eur. Addict. Res. 18, 103–109. doi:
10.1159/000335083
Kim, E. J., Namkoong, K., Ku, T., and Kim, S. J. (2007). The relationship between
online game addiction and aggression, self, control and narcissistic personality
traits. Eur. Psychiatry 23, 212–218. doi: 10.1016/j.eurpsy.2007.10.010
Kim, H., Ha, J., Chang, W. D., Park, W., Kim, L., and Im, C. H. (2018).
Detection of craving for gaming in adolescents with internet gaming
disorders using multimodal bio signals. Sensors 18:102. doi: 10.3390/s180
10102
Ko, C.-H., Gin-Chung, L., Sigmund, H., Ju-Yu, Y., Ming-Jen, Y., Wei-Chen, L.,
et al. (2009). Brain activities associated with gaming urge of online gaming
addiction. J. Psychiatry Res. 43, 739–747. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2008.09.012
Koepp, M. J., Gunn, R. N., Lawrence, A. D., Cunningham, V. J., Dagher, A., Jones,
T., et al. (1998). Evidence for striatal dopamine release during a video game.
Nature 393, 266–268. doi: 10.1038/30498
Kowert, R., Vogelgesang, J., Festl, R., and Quandt, T. (2015). Psychological causes
and consequences of online video game play. Comput. Hum. Behav. 45, 51–58.
doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2014.11.074
Kringelbach, M., and Berridge, K. (2009). Towards a functional neuro-anatomy of
pleasure and happiness. Trends Cogn. Sci. 13, 479–487. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2009.
08.006
Kringelbach, M., and Berridge, M. (2010). The neuroscience of happiness and
pleasure. Soc. Res. 77, 659–678.
Lawrence, L. M., Ciorciari, J., and Kyrios, M. (2014). ”Relationships that
compulsive buying has with addiction, obsessive-compulsiveness, hoarding and
depression”. Compr. Psychiatry 55, 1137–1145. doi: 10.1016/j.comppsych.2014.
03.005
Lazarus, R. S., and Folkman, S. (1984). Stress, Appraisal and Coping. New York, NY:
Springer.
Lee, Y., Han, D., Yang, K. C., Daniels, M. A., Na, C., Kee, B. S., et al. (2008).
Depression like characteristics of 5HTTLPR polymorphism and temperament
in excessive Internet users. J. Affect. Disord. 2, 165–169. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2007.
10.020
Lemmens, J., Valkenburg, P., and Peter, J. (2011). Psychological causes and
consequences of pathological gaming. Comput. Hum. Behav. 27, 144–152. doi:
10.1016/j.chb.2010.07.015
Lemmens, J. S., Valkenburg, P. M., and Peter, J. (2009). Development and validation
of game addiction scale for adolescents. Media Psychol. 12, 77–95. doi: 10.1080/
15213260802669458
Lepine, J.-P., and Briley, M. (2011). The increasing burden of depression.
Neuropsychiatr. Dis. Treat. 7(Suppl. 1), 3–7.
Loas, G., Dubal, S., Perot, P., Tirel, F., Nowaczkowski, P., and Pierson, A. (1997).
Etude de validation de la version française de l’échelle de plaisir de Snaith et
Hamilton. L’Encephale 23, 454–458.
Loonen, A., and Ivanova, S. (2016). Circuits regulating pleasure and happiness –
mechanisms of depression. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 10:571.
Lu, D., Wang, J. W., and Huang, A. C. (2010). Differentiation of internet addiction
risk level based on autonomic nervous responses: the internet-addiction
hypothesis of autonomic activity. Cyberpsychol. Behav. Soc. Netw. 13, 371–378.
doi: 10.1089/cyber.2009.0254
Lustig, R. (2017). The Hacking of the American Mind. New York, NY: Avery.
MacNicol, B. (2016). The biology of addiction. Can. J. Anesthesia 64, 141–148.
doi: 10.1097/YPG.0000000000000095

18

January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 2894

Gros et al.

Video Game Addiction and Emotional States

Mahapatra, A., and Sharma, P. (2018). Association of internet addiction and
alexithymia – A scoping review. Addict. Behav. 81, 175–182. doi: 10.1016/j.
addbeh.2018.02.004
Mikolajczak, M., and Luminet, O. (2006). Is alexithymia affected by situational
stress or is it a stable trat related to emotion regulation? Pers. Individ. Differ.
40, 1399–1408. doi: 10.1016/j.paid.2005.10.020
Orzack, M. H., Vouse, A. C., Wolf, D., and Hennen, J. (2006). An on-going study
of group treatment for men involved in problematic Internet enabled sexual
behaviour. CyberPsychol. Behav. 9, 348–360. doi: 10.1089/cpb.2006.9.348
Petry, N. M., Rehbein, F., Gentile, D. A., Lemmens, J. S., Rumpf, H. J., Mößle, T.,
et al. (2014). An international consensus for assessing Internet gaming disorder
using new DSM-5 approach. Addiction 109, 1399–1406. doi: 10.1111/add.12457
Petry, N. M., Rehbein, F., Ko, C. H., and O’Brien, C. H. (2015). Internet gaming
disorders in the DSM-5. Curr. Psychiatry Rep. 17:19.
Pollard, I. (2003). From Happiness to Depression”. Today’s Life Science. Available at:
www.biotechnews.com.au (accessed August, 2019).
Procter, P. (1985). Longman Concise English Dictionary. England: Longman Group
Limited.
Ryu, H., Lee, J., Choi, A., Park, S., Kim, D., and Choi, J. (2018). The relationship
between impulsivity and internet gaming disorders in young adults: mediating
effects of interpersonal relationships and depression. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public
Health 15:458. doi: 10.3390/ijerph15030458
Sarda, E., Bègue, L., Bry, C., and Gentile, D. (2016). Internet gaming disorders
and well-being: a scale validation. Cyberpsychol. Behav. Soc. Netw. 19, 674–679.
doi: 10.1089/cyber.2016.0286
Schimmenti, A., and Caretti, V. (2010). Psychic retreats or psychic pits? Unbearable
states of mind ad technological addiction. Psychoanalogy 27, 115–132. doi:
10.1037/a0019414
Schimmenti, A., Passanisi, A., Caretti, V., La Marca, L., Granieri, A., Iacolino,
C., et al. (2017). Traumatic experiences, alexithymia and Internet addiction
symptoms among late adolescents: a moderated mediation analysis. Addict.
Behav. 64, 314–320. doi: 10.1016/j.addbeh.2015.11.002
Schmidt, L. A. (2016). “What are addictive substances and behaviours and how
far do they extend?,” in Impact of Addictive Substances and Behaviours on
Individual and Societal Well-Being, eds P. Anderson, J. Rehm, and R. Room,
(London: Oxford Unversity Press).
Schwabe, L., Tegenhoff, M., Höffken, O., and Wolf, O. (2012). Simultaneous
glucocorticoid and noradrenergic activity disrupts the neural basis of goaldirected action in the human brain. J. Neurosci. 32, 10146–10155. doi: 10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.1304-12.2012
Seay, A. F., and Kraut, R. E. (2007). “Project massive: self-regulation and
problematic use of on-line gambling,” in Proceedings of the ACM CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, San Jose, CA.
Serretti, A., Calati, R., Mandelli, L., and Ronchi, D. D. (2006). Serotonin transporter
gene variant and behaviour: a comprehensive review. Curr. Drug Targets 7,
1659–1669. doi: 10.2174/138945006779025419
Shen, C., Ratan, C., Dora, Y., and Leavitt, A. (2016). “ Do men advance faster than
women? Debunking the gender performance gap in two massively multiplayer
online games. J. Comput. Med Commun. 21, 312–329. doi: 10.1111/jcc4.
12159
Sinha, R., Fuse, T., Aubin, L. R., and O’Malley, S. S. (2000). Psychological stress
drug-related cues and cocaine craving. Psychopharmacology 152, 140–148. doi:
10.1007/s002130000499
Snaith, R. P., Hamilton, M., Morley, S., and Humayan, A. (1995). A scale for
the assessment of the hedonic tone: the Snaith-Hamilton Pleasure Scale. Br. J.
Psychiatry 167, 99–103. doi: 10.1192/bjp.167.1.99
Szalavitz, M. (2011). What does a 400% increase in antidepressant use really mean?.
Patna: Time.
Teplan, M., and Krakovskà, A. (2009). “EEG features of psycho-physiological
relaxation,” in Proceedings of the 2nd International Symposium on Applied
Sciences in Biomedical and Communication Technologies ISABEL 2009,
(Bratislava: Institute of Measurement Science SAS).
Tian, Y., Liu, P., and Huang, X. (2018). The role of emotion regulation in reducing
emotional distortions of duration perception. Front. Psychol. 9:347. doi: 10.
3389/fpsyg.2018.00347

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

Torres, A., Catena, A., Megias, A., Maldonado, A., Candido, A., Verdejo-Garcia,
A., et al. (2013). Emotional and non-emotional pathways to impulsive behavior
and addiction. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 7:43. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00043
Tricomi, E., Ballaine, B. W., and O’Doherty, J. P. (2009). A specific role for posterior
dorsolateral striatum in human habit learning. Eur. J. Neurosci. 29, 2225–2232.
doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2009.06796.x
Üstün, T. B., Ayuso-Mateos, J. L., Chatterji, S., Mathers, C., and Murray, C. J.
(2004). Global burden of depressive disorders in the year 2000. Br. J. Psychiatry
184, 386–392. doi: 10.1192/bjp.184.5.386
van Holst, R. J., Lemmens, J. S., Valkenburg, P. M., Peter, J., Veltman, D. J., and
Goudriaan, A. E. (2012). Attentional bias and disinhibition toward gaming cues
are related to problem gaming in male adolescents. J. Adolescent. Health 50,
541–546. doi: 10.1016/j.jadohealth.2011.07.006
Volkow, N., Wang, G., Fowler, J., Tomasi, D., and Telang, F. (2011). Addiction:
beyond dopamine reward circuitry. PNAS 108, 15037–15042. doi: 10.1073/pnas.
1010654108
Wallace, B. C. (1989). Psychological and environmental determinants of relapse
in crack cocaine smokers. J. Subst. Abuse Treat. 6, 95–106. doi: 10.1016/07405472(89)90036-6
Wang, L., Wu, L., Wang, Y., Li, H., Liu, X., Du, X., et al. (2017). Altered brain
activities associated with craving and cue reactivity in people with Internet
gaming disorders: evidence from the comparison with recreational Internet
game users. Front. Psychol. 8:1150. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2017.01150
Waterman, A., Schwartz, S., and Conti, R. (2008). The implication of the two
conceptions of happiness (Hedonic. (enjoyment)and Eudamonia) for the
understanding of intrinsic motivation. J. Happiness Stud. 9, 41–79. doi: 10.1007/
s10902-006-9020-7
Wei, H.-T., Chen, M. H., Huang, P. C., and Bai, Y. M. (2012). The association
between online gaming, social phobia and depression: an internet survey. BMC
Psychiatry 12:92. doi: 10.1186/1471-244X-12-92
Wenzel, H. G., Bakken, I. J., Johansson, A., Götestam, K. G., and Øren, A. (2009).
Excessive computer game playing among Norwegian adults: self-reported
consequences of playing and association with mental health problems. Psychol.
Rep. 105, 1237–1247. doi: 10.2466/pr0.105.f.1237-1247
Whiteford, H., Degenhardt, L., Rehm, J., Baxter, A. J., Ferrari, A. J., Erskine,
H. E., et al. (2013). ”Global burden of attributable to mental and substance use
disorders: findings from the global burden of disease study 2010”. Lancet 382,
1575–1586. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(13)61611-6
Wittek, C. T., Reiten Finseras, T., Pallesen, S., Mentzoni, A., Hanss, D., Griffiths, M.,
et al. (2016). Prevalence and predictors of video game addiction: a study based
on a national and representative sample gamers. Int. J. Mental Health Addict.
14, 672–686. doi: 10.1007/s11469-015-9592-8
World Health Organization [WHO] (2018). Available at: https://www.who.int/
features/qa/gaming-disorder/en/ (accessed December, 2018).
Yau, Y., Crowley, M., Mayes, L., and Potenza, M. (2012). Are Internet use and
video game play addictive behaviours? Biological, clinical and public health
implications for youths and adults. Minerva Psichiatrica 53, 153–170.
Yin, H. H., Knowlton, B. J., and Ballaine, B. W. (2004). Lesions of dorsolateral
striatum preserve outcome expectancy but disrupt habit formation in
instrumental learning. Eur. J. Neurosci. 19, 181–189. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.
2004.03095.x
Zheng, Y., Fan, F., Liu, X., and Mo, L. (2012). Life events, coping and posttraumatic
stress symptoms among Chinese adolescents exposed to 2008 Wenchuan
Earthquake. China. PLoS One 7:e29404. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029404
Conflict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2020 Gros, Debue, Lete and van de Leemput. This is an open-access
article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License
(CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided
the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original
publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No
use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.

19

January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 2894

Gros et al.

Video Game Addiction and Emotional States

ANNEX
Self-Report Questionnaires
– Six items Questionnaire: Pleasure and/or Happiness associated with VG play (Items 7 and 8 were suppressed after the
preliminary phase)
Items
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)

I enjoy playing video games.
I am happy when I play video games.
I would find pleasure in my video game activities.
I find video games amusing.
I enjoy playing my favorite video game.
I often experience joy and exaltation when playing video games.
I would feel pleasure when I receive praise from other people on my capacity to play video games.
I don’t have fun when playing video games with other people.

fully disagree disagree slightly disagree slightly agree
agree
fully agree
<———I——————I——————I————————I——————I—————I———>
– Questionnaire on Craving for playing VG
– After having watched this clip I feel craving for playing video games.
fully disagree disagree slightly disagree slightly agree
agree
fully agree
<———I——————I——————I————————I——————I—————I———>
– Three bipolar items Questionnaire: Pleasure and/or Happiness associated with VG play
Bipolar items.
(1) I enjoy playing video games

I am happy when I play video games

I——————I——————I——————I—————I
(2) I would find pleasure in
my video game activities

I find video games amusing

I——————I——————I——————I—————I
(3) I enjoy playing my favorite
video game

I often experience joy and exaltation
when playing video games

I——————I——————I——————I—————I
– Ten key words [resulting from the semantic mapping of pleasure (P) and happiness (H)]: 3/10 words to be associated with VG
play
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

Joy
Craving
Well-being
Impulsivity
Fellowship
Desire
Fun
Contentment
Gratification
Serenity

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

20

January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 2894

Gros et al.

Video Game Addiction and Emotional States

Pleasure cluster: joy, craving, impulsivity, desire, fun, gratification.
Happiness cluster: well-being, fellowship, contentment, serenity.
– One bipolar item Questionnaire: Pleasure or Happiness associated with VG play (with explicit definitions)
Happiness: emotional state of lasting contentment.
Pleasure: transient emotional state when satisfying a desire, a craving.
A bipolar item
– When I play my favorite video games, I feel. . .
– Much happiness

– Happiness





Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

– A little bit of happiness


– A little bit of pleasure


21

– Pleasure


– Much pleasure


January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 2894

