The association between suicidal behavior,
attentional control, and frontal asymmetry
Thompson, C and Ong, E
http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fpsyt.2018.00079
Title

The association between suicidal behavior, attentional control, and frontal
asymmetry

Authors

Thompson, C and Ong, E

Type

Article

URL

This version is available at: http://usir.salford.ac.uk/46301/

Published Date

2018

USIR is a digital collection of the research output of the University of Salford. Where copyright
permits, full text material held in the repository is made freely available online and can be read,
downloaded and copied for non­commercial private study or research purposes. Please check the
manuscript for any further copyright restrictions.
For more information, including our policy and submission procedure, please
contact the Repository Team at: usir@salford.ac.uk.

Original Research
published: 14 March 2018
doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2018.00079

The association Between suicidal
Behavior, attentional control, and
Frontal asymmetry
Catherine Thompson1* and Elsie Li Chen Ong1,2
1
School of Health Sciences, University of Salford, Salford, United Kingdom, 2 Division of Information and Technology
Studies, Faculty of Education, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong

Edited by:
Yossi Levi-Belz,
Ruppin Academic Center, Israel
Reviewed by:
Jeremy Gordon Stewart,
Queen’s University, Canada
Henry W. Chase,
University of Pittsburgh,
United States
*Correspondence:
Catherine Thompson
c.thompson@salford.ac.uk
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Psychopathology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychiatry
Received: 30 November 2017
Accepted: 26 February 2018
Published: 14 March 2018
Citation:
Thompson C and Ong ELC (2018)
The Association Between Suicidal
Behavior, Attentional Control, and
Frontal Asymmetry.
Front. Psychiatry 9:79.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2018.00079

Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org

It can be difficult to identify those at risk of suicide because suicidal thoughts are often
internalized and not shared with others. Yet to prevent suicide attempts it is crucial to
identify suicidal thoughts and actions at an early stage. Past studies have suggested
that deficits in attentional control are associated with suicide, with the argument that
individuals are unable to inhibit negative thoughts and direct resources away from
negative information. The current study aimed to investigate the association of suicidal
behavior with neurological and behavioral markers, measuring attentional bias and
inhibition in two Stroop tasks. Fifty-four participants responded to the color of color
words in a standard Stroop task and the color of positive, negative, and neutral words
in an emotional Stroop task. Electroencephalographic (EEG) activity was recorded from
frontal areas during each task and at resting. Participants were separated into a low-risk
and high-risk group according to their self-reported suicidal behavior. Participants in
the high-risk group showed slower response times in the color Stroop and reduced
accuracy to incongruent trials, but faster response times in the emotional Stroop task.
Response times to the word “suicide” were significantly slower for the high-risk group.
This indicates an attentional bias toward specific negative stimuli and difficulties inhibiting information for those with high levels of suicidal behavior. In the emotional Stroop
task the high-risk group showed reduced activity in leftward frontal areas, suggesting
limitations in the ability to regulate emotional processing via the left frontal regions. The
findings support the argument that deficits in attentional control are related to suicidal
behavior. The research also suggests that under certain conditions frontal asymmetry
may be associated with suicidal behavior.
Keywords: suicide, attentional control, inhibition, frontal asymmetry, emotional Stroop, capability model

INTRODUCTION
Suicidal behavior refers to a wide range of suicide-related cognitions, emotions, and behaviors (1).
It is a term that has been used to categorize behavior associated with ideas, intentions, motivations,
plans, and attempts for suicide. Prediction and prevention of suicide is challenging because it is
a personal and sensitive topic (2). Those who experience suicidal behavior may avoid discussing
this with others and sharing their thoughts can often trigger feelings of stigmatization. This can
also lead to difficulties in identifying those who are vulnerable to suicide because assessments
are largely based on clinical interviews and self-report measures (3). This means clinicians have

1

March 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 79

Thompson and Ong

Attentional Control, Asymmetry, and Suicide

to rely on individuals self-disclosing information regarding
their current suicidal thoughts and plans, and any history of
past suicide attempts. Such disclosure may be unreliable if a
person is unwilling to report their intentions (4) and individuals may deliberately deny or conceal their suicide tendency to
avoid intervention or hospitalization (2, 5). This highlights the
importance of developing alternative measures for identifying
individuals with a suicide risk. One potential option would be to
use measures of cognitive and neurological processing (5).
Deficits in cognitive processing and neurological activity
have been found in suicidal individuals and these are specifically
related to “executive function” (6–9). Executive function [also
termed cognitive control, e.g., Ref. (10)] constitutes many
components that allow an individual to plan and execute goaldirected behavior including the ability to regulate emotions,
exert inhibitory control, shift focus between multiple tasks,
and flexibly modify behavior according to a situation (11–14).
Deficits therefore relate to impairment of a broad range of cognitive functions such as memory, attention, and decision-making.
Miyake et al. (15) identify three key components of executive
function: shifting, updating, and inhibition. Updating is the
ability to maintain relevant information within working memory
and to update this information in accordance with changes in
task demands. Shifting refers to directing attentional resources
away from task-irrelevant information and toward task-relevant
information. Inhibition is the ability to override an automatic but
irrelevant response. Attentional control (the ability to flexibly
shift attentional resources in dynamic situations, maintain focus
on relevant information, and inhibit irrelevant information) is
implicated in each of these components. Deficits in attentional
control are argued to be related to affective disorders as individuals
have difficulties shifting resources away from negative thoughts
and re-directing attention toward more positive information
(16). The importance of executive control in the development and
maintenance of affective disorders is outlined in an integrative
cognitive-biological model of depression that proposes two key
components (17, 18). Initially, low-level bottom–up processing of
negative information results in attentional biases. Second, deficits
in top–down control processes mean that an individual is unable
to direct attention away from negative information.
Executive dysfunction is argued to have a direct impact on
emotional regulation as it prevents individuals engaging in effective mood-regulation strategies and instead a person may utilize
maladaptive strategies that serve to sustain negative biases. For
instance, Joormann and Tanovic (10) make the argument that
individuals with major depressive disorder may have difficulties changing the contents of working memory and moving
the focus away from negative thoughts (updating). Deficits in
shifting have also been associated with increased rumination
in depressed individuals due to an inability to shift the focus
of attention away from negative thoughts [e.g., Ref. (19)]. This
increased focus on negative information serves to enhance and
maintain negative mood states (20).
While the theoretical explanations for the links between
executive function and affective disorders focus on depression,
deficits in executive control have also been linked to the reduced
ability to deal with emotional disturbances that are commonly

Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org

found in suicidal patients (21, 22). For example, difficulties with
response inhibition can make one more likely to act impulsively,
while impairments in interference control can prevent the inhibition of irrelevant and intrusive thoughts, such as those relating to
self-harm (13, 23). Richard-Devantoy and Courtet (24) proposed
that suicidal individuals with impaired executive function are
at a greater risk of attempting suicide due to their diminished
ability to engage in protective cognitive strategies. This is because
they are less able to accurately assess the consequences of their
behavior, and less capable of inhibiting maladaptive emotional
and behavioral responses. They found that individuals who had
attempted suicide showed deficits in decision-making, problem
solving, autobiographical long-term memory, and working
memory. Loyo et al. (25) measured the links between executive
functioning and suicidal behavior, taking measures of attentional
control, abstract reasoning ability, and decision-making in 25
suicide attempters with depressive symptoms, 25 non-suicide
attempters with depressive symptoms, and 24 non-depressed
participants. Consistent with Richard-Devantoy and Courtet
(24), they found that compared with the non-suicide attempters and non-depressed participants, suicide attempters showed
greater deficits in a range of tasks including the Wisconsin Card
Sorting Task and the Iowa Gambling Task. These findings suggest a relationship between executive dysfunction and suicidal
behavior. Interestingly, a study by Keilp et al. (16) that compared
executive function in depressed suicide attempters, depressed
non-attempters, and healthy controls found that while the patient
groups showed poor performance across a number of measures,
those with a past suicide attempt showed specific deficits in tests
of attentional control and working memory.
Further supporting evidence for the link between suicide and
executive control comes from a study by Richard-Devantoy et al.
(26) using a color-word interference test similar to the Stroop
task. Participants were 17 healthy controls and 38 depressed individuals with no suicide attempts or ideation (thoughts of suicide),
16 depressed individuals with suicide ideation, 14 depressed
low-lethality suicide attempters, and 17 depressed high-lethality
suicide attempters. The task involved color naming, word reading,
inhibition, and inhibition/switching trials and compared with
healthy controls and those with suicide ideation, high-lethality
suicide attempters took longer to respond to inhibition trials.
Richard-Devantoy et al. (26) argued that the results have important
implications for suicidal behavior because deficits in executive
control may undermine the ability to deal with real-life emotional
distractions. While individuals with adequate inhibition may
exert control over inappropriate behaviors (such as self-harm)
and are better able to resist suicidal urges, those with impaired
inhibition may be less able to exercise control over these impulses,
and may have difficulty resisting the urge to act on suicidal
thoughts. Such deficits may therefore predict whether an individual will engage in suicidal behavior. The authors do however
state that executive control is impacted by age and their findings
are limited due to the fact that they used a group of older adults.
Consequently it would be beneficial to assess executive dysfunction in a younger population.
Executive function is primarily controlled by the prefrontal
cortex (PFC), which interacts closely with other brain regions such
2

March 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 79

Thompson and Ong

Attentional Control, Asymmetry, and Suicide

as the anterior cingulate and the amygdala (13, 27). It has been
proposed that the frontal regions of the brain, predominantly the
dorsal lateral and ventral lateral PFC (dlPFC, vlPFC), are responsible for guiding attention, maintaining information within the
mind, shifting cognitive resources between different sources of
information, and inhibiting the processing of task-irrelevant
information (8, 9, 28–30). Compton et al. (28) measured PFC
activity using functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) in
a color Stroop and an emotional Stroop task. In a color Stroop
task (31), participants are asked to name the color of words that
possess a congruent (e.g., the word red printed in red) or incongruent semantic meaning (e.g., the word red printed in green).
In an emotional Stroop task (32), participants are asked to name
the color of emotional and neutral words. Both tasks require
the inhibition of an automated, irrelevant response (reading
the word), and the allocation of resources to process a relevant
response (the name of the color); therefore, they allow for the
measurement of attentional control. In general, studies show
that responses are slower to incongruent trials compared with
congruent trials in a standard color Stroop, revealing difficulties
inhibiting the automatic processing of irrelevant information
[known as the Stroop interference effect (33)]. Responses are
also slower to emotional words compared with neutral words in
an emotional Stroop task [also known as the emotional Stroop
effect (34–36)]. This is particularly the case in patient groups
when the emotional words are related to affective disorders
[e.g., Ref. (37)]. Compton et al. (28) found that activity in the
dlPFC increased for trials in which the word was incongruent to
the color and for trials in which negative words were presented.
It is argued that increased activity reflects greater investment of
resources in order to inhibit automatic responses (regardless of
whether these are emotionally significant); therefore, difficulties
recruiting the dlPFC would lead to impaired inhibition.
Pan et al. (38) measured response inhibition using the Go/
No-go task in adolescents with various degrees of suicidal
thoughts and actions. The sample included 15 depressed adolescents with a history of suicide attempts, 15 depressed adolescents
with no history of suicidal behavior, and 14 healthy controls.
The Go/No-go task requires participants to press a button in
response to a target stimulus (Go), but to inhibit the button press
and do nothing in response to a non-target stimulus (No-go).
In the healthy controls, fMRI recordings showed increased
activation of the prefrontal, anterior cingulate, and parietal
cortical regions. The anterior cingulate in particular is considered crucial for inhibitory control (8) and while the depressed
individuals with no past history of suicidal behavior did not
differ from the controls with regard to activity in this area, the
depressed adolescents with a history of suicide attempts showed
significantly reduced activity. This indicates impairments in
inhibitory control for suicidal individuals and also shows the
relationship between cognitive processing and cortical activity.
The findings were consistent with those of Compton et al. (28)
regarding the association between frontal activity and attentional
control. They also suggest that this association may constitute
a neurobiological basis for predisposition to suicidal behavior.
It is proposed that executive control may moderate frontal cortical activity and neurological measures may therefore be used

Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org

to predict suicidal behavior of individuals beyond the currently
used self-report measures.
The majority of past research exploring the neurological
basis of affective disorders has focused on clinical depression
and there are comparatively fewer studies that measure executive
function and neurological activity in suicidal populations. The
initial argument that limited executive function and patterns
of PFC activity may be related to affective disorders came from
observations of patients who had experienced a stroke and
were suffering from clinical depression [(39); see Ref. (40) for a
review]. It was evident that following damage to the left prefrontal regions some patients became increasingly depressed, while
damage to the right frontal regions resulted in increasing levels
of manic symptoms. Schaffer et al. (41) explored this dissociation by measuring cortical activity in patients who were suffering
from depression to varying extents. The aim was to identify any
“asymmetry” of activity to support the claim that different patterns of frontal activation may be related to the severity of the
disorder. Electroencephalogram (EEG) electrodes were placed
on the frontal and parietal regions of the brain and similar to the
clinical report of Gainotti (39), patients indicating more severe
symptoms of depression showed greater activity in the right
compared with the left. Importantly, this pattern was only found
in the frontal regions, not the parietal regions.
These findings led to a rapid expansion of research surrounding lateralized frontal activation and EEG has been a common
tool used to measure the correlates of relative hemispheric dominance (42, 43). It has been posited that the left hemisphere (LH)
is dominant for processing positive emotions, whereas the right
hemisphere (RH) is dominant for processing negative emotions.
This means that if individuals have greater electrocortical activity in the right frontal region, they will have a disposition toward
focusing on negative emotions and information. Supporting
evidence for this came from Davidson and Fox (44) who were
among the first to use asymmetric frontal cortical activity to
make inferences about frontal asymmetry and emotions. They
suggested that patterns of lateralized brain activity can be identified as early as infancy and to test this hypothesis they recruited
10-month old infants to view videotapes consisting of happy or
sad facial expressions. Activity in frontal and parietal regions
was recorded and it was found that increased activation in the
left (relative to the right) corresponded to viewing happy faces
while increased activation in the right (relative to the left) corresponded to viewing sad faces. The findings were also consistent
with those of Schaffer et al. (41) as the differential pattern of
activity was only found in the frontal regions, not the parietal
regions.
Based on this research, Davidson et al. (45) and Davidson
et al. (46) developed the dispositional model. The model holds
a valence hypothesis that positive affect is associated with leftward frontal cortical activity, and negative affect is associated
with rightward frontal cortical activity [e.g., Ref. (42)]. Since
the introduction of this model research has been conducted to
show the relationship between asymmetric frontal activation
and depression (42, 43, 47–50). Overall the findings show that
patients with a history of depression or with recurrent depression
have relatively lower left frontal cortical activity (51), also known
3

March 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 79

Thompson and Ong

Attentional Control, Asymmetry, and Suicide

as left frontal hypoactivation [for reviews, see Ref. (52–54)]. This
is in contrast to healthy controls that show the opposite pattern
with greater leftward frontal cortical activity (50, 55). The level
of reduced leftward activity also correlates with the level of
symptoms reported, suggesting that this may provide a potential
marker for assessing severity of disorders in patients (56).
The dispositional model makes the assumption that positive
emotion is always associated with leftward frontal activation
and negative emotion is always associated with rightward
frontal activation. This has been challenged by Coan et al. (57)
who proposed the capability model. This model supports the
claim that individual differences in frontal asymmetry exist
but argues that the differences will vary according to different
situational contexts (40, 58). Therefore, while the dispositional
model posits that rightward frontal activity will correspond to
more negative emotional responses in all situations (e.g., in
events that trigger joy, fear, or sadness), Coan and Allen (58)
propose that differences in frontal asymmetry correspond to
the different emotional demands of a situation. The capability
model therefore suggests that asymmetrical differences are best
thought of as interactions between individual differences and
situational demands.
Despite the differences in these two models, neurological
findings provide evidence that frontal asymmetry may serve as
an indirect neurological indicator for predicting depression, or
even suicide risk. For instance, using event-related fMRI, Jollant
et al. (59) compared the neural activity of previously depressed
men with past suicide attempts, previously depressed men with
no suicide attempts, and healthy male controls. Across the three
groups, only those with a history of suicide attempts showed
frontal asymmetrical differences in response to emotional faces
(angry, happy, and neutral). Specifically, they showed increased
neural activation in the right lateral orbitofrontal cortex in
response to angry faces relative to neutral faces. Jollant et al.
argue that increased sensitivity to another person’s disapproval
(e.g., in the form of an angry facial expression) and a higher
propensity to process and act on negative emotions may exacerbate suicidal behavior in suicidal individuals. This links to
the proposal that increased processing of negative information
(as demonstrated by increased activation) may serve to maintain
negative attentional biases in individuals suffering from affective
disorders (10, 17, 18).
Grimshaw and Carmel (60) provided an explanation for the
inhibitory difficulties in depressed individuals arguing that they
are unable to utilize the parts of the brain (i.e., the left PFC)
responsible for inhibition, particularly the inhibition of negative
information. Studies have supported this by showing that failure
to recruit the left dlPFC when presented with irrelevant negative information is associated with depression (61, 62) and trait
negative affect (63). Given the relationship between frontal asymmetry and inhibition, Grimshaw and Carmel (60) have proposed
the asymmetric inhibition model. It is predicted that each frontal
region specializes in the inhibition of different types of emotions,
with the left dlPFC responsible for inhibiting negative stimuli,
and the right dlPFC responsible for inhibiting positive stimuli.
Therefore, frontal asymmetric activation reflects the ability to
inhibit different types of emotional stimuli.

Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org

The current study aims to further investigate the relationship
between frontal asymmetry, executive function (specifically
attentional control), and suicidal behavior. While the majority
of the previous research focuses on clinical samples there is an
argument that early identification of those at risk of suicidal
behavior is essential (64, 65). On the basis of this, the present
work explores the links between suicidal behavior, attentional
control, and asymmetry using a non-clinical population reporting
relatively mild symptoms. Frontal asymmetry was recorded from
individuals reporting high and low levels of suicidal behavior at
resting state (both eyes closed and eyes opened) and during a
color Stroop task and an emotional Stroop task. The dispositional
model (45, 46) asserts that individuals who report higher levels
of suicidal thoughts and behaviors will exhibit rightward frontal
activity compared with those with low suicide risk regardless of
the situation. However, the capability model (57) argues that the
effect of suicidal behavior on asymmetric frontal brain activation
will be more pronounced during emotionally demanding situations. By comparing frontal asymmetry at resting state and in
emotional and non-emotional tasks it will be possible to test the
predictions of these two models. Using the Stroop task also allows
differences in attentional control to be compared according to
levels of suicidal behavior. It is proposed that individuals reporting higher levels of suicidal behavior (high-risk) will show more
difficulties in attentional control and will therefore be at a greater
risk of suicide (and more likely to make a future suicide attempt)
because they are less able to inhibit negative thoughts and direct
attention toward task-relevant information. In contrast, those
who experience low levels of suicidal behavior will have effective
attentional control and will therefore be less likely to focus on
irrelevant negative thoughts and actions. On the basis of this it
was predicted that individuals with a high-risk would show a bigger Stroop interference effect in the color Stroop task compared
with those in the low-risk group. For the emotional Stroop task,
it was predicted that all participants would show the expected
emotional Stroop effect, but that the high-risk group would show
increased difficulty inhibiting negative words. According to the
models of frontal asymmetry it was hypothesized that those
who report high levels of suicidal behavior would also show
relatively higher rightward frontal activation during the color
Stroop task. Additionally, in the emotional Stroop task, leftward
frontal activation would correspond to inhibition of negative
stimuli whereas rightward frontal activation would correspond
to inhibition of positive stimuli.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Design

The study used a mixed measures design to investigate the effects
of suicidal behavior in a Stroop task and an emotional Stroop
task. Suicidal behavior was a between-participants variable
with two conditions, high-risk and low-risk. In the color Stroop
task a 2 (suicidal behavior) × 2 (congruency) design was used.
Congruency referred to whether each color word was the same
(congruent) or different (incongruent) to the color of ink in
which the word was presented and this was a within-participants

4

March 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 79

Thompson and Ong

Attentional Control, Asymmetry, and Suicide

variable. In the emotional Stroop task a 2 (suicidal behavior) × 3
(emotion) design was used. Emotion was the valence of the
words presented with positive, negative, and neutral words.
This was a within-participants variable. The dependent variables
were accuracy (total number of correct responses), and response
times (milliseconds) to respond to the color of each word.
A self-reported measure of depression was also recorded for
each participant.
Frontal asymmetry (uV2) was recorded during resting state
and during the color Stroop and emotional Stroop tasks. In the
resting state and color Stroop task asymmetry was compared
between the high- and low-risk groups. In the emotional Stroop
task asymmetry was compared between these two groups and
across the three conditions of emotion.

Words [ANEW (70)], 64 positive (e.g., birthday, laughter, angel),
64 negative (e.g., bankrupt, suicide, funeral), and 64 neutral
(e.g., handle, carpet, time). Valence of positive words ranged
from 6.17 to 8.43 with a mean of 7.49, valence of negative words
ranged from 1.61 to 3.69 with a mean of 2.47, and valence of
neutral words ranged from 4.02 to 7.57 with a mean of 5.64.
Depression was measured using the Beck Depression
Inventory-II [BDI-II (71)]. This self-report inventory measures
different aspects of depression such as sadness and irritability.
It is a 21-item inventory and all items are assessed on a 4-point
rating scale from zero to three (0 indicates no symptoms and
a score of 3 indicates severe symptoms). Each item focuses on
a particular feeling or behavior and respondents are asked to
indicate the extent to which they have experienced this in the
previous two weeks. For instance, item 14 focuses on “worthlessness” with responses from 0 (“I do not feel I am worthless”) to
3 (“I feel utterly worthless”). The total score ranges from 0 to 63
with higher scores indicating more severe depression symptoms.
A score of 17 or above represents a risk of clinical depression, and
scores higher than 31 are indicative of more severe depression.
In the current investigation responses to item 9 were removed.
This item refers to suicidal behavior and was removed to avoid
any overlap with the SBQ-R.
Electroencephalogram activity was recorded using an Emotive
EEG Neuroheadset with a sampling rate of 128 Hz (Emotiv
Technology Inc., USA) that records from 14 sites (AF3, AF4, F3,
F4, FC5, FC6, F7, F8, T7, T8, P7, P8, O1, O2) using a 16-channel
Biosemi Active Two system. Two additional electrodes situated at
the back of the ears (CMS, DRL) were selected as the reference of
choice for all analyses and all sites were referenced to the average
of these electrodes during recording, and re-referenced offline.
Frontal electrodes were F3, F4, F7, F8, AF3, and AF4. Central
electrodes were FC5, FC6, T7, and T8. Parietal electrodes were
P7 and P8 and occipital electrodes were O1 and O2. The numbers
also indicated the area of the right/left hemispheres of the brain
an electrode was located, where even numbers represent the RH
and odd numbers refer to the LH. Prior to use, all felt pads on top
of the sensors were moistened with a saline solution.

Participants

Fifty-four undergraduate students (32 females) studying at The
Open University in Hong Kong were recruited by convenience
sampling. Age ranged from 18 to 27 years, with a mean of
21.65 years (SD = 2.10). Prospective participants were prescreened
for previous history of neurological and mental health problems
(e.g., currently taking medication known to affect cognitive
performance, cognitive deficits, and diagnosis of PTSD).

Stimuli and Materials

Suicidal behavior was measured using the Suicidal Behavior
Questionnaire-Revised [SBQ-R (66)]. This is a 4-item inventory that explores different dimensions of suicidal thoughts
and actions. Item 1 measures lifetime suicide ideation and/or
suicide attempts, item 2 assesses the frequency of suicidal
thoughts in the previous 12 months, item 3 quantifies the threat
of a suicide attempt, and item 4 is the self-reported likelihood
of future suicidal behavior. Each question was answered using
a Likert scale and the scale for each question differed slightly,
with scales ranging from a minimum of 1 to a maximum of
6. Total scores, ranging from 3 to 18, represent overall suicide
risk whereby higher scores represent greater risk. In an undergraduate student population the SBQ-R has demonstrated good
internal reliability with Cronbach’s alpha ranging from 0.76 (66)
to 0.8 (67, 68). Individuals scoring a total of 7 or above were
considered to be at a significant risk of suicidal behavior. A cutoff of 7 was selected on the basis of past findings from Osman
et al. (66) who found a total score of 7 was most effective at
distinguishing between those who had suicide ideation and/or
had made a suicide attempt from those who had not experienced
suicide behavior. This differs from clinical populations, and while
Osman et al. (66) suggest a cut-off of 8, Rueda-Jaimes et al. (69)
propose a cut-off of 11 for clinical populations.
The Stroop tasks were presented on a 19˝ computer monitor
using E-Prime. In the color Stroop task the words “red,” “yellow,”
“blue,” and “green” were presented in bold Times New Roman
font, size 28. Each word was presented in the color red, yellow,
blue, or green depending on the congruence of the trial. The
emotional Stroop task was adapted from Herrington et al. (62)
and consisted of positive, negative, and neutral words presented
in one of the four colors (red, yellow, blue, and green). A total
of 192 words were used from the Affective Norms for English

Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org

Procedure

After providing written informed consent participants were
seated in a dimly lit room and the EEG headset was affixed to the
scalp with sites located according to the 10/20 system (72). The
impedance at each site was checked to ensure good contact quality (large signal to noise ratio). Participants were instructed to
remain seated in a relaxed state and EEG recordings were taken
with the eyes closed for 2 min and the eyes open for 2 min to
provide a resting state measure. Next, participants were asked to
complete the color and the emotional Stroop tasks while wearing
the EEG headset. The order of the tasks was counterbalanced
across participants. For both tasks, a trial began with a fixation
cross of 500 ms followed by the presentation of a word in the
center of the computer screen. For each word participants were
asked to identify the color of the text (red, yellow, blue, or green)
as quickly as possible by pressing the corresponding key on the
computer keyboard (R, Y, B, and G). A total of 60 trials were
completed in the color Stroop task with 30 congruent and 30

5

March 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 79

Thompson and Ong

Attentional Control, Asymmetry, and Suicide

incongruent trials. There were an equal number of words presented in red, yellow, blue, and green and all trials were presented
in a random order. The emotional Stroop task consisted of three
emotional blocks showing positive, negative, and neutral words.
The order of the blocks was randomized and there were 64 trials
in each block. An equal number of words were presented in each
of the four colors within each block and all trials were presented
in a random order.

taking any medication known to affect brain activity or cognitive performance. The SBQ-R had a suitable level of internal
reliability that was consistent with past studies [e.g., Ref.
(66)], Cronbach’s α = 0.74. Participants were separated into
high and low suicidal behavior groups according to their total
score on the SBQ-R. Participants with a total score less than 7
were categorized as low-risk (median score = 5, range = 3–6),
while participants with a score of 7 or above were categorized
as high-risk (median score = 9.5, range = 7–15). There were
a total of 22 participants (13 female, aged 20–23, mean age of
21.55) in the high-risk group and 30 (18 female, aged 20–25,
mean age of 21.94) in the low-risk group. Six participants in
the high-risk group and none of the participants in the lowrisk group reported a past suicide attempt. To ensure that any
group differences were not driven by those who had made a
past suicide attempt, the results were analyzed once with all
participants included, and a second time without attempters.
Analysis without attempters is only reported where the results
differed from that of the full sample.
The data did not meet parametric assumptions, and therefore a
Mann–Whitney U test was used to confirm that the SBQ-R scores
between the two groups were significantly different (U = 0.001,
z = −6.162, p < 0.001, r = 0.85). Analysis of scores from the
BDI-II (without item 9) also showed that participants in the high
suicidal behavior group reported significantly higher levels of
depression (median score = 28, range = 17–42) than those in the
low suicidal behavior group [(median score = 8, range = 1–16),
U = 112.500, z = −4.034, p < 0.001, r = 0.57].

EEG Data Processing

Activity was recorded across the entirety of each block to allow
for a general pattern of hemispheric asymmetry to be gained.
Consequently activity was taken for all elements within a trial
(fixation, stimulus presentation, and response) and a precise
measure of electrocortical activity in specific time epochs was
not generated. Activity within each block was compared with a
baseline measure taken over a period of 20 s in eyes-open resting state immediately prior to each block. All artifact screening,
re-referencing, and spectral analysis were performed using
EEGLAB toolbox (73) and custom scripts in MATLAB (74).
Each data file was visually inspected to manually remove artifacts
such as aberrant signals due to large non-blink eye movements,
muscle movements, or signal discontinuities. Further EEG artifacts were removed using an independent component analysis
[ICA; (73)] during offline signal processing. A bandpass filter
of 2–45 Hz and a notch filter of 50 Hz were applied to the raw
data with 128-Hz sampling frequency per channel. A Hamming
window (1024 sample and 50% overlap) was also applied to the
data in preparation for spectral analysis, from which the power
and asymmetry estimates were derived.
The experiment was completed in blocks (eyes open resting,
eyes closed resting, color Stroop, positive, negative, and neutral
emotional Stroop) and activity was recorded and analyzed across
each block. Frontal alpha asymmetry was calculated in 1-Hz
frequency bins and averaged across the frequency bandwidths
of interest: delta (1.5–3.5 Hz), theta (4–7.5 Hz), alpha (8–13 Hz),
alpha1 (8–10 Hz), alpha2 (10–13 Hz), beta1 (13–20 Hz), and
beta2 (20–28 Hz). Frontal alpha asymmetry was calculated for
F3 (left frontal) and F4 (right frontal) electrodes using the Fast
Fourier Transform (FFT) method. The alpha power values for
F3 and F4 were natural log transformed (73) such that an asymmetry score comparing activity in the RH to activity in the LH
in each block was computed [ln ALPHA = (ln[RH] − ln[LH])].
Frontal asymmetry indices were calculated by subtracting the
natural log of the power of the LH electrode from that of the RH
electrode [ln [right (F4)] − [left (F3)]] (75). Given the inverse
relationship between alpha power and cortical activity (76),
a positive alpha asymmetry index reflects relatively higher left
frontal activity and lower right frontal activity, and a negative
asymmetry index reflects relatively higher right frontal activity
and lower left frontal cortical activity.

Resting EEG

To investigate differences in alpha-asymmetrical activation in
relation to suicidal behavior in the resting state, independent
t-tests were conducted with suicidal behavior group as the
between-participant variable and alpha-asymmetrical index
as the dependent variable. Opposite to what was expected, the
alpha-asymmetrical index was higher in the high-risk group
(M = 0.07uV2, SD = 0.49) than the low-risk group (M = 0.51uV2,
SD = 0.67) during the eyes-open resting state [t(50) = −2.63,
p = 0.01, Cohen’s d = 0.75]. This means that while both groups
showed more activity in the left compared with the right, this was
most pronounced for the high-risk group. There was no significant
difference in alpha asymmetry between the high- and the lowrisk groups during the eyes-closed resting state [t(50) = −4.497,
p = 0.141, Cohen’s d = 0.42].

Performance in the Stroop Task

All incorrect trials were removed and any correct response times
that were more than 2.5 SD from the mean were classed as outliers
and removed (a total of 4.84% of trials). Accuracy was analyzed
using a generalized estimating equation (GEE) assuming a
nega­tive binomial distribution. All RTs were log transformed to
ensure data met the assumptions of a normal distribution and
RT data were analyzed using a 2 (suicidal behavior) × 2 (congruency) mixed measures ANOVA.
Analysis of accuracy in the color Stroop task showed a significant main effect of suicidal behavior [Wald χ2 (1) = 4.385,
p < 0.05, Cohen’s d = 0.61]. Accuracy was higher for the low-risk

RESULTS
Two participants were excluded from the analysis due to
poor EEG data or missing behavioral data. The remaining 52
participants (31 females) were all right handed and were not

Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org

6

March 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 79

Thompson and Ong

Attentional Control, Asymmetry, and Suicide

group (M = 28.82, SD = 1.16) compared with the high-risk group
(M = 27.35, SD = 1.71). There was also a significant effect of congruency [Wald χ2 (1) = 24.053, p < 0.001, Cohen’s d = 1.86], with
higher accuracy in congruent (M = 29.4, SD = 0.76) compared
with incongruent trials (M = 27.78, SD = 1.51). There was a
significant interaction between suicidal behavior and congruency
[Wald χ2 (1) = 6.158, p < 0.05, Cohen’s d = 0.73]. Differences
between the low- and high-risk groups were only found in the
incongruent trials (M of 28.19 and 27.35 respectively, SD of 1.12
and 1.76) and not the congruent trials (M of 29.44 and 29.36
respectively, SD of 0.89 and 0.67) (see Figure 1A).
For RT (see Figure 1B), there was a significant effect
of suicidal behavior [F(1, 50) = 28.916, MSE = 27712.152,
p < 0.001, partial η2 = 0.366]. Participants reporting lower
levels of suicidal behavior showed faster response times than
those with higher levels (M of 700.95 and 878.72 ms respectively, and SD of 146.60 and 144.17). There was a significant
effect of congruency [F(1, 50) = 157.325, MSE = 4360.631,
p < 0.001, partial η2 = 0.719], with faster response times to
congruent (M = 704.17 ms, SD = 135.59) than incongruent
trials (M = 848.05 ms, SD = 170.78). There was no interaction
between suicidal behavior and congruence [F(1, 50) = 1.222,
MSE = 4360.63, p = 0.274, partial η2 = 0.084].
There was no significant difference in alpha-asymmetrical
index between the high-risk group (M = 0.334uV2, SD = 0.50)
and the low-risk group (M = 0.452uV2, SD = 0.85) in the color
Stroop task [t(50) = −0.580, p = 0.564, Cohen’s d = 0.18].

accuracy or because response times were more than 2.5 SD from
the mean. All RTs were log transformed to satisfy distributional
assumptions.
For accuracy (Figure 2A), the model revealed a significant
main effect of suicidal behavior [Wald χ2 (1) = 4.069, p < 0.05,
Cohen’s d = 0.58]. Accuracy was higher for the low-risk group
(M = 61.88, SD = 2.39) compared with the high-risk group
(M = 61.17, SD = 1.74). There was no main effect of emotion
[Wald χ2 (1) = 1.034, p = 0.309, Cohen’s d = 0.28], and no interaction between suicidal behavior and emotion [Wald χ2 (1) = 2.483,
p = 0.115, Cohen’s d = 0.45].
For RT (Figure 2B), there was a significant effect of suicidal
behavior [F(1, 50) = 11.30, MSE = 8495.123, p < 0.001, partial
η2 = 0.184] with faster response times in the high-risk group
(M = 593.31 ms, SD = 84.83) compared with the low-risk group
(M = 679.76 ms, SD = 94.95). There was no significant effect of
emotion [F(2, 100) = 1.824, MSE = 3969.585, p = 0.110, partial
η2 = 0.035] and no interaction between suicidal behavior and
emotion [F(2, 100) = 0.608, MSE = 2413.522, p = 0.546, partial
η2 = 0.012].
To assess inhibition of suicide-related stimuli, response times
were also considered across the two groups when responding to
the word “suicide.” A between-participants t-test was conducted
that showed significantly longer response times for the high-risk
group compared with the low-risk group [M of 725.20 and 652.78
respectively, SD of 126.32 and 116.12, t(50) = 2.17, p = 0.035,
Cohen’s d = 0.6].
A 2 (suicidal behavior) × 3 (emotion) mixed measures ANOVA
was conducted to analyze alpha-asymmetrical index in the emotional Stroop task (where sphericity was violated Greenhouse–
Geisser corrections are reported). This showed a significant effect
of suicidal behavior [F(1, 50) = 4.024, MSE = 0.484, p = 0.05,
partial η2 = 0.074], with a more positive index in the low-risk

Performance in the Emotional Stroop Task

Analysis of the emotional Stroop task followed that of the color
Stroop task. Accuracy was analyzed using a GEE and RT was
analyzed with a 2 (suicidal behavior) × 3 (emotion) mixed measures ANOVA. A total of 4.21% of trials were removed due to low

Figure 1 | Accuracy (total correct) and RT (ms) in the color Stroop task. Error bars represent standard error of the mean. (A) The interaction between suicidal
behavior and congruency for accuracy. Reduced accuracy to incongruent trials compared with congruent trials was more apparent for the high-risk group.
(B) Participants with a high risk of suicide were slower to identify the color of the words (regardless of congruency) than the low-risk group. Response times
were also slower to incongruent trials compared with congruent.

Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org

7

March 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 79

Thompson and Ong

Attentional Control, Asymmetry, and Suicide

Figure 2 | Accuracy (total correct) and response times (ms) in the emotional Stroop task. Error bars represent standard error of the mean. There was a speedaccuracy trade-off in this task whereby the high-risk group responded faster (B) but were less accurate (A).

group (M = 0.49uV2, SD = 0.81) compared with the high-risk
group (M = 0.10uV2, SD = 0.61). With the removal of attempters
from the high-risk group, this effect was no longer significant
[F(1, 44) = 2.955, MSE = 0.501, p = 0.093, partial η2 = 0.063].
There was also a significant effect of emotion [F(1.358,
67.91) = 13.73, MSE = 0.113, p < 0.001, partial η2 = 0.215].
Planned contrasts were completed to compare asymmetry in the
positive and negative conditions to that in the neutral condition.
These revealed that the alpha-asymmetry index was significantly
higher for negative words (M = 0.44uV2, SD = 0.78) compared
with neutral words [(M = 0.18uV2, SD = 0.80), F(1, 50) = 16.632,
MSE = 0.231, p < 0.001, partial η2 = 0.250] and higher for positive
words (M = 0.37uV2, SD = 0.66) compared with neutral words
[F(1, 50) = 12.852, MSE = 0.175, p = 0.001, partial η2 = 0.204];
see Figure 3. There was no interaction between emotion and suicidal behavior [F(1.358, 67.91) = 3.068, MSE = 0.113, p = 0.072,
partial η2 = 0.058]. This interaction was however significant
when attempters were removed from the high-risk group [F(1.38,
60.902) = 5.312, MSE = 0.079, p < 0.05, partial η2 = 0.11]. This
supported a trend showing that the high-risk participants showed
a negative asymmetry index in the neutral condition compared
with the positive [F(1, 44) = 7.724, MSE = 0.185, p < 0.01, partial
η2 = 0.15] and negative conditions [F(1, 44) = 4.565, MSE = 0.232,
p < 0.05, partial η2 = 0.094]. This reflects more rightward relative
to leftward activity in the neutral condition and this pattern was
not found for the low-risk participants.

Figure 3 | Measures of frontal alpha asymmetry (uV2) in the emotional
Stroop task showing a more positive index for the low-risk group (a positive
alpha asymmetry index reflects lower right frontal cortical activity and a
negative asymmetry index reflects lower left frontal cortical activity). The
asymmetry index was also higher for emotional trials compared with neutral.
Error bars represent standard error of the mean.

attentional control, and suicidal behavior. Frontal asymmetry
was compared between individuals reporting high and low levels
of suicidal behavior at resting state (both eyes closed and eyes
opened), during a color Stroop task, and during an emotional
Stroop task. It was predicted that individuals with a high risk of
suicidal thoughts and actions would show general difficulties in

DISCUSSION
Deficits in cognitive processing and neurological activity
have been consistently linked to suicidal behavior in previous
research (7, 9, 24) and the current study sought to extend this
work by examining the association between frontal asymmetry,

Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org

8

March 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 79

Thompson and Ong

Attentional Control, Asymmetry, and Suicide

attentional control, difficulties inhibiting negative stimuli, and
reduced leftward-frontal activity.
In the color Stroop task, the high-risk group took significantly longer and were less accurate than the low-risk group to
identify the color of each word, regardless of whether this was
congruent or incongruent. They were also less accurate when
responding to incongruent trials. This shows their difficulties
with inhibiting irrelevant information. The results are consistent with previous research [e.g., Ref. (16, 26)], showing that
suicidal individuals have more difficulty inhibiting distracting
information. Inhibition is one of three components of executive
function (15) that contributes to the control and regulation of
behavior. It is a crucial element within attentional control and
in many every-day tasks an individual needs to inhibit the automatic processing of irrelevant information and direct attention
toward relevant information. It is argued that poor attentional
control contributes to suicidal behavior as it prevents the
disengagement from suicide-related thoughts making one less
able to resist suicidal urges (26), and it limits the redirection of
resources to more positive information therefore maintaining
negative biases.
In contrast to the results of the color Stroop task, in the
emotional Stroop task the high-risk group responded quicker
than the low-risk group (although this was at the expense of
accuracy). This pattern was found for all three types of words
(positive, negative, and neutral) and would indicate that those
reporting high levels of suicidal behavior are able to inhibit
irrelevant information more effectively than those reporting low
levels. The overall lack of any emotional Stroop effect within this
task is also inconsistent with past findings showing that response
times in an emotional Stroop task are generally slower to emotional words compared with neutral words (34, 35). It may be
proposed that individuals with a high risk of suicidal behavior
are slower to inhibit irrelevant information at a general level,
yet when presented with emotional stimuli they may act more
quickly and somewhat impulsively (this would be supported
by the speed-accuracy trade-off whereby the high-risk group
sacrificed accuracy for faster responses). The importance of
impulsivity has been identified in the warning signs for suicidal
behavior listed by the American Association of Suicidology and
includes acting recklessly (77). The Association documented that
the presence of impulsivity, inhibitory problems, and inflexible
thinking processes may lead to an increased risk of suicidal
behavior. Rudd (78) has also incorporated the measures of
impulsivity into suicide risk assessment tools. This reflects the
proposed importance of executive dysfunction in suicidal behavior with symptoms indicative of poor updating (sustained focus
on negative information), shifting (inability to direct resources to
task-relevant information), and inhibition (inability to suppress
the processing of irrelevant, negative information).
While it may be argued that those with high levels of suicidal behavior can respond more quickly to emotional stimuli
compared with neutral, one may question why this group did
not show longer response times in the neutral condition of the
emotional Stroop task (similar to the color Stroop). This effect
illustrates key differences between these two tasks. In particular,
in a color Stroop the to-be-ignored information in incongruent

Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org

trials (the word) is in direct competition with the to-be-identified
information (the color). This is not the case in the emotional
Stroop task. Consequently the differing patterns of performance
across the two tasks may indicate that individuals with a greater
risk of suicide will have more difficulty inhibiting directly
competing responses, but not information that has no semantic
relationship to the task they are completing. Further support for
this argument comes from the response times in identifying the
color of the word “suicide” in the emotional Stroop task. Results
showed that the pattern of performance in the task reversed
and those in the high-risk group took longer to respond to the
color of this word showing that they have difficulties inhibiting emotionally relevant information. It is proposed that such
“personally” relevant information is more salient and despite
being irrelevant to the task it competes for attentional resources
in the same way that the directly competing word meaning does
in the color Stroop.
The bias of attention to emotionally significant stimuli supports the findings of Chung and Jeglic (79) who also reported no
emotional Stroop effect in individuals high in suicidal behavior
but found evidence for a specific attentional bias to the word
“suicide.” Cha et al. (80) propose that a stimulus-specific Stroop
interference effect (whereby only disorder-related words lead to
longer response times) may be particularly useful for clinicians.
They found that it was able to predict, above and beyond other
clinical measures, those individuals who went on to make a suicide attempt within the following 6 months. Evidently, the current
findings support this suggestion, in which a specific attentional
bias may exceed the predictive ability of any general negativity
bias. This can add to cognitive models that attempt to explain
the development and persistence of affective disorders such as
depression [e.g., Ref. (17, 18)]. It is theorized that an individual
will be automatically distracted by negative information and the
processing of this information will lead to an attentional bias.
The results of the emotional Stroop task would suggest that
these biases are disorder-specific, and while general deficits in
top–down control predicted in the model will limit inhibitory
processing at a general level (as demonstrated in the Stroop
task) it will also manifest in specific impairments in the ability to
inhibit disorder-related thoughts and behaviors.
In addition to measuring the importance of attentional
control in suicidal behavior, the current study also aimed to
determine whether patterns of frontal asymmetry could be used
to identify those at risk of suicidal behavior. The dispositional
model (45, 46) argues that positive affect is associated with
leftward frontal cortical activity and negative affect is associated
with rightward frontal cortical activity, whereas the capability
model (57) predicts that frontal asymmetrical differences will
be more pronounced under specific situational contexts [(57);
see also Ref. (81)]. To examine frontal asymmetry in relation to
both models, activity was measured during an emotionally challenging state (the emotional Stroop) to see if this may provide a
more promising indicator of suicide risk than activity measured
during resting state (as favored by the dispositional model) and
during a challenging but non-emotional task (the color Stroop).
The EEG recordings in the eyes closed resting state gave no
support for the dispositional model as individuals with high and
9

March 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 79

Thompson and Ong

Attentional Control, Asymmetry, and Suicide

low risk did not differ in their alpha asymmetry index. Although
there was a significant group difference during the eyes open
resting condition, the difference was opposite to the predictions
made. Individuals in the high-risk group had more leftward
frontal activity than the low-risk group indicating that this side
of the brain is more active at baseline. It is interesting to note
that increased leftward frontal activity is associated with the
inhibition of negative information (60) and may reflect inhibition of general negative thoughts that an individual with suicidal
behavior could be experiencing when not completing a demanding task (this would not be apparent in the low-risk group as
it is predicted they would not experience upsetting thoughts
and so would not need to engage in inhibition). However, when
the EEG recordings were taken during the color Stroop task
there was no significant difference in alpha-asymmetrical index
between high- and low-risk groups. This reveals that measurements of frontal asymmetry taken during a demanding task are
no more effective than those taken in a resting state with regard
to identifying individuals high in suicidal behavior. The differences between activity in the Stroop and the eyes open resting
state may also suggest that when engaged in a demanding neutral
task high-risk participants in the current sample (reporting relatively mild suicidal behavior) are not having to devote additional
resources to the inhibition of negative thoughts because the
focus on the task itself prevents the processing of such information. Yet the results of asymmetry do not reflect performance in
the Stroop task as the high-risk group performed less well than
the low-risk group but showed no corresponding differences
in frontal asymmetry. This may be due to the fact that stimuli
in this task were neutral and therefore any increase in activity is
unlikely to be related to specific inhibition of positive (right) or
negative (left) information. This indicates a limitation to the use
of asymmetry as a marker for affective disorders, including suicide. Compton et al. (28) found increased activity overall in the
dlPFC for incongruent trials in a color Stroop and suggested that
this shows greater investment in cognitive control processes in
order to inhibit this information. Asymmetry does not provide a
direct measure of activity and instead shows relative differences
between the left and right. Arguably the measure is more relevant
to the processing of emotional information if left and right areas
are associated with inhibition of negative and positive stimuli
respectively.
Consistent with proposals of the capability model, the results
did reveal a significant difference in frontal asymmetry between
the high- and low-risk groups during the emotional Stroop task.
In particular, the low-risk group showed more leftward frontal
activation compared with the high-risk group. This suggests
greater recruitment of left frontal areas during completion of a
task that requires inhibition of emotional information (although
not specifically negative information as the models of asymmetry
suggest). It should be noted that this effect disappeared when
individuals reporting a past suicide attempt were removed from
the analysis suggesting that the effect was driven by this subset of
participants. This is supported by the findings of Jollant et al. (59)
in which asymmetrical differences were only found in individuals
with a history of suicide attempt. While behavioral performance

Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org

in the Stroop tasks may be able to distinguish those at risk of
mild levels of suicidal behavior (and would therefore be beneficial
in identifying those at risk at an early stage) the same may not
be concluded for measures of alpha asymmetry. In addition, the
findings for asymmetry do not reflect performance in the task
because those in the high-risk group were faster to make accurate
responses. Once again this may indicate the limitations of using
asymmetry as a marker because it reflects relative activity, it does
not show whether an individual is putting more effort overall
into the task. A study by Kaiser et al. (82) showed increased
activation in the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex and the posterior
cingulate cortex for depressed patients when completing a task
requiring the inhibition of negative distracters. They proposed
that increased activity demonstrates that individuals are devoting
more cognitive resources to directing attention away from negative information; however, frontal asymmetry does not provide
information about such overall patterns of activity.
Grimshaw and Carmel (60) suggest that inhibition of different
emotional stimuli is linked to frontal alpha asymmetry and that
individuals will exhibit leftward frontal cortical activity during
inhibition of negative stimuli, and rightward frontal cortical
activity during inhibition of positive stimuli. Although there is
considerable evidence to suggest that frontal asymmetry reflects
the inhibitory control of emotions [e.g., Ref. (60, 83); see Ref.
(84)], the current findings provide only partial support for the
asymmetric inhibition model. Individuals were showing more
leftward frontal activation during inhibition of negative stimuli
as predicted; however, they did not show an increase in rightward
frontal activity when inhibiting positive stimuli. These results are
similar to past findings (60, 62) that have shown that the links
between cortical activity in the right dlPFC and control of positive distractors are different to those between the left dlPFC and
the control of negative distractors. For example, Pérez-Edgar
et al. (83) conducted a study investigating frontal asymmetry
in relation to attentional bias and avoidance. Frontal EEG was
measured from young adults at rest and under a socially threatening situation (preparing to give a short speech about their most
embarrassing moment in public). Following this, participants
performed a dot probe task in which they had to respond to
probes appearing in the same spatial location as emotional
faces. Results showed that although frontal alpha asymmetry in
the resting state did not predict performance in the dot probe
task, there was a strong link between behavioral performance
and frontal asymmetry in the socially threatening condition.
Specifically, an increase in rightward frontal alpha asymmetry
in this condition was associated with increased attentional bias
to angry faces and avoidance of happy faces but no association
between leftward frontal asymmetry and emotions. This trend
was replicated by Grimshaw and Carmel (60) who suggested
that positive and negative stimuli may not exert the same level of
influence on frontal alpha asymmetry.
One unexpected finding from the alpha asymmetry analysis
was the trend toward a negative alpha asymmetry index in the
neutral condition of the emotional Stroop task for the high-risk
group. This trend did not reach significance until participants
reporting a past suicide attempt were removed from the analysis,

10

March 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 79

Thompson and Ong

Attentional Control, Asymmetry, and Suicide

but the pattern of activation was markedly different to that of the
other conditions. The finding shows that the high suicidal behavior group had relatively lower leftward activation in the neutral
condition suggesting that they only recruited more left frontal
areas when inhibiting emotional but not neutral information.
Again, this was not evidenced by differences in performance in
this task, providing limiting support for the use of asymmetry
as a marker of suicidal behavior, and showing that the exact role
of the right and left PFC is not yet apparent with regard to the
inhibition of positive and negative distracters. Furthermore,
Gable et al. (84) proposed that frontal asymmetry may reflect
a wide range of cognitive mechanisms, not just inhibitory processes. For example, the dlPFC is activated during tasks requiring
task switching (85), working memory (86), emotion regulation
[for a review, see Ref. (30)], and attentional disengagement (87).
All of these are implicated in vulnerability to psychopathologies associated with frontal asymmetry (88). These processes
also require the executive control components of updating and
shifting in addition to inhibition (10, 15, 89). Future work would
benefit from recording performance and activity in a wider range
of neuropsychological tasks [i.e., Ref. (90)].
The present results show some support for the association
between attentional control, frontal asymmetry, and suicidal
behavior. However, the findings do not fully support previous
work and therefore may indicate that other factors may be
involved. In particular, the current results may be influenced
by depression. A measure of depression was taken from all participants and analysis showed clear differences between the two
groups with the high-risk group reporting significantly higher
symptoms of depression. It is well documented that depression
is comorbid with suicide [e.g., Ref. (90)] and studies provide
strong evidence for the links between depression and executive
dysfunction [e.g., Ref. (10)] and depression and frontal asymmetry [e.g., Ref. (41)]. Consequently, the present findings may
be showing differences due to depression, rather than suicide.
However, researchers argue that the Stroop task is one of very few
measures of executive control that is able to identify differences
between levels of depression and suicidal behavior. RichardDevantoy et al. (90) conducted a meta-analysis to explore the
findings of studies investigating executive control in patients
with mood disorders, patients with mood disorders and reporting a past suicide attempt, and healthy controls. Across a number
of tasks designed to assess executive function they found that
the patients performed worse than the healthy controls, yet performance in the Stroop task was also able to distinguish suicide
attempters from non-attempters. Given the differences between
the two groups in the color Stroop task, and the fact that the highrisk group showed a specific attentional bias to suicide-related
information, rather than a general negativity bias [e.g., Ref. (37)],
it is argued that the present study is assessing suicidal behavior
additional to the effects of depression.
While it may be argued that this study assesses suicidal
behavior, the results are limited due to the use of the SBQ-R (66).
This is a relatively simplistic single-item assessment that groups
a variety of quite distinct suicidal behaviors together. Many past
studies in this field utilize more in-depth assessments and often
use a mixture of clinical measures and interviews. Milner et al.

Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org

(91) express concern over the use of single-item assessments due
to the increased risk of Type-I and -II errors and after conducting an evaluation of such measures they found that many were
unable to capture the precise nature of suicide-related thoughts
and behaviors that were reported. While these limitations are
acknowledged and future research would make use of more
detailed measures, it is important to note that the aim of this
study was to measure the association of attentional control,
asymmetry, and suicidal behavior, rather than to measure
whether deficits varied according to the severity of symptoms.
The SBQ-R has benefits in this case due to the relative ease of
administration.
Related to the measurement of suicide, future studies that
explore variations in attentional control due to severity of suicidal behavior may employ a correlational design to allow for
the prediction of suicide through measures of executive control.
The small sample size and the relatively limited spread of suicidal behavior in the current study supported the use of group
comparisons but arguably the findings have no predictive power.
Given that past research focuses on more clinical samples, and
often uses older patients [e.g., Ref. (26)] one key feature of the
present work was to explore possible cognitive deficits associated
with relatively mild symptoms of suicidal behavior. By showing
that suicidal behavior in a non-clinical population is associated with deficits in attentional control (specifically difficulties
inhibiting irrelevant information and an attentional bias to
emotionally pertinent information) the current work expands on
the past studies. For instance, when comparing executive function in depressed suicide attempters, depressed non-attempters,
and healthy controls Keilp et al. (16) supported the findings of
Richard-Devantoy et al. (90) by showing that performance in a
Stroop task was a “relatively independent marker of suicide risk”
(p546). In their study, deficits in attentional control (as evidenced
through the Stroop task) were found in all individuals with a
history of suicide attempt. In the current study the comparison
of attempters and non-attempters was not possible as only 6 of
those in the high-risk group reported a past suicide attempt, yet
performance in the Stroop task did identify those more vulnerable to suicidal thoughts and behaviors. The findings demonstrate
the effectiveness of the Stroop task in assessing vulnerability to
suicide in non-clinical samples and support its use in the intervention and prevention of suicidal behavior.
Using EEG in a color Stroop task and an emotional Stroop
task, the current study examined whether measures of cognitive
and neurological processing can be used to identify individuals at
risk of suicidal behavior. The study compared attentional control
and frontal asymmetry between individuals reporting high and
low levels of suicidal behavior. Results showed that individuals
reporting higher levels of suicidal behavior are more likely to
encounter difficulties in attentional control and will struggle
to disengage attention from suicide-related information. The
findings provide relatively limited support for the effectiveness
of frontal asymmetry in identifying those vulnerable to suicide,
and in line with the capability model of Coan et al. (57) general
differences were only apparent in the emotional Stroop task.
By exploring executive dysfunction in a non-clinical sample
reporting relatively mild symptoms of suicidal behavior the
11

March 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 79

Thompson and Ong

Attentional Control, Asymmetry, and Suicide

current work lends support to those who advocate the use of the
Stroop task in prevention of suicide, showing that its effectiveness
extends beyond patient groups.

Sciences at the University of Salford. All participants gave written informed consent in accordance with the Declaration of
Helsinki.

ETHICS STATEMENT

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

This study was carried out in accordance with the recommendations of The British Psychological Society. The protocol was
approved by the Research Ethics Panel for the School of Health

CT and EO conceived and designed the study. EO gained ethical
approval and collected the data. CT and EO analyzed the data and
drafted the manuscript.

REFERENCES

19. Demeyer I, De Lissnyder E, Koster EH, De Raedt R. Rumination mediates the
relationship between impaired cognitive control for emotional information
and depressive symptoms: a prospective study in remitted depressed adults.
Behav Res Therapy (2012) 50(5):292–7. doi:10.1016/j.brat.2012.02.012
20. Gotlib IH, Joormann J. Cognition and depression: current status and future
directions. Annu Rev Clin Psychol (2010) 6:285–312. doi:10.1146/annurec.
clinpsy.121208.131305
21. Desmyter S, van Heeringen C, Audenaert K. Structural and functional
neuroimaging studies of the suicidal brain. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol
Psychiatry (2011) 35(4):796–808. doi:10.1016/j.pnpbp.2010.12.026
22. Jollant F, Lawrence NL, Olié E, Guillaume S, Courtet P. The suicidal mind
and brain: a review of neuropsychological and neuroimaging studies.
World J Biol Psychiatry (2011) 12(5):319–39. doi:10.3109/15622975.2011
.556200
23. Carter CS, van Veen V. Anterior cingulate cortex and conflict detection: an
update of theory and data. Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci (2007) 7(4):367–79.
doi:10.3758/CABN.7.4.367
24. Richard-Devantoy S, Courtet P. Neurocognitive processes and decision
making in suicidal behavior. In: Kaschka WP, Rujescu D, editors. Biological
Aspects of Suicidal Behavior. Basel: Karger (2016). p. 88–100.
25. Loyo LMS, Martinez-Velazquez ES, Ramos-Loyo J. The influence of emotions
on executive functions in suicide attempters. Suicidology (2013) 4:42–55.
26. Richard-Devantoy S, Szanto K, Butters MA, Kalkus J, Dombrovski AY.
Cognitive inhibition in older high-lethality suicide attempters. Int J Geriatr
Psychiatry (2015) 30(3):274–83. doi:10.1002/gps.4138
27. Anderson PJ. Towards a developmental model of executive function. In:
Anderson V, Jacobs R, Anderson PJ, editors. Executive Functions and the
Frontal Lobes: A Lifespan Perspective. New York: Taylor & Francis (2008). p.
23–56.
28. Compton RJ, Banich MT, Mohanty A, Milham MP, Herrington J, Miller GA,
et al. Paying attention to emotion: an fMRI investigation of cognitive and
emotional Stroop tasks. Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci (2003) 3(2):81–96.
doi:10.3758/CABN.3.2.81
29. Miyake A, Friedman N. The nature and organization of individual differences
in executive functions: four general conclusions. Curr Direct Psychol Sci (2012)
21(1):8–14. doi:10.1177/0963721411429458
30. Ochsner KN, Silvers JA, Buhle JT. Functional imaging studies of emotion
regulation: a synthetic review and evolving model of the cognitive control
of emotion. Ann N Y Acad Sci (2012) 1251:E1–24. doi:10.111/j.1749-6632.
2012.06751.x
31. Stroop JR. Studies of interference in serial verbal reactions. J Exp Psychol
(1935) 18(6):643–62. doi:10.1037/h0054651
32. Williams JM, Mathews A, MacLeod C. The emotional Stroop task and psychopathology. Psychol Bull (1996) 120(1):3–24. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.120.1.3
33. MacLeod CM. Half a century of research on the Stroop effect: an integrative
review. Psychol Bull (1991) 109(2):163–203. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.109.2.163
34. Ben-Haim MS, Williams P, Howard Z, Mama Y, Eidels A, Algom D. The
emotional Stroop task: assessing cognitive performance under exposure to
emotional content. J Vis Exp (2016) (112):e53720. doi:10.379/53720
35. Cothran DL, Larsen R. Comparison of inhibition in two timed reaction
tasks: the color and emotion Stroop Tasks. J Psychol (2008) 142(4):373–85.
doi:10.3200/JRLP.142.4.373-385
36. Gilboa-Schechtman E, Revelle W, Gotlib IH. Stroop interference following
mood induction: emotionality, mood congruence, and concern relevance.
Cognit Ther Res (2000) 24(5):491–502. doi:10.1023/A:1005517326981

1. Silverman MM. The language of suicidology. Suicide Life Threat Behav (2006)
36(5):519–32. doi:10.1521/suli.2006.36.5.519
2. Nock MK, Park JM, Finn CT, Deliberto TL, Dour HJ, Banaji MR. Measuring
the suicidal mind: implicit cognition predicts suicide behavior. Psychol Sci
(2010) 21(4):511–7. doi:10.1177/0956797610364762
3. Wilson TD. Know thyself. Perspect Psychol Sci (2009) 4(4):384–9.
doi:10.1111/j.1745-6924.2009.01143.x
4. Mann JJ, Currier D. A review of prospective studies of biologic predictors
of suicidal behavior in mood disorders. Arch Suicide Res (2007) 11(1):3–16.
doi:10.1080/1381110600993124
5. Mann JJ, Currier D, Stanley B, Oquendo MA, Amsel LV, Ellis SP. Can biological
tests assist prediction of suicide in mood disorders? Int J Neuropsychopharmacol
(2006) 9(4):465–74. doi:10.1017/S1461145705005687
6. Baddeley A. Working memory. Science (1992) 255(5044):556–9. doi:10.1126/
science.1736359
7. Imbir KK, Jarymowicz MT. The effect of automatic vs. reflective emotions on
cognitive control in antisaccade tasks and the emotional Stroop Test. Polish
Psychol Bull (2013) 44(2):137–46. doi:10.2478/ppb-2013.0016
8. Løvstad M, Sigurdardottir S, Andersson S, Grane VA, Moberget T, Stubberud J,
et al. Behavior Rating Inventory of Executive Function Adult Version in
patients with neurological and neuropsychiatric conditions: symptom
levels and relationship to emotional distress. J Int Neuropsychol Soc (2016)
22(6):682–94. doi:10.1017/S135561771600031X
9. Miller EK, Wallis JD. Executive function and higher-order cognition:
definition and neural substrates. In: Squire LR, editor. Encyclopedia of Neuro­
science. (Vol. 4), Oxford: Academic Press (2009). p. 99–104.
10. Joormann J, Tanovic E. Cognitive vulnerability to depression: examining
cognitive control and emotion regulation. Curr Opin Psychol (2015) 4:86–92.
doi:10.1016/j.copsyc.2014.12.006
11. Burgess PW, Veitch E, de Lacy Costello A, Shallice T. The cognitive and neuroanatomical correlates of multitasking. Neuropsychologia (2000) 38(6):848–63.
doi:10.1016/S0028-3932(99)00134-7
12. Burton CZ, Vella L, Weller JA, Twamley EW. Differential effects of executive
functioning on suicide attempts. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci (2011)
23(2):173–9. doi:10.1176/appi.neuropsych.23.2.173
13. Diamond A. Executive functions. Annu Rev Psychol (2013) 64:135–68.
doi:10.1146/annurev-psych-113011-143750
14. Doty L. Executive Function & Memory/Cognition Changes. (2012). Available
from: http://alzonline.phhp.ufl.edu/en/reading/executivefxlatest.pdf
15. Miyake A, Friedman NP, Emerson MJ, Witzki AH, Howerter A, Wager TD.
The unity and diversity of executive functions and their contributions to
complex “frontal lobe” tasks: a latent variable analysis. Cogn Psychol (2000)
41:49–100. doi:10.1006/cogp.1999.0734
16. Keilp JG, Gorlyn M, Russell M, Oquendo MA, Burke AK, HarkavyFriedman J, et al. Neuropsychological function and suicidal behavior:
attention control, memory and executive dysfunction in suicide attempt.
Psychol Med (2013) 43:539–51. doi:10.1017/S0033291712001419
17. Auerbach RP, Webb CA, Gardiner CK, Pechtel P. Behavioral and neural mechanisms underlying cognitive vulnerability models of adolescent depression.
J Psychother Integr (2013) 23(3):222–35. doi:10.1037/a0031417
18. Disner SG, Beevers CG, Haigh EAP, Beck AT. Neural mechanisms of the cognitive model of depression. Nat Rev Neurosci (2011) 12:467–77. doi:10.1038/
nrn3027

Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org

12

March 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 79

Thompson and Ong

Attentional Control, Asymmetry, and Suicide

37. Gotlib IH, Krasnoperova E, Yue DN, Joormann J. Attentional biases for
negative interpersonal stimuli in clinical depression. J Abnorm Psychol
(2004) 113(1):127–35. doi:10.1037/0021-843X.113.1.121
38. Pan LA, Batezati-Alves SC, Almeida JR, Segreti A, Akkal D, Hassel S, et al.
Dissociable patterns of neural activity during response inhibition in depressed
adolescents with and without suicidal behavior. J Am Acad Child Adolesc
Psychiatry (2011) 50(6):602–11. doi:10.1016/j.jaac.2011.03.018
39. Gainotti G. Emotional behavior and hemispheric side of the lesion. Cortex
(1972) 8(1):41–55. doi:10.1016/S0010-9452(72)80026-1
40. Harmon-Jones E, Gable PA, Peterson CK. The role of asymmetric frontal
cortical activity in emotion-related phenomena: a review and update. Biol
Psychol (2010) 84(3):451–62. doi:10.1016/j.biopsyco.2009.08.010
41. Schaffer CE, Davidson RJ, Saron C. Frontal and parietal electroencephalogram
asymmetry in depressed and nondepressed subjects. Biol Psychiatry (1983)
18(7):753–62.
42. Tomarken AJ, Davidson RJ, Wheeler RE, Doss RC. Individual differences
in anterior brain asymmetry and fundamental dimensions of emotion. J Pers
Soc Psychol (1992) 62(4):676–87. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.62.4.676
43. Tucker DM. Lateral brain function, emotion, and conceptualization. Psychol
Bull (1981) 89(1):19–46. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.89.1.19
44. Davidson RJ, Fox NA. Asymmetrical brain activity discriminates between
positive and negative affective stimuli in human infants. Science (1982)
218(4578):1235–7. doi:10.1126/science.7146906
45. Davidson RJ, Schwartz GE, Saron C, Bennett J, Goleman DJ. Frontal
versus parietal EEG asymmetry during positive and negative affect. Psy­
chophysiology (1979) 16:202–3.
46. Davidson RJ. Hemispheric asymmetry and emotion.In: Scherer K, Ekman P,
editors. Approaches to Emotion. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum (1984). p. 39–57.
47. Allen JJB, Kline JP. Frontal EEG asymmetry, emotion, and psychopathology:
the first, and the next 25 years. Biol Psychol (2004) 67(1–2):1–5. doi:10.1016/
j.biopsycho.2004.03.001
48. Allen JJB, Reznik SJ. Frontal EEG asymmetry as a promising marker of
depression vulnerability: summary and methodological considerations. Curr
Opin Psychol (2015) 4:93–7. doi:10.1016/jcopsych.2014.12.017
49. Heller W, Levy J. Perception and expression of emotion in righthanders and left-handers. Neuropsychologia (1981) 19(2):263–72.
doi:10.1016/0028-3932(81)90110-X
50. Thibodeau R, Jorgensen RS, Kim S. Depression, anxiety, and resting frontal
EEG asymmetry: a meta-analytic review. J Abnorm Psychol (2006) 115(4):
715–29. doi:10.1037/0021-843X.115.4.715
51. Gotlib IH, Ranganath C, Rosenfeld JP. Frontal EEG alpha asymmetry, depression, and cognitive functioning. Cogn Emot (1998) 12(3):449–78. doi:10.1080/
026999398379673
52. Davidson RJ, Pizzagalli D, Nitschke JB, Putnam K. Depression: perspectives
from affective neuroscience. Annu Rev Psychol (2002) 53:545–74. doi:10.1146/
annurev.psych53.100901.135148
53. Miller EK, Cohen JD. An integrative theory of prefrontal cortex function.
Annu Rev Neurosci (2001) 24:167–202. doi:10.1146/annurev.neuro.24.1.167
54. Miller GA, Crocker LD, Spielberg JM, Infantolino ZP, Heller W. Issues
in localization of brain function: the case of lateralized frontal cortex in
cognition, emotion, and psychopathology. Front Integr Neurosci (2013) 7:2.
doi:10.3389/fnint.2013.00002
55. Stewart JL, Bismark AW, Towers DN, Coan JA, Allen JJ. Resting frontal EEG
asymmetry as an endophenotype for depression risk: sex-specific patterns of
frontal brain asymmetry. J Abnorm Psychol (2010) 119(3):502–12. doi:10.1037/
a0019196
56. Saletu B, Anderer P, Saletu-Zyhlarz GM. EEG topography and tomography
(LORETA) in diagnosis and pharmacotherapy of depression. Clin EEG Neurosci
(2010) 41(4):203–10. doi:10.1177/155005941004100407
57. Coan JA, Allen JJB, McKnight PE. A capability model of individual differences
in frontal EEG asymmetry. Biol Psychol (2006) 72(2):198–207. doi:10.1016/
j.biopsycho.2005.10.003
58. Coan JA, Allen JJ. Frontal EEG asymmetry as a moderator and mediator of emotion. Biol Psychol (2004) 67(1–2):7–49. doi:10.1016/j.biopsycho.2004.03.002
59. Jollant F, Lawrence NS, Giampietro V, Brammer MJ, Fullana MA, Drapier D,
et al. Orbitofrontal cortex response to angry faces in men with histories of
suicide attempts. Am J Psychiatry (2008) 165(6):740–8. doi:10.1176/appi.
ajp.2008.07081239

Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org

60. Grimshaw GM, Carmel D. An asymmetric inhibition model of hemispheric
differences in emotional processing. Front Psychol (2014) 5(489):1–7.
doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2014/00489
61. Engels AS, Heller W, Spielberg JM, Warren SL, Sutton BP, Banich MT, et al.
Co-occurring anxiety influences patterns of brain activity in depression. Cogn
Affect Behav Neurosci (2010) 10(1):141–56. doi:10.3758/CABN.10.1.141
62. Herrington JD, Heller W, Mohanty A, Engels AS, Banich MT, Webb AG,
et al. Localization of asymmetric brain function in emotion and depression. Psychophysiology (2010) 47(3):442–54. doi:10.111/j.1469-8986.2009.
00958.x
63. Crocker LD, Heller W, Spielberg JM, Warren SL, Bredemeier K, Sutton BP,
et al. Neural mechanisms of attentional control differentiate trait and state
negative affect. Front Psychol (2012) 3(298):298. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2012.
00298
64. Palmer CJ. Suicide attempt history, self-esteem, and suicide risk in a sample of 116 depressed voluntary inpatients. Psychol Rep (2004) 95:1092–4.
doi:10.2466/pr0.95.3f.1092-1094
65. Klonsky ED, May AM. Differentiating suicide attempters from suicide
ideators: a critical frontier for suicidology research. Suicide Life Threat Behav
(2014) 44(1):1–5. doi:10.1111/sltb.12068
66. Osman A, Bagge CL, Gutierrez PM, Konick LC, Kopper BA, Barrios FX.
The Suicidal Behaviors Questionnaire-Revised (SBQ-R): validation with
clinical and nonclinical samples. Assessment (2001) 8(4):443–54. doi:10.1177/
107319110100800409
67. Aloba O, Ojeleye O, Aloba T. The psychometric characteristics of the 4-item
Suicidal Behaviors Questionnaire-Revised (SBQ-R) as a screening tool in a
non-clinical sample of Nigerian university students. Asian J Psychiatr (2017)
26:46–51. doi:10.1016/j.ajp.2017.01.017
68. Cotton CR, Peters DK, Range LM. Psychometric properties of the
Suicidal Behaviors Questionnaire. Death Stud (1995) 19:391–7.
doi:10.1080/07481189508252740
69. Rueda-Jaimes GE, Corzo-Casasadiego JD, Moreno-Quijano C, Camacho PA.
Validity of the Suicide Behaviors Questionnaire-Revised in patients with
short-term suicide risk. Eur J Psychiatry (2017) 31(4):145–50. doi:10.1016/
j.ejpsy.2017.09.002
70. Bradley MM, Lang PJ. Affective Norms for English Words (ANEW): Instruction
Manual and Affective Ratings. Technical report C-1. The Center for Research
in Psychophysiology, Gainesville: University of Florida (1999).
71. Beck AT, Steer RA, Brown GK. Manual for the Beck Depression Inventory-II.
San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation (1996)
72. Malmivuo J, Plonsey R. Bioelectromagnetism: Principles and Applications
of Bioelectric and Biomagnetic Fields. New York: Oxford University Press
(1995).
73. Delorme A, Makeig S. EEGLAB: an open source toolbox for analysis of
single-trial EEG dynamics including independent component analysis.
J Neurosci Methods (2004) 134(1):9–21. doi:10.1016/j.neumeth.2003.
10.009
74. The MathWorks. MATLAB and Statistics Toolbox Release. Natick, MA: The
MathWorks, Inc. (2007).
75. Allen J, Urry H, Hitt SK, Coan JA. The stability of resting frontal electroencephalographic asymmetry in depression. Psychophysiology (2004) 41(2):
269–80. doi:10.1111/j.1469-8986.2003.00149.x
76. Oakes TR, Pizzagalli DA, Hendrick AM, Horras KA, Larson CL, Abercrombie HC,
et al. Functional coupling of simultaneous electrical and metabolic activity
in the human brain. Hum Brain Mapp (2004) 21(4):257–70. doi:10.1002/
hbm.20004
77. American Association of Suicidology. Know the Warning Signs of Suicide.
(2017). Available from: http://www.suicidology.org/resources/warning-signs
78. Rudd MD. Fluid vulnerability theory: a cognitive approach to understanding
the process of acute and chronic suicide risk. In: Ellis TE, editor. Cognition
and Suicide: Theory, Research, and Therapy. Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association (2006). p. 355–68.
79. Chung Y, Jeglic E. Use of the modified emotional Stroop task to detect suicidality in college population. Suicide Life Threat Behav (2016) 46(1):55–66.
doi:10.1111/sltb.1274
80. Cha CB, Najmi S, Park JM, Finn CT, Nock MK. Attentional bias toward
suicide-related stimuli predicts suicidal behavior. J Abnorm Psychol (2010)
119(3):616–22. doi:10.1037/a0019710

13

March 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 79

Thompson and Ong

Attentional Control, Asymmetry, and Suicide

81. Stewart JL, Coan JA, Towers DN, Allen JJ. Resting and task-elicited prefrontal
EEG alpha asymmetry in depression: support for the capability model.
Psychophysiology (2014) 51(5):446–55. doi:10.111/psyp.12191
82. Kaiser RH, Andrews-Hanna JR, Spielberg JM, Warren SL, Sutton BP,
Miller GA, et al. Distracted and down: neural mechanisms of affective
interference in subclinical depression. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci (2014)
10(5):654–633. doi:10.1093/scan/nsu100
83. Pérez-Edgar K, Kujawa A, Nelson SK, Cole C, Zapp DJ. The relation
between electroencephalogram asymmetry and attention biases to threat at
baseline and under stress. Brain Cogn (2013) 82(3):337–43. doi:10.1016/j.
bandc.2013.05.009
84. Gable PA, Mechin NC, Hicks JA, Adams DL. Supervisory control system and
frontal asymmetry: neurophysiological traits of emotion-based impulsivity.
Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci (2015) 10(10):1310–5. doi:10.1093/scan/nsv017
85. Ambrosini E, Vallesi A. Asymmetry in prefrontal resting-state EEG spectral
power underlies individual differences in phasic and sustained cognitive control. Neuroimage (2016) 124:843–57. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.09.035
86. Petrides M. The role of the mid-dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in working
memory. Exp Brain Res (2000) 133(1):44–54. doi:10.1007/s002210000399
87. Vanderhasselt MA, Kühn S, DeRaedt R. Healthy brooders employ more
attentional resources when disengaging from the negative: an event-related
fMRI study. Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci (2011) 11(2):207–16. doi:10.3758/
s13415-011-0022-5

Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org

88. Snyder HR. Major depressive disorder is associated with broad impair­ments
on neuropsychological measures of executive function: a meta-analysis and
review. Psychol Bull (2013) 139(1):81–132. doi:10.1037/a0028727
89. Schmeichel BJ, Tang D. Individual differences in executive functioning and
their relationship to emotional processes and responses. Curr Direct Psychol
Sci (2015) 24(2):93–8. doi:10.1177/0963721414555178
90. Richard-Devantoy S, Berlim MT, Jollant E. A meta-analysis of neuropsychological markers of vulnerability to suicidal behavior in mood disorders.
Psychol Med (2013) 44:1663–73. doi:10.1017/S0033291713002304
91. Milner AJ, Lee MD, Nock MK. Single-item measurement of suicidal
behaviors: validity and consequences of misclassification. PLoS One (2015)
10(10):e0141606. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0141606
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be
construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2018 Thompson and Ong. This is an open-access article distributed under
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution
or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the
copyright owner are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited,
in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction
is permitted which does not comply with these terms.

14

March 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 79

