bioRxiv preprint first posted online Apr. 11, 2017; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/125872. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Complexity of EEG Reflects
Socioeconomic Context
and Geofootprint
Dhanya Parameshwaran1 and Tara C. Thiagarajan2*
Human Brain Diversity Project, Sapien Labs, Chennai India
Human Brain Diversity Project, Sapien Labs, Arlington VA, USA

1
2

ABSTRACT
The fine scale structure and resulting activity of the brain are largely shaped by
experience, suggesting that the faster rate and complexity of experience offered
by modern civilization may have significant impact on human brain dynamics.
Here we defined a new measure of complexity of the EEG signal and compared
it across populations spanning incomes from <$1/day to ~$410/day with a wide
range of access to features of modern life such as urban environments, higher
education, electricity, motorized transport and telecommunication. Complexity
across our sample spanned a 2.75-fold range, separating into two distinct
distributions of pre-modern and modern experience. Furthermore, complexity
scaled systematically with various technologies and experience factors, of which
travel or geofootprint had the strongest relationship. Complexity also had a
steep non-linear relationship with income that leveled out at an income of ~$30/
day. Finally, it was strongly correlated to performance on a pattern completion
task indicating its relevance as a cognitive measure. In light of growing income
inequality and divergence in access to the tools of modern living across the
globe, our findings have significant implications for social policy.

INTRODUCTION
Until 1800 the majority of the world lived in small rural settlements, education and literacy were
limited, and mobility was constrained by horse speed. The world has changed profoundly over the
last 200 years with increasing agglomeration into large urban settlements alongside greater mobility
and communication enabled by technology, and an explosion of collective knowledge. These
elements of modern civilization greatly alter both the rate and the possible complexity of experience
but have not perpetuated uniformly across the world. With incomes now diverging well over a
million fold [1; 2] people increasingly diverge in their access and use of these tools, and therefore the
rate and complexity of their experience of the world. What is the impact of this dramatic divergence
on the human brain?

*Corresponding Author
Tara C. Thiagarajan
Email: tara@sapienlabs.org

Unlike any other organ, the brain is profoundly experience dependent in its function. The precise
circuitry and dynamics of the brain are sculpted by experience [3; 4; 5; 6; 7; 8; 9; 10] and changes
in the level of activity result in not just quantitative, but also qualitative changes in the mechanism
of neural function [11; 12]. Furthermore, studies done in rodents show that placing the animal
in a more complex or enriched environment has far reaching impact on gene expression in the
brain [13], the degree and nature of synaptic plasticity [14; 15; 16; 17; 18], dendritic branching

1

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Apr. 11, 2017; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/125872. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

[19; 20], brain surface area and a host of other functional and
structural aspects [21; 22]. Enriched environment also protects
against cognitive deficits in aging [23] and those resulting from
other diseases such as epilepsy [24], Alzheimer’s[25] and Down
Syndrome [26; 27; 28]. Furthermore, studies in the United States
demonstrate that income, particularly childhood poverty, has a
dramatic negative effect on cortical volume [29] and surface area
[30], as well as gamma power in the EEG [31]. Conversely years
of education have been shown to correlate positively with these
structural aspects of the cortex [32; 33].

Participants were selected to span an income range from $0.85
to ~$410/day (family income) and within each income band ($0$10/day, $10-$30/day and >$30/day) were spread roughly equally
by age and gender.
Willing participants who met our demographic sampling criteria
(gender, age, income, no known history of physical or mental
illness) were first surveyed to capture information about their
income, education and technology use. Participants were then
instructed to wash and dry their hair on the day of the EEG
recording without the application of hair products, particularly hair
oil, which is customary in the region. Low-income participants
were provided with a sachet of shampoo.

These findings strongly suggest that the advances of modernity
may have dramatically altered the dynamical functioning of the
human brain. We therefore address here how differences along
core dimensions of income and access to the dominant tools and
structures of modern civilization have impacted the complexity of
dynamics of the human brain.

Recording locations were often outside in rural locations and care
was taken to select locations at distance from noise producing
equipment such as mobile towers and electric motors and pumps.
Low-income participants were sometimes paid Rs. 150 ($2.50) to
compensate for loss of wages when experiments were conducted
during working hours. Prior to or following the recording (but
on the same day), participants were asked to participate in a
simple test of memory recall. A subset (28 people in two locations
spanning a range of complexity) was asked to complete a short
pattern completion test.

We chose to carry out this study in India, where modern cities exist
in relatively close proximity to remote rural settlements with little
access to modern tools. In order to restrict the impact of racial
genetics and language, we confined our study to the State of Tamil
Nadu, which is relatively homogeneous along these dimensions.
For this study we collected resting EEG activity from participants
for 3 minutes with informed consent in a quiet environment
with their eyes closed, along with a host of demographic and
socioeconomic information including income, education,
occupation, travel patterns, mobile phone usage, electricity and
fuel consumption and Internet usage. Our sample comprised 402
adults between the ages of 21 and 65 from 48 locations including
remote settlements of just 300 people with no access to electricity
or motorized transport, to cities of several million people with all
modern amenities (see Methods, Sup. Figs. 1A,B.) Annual incomes
of participants ranged from $300 to approximately $150,000
dollars, (conversion at 2014 exchange rates of Rs. 60 INR per USD)
translating to daily incomes of $0.85 to ~$410 (Sup. Fig.1C). The
~483 fold range of incomes of our sample has a distribution that is
roughly similar in structure to world income distribution, relevant
to upwards of 90% of the global population. Across this range
of incomes, formal education levels spanned anywhere from no
schooling to college graduates, with college educated representing
~10% of the sample, again in line with global metrics for education
[34] (Sup. Fig.1D).

All participants were fully informed about the intent and
methodology of the experiment and signed a consent form. All
recruitment, consent and data collection were carried out in
accordance with protocols approved by Health Media IRB (USA,
OHRP IRB #00001211) and Sigma-IRB (India) in accordance with
Title 45, code of federal regulations, sub-part A of NIH and Indian
Independent Ethics Committee requirements.

Survey of Individual Experience
To understand the broad contours of how individuals across
different socioeconomic contexts experience the world, our survey
probed individual and family income levels, years of education,
geo-footprint as measured by how far they had traveled in the
world, geographic distance of their social network of friends
and family, and finally use and spending on various modern
technologies from fuel to electricity, mobile phones and the
internet (Sup. Table 1).

Cognitive Tests

Our results indicate a distinct shift in complexity that is
systematically related to signatures of modernity with significant
implications for how we understand ourselves collectively and
how we approach social and economic development around the
world.

NAME RECALL: Participants who had writing literacy (n=346)
were asked to write down on a piece of paper as many names of
people or places that they could think of in a one minute period.
We note that this exercise was done prior to or immediately after
the recording and not during where they remained still with their
eyes closed.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Field Recruitment, Survey and Recording

PATTERN COMPLETION: The pattern completion test was an
abridged adaptation of the Raven’s test and involved 5 questions of
increasing difficulty. Questions were of a standard format showing
a pattern and a multiple-choice selection of five options of which
one completed the pattern (Fig. 5C). The patterns were entirely
visual in nature and required no reading literacy or numerical
literacy beyond counting to 10. The test was not timed. Again
the test was conducted on the same day as the recording but not
simultaneously.

Participants were recruited from 48 locations across the state of
Tamil Nadu in India (Sup. Fig. 1A). Locations were selected to span
various criteria of population, education levels, industrialization
and infrastructural features such as distance to road, electrification,
industrial worker ratio and other factors derived from the census,
economic census and other geospatial data sources.

2

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Apr. 11, 2017; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/125872. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

EEG Recordings

the extreme this would be a flat line. Conversely, a measure of
100 would reflect the maximal diversity where at least half of the
segment pairs had a correlation of 0 such as would be expected
with random noise, meaning the waveform rarely revisited the
same pattern within the recording or analysis period.

Our recording paradigm involved a simple measurement of
the resting EEG for 3 minutes when the subject was sitting still
with their eyes closed. To carry out our recordings, we used
the Emotiv EPOC wireless EEG headset with 14 gold plated
electrodes (Sup. Fig. 1F) and 2 reference electrodes (M1, a
ground reference point for measuring the voltage of the other
sensors and M2, a feed-forward reference point for reducing
electrical interference from external sources). The Emotiv EPOC
is an inexpensive, portable and easy to use device, making it very
advantageous for large-scale studies across multiple locations.
In addition, it has a 12 hour battery life which is convenient for
recording in remote locations where electricity may be absent or
intermittent. Multiple studies have now shown that the EPOC is
capable of measuring event-related potentials [35; 36; 37; 38; 39]
as well as variation in EEG related to mood [40] and cognitive
load [41]. Nonetheless, given its lower temporal resolution
(128 Hz compared to ≥1kHz of clinical grade EEG) and higher
electrode impedance (10-15 kΩ minimized by maintaining
saline hydration of electrode sponges, compared to 2-5 kΩ of
clinical grade electrodes) we sought to determine the suitability
of the EPOC for our purpose by comparing the complexity
measured in simultaneous recordings with the EPOC and a high
end clinical grade EEG device. The very close results (Sup. Fig 3,
described further down) motivated our use of the device.

We chose the period t = 750 ms for reasons described below
corresponding to n = 96 points points. Measured thus the CT
varied from 35 to 96 across our sample, a 2.75-fold range (Fig 1A).

Selection of segment duration (t)
A fundamental aspect of the measure is the length of segment
compared. Shorter segments would have fewer possible
configurations and therefore produce different results. Periods of
synchrony with fine scale temporal structure have been found to
vary in duration from 100 to 900 ms [42; 43]. We thus looked at
complexity across our sample as a function of segment duration
from 100 to 1250 ms.
At duration t=100 ms the mean CT across our sample was ~62,
increasing sharply to ~75 at t = 250 ms and then staying relatively
flat, declining only slightly to 72 as the duration was increased
to 1250 ms (Sup. Fig. 2C). However, as the duration increased
from 250 to 750 ms, the coefficient of variation of CT across our
sample increased steeply from 10% to 18% at 750 ms, flattening
out thereafter at 19% (Sup. Fig 2D; shown CV%). This is in sharp
contrast to results obtained when the amplitude values of the
signal were shuffled, destroying the temporal structure. In the
shuffled signal CT increased from 88 for n= 100 ms to 98+ for
n=1250 ms indicating more repetitive temporal motifs in the
signal relative to random. Correspondingly CV% decreased in
the shuffled signal, tending towards 0 at 1250 ms from a max of
57% at 250 ms (Sup. Fig. 2D).

Finally, we note that our eyes closed paradigm mitigated any
artifacts from EMG signals arising from movement such as eye
blink.

Signal Complexity
We defined a measure of complexity in terms of the diversity of
patterns represented in the waveform (Temporal Complexity
or CT) as follows. For each channel or electrode we calculated
the correlation rn of 100 non-overlapping randomly selected
segments of t ms duration or n points where n= (t/1000)*sampling
rate in Hz as defined below.

We thus chose the period n = 750 ms for analysis going forward
as representative of the minimum duration at which complexity
of the temporal sequence diverged maximally across the
population.
The pattern of CT versus sampling rate was also similar,
increasing up to 32 Hz and then flattening out (Sup Fig. 2E)
along with concomitant increases and flattening out of the CV%
(Sup Fig. 2F) suggesting that most of the relevant signal had
frequencies below 64 Hz (see next section for further discussion).
Comparisons of the shuffled signal also increased with sampling
rate with a similar pattern (but from 92 to 99+) while CV% again
in stark contrast to the data, decreased, with increasing sampling
rate, tending towards 0 as the sampling rate was increased.

∑n x y -n xy
rn= 1 i i
(n-1) sx sy
where x and y are the means of the signal and sx and sy are the
standard deviation of the two segments compared (essentially
the standard deviation of the amplitude distribution of the
segment).
We then constructed the distribution of the (1-|rn|) x100
values for each channel, which we call the diversity distribution
(cumulative form shown in Sup. Fig. 2A) that provides a measure
of how different the segments are. While the EEG from different
electrodes in an individual could have a fair degree of variance,
no particular region was distinct when averaged across all the
sampled individuals (Sup. Fig. 2B). We then calculated the
average diversity distribution across all channels and defined the
complexity CT for the individual as the median of the average
diversity distribution.

Effects of device properties
and sampling resolution
CT is fundamentally dependent on two factors of the measuring device,
the electrode impedance and the sampling rate of the signal. Higher
electrode impedance would add noise into the signal, particularly
in the lower frequency ranges [44]. A lower sampling rate may lose
important temporal structure that could distort CT. To determine
the impact of these factors we compared recordings performed
simultaneously on people fitted concurrently with both the EPOC
and the clinical Neuroscan Version 4.3 (n=5, methods and data from
Badcock et al, 2013) (Sup Fig 3A-D). Note that these simultaneous

By definition the measure could span a range from 0 to 100
where CT = 0 would essentially be a highly repetitive pattern
where at least half of the pairs of random segments had r = 1. At

3

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Apr. 11, 2017; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/125872. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Spectral Measures

recordings were done for 13 minutes with eyes open and therefore
represented a different experimental paradigm than our sample.

To analyze the spectral properties of the signal we computed the
component in each frequency band delta (0-4), theta (4-7.5), alpha
(7.5-14), beta (14-30) and gamma (30+) for each channel as:

The EPOC signals were high-pass filtered with a 0.16 Hz cut-off,
pre-amplified and low-pass filtered at an 83 Hz cut-off. The analog
signals were then digitized at 2048 Hz and filtered using a 5thorder sinc notch filter (50 and 60 Hz) before being down-sampled
to 128 Hz (company communication). The effective bandwidth of
the signal is therefore between 0.16 and 45 Hz. In contrast, the
Neuroscan samples at 1 kHz with band pass filtering between 1
and 100 Hz. To create as close a comparison as possible, and to
remove 50 Hz noise, we applied 50 and 60 Hz notch filters to the
Neuroscan (NS) signa.

Spectral Component = ∑band|X(f)|,
where X(f) is the Discrete Fourier Transform or DFT. We then
calculated and reported the mean across all channels (Fig. 1C).
Spectral entropy was determined by computing the Shannon entropy
of normalized power spectrum density (PSDN) as:
SE = -∑Nf=1pf log(pf )

The power spectrums of the simultaneously recorded EPOC and the
NS signals were very similar when the NS signal was downsampled
to 125 Hz by using every 8th point in the recording (Sup. Fig. 3A).
The EPOC had higher signals in the 0.16 – 1 Hz range that had
been filtered out in the Neuroscan recordings. However, given
that these are very low they are not likely to impact the complexity
measure which involves changes in the signal on faster time scales.
Moreover, any impact of this noise is likely to reduce the difference
between groups and not artificially increase it.

where pf is the PSDN for each frequency f and PSD = |X(f)|2. The
reported value is the average across all channels (Fig. 1B).

Statistical Tests
CONTROLLING FOR INTRA-PERSON VARIABILITY
To determine whether our results could be accounted for by intraperson variability rather than true population differences we measured
resting, eyes closed EEG activity in 20 people in 10 separate sessions
conducted over a week at different times of the day. We then used
this to construct an average intra-person distribution and assess the
probabilities of randomly picking groups with significantly different
population means.

We next looked at the impact of sampling frequency on CT. Much
of the useful range of the EEG signal, given its spatial resolution
and filtering of the signal by the skull, is likely to be within the
60-70 Hz range suggesting that the 128 Hz sampling of the EPOC
would be sufficient. For instance, even rhythmic discharges of
fast spiking bursts with spike rates greater than 100 Hz typically
produce gamma range (30-70 Hz) oscillations in the LFP [45].
Nonetheless, high frequency activity in the EEG has been shown
to relate to cortical processing [46]. Thus if large differences in
waveform patterns exist between 45 Hz and 100 Hz or even beyond,
CT measured using EPOC could be a considerable underestimate.
We therefore looked at CT as a function of sampling frequencies
of 25 to 500 Hz in the NS signal and 16 to 128 Hz in the EPOC.

The coefficient of variation across channels within an individual,
expressed as a percentage (CV%), had a median of 10%, compared to
the CV% of 18% across our sample population (Sup Fig. 4A, n=400).
People with higher complexity overall generally had lower CV%
across channels, as low as 2%, while those with lower complexity
overall were more likely to have greater cross channel variance (Sup
Fig. 4B). This suggests that those with lower overall CT have much
more location-to-location variation and therefore potentially higher
variability arising from differences in electrode placement.
We next looked at the variability within individuals (n=20) arising
over separate recording sessions. The variation in CT across sessions
for each person was significantly narrower than the overall sample and
also much narrower than the inter-channel variation (Sup Fig. 4B).
Nonetheless, CV% within individuals ranged from 2% to 20%
with an average of ~10%. Furthermore, unlike the variation across
channels, this variability was not correlated with the CT value
itself (Sup Fig. 4C filled circles) or with the inter-channel variation
(Fig. 4D). This suggests that variation is more a consequence of state
of mind than small differences in electrode placement.

Sup. Fig.3B shows the values of CT for both devices averaged across
the 5 simultaneous recordings as a function of sampling rate.
CT in both the EPOC and NS increased with sampling rate
although CT was marginally lower in the EPOC and flattened out
beyond 64 Hz while CT continued to increase slightly up to 250 Hz
in the NS. Nonetheless at the resolution of 128 Hz the differences
were small and systematic (Sup Fig. 3D). Thus, given the sampling
constraints of the EPOC, it performed remarkably well.
We next looked at CT in the EPOC and NS as a function of duration (at
128/125 Hz sampling for the EPOC and NS respectively). Here again
the pattern was similar in the two devices (Sup. Fig. 3C), although
CT was marginally lower in the EPOC.

We next constructed an average intra-person distribution by
shifting each individual distribution such that the peak value was 0 (i.e.
subtracting the peak value), and then averaging across them (Sup. Fig. 4E).
Deviations from the peak represented the cross-trial variation in CT
points to the left and right of the peak in the average person. We
then drew random samples of varying equal and unequal size (30
vs. 30, 30 vs. 60 which were typical of our size groupings in various
comparisons) to determine the probability of a difference arising
between the groups (Sup. Fig. 4F). The probability of a difference
in the mean of ≥5 CT points between two groups was less than
5% for both equal and unequal groupings. More significantly, the
probability of choosing two groups with a difference in mean of 2.5
points or higher that was statistically significant at a 0.05 level by a

A comparison of the CT values in the EPOC and the NS (duration
750 ms, sampling rate of 128/125 Hz) across the 5 individual is
shown in Fig. 3D. CT values in the NS were on average 2.3 points
higher with a linear relationship (R2=0.62). Given the high
similarity we concluded that the EPOC was an appropriate device
for our study.
Finally we note that the CT values in this sample of 5 people who
were all graduate researchers at Macquarie University in Australia
fell between 85 and 96, in the range that we found for people in our
modern, educated and technology savvy group using the EPOC.

4

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Apr. 11, 2017; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/125872. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

t-test was 2x10-3 at the highest (Sup Fig. 4F inset). Thus it would be
safe to assume that statistically significant results of 2.5 CT points or
higher obtained between groups of people along different experiential
criteria would be highly unlikely to arise from artifacts of trial-to-trial
variation within individuals.

that the diversity of patterns of the measured waveform is likely
to bear strong relation to the number of spatiotemporal patterns
of underlying activity.
Complexity, when considered as diversity of the waveform
structure, is very closely related to entropy. Typical measures
of EEG signal entropy involve its decomposition into either its
spectral or wavelet components followed by a subsequent analysis
of the diversity of these components, and have been found to
have relationships to both depth of anesthesia and disease states
[58; 59; 60]. Motivated by studies that demonstrate stimulus
related changes in the structure and synchrony of waveforms
in short epochs [43] and the loss-less transmission of complex
waveforms that are related to behavior [42; 53], our measure
is related to these measures of entropy, but is constructed
on the premise that it is the whole waveform structure that is
important (and therefore the interspersion of spectral and
wavelet components). One might imagine the analogy to a line
of text where the relative positioning and spacing of letters is
what confers meaning as opposed to how many of each letter
there are. Our measure thus maintains the signal in its intact
form, identifying the diversity of complex waveform patterns in
the signal. A complete description of this measure of complexity
and the factors considered in its definition are described in the
methods, along with supplementary figures. By definition our
measure could span a range from 0 to 100 where a flat line would
be 0 and both white noise and a structured highly non-repetitive
pattern over our measurement would be 100. Measured in this
way, complexity spanned a ~2.75-fold range across our sample
with values from 35 to 96 (Fig. 1A).

STATISTICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF TRENDS
To determine the significance of the trends observed in Fig. 4, i.e.
the shift in population means of CT relative to income, education
and other factors, we computed various statistics and probabilities.
We first looked at the R2 of a best fit for income and education
(logarithmic and linear respectively) as well as the correlation and
their p-values, which provided an indication of the nature of the
trend. We next computed the significance of an ANOVA (pANOVA),
which would provide the probability of a difference across the
various bins. To determine the likelihood of such a trend appearing
that could not be accounted for by intra-person fluctuations, we also
computed the probability of finding a similar trend from shuffling
the CT values across the participants 1000 times including: (i)
the probability of obtaining a significant ANOVA in the shuffled
iterations that was ≤ 0.05 (pshuff1) or (ii) ≤ the p-value of the data
(pshuff2) and (iii) the probability of finding a shuffled iteration with a
trend that was positively correlated with p<0.05 to the data (pshuff3).
These statistics are shown in Table 1.

Principal Component Analysis
Principal Component Analysis was done using the FactomineR
PCA function. Prior to application of the PCA function, all records
without values in any of the columns were removed from the
analysis (121/402 records). Secondly, given that the distributions
of data across all variables except Travel and Education (i.e. Income,
Fuel, Phone, Electricity, Population) were lognormal in nature,
these variables were log transformed with a base 5 to create linear
relationships among the variables. Individual component scores
were calculated as the contribution of each element multiplied by
the unscaled contextual factors.

Relation of CT to measures
of Spectral Properties and Entropy
The greater the number of distinct waveform patterns in the
system, the greater the complexity. To create a larger number
of waveform patterns however, one must necessarily have a
wide range of frequencies with various phase relationships. We
therefore looked at the relationship between our complexity
measure to the relative power in the different frequency ranges
delta (1-4 Hz), theta (4-7.5 Hz), alpha (7.5-14 Hz), beta (14- 30
Hz) and gamma (30+ Hz). As would be expected, we found that
higher temporal complexity was generally associated with a higher
fraction of frequencies above 4 Hz, although none of the higher
frequency bands were more specifically related to the measure (R2
of linear fit 0.19 for both theta and gamma, 0.41 for beta and 0.44
for alpha). Conversely, this was accompanied by a concomitant
decrease in the delta power (R2 of linear fit 0.54). This pattern is
easily visualized in Fig. 1C showing the summed power in each
frequency band for each participant ordered by complexity.

RESULTS
A measure of complexity of the EEG signal
Complexity is not a clearly defined concept but in its broadest sense
could be thought of as the diversity of possible configurations that
could emerge from a nonlinear interdependent system. In the
context of the brain, this could be the various patterns of activity
produced by the communication of its billions of neurons. Much
evidence now points to spatiotemporal patterns of neuronal
activity as representative of memories and behaviors [47; 48; 49].
Furthermore these associations between spatiotemporal patterns
of neuronal activity and memory and behavior have been found
at various resolutions of measurement, from spiking patterns of
individual neurons [48; 50; 51] to local field potentials (LFPs)
measured with microelectrodes on the surface of brain tissue
[52], ECoG [53; 54] and EEG [55; 56]. These field level potentials
(LFP, ECoG, EEG) arise from the aggregate synaptic and spiking
activity of the underlying neurons within the field of the electrode
[43; 57]. The temporal structure or waveform is therefore grossly
reflective of the underlying spatiotemporal patterns of neuronal
activity and holds meaning about the internal state. It thus follows

We then compared the spectral entropy of the signal (the Shannon
entropy of the power spectrum, see methods) to our measure of
complexity (Fig. 1B). The two measures were positively correlated
(r=0.66) but had a nonlinear relationship, an indication that the
measures were related but yet carried different information. For
instance, people with low spectral entropy values of 0.45 could
have complexity values ranging from 40 to 80 indicating that
the diversity of patterns constructed from the same spectral
composition varied substantially.

5

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Apr. 11, 2017; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/125872. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Figure 1 - COMPLEXITY AND SPECTRAL PROPERTIES

A

Distribution of CT (n = 750 ms,
sampling @128 Hz) across all participants.

B

CT vs. Spectral Entropy across channels for all
participants shows a nonlinear relationship.

C Relative power of spectral components from delta to gamma for each

participant ordered from lowest to highest CT. Correlations shown on right.

Complexity, Socioeconomics
and Modern Experience

The probability of a difference in the mean between two groups
being ≥5 CT points was less than 5% for both equal and unequal
groupings of sizes similar to our experience groupings. More
significantly, the probability of choosing groups with a difference
in mean of 2.5 points or higher that was statistically significant at
a 0.05 level by a t-test was 2x10-3 at the highest (Sup Fig. 4F inset).
Thus it would be safe to assume that statistically significant results
of 2.5 CT points or higher obtained between groups of people
along different experiential criteria would be highly unlikely to
arise as a consequence of trial-to-trial variation within individuals.

We next explored whether the complexity of the EEG reflects
the divergent complexity of human experience in the transition
from pre-modern to modern society. To do so we compared the
complexity of different groupings of income and experience.
Before describing these results, however, we note that our study
involves comparison of the complexity of the resting EEG signal
from just a 3-minute snapshot across a large number of people.
It is thus possible that the variation in CT across the population
was simply a function of intra-person variability arising from
differential placement of electrodes or state of mind at the time of
recording. We therefore examined the variability arising within
20 individuals across 10 sessions conducted at various times over
a one week period to determine levels of statistical significance in
differences among random groups drawn from the average intraperson distribution (described in detail in Methods, Sup. Fig 4).

We first compared gender and age groupings. Our sampling
was such that each income group in our sample was equally
distributed across males and females and decadal age groups, thus
comparisons along these dimensions would not be likely to reflect
second order differences along other dimensions.
The distribution of EEG complexity of males and females were
not significantly different (Fig. 2A) with mean ± SEM for males at
74.07±0.96 and Females at 72.11±0.98 (p>0.15 both KS test and t-test).

6

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Apr. 11, 2017; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/125872. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Figure 2 - DISTRIBUTIONS OF COMPLEXITY FOR AGE, GENDER, MODERNITY AND INCOME

A

Cumulative distributions
of CT for males (solid line)
and females (dotted line)
sampled equally across
socioeconomic groups.

B

C Distributions of CT of pre-

Distributions of CT
across decadal age
groupings from 20s
to 60s also sampled
roughly equally across
socioeconomic groups.

modern (low education,
low tech), modern
(higher education, high
tech) and transitioning
populations.

Similarly there was no significant difference between any successive
decadal age groups (Fig. 2B; mean ± SD age 21-30: 75.09±1.16, 3040: 71.99±1.31, 40-50: 73.97±1.45, 50-60: 70.35±1.61, 0.18<p<0.6
by KS test, ANOVA F = 2.23 p = 0.08 old), although the 21-30 age
group was significantly higher than those 51-60 (p=0.02).

D Distributions of CT of

family income groups
of <$10/day, $10-$30/
day and >$30/day.

(pANOVA) and compared it to the probability of finding a similar
trend from shuffling the CT values across the participants 1000
times including the probability of obtaining (i) a significance level in
the ANOVA that was less than 0.05 (pshuff1), (ii) a significance level
in the ANOVA that was less than the p-value of the data (pshuff2) and
(iii) the probability of finding a shuffled iteration that was positively
correlated to the trend in the data (pshuff3) (detailed in Methods).
While differences between specific groups and the ANOVA are
shown in the text with standard statistics between groups, the
comprehensive trend statistics are shown only in Table 1.

We next divided the population into three groups along a dimension
of modernity (Fig. 2C): (i) Pre-modern, referring to those with
primary education or below and limited use of technology (no
mobile phone, internet or owned vehicles), (ii) modern, referring
to college educated with extensive use of mobile phones, internet
access and owned vehicles, and (iii) transitioning, referring to those
at various stages of education and technology use between these
two extremes. Complexity of the pre-modern, transitioning and
modern groups were (mean±SEM) 71.53±2.65, 72.07 ±0.73 and
86.23±1.53 respectively. Pre-modern and transitioning populations
were not significantly different (p=0.97 by KS test). In contrast both
were dramatically distinct from the modern group (p= 1.8 x 10-5
t-test, 6.1 x 10-9 by KS test). The dramatic shift of the modern group
suggests a distinctly non-linear jump in complexity at a certain
threshold of modernity.

Table1
No.

Given that much of modern experience is enabled by income, we
next looked at the difference in CT across different income groups
(Fig. 2D). We found a similar pattern whereby the population with
family income below $10/day and between $10 and $30/day were
largely similar with means±SEM of 71.82±0.74 and 72.9±2.82
respectively (p=0.37). In contrast, the group with incomes of >$30/
day had mean±SEM of 85.28±1.68, dramatically different from both
other groups (p=3.5 x 10-10 t-test, 1.8 x 10-5 KS test), once again
suggesting that the increase in complexity is not linear.
To probe in more depth the factors that contributed to this
difference we binned participants more finely along various income
and experience dimensions (described in Sup. Table 1) and looked
for systematic trends in the population complexity (shown are mean
± SEM of CT)(Fig. 3). However given that these were trends across
a number of bins, for further assessment of their significance and
likelihood that they were a consequence of intra-person variability
we computed the significance of an ANOVA across these bins

7

Life Context
Factor

Figure

Range

P-value

(Max -Min)

(Max, Min)

1

Age

2A

5

2.40E-02

2

Gender

2B

3

1.60E-01

3

Modernity

2C

15

1.80E-05

4

Daily Family
Income (USD)

2D

13

3.50E-07

5

Daily Family
Income (USD)

3A

21

6

Daily Individual
Income (USD)

3B

7

Years of
Education

8

P-shuff1 P-shuff2 P-shuff3
6.2E-02

9.6E-02

3.1E-02

5.8E-02

0.0E+00

3.4E-02

7.02E-03

5.8E-02

0.0E+00

5.1E-02

14

5.93E-03

5.8E-02

0.0E+00

2.0E-02

3C

18

8.54E-04

5.1E-02

0.0E+00

0.0E+00

Geofootprint
Past Year

3D

21

6.80E-06

3.8E-02

0.0E+00

4.8E-02

9

Geofootprint
Life

3E

18

4.31E-09

3.8E-02

0.0E+00

4.8E-02

10

Geofootprint
Family/Friends

3F

6

6.31E-03

6.2E-02

0.0E+00

1.0E-02

11

Mobile Phone
Spend

3G

11

1.68E-05

6.6E-02

0.0E+00

1.0E-01

12

Fuel Spend

3H

14

1.49E-01

6.8E-02

1.0E-02

3.7E-02

13

Electricity
Spend

3I

7

2.68E-01

5.5E-02

7.9E-02

3.1E-02

14

Name Task
Score

5A

19

6.34E-05

4.1E-02

4.1E-02

5.5E-02

15

Pattern Task
Score

5B

29

5.14E-04

3.1E-02

0.0E+00

1.4E-02

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Apr. 11, 2017; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/125872. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

their lifetime was 21 and 18 points respectively. In contrast, there
was a far less significant difference between populations with
geographically wider social networks with only category 5 (overseas
family or friends) having any significance (Fig. 3F, ANOVA F= 5.55
p = 2.4 x 10-4).

INCOME
Consistent with the nonlinear jump in CT in Fig 2D, the relationship
between CT and income was best fit by a logarithmic function
(Fig. 3A,B R2 = 0.71 for Family Income and 0.67 for Self Income,
ANOVA F = 6.08 p = 9.9 x 10-7 family income and F= 5.88 p =1.9 x
10-6 individual income), indicating that the population CT shifted
sharply to the right with increasing family income up to ~$30/day
and increasing individual income up to about ~$17/day, leveling
out thereafter. The difference in complexity between the lowest
and highest income groups was 21 points. We note however that
between the range of $3 and $10 where the largest fraction of our
sample (and humanity) resides, there was no significant difference.

COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY
We also looked at mobile phone and Internet usage. Since all users
of the Internet in our sample were college educated and had similar
hours of usage, we were unable to make any useful comparison.
This is therefore excluded. However we found that populations with
increasing mobile phone usage were not substantially different until
the level of usage went beyond 300 Rs. (~$5) per month (equivalent
to ~ 300 minutes of talk time or 1.25GB of data transfer per month)
at which point there was a dramatic jump in CT of 8 points (Fig.
3G, ANOVA F= 4.65, p = 1.6 x 10-4). Note the logarithmic trend,
similar to income.

EDUCATION
Education represents the most formalized access to knowledge of
increasing complexity. Indeed mean CT of the population scaled
systematically with years of education and could be best fit by a
linear function (Fig. 3C, R2 = 0.70, ANOVA F = 4.55 p = 8.1x10-7)
with an 18-point difference in the mean between unschooled and
college-educated groups (16 years). We note that those who drop
out of school at various stages without going to college, tend to
have gone to lower income government schools where standards
of education are relatively poor, while the college goers have also
had the benefit of a better private schooling. This could be a major
reason for the greater variance and the sharper increase from 1216 (college) years relative to 1-12 years of education.

FUEL CONSUMPTION
Fuel stands as a proxy for daily activity and local travel. Here again
we found no significant change in CT as a function of increasing
fuel consumption until fuel consumption was $128/month or more
(Fig 3H, ANOVA F = 3.78 p = 0.003) where CT was 8 points higher
than all values at lower fuel consumption. Overall the effects were
significantly less than for Geofootprint, income and education.
ELECTRICITY CONSUMPTION
Finally, we looked at CT as a function of electricity consumption.
There was some evidence of a threshold dependent trend as seen
for mobile spend with a greater likelihood of an increase when
electricity consumption exceeded ~$32/month, however the effects
here were not significant (ANOVA F= 1.94 p = 0.071).

GEOFOOTPRINT
Geofootprint refers to the distance a person has traveled in the world
or the geographical space of exploration. Travel is highly dependent
on access to modern transport and requires a wide repertoire
of ability from planning to spatial navigation to navigating new
languages and cultures. This measure thus stands as gross proxy
for an integrated range of different stimuli that a person is likely to
have encountered in their lifetime. To get an approximate measure
of a person’s geofootprint we classified their travel into six categories
reflecting the distance and complexity of their travel. Category 1
referred to no travel outside of ones hometown, 2 referred to trips
to places that were less than 100 km away and within the same State
and were typically a day trip, Category 3 referred to trips to places
that were within the same State but more than 100 km away and
therefore required overnight stay and more planning. Category 4
was to another State, and 5 was out of the country. Crossing State
borders in India represents a transition into a different language and
culture and therefore adds a significant layer of complexity. We then
identified the category that defined the maximum extent of their
travel in the last year as well as in their lifetime. We also identified
the category that defined the maximum geographic range of their
social network (Farthest friends and family).

Overall, the statistics were highly significant (Table 1) with very
small probabilities that these patterns could have emerged simply
from intra-person or sampling variations of the populations.
Finally we note that both the related measures of spectral entropy
and delta fraction had directional similarities but without the
consistent statistical significance of this measure (not shown).
PARSING THE CONTRIBUTIONS
OF INDIVIDUAL FACTORS
Taken together our results suggest that the complexity of the
EEG reflects a host of economic and experiential factors, most
significantly income and travel. Income serves as a universal enabler
for the experiential factors of education, travel, communication and
energy consumption. People with higher income therefore have
greater access to all elements, and all factors would likely strongly
co-vary with income. Thus while there were clear shifts in the mean
population CT as a function of most experiential factors, it is not
clear how much each factor contributes independent of the others.
Indeed all of the factors we considered were positively correlated with
one another, with income most tightly correlated with education
and mobile phone use (Fig. 4A). In contrast, geofootprint (travel
year and life) had the weakest correlation with income, education
and other factors. The systematic shift in the population mean of CT
with geofootprint was evident even when separated by income (Fig.
4B) or education (Fig. 4C) categories, and was apparent even for the
high income and education groups although they spanned only two
of the travel categories (geofootprint 5 or 6).

Mean CT scaled systematically by 3 or 4 points for each successive
category of geofootprint (Fig. 3D,E, ANOVA F = 11.35 p = 9.1 x 10-9
past year, F = 13.27, p = 2.9 x 10-8 life). Populations with overseas
footprints within the last year however had CT values 8 point
higher than those who had not left the country, while populations
with overseas footprints over their entire lifetime had CT values 6
points higher than those who had never left the country. Overall,
the difference in CT between populations who had never left their
hometown to those who had traveled overseas in the last year or

8

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Apr. 11, 2017; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/125872. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Figure 3 - SCALING OF COMPLEXITY WITH VARIOUS EXPERIENCE FACTORS

A

B

CT as a function
of individual income
(R2 of logarithmic fit: 0.67).

C CT as a function of years

D CT for categories of increasing geo-

E

Same as above but for
lifetime geo-footprint.

F

CT as a function of farthest
distance of friends and family
(Categories same as (D)).

G CT as a function of monthly

H CT as a function of monthly

I

CT as a function on monthly
expenditure on electricity.
Note that bins are logarithmic
(base 2).

Mean±SEM of CT for populations
within each family income bin with
logarithmic fit (R2 = 0.71). Open circles
show average of random shuffling of
CT values across the sample.

footprint in the last year (1= never left
home town, 2 =<100 km within same
State, 3 =>100 km within same State,
4 = To a different State, 5 = Out of
country; note that States in India have
different language and culture).

expenditure on mobile phone
usage. Note that bins are
logarithmic (base 5).

expenditure on fuel
(gasoline). Note that bins
are logarithmic (base 5).

9

of education. 16 indicates
college graduates and above.
R2 of linear fit is 0.70.

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Apr. 11, 2017; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/125872. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Figure 4 - PARSING OUT EFFECTS OF EXPERIENCE FACTORS FROM INCOME

A

Correlation matrix for socioeconomic
and experience factors. Income,
Fuel, Phone and Electricity are
log transformed (base 5) before
computing correlation.

D Proportion of variance of

socioeconomic and technology
factors contributed by each principal
component. The first and second
components contribute 47.54% and
14.24% respectively.

B

CT as a function of geofootprint
within the past year (see code
in 3D) for the lowest (<$10/day)
and highest incomes categories
(>$30/day) (Mean±SEM).

C Same as in B. but for the lowest

E

Circle of correlation of second
component versus the first
component shows domination of
travel in the second component
with little or no contribution of
income and other factors.

F

and highest education categories
(≤ 5th grade and college).

CT as a function of the first two
components (Mean±SEM). CT
increases systematically with
increases in the first (all factors)
and second components (travel
dominated).

components (R2=0.94, PANOVA p = 2.3 x 10-9 (Comp1), R2 = 0.96,
PANOVA 4.6 x 10-10 (Comp2)).

We next performed a principal component analysis to identify any
further dimensions of experience that could be disaggregated from
one another, and income in particular (see Methods for details).

COMPLEXITY AND FUNCTIONAL CAPACITY

The first principal component (Comp1), where all factors of
experience essentially co-varied with income, accounted for
approximately 47.54% of the variance in CT (Fig. 4D). The second
component (Comp2) contributed 14.24% of the variance and was
dominated by travel (geofootprint), while all other factors made
little to no positive contribution (Fig. 4E). Thus travel appears to
be an experiential choice that is more individual and independent
relative to all other factors. We next looked at CT as a function
of individual scores constructed for each of these components
(Fig. 4F). Indeed CT scaled systematically as a function of both

A major question that arises when attempting to interpret these
results is the relationship between this measure of complexity (CT)
and the functional capacity of the individual. While this warrants in
depth investigation with respect to various dimensions of cognition,
we made a rudimentary first attempt to quantify two functional
aspects, namely the speed of free recall of names of people or
places and the ability to recognize patterns (Fig. 5). These tests were
administered on the same day as the EEG recording but were not
simultaneous with the recording, which required the participant to
be still with their eyes closed.

10

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Apr. 11, 2017; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/125872. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Figure 5 - COMPLEXITY AND COGNITIVE TESTS

A

CT as a function of number of
places recalled within 60 seconds
(Mean±SEM).

B

CT as a function of scores on a
5-question pattern completion test.
(r =0.93, p =0.006 and R2 (linear fit)
= 0.87 for population means; r =0.66,
p =0.0005 and R2=0.43 for raw data
(not shown here))

C Example of one question

in the pattern completion test.

NAME RECALL

DISCUSSION

This test, which we administered only to people with writing literacy
(n = 346) required writing as many names of people and places as
possible within a one minute period. We note that this could reflect
a larger pool of names available for recall, a faster rate of retrieval
and/or greater motor facility and is a coarse test at best.

The brain lies at the core of our sense of what is human. Most of
the understanding we have built thus far, however, comes from
work done in the developed world, and with subjects that are, most
often, university students representing only a very small privileged
fraction of humanity. The implicit assumption is that findings from
these studies extend easily to all of humanity.

Here we found that CT increased only slightly as the number of
names recalled increased from 10 to 50 but then grew dramatically
higher beyond (Fig. 5A). The overall trend was not significant
(ANOVA p = 0.12), however the group with scores >60 had an
average CT value 12 points higher than the 50-60 names group (p =
6.3 x 10-5) and 19 points higher than the 0-10 group. The nonlinear
trend hints that higher CT may be associated with non-linear gains
in this cognitive function. However, the relatively low correlation of
the raw scores to complexity (r = 0.12 p = 0.018) suggests that this
measure is at best an indirect measure of recall or retrieval speed.

This study is the first of its kind, extending far beyond the
populations that reside around universities and into populations
relatively untouched by modern advances, with four important
results. First, the complexity of the EEG signal varies severalfold across individuals. Second, the complexity of the signal is
nonlinearly related to the increasing complexity of modern living
as well as to income. The relationship with income is logarithmic
in nature similar to that reported between income and brain surface
area for a study conducted in the United States [30]. Given the
structure of this relationship parity in complexity was roughly
achieved at a family income of ~$30/day or individual income of
$17/day. Third, geofootprint or travel of the individual has the most
dramatic independent contribution to complexity relative to all
other factors including education. Fourth, complexity is strongly
correlated with scores on a pattern completion task (and weakly
with memory retrieval) indicating that higher complexity implies
clear cognitive gains. Taken together, these results demonstrate a
wide range in the dynamical complexity of the human brain that is
profoundly related to socioeconomic context and geofootprint and
has cognitive relevance.

PATTERN COMPLETION
The pattern completion test used a modified and abridged version
of the Raven’s progressive matrices and consisted of five multiple
choice questions of increasing difficulty, a sample of which is shown
in Fig. 5C. The test was administered to 28 people across two
locations (one urban and one rural). The patterns were visual in
nature and required no formal verbal or numerical literacy beyond
counting to 10. Unlike name recall, we found that EEG complexity
scaled linearly with test scores. The correlation between complexity
and raw scores of all 28 people (not shown) was 0.66, (pr = 1.5 x
10-4), while the shift in mean complexity within each score group
(Fig. 5B) followed a linear trend with a correlation of 0.93 (pr =
0.006, pANOVA = 0.007 and R2 of linear fit of 0.43). We note that this
was a far stronger relationship compared to the related measure of
spectral entropy where the correlation was 0.4 (pr = 0.03).

We note poignantly that 80% of the world’s population falls below
the threshold of $30/day of family income beyond which EEG
complexity distributions show parity across incomes.
A crucial question that arises is therefore the direction of causality
– does higher complexity confer higher income or does higher
income confer higher complexity? Does travel increase complexity
or does higher complexity spur greater travel and exploration?

All together this suggests that our measure of complexity strongly
reflects both experience and cognitive function.

11

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Apr. 11, 2017; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/125872. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

The malleability of complexity and functional capability with
different dimensions of experience is a critical question that must
be addressed going forward, with significant implications for how
we might approach a global development agenda. Indeed, although
it was once thought that the adult human cortex was not capable
of substantial rewiring, there has been mounting evidence to the
contrary [10; 61; 62; 63]. Thus while a greater ability to make sense
of new situations and patterns may propel greater geo exploration,
such exploration will likely in turn enhance complexity, leading to
meaningful cognitive benefits. In this construct interventions that
lower barriers to physical mobility may deliver the most meaningful
gains by allowing people to explore a wider range of environments,
and warrants deeper investigation.

effective technologies available, it is possible to take neuroscience
investigation out of the lab and to a much larger global population.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
A very special thanks to Sathish S, Aravind and Govind for managing
the field EEG recordings and surveys, as well as S. Ravi Shankar who
enabled smooth coordination of the process.
We also thank the various staff at Madura Microfinance who
facilitated access to the villages and recruitment of participants,
SciSphere, India for providing us survey tools, access to demographic
and economic data for location selection and data support, and
Nicholas Badcock and Betty Mousikou at Macquarie University in
Sydney, Australia for providing us with the simultaneously recorded
Emotiv EPOC and Neuroscan data.

Finally our study warns against extending results obtained from
small or socioeconomically limited groups to global populations.
We also note that our study demonstrates that, with new cost-

REFERENCES
[15] R. Hullinger, K. O’Riordan, and C. Burger, Environmental enrichment improves
learning and memory and long-term potentiation in young adult rats through
a mechanism requiring mGluR5 signaling and sustained activation of p70s6k.
Neurobiol Learn Mem 125 (2015) 126-34.

[1] I. Ortiz, and M. Cummins, Global Inequality: Beyond the Bottom Billion: A
Rapid Review of Income Distribution in 141 Countries. Unicef Social and
Economic Policy Working Paper (2011).
[2] C. Lakner, and B. Milanovic, Global Income Distribution: From the Fall of the
Berlin Wall to the Great Recession. The World Bank Policy Research Working
Paper 6719 (2013).

[16] M.S. Kim, J.H. Yu, C.H. Kim, J.Y. Choi, J.H. Seo, M.Y. Lee, C.H. Yi, T.H.
Choi, Y.H. Ryu, J.E. Lee, B.H. Lee, H. Kim, and S.R. Cho, Environmental
enrichment enhances synaptic plasticity by internalization of striatal dopamine
transporters. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab (2015).

[3] P. Medini, Experience-dependent plasticity of visual cortical microcircuits.
Neuroscience 278 (2014) 367-84.

[17] G.I. Irvine, and W.C. Abraham, Enriched environment exposure alters the
input-output dynamics of synaptic transmission in area CA1 of freely moving
rats. Neurosci Lett 391 (2005) 32-7.

[4] J.W. Schnupp, and O. Kacelnik, Cortical plasticity: learning from cortical
reorganisation. Curr Biol 12 (2002) R144-6.
[5] M. Sur, J. Schummers, and V. Dragoi, Cortical plasticity: time for a change. Curr
Biol 12 (2002) R168-70.

[18] L.R. Stein, K.A. O’Dell, M. Funatsu, C.F. Zorumski, and Y. Izumi, Short-term
environmental enrichment enhances synaptic plasticity in hippocampal slices
from aged rats. Neuroscience 329 (2016) 294-305.

[6] C. Xerri, Plasticity of cortical maps: multiple triggers for adaptive reorganization
following brain damage and spinal cord injury. Neuroscientist 18 (2012) 133-48.
[7] S. Chaudhury, V. Sharma, V. Kumar, T.C. Nag, and S. Wadhwa, Activitydependent synaptic plasticity modulates the critical phase of brain development.
Brain Dev (2015).

[19] M. Bose, P. Munoz-Llancao, S. Roychowdhury, J.A. Nichols, V. Jakkamsetti,
B. Porter, R. Byrapureddy, H. Salgado, M.P. Kilgard, F. Aboitiz, A. DagninoSubiabre, and M. Atzori, Effect of the environment on the dendritic morphology
of the rat auditory cortex. Synapse 64 (2010) 97-110.

[8] C. Chen, and S. Tonegawa, Molecular genetic analysis of synaptic plasticity,
activity-dependent neural development, learning, and memory in the
mammalian brain. Annu Rev Neurosci 20 (1997) 157-84.

[20] M. Caleo, D. Tropea, C. Rossi, L. Gianfranceschi, and L. Maffei, Environmental
enrichment promotes fiber sprouting after deafferentation of the superior
colliculus in the adult rat brain. Exp Neurol 216 (2009) 515-9.

[9] S.A. Marik, H. Yamahachi, J.N. McManus, G. Szabo, and C.D. Gilbert, Axonal
dynamics of excitatory and inhibitory neurons in somatosensory cortex. PLoS
Biol 8 (2010) e1000395.

[21] M. Mainardi, A. Di Garbo, M. Caleo, N. Berardi, A. Sale, and L. Maffei,
Environmental enrichment strengthens corticocortical interactions and
reduces amyloid-beta oligomers in aged mice. Front Aging Neurosci 6
(2014) 1.

[10] H. Yamahachi, S.A. Marik, J.N. McManus, W. Denk, and C.D. Gilbert, Rapid
axonal sprouting and pruning accompany functional reorganization in primary
visual cortex. Neuron 64 (2009) 719-29.

[22] M. Mainardi, S. Landi, L. Gianfranceschi, S. Baldini, R. De Pasquale, N.
Berardi, L. Maffei, and M. Caleo, Environmental enrichment potentiates
thalamocortical transmission and plasticity in the adult rat visual cortex. J
Neurosci Res 88 (2010) 3048-59.

[11] T.C. Thiagarajan, M. Lindskog, A. Malgaroli, and R.W. Tsien, LTP and
adaptation to inactivity: overlapping mechanisms and implications for
metaplasticity. Neuropharmacology 52 (2007) 156-75.
[12] T.C. Thiagarajan, M. Lindskog, and R.W. Tsien, Adaptation to synaptic
inactivity in hippocampal neurons. Neuron 47 (2005) 725-37.

[23] J.C. Bennett, P.A. McRae, L.J. Levy, and K.M. Frick, Long-term continuous, but
not daily, environmental enrichment reduces spatial memory decline in aged
male mice. Neurobiol Learn Mem 85 (2006) 139-52.

[13] C. Rampon, C.H. Jiang, H. Dong, Y.P. Tang, D.J. Lockhart, P.G. Schultz, J.Z.
Tsien, and Y. Hu, Effects of environmental enrichment on gene expression in
the brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 97 (2000) 12880-4.

[24] S. Koh, H. Chung, H. Xia, A. Mahadevia, and Y. Song, Environmental
enrichment reverses the impaired exploratory behavior and altered gene
expression induced by early-life seizures. J Child Neurol 20 (2005) 796-802.

[14] M. Bayat, M.D. Sharifi, M. Haghani, and M. Shabani, Enriched environment
improves synaptic plasticity and cognitive deficiency in chronic cerebral
hypoperfused rats. Brain Res Bull 119 (2015) 34-40.

[25] D.A. Costa, J.R. Cracchiolo, A.D. Bachstetter, T.F. Hughes, K.R. Bales, S.M. Paul, R.F.
Mervis, G.W. Arendash, and H. Potter, Enrichment improves cognition in AD mice
by amyloid-related and unrelated mechanisms. Neurobiol Aging 28 (2007) 831-44.

12

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Apr. 11, 2017; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/125872. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

[44] E.S. Kappenman, and S.J. Luck, The effects of electrode impedance on data
quality and statistical significance in ERP recordings. Psychophysiology 47
(2010) 888-904.

[26] T. Begenisic, M. Spolidoro, C. Braschi, L. Baroncelli, M. Milanese, G. Pietra,
M.E. Fabbri, G. Bonanno, G. Cioni, L. Maffei, and A. Sale, Environmental
enrichment decreases GABAergic inhibition and improves cognitive abilities,
synaptic plasticity, and visual functions in a mouse model of Down syndrome.
Front Cell Neurosci 5 (2011) 29.

[45] C.M. Gray, and W. Singer, Stimulus-specific neuronal oscillations in
orientation columns of cat visual cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 86 (1989)
1698-702.

[27] A.C. Kentner, A. Khoury, E. Lima Queiroz, and M. MacRae, Environmental
enrichment rescues the effects of early life inflammation on markers of synaptic
transmission and plasticity. Brain Behav Immun 57 (2016) 151-60.

[46] J.P. Lachaux, N. Axmacher, F. Mormann, E. Halgren, and N.E. Crone, Highfrequency neural activity and human cognition: past, present and possible
future of intracranial EEG research. Prog Neurobiol 98 (2012) 279-301.

[28] J. Nithianantharajah, and A.J. Hannan, Enriched environments, experiencedependent plasticity and disorders of the nervous system. Nat Rev Neurosci
7 (2006) 697-709.

[47] N. Axmacher, F. Mormann, G. Fernandez, C.E. Elger, and J. Fell, Memory
formation by neuronal synchronization. Brain Res Rev 52 (2006) 170-82.

[29] N.E. Holz, R. Boecker, E. Hohm, K. Zohsel, A.F. Buchmann, D. Blomeyer,
C. Jennen-Steinmetz, S. Baumeister, S. Hohmann, I. Wolf, M.M. Plichta,
G. Esser, M. Schmidt, A. Meyer-Lindenberg, T. Banaschewski, D. Brandeis,
and M. Laucht, The long-term impact of early life poverty on orbitofrontal
cortex volume in adulthood: results from a prospective study over 25 years.
Neuropsychopharmacology 40 (2015) 996-1004.

[48] G.R. Sutherland, and B. McNaughton, Memory trace reactivation in
hippocampal and neocortical neuronal ensembles. Curr Opin Neurobiol 10
(2000) 180-6.
[49] C. Herry, and J.P. Johansen, Encoding of fear learning and memory in
distributed neuronal circuits. Nat Neurosci 17 (2014) 1644-54.

[30] K.G. Noble, S.M. Houston, N.H. Brito, H. Bartsch, E. Kan, J.M. Kuperman,
N. Akshoomoff, D.G. Amaral, C.S. Bloss, O. Libiger, N.J. Schork, S.S. Murray,
B.J. Casey, L. Chang, T.M. Ernst, J.A. Frazier, J.R. Gruen, D.N. Kennedy, P. Van
Zijl, S. Mostofsky, W.E. Kaufmann, T. Kenet, A.M. Dale, T.L. Jernigan, and E.R.
Sowell, Family income, parental education and brain structure in children and
adolescents. Nat Neurosci 18 (2015) 773-8.

[50] E. Thomson, J. Lou, K. Sylvester, A. McDonough, S. Tica, and M.A. Nicolelis,
Basal forebrain dynamics during a tactile discrimination task. J Neurophysiol
112 (2014) 1179-91.
[51] K. Dzirasa, R. Fuentes, S. Kumar, J.M. Potes, and M.A. Nicolelis, Chronic in
vivo multi-circuit neurophysiological recordings in mice. J Neurosci Methods
195 (2011) 36-46.

[31] P. Tomalski, D.G. Moore, H. Ribeiro, E.L. Axelsson, E. Murphy, A. KarmiloffSmith, M.H. Johnson, and E. Kushnerenko, Socioeconomic status and functional
brain development - associations in early infancy. Dev Sci 16 (2013) 676-87.

[52] D. Gervasoni, S.C. Lin, S. Ribeiro, E.S. Soares, J. Pantoja, and M.A. Nicolelis,
Global forebrain dynamics predict rat behavioral states and their transitions. J
Neurosci 24 (2004) 11137-47.

[32] B. Boller, S. Mellah, G. Ducharme-Laliberte, and S. Belleville, Relationships
between years of education, regional grey matter volumes, and working
memory-related brain activity in healthy older adults. Brain Imaging
Behav (2016).

[53] D. Parameshwaran, N.E. Crone, and T.C. Thiagarajan, Coherence potentials
encode simple human sensorimotor behavior. PLoS One 7 (2012) e30514.

[33] S.R. Cox, D.A. Dickie, S.J. Ritchie, S. Karama, A. Pattie, N.A. Royle, J. Corley,
B.S. Aribisala, M. Valdes Hernandez, S. Munoz Maniega, J.M. Starr, M.E.
Bastin, A.C. Evans, J.M. Wardlaw, and I.J. Deary, Associations between
education and brain structure at age 73 years, adjusted for age 11 IQ.
Neurology 87 (2016) 1820-1826.

[54] M.S. Fifer, M. Mollazadeh, S. Acharya, N.V. Thakor, and N.E. Crone,
Asynchronous decoding of grasp aperture from human ECoG during
a reach-to-grasp task. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc 2011 (2011)
4584-7.

[34] G. Ingram, and A. Will, Global Educational Trends: 1970-2025. FHI 360
Working Paper (2009).

[55] T.H. Grandy, M. Werkle-Bergner, C. Chicherio, M. Lovden, F. Schmiedek, and
U. Lindenberger, Individual alpha peak frequency is related to latent factors of
general cognitive abilities. Neuroimage 79 (2013) 10-8.

[35] N.A. Badcock, K.A. Preece, B. de Wit, K. Glenn, N. Fieder, J. Thie, and G.
McArthur, Validation of the Emotiv EPOC EEG system for research quality
auditory event-related potentials in children. PeerJ 3 (2015) e907.

[56] C. Richard Clark, M.D. Veltmeyer, R.J. Hamilton, E. Simms, R. Paul, D.
Hermens, and E. Gordon, Spontaneous alpha peak frequency predicts
working memory performance across the age span. Int J Psychophysiol 53
(2004) 1-9.

[36] M. Duvinage, T. Castermans, M. Petieau, T. Hoellinger, G. Cheron, and T.
Dutoit, Performance of the Emotiv Epoc headset for P300-based applications.
Biomed Eng Online 12 (2013) 56.
[37] A.S. Elsawy, S. Eldawlatly, M. Taher, and G.M. Aly, Performance analysis of
a Principal Component Analysis ensemble classifier for Emotiv headset P300
spellers. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc 2014 (2014) 5032-5.

[57] T. Petermann, T.C. Thiagarajan, M.A. Lebedev, M.A. Nicolelis, D.R. Chialvo,
and D. Plenz, Spontaneous cortical activity in awake monkeys composed of
neuronal avalanches. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106 (2009) 15921-6.

[38] N.A. Badcock, P. Mousikou, Y. Mahajan, P. de Lissa, J. Thie, and G. McArthur,
Validation of the Emotiv EPOC((R)) EEG gaming system for measuring
research quality auditory ERPs. PeerJ 1 (2013) e38.

[58] H.A. Al-Nashash, J.S. Paul, W.C. Ziai, D.F. Hanley, and N.V. Thakor, Wavelet
entropy for subband segmentation of EEG during injury and recovery. Ann
Biomed Eng 31 (2003) 653-8.

[39] P. de Lissa, S. Sorensen, N. Badcock, J. Thie, and G. McArthur, Measuring the
face-sensitive N170 with a gaming EEG system: A validation study. J Neurosci
Methods 253 (2015) 47-54.

[59] V. Jantti, and S. Alahuhta, Spectral entropy--what has it to do with anaesthesia,
and the EEG? Br J Anaesth 93 (2004) 150-1; author reply 151-2.

[40] A. Rodriguez, B. Rey, and M. Alcaniz, Validation of a low-cost EEG device for
mood induction studies. Stud Health Technol Inform 191 (2013) 43-7.

[60] Z. Liang, Y. Wang, X. Sun, D. Li, L.J. Voss, J.W. Sleigh, S. Hagihira, and X. Li,
EEG entropy measures in anesthesia. Front Comput Neurosci 9 (2015) 16.

[41] T. Hwang, M. Kim, M. Hwangbo, and E. Oh, Comparative analysis of cognitive
tasks for modeling mental workload with electroencephalogram. Conf Proc
IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc 2014 (2014) 2661-5.

[61] H. Abe, J.N. McManus, N. Ramalingam, W. Li, S.A. Marik, S.M. Borgloh,
and C.D. Gilbert, Adult cortical plasticity studied with chronically implanted
electrode arrays. J Neurosci 35 (2015) 2778-90.

[42] T.C. Thiagarajan, M.A. Lebedev, M.A. Nicolelis, and D. Plenz, Coherence
potentials: loss-less, all-or-none network events in the cortex. PLoS Biol 8
(2010) e1000278.

[62] R.P.K. Sammons, T., Adult plasticity and cortical reorganization afer peripheral
lesions. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 35 (2015) 136-141.

[43] C.M. Gray, A.K. Engel, P. Konig, and W. Singer, Synchronization of oscillatory
neuronal responses in cat striate cortex: temporal properties. Vis Neurosci 8
(1992) 337-47.

[63] H.K. Lee, Whitt J.L., Cross-modal synaptic plasticity in adult primary sensory
cortices. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 35 (2015) 119-26.

13

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Apr. 11, 2017; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/125872. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Sup. Figure 1 - SAMPLING ACROSS A BROAD RANGE OF HUMANITY

A

48 settlements in Tamil
Nadu, India where data was
collected.

D Distribution of daily self- or individual
incomes among participants (Note
log scale on x-axis).

B

Distribution of populations of the
48 settlements (Note log scale on
x-axis).

C Distribution of daily family income

E

Distribution of years of education
of participants (1 = 1st grade, 16
= college graduates and above).

F

14

among participants (Note log scale
on x-axis).

Map of electrode positions
in the Emotiv EPOC.

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Apr. 11, 2017; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/125872. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Sup. Figure 2 - DEFINING A MEASURE OF COMPLEXITY

A

Cumulative distribution of diversity of
B
waveform segments of length t=750
ms (|1-rn|*100, n=96) for each each
electrode in one participant (grey line).
Black line is the mean across electrodes.
Value corresponding to median
(dotted line) is defined as the temporal
complexity (CT) for that individual.

D Coefficient of Variation (CV%) of CT

across all participants computed
with increasing segment duration
from t = 100 to t = 1250 ms (solid
line) Dotted line shows CV% for the
amplitude shuffled signal. t=750 ms
used in all cases going forward.

E

Cumulative distribution of the
complexity of each channel
averaged across all participants
(grey lines). Black line is the
global mean across all channels.

C Mean CT across all participants

Mean CT across all participants
computed with signal of varying
sampling frequency from 12 to
128 Hz (solid line). Dotted line
shows mean CT for amplitude
shuffled signal.

F

15

computed for varying segments
from t = 100 to 1250 ms is
significantly lower for the
recorded signal (solid line)
compared to the amplitude
shuffled signal (dotted line).

CV% of CT across all participants for
the intact (solid line) and amplitude
shuffled signal (dotted line) as a
function of sampling frequency.

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Apr. 11, 2017; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/125872. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Sup. Figure 3 - COMPARISON OF THE EMOTIV EPOC TO NEUROSCAN

A

Average power
spectrum of the signals
simultaneously recorded
with the Emotiv EPOC
and Neuroscan (n=5, all
subsequent panels).

B

C Mean CT computed

Mean CT computed
with different signal
sampling frequency
in the EPOC and
Neuroscan.

with varying segment
duration in the EPOC
and Neuroscan.

16

D CT computed for duration

t=750 ms and sampling
frequency 125 (NS)/128
(EPOC) Hz in the Neuroscan
(NS) vs. the EPOC (R2=0.62,
solid line = fit, dotted line
shows y=x)

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Apr. 11, 2017; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/125872. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Sup. Figure 4 - INTRA-PERSON VARIABILITY OF CT

A

Distribution of cross-channel CV%
of participants.

D CV% of intra-person CT vs.

mean CV% of inter-channel CT
for the same people (n=20).

B

Distribution of intra person
variability shown as CV% for 20
individuals for whom 10 separate
recordings were done over a one
week period.

C Inter-channel (open circles, n=400)

E

Average peak-subtracted
distribution of intra-person
variability of CT.

F

17

and Intra-person (closed circles, n=20)
CV% versus CT. Inter-channel CV%
was lower on average for participants
with higher CT implying that lower
CT was also associated with more
variability across the brain. In contrast.

Probabilities of difference in means
between groups of equal size of 30
and unequal size of 30 and 60 drawn
randomly from the intra-person
distribution in D. Inset: Probabilities
of difference in means with p-value
<0.05 by t-test.

bioRxiv preprint first posted online Apr. 11, 2017; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/125872. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Sup. Table 1
No.

Feature

Description

1

Family Income

Monthly income in Indian Rupees of the total household income. 60 Rs = $1. 50,000 Rs. is
~$850 or $28 per day.

2

Individual Income

The individual’s self-earned monthly income in Indian Rupees.

3

Education Level

Number of years of completed education. Of those who attended college, all in the sample
completed it. Note all college grads are marked as 16 years of education, although some
attended 3 year college.

4

Geofootprint (Past year)

This indicates the distance from home they have traveled in the one year before the date of
survey. The question was asked in the form of the following categories:
1: Within home town
2: Within 100 km from hometown in the same State (typically a day trip)
3: >100 km from hometown in the Same State(typically requires overnight stay)
4: Within 100 km from hometown to a different State (note that State boundaries in India are
based on language so different State indicates a different language)
5: >100 km from hometown to a different State
6: To a different country

5

Geofootprint (Lifetime)

This indicates the distance from home they have ever traveled in their life for any reason at
any age. The categories are the same as above.

Farthest Friends or Family

This indicates the furthest distance from home that they have either friends or family,
essentially an indication of the geographic distance of their social network. The categories are
once again the same as above.

Fuel Usage

This refers to the amount they spent on purchasing petrol or gasoline in the previous full
month shown in Indian Rupees. The price of petrol was ~ Rs. 75/liter or $4.75/ gallon at the
time of survey. The range of fuel purchase ranged from 0 (no vehicle) or going from 1 liter
all the way to 160 liters or 42 gallons, translating to miles traveled in the month of anywhere
from 20 to 1500.

8

Electricity Usage

This refers to the amount they spent on household electricity in the previous full month shown
in Indian Rupees. The price of electricity at the time of survey ranged from Rs. 1 to Rs. 4 per
unit or kWH. The tariff was a sliding scale with lower prices for those consuming lower levels
of electricity. Consequently an exact conversion to units consumed was not readily possible.

9

Mobile Phone Usage

This refers to the amount spent on mobile phone communication in the previous full month
shown in Indian Rupees.

10

Internet Usage

Here we asked for hours of Internet use. However, since it was used only by highly people
with income >50,000 Rs. per month, the data was insufficient to make relevant comparisons.

6

7

18

