Modeling Stress Recognition in Typical Virtual
Environments
Nandita Sharma and Tom Gedeon
Research School of Computer Science, Australian National University
Canberra, Australia
{nandita.sharma, tom.gedeon}@anu.edu.au

Abstract— Stress is a major problem in our world today
motivating objective understanding of how average individuals
respond to stress in a typical activities. The main aim for this
paper is to determine whether stress can be recognized using
individual-independent computational models from sensor based
stress response signals induced by films with typical stressful
content. Another aim is to determine whether a consumer
electroencephalogram (EEG) sensor device, which is portable,
less obtrusive and relatively inexpensive, can be used for stress
recognition. A support vector machine and an artificial neural
network based models were developed to recognize stress using
various physiological and physical signals. The models produced
stress classification with 95% accuracy. Using the data obtained
from the consumer device, the models produced stress
classification with 91% accuracy. Statistical analysis of the
results showed that the classification results from the
physiological and physical signals are not statistically different to
the results from the consumer device implying that the consumer
device can be used for recognizing stress in typical virtual
environments.
Keywords-stress recognition; support vector machines; artificial
neural networks; genetic algorithms; physiological signals;
physical signals; EEG; films

I.

INTRODUCTION

Stress is part of everyday life and it is widely accepted that
stress which leads to less favorable states (such as anxiety, fear
or anger) is a growing concern for people and society. The
term, stress, was coined by Hans Selye. He defined it as “the
non-specific response of the body to any demand for change”
[1]. Stress is the body’s reaction or response to the imbalance
caused between demands and resources available to a person. It
is seen as a natural alarm, resistance and exhaustion [2] system
for the body to prepare for a fight or flight response to protect
the body from threats and changes. When experienced for
longer periods without being managed, stress has been widely
recognized as a major growing concern because it has the
potential to cause chronic illnesses (e.g. cardiovascular
diseases, diabetes and some forms of cancer) and increase
economic costs in societies, especially in developed countries
[3, 4]. Benefits of stress research range from improving day-today activities, through increasing work productivity to
benefitting the wider society - motivating interest, making it a
beneficial area of research and posing some difficult technical
challenges for Computer Science.

Various computational methods have been used to
objectively define and classify stress to differentiate conditions
causing stress from other conditions. The methods developed
have used simplistic models formed from techniques like
Bayesian networks [5, 6], decision trees [7] fuzzy models [8]
and support vector machines [9]. These models have been built
from a relatively smaller set of stress features than the sets used
in the models in this paper.
Stressful events or emergency situations cause dynamic
changes in the human body, which can be observed by changes
in the body’s response signals. These response signals are
involuntarily caused by the Autonomic Nervous System
(ANS). The ANS is made up of the Sympathetic Nervous
System (SNS) and the Parasympathetic Nervous System
(PNS). When the body is under stress, activity in the SNS
increases and dominates the activities produced by the PNS,
which changes the body’s response signals. The response
signals obtained from non-invasive methods that reflect
reactions of individuals and their bodies to stressful situations
have been used to interpret degrees of stress. These measures
have provided a basis for defining stress objectively.
Stress response signals used in this paper fall into two
categories – physiological and physical signals. Physiological
signals that have been used for stress analysis include galvanic
skin response (GSR) [10, 11], electrocardiogram (ECG) [12]
and blood pressure (BP) [13]. As defined in [14], physical
signals are changes made by the human body that can be
generally seen by humans without the need for equipment and
tools that need to be attached to individuals to detect general
fluctuations. However, sophisticated equipment and sensors
using vision technologies are still needed to obtain physical
signals at sampling rates sufficient for data analysis and
modeling like the ones used in this paper. Physical signals
include eye gaze and pupil dilation signals.
GSR is a measurement of the flow of electricity through the
skin of a person. When the person is under stress, the activity in
the SNS causes an increase in the moisture on the skin, which
increases the flow of electricity. As a result, it increases skin
conductance [5]. Conversely, the skin conductance is reduced
when the individual becomes less stressed. The fluctuations in
skin conductance are recorded as changes in GSR.
ECG signals show electrical activity produced by an
impulse of ions flowing through cardiac muscles, which
dissipates into the region around the heart with diminished

amounts spreading around the surface of the body. The main
electrical signals are produced by cardiac cells depolarising and
repolarising. Depolarising occurs due to the flow of ions
accompanying atrial heart muscle constriction which results in
a P wave. The impulse then travels through the ventricles of the
heart causing septal depolarisation, early ventricular
depolarisation followed by late ventricular depolarisation. This
series forms a QRS wave, the dominant wave. After the
completion of depolarisation, ventricular cells repolarise by
restoring it to resting polarity, resulting in a T wave. An
example of a stress feature in ECG signals is the decrease in RR intervals [12].
BP signals show the pressure exerted on the walls of blood
vessels due to blood circulation and varies between a systolic
(maximum) and a diastolic (minimum) pressure. An increase
BP has been related with increase in stress [15].
GSR, ECG, BP, eye gaze and pupil dilation signals have
been used in some smaller combinations to detect stress in
literature [5, 16, 17] but this proposed combination for stress
analysis in virtual environments has not been reported so far.
We use this combination of sensor signals in this paper and
refer to them as primary stress signals.
Hundreds of stress features can be derived from primary
stress signals to classify stress. However, this set of features
can include redundant and irrelevant features which may
outweigh the more effective features showing stress patterns.
As a consequence, this could cause a classifier to learn weaker
stress patterns and produce lower quality classifications. Since
this paper is dealing with sensor data, some features may suffer
from corruption as well. In order to achieve a good
classification model that is robust to such potential features that
may reduce the performance of classifications, appropriate
feature selection methods must be developed and adopted by
the classifiers. A genetic algorithm (GA) could be used to
select subsets of features for optimizing stress classifications. A
GA is a global search algorithm and has been commonly used
to solve optimization problems [18]. The search algorithm is
based on the concept of natural evolution. It evolves a
population of candidate solutions using crossover, mutation
and selection methods in search for a population of a better
quality. GAs have been successfully used to select features
derived from physiological signals [19, 20].
This paper also investigates the potential for
electroencephalogram (EEG) signals sourced using the Emotiv
EPOC consumer device [21] as a primary signal for stress.
EEG captures neural activity in the brain. It records complex
electrical waveforms at the scalp formed by action electrical
potentials during synaptic excitations and inhibitions of
dendrites. Research shows that relationships exist between
brain activity and stress [22-26]. EEG signals are generally
captured by equipment that is obtrusive and requires a
relatively higher degree of intrusion (e.g. EEG sensors with
conductivity gel needs to be attached to particular positions of a
subject’s head), relatively long set up time and experimenters
that are experienced with the use of the equipment. These
factors contribute to lower number of participants in
experiments recording EEG signals in Human Centered

Computing experiments and motivated us to use the Emotiv
EPOC consumer device. Emotiv is portable, nonintrusive,
easier to use and cheaper – the Emotiv headset with EEG
sensors (and costs approximately $300 USD). Unlike
conventional EEG recording equipment, which has multiple
wires that needs to be managed, Emotiv is wireless. However,
Emotiv has fewer sensors (14 channels) and a lower sampling
rate (128 Hz) than the conventional EEG recording equipment
which can have from 32 to 256 sensors and a sampling rate of
at least 240 Hz to 16,000 Hz [27, 28]. The channels for Emotiv
are AF3, AF4, F3, F4, F7, F8, FC5, FC6, P3, P4, P7, P8, T7,
T8, O1, and O2 based on the International 10-20 standard.
Previous work has used signals from Emotiv for analysis of
affective states [29]. Our work includes a comparison of the
performances for stress classification for models developed
from Emotiv signals with performances for models developed
from primary stress signals sourced by sensitive sensors. This
will help to determine whether future stress research could use
signals sourced from the less obtrusive Emotiv sensors for
computationally modeling stress.
This paper presents computational models of stress for
observers watching stressful films and investigates whether
models formed from signals sourced using a consumer EEG
device have the capacity to recognize stress. It describes the
method that was used to collect stress data and develop
computational models for recognizing stress patterns captured
in response signals observed from individuals while they
watched stressed and non-stressed film clips. It details an
experiment conducted to collect stress response signals using
multiple sensors and EEG signals from the consumer EEG
device from experiment participants who watched films with
stressful and non-stressful content and human-reported data.
Several approaches for stress recognition of film watchers are
developed, compared and discussed including a method for
selecting features from hundreds of features derived from the
response signals. Performances for models formed from the
primary signals of stress for stress recognition are compared
with the models formed from the EEG signals. The paper
concludes with a summary of the findings and suggests
directions for future work.
II.

DATA COLLECTION FROM THE FILM EXPERIMENT

Twenty five undergraduate students were recruited as
experiment participants. The participant cohort was made up of
15 males and 10 females between the ages of 18 and 30 years.
Before the start of each experiment, the lab room was set up
with the temperature set at 22oC, Acquisition and Inquisition
computers with required applications started, consent forms
and assessment sheets placed at appropriate locations in the
room, and all sensor equipment initialized and ready to be
attached to a participant. The lab room is made up of two
smaller rooms – Acquisition and Inquisition rooms. The
experiment instructor controlled the data acquisition, films that
participants watched and the room settings of the Inquisition
room from the Acquisition room. The participant watched the
film clips and had their measurements recorded in the
Inquisition room.

Figure 1. The process that experiment participants followed during the film experiment

Each participant had to understand the requirements of the
experiment from a written set of experiment instructions and
what was involved in the experiment with the guidance of the
experiment instructor. After providing their consent to
participate in the experiment, the experiment instructor
attached ECG, GSR, BP and EEG sensors to the participant
and calibrated the eye tracking sensors. The instructor started
the films, which triggered a blank screen with a countdown of
the numbers “3”, “2” and “1” transitioning in and out slowly
with one after the other. The reason for the countdown display
and the blank screen was for participants to move away from
their thoughts at the time and get ready to pay attention to the
films that were about to start. This approach was used in
experiments for similar work done in literature [30].
Subsequent to the countdown display, a blank screen was
shown for 15 seconds, which was followed by a sequence of
film clips with 5 second blank screens in between. The film
clips were made up of stressed and non-stressed films and each
film was approximately one minute in length. After the films

finished, the participant was asked to do an assessment on the
films to validate the film labels. In total, the experiment took
approximately thirty minutes. An outline of the process of the
experiment for a participant is shown in Figure 1. After the
experiment, the experiment instructor helped the participant to
remove the sensors that were attached to the participant.
Film clips were categorized by the type of environment
they created. Stressed films had stressful content in the
direction towards distress, fear and tension whereas the nonstressed films had content that created an illusion of meditation
or soothing environments. There were three stressed films and
three non-stressed films. For consistency, the films were
displayed on a 1050 x 1680 pixel LCD Dell monitor and
positioned at the same location of the computer screen with a
surround sound system for each participant.
Results from the experiment survey validated the film
classes. In addition, the film classes were also validated by
another forty people giving a total of 65 people who did the

Figure 2. The Inquisition room for the film experiment where experiment participants did the experiment

>> Trigger signal to control films >>

>> Trigger signal to control films >>

Server

LCD
Monitor

<< FaceLAB data <<

>> display screen >>
<< FaceLAB data <<

<< EEG data <<
Experiment
Instructor

FaceLAB Laptop

Acquisition
Computer

<< EEG data <<
Emotiv Laptop

Subject

^
Biopac & Finapres data

FaceLAB
Cameras

Biopac MP150
ECG100C

<< ECG & GSR data <<

GSR100C

Parallel PC Adapter

Finapres

<< Blood pressure data <<

Figure 3. A schematic diagram of the equipment setup for the film experiment

survey. Analysis of survey responses is a common method used
in literature to validate stress classes for tasks [31]. Participants
found the films that were labeled stressed created stressful
environments and films labeled non-stressed created
environments that were not stressful with a statistical
significance of p < 0.001 according to the T-test and the
distribution of the survey question responses for stress.
Each participant had physiological and physical signal
measurements taken over the experiment time. The
physiological and physical sensor signals (which we refer to as
primary stress signals) captured during the experiment were
GSR, ECG, BP, eye gaze and pupil diameter signals. Biopac
ECG100C, Biopac GSR100C and Finapres Finger Cuff
systems were used to take ECG, GSR and blood pressure
recordings at a sampling rate of 1000 Hz. The Biopac
GSR100C system sourced GSR data through disposable EL507
GSR electrodes, which were placed on the first (or index) and
fourth (ring) fingers of the participant’s left hand. The sensors
had to be attached to the participant 5 minutes before data
acquisition so that appropriate signals could be recorded. For
acquiring ECG signals, the Biopac ECG100C system was
connected with disposable EL503 ECG electrodes, which were
placed on the participant’s left and right wrists. Further, the
Finapres Finger Cuff system was attached to the participant’s
third (or middle) finger of the left hand to acquire BP signals.
Eye gaze and pupil dilation signals were obtained using Seeing
Machines FaceLAB system with a pair of infrared cameras at

60 Hz. Additionally, EEG signals from the Emotiv EPOC
device was obtained as well at a sampling rate of 128 Hz.
A schematic diagram of the equipment setup for the film
experiment is provided in Figure 3. The experiment instructor
controlled the film clips that the experiment participant
watched from the Acquisition computer. The computer was
also used to control the participant’s response signal acquisition
and synchronize the signals while the films were shown to the
participant. Acquisition software applications for eye tracking
and EEG signals required relatively greater amounts of
computer memory and processing. In order to ensure that it did
not affect the acquisition of the other signals, there was a
computer designated for eye tracking signal acquisition and
another computer for EEG signals.
There were other signals that were derived from the
primary stress signals to form other stress response signals.
These signals included the heart rate variability (HRV) signal,
which was calculated from consecutive ECG peaks and another
popular signal used for stress detection [12, 32]. Data from
various frequency bands were extracted from EEG and HRV
signals, which have been used in literature for stress analysis.
There are four main frequency band categories used to analyze
EEG signals and they are presented in TABLE I. The band
categories are Beta, Alpha, Theta and Delta. Each band
category represents some state for a person. Beta and alpha
waves represent conscious states of a person whereas theta and

delta waves signify unconscious states. Rapid beta wave
frequencies (and due to the decrease in alpha wave frequencies)
have been found to indicate stress [24-26].
Generally, low frequency (LF) and high frequency (HF)
bands of HRV have been used to analyze stress in literature [8].
LF and HF are known to reflect SNS and PNS activities
respectively. LF was defined in the frequency range between
0.04 Hz and 0.15 Hz [31] and HF was defined in the range
between 0.15 Hz and 0.5 Hz [13].
Features were derived from the primary stress signals and
EEG signals. Statistics (e.g. mean, standard deviation,
skewness, kurtosis and measures listed in [33]) were calculated
for the signal measurements for each 5 second interval during
the experiment time. Measures such as the number of peaks for
periodic signals, the distance an eye covered, the number of
forward and backward tracking fixations, and the proportion of
the time the eye fixated on different regions of the computer
screen over 5 second intervals were also obtained. The EEG
feature set also included measurements for Hjorth parameters
and fractal dimensions, which are generally used in analyzing
EEG signals.
Hjorth parameters are time-based characteristics of an EEG
signal and the three Hjorth parameters are the Activity,
Mobility and Complexity parameters. Suppose x is an EEG
signal with values for N equally spaced timestamps. Then the
Activity parameter is the variance for an EEG signal and is
defined by

(1)
The Mobility parameter is a measure of the signal mean
frequency. Given that x’ is the derivate for x, then the Mobility
parameter is defined by

(2)

The Complexity parameter is a measure of the deviation of
the EEG signal from the shape of the sine signal and is defined
by

where

(5)

and
(6)
The statistic and measure values formed the stress feature
set. There were 215 features derived from the primary stress
signals and 1119 features were derived from the EEG signals
sourced by the 14 Emotiv sensors. Features from the primary
stress signals and EEG signals were used as inputs to the stress
recognition models.
III.

STRESS CLASSIFICATION MODELS

The stress classification models were based on a support
vector machine (SVM) and an artificial neural network (ANN).
A GA and SVM hybrid (GA+SVM) and a GA and ANN
hybrid (GA+ANN) models were also developed with the aim
to use features, which were more relevant for stress recognition
and reduce feature redundancy to optimize stress classification.
A. Support Vector Machine Based Classification Models
SVMs have been widely used in literature for classification
problems including classifications based on physiological data
[34, 35]. Provided a set of training samples, a SVM transforms
the data samples using a nonlinear mapping to a higher
dimension with the aim to determine a hyperplane that
partitions data by class or labels. A hyperplane is chosen based
on support vectors, which are training data samples that define
maximum margins from the support vectors to the hyperplane
to form the best decision boundary. This contributes to the
resistance to data overfitting and helps to generalize
classifications well.
Despite the useful characteristics, SVMs are still not robust
to feature sets with redundant and irrelevant features in
classification. As a consequence, hybrids of SVM with GA
were used to reduce the redundant and irrelevant features and
to determine whether the hybrid improved the quality of the
classification.
The SVM based stress classification models developed
were:

(3)
Fractal dimension measures of an EEG signal provides
information of the space filling and self-similarity and can be
approximated using the following

TABLE I.
Band Category

EEG FREQUENCY BAND CATEGORIES
Frequency
Range

Person’s State

Beta

13 – 30

Alertness or anxiety

Alpha

8 – 13

Relaxation

Theta

4–8

Dream sleep or phase between
consciousness and drowsiness

Delta

0.5 – 4

Coma or deep sleep

(4)

TABLE II.

IMPLEMENTATION SETTINGS FOR THE GENETIC ALGORITHM

GA Parameter

Value/Setting

population size

100

number of generations

2000

crossover rate

0.80

mutation rate

1/(length of the chromosome)

crossover type

MATLAB’s Scattered Crossover

mutation type

MATLAB’s Uniform Mutation

selection type

MATLAB’s Stochastic Uniform Selection



SVM: a SVM classification model that was provided
all the features in the stress feature set as input to
recognize stress patterns



GA+SVM: a SVM that was provided features selected
by a GA as input to recognize stress patterns

B. Artificial Neural Networks Based Classification Models
ANNs, inspired by biological neural networks, have
capabilities for learning patterns to recognize characteristics in
input tuples by classes. An ANN is made up of interconnected
processors, known as artificial neurons, which are connected
by weighted links that pass signals between neurons to learn
the relationship between input and output tuples. In this paper,
feed-forward ANNs trained using backpropagation were used.
The layers and neurons in each layer define the topology of a
feed-forward ANN. Two topologies were used, which differed
only on the number of inputs. The ANN based stress
classification models were:


ANN: an ANN classification model that used all the
features in the stress feature set as input to recognize
stress patterns just like SVM



GA+ANN: an ANN that used inputs selected by a GA
to recognize stress patterns

The MATLAB adapt function was used for training the
ANNs on an incremental basis. Each network was trained using
the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm for 1000 epochs or until
the magnitude of the gradient for the mean square error was
less than 10-5. The mean square error is the average squared
error determined from the actual output of the network and the
expected output. The ANNs had 7 hidden neurons and one
neuron in the output layer.
C. A Genetic Algorithm for Optimization of Stress
Recognition
A GA was used to optimize the stress features and
determine whether the SVM and ANN classification model
systems were able to better capture stress patterns. It was used

to investigate whether feature selection improved the quality of
stress classifications. The GA search evolved a population of
subsets of features using crossover, mutation and selection
methods in search for a population of subset of features that
produced a better quality stress classification. A subset of
features is referred to as an individual or chromosome. The
quality for each chromosome in the population was defined by
the quality of classifications produced when a classifier was
provided with the features encoded by the chromosome.
The initial population for the GAs was set up to have all the
features. The number of features in the chromosomes varied
but the chromosome length was fixed. The length of a
chromosome was equal to the number of features in the feature
space. A chromosome was a binary string where the index for a
bit represented a feature and the bit value indicated whether the
feature was used in the classification.
The GAs in the hybrid classification systems were
implemented with the settings provided in TABLE II.
IV.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The computational classification models were tested on the
stress data obtained from the film experiment. Features derived
from the primary stress signals were provided to the SVM,
ANN, GA+SVM and GA+ANN classification systems. The
feature values were normalized by participant to reduce the
effect of individual bias. Performances of the classifications
produced the classification systems were calculated using 10fold cross validation. The classification results are provided in
TABLE IV.
Stress patterns in the film data set were best recognized
with the GA hybrids according to the stress recognition
measures. When the classification model systems were
provided all the features derived from the primary stress
signals, the accuracy and the F-score were at least 0.24 lower
than systems with the GA feature selection. Classification
results show that the performances of SVM and ANN were
similar. Similarly, the performances of GA+SVM and
GA+ANN in stress classification were similar.
The GA in the GA hybrid classification systems selected
ECG features for measurements of the LF and HF frequency
bands, gradients, rate of change, mean and variance for GSR,
ECG and BP, rate of change of the distance covered by eye
gazes calculated by eye fixations, and the rate of change of the
diameter size of the eye pupil. This feature subset had stress
data on how the experiment participants reacted to the different
films and provided improved capability for the classification
systems to capture better stress patterns in the film experiment
data set and recognize stress better.
Further, EEG features were provided as input to the SVM,
ANN, GA+SVM and GA+ANN classification systems as well.
The classification results based on 10-fold cross validation are
shown in TABLE III.

TABLE III.
PERFORMANCE MEASURES FOR STRESS RECOGNITION
MODELS DEFINED FROM EEG SIGNALS USING 10-FOLD CROSS VALIDATION
Stress
Recognition
Measure

Stress Recognition Model
SVM

ANN

GA+SVM

GA+ANN

Recognition
Rate

0.64

0.70

0.89

0.91

F-score

0.63

0.73

0.91

0.90

TABLE IV.
PERFORMANCE MEASURES FOR STRESS RECOGNITION
MODELS DEFINED FROM PRIMARY STRESS SIGNALS USING 10-FOLD CROSS
VALIDATION
Stress
Recognition
Measure

Stress Recognition Model
SVM

ANN

GA+SVM

REFERENCES
GA+ANN

Recognition
rate

0.67

0.68

0.94

0.95

F-score

0.66

0.70

0.94

0.94

Like the performance of the classification systems on the
primary stress signals, GA hybrids produced better stress
recognition rates and F-score values than the systems that used
all features to develop a model. This shows that the GA hybrids
captured stronger stress patterns in their models. The stress
recognition measures for the systems without the GA was at
least 0.16 lower than the GA hybrid systems. In addition, SVM
and ANN produced similar stress recognition rates and the GA
hybrids produced classifications with similar stress recognition
rates.
The GAs selected measures for EEG fractal dimensions,
and variance, mean and skewness features of the EEG signals
and signals in the Beta and Alpha frequency bands for stress
classification. The features selected by the GAs had stronger
relationship with stress and enabled the classifiers in the
classification system to better capture stress patterns in the film
experiment EEG data set.
Statistical analyses were conducted on the results and in
accordance with the Student’s T-test the GA hybrid systems
produced significantly better stress recognition rates than the
systems without the GA with p < 0.01. Analysis of the stress
recognition rates produced by systems on the feature sets
derived from primary stress signals and the EEG signals
showed no statistical difference for the two feature sets (p >
0.1). This suggests that the Emotiv system has the capability to
capture stress signals and has the potential to be used for stress
recognition in environments where intrusion needs to be
minimized for easier stress data acquisition.
V.

sourced by a consumer device – the Emotiv system. Stress
patterns in the data were successfully captured by the SVM and
ANN models. The hybrids of GA with SVM and GA with
ANN performed significantly better than the stress recognition
systems without a GA with higher stress recognition results.
Analysis of the results produced by the stress recognition
systems on the data sourced by the consumer EEG device
shows potential for the device as a tool for stress analysis for
the type of work presented in this paper. Some extension to this
work will include optimal sensor selection for the consumer
EEG device and modeling of online stress analysis. Future
work will also include stress analysis for observers of other
types of environments such as more natural environments with
real-life settings with more suitable sensors that are nonobtrusive to suit day-to-day data capture and stress analysis.

CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

Computational models of stress for observers of films were
developed based on SVMs and ANNs using a real-world stress
data set formed from a film experiment. The data set was made
up of physiological and physical signals as well as EEG signals

[1] H. Selye, "The stress syndrome," The American Journal of
Nursing, vol. 65, pp. 97-99, 1965.
[2] L. Hoffman-Goetz and B. K. Pedersen, "Exercise and the
immune system: a model of the stress response?," Immunology
Today, vol. 15, pp. 382-387, 1994.
[3] The-American-Institute-of-Stress. (05/03/2012). America's No. 1
Health Problem - Why is there more stress today? Available:
http://www.stress.org/americas.htm
[4] Lifeline-Australia. (2009, 15/03/2013). Stress Costs Taxpayer
$300K Every Day. Available: www.lifeline.org.au
[5] W. Liao, W. Zhang, Z. Zhu, and Q. Ji, "A real-time human stress
monitoring system using dynamic bayesian network," Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition - Workshops, p. 70, 2005.
[6] J. H. Hong, J. Ramos, and A. K. Dey, "Understanding
physiological responses to stressors during physical activity," in
Proceedings of the 2012 ACM Conference on Ubiquitous
Computing, 2012, pp. 270-279.
[7] J. Zhai and A. Barreto, "Stress recognition using non-invasive
technology," in Proceedings of the 19th International Florida
Artificial Intelligence Research Society Conference FLAIRS,
2006, pp. 395–400.
[8] M. Kumar, M. Weippert, R. Vilbrandt, S. Kreuzfeld, and R.
Stoll, "Fuzzy evaluation of heart rate signals for mental stress
assessment," Fuzzy Systems, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 15, pp.
791-808, 2007.
[9] Q. Dou, "An SVM ranking approach to stress assignment,"
University of Alberta, 2009.
[10] J. Bakker, M. Pechenizkiy, and N. Sidorova, "What's your
current stress level? detection of stress patterns from gsr sensor
data," in International Conference on Data Mining Workshops
(ICDMW), Vancouver, BC, 2011, pp. 573-580.
[11] A. de Santos Sierra, C. S. Avila, J. Guerra Casanova, G.
Bailador del Pozo, and V. Jara Vera, "Two stress detection
schemes based on physiological signals for real-time
applications," in International Conference on Intelligent
Information Hiding and Multimedia Signal Processing,
Darmstadt, 2010, pp. 364-367.
[12] R. K. Dishman, Y. Nakamura, M. E. Garcia, R. W. Thompson,
A. L. Dunn, and S. N. Blair, "Heart rate variability, trait anxiety,

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]
[19]

[20]

[21]
[22]

[23]

and perceived stress among physically fit men and women,"
International Journal of Psychophysiology, vol. 37, pp. 121-133,
2000.
H. Ashton, R. Savage, J. Thompson, and D. Watson, "A method
for measuring human behavioural and physiological responses at
different stress levels in a driving simulator," British journal of
pharmacology, vol. 45, pp. 532-545, 2012.
N. Sharma and T. Gedeon, "Objective measures, sensors and
computational techniques for stress recognition and
classification: A survey," Computer methods and programs in
biomedicine, vol. 108, pp. 1287-1301, 2012.
T. Pickering, R. Devereux, G. James, W. Gerin, P. Landsbergis,
P. Schnall, and J. Schwartz, "Environmental influences on blood
pressure and the role of job strain," Journal of hypertension.
Supplement: official journal of the International Society of
Hypertension, vol. 14, pp. 179-185, 1996.
E. Labbé, N. Schmidt, J. Babin, and M. Pharr, "Coping with
stress: the effectiveness of different types of music," Applied
Psychophysiology and Biofeedback, vol. 32, pp. 163-168, 2007.
J. A. Healey and R. W. Picard, "Detecting stress during realworld driving tasks using physiological sensors," IEEE
Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 6, pp.
156-166, 2005.
D. E. Goldberg, Genetic algorithms in search, optimization, and
machine learning: Addison-Wesley, 1989.
B. J. Park, E. H. Jang, S. H. Kim, C. Huh, and J. H. Sohn,
"Feature selection on multi-physiological signals for emotion
recognition," in 2011 International Conference on Engineering
and Industries (ICEI), Korea, 2011, pp. 1-6.
X. Niu, L. Chen, and Q. Chen, "Research on genetic algorithm
based on emotion recognition using physiological signals," in
International Conference on Computational Problem-Solving,
2011, pp. 614-618.
Emotiv. Available: www.emotiv.com
Z. Dharmawan, "Analysis of Computer Games Player Stress
Level Using EEG Data," Master of Science Thesis Report,
Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Mathematics and Computer
Science, Delft University of Technology, Netherlands, 2007.
Interactive-Productline.
(2013, 10/02/2013).
Interactive
Productline
IP
AB
Mindball.
Available:
http://www.mindball.se/index.html

[24] D. Novák, L. Lhotská, V. Eck, and M. Sorf, "EEG and VEP
signal processing," Technical Report. Czech Technical
University in Prague, Department of Cybernetics, 2004.
[25] T. Lin and L. John, "Quantifying mental relaxation with EEG
for use in computer games," in International Conference on
Internet Computing, Las Vegas, Nevada, USA, 2006, pp. 409–
415.
[26] E. Hoffmann, "Brain Training Against Stress: Theory, Methods
and Results from an Outcome Study," Stress Report, vol. 4, p.
24, 2005.
[27] EGI. (2013). Geodesic EEG System 300. Available:
http://www.egi.com/research-division-research-products/eegsystems
[28] BioSemi. (2013). BioSemi. Available: http://www.biosemi.com/
[29] P. Cipresso, S. Serino, D. Villani, C. Repetto, L. Sellitti, G.
Albani, A. Mauro, A. Gaggioli, and G. Riva, "Is your phone so
smart to affect your state? An exploratory study based on
psychophysiological measures," Neurocomputing, vol. 84, p. 23,
2012.
[30] J. J. Gross and R. W. Levenson, "Emotion elicitation using
films," Cognition & Emotion, vol. 9, pp. 87-108, 1995.
[31] J. D. Hill and L. N. Boyle, "Driver stress as influenced by
driving maneuvers and roadway conditions," Transportation
Research Part F: Traffic Psychology and Behaviour, vol. 10, pp.
177-186, 2007.
[32] P. Ferreira, P. Sanches, K. Höök, and T. Jaensson, "License to
chill!: how to empower users to cope with stress," Proceedings
of the 5th Nordic conference on Human-computer interaction:
building bridges, pp. 123-132, 2008.
[33] S. A. Hosseini and M. A. Khalilzadeh, "Emotional stress
recognition system using EEG and psychophysiological signals:
Using new labelling process of EEG signals in emotional stress
state," in International Conference of Biomedical Engineering
and Computer Science (ICBECS), 2010, pp. 1-6.
[34] B. Cheng, "Emotion Recognition from Physiological Signals
Using Support Vector Machine Software Engineering and
Knowledge Engineering: Theory and Practice." vol. 114, Y. Wu,
Ed., ed: Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 2012, pp. 49-52.
[35] P. P. Paul, H. Leung, D. A. Peterson, T. J. Sejnowski, and H.
Poizner, "Detecting Neural Decision Patterns Using SVM-Based
EEG Classification," in International Conference on
Bioinformatics and Biomedical Engineering, Chengdu, 2010,
pp. 1-4.

