The BCI as a Pervasive Technology
– A Research Plan
C. P. Brennan

P. J. McCullagh

PhD Student, Smart
Environments
University of Ulster
Jordanstown, N. Ireland

Computer Science
Research Institute
University of Ulster
Jordanstown, N. Ireland

brennan-c15
@email.ulster.ac.uk

pj.mccullagh
@ulster.ac.uk

L. Galway

Research Institute
University of Ulster
Jordanstown, N. Ireland

Computer Science
Research Institute
University of Ulster
Jordanstown, N. Ireland

g.lightbody
@ulster.ac.uk

l.galway
@ulster.ac.uk

technology could greatly improve the quality of life and
independence for those with a disorder of the aforementioned
nature.
One such technology that offers this potential is that of BCI. A
generally accepted definition of a BCI is a system that provides a
communication channel for users, which does not rely on physical
movement [12]. Additionally, these systems can be categorised
as either invasive or non-invasive. The former refers to systems
that require microelectrode arrays to be placed directly into the
cortex in order to derive the user’s intent from neuronal action
potentials or local field potentials [15]. Whereas the latter derives
the user’s intent from scalp recorded EEG activity that does not
require clinical procedures to implant the electrodes [15]. Due to
the substantial technical difficulties and clinical risks associated
with invasive BCIs, non-invasive methods are the only viable
potential pervasive BCI technology.
Medical grade BCI devices use EEG to measure brain activity
in order to determine user intent from which to control and/or
communicate with devices and applications [7]. Whilst these
devices can achieve this goal, applications suffer from various
limitations such as inaccuracies, inconvenient setup, timeconsuming process, complex applications, and the need for
carefully controlled environments [13]. Recent advancements
have led to the release of consumer grade BCI devices that can
potentially overcome some of these limitations. However there is
a lack of evidence at the present time with regard to the utility of
such commercial devices and their performance. One device of
this kind is the Emotiv EPOC, which is a wireless and
aesthetically pleasing neuroheadset that offers a multichannel
EEG system. The device features a user-friendly software
interface, a design that requires minimal experimenter assistance,
and the ability to reduce electrode impedance by saline solution
(as opposed to the gel needed for medical grade devices). Studies
are now being reported that evaluate the performance of the
Emotiv EPOC [10], [14]. Some studies have shown that this
device may not be suitably accurate for critical applications [8],
[9], but this requires further evidence. This study evaluates the
Emotiv EPOC in terms of flexibility, performance and usability
for healthy users.

Abstract—In this work we explore whether the BrainComputer Interface (BCI) can become a pervasive technology.
The primary goal of BCI technology has been to provide
communication and control for people with severe neural
dysfunction, which affects their ability to interact with the
environment. BCI research has focused largely on noninvasive, electroencephalography (EEG) based BCI methods.
A number of EEG consumer grade devices are now available;
the Emotiv EPOC neuroheadset is one such device. This paper
investigates the utility, performance and usability of this
device in an office setting by using EEG correlates of biosignals for control. The results suggest that it is possible for
some users to achieve reasonable control with only minutes of
training. However sustaining engagement over a longer
duration and widespread use provide suitable areas for
further investigation. As a contribution to the Doctoral
Colloquium the paper provides an account of intended
contributions of this BCI research, the plan of study necessary
to achieve this goal, and enumerates the major research
questions to be addressed in the next two years. The longerterm aim is to deploy BCI as a Pervasive technology.
Index Terms—Augmentation, Communication, BrainComputer Interface (BCI), Electroencephalography (EEG),
Electrooculography (EOG), Emotiv EPOC, Pervasive.

1.INTRODUCTION
Over the past 30 years, the life expectancy of the population in
developed countries has steadily risen. This extension in
longevity significantly increases the number of people that are
most susceptible to disease and disability [1], [5] and in need of
assistive technology.
Some disorders can disrupt the
neuromuscular channels through which the brain communicates
and controls its external environment [16]. These conditions
include amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, multiple sclerosis, muscular
dystrophies, brainstem stroke, and a number of other diseases.
Although prevalence is very small the increased probability of
contracting one of these conditions impacts the demand for
innovation in the field of healthcare with technological
advancements from a healthcare perspective. Thus assistive
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work fora s.

SHUVRQDORUFODVVURRPXVHLVJUDQWHGZLWKRXWIHHSURYLGHGWKDWFRSLHV
Although prevalence is very small the increased probability of
DUHQRWPDGHRUGLVWULEXWHGIRUSURILWRUFRPPHUFLDODGYDQWDJHDQGWKDW
contracting one of these conditions impacts the demand for
FRSLHVEHDUWKLVQRWLFHDQGWKHIXOOFLWDWLRQRQWKHILUVWSDJH7RFRS\
innovation in the field of healthcare with technological
RWKHUZLVHWRUHSXEOLVKWRSRVWRQVHUYHUVRUWRUHGLVWULEXWHWROLVWV
advancements from a healthcare perspective. Thus assistive
UHTXLUHVSULRUVSHFLILFSHUPLVVLRQDQGRUDIHH
3HUYDVLYH+HDOWK0D\2OGHQEXUJ*HUPDQ\
&RS\ULJKWk,&67
'2,LFVWSHUYDVLYHKHDOWK

G. Lightbody
_Computer
Science



cleaning time may add another five, yielding a total session time
in excess of one hour. The easy to use interface with real time
feedback on the state of electrodes also improves usability,
particularly where non-experts are involved. This has significant
impact on the user experience.

2. METHOD
The purpose of this study was to address a specific research
question: Can a consumer grade BCI device (such as the EPOC)
provide an acceptable EEG measure to function as part of a
collaborative assistive technology?
Four subjects who do not suffer from brain injury participated
in this study. Each participant gave informed consent for the
study, which had been reviewed and approved by the Ethics
Committee of the Faculty of Computing and Engineering in the
University of Ulster.

2.1 Preparation
Each participant was required to take part in a short recording
session that lasted no more than 1 hour inclusive of setup and data
acquisition. Before this began, the Emotiv EPOC was cleaned
and prepared for use. The cleaning procedure involved a 50%
diluted solution of white vinegar and a soft cloth. The rear of
each sensor was gently agitated with this solution to remove any
corrosion. Before each trial, all electrodes and felt pads where
placed in a hydrator pack and a saline solution applied to each.
After this, each electrode was secured to the device and
positioned appropriately on the head of the subject.

2.2 Training

Figure 1. An illustration of the control paradigm. In this example
the user is sucessfully replicating the drop command by tapping
their left foot.

At the beginning of the session the participant was required to
undergo a training procedure facilitated by the Cognitiv Suite
within the control panel application. The Cognitiv Suite employs
various approaches such as EEG and electrooculography (EOG).
It records and interprets a user’s conscious EEG and intent so as
to enable the user to manipulate virtual objects. This suite was
used to train a ‘neutral’ state plus four additional commands left,
right, lift, and drop. When training the neutral state the
participant was required to relax, clear their thoughts and think of
nothing in particular. To train the commands left and right the
participant was asked to focus their gaze on markers to the left
and right of the screen. To train the lift command the participant
was required to clench their teeth and to train the drop command
they were asked to tap their left foot. Each trial commenced only
after the user had trained each command to an accuracy of greater
than 70% (as advised by the Emotiv detection suite, Cognitiv).
For all subjects each command had 3 to 15 training periods, each
lasting 8 seconds.

3. RESULTS
Over the initial training phases all four subjects acquired a
reported skill level greater than 70% for each command. Table 1
displays the overall skill rating for all subjects. Furthermore, it
defines the skill rating of each individual command for all
participants. In addition to this, Table 2 presents the actual
accuracy and defines the number of each request that was
completed correctly. Each subject exceeded the 20% accuracy
expected by chance. The mean accuracy for all subjects equates
to 64% with subjects B and C performing greater than 85%. Each
of the four commands was issued five times per participant in a
stochastic order. All subjects were able to correctly complete the
up command 100% of the time, the right command 55% of the
time and the left and down commands 50% of the time. However
some subjects performed significantly better than others
indicating the inter subject variability.
Subjects A and D were unable to perform the down command
successfully. The down command requires a degree of physical
movement and this may disrupt the EEG signal by introducing
unpredictable movement artefacts.
It is possible that the
vibrations caused from tapping of the foot created noise in the
scalp recorded EEG.
The second least successful command was left since subject D
could not complete it at all and subject A could only complete it
once. Observation showed that inaccurate control of this
command may be due to a difference in training and replication
strategies, i.e. the subject trained the command on the correlated
brain signal for eye movement but during the trial attempted to
control the left command by turning their head slightly to focus
on the target. As both left and right commands are controlled by
EOG, the software may have difficulties differentiating between
the two, as a movement to the right is always followed by a return
to the left, introducing the need for more considered
synchronisation. Nevertheless, further investigation is required to

2.3 Experimental Design
Once the session began, the participant was issued with twenty
requests (e.g. move in one of four directions) and allowed ten
seconds to complete each request. A five second rest period was
given between each request in which the participant was asked to
relax and simulate the neutral state. For each of the twenty
requests the participant had to concentrate on moving an object to
one of four locations on the screen top, bottom, left, or right. In
order move the object right or left the user was required to focus
their gaze on a marker located to the left or right of the screen. In
order to move the object up the user was required to clench their
teeth and to move it down the user was required to tap their left
foot [Figure 1].
Correctly completed requests were assigned a value of 1 and
incorrectly completed requests were assigned a value of 0. This
allowed for an accuracy value to be determined. Including the
training phase each session took no longer than 30 minutes to
complete.
Curtailing a recording session to half an hour contrasts with
normal laboratory based recording, where set up time for
electrode preparation and placement may take 15-20 minutes and



achieve more conclusive results and provide a potential solution
to the problem.
Table 1- Training Skill Rating
Subject Sex
Overall Left Right
Skill
Rating
M
83%
86%
94%
A
M
79%
77%
71%
B
M
81%
74%
83%
C
F
81%
80%
95%
D
Mean:
81%
79%
86%

Lift

Drop

76%
91%
87%
71%
81%

76%
78%
80%
78%
78%

5. FUTURE WORK
The study undertaken here points to four areas that should be
further explored: a larger number of subjects, comparison with
laboratory BCI, other control paradigms and hybrid systems.
x By performing the same experiment with a larger number of
subjects (N>50) more conclusive results can be achieved with
regard to widespread BCI ability and demographics.
x Further comparison with medical grade devices is needed.
The systems differ in terms of accuracy, set up and cost.
However it may be possible to demonstrate that EPOC has
sufficient flexibility and accuracy to achieve widespread
deployment, as accuracy may be matched to intended
application.
x This study used ‘commands’ which are easy to reproduce
(foot tapping, left and right eye movement and teeth
clenching). The experiment can be conducted again with a
different control paradigm. For example actual movement
could be replaced with ‘imagined’ movement as this aligns
with application for users with more severe deficits. It is
recognised that this paradigm is more difficult to master;
therefore the training time will subsequently be increased.
x Focus on the EPOC as a component of a hybrid BCI (hBCI)
would potentially provide more robust performance and
ameliorate any deterioration in accuracy when compared with
medical grade systems.
Thus a number of issues still need to be addressed and potentially
solved. Previous and contemporary research studies have focused
on BCI for non-critical applications such as gaming [4], [6], [11].
Such technology will be readily available at an affordable price
(less than 500 Euro) and therefore it could become a technology
for all potential users. Indeed an improved hBCI system would
further expand the target market for multimodal human computer
interaction. It is, however clear that in a BCI, the user (brain) has
the final say in determining whether such devices can be accepted
and finally become pervasive.

Table 2- Subject Accuracy for the Test
Requests Completed Correctly
Subject Sex
Actual
Left Right
U
Down
Accuracy
p
M
35%
1
1
5
0
A
M
85%
4
3
5
5
B
M
90%
5
3
5
5
C
F
45%
0
4
5
0
D
Total:
64%
10
11
20
10

4. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
This paper describes the use of a consumer grade BCI device, the
Emotiv EPOC for manipulating a virtual object based on eye gaze
direction and actual movement. The results show that accurate
control can be achieved with little training. Participants that
possessed more BCI experience seemed to perform better. While
this is a preliminary study, it suggests that the accuracy is not
dependent on the overall skill rating as reported by the Cognitiv
Suite. All four subjects acquired differing degrees of control with
subjects A and D performing less well, yet subject A had the
highest overall skill rating.
It was not possible to determine how the EPOC compares to a
medical grade device in terms of performance and such work
needs to be undertaken to provide further benchmarks. There are a
number of previous studies that suggest that the EPOC
performance is lower than that of a medical grade BCI [8], [14].
However these studies do not address usability and flexibility [2],
[8] and it is clear from initial feedback that the EPOC was readily
accepted, and better in terms of usability.
All participants had experience of medical grade devices and
stated that the EPOC is much more comfortable and less difficult
to setup. One subject indicated that the CMS and DRL references
were the most uncomfortable part of the interaction. All subjects
agreed that, as with any BCI device, prolonged use causes fatigue.
It is evident that further investigations are required to achieve
more conclusive results.
However this preliminary study
demonstrates that specific users are able to gain accurate control
with little effort, though suggests that this will not be the case for
all users. Some studies have shown that healthy participants are
able to gain better control of BCI systems than severely disabled
participants [12]. Consequently, if an adequate level of control
can be achieved with a device of this nature then it may be
possible to complement and improve performance with a
completely separate technology (e.g. Eye tracking). If this is the
case, less accurate and inconsistent consumer grade BCI devices
can play a fundamental role in the evolution of BCI and hybrid
systems.

6. PH.D. RESEARCH
This section emphasises the Ph.D. plan of study, potential
research contributions, and major research questions. The Ph.D.
proposal focuses on BCI and eye tracking technology as a
Collaborative Assistive Technology. The primary aim is to
support ongoing research and develop an effective hBCI system.

6.1 Plan of Study
Within this research endeavour, a series of planned activities can
be identified. It was a necessity to conduct extensive research in
order to gain substantial knowledge within the field of BCI,
assistive technology and hybrid systems. This research has and
will continue to provide experience with data analysis tools and
software development kits (SDK) such as OpenVibe, MATLAB,
EEGLAB, BCILAB and the Emotiv framework etc. The next
planned activity is to begin developing an hBCI system that can
improve upon current systems in terms of performance, reliability
and usability. After which, it is necessary to conduct a number of
studies.
These studies aim to identify the feasibility of commercial BCI
devices for the hybrid approach, widespread BCI ability and
demographics, efficiency of different BCI paradigms and the
improvements of combining multiple BCI paradigms with
separate technologies. The majority of existing research is
performed on healthy subjects under laboratory conditions rather
than on target user groups in domestic settings. The final studies



of this proposal will aim to engage with community partners in
the Cedar Foundation in order to evaluate the developed hybrid
technology on people with brain injury thus providing early
access of this emerging assistive technology to those who
potentially need it the most.

3.
4.

6.2 Research Contributions
A research contribution to computing science is possible within
multiple capacities: (i) the development of a hybrid architecture,
(ii) data analysis and processing improvements, (iii) graphical
user interface design for hybrid systems, and (iv) high frequency
steady state visually evoked potential (SSVEP) protocols.
The development of an effective hybrid architecture could have
a substantial impact in the field of BCI. While it is evident that
BCI technology experiences various limitations including
performance, usability and reliability constraints, these limitations
can be overcome by a hybrid approach.
An approach that
combines a multitude of BCI paradigms (e.g. an active motor
imagery protocol coupled with a reactive SSVEP protocol) with
separate input modalities (e.g. eye tracking). Preliminary studies
suggest that hBCI is an innovative and viable solution to facilitate
the evolution of BCI technology across multidisciplinary
application areas including ‘communication and control’,
‘entertainment’, ‘motor recovery’, and ‘motor substitution’.
Additionally, it is likely that data analysis techniques can be
employed to determine features appropriate to improved
classification for the hybrid approach. Eye tracking systems can
provide efficient navigation (e.g. control of a cursor) but are
limited by intentional selection commands (e.g. mouse click); an
area of significant attention in BCI. When measuring EEG
activity, other correlates of bio-signal can be identified that are
representative of other input modalities. It may be possible to
extract features from the EEG that represent the eye tracking data.
For example using dwells from eye tracking in an attempt to
identify an intended selection in the EEG and distinguish this
from other types of dwell such as pausing to read or losing
concentration.
A research contribution is also possible in the form of graphical
user interface design for the hybrid approach. The collaboration
of the inputs from BCI and eye tracking modalities, which may
have different temporal properties, can be utilised to interact with
a menu system and provide actuation of outputs. Such a system
would need to be designed and developed without the use of
existing structures, documents, and procedures.
To our
knowledge this type of work is yet to be undertaken thus ensuring
its originality and contribution to knowledge.
Finally, it is possible to make a research contribution towards
BCI as a pervasive technology. As the majority of SSVEP based
BCI studies have focused on low frequency protocols, which
suffer from photosensitivity concerns, a substantial barrier
preventing SSVEP methods from becoming pervasive exists.
Therefore an investigation into high frequency SSVEP is feasible.
An SSVEP protocol consisting of a frequency above 35Hz, the
lower limit of the flicker fusion threshold (a concept that defines
the frequency at which an intermittent visual stimulus appears to
be steady to the human observer) may prove to be the solution.

5.

system? Which BCI paradigms should be combined
with eye tracking technology to provide an efficient
level of communication and control?
Can the collaboration of eye tracking and EEG data be
used to determine intended selection?
Is it possible to use the combination of EEG and eye
tracking data to identify error potentials and
autonomously correct false positive no-control states?
Can this technology become pervasive?

7. REFERENCES
[1] Allison, B.Z, “Future BNCI: A Roadmap for Future
Directions in Brain / Neuronal Computer Interaction
Research,” http://future-bnci.org/images/
stories/Future_BNCI_Roadmap.pdf (accessed September
2013) 1 1. (2012), 1–255.
[2] Badcock, N. a et al. 2013. Validation of the Emotiv EPOC
EEG gaming system for measuring research quality auditory
ERPs. PeerJ. 1, (2013), e38.
[3] Biosemi. 2013. What is the function of CMS and DRL
electrodes Ground, Reference or what? (2013). Retrieved
December 1, 2013 from
http://www.biosemi.com/faq/cms&drl.htm
[4] Bos, D.O. and Reuderink, B. 2008. BrainBasher: a BCI
Game. Methods. (2008), 7–10.
[5] Christensen, K. et al. 2009. Ageing populations: the
challenges ahead. Lancet. 374, 9696 (Oct. 2009), 1196–208.
[6] Chumerin, N. et al. 2013. Steady-State Visual Evoked
Potential-Based Computer Gaming on a Consumer-Grade
EEG Device. 5, 2 (2013), 100–110.
[7] Duvinage, et al. 2013 “Performance of the Emotiv Epoc
headset for P300-based applications,” Biomedical
engineering online, 12, (Jan. 2013), 56.
[8] Duvinage, M. et al. 2012. A P300-based Quantitative
Comparison between the Emotiv Epoc Headset and a
Medical EEG Device. Biomedical Engineering / 765:
Telehealth / 766: Assistive Technologies. (2012).
[9] Duvinage, M. et al. 2013. Performance of the Emotiv Epoc
headset for P300-based applications. Biomedical engineering
online. 12, (Jan. 2013), 56.
[10] Ekanayake, H. 2010. P300 and Emotiv EPOC : Does Emotiv
EPOC capture real EEG (2010), Retrieved from
http://neurofeedback.visaduma.info/emotivresearch.htm,
[11] Marshall, D. et al. 2013. Games, Gameplay, and BCI : The
State of the Art. 5, 2 (2013), 82–99.
[12] Mccullagh, P. et al. 2013. Investigation into a Mixed Hybrid
Using SSVEP and Eye Gaze for Optimising User Interaction
within a Virtual Environment. (2013), 530–539.
[13] Mulvenna, M. et al. 2012. Realistic expectations with brain
computer interfaces. Journal of Assistive Technologies. 6, 4
(2012), 233–244.
[14] Stytsenko, K. et al (2011). Evaluation of consumer EEG
device Emotiv EPOC. MEi: CogSci Conference 2011,
Ljubljana. (2011). Retrieved from
http://www.univie.ac.at/meicogsci/php/ocs/index.php/meicog
/meicog2011/paper/view/210.
[15] Wolpaw, J.R. and McFarland, D.J. 2004. Control of a twodimensional movement signal by a noninvasive braincomputer interface in humans. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 101,
51 (Dec. 2004), 17849–54.
[16] Wolpaw, J.R. et al. 2002. Brain – computer interfaces for
communication and control. Clinical Neurophysiology. 113,
6 (2002), 767–791.

6.3 Research Questions
Extensive research has been conducted in which a number of
research question have been identified:
1. Can consumer grade BCI devices (such as the Emotiv
EPOC) provide an acceptable EEG measure to function
as part of a collaborative assistive technology?
2. What architecture would constitute a more robust hBCI



