ISSN 2278-3091
VolumeTrends
9, No.4,
July – August
2020
Adarsh Kushwaha et al., International Journal of Advanced
in Computer
Science and
Engineering, 9(4), July – August 2020, 5296 – 5302

International Journal of Advanced Trends in Computer Science and Engineering
Available Online at http://www.warse.org/IJATCSE/static/pdf/file/ijatcse161942020.pdf
https://doi.org/10.30534/ijatcse/2020/161942020

Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder prediction using
Machine learning
Adarsh Kushwaha1, Anmol Mishra2, Ayushi Jain3
Jaypee Institute Of Information Technology, India, adarshkush1311@gmail.com
2
Jaypee Institute Of Information Technology, India, anmolmishra.jiit@gmail.com
3
Jaypee Institute Of Information Technology, India, ayushijain.jiit@gmail.com
1

the reason from ADHD. Premature birth and extremely low
weight at the time of birth may lead to ADHD.

ABSTRACT

Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder is a mental disorder
and after a survey it can be concluded that 5% children and
3% adults are affected by this condition. It can cause
learning disability in children which is not tolerable in this
learning phase of life. Deep analysis is required of this
disease because it is one of the hardest diseases to be
diagnosed. The subtle symptoms of this disease are
misunderstood most of the time. Most of the children are
not properly diagnosed and always get remark by teacher
that your child is not performing in class, he is not giving
his best effort. Mental disorder is illness which deteriorate
the whole life of a person when neglected. ADHD is the
most severe and neglected mental disease found in children
and in adults.
We as a society found it very difficult and shameful to adopt
the truth that he or she may be suffering from mental illness
that is the main reason this kind of disease never get
diagnosed and create difficulties for humans in future. In fact
diagnosis of this kind of disease is very difficult to identify
due to its very subtle symptoms. Experiment results illustrate
the technical aid using the FMRI scans of the brain and
unsupervised learning with a decent percentage of prediction
accuracy.

Figure 1: The light blue portion is affected with ADHD

Figure 1 depicts the portion of the brain that is affected by
ADHD. This has been proved by the medical science that
there is the reduction of volume and thinning of cortex
in the left prefrontal of the brain [2]. ADHD brain scans are
observed to be of smaller size than normal healthy brain due
to slow development and reduced volume. ADHD brains
scans are observed to have low blood flow as compared to
healthy brain which leads to reduced concentration in
performing any activity.

Key words: Computer Aided detection, Feature Extraction,
Machine learning, mental disorder detection, Decision tree
1. INTRODUCTION
Human Brain, spinal Cord and nervous system under
one head is known as Central nervous system. Attention
Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder [1] is a complex neuro
disorder. A person suffering from ADHD has a relatively
slow and different brain development process as compared to
normal person. In this mental disorder the victim’s brain
loses the self-controlling powers, and develops a slow
responding and understanding ability. ADHD can be
transmitted in genes from parent to children. Exposer of
pregnant women to chemicals such as Nicotine can also be

Figure 2: Non-ADHD vs ADHD

Figure 2 represents brain scan of ADHD and Non-ADHD
brains. To diagnose the disorder the doctors first observes the
patient’s habits, talks to their family members about their
behavior.
5296

Adarsh Kushwaha et al., International Journal of Advanced Trends in Computer Science and Engineering, 9(4), July – August 2020, 5296 – 5302

Symptoms of ADHD in human being:
1) Person suffering from ADHD is not able to respond to the
other persons efficiently.
2.) ADHD persons develops the self-focused behavior thus
they interrupt other people in their activities to gain their
attention.
3) Children suffering with ADHD losses their control over
patience and troubles waiting for their turn during and class
sessions, games our any daily activities.

In different researches different models are combined
with SVM as one of the important part to effectively
produce
the
results
for example CNN + SVM
(linear/kernel).

Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) [3] [4] generates the
detailed images of the different organs and tissues with the
help of radio waves and magnetic fields. The signal
generated are the measurement of the density with which
the waves are reflected back to the scanner by the tissue. The
doctors will be able to detect the problem in an early stage.
With the use of cutting-edge methods[5] [6] and techniques
we aim to collaborate to the betterment of the Attention
Deficit Hyperactivity disorder Detection and classifications
and in turn help the people suffering from mental disorder.

After studying and analyzing the research paper and the
parameter affecting Attention Deficit hyperactivity
disorder we had decided to work on 2 parameters namely
variations in functional and structural MRI scans, Physical
factors such as age, IQ level etc., and thus collected the
dataset. After collecting the dataset our first aim was to
successfully clean the dataset and preprocess it. We applied
several cleaning and pre-processing techniques [12] to
achieve the desired output and prevent the model form
unwanted noise. Then we perform the correlation analysis
to collect the knowledge of the degree of correlation
among parameter. This step of finding the correlation
among the correlation analysis also helps us to
understand the dataset more quickly and clearly before
visualizing and analyzing the dataset. Now, at this point
of time we divided the dataset into two parts train and
test in the ratio of 70:30 and rest all operation except
testing is done on training dataset. The next step is to tune
the hyper parameters. We had also applied the crossvalidation so that our model does not over fit or under fit
the model so as to reduce the false negative probability.
The last step is to train and predict the different models and
compare their results on the parameter of Accuracy,
precision and recall.

The other used model were feed forward neural networks i.e.
ELM. The results of different research contributions varies
from 50% to 91% accuracy. The average accuracy rate is
72% to 76%. The highest accuracy of approx. 91% was
achieved with ELM mode.

Most of the research works carried out earlier by t/he
different researchers make use of the most common
Global datasets available namely - ADHD-200 [7], ABIDE.
Both dataset include the high definition structural MRI
and functional MRI scans of both patient suffering from
ADHD and healthy persons. In some of the research
works we came across this imaging dataset is combined
with Phenotypic data includes age, sex, handedness,
Intelligence level, and scanning sites of the brain.
Phenotypic data was founded more useful in building models
to detect the disorder with much greater accuracy.
Since the imaging data includes high definition images it quit
important to decrease to resolutions, dimensionality, and
linearity of the dataset. In order to achieve the same
almost all the researches have used the most common
dimensionality reduction techniques i.e. PCA [8], LDA
and some researches includes FFT. In order to achieve
higher accuracy some images were rotated at different
angles, some were blurred, and some were sharpen [9].
Different methods were used to increase or decrease the
noise as per the requirement and training. The feature maps
thus obtained were made to undergo several other
processes according to the model requirement based on the
researcher requirement for example scaling of the dataset,
k-fold cross validation, averaging etc.

After successfully training the machine learning models
on personal characteristics dataset to move to CNN VGG16 model. We trained the model on MRI image dataset using
predefined weights available globally. We augmented the
images by applying filter, cropping and rotating them. Then
they are served as input to the VGG16 model.
2. LITERATURE SURVEY
Classification of ADHD and Control Adults with Phase
Space
Reconstruction
of
Electroencephalography
(EEG)Signals is discussed [17], the features and tools used
are Electroencephalography signals, support vector machine,
k-nearestneighbour, Naive-Bayes classifier, enhanced
probabilistic neural network, NDC and found that the
accuracies were 80% for neural dynamic classifier, 76.7%
for enhanced probabilistic neural network, 80% for support
vector machine, 73.3% for k-nearest neighbourand 76.7% for

At this stage the feature map obtained are finally served
to machine learning models [10]. All the researches
includes SVM [11] model as one of the important model to
classify the healthy vs ADHD suffering patient. SVM and
its different versions are always considered as the top
candidate in classification task because of its higher accuracy
and efficiency to differentiate between two or more classes.
5297

Adarsh Kushwaha et al., International Journal of Advanced Trends in Computer Science and Engineering, 9(4), July – August 2020, 5296 – 5302

naive-Bayes classifier. Various statistical features have been
constructed upon reconstruction of phase space of signals.
There is a high accuracy of 93.3% under the eyes-open, 90%
under the eyes-closed, and 100% under the CPT condition.

ADHD and Psychiatric Comorbidity: Functional Outcomes
in a School-Based Sample of Children, Teachers and parents
of South Carolina and Oklahoma were selected and went
through different screenings using Logistic Regression.
Children with ADHD and low academic performance
showed an increase in psychiatric disorders and anxiety,
ADHD alone associated with school discipline [24].

Dilated 3 dimensionconvolutional neural network method
used for classifying 3 dimension MRI scans convoluted with
feature maps and gave 76.6% accuracy on structural MRI
ADHD images and 82.7% on SZ fMRI EPI imagesof a
Schizophrenia dataset, demonstrating better performances
than some other state-of-the-art methods.The accuracy
achieved in this using single EPI image level.This method
could also be used in Computer-Assisted Diagnosis and realtime fMRI analysis [18].

J – Eros [27] which is a model selection scheme i.e. It picks
an optimum value for k from the training data for k – nearest
neighbors. As compared to the current algorithms, the
model showed an increase in accuracy by 20%. The
main here in this research is to be able to design such GPU
based parallel computing algorithms that analyze the big
fMRI data and also by taking some pairwise relations
between each voxels without any constraints. The paper
[27] also discusses also presented a strategy that was
based on GPU which uses Pearson correlations to allow
functional connectivity to be calculated for big fMRI
data [27].

Classification of Structural MRI Images in ADHD using 3D
Fractal Dimension Complexity Map [19], fractal dimension
map based 3D CNN was used for Automatic diagnosis of
ADHD with significant results in representing gray matter
density data sparsely. The research is effective in supporting
the efficiency of MRI images in ADHD.

In [28] paper a new feature selection method based on
Relative Importance and Ensemble Learning (FS_RIEL) was
introduced through which high dimensional feature spaces
get reduced to more refined subspace. Decision trees are
used to calculate the relative importance of features. While
maintaining the low dimensions of FCs feature space, a
forward – backward selection algorithm is applied on
combined features to increase the diversity of new feature
space. When they compared conventional feature selection
methods with FS_RIEL, it showed that the later increased
the ADHD classification by about 15% in both adults and
children and gave around 80% - 86% accuracy.

In [20], Social media and big data analytics were used in
predicting the mental health of an individual by Co-training
with and without SVM, RF, NB and classifiers with Cotraining outperformed the state of the art models by a margin
of 3%.
Detecting ADHD Patients by an EEG-Based Serious Game,
an EEG based serious game using RBF Kernel model,
EMOTIV data and keyboard data was used for Detection
level of ADHD, with 98.4% for RBF Kernel and 64.73% and
64.74% 1 ADHD subject’s data holdout and 2 ADHD
subject’s dtaa holdout respectively [21].

The chance accuracy set by the researchers was 64.2% for
the data used at the training time. The logistic regression
classifier, linear, quadratic, cubic and kernel support vector
machine performed better on all the combinations of the
feature sets. The best performance was shown by kernelrbf SVM. Maximum accuracy obtained was 75% from linear
SVM [29].

In [22] Evaluating the Effectiveness of a Group CBT for
Parents of ADHD Children, an experimental study Quasi
observed the culturally aware CBT treatment groups’ effect
on mental health and quality of life (QoL) of Chinese parents
with children with ADHD Effect. Effect of CBT on mental
health and improved QoL significantly mediated after
reduction in parenting stress and on reduction of
dysfunctional attitudes, the effect of CBT on improved QoL
significantly mediated.

The paper [30] follows the method of deep learning to
diagnose Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder. This
paper [30] increases the performance of CNN algorithm by
taking the input dataset of three popular types of features of
fMRI data. The three features were Regional Homogeneity,
Voxel Connectivity and low amplitude of low frequency
fluctuation. These were combined to create a 3D dataset,
which further results in 3D CNN model. As a result this
model has encouraged the diagnosis accuracy of ADHD
disease. They have also implemented 10-fold cross

Event-Related Potentials for Diagnosing Children and Adults
with ADHD, there was a study about discriminating
participants based on ERP classifiers between ADHD and
healthy controls. A total of 49 papers were scanned and
selected out of which 7 fulfilled the inclusion criteria and
gotselected for final review [23].
5298

Adarsh Kushwaha et al., International Journal of Advanced Trends in Computer Science and Engineering, 9(4), July – August 2020, 5296 – 5302

validation which helped them in selecting different sets of
validation in each occurrence. Performance of methods using
classifiers like multi-kernel learning and SVM were
compared to the proposed method using 3D CNN as
classifier based on the ADHD–200 dataset.
The proposed method gave the highest accuracy of 65.67%
which is supports.

Now talking about Gradient Boosting the model which we
build is the weighted some of less powerful learners.
Formula used:
(∙)=∑

×

(∙)

where is a coefficient and
are weak learners
It views the whole issue of reducing the bias as a gradient
descent. Every time we learn a weak learn we learn it
opposite to the value of gradient descent of the recent fitting
error of recent ensemble model.
Formula used for Gradient descent process applied on
ensemble model:

3. SOLUTION APPROACH
We have implemented Ensemble learning methods and deep
learning model to predict the ADHD disease through MRI
scans and IQ level datasets. Ensemble learning is the stand
out technique in the field of ADHD disease prediction and
we have attained trustable accuracy percentage on that.
Ensemble learning is aggregation of different classifiers to
attain better results. Sometimes, the only classifier is not
sufficient for classification due to large dataset or different
kind of features in a dataset then comes the role of ensemble
learning when one classifier is not sufficient and called as
“Weak classifier”. Ensemble learning methods benefits are
as follows:
1. Easy to train
2.Takes less time
3.Scalable
4.Improved results

(.)=

−1 ( ∙ ) -

×∇

- 1Ε (

- 1) ( ∙ )

In the above formula, Fitting error of model = E ( ∙ ) and
a coefficient of step size.

is

3.Extra Tree Classifier: Extra tree classifier [14] is an
ensemble machine learning algorithm which works on
decision tree. In this model several decision tree estimators
are created based on random subsets of the dataset. Since
each dataset is based on random subsample mostly the
trees are built different from each other. Now at the time
of testing, each instance is evaluated on all the trees formed
and then the class with maximum votes is returned.

Ensemble learning methods:
1.Bagging: Bagging Classifier [13] is used to reduce
variance of the aggregated model which is received after
learning all weak learners. However, it’s very much near to
impossible to reduce variance of resultant model due to less
size of dataset. So, the idea is to create one or more than one
bootstrap sample and learn these samples one by one and
then take average of all the samples after learning. Two ways
are there to aggregate all the models and find the output
class:
a. Hard Voting: Take the output of each samples and class
with highest votes is taken as a result.
b.Soft voting: In this method we calculate the probabilities of
each class obtained and the take the average of probabilities.
Formula used for classification:
( . ) = rg max [

=1

3.1 Deep leaning model
a. CNN VGG 16: VGG-16 [15] is a 16 layered CNN
based model that focuses more on convolution layers
than other hyper parameters. In VGG-16 each
convolution layer uses 3x3 filters with stride of 1 and
max-pooling layer uses 2x2 filter with stride of 2. At the
end there are three fully connected layer followed by
soft-max layer at the output. There are all over 13
convolution layers and 5 max-pooling layers followed by
3 fully connected layers and finally the 1 soft-max layer.
i) Convolution layer: The input in the form of matrix is fed
to the convolution layer. In this layers several filter are
applied and the output is send to next layer.
ii) Max-pooling layer: The dimensions of input are reduced
by taking the maximum value in the stride.
iii) Fully connected layer: In fully connected layer each node
is connected to every node of the next layer.
iv) Softmax layer: In this layer the output from the fully
connected layer is converted to discrete probability
distribution so that they can be classified into classes.

( | ( . ) = )]

Above formula is used to take the class with maximum
votes.
2. Gradient Boosting: Boosting [13] is basically training
weak learner models in a sequential way to reduce bias.
Hence, model with a higher value of bias is trained at first.

5299

Adarsh Kushwaha et al., International Journal of Advanced Trends in Computer Science and Engineering, 9(4), July – August 2020, 5296 – 5302

Mathematical modelling of CNN VGG 16
• Error formula:
=

2. Encoding Categorical Data: All the data in the dataset is
not always of same category to resolve this issue we use
label encoding. In this we categorize the data into numeric
form which can be applicable to model. Label encoder gives
integer value to the data which is not in integer form.
3.Feature Scaling: Some of the values in dataset maybe in
between 1-10 and some may be in 1000 so this will create
problem and a biasness factor to higher value feature will be
there. To tackle this feature scaling is used to normalize all
the value in dataset using standardization or Normalization
[26].

1
Σ min(i)d(C , C )
n

where c is matrix of classes sorted in decreasing order and C
is a matrix of truth class.
Loss function:
(ŷ,

) = - ∑1000

log( ŷ i )

where y is a vector of prediction and ŷ is output vector
3.2 Dataset
Government introduced a competition of predicting ADHD
disease through two types of dataset one is phenotypic
dataset which is in number and other is Brain MRI scans of
ADHD and non ADHD patients. Different universities
provided their datasets. Datasets [16] were mainly collected
by public who have released 776 fMRI scans in which
anatomical dataset was aggregated using different imaging
sites. Hence, we have used 2 types of dataset.

a. Standardization: Here represents the mean of values in
feature and means the feature value’s standard deviation.
b. Normalization: Here Xmax is the max value in a feature
whereas Xmin is min value.
In Deep learning pre-processing is as follows:
For the deep learning we have used VGG16 model and brain
scans
images dataset. There are all over 155 images
belonging to ADHD class and 98 image belonging to non
ADHD class.
First we divide the dataset in train set, test set and
validation set. The augmentation started with image
resizing, RGB images are converted to gray scale. Then the
images are cropped so as to reduce the background noise
which in turn will decrease the size of image pixel array.
Data set so obtained is saved and passed to image generator.
Image generator will automatically assign the classes to the
dataset.
Existing approach models mostly all the researchers used
SVM (kernel / simple), combinations of SVM with some
other machine learning method. Very few researchers used
deep learning models and that to complex such as 3D CNN
and LSTM and maximum accuracy with SVM was 80%,
with SVM RBF was 98% and 3D CNN was 76.6%
Proposed approach is more focused towards extracting best
accuracy with the much simpler machine learning and deep
learning models. It used ensemble machine learning models
such bagging and boosting and CNN VGG-16 model that is
much simpler and smaller in terms of memory requirement.
Maximum accuracy of 89% is achieved by gradient oosting
and 90% is achieved by VGG-16.

a. Phenotypic dataset: This Phenotypic dataset consist of
phenotypic information (personal information) of 221
ADHD and non ADHD people. The phenotypic information
contains 8 features that are gender, HI, med, aggression,
perfIQ, VerbIQ, fullIQ and AD.
b. Brain MRI Scans: Brain MRI scans dataset consist of 98
brain scans of non ADHD persons and 155 of ADHD
persons. figure 3 below is one of the Brain MRI scans of the
actual ADHD individual.

Figure 3: Brain scan with ADHD

3.3 Data Pre-processing
The data pre-processing techniques are as follows:
1. Missing Data: All the data which was missing in dataset
was taken care of by using imputer class imported via
Skcit.learn. NaN was filled in the place of missing data.
5300

Adarsh Kushwaha et al., International Journal of Advanced Trends in Computer Science and Engineering, 9(4), July – August 2020, 5296 – 5302

4. REULTS AND CONCLUSION
Hence, we would like to establish that ensemble learning
methods are more approachable process in the field of
ADHD prediction as they secure good accuracies and takes
less time and moderate software requirements and is very
much low in costs. Though we get highest accuracy of 90%
through CNN VGG 16 but it has taken more time and
requires higher software requirements. Table 1 shows CNN
VGG16confusion matrix. Figure 4 is the model accuracy of
CNN VGG-16.

With the aim to contribute for the development of the society
we opted to perform the research on the neural disorder
namely Attention Deficit Hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).
Several researches had been carried out to help the doctors
detect and cure this neural disorder. We have applied
different ensemble learning models like Extra tree classifier,
Bagging and Ada boosting in order to improve the prediction
and classification of disease and then at last we have applied
the deep learning model CNN VGG-16 on Brain MRI scans
to predict the ADHD disease and got the accuracy of 90%. In
different researches different models are combined with
SVM as one of the important parts to effectively produce the
results for example CNN + SVM (linear/kernel).

5. FUTURE SCOPE
In future, there is a scope to use a larger dataset so that this
result is more reliable. Adapting additional parameters can
give a scope of improvement of accuracy with a larger
dataset including more factors which are affecting ADHD
patients now needs to be inculcated in the dataset. It can be
used as a foundation to additional research for similar
disorder, A whole software which can be operated by doctors
in hospitals [25] is what we aim for now.

Table 1 : CNN VGG16 Confusion Matrix

(0,’NO’)

17

2

(1,’YES’)

3

28

(0,’NO’)

REFERENCES
1. TJensen, P. S., Martin, D., & Cantwell, D. P.,
Comorbidity in ADHD: implications for research,
practice, and DSM-V in Journal of the American
Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 36(8), pp.
1065-1079, 1997.
2. Singh, I., Biology in Context: Social and Cultural
Perspectives on ADHD. Research Review in Children
& society, 16(5), pp. 360-67, 2002
https://doi.org/10.1002/chi.746
3. Sinha, A., Pratik, R., & Panchal, M., MRI IMAGE
SEGMENTATION–A REVIEW, 2014
4. Tian, L., Jiang, T., Wang, Y., Zang, Y., He, Y., Liang,
M., ... & Zhuo, Y., Altered resting-state functional
connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in
adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder in Neuroscience letters, 400(1-2), pp. 39-43,
2006.
5. Simon, V., Czobor, P., Balint, S., Meszaros, A., Murai,
Z., & Bitter, I., Detailed review of epidemiologic
studies on adult Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity
Disorder (ADHD) Psychiatria Hungarica: A Magyar
Pszichiatriai Tarsasag tudomanyos folyoirata, 22(1), pp.
4-19, 2007.
6. Brown, M. R., Sidhu, G. S., Greiner, R., Asgarian, N.,
Bastani, M., Silverstone, P. H., ... & Dursun, S. M.,
ADHD-200 Global Competition: diagnosing ADHD
using personal characteristic data can outperform
resting state fMRI measurements in Frontiers in
systems neuroscience, 6, 69, 2012.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnsys.2012.00069

(1,’YES’)

Figure 4 : CNN VGG-16 Model Accuracy

Table 2 : Accuracies of different classifiers and
models

5301

Adarsh Kushwaha et al., International Journal of Advanced Trends in Computer Science and Engineering, 9(4), July – August 2020, 5296 – 5302

7. Friston, K. J., Frith, C. D., Liddle, P. F., & Frackowiak,
R. S. J., Functional connectivity: the principal component analysis of large (PET) data sets in Journal
of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism, 13(1), pp. 5-14,
1993.
8. Wang, S. H., Zhang, Y. D., Dong, Z., & Phillips, P.,
Image Preprocessing for Pathological Brain Detection
in Pathological Brain Detection, Springer, Singapore, pp.
29-44, 2018.
9. Ray, S., A Quick Review of Machine Learning
Algorithms in 2019 International Conference on
Machine Learning, Big Data, Cloud and Parallel
Computing (COMITCon), pp. 35-39, IEEE.
10. Suykens, J. A., & Vandewalle, J. Least squares support
vector machine classifiers in Neural processing letters,
9(3), pp. 293-300, 1999.
11. Paulus, M. P., Kuplicki, R., & Yeh, H. W., Machine
Learning and Brain Imaging: Opportunities and
Challenges in Trends in neurosciences, 42(10), pp. 659661, 2019.
12. Badrinarayanan, V., Kendall, A., & Cipolla, R., Segnet:
A deep convolutional encoder-decoder architecture
for image segmentationin IEEE transactions on pattern
analysis and machine intelligence, 39(12), pp. 24812495, 2017
13. Skurichina, M., & Duin, R. P., Bagging, boosting and
the random subspace method for linear classifiers
Pattern Analysis & Applications, 5(2), pp. 121-135,
2002.
14. Goetz, M., Weber, C., Bloecher, J., Stieltjes, B., Meinzer,
H. P., & Maier-Hein, K., Extremely randomized trees
based brain tumor segmentation in Proceeding of
BRATS challenge-MICCAI, pp. 006-011, 2014.
15. Belaid, O. N., & Loudini, M., Classification of Brain
Tumor by Combination of Pre-Trained VGG16 CNN
in Journal of Information Technology Management, pp.
13-25, 2020.
16. Fcon_1000.projects.nitrc.org. 2020. ADHD200. [online]
Available:<http://fcon_1000.projects.nitrc.org/indi/adhd2
00/> [Accessed 19 May 2020].
17. Kaur, S., Singh, S., Arun, P., Kaur, D., & Bajaj, M.,
Phase Space Reconstruction of EEG Signals for
Classification of ADHD and Control Adults, in
Clinical EEG and Neuroscience, 51(2), pp. 102-113,
2020.
18. Wang, Z., Sun, Y., Shen, Q., & Cao, L., Dilated 3D
Convolutional Neural Networks for Brain MRI Data
Classification IEEE Access, 7, pp. 134388-134398,
2019.
19. Wang, Tianyi, and Sei-ichiro Kamata. Classification of
Structural MRI Images in Adhd Using 3D Fractal
Dimension Complexity Map 2019 IEEE International
Conference on Image Processing (ICIP). IEEE.
20. Tariq, S., Akhtar, N., Afzal, H., Khalid, S., Mufti, M. R.,
Hussain, S., ... & Ahmad, G., A Novel Co-Training-

Based Approach for the Classification of Mental
Illnesses Using Social Media Posts, IEEE Access, 7, pp.
166165-166172, 2019.
21. Alchalabi, A. E., Shirmohammadi, S., Eddin, A. N., &
Elsharnouby, M., FOCUS: detecting ADHD patients by
an EEG-based serious game, in IEEE Transactions on
Instrumentation and Measurement, 67(7), pp. 1512-1520,
2018.
22. Wong, D. F., Ng, T. K., Ip, P. S., Chung, M. L., & Choi,
J., Evaluating the Effectiveness of a Group CBT for
Parents of ADHD Children. Journal of Child and
Family Studies, 27(1), pp. 227-239, 2018.
23. Gamma, Alex, and Olga Kara, Event-Related Potentials
for Diagnosing Children and Adults with ADHD.In
Journal of attention disorders, 1087054716631821, 2016.
24. Cuffe, S. P., Visser, S. N., Holbrook, J. R., Danielson, M.
L., Geryk, L. L., Wolraich, M. L., & McKeown, R. E.,
ADHD and psychiatric comorbidity: Functional
outcomes in a school-based sample of children in
Journal of attention disorders, 1087054715613437, 2015.
25. Munya A. Arasi , Sangita babu, Survey of Machine
Learning
Techniques
in
Medical
Imaging,
International Journal of Advanced Trends in Computer
Science and Engineering, Volume 8, No.5, ISSN 22783091,
September
October
2019.
https://doi.org/10.30534/ijatcse/2019/39852019
26. Randhir Singh , Saurabh Pal, Machine Learning
Algorithms and Ensemble Technique to Improve
Prediction of Students Performance, International
Journal of Advanced Trends in Computer Science and
Engineering, Volume 8, No.5, ISSN 2278-3091, May June
2020.
https://doi.org/10.30534/ijatcse/2020/221932020
27. Saeed, Fahad. "Towards quantifying psychiatric
diagnosis using machine learning algorithms and big
fMRI data." in Big Data Analytics 3.1, 7, 2018.
28. Yao, D., Guo, X., Zhao, Q., Liu, L., Cao, Q., Wang, Y.,
... & Sui, J., “Discriminating ADHD from healthy
controls using a novel feature selection method based
on relative importance and ensemble learning” in
2018 40th Annual International Conference of the IEEE
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC),
pp. 4632-4635, IEEE.
29. Brown, M. R., Sidhu, G. S., Greiner, R., Asgarian, N.,
Bastani, M., Silverstone, P. H.,& Dursun, S. M.,
“ADHD-200 Global Competition: diagnosing ADHD
using personal characteristic data can outperform
resting state fMRI measurements” in Frontiers in
systems neuroscience, 6, 69, 2012.
30. Zou, Liang, Jiannan Zheng, and Martin J. McKeown,
"Deep learning based automatic diagnoses of attention
deficit hyperactive disorder" in 2017 IEEE Global
Conference on Signal and Information Processing
(GlobalSIP),IEEE.

5302

