International Journal of Software Engineering and Computer Systems (IJSECS)
ISSN: 2289-8522, Volume 5 Issue 1, pp. 52-66, February 2019
©Universiti Malaysia Pahang
https://doi.org/10.15282/ijsecs.5.1.2019.4.0054

EFFICIENT METHOD TO IMPROVE HUMAN BRAIN SENSOR ACTIVITIES
USING PROPOSED NEUROHEADSET DEVICE EMBEDDED WITH
SENSORS: A COMPREHENSIVE STUDY
Rajib Chowdhury, A F M Saifuddin Saif
Department of Computer Science
Faculty of Science and Information Technology
American International University – Bangladesh
saif@aiub.edu
ABSTRACT
The main purpose of this research is to investigate the human brain sensor activities
related prior researches towards the needs of an efficient method to improve the human
brain sensor activities. Human brain activities mainly measured by brain signal acquired
from the brain sensor electrodes positioned on several parts of the brain cortex.
Although previous researches investigated human brain activities in various aspects, the
improvement of the human brain sensor activities is still unsolved. In today’s world, it
is very crucial need for improving the sensor activities of the human brain using that
human brain improved signal externally. This research demonstrated a comprehensive
critical analysis of human brain activities related prior researches to claim for an
efficient method integrated with proposed neuroheadset device. This research presented
a comprehensive review in various aspects like previous methods, existing frameworks
analysis and existing results analysis with the discussion to establish an efficient method
for acquiring human brain signal, improving the acquired signal and developing the
sensor activities of the human brain using that human brain improved signal.
Demonstrated critical review has expected for constituting an efficient method to
improve the performance of maneuverability, visualization, subliminal activities and so
forth on human brain activities.
Keywords: Human Brain Activities; Human Brain Signal; Efficient Method; Proposed
Neuroheadset Device; Brain Engineering;
INTRODUCTION
One of the most complex things which have discovered in the universe is the human
brain. In every stage of life, people face everything using brain (Rao, Lakshmi, and
Prasad 2012). In the neuroscience research, imaging of human brain activity is highly
required for the better understanding of the human brain works (Taruno et al., 2013). It
works like a network that passes the information’s to several regions of the body parts
and also controls the entire functions of the body. It has a significant contribution to
receive, store and pass information (Sulaiman, Cheng Chee, Hadi, Mustafa, and Jadin
2014). Brain signal helps to define the activity of the human brain from the scalp.
The human brain can losses the efficiency when it feels to get tired and also feels
anxious for the several types of worst proceedings. The human brain competence can
easily decrease by the sentiment that causes disability to make the best assessments and
also the reason for reducing the capability of thinking. Age can be another reason to
52

Rajib Chowdhury, A F M Saifuddin Saif /International Journal of Software Engineering and Computer Systems 5(1) 2019 52-66

increases the complexities in the human brain function. In artificial intelligence
research, the improvement of the human brain activities will be a great challenge.
In previous, researchers have established emotion recognition; human brainmachine interactions; wheelchair control; human brain auditory activity observation;
human thought interpretation; brain-computer interfaces; etc. using the human brain
activity as well as the human brain signal. This research actually demonstrates the
exploration of human brain sensor activities related previous research for establishing
an efficient method assists to improve the human brain activities using proposed
neuroheadset device embedded with sensors. In the future, we will illustrate the details
framework helps to improve the human brain activities. This framework will be
constituted using several steps like brain signal acquisition, acquired signal processing,
signal feature extraction, the brain signal improvement and also the human brain
activities improvement. The complete procedure will continue in a proposed
neuroheadset device with the help of the efficient method. This efficient method will be
constituted using several methods like signal acquisition technique, signal processing
method, signal improvement method and also brain activity development approach.
RESEARCH BACKGROUND
Rushambwa and Mythili (2017) focused on the effects of mental and physical
subliminal behavior on the human brain signal. For this, they used an EEG frontal lobe
sensor, a Neurosky brain wave sensor with an ear clip for grounding, and a headband
for acquiring the EEG signals. Then, they deducted the voltage from the brain through
common mode rejection and also changed into a mono channel EEG signal. After that,
they extracted the values of poor signal quality, attention, and meditation using FFT
from the serial stream of the encoded values which was sent out by the brainwave and
that also appeared as a serial stream of bytes using the standard Bluetooth serial port
profile (SPP). They also configured the HC05 Bluetooth module using Cool term
software through AT commands to receive the data wirelessly from the brainwave
sensor and passed it via UART to the controller. Finally, they implemented Hardware
circuitry in Proteus software (Rushambwa and Mythili 2017).
R. Majid Mehmood, Du, and Lee (2017) recognized the emotion using maximum
characteristics of features and methods which extracted from deep learning research
domains. They recorded and preprocessed EEG data using the EMOTIV-EPOC system
and the EEGLAB toolbox respectively. After that, they measured the signal activity in
the time series data using Hjorth parameters for various frequency ranges. Then, they
used a balanced one-way ANOVA method for selecting the features of optimal EEG.
The optimal EEG features were further processed to classify the emotion (R. Majid
Mehmood, Du, and Lee 2017).
Wijayasekara and Manic (2013) used an Emotiv EPOC headset to measure brain
activity. At first, they concentrated on raise the conductivity of the contact pad. For this,
they considered a saline solution to hydrate an electrode of the 14 sensors. These
sensors have positioned according to the international 10-20 system. Then, processed
signals were combined from the Emotiv SDK using implemented GUI in the C++
environment and controlled the outputs to the mobile robot. They also identified the
desired action and facilitated the training of the system to different subjects using
Emotiv SDK. They also converted the action into motor speeds which helped to control
the differential Wheel Robot. Finally, they used Lego NXT to create contact between a
computer and the robot wirelessly through Bluetooth (Wijayasekara and Manic 2013).

53

Efficient method to improve human brain sensor activities using proposed neuroheadset device embedded with sensors: a
comprehensive study

Shuangquan, Jie, Ningjiang, Xin, and Qinfeng (2005) recognized the human
activities using tri-axial accelerometers, through matching the patterns of the objects
movement’s used for detecting and transforming the changes in capacitance into an
output voltage of the analog system. Here, an onboard A/D converter was used to
digitize this output voltage and contacted through a Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI).
The KXP74 accelerometer was used to collect the data of acceleration. They mounted
the sensors on the board and then sealed it hermetically. They also attached node of a
sensor wirelessly that transmitted the data to the base station via the RF signal. They
used a linear model for describing the mapping from electrical data to acceleration.
They extracted the frequency-domain entropy, mean, energy, acceleration, standard
deviation, and the correlation between axes. They also used Decision Tree (DT) C4.5,
Support Vector Machine (SVM), and Multiple-Layer Perception (MLP) neural
networks for performing the activities of recognition. Finally, they developed the data in
a centralized way in the application of almost all recognition (Shuangquan, Jie,
Ningjiang, Xin, and Qinfeng 2005).
Suzuki, Suzuki, Baba, and Furuta (2005) focused on the characteristics of human in
machine operation. In here, they concentrated on the pendulum graphics where the
physical rule was obeyed using the motion changes by the forces of operator’s. Then,
they sent out information to the human high dimensional function from the environment
and a machine. They adopted information on force sense in a part of interfaces of the
physical man-machine system to increase the maneuverability. They introduced the
Haptic Test to detect the visual information, the Virtual Internal Model (VIM) for the
slider control and the Near-Infrared Spectroscopy (NIRS) to detect changes which
correspond with the activation of neural in the brain region. VIM behaved like a virtual
model with particular properties of mass, stiffness, and damping to find haptic sense
information (Suzuki, Suzuki, Baba, and Furuta 2005).
PREVIOUS METHODS AND ANALYSIS
The brain activities usually monitored by observing the electrical signals produced
in the neurons (Arman, Ahmed, and Syed 2012). In many cases, researchers
concentrated on the processing of the human brain signal to solve their identified
problems. For signal processing, they followed several steps like signal acquisition, preprocessing, feature extraction and classification. In every phase, they considered an
individual method to solve their identified problem. The main aim of us is to develop
the human brain activities by processing the brain signal. For that, we have to
concentrate on existing brain signal processing methods. We have demonstrated the
comparison of previous methods based on the approaches which were previously
established by the researcher for the brain signal processing in below:
Brain activities can be measured from the brain signal acquired by using the
invasive or the non-invasive technique (Rao et al., 2012). Inspect of Invasive signal
acquisition techniques provide excellent signals quality, it requires a surgery which is an
ethical controversy. For this, most of the case, researchers focused on Non-Invasive
acquisition method using functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI), ElectroEncephalography (EEG), Magneto Encephalography (MEG), etc. In the Neuro Port data
acquisition system, researcher trialed each electrode at 30 kHz and pertained an analog
at 0.3 Hz to 7.5 kHz band-pass filter to each electrode (Even-Chen et al., 2018).
Compared to conventional disc electrode signals, Tri-polar concentric ring electrode
(TCRE) sensors EEG has better reciprocal information, better signal to noise ratio, and
spatial resolution than others (Besio 2017).

54

Rajib Chowdhury, A F M Saifuddin Saif /International Journal of Software Engineering and Computer Systems 5(1) 2019 52-66

Figure 1. Electrode Placement System for Invasive Signal Acquisition Technique

Figure 2. Electrode Placement System for Non- Invasive Signal Acquisition Technique

In previous, EEG has frequently used due to its simplicity and easiness of use which
helped to meet the BCI specifications in real time implementation (Rao et al., 2012). It
has a high temporal resolution, safety, and easiness technique but it has low spatial
resolution and nonstationary signal (Lakshmi et al., 2014). Tri-polar concentric ring
electrode (TCRE) sensors can use to acquire various bio-signals (Besio 2017). Strong
visual evoked potentials also can see in the tEEG.
In most of the scenario, acquired brain signals were infected using various noise and
Figure
1. Existing
Methods
on Human
Activities
artifacts. Principal
Component
Analysis
(PCA)
helpsBrain
to classify
data and helps to
decrease of feature dimensions. In a BCI system, despite good classification results of
the PCA, the ICA performs better than PCA (Lakshmi et al., 2014).
Independent component analysis (ICA) demonstrated a significant role in
decomposing mixed data in independent components (ICs) when deriving RSNs from
55

Efficient method to improve human brain sensor activities using proposed neuroheadset device embedded with sensors: a
comprehensive study

EEG/MEG data (Li, Yuan, Urbano, Cha, and Ding 2017). ICA showed routine for
large-sized data, computationally proficient. It can decompose the signal data into
temporally independent components and spatial specific components (Lakshmi et al.,
2014).
Independent Component Analysis (ICA), Principal Component Analysis (PCA), and
Fast Fourier Transformations (FFT) were mostly used to extract the features from the
signal (Lakshmi et al., 2014). ICA was used to remove artifacts from independent
signals and also contributed to separate noise for eye movement (Li, Yuan, Urbano,
Cha, and Ding 2017). It can help to recognize the brain signals but it requires more
computations for decomposition (Lakshmi et al., 2014). FFT is an influential method for
frequency analysis and also helps to transfer the time domain data into power values in
the frequency domain, but it is only appropriate for stationary signals and linear random
methods. It suffers from noise, and also shows inappropriate for poor time localization
in respect of various kinds of applications (Gutmann et al., 2015).
PCA is one of the exploratory analyses of multivariate data to investigate and deduct
the dimensionality of data without loss of important information (Lakshmi et al., 2014;
Suzuki et al., 2005). It holds lack of redundancy, helps to reduce the complication in
images grouping and helps to decrease the noise for the maximum variation. In the case
of PCA, only the trainee images, which are the representation of a smaller database,
were also stored in the form of the researchers’ protrusion (Karamizadeh, Abdullah,
Manaf, Zamani, and Hooman 2013).
For classification Lakshmi, Prasad, and Prakash (2014) used various types of
classifiers such that Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) based classifiers, linear
classifiers, Nearest Neighbor classifiers and Nonlinear Bayesian classifiers (NBC).
Support Vector Machine (SVM) and Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) were most
commonly used to classify the data. Comparing with previous research, although, LDA
demonstrates less computational requirements, easy to use and higher efficiency in
experimental results for accuracy, LDA fails when the discriminatory function is not in
the mean but invariance of the features. For non-Gaussian distributions, it may not
preserve the complex structures. SVM provides good simplification and performance
result, which is higher than other linear classifier but it has high computational
complexity. Minimum-Redundancy-Maximum-Relevance (mRMR) method helps to
choose the features that associates with the classification variable appropriately, reduce
redundancy between bad and good features using Mutual Information (MI) methods
(Atkinson and Campos 2016). ANN is simple to use and execution, robust in nature,
able to easy computations. It requires a small training set, but it is not able to build
easily. Its performance also depends on the number of neurons in the hidden layer
(Lakshmi et al., 2014). Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) is able to use their internal
memory by calculating the data for both forward and backward direction with two
separate hidden layers which have loaded towards the same output layer. Deep Neural
Network (DNN) helps to facilitate the learning process and amalgamate the Context. It
can also perform as Semantic and Sentiment analyzer. DNN generally perform as feed
forward networks where data can able to flow from input to output without following
any backtracking (Hebbar 2017). NBC needs the small amount of training data to
calculate the constraints data approximately, compute the variance of class variables. It
has no need to determine the whole covariance matrix without good approximation for
the class possibilities accurately (Lakshmi et al., 2014). In another side, the OSEC_111
algorithm is faster than SVM and NN but slower than Naïve Bayes and k-NN classifier.
Quadratic Discriminant Analysis (QDA) and k-NN provide comparatively better
classification findings than SVM (Atkinson and Campos 2016).

56

Rajib Chowdhury, A F M Saifuddin Saif /International Journal of Software Engineering and Computer Systems 5(1) 2019 52-66

Invasive
Acquisition

Inspect of Invasive signal acquisition techniques give
excellent quality of signals but it must require a surgery
which is an ethical controversy.

Non Invasive
Acquisition

Use to capture the electrophysiological signals from the
scalp using the technologies like EEG, MEG etc. EEG has
been most commonly used for its simplicity and ease of use.
Tri-polar concentric ring electrode (TCRE) sensors EEG
have better signal to noise ratio, better mutual information
and spatial resolution than others.

Signal
Acquisition
Method

Signal
Preprocessing
Method

ICA identifies independent signals and reduces noise
significantly from brain signals but it requires comparatively
more computations for decomposition.

Independent
component
analysis (ICA)

Principal
Component
Analysis (PCA)

Previous
Methods
Signal Feature
Extraction
Method

Signal
Classification
Method

Fast Fourier
Transformations
(FFT)

Usage of PCA in BCI system yields the best classification
results. However, PCA does not provide comparatively
better results than ICA in terms with various performance
metrics.
Fast Fourier Transformation (FFT) is powerful method for
frequency analysis, but FFT is only applicable to stationary
and linear random process.

Support Vector
Machine (SVM)

SVM provides good generalization and performance is more
than other linear classifier but it has high computational
complexity.

Bidirectional
RNNs (BRNNs)

BRNNs compute data in both forward and backward
direction with two separate concealed layers and then loaded
towards to the same output layer.

Deep Neural
Network (DNN)

DNN are integrating the Semantic, Context and Sentiment
analyzer. DNN usually made of feed forward networks
where data flows from input to output without any
backtracking.

k-NN is easy to understand and easy to implement, but KNN provides poor runtime performance for large training set,
provides unreliable results to irrelevant and redundant
features.

K-Nearest
Neighbour (kNN)

HMM is a potential discrete decoder and able to achieve
high performance discrete state decoding.

The Hidden
Markov Model
(HMM)

Figure 3. Existing Methods on Human Brain Activities

K-Nearest Neighbour (k-NN) classifier is a feature vector and also a nonparametric
classifier. It helps to recognize very easily, execute and debug. The runtime
performance of k-NN is poor if the training data set is large, perceptive to inappropriate
57

Efficient method to improve human brain sensor activities using proposed neuroheadset device embedded with sensors: a
comprehensive study

and also contains redundant features, on complicated classification tasks outperformed
by other classification techniques (Lakshmi et al., 2014). The Hidden Markov Model
(HMM) is a prospective discrete state decoder that would be capable of obtaining the
higher level performance of discrete state decoding (Kao, Nuyujukian, Ryu, and Shenoy
2017).
From the above review based on the existing methods, we observed that NonInvasive EEG signal acquisition technique was highly used to acquire the human brain
signal. Independent Component Analysis performed better to lessen the artifacts and
noise from the signal data. Fast Fourier Transformation was mostly utilized to reduce
the poor signal quality. In previous, more classification techniques were used to classify
the signal data, but there is no existing improvement method to improve the signal.
There is also no improvement approach exist for the development of human brain
activities.
EXISTING FRAMEWORKS AND ANALYSIS
Previous methods were applied to solve the researchers identified problems for each
phase of the established framework. They, at first, established a framework with the
required methods for their research to solve their identified problem in the experiment
level. In this section, we reviewed the previous research framework based on the sensor
activities of the human brain. In previous, the human brain sensor activities related more
researches have done based on the researcher’s established framework. We have
demonstrated the review of existing frameworks based on human brain activities in
below:
Neurally and ocularly informed graph-based models were designed to search 3D
environments with a represented framework. In here, at first, EEG data, pupil area data,
and eye position data have collected in random route traversal. Then, Sensorium DBPA1 Amplifier was used to amplify the EEG data. 77 Ag/AgCl electrodes were also
considered to collect the data. After that, an Eye Link 1000 eye tracker was used to
collect eye position and pupil area data from one eye. In next, Principal Component
Analysis was considered to reduce the dimensionality of the feature space and avoid
rank deficiency issues. The Temporal independent component analysis was used to
identify components whose temporal patterns of activity were statistically independent
of one another. Within-Bin Classification and Cross-Bin Classification were applied to
classify the data. The Final search has done after Label Self-Tuning and Route Planning
(TSP Solver). In here, EEG gave independent information individually to allow a hybrid
classifier to generate more precise output, but the addition of an eye tracker in a BCI
system may induce material and calibration costs (Jangraw, Wang, Lance, Chang, and
Sajda 2014).
SVM classifier and Hjorth Parameters were considered to recognize the emotion
based on the acquired EEG signal with an established framework. In here, researchers,
at first, acquired the EEG signal data using non-invasive signal acquisition. Then, they
recorded, preprocessed and featured extracted the EEG signal data. Hjorth Parameters
was also used to convert EEG data in the time-frequency domain. Finally, SVM
classifier was used to classify the emotion recognition. In here, SVM classifier helped to
obtain the highest 70% accuracy for recognizing the emotion (Raja Majid Mehmood
and Lee 2015).
Design and implementation of Brain-Computer Interface for wheelchair control
were established using a recognized framework. This framework was constituted using

58

Rajib Chowdhury, A F M Saifuddin Saif /International Journal of Software Engineering and Computer Systems 5(1) 2019 52-66

several steps like EEG signal acquisition, preprocessing, feature extraction, translate
into specified command and control wheelchair movement using the command. In here,
the main advantage is that the average success rate is about 80% for controlling the
wheelchair (Turnip, Suhendra, Esti, and Sihombing 2017).
Brain signals classification in a rapid sequential visual appearance task was
improved using Active Learning (AL) has been established with a constitutional
framework. At first, researchers have recorded and analyzed the EEG signal data, and
then, they classified the signal data using Hierarchical Discriminant Component
Analysis (HDCA), Common Spatial Patterns (CSP), XDawn + Bayesian Linear
Discriminant Analysis (XDBLDA), Confidence, Merging Classifier Output, and CrossValidation (CV). Finally, they used the Active Learning and completed the statistical
analysis. Here, some additional information helped to estimate a better decision
boundary (Marathe, Lawhern, Wu, Slayback, and Lance 2016).
A compact and autoclavable system was demonstrated using researchers established
framework. This system was used to record the keen extracellular neural data and
monitor the human brain pressure. Then, they introduced a headstage design and the
system control unit design. Headstage design was included using mechanical design,
integrated amplifiers, and the pressure sensor. Headstage embedded with a strain-gauge
based pressure sensor in order to give the medical surgeon for measuring and
controlling the pressure exerted on the brain function during recordings. The system
control unit design embedded using the neural data processing system and head stage
positioning control system (Angotzi et al. 2015).
Spatial resolution improvement of EEG source reconstruction using swLORETA
was build using researchers established framework. In here, the findings, based on
sLORETA and swLORETA, helped to localize the dipole’s activity from the EEG
signal was introduced using semi-synthetic data (Boughariou, Jallouli, Zouch, Slima,
and Hamida (2015).
From the above review based on the framework, we observe that signal acquisition,
processing, and classification based frameworks were mostly used to solve the
researchers identified problems. So, in this research, we focused on methods based on
signal acquisition, processing, and signal improvement. But there is no existing method
to improve brain activities.
EXPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION
In this section, we reviewed the previous research experiment based on the sensor
activities of the human brain for identifying the best methods which perform better to
get the experimental highest result. In previous, human brain sensor activities related
more research have done based on the experimental analysis.
Thirty young males were appointed as individuals in the experiment for emotion
reorganization based on EEG signal using the SVM classifier. The EEG signals were
acquired using the 10/20 internationally recognized placement system and were also
recorded through Brain-Vision System using 18 electrodes. In here, EEGLAB Toolbox
was considered to preprocess the signals. Hjorth Parameters has been used to convert
the EEG data into a time-frequency domain. SVM classifier was used to classify the
emotion recognition. The highest 70 percent accuracy was obtained using SVM for two
emotions shown in Table 1 (Raja Majid Mehmood and Lee 2015).
Experiments used information on 14 channels while DEAP data includes EEG based
signals extracted from a 32-channel BCI device. GA-SVM is other state-of-the-art
59

Efficient method to improve human brain sensor activities using proposed neuroheadset device embedded with sensors: a
comprehensive study

features selection method used to compare with mRMR in order to tune the model.
Three kernel configurations were tested based on the SVM using different kernel
functions and degrees. Strength estimation of candidate solutions in the GA has utilized
the classification accuracy of the SVM. The results showed that the mRMR-based
feature selection method performed the most significant feature selection strategy than
GA-SVM for Arousal and Valence dimensions. The accuracy results have shown in
Table 2 (Atkinson and Campos 2016).
Table 1. Accuracy Results of the Emotion Groups with SVM Classifier
Emotion Groups

Emotion Contains

E5

Five Emotions including Calm,
Happy, Neutral, Scared and Sad.
Four Emotions including Calm,
Happy, Scared and Sad.
Three Emotions including Happy,
Neutral and Sad.
Two Emotion including Happy
and Sad

E4
E3
E2

Accuracy(%) with SVM
classifier
30
45
55
70

Table 2. Accuracy Results for Arousal and Valence Dimension with MRMR and GASVM Methods
Method Name

Accuracy (%) for Arousal

Accuracy (%) for Valence

mRMR

60.72

62.39

GA-SVM

56.69

53.46

Classifier Trainer has run with the corresponding data obtained as input; the
circumstance read through the data while feature vectors were extracted and write them
all into one pattern file for using it later. SVM was used to classify the data. They also
executed the testing step by running mi-CSP-4-online.xml in Open Vibe with adjusting
simple DSP filter by x-0.5. From the overall result, the percentage of success rates for
the six scenarios are 76.67%, 91.67%, 28.33%, 13.33%, 60%, and 53.33% for scenario
1 to 6 respectively shown in Table 3 (Fakhruzzaman, Riksakomara, and Suryotrisongko
2015).
In the experiment for detecting EEG signal based emotion using deep learning
network with principal component-based covariate shift adaptation, the efficiency was
evaluated using four experimental steps. In the first step, the emotion was recognized
using a deep learning network with a hundred concealed nodes in each layer (DLN100). The feature extraction was used to calculate all of the input features from EEG
signals based on DLN. In the second step, the number of concealed nodes has
concentrated to 50 (DLN-50) for analyzing the effects of hidden node size in the DLN.
In the third experimental step, the PCA was used to lessen the over-fitting problems
based on DLN. The last experimental step, the efficiency of the emotion recognition
system has enhanced by applying the covariate shift adaptation (CSA) concept to solve
the problem of nonstationary for EEG signals. The DLN-100 supported to get the
accuracy of 49.52% for the valence and 46.03% for the arousal dimension. The

60

Rajib Chowdhury, A F M Saifuddin Saif /International Journal of Software Engineering and Computer Systems 5(1) 2019 52-66

accuracy slightly decreased to 47.87% and 45.50% for DLN-50 shown in Table 4. The
PCA+CSA setup improved the accuracy by 5.55% and 6.53% for valence and arousal
dimension respectively. The classification accuracy for the DLN with PCA+CSA is
53.42% and 52.05% shown in Table 4 (Jirayucharoensak, Pan-Ngum, and Israsena
2014).
Table 3. Success Rate for the Different Testing Scenario with SVM Classifier
Scenario
Number
1

Movement of Left Hand

2

Movement of Right Foot

91.67

3

Movement of Left Hand and Right
Hand Simultaneously
Movement of Left Hand and Head
Nodding Simultaneously
Movement of Left Foot and Right
Foot Simultaneously
Movement of Left Foot and Head
Nodding Simultaneously

28.33

4
5
6

Testing Scenario

Success Rate (%) with SVM
Classifier
76.67

13.33
60.00
53.33

Table 4. Average Accuracy Results for Arousal and Valence Dimension with Different
Methods
Method

DLN-100

Accuracy
(%) for
Arousal
46.03

Accuracy (%)
for Valence

DLN-50

45.50

47.87

PCA

50.88

48.64

PCA+CSA

53.42

52.05

49.52

In the above review based on experiment, we observe that, in most cases, the
researcher focused on the signal acquisition, processing, and classification. In the
classification level, SVM classifier was mostly used to classify the data, but we have
required an improved technique which can help to improve the brain activities.
OBSERVATION AND DISCUSSION
We observe from the human brain sensor activities related to previous research, in
most cases, the EEG signal was acquired using a noninvasive acquisition technique
from the human brain. After signal acquisition, the data was recorded and preprocessed.
After preprocessing, the feature extraction was completed to reduce the noise, artifacts
and unwanted signal data. Brain-Vision System using 18 electrodes was performed
61

Efficient method to improve human brain sensor activities using proposed neuroheadset device embedded with sensors: a
comprehensive study

better for recording the signal data in previous research. ICA and PCA have mostly used
in case of preprocessing and feature extraction. In the signal classification level SVM,
k-NN, QDA, NB, NN contributed for getting the better performance, but SVM was used
to classify the data in most cases. Hjorth parameter was highly used to convert the EEG
signal into the time-frequency domain. But, it is the fact that, there is no improvement
method which can develop the human brain sensor activities. For that, in the future, we
will demonstrate a proposed improvement method to improve the human brain
activities.
From the above observation, we decide that non-invasive EEG signal achievement
method will be the better option to acquire the signal data. ICA can be used to lessen
artifacts and noise from the signal data. Fast Fourier Transformation can be considered
to reduce poor signal quality. In the future, we want to establish an efficient method
which can help to improve the sensor activities of the human brain. By using this
efficient method at first, we can acquire the EEG based brain signal data from the
selected individual subjects. For acquiring the signal, we can use a proposed
neuroheadset device which can contribute to acquire, modify and process the signal data
in the human brain swiftly and frequently. Here, we can use Brain-Vision System using
18 electrodes to record the signal data. After recording the signal data, ICA and PCA
can be used in case of preprocessing and feature extraction respectively. After that, we
can establish a method, with the help of artificial intelligence, which can modify the
brain signal into desired improve signal and finally this improved signal will help to
develop the human brain activity with the aid of a proposed improvement approach. The
overall methodology has been demonstrated to improve the brain activities in Table 5.
The overall process can proceed in the proposed neuroheadset device helps to improve
the human brain sensor activities. Several iterations may require at the experiment level.
The whole process will stop when the acquired signal match or nearly close to the
desired improve signal. Hopefully, this will be the greatest discoveries in science and
will also be the greatest advancement in the field of artificial intelligence.
Table 5. Overall Methodology for Human Brain Activities Improvement
Phase of Methodology

Methods

Signal Acquisition

Non- Invasive Signal
Acquisition

Signal Preprocessing

Independent Component
Analysis

Reduce Noise and Artifacts
from Signal.

Signal Feature Extraction

Fast Fourier
Transformation

Extract the Data of Poor
Signal Quality

Signal Improvement

Proposed Improvement
Method

Improve the Brain Signal.

Human Brain Activities
Improvement

Proposed Approach

Improve the Human Brain
Activities.

62

Purpose for the Each Phase
of Methodology
Acquiring the Human
Brain Signal.

Rajib Chowdhury, A F M Saifuddin Saif /International Journal of Software Engineering and Computer Systems 5(1) 2019 52-66

CONCLUSION
The main reason for this research is to introduce an efficient method by presenting a
critical analysis of the human brain sensor activities related to previous research. This
research demonstrated the investigation of brain sensor activities related to previous
research based on methods, framework and also experimental analysis to constitute an
efficient method. This efficient method will be the combination of all methods which
will be required to perform for improving the human brain sensor activities. From the
comprehensive analysis, we observe that non-invasive EEG based signal acquisition
technique was mostly used to acquire the brain signal data. Independent Component
Analysis was highly considered to pre-process the signal data. Fast Fourier
Transformation was highly recommended to extract the signal features from the brain
signal data. From this analysis, we have demonstrated, that inspect of more
classification techniques, there are no methods exist for improving the brain signal and
also for developing brain activities. For this, in future research, we will discuss a
proposed improvement method for developing the brain signal and will also discuss a
proposed approach for developing brain activities. The details framework will be
discussed to develop the human brain activities in future research. In future research, the
design of a proposed neuroheadset device will also be introduced to develop the human
brain activities by executing an efficient method. Due to the huge challenge to control
and improve the brain sensor activities of the human brain, this comprehensive analysis
will keep a contribution to establish an efficient method proceeds in a proposed
neuroheadset device help to receive, process, improve the human brain signal data and
also develop the human brain signal activities very swiftly and frequently.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This research immensely supported through knowledge sharing from ABERT
Research Team (AIUB Brain Engineering Research Team) in the Department of
Computer Science, American International University – Bangladesh (AIUB).
REFERENCES
Suzuki, S., Suzuki, Y., Baba, Y., & Furuta, K. (2005, 6-10 Nov. 2005). Human skill
and brain activity in machine operation. 31st Annual Conference of IEEE Industrial
Electronics Society, 2005. IECON 2005.
Shuangquan, W., Jie, Y., Ningjiang, C., Xin, C., & Qinfeng, Z. (2005, 13-15 Oct.
2005). Human activity recognition with user-free accelerometers in the sensor
networks. International Conference on Neural Networks and Brain.
Taruno, W. P., Baidillah, M. R., Sulaiman, R. I., Ihsan, M. F., Fatmi, S. E., Muhtadi,
A. H., . . . Aljohani, M. (2013, 7-11 April 2013). 4D brain activity scanner using
Electrical Capacitance Volume Tomography (ECVT). IEEE 10th International
Symposium on Biomedical Imaging.

63

Efficient method to improve human brain sensor activities using proposed neuroheadset device embedded with sensors: a
comprehensive study

Wijayasekara, D., & Manic, M. (2013, 6-8 June 2013). Human machine interaction
via brain activity monitoring. 6th International Conference on Human System
Interactions (HSI).
Angotzi, G. N., Baranauskas, G., Vato, A., Bonfanti, A., Zambra, G., Maggiolini,
E., . . . Fadiga, L. (2015). A Compact and Autoclavable System for Acute
Extracellular Neural Recording and Brain Pressure Monitoring for Humans. IEEE
Transactions
on Biomedical Circuits
and Systems,
9(1),
50-59.
doi:10.1109/tbcas.2014.2312794
Boughariou, J., Jallouli, N., Zouch, W., Slima, M. B., & Hamida, A. B. (2015).
Spatial Resolution Improvement of EEG Source Reconstruction Using swLORETA.
IEEE
Transactions
on
NanoBioscience,
14(7),
734-739.
doi:10.1109/tnb.2015.2477247.
Bastani, K., Kim, S., Z, Nussbaum, M. A., & Huang, W. (2016). Online
Classification and Sensor Selection Optimization With Applications to Human
Material Handling Tasks Using Wearable Sensing Technologies. IEEE Transactions
on Human-Machine Systems, 46(4), 485-497. doi:10.1109/thms.2016.2537747
Mehmood, R. M., Du, R., & Lee, H. J. (2017). Optimal Feature Selection and Deep
Learning Ensembles Method for Emotion Recognition From Human Brain EEG
Sensors. IEEE Access, 5, 14797-14806. doi:10.1109/access.2017.2724555.
Li, C., Yuan, H., Urbano, D., Cha, Y. H., & Ding, L. (2017, 11-15 July 2017). ICA
on sensor or source data: A comparison study in deriving resting state networks
from EEG. 39th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in
Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC).
Rushambwa, M. C., & Mythili, A. (2017, 16-18 March 2017). Impact assessment of
mental subliminal activities on the human brain through neuro feedback analysis.
Third International Conference on Biosignals, Images and Instrumentation (ICBSII).
Even-Chen, N., Stavisky, S. D., Pandarinath, C., Nuyujukian, P., Blabe, C. H.,
Hochberg, L. R., . . . Shenoy, K. V. (2018). Feasibility of Automatic Error Detectand-Undo System in Human Intracortical rain(2013);Computer Interfaces. IEEE
Transactions
on
Biomedical
Engineering,
65(8),
1771-1784.
doi:10.1109/tbme.2017.2776204

64

Rajib Chowdhury, A F M Saifuddin Saif /International Journal of Software Engineering and Computer Systems 5(1) 2019 52-66

Besio, W. (2017, Oct. 29 2017-Nov. 1 2017). Live demonstration: High-fidelity
brain electrical activity from automatic noise cancelling tripolar concentric ring
electrode sensor. IEEE SENSORS.
Hebbar, A. (2017, 3-5 Nov. 2017). Augmented intelligence: Enhancing human
capabilities. Third International Conference on Research in Computational
Intelligence and Communication Networks (ICRCICN).
Turnip, A., Suhendra, M. A., Esti, K. D., & Sihombing, P. (2017, 9-11 Aug. 2017).
Design of extraction method of SSVEP brain activity with IIR Chebyshev. 5th
International Conference on Instrumentation, Control, and Automation (ICA).
Rao, T. K., Lakshmi, M. R., & Prasad, T. (2012). An exploration on brain computer
interface and its recent trends. arXiv preprint arXiv:1211.2737.
Mehmood, R. M., & Lee, H. J. (2015). EEG based emotion recognition from human
brain using hjorth parameters and SVM. Int. J. Bio-Sci. Bio-Technol, 7(3), 23-32.
Atkinson, J., & Campos, D. (2016). Improving BCI-based emotion recognition by
combining EEG feature selection and kernel classifiers. Expert Systems with
Applications, 47, 35-41.
Gutmann, B., Mierau, A., Hülsdünker, T., Hildebrand, C., Przyklenk, A., Hollmann,
W., & Strüder, H. K. (2015). Effects of physical exercise on individual resting state
EEG alpha peak frequency. Neural plasticity, 2015.
Marathe, A. R., Lawhern, V. J., Wu, D., Slayback, D., & Lance, B. J. (2016).
Improved neural signal classification in a rapid serial visual presentation task using
active learning. IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation
Engineering, 24(3), 333-343.
Kao, J. C., Nuyujukian, P., Ryu, S. I., & Shenoy, K. V. (2017). A high-performance
neural prosthesis incorporating discrete state selection with hidden Markov models.
IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, 64(4), 935-945.
Fakhruzzaman, M. N., Riksakomara, E., & Suryotrisongko, H. (2015). EEG wave
identification in human brain with Emotiv EPOC for motor imagery. Procedia
Computer Science, 72, 269-276.

65

Efficient method to improve human brain sensor activities using proposed neuroheadset device embedded with sensors: a
comprehensive study

Lakshmi, M. R., Prasad, D. T., & Prakash, D. V. C. (2014). Survey on EEG signal
processing methods. International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer
Science and Software Engineering, 4(1).
Jangraw, D. C., Wang, J., Lance, B. J., Chang, S.-F., & Sajda, P. (2014). Neurally
and ocularly informed graph-based models for searching 3D environments. Journal
of neural engineering, 11(4), 046003.
Jirayucharoensak, S., Pan-Ngum, S., & Israsena, P. (2014). EEG-based emotion
recognition using deep learning network with principal component based covariate
shift adaptation. The Scientific World Journal, 2014.
Sulaiman, N., Cheng Chee, H., Hadi, A. A., Mustafa, M., & Jadin, S. (2014, 28-30
Nov. 2014). Interpretation of human thought using EEG signals and LabVIEW.
IEEE International Conference on Control System, Computing and Engineering
(ICCSCE 2014).
Arman, S. I., Ahmed, A., & Syed, A. (2012). Cost-effective eeg signal acquisition
and recording system. International Journal of Bioscience, Biochemistry and
Bioinformatics, 2(5), 301.
Karamizadeh, S., Abdullah, S. M., Manaf, A. A., Zamani, M., & Hooman, A.
(2013). An overview of principal component analysis. Journal of Signal and
Information Processing, 4(03), 173.
.

66

