Paper ID #9966

Introducing High School Students to Biomedical Engineering through Summer Camps
Dr. Mansoor Nasir, Lawrence Technological University
Dr. Mansoor Nasir received his B.Sc. in Electrical Engineering from University of Cincinnati and Ph.D.in
Bioengineering from University of California-Berkeley. Thereafter, he pursued his research interests first
as a postdoctoral associate and then as a Mechanical Engineer at the US Naval Research Laboratory
in Washington DC. He has several publications in the areas of microfluidics, chemical and biological
sensors and MEMS technology. He is also is passionate about engineering pedagogy and has attended
several workshops on using techniques that make the classroom instruction more engaging and effective.
Mr. Joseph Seta, Lawrence Technological University
Joseph Seta received his B.S in biomedical engineering from Lawrence Technological University in 2012.
While at Lawrence Technological University, served as the president of the Biomedical Engineering Society student chapter and is a member of Alpha Eta Mu Beta, the national biomedical engineering honor
society. He currently holds a research position at Wayne State University with interest in tissue engineering of the musculoskeletal system and clinically translatable technologies.
Dr. Eric G Meyer, Lawrence Technological University
Assistant Professor, Biomedical Engineering Program Director of Experimental Biomechanics Laboratory Dr. Meyer directs the Experimental Biomechanics Laboratory with the goal to advance experimental
biomechanics understanding. Recently, the EBL has partnered with ME and EE faculty to develop a
”Biorobotics” facility that provides practical, hands-on experiences to students focused around the topics
of sensing, perception, and control in next generation robotics. Meyer teaches Introduction to Biomechanics,Tissue Mechanics, Engineering Applications in Orthopedics and Foundations of Medical Imaging. He
has been an active member of the engineering faculty committee that has redesigned the Foundations of
Engineering Design Projects course that is required for all freshman in the College of Engineering at LTU.
He has published 31 peer-reviewed journal articles. At LTU, Meyer offers a number of outreach programs
for high school students and advises many projects for undergraduate students.

Page 24.809.1

c American Society for Engineering Education, 2014

Introducing High School Students to
Biomedical Engineering through
Summer Camps

Abstract
Summer camps provide many high school students their first opportunity to learn about various
disciplines in the engineering profession. A week-long summer camp in Biomedical Engineering
(BME) was used to introduce students to many of the topics that make up this discipline, and to
engage them in learning through hands-on activities, discussions and lab tours. The BME topic
areas that were covered in this summer camp were biomechanics, bioMEMS, medical imaging
and medical sensors. Of the students that responded in the exit surveys, 71% of student rated the
summer camp as good and 57% said that they will probably recommend the camp to others.
Summer camps and outreach days for high school students can be an effective means for
introducing young people to BME through tailored activities that used the resources available at
the host academic institution.

Introduction
Biomedical Engineering
Biomedical Engineering (BME) is a relatively recent addition at many traditional engineering
schools with an increasing number of academic institutions now offering a Bachelors of Science
(BS) degree in BME. The field of BME merges engineering disciplines such as mechanical,
chemical, and electrical engineering with biology-based disciplines of life sciences and
medicine. This merger was prompted by the need to improve procedures such as diagnostics,
therapeutics, noninvasive surgical techniques, patient rehabilitation and quantitative analyses for
biological problems [1]. The multidisciplinary nature of the field means that students in BME
need to develop a broad based set of skills and knowledge. They need the modeling and
quantitative skills of traditional engineers, but they also need the systems understanding
representative of a more biological approach.

Page 24.809.2

The broad range of topics covered in BME also make it difficult to present this discipline with
the similar cohesive image as that of other engineering fields. High school students may have
varied perceptions about what a BS in BME entails. This includes an unclear understanding of
the BME concentrations, the type of courses taken by BME undergraduates and the future jobs
filled by Biomedical Engineers. The heavy emphasis on scientific research and a lack of
understanding of the subtopics within BME also increases the confusion and may drive potential
students away from an otherwise, exciting and in-demand, field of study.

Summer Camps
Summer camps are offered by many academic institutions as a means to introduce the high
school students to areas and fields of study that they might be interested in. Universities and
programs also use these opportunities to showcase their academic institution and attract students
towards enrollment in the program [2, 3]. Many programs, especially the ones with week-long
resident aspect built into the camp, also allow the students to explore the general college lifestyle
and campus activities. Some programs may even hand out grades that can be used as transferable
credit. Other programs may focus on increasing female or minority participation in engineering.
Regardless of the specific circumstances, summer engineering program can be a great way to
introduce engineering fields and expand student understanding of the college experiences.
Setting up a summer camp curriculum from scratch may be a daunting task for BME faculty
members. Therefore, it is important to use the existing subject matter and facilities that are
available at the institution in order to reduce some of the burden and to ensure that the summer
camp participants are getting high quality introduction. Instructors can modify many of the
established teaching approaches and learning outcomes that are used for first year engineering
courses to also teach summer camps [4, 5]. They can readily use engagement tools such as
internet resources and simulations, but may need to carefully screen through many offerings to
find the most suitable techniques. Universities focused on engineering pedagogy can utilize
teaching methodologies to increase engagement during summer camps and focus activities to
highlight key areas of education and research.
Summer Camp in Biomedical Engineering
Lawrence Technological University (LTU) is a regional, private technical university that
emphasizes engineering pedagogy. The university offers many outreach activities where high
school students have an opportunity to learn and experience different engineering degrees
including summer camps. The goal of the summer camp in BME is to give the participants an
opportunity to explore the roles of biomedical engineers in ‘designing procedures and equipment
that assist in the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of disease and injury’. The participants have
varied backgrounds and motivations for attending the camp . As such, the technical information
must be inclusive and presented in a manner that is both engaging and informative.
Overview

Page 24.809.3

The camp enrollment was capped at 16 students. The overall strategy for the camp was to
include a variety of learning modalities and include videos, demonstrations, simulations, hand-on
activities and active learning techniques to increase student engagement [6, 7]. An oral survey at
the start of the Day 1 was indicative of the motivation and reason for interest in the camp. Most
students cited the desire to learn more about BME as the primary reason for joining the camp.
Many had little to no understanding of studying BME for an undergraduate degree and had been
prompted to consider it by family members due to the perceived employment opportunities.

Prosthetics were a popular area of interest among students. The camp was taught by three
Staff/Faculty members. Two days were dedicated for biomechanics and orthopedics related
activities, two for biosensing and medical device applications and one for biomedical imaging
including a trip to a radiology department at St. John Providence hospital, in Southfield,
Michigan. Table 1 shows all the topics and activities during the summer camp.
Day/
Time

Monday

Tuesday

Wednesday

Thursday

Friday

Theme

Introduction

Biomechanics

Biosensors

Imaging

MEMS

Activity:
Group Ice breaker

Presentation:
Anthropometry
Activity:
Body segment
measurement

Presentation:
Motion capture
Demonstration:
Kinect game Nike
Fit

Presentation:
Video analysis
Demonstration:
Kinovia 2D analysis
software

Activity:
Kinect and Wii
Balance Board

Activity:
Joints range of
motion
measurement

Presentation:
Orthopedic surgery
Simulation:
Edheads.com total
knee replacement
Activity:
Sawbones ACL
reconstruction

Presentation:
3D motion analysis
Demonstration:
Vicon motion
capture system
Activity:
3D human
movement analysis

Presentation:
Surgical techniques
Activity:
Endoscopy and
suturing skills

Presentation:
Foot center of
pressure
Activity:
Foot type
measurement

9 am

10 am

11 am

Presentation:
Biosensor
measurements
Activity:
ECG and effect of
exercise
Presentation:
Miniaturization of
medical devices
Demonstration:
Try a handheld
ECG monitor
Presentation:
Temperature
sensors
Activity:
Build and test a
temperature
sensor

Presentation:
Medical imaging
modalities
Demonstration:
MIMICS software

Presentation:
MEMS techniques
for miniaturization
Demonstration:
MEMS fabrication

Activity:
MIMICS surgical
simulation

Activity:
PDMS microfluidics
device fabrication
and testing

Presentation:
Microscopy and
ESEM
Demonstration:
ESEM with
microtester

Presentation:
Alternative
fabrication
methods
Activity:
Design a
microfluidic device

Presentation:
Blood pressure
sensors
Activity:
Name that device
Presentation:
EEG and brain/
computer interface
Activity:
EEG game contest
Presentation:
Stimulation
Discussion:
Detection vs.
Intervention

Tour:
Radiology
Department

Activity:
Take apart
pregnancy test

Tour:
Orthopedic
Research Lab

Activity:
Print CAD design
and test

Tour:
Surgical Simulation
Lab

Activity:
Poster session

Lunch

1 pm

2 pm

3 pm

Page 24.809.4

Table 1: The activities and topics presented have been broken down by each day. The table also
summarizes the time allocated for each activity.

The first day began with an icebreaker activity. Students were asked to rank medical devices in
the chronological order of invention, first individually, then in teams of two and four. This not
only allowed them to get to know each other but also helped them realize how group knowledge
exceeds the knowledge of an individual. These active collaborative learning activities are an
effective way to start group discussions and allowed the students in the summer camp to
immediately engage with their peers and instructor. Since summer camps run for a short time,
such activities are very beneficial to pave the way for presentation and open discussion of indepth topics.
Biomechanics and Motion Capture
Rehabilitation of athletes as well as use of modern day prosthetics is a popular entry point into
BME for many high school students. The technology used to restore mobility to amputees and
the advancements in biorobotics makes this area of study more accessible and relevant to new
students. It is also easier to communicate some of the future job opportunities where BME are
improving outcomes for people. The Experimental Biomechanics Lab is equipped with a Vicon
motion capture system and the topic was initially presented through the historical use of such
systems in gait analysis and automobile accident research. One student was prepared for 3D
motion analysis by attaching 39 retro-reflective markers to the body segments defined by the
Vicon “Plug-in Gait” biomechanical model (Fig. 1). After calibration, a number of motion trials
were recorded during various human movement activities, such as walking and jumping.

Figure 1: The motion capture system that the students used in the BME summer camp on Day 1
incorporates reflective markers that are monitored by eight infrared markers.
Page 24.809.5

The complexity of this activity can be modified based on student interest. For a more engaged
audience, 3D joint angles and linear velocity of the center of mass of the whole body can be

calculated using Vicon software. Other applications for 3D motion capture such as computer
generated animations in game design and movies can also be discussed. The students were also
given the opportunity to play games that used markerless optical motion tracking (Microsoft
Xbox Kinect®) and a ground reaction force measuring platform (Nintendo Wii Balance
Board®). The students particularly enjoyed and appreciated this activity. Learning by
observation is an excellent way to teach them about rudimentary biomechanics.
Anterior Cruciate Ligament (ACL) Reconstruction
Biomedical engineers work with clinicians to develop new medical devices and techniques that
improve the treatment of injury and disease. One example is in the field of Orthopedics, which
has an obvious connection to biomechanical design of total joint replacements and fixation
devices that improve healing. The students were given the task go online to find an example of
an Orthopedic company that produces one such device. They were encouraged to focus on the
theme of ACL reconstruction surgery techniques. Next, they shared the device that they
researched with the rest of the students and discussed the benefits as well as possible
improvements. An online virtual knee replacement surgery demonstration (Edheads.com) gave
the students an introduction to the steps in an orthopedic surgery. Using Sawbones model of a
knee joint, the students performed an in-class ACL reconstruction with their group (Fig. 2)

Figure 2: The images show the tools and materials used to simulate ACL reconstruction. The
close up on the right shows a fixated knee after the activity.

Page 24.809.6

Students learned how to diagnose an ACL injury by measuring the anterior-posterior laxity
displacement and graft options that are available to match the normal stiffness and strength
properties of the natural ACL. They used two of the fixation methods to attach the graft to the
bones on either side of the knee. Finally, they checked the outcome of their surgery by retesting
the laxity and also whether their knee retained its normal ranges of motion in flexion and

extension. This group hands-on activities was popular although some of the students had to be
instructed on safe usage of handheld drill.
Anthropometry Activity and Discussion
Basic anatomical terminology was introduced and related to human normal anthropometry. The
students measured the segment lengths of their group members and used a 2D video analysis
software program (Kinovia) to measure the maximum angles of each joint. This activity was
used to highlight the slight variations in human anatomy and requirement for biomedical
engineered devices and techniques to work with these variations. The reception for this activity
varied across different groups. Some students did not have any experience with using technical
software and the learning curve for 2D analysis disinterested them.
Biosensor and Medical Devices Introduction
Sensors are incorporated in all kinds of devices and technology. Biological and chemical sensors
are used in many industries and are finding increasing use in personalized medical devices. At
the start of day three, students were engaged in a discussion about the type of sensors they had
interacted with since the time they woke up that morning. Students were asked if they had been
an ER or a hospital and can name some of the routinely measured physiological parameters. The
ensuing discussion was used to introduce important components of electrophysiological systems.
A brief introduction to personalized medical devices was also given. Students were given seven
mystery devices and were asked to work in groups to identify the device functionality. Some of
the devices used were glucose sensors, medication cartridges, TempaDot® temperature sensor
and a mock pacemaker. The number of devices in this activity can be varied and the student
interaction can be promoted through a discussion of ideas such as device construction,
marketing, safety and packaging.
Measuring Vital Signs

Page 24.809.7

The Biosensor lab at LTU is equipped with BIOPAC Student Lab® which is a multifunctional
system that includes hardware and software for life science and engineering education. The
system was used to demonstrate the measurement of electrocardiogram (ECG). Students were
divided in groups of three and given the task of measuring their ECG during rest and after
performing various exercises. They observed the PQRST waveform synonymous with heart
functionality and the increase in heart rate after exercise. The results were compared among
different groups and also with that of a handheld ECG device that uses dry electrodes. Students
realized the pros and cons of personalized devices and the tradeoff between convenience and
accuracy. Students also used the BIOPAC system to measure blood pressure and a pulse
oximeter to measure blood oxygen level. In such activities, any irregularities in measurement can
be used to discuss proper device usage and the importance of clear device operating instructions.
The critical importance of accurate measurements should be reiterated in such activities. Glucose
monitor can be used as an example of a ubiquitous biosensor where accuracy is of paramount

importance. The observable change in heart rate with exercise promoted student engagement,
making the activity interesting and informative for the participants.
Building a Sensor
Several sensor platforms were considered and in the end a temperature sensor based on a simple
thermistor was chosen. The reason for this was because of the ease of the electronic circuit and
the high sensitivity of the temperature element. Students were provided written descriptions of
the procedure which included pictorial identification of different parts such as the one shown in
Fig. 3

a

b
Fig. 3: a Each sensor kit had six components. A picture was included for easier identification. b
The procedure also included a simple circuit diagram.
The procedure also included instructions on how to connect the components together and
measure the voltage across the thermistor which can be translated into a temperature using a
provided calibration curve. The students were provided with a formula that had to be
algebraically manipulated to find the answer for the unknown RT. Once this value had been
found, they could then use the lookup table or the calibration curve to find the temperature value.
The activity required them to measure the ambient temperature as well the change when holding
the thermistor in between the fingers. They were also given a bulb, a digital and a strip
thermometer to measure and compare the temperatures using these different types of sensors.

Page 24.809.8

The students did not have any problems with identifying the components and then following
instructions to create the simple voltage divider circuit despite the fact that most students were
unfamiliar with electrical circuits and the current and voltage relationship (Ohm’s law).
However, the student groups had considerable difficulty in solving for the unknown RT value in
the provided equation. Almost everyone had to be instructed on algebraic analysis which resulted
in some student frustration as well as extra time than what had been allocated in the original
plan. This can be avoided by providing the students with a EXCEL® worksheet which
automatically converts their measured resistance value to a temperature value.

The unexpected outcome highlighted the hesitation faced by many high school students to tackle
real world problems that may require mathematical analysis. Most students liked the activity, as
indicated by exit feedback forms, demonstrating that they did not shy from a challenge.
However, problem-based learning (PBL) [8] and application of core mathematical knowledge to
real world problems is something that needs to be emphasized even at the secondary education
level.
Understanding Brainwaves and Mindwave® Activity
Continuing with the theme of physiological measurements, the topic of electroencephalogram
(EEG) and Neuroscience was introduced in a presentation. This topic was chosen because the
state-of-the-art research in this area is seemingly stuff out of science fiction movies. Mind control
and brain waves to control mechanical robots or spaceships is a popular theme in media. More
recently, using brain waves to play videogames has gained a lot of attention, with some basic
game offering already on the market. EEG related neurotechnology is a prime example where
physicians work in close collaboration with engineers to come up with solutions to understand
the human control of bodily functions and activities. Recent studies by research groups at Brown
University as well as the new BRAIN initiative have garnered a lot of interest in this area.
These presentation of the topic included videos of such technology in action. The enabling
technology that allows patients in locked-in states to control robotic arms using pure thoughts
has a big wow factor. Such groundbreaking studies can serve as a great way to introduce BME to
students who are interested in engineering but are also motivated by the desire to serve the
humanity. The discussion on this topic included the complexity of understanding the most
sophisticated computer known i.e. the brain. The topics of patient safety and using innovative
medical devices to accurately read and decipher thoughts were a natural progression in the
discussion.
The activity for this section included using two commercially available brainwave toys, the
Mindwave® and Mindflex®. The Mindwave® works with a computer interface and using a
simple single-electrode headset, the user can monitor concentration or relaxation (Fig. 4c). The
Mindflex® toy can be used in battle-mode where the users can perform certain actions by
exercising mental concentration. Many of the EEG toys are not very expensive (Mindwave®
sells for about $100) and make it easier for students to understand sophisticated concepts.

Page 24.809.9

Students were highly interested in trying each of the toy and group members eagerly battled
against each other. The groups were given half an hour to test the effects of different activities on
human concentration and the ensuing EEG signal. Many groups realized the inaccurate response
of these toys and this spurred a healthy discussion about data interpretation. Still many students
readily offered their own suggestions on how to increase concentration or relaxation. Faculty and
staff volunteers interacted with groups during the activity and emphasized the intersection of
medicine and engineering as a recurring theme in BME.

Fig. 4: Some of the commercially available EEG measuring devices and electrode setup. a IMEC
Wireless EEG b. StatNet Disposable EEG c. Neurosky Mindwave d. MicroEEG e. Emotiv f.
NeuroFocus
Miniaturization, Microfluidics and Lateral Flow Assay Activity
An important thrust in medical devices is miniaturization and personalization. Glucose sensors
are an excellent example of this trend where the diagnostics are taking place at the point-of-care.
One area where this trend has really taken off is in sports health and quantized self. There are
many products that are being marketed by the traditional sport manufacturers to provide a wealth
of physiological information such as user heart rate, blood pressure and temperature to name a
few. These devices, although not regulated, are in common use and can be easily incorporated in
summer camps to talk about miniaturization of medical devices. This topic was presented to the
students and the pros and cons of having such technology readily available were discussed. Some
of the students had not only heard about these devices but owned them and contributed to the
conversation with their personal observations.

Page 24.809.10

Using quantified self as a launching point, the critical components of medical devices and
sensors were discussed through examples. Students engaged with the faculty about what
components could be miniaturized and how this could be achieved. Analogies for reduction in
size of other popular devices such as modern computers and cellphones can be easily used to
hone in on this point. After introducing the topic of microfluidics, students were asked about the

need for pumping fluids and the analogous components in human circulation system. Most
students were able to identify the pump (heart) and piping (arteries, veins, capillaries) and
appreciated the problems with mixing and diffusion at slow flow rates. Students were taken to a
MEMS sensor lab where they observed laminar flow of different colored dyes in an H-cell flow
channel. Two phase flow was demonstrated by creating micro air droplets of interspersed in
water. A physical demonstration can work wonders in correcting perceptions about scale and size
of interest in micron scale devices.
Students were given a pregnancy kit ($1 each) and asked to take it apart. A question was posed
to them about what was the pumping mechanism in the device. Lateral flow assays (LFA) were
then presented as a solution to miniaturization of pumping scheme by using the wicking power
of absorbent substrates. Students used water solutions with dyes to observe how the solution
wicked through the test strips. The conversation was extended by presentation of state-of-the-art
LFA which allow detection of serious diseases such as Malaria and Cyptococcal Antigen. The
activity related to this discussion asked them to create their own LFA and then observe the
laminar flow and mixing at microscale. Student groups were given access to simple graphing
software and instructions to make the boundaries of simple Y-shape channel designs. They were
also given the liberty to draw/pick two designs of their own liking. These designs were printed
and the channels were prepared using a procedure highlighted in the literature [9]. Thereafter,
students used different colored dye solutions to observe the flow and mixing between colors.
Many students chose to write their names for their own designs and this personalized element
increased their interest in the activity. They were also able to take these designs with them which
not only served as keepsakes from the summer camp. This activity was received enthusiastically
and was ranked near the top in exit surveys.
Imaging Modalities and Student Hospital Tour

Page 24.809.11

Medical Imaging is another area within BME which can be made accessible to students as
instruments such as CT-scans, MRIs and X-Rays that are commonly found in hospital settings.
Many students know about these instruments through their personal hospital visits. Staff
members introduced these imaging modalities through presentation to the student at the start of
the day 4. The students were given a chance to use MIMICS software which renders 3D designs
and models of anatomical parts using 2D slices. BME department at LTU has a licensed version
of the software and the system is used in the instruction of Imaging and Biomechanic classes.
Students were informed how similar software can be used to enhance the understanding and
interface between different anatomical features and can assist physicians during surgical
procedures. The software comes preloaded with skull, hip joint and knee renderings and students
were able to observe the intricacies of design by dragging and rotating the models.
Accompanying presentation was important in helping them understand how computer generated
models can be used in conjunction with actual images to get a better understanding of injury and
disease states.

LTU has access to an Environmental Scanning Electron Microscope (ESEM) that was bought
through and NSF MRI grant. While ESEMs are not common tools for diagnosis in medical
facilities, they do provide high magnification images and allow observation of minute details.
After the morning presentation and software demo, student groups were shown the ESEM and a
live demonstration of pulling apart a strand of hair was given. Similar activities can be done with
other imaging instruments based on access and availability, focusing on need to image noninvasively with high resolution. Biomedical Engineers are continually working with
technologists to enhance instrument functionality by improving the software and hardware.
There are many online resources and electronic media that can be included in accompanying
presentation and discussions. Students were also taken for a tour to a radiology facility at St.
John, Providence Hospital in close vicinity of LTU where a resident radiologist showed them
commercial MRIs and CT-scanners. The tour consisted of brief stops at multiple imaging
modalities. Students were able to observe the basic components of an X-ray and MRI machines.
They also saw the operation of an ultrasound device as the radiologist demonstrated the device
usage on a student volunteer from the summer camp. The physician explained surgeries
performed at the hospital and how the imaging devices were used to assist in these surgeries. The
students made a final stop at an orthopedic research lab and also observed simulation dummies
which are used to teach medical interns.
The hospital tour was one of the highest ranked activities. As a part of the summer camp, tours to
manufacturing and hospital facilities not only break the monotony of presentation/activity
combination but can also give the participants a chance to observe usage of many of the
engineered products. Tours and technology-in-action type activities allow students to better
understand the future job opportunities and required skills for success and are therefore highly
recommended.
General Observations
•

In order to increase student engagement, it is necessary to include open-ended questions
during presentations and inviting student responses. For example, a simple slide comparing
fluidic architecture and desire for equal flow rates garnered correct responses from most
students (Fig 5).

Page 24.809.12

Fig. 5: Students were asked which fluidic channel will have equal flow in all legs and why?

•

•

•
•
•
•
•

A combination of presentation and activity should be used in summer camps. The
presentations should not last longer than 15-20 minutes and should be interspersed with
open-ended questions and techniques to increase discussion type format.
The activities should focus on one or two key concepts as including any more tends to only
confuse the students. The instructions for activities should avoid too many scientific
terminologies.
The instructors and faculty members should take the time to explain the procedure for
activities and should work with groups while students perform the activity.
Groups should include ideally two and no more than three students as any more inadvertently
cause some of the students to disengage during the activity.
The presentations and activities should include a variety of media and demonstrations and
references to popular science are well appreciated.
The activities requiring simulations and computer demonstrations should be tested
beforehand to avoid technical difficulties which can disrupt the flow and distract the students.
The tours work very well and should be included during the middle of the week to break the
monotony of lab activities and presentations.

Student Feedback
At the end of the summer camp, students were asked to rate the overall satisfaction with the
camp and if they would recommend it to others. Of the students that responded in the exit
surveys, 71% of student rated the summer camp as good and 57% said that they will probably
recommend the camp to others. The students were also surveyed about the specific hands-on
activities and provided vital feedback about the ones that were popular and the ones which were
not well-received. The popularity of a specific activity is both indicative of student interest as
well as the communication and instructions provided for the activity.

Page 24.809.13

Figure 6: The results of how the activities were received by the BME summer camp participants.

Figure 7: The results of interest in the different topics presented during the BME summer camp.
In our assessment, some activities can be made more informative by improving the set up
instructions (Temperature Sensor) while others require better setup presentations (Body Segment
Measurement and Foot Arch Measurement – data not shown). The assessment results indicated
that the specific activities affect the student interest in the topics discussed. When the students
found the activity interesting, their interest in the corresponding topic also increased. Generally
speaking, activities that allowed personalization (Microfluidics) or included gamification (EEG,
Motion Capture) were more popular. In future, we will employ surveys at the start and end of
each day to better gauge the effectiveness of the different activities.
Conclusion
Ultimately, the success of activities in a BME summer camp lies in providing a glimpse of the
basic engineering design tools and instrumentation that are used in medical settings. The purpose
of these camps is also to generate enthusiasm in the participants to pursue a postsecondary
degree in an emerging engineering field that aims at enhancing the quality of life. Obviously, the
activity for each topic cannot be a game but the summer camp instructors and coordinators
should aim to strike a balance between presentation and activity. By choosing a host of different
topics, the camp can not only cater to students with different interests and backgrounds but will
provide the participants with a broad overview of BME, which is the primary reason for most
students attending such a camp.

Page 24.809.14

References
[1] LaPlaca MC, Newstetter WC and Yoganathan AP, Problem Based Learning in Biomedical
Engineering Curricula, Front. In Educ. Conf., 2001, Oct 10-13th, Las Vegas, NV
[2] Elam M, Donham B, Soloman SR, An Engineering Summer Camp for Underrepresented
Students from Rural School Districts, 2012, Journal of STEM Education, Vol 13, No 2
[3] Dave V, Blasko D, Holliday-Darr K, Kremer JT, Edwards R, Ford M, Lenhardt L and Hido
B, Re-enJEANeering STEM Education: Math Options Summer Camp, 2010, The Journal of
Technology Studies, Vol. 36 Issue 1, p35
[4] Froyd JE, Wankat PC, and Smith KA, Five Major Shifts in 100 Years of Engineering
Education, 2012, Proc. of the IEEE, 100, 1334-57
[5] Fairweather J., Linking Evidence and Promising Practices in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) Undergraduate Education, Paper presented at the
National Research Council’s Workshop Linking Evidence to Promising Practices in STEM
Undergraduate Education, October, Washington, DC. Available
athttp://www7.nationalacademies.org/bose/Fairweather_CommissionedPaper.pdf.
[6] Smith KA, Douglas TC, Cox MF, Supportive Teaching and Learning Strategies in STEM
Education 2009, New Direction for Teaching and Learning, no. 117
[7] Smith KA, Sheppard, SD, Johnson DW, and Johnson RT, Pedagogies of Engagement:
Classroom-Based Practices, 2005, Journal of Engineering Education
[8] Dochy, F., Segers, M., Van den Bossche, P., and Gijbels, D. (2003). Effects of problembased learning: A meta-analysis. Learning and Instruction, 13, 533-568.
[9] Carrilho E., Martinez A.W., Whitesides G.M., Understanding Wax Printing: A Simple
Micropatterning Process for Paper-Based Microﬂuidics. 2009, Anal. Chem. 81, 7091–7095

Page 24.809.15

