ANALYSIS OF EEG SIGNAL FOR USING IN BIOMETRICAL
CLASSIFICATION
Roman Zak, Jaromir Svejda, Roman Senkerik and Roman Jasek
Department of Informatics and Artificial Intelligence
Tomas Bata University in Zlin
Nam T.G. Masaryka 5555, 760 01 Zlin, Czech Republic.
E-mail: {rzak, svejda, senkerik, jasek}@fai.utb.cz

KEYWORDS
Brain Computer Interface, EEG, Signal processing,
Neural network classification,
ABSTRACT
Aim of this article is to clarify the potential use of EEG
signal in modern information age. The basic principle of
Brain Computer Interface (BCI) lies in the connection
of brain waves with output device through some
interface. BCI technology represents a communication
interface between brain and computer. To sense electric
signal from the brain, it is usually used an equipment
based on the last results of scientific research on neurotechnology. Communication is provided by wireless
transmission through which the signal is transmitted
from the equipment to personal computer. Then the
signal is analysed, processed and used for finding
appropriate classification parameters.
INTRODUCTION
Many scientific disciplines deal with the human brain;
for example numerical neuroscience, neuro-informatics,
informatics or medicine. All of them bring theories,
which could explain different brain activities.
Numerical neuroscience provides mathematical and
biophysical models, which are able to model basic
processes in neurons and neural networks. The main
goal of neuro-informatics is systematic development of
database intended to collect information such as brain
morphology, brain parts anatomy and their functional
connection, brain electrophysiology, brain states
obtained with magnetic resonance and their integration.
Further, it seeks to develop tools for modelling, where
the aim is the most accurate emulation of brain activity.
In Informatics, complex networks are highly suitable to
model a complex system among which the brain
includes. The contribution of medicine is undisputable
especially in brain anatomy research.
The human brain is a complex system, which is an
object of our research. It is regarded as the most
complex system in the universe. The modern science is
currently attempting to understand the complex
interconnection among individual parts of the brain
(Sporns et.al. 2005). There are many publications,
which deal with description of the brain (Adeli 2010;
Damasio 1995; Sporns et al. 2005).
Proceedings 28th European Conference on Modelling and
Simulation ©ECMS Flaminio Squazzoni, Fabio Baronio,
Claudia Archetti, Marco Castellani (Editors)
ISBN: 978-0-9564944-8-1 / ISBN: 978-0-9564944-9-8 (CD)

Currently there are many known applications of BCI
technology, but not enough at each particular field of
study. Signal that is sensed from the brain is the key
element in the BCI model; therefore the design of an
appropriate algorithm for processing of the signal is the
most discussed part of BCI model structure (Schalk et
al. 2004).
Invasive methods of sensing the brain activity could
provide very accurate data, but it is not both technically
and user friendly; thus, it would not be further
mentioned in this article. On the other hand, more
accessible non - invasive methods can obtain relatively
weak signal with amplitude ranging from units to
hundreds of microvolts. Moreover, the signal is also
prone to noise elements. Another disadvantage of this
method is a summation of neuron signals; thus, obtained
data are referenced to a specific group of neurons. The
brain itself is composed of several parts, without which
his activity could not be possible. One of its basic
structural parts is a neuron. The neuronal cells are
characterized by the fact that electrical activity is
carried out in them. These cells communicate with each
other by electrical signals. According to the last
estimate, there are approximately 1011 neurons in the
brain. Every one of them is connected with thousands of
other neurons. The main source of EEG signal is an
electric activity of synapse - dendrites membrane
located in the surface layer of the cortex. Each active
synapse dispatches electromagnetic pulse to the
environment during excitation. Due to the high number
of these pulses, it is difficult to locate their source by
means of multichannel sensor on the skin. This issue
could be compared to full amphitheatre, in which there
are chanting people and the task is to recognize from
outside, which specific group of fans shouts. A different
perspective on this issue may be such that the aim is to
identify uniqueness of the signal for each individual
subject. In the example shown above, it is as we would
like to recognize the type of the stadium by the mass of
chanting people. For example, there is noticeable
difference between hockey and tennis fans. The
biometric signatures are different for each creature on
the planet Earth.
METHODS
There are several approaches for sensing brain activity.
The most widely used is EEG technology, which

belongs among the non – invasive methods. Devices
based on EEG technology provide signal with very low
voltage amplitude, because the signal has to pass
through the relatively low conductive skull. The
amplitude ranges from tens to hundreds microvolts.

based on its position on the head: AF3, F7, F3, FC5, T7,
P7, O1, O2, P8, T8, FC6, F4, F8, and AF4. Sampling
frequency of the neuroheadset is 2048 Hz. More
information about neuroheadset can be found in
(Emotiv 2012).

Sensing the brain activity
Recently, we have used Emotiv EPOC neuroheadset to
obtain EEG signal from the human brain. Sensing of
EEG by Emotiv EPOC neuroheadset has a number of
advantages, because it already involves solved
elementary issues in the processing of the measured
signal. Due to this fact, it is not necessary to operate
with raw data. It depends on the further usage of the
data. Although the spectrum of this data could be used
in many applications, it is not simple to understand the
entire significance of the whole signal even if the
proportion of the noise is minimal. This technology has
the greatest expansion and certainly also the priority
significance in diagnosis of various diseases in
medicine (Adeli 2010).
Emotiv Corporation developed personal brain computer interface for human – computer interaction
using neuro-technology, which is based on processing
of electromagnetic waves occurring in human brain.
The interface has wide range of possible applications;
for example in interactive games, intelligent adaptive
environment, audio visual art and design, medicine,
robotics and automotive industry. Moreover, it can be
deployed in large amount of scientific research.
Emotiv EPOC neuroheadset (Figure 1) measures a
signal wirelessly transferred to common personal
computer. It is a device, which has a set of sensors
intended for sensing the activity produced by human
brain. Traditional EEG devices requires the use of
conductive pasta to improve the conductivity between
electrodes and hairs. On the other hand, the
neuroheadset do not need any additional tools. It has 14
high resolution sensors, which are placed on optimal
positions on the human head (Figure 2).

Figure 1: Emotiv EPOC neuroheadset (Emotiv 2012)
Moreover, it also includes gyroscope for determinate
the position in the area. Each channel has its own label

Figure 2: Placement of electrodes of Emotiv EPOC
neuroheadset
Emotiv provide basic software set containing many
tools, which can be used for recording various signals
such as electric potential from all 14 sensors, power
spectrum of individual EEG channels in real time and
rotational acceleration of the head in horizontal and
vertical axis using data from gyroscope. All of these
outputs are shown in graphs. Data are also available in
raw form, which can be used for further analysis. If it is
required special functionality, which is not provided by
native software, it is desirable to develop own
application using Emotiv SDK (Software Development
Kit).
Native software consists of three classification suites.
Each of them enables the usage of algorithm developed
by Emotiv. First of them is Expressive suite, which
contains identification system for recognition of facial
expression such as smile, eyewink, etc. The muscle
signals are used for this purpose. The sources for these
signals are obtained by sensors, which are located
around the face.
The second suite can be used to measure and
identification of emotional state; for example
nervousness, alertness, concentration, etc. Therefore, it
is called Affective suite. Muscle signals and ocular
signals are filtered by specially designed filters; thus,
identification algorithm uses clear brain signal.
The last suite is called Cognitive. This classification
mode uses whole measured signal, which contains both
clear brain signal and muscle signal. Classification
algorithm is based on artificial intelligence methods.
Type and structure of applied neural network is
patented by Emotiv Corporation; therefore, the specific
information about the algorithm is protected.
If it is required other processing of the signal than the
native software allows, it may be processed by another
software application.
Measured raw data can be subjected to offline analysis
to research.

Processing the brain activity

RESULTS

If person could be recognized by custom EEG traces, it
would mean that the person could be uniquely identified
by EEG signal and it could bring new ways of
authorization routines. Critical phase lies in signal
classification. Even if the meaning of both the
waveform and the signal content is not very important
for classification purposes, there is another issue which
have to be considered. EEG device provides large
amount of data which has to be effectively and quickly
processed in order to perform correct classification of
the subject from the signal in real time. Classification
tasks could be realized by using neural networks.
However, it is difficult to predict, which neural network
could use its cognitive potential for classification task
mentioned above (Hazrati and Erfanian 2010).
Investigation of the most appropriate classifier requires
testing of many subjects. Furthermore, it is necessary to
find algorithm with the shortest response time with
respect to the credibility of obtained output. Another
issue is to determinate which output is suitable. There
could be considered the theory of large numbers; thus,
maximum possible number of subjects needs to be
tested. Therefore, it is more important to select key
parameters of the signals that are different for each
person. Even though the parameters are different for
different people, the question remains whether the
parameters remain constant in different time frames for
the same person.

Idle state of mind was chosen as the optimal for the
measurement. The relative idle state is such that the
EEG signal does not contain any artefacts. Some
artefacts are already filtered out before the signal
processing. That mostly includes elements in signal that
related to some physical responses such as eye blinking,
motion and muscle activity, heartbeat etc. Furthermore,
external artefacts interfering the signal are primarily
eliminated in analog-to-digital conversion.
In order to perform classification, it has to be set unique
characteristics of the signal (hereinafter called as
classification parameters). That task is the first step of
our research. The most important is to find appropriate
classification parameters. However, the device returns
fourteen channels with various amplitudes. Therefore, it
is necessary to normalize the signal by applicable
algorithm. This procedure count with sampling
frequency of the neuroheadset, which is 128 Hz.
Prepared set of data is ready for another mathematical
or statistical analysis. Firstly, it was performed a
correlation analysis between channels of the first
subject’s EEG signal. All combinations of signals were
tested in order to find which pair of channels influence
each other. Further aim of the analysis was to find out
whether another subjects have different relations
between the channels. Correlation was calculated for
each compared pair of channels.

Table 1: Example of data analysis

Further, the same correlation threshold is set for all
pairs. Then it is count the number of similarities moving
over the threshold. Obtained value is converted into
percentage (marginal match). Course of marginal match
for 5000 samples is shown in Table 1. It can be
observed that the marginal match is different for each
subject. Even if the marginal match could be one of the
appropriate classification parameters, it is necessary to
confirm all complex biometric links on higher number
of subjects. That remains as another object of our
further research. However, good result is obvious from
the waveform of the signal with the highest correlation.
Further possible conclusion from data presented in
Table 1 is that signals seem different even if they all
had relatively similar initial conditions including closed
eyes, no muscle motions and also the same time range.
Further, it was investigated how the correlation changes
with variety length of examined data. Figure 3 depicts
three subjects compared in various offsets. The offset‘s
length changes from 1000 to 30 000 with step 1000. It
seems that a larger amount of data slightly decreases the
correlation.

Figure 3: Dependence of correlation value to sample
length
DISCUSSIONS
Human brain is the most complex known system in the
universe. Study of its activity is extremely important
mainly due to the more precise diagnosis of brain
diseases and their treatment. Furthermore, acquired
knowledge could be used in modern technologies with
BCI systems, where an interaction between brain and
computers appears.
We are currently performing the measurement of the
EEG signal in our research. Our aim is to discover
interesting regularities in the EEG signal waveform,
which could contribute to the improvement of current
approaches of brain activity simulation. Moreover, these
regularities could be used to recognize some specific
states of the brain, which can be then used to control the
software or equipment connected to the computer.

There are many approaches to analysis of data.
Moreover, EEG signal belongs to group of biometric
signals which are usually very complex. The question
remains whether it is possible to involve significance of
all characteristics and signal history of EEG signal to
classification process.
Biometrical data are typically represented as an image
or a quantification of measured physiological or
behavioural characteristics. As these data should refer to
very complex human behaviour or describe very
precisely physiological characteristic (typically iris
scan, fingerprint, palm vein image, hand scan, voice,
walk pattern etc.) these data can easily became very
large and hard to process. For this reason a modern
ways of data processing and classification are applied
for biometrical data. The leading method is the usage of
neural networks (Tangkraingkij 2009).
Correlation analysis demonstrates that there are
relations between individual EEG channels. Further, it
shows that the highest value of correlation was always
found between neighbouring electrodes. Subject 1 has
the highest correlation between electrode AF3 and F3
which are both located in frontal region of the brain. On
the other hand, the subject 2 has the highest correlation
between electrodes O2 and P8, which are located in rear
regions of the brain. Both subject were measured in the
idle state of mind. That behaviour of the subject’s
brains should be proven on more measurements of the
same subjects. If the behaviour remained the same, it
would mean, that it could be set as another classification
parameter.
From obtained results we concluded that our future
research could possibly answer the question which
statistical characteristics are the most suitable for usage
in classification algorithm based on neural network. For
example, difference between individual subjects is the
feature, which could be used as another classification
parameter. Results described in this article are the first
part of future extensive research.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by Internal Grant Agency of
Tomas Bata University under the project No.
IGA/FAI/2014/31; further it was supported by
European Regional Development Fund under the
project CEBIA-Tech No. CZ.1.05/2.1.00/03.0089.
REFERENCES
Adeli H. 2010. Wavelet-Chaos-Neural Network Models for
EEG-Based Diagnosis of Neurological Disorders. In: Kim
T-h, Lee Y-h, Kang B-H, Ślęzak D (eds) Future
Generation Information Technology, vol 6485. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science. Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
pp 1-11. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-17569-5_1.
Damasio, H. 1995. Human brain anatomy in computerized
images. Oxford university press.

Emotiv | EEG System | Electroencephalography. 2012.
(online).
Available
from:
http://www.emotiv.com/index.php.
Hazrati, Mehrnaz Kh. a Abbas Erfanian. 2010. An online
EEG-based brain–computer interface for controlling hand
grasp using an adaptive probabilistic neural network.
DOI: 10.1016/j.medengphy.2010.04.016.
Schalk, G., D.J. Mcfarland, T. Hinterberger, N. Birbaumer a
J.R. Wolpaw. 2004. BCI2000: A General-Purpose BrainComputer
Interface
(BCI)
System.
DOI:
10.1109/TBME.2004.827072.
Sporns, O., Tononi, G., Kötter, R. 2005. The human
connectome: a structural description of the human brain.
PLoS computational biology, 2005, 1.4: e42.
Tangkraingkij, P.; Lursinsap, C.; Sanguansintukul, S.;
Desudchit, T. 2009. Selecting Relevant EEG Signal
Locations for Personal Identification Problem Using ICA
and Neural Network, Computer and Information Science.
ICIS 2009. Eighth IEEE/ACIS International Conference
on,On page(s): 616 – 621

AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES
ROMAN ZAK was born in the Czech Republic, and went to
the Tomas Bata University in Zlin, where he
studied Information Technologies and
obtained his MSc degree in 2011. He is now
a Ph.D. student at the same university. His
email address is: rzak@fai.utb.cz
JAROMIR SVEJDA was born in the Czech Republic, and
went to the Tomas Bata University in Zlin,
where he studied Information Technologies
and obtained his MSc degree in 2011. He is
now a Ph.D. student at the same university.
His email address is: svejda@fai.utb.cz
ROMAN SENKERIK was born in the Czech Republic, and
went to the Tomas Bata University in Zlin,
where he studied Technical Cybernetics and
obtained his MSc degree in 2004, Ph.D. degree
in Technical Cybernetics in 2008 and Assoc.
prof. in 2013 (Informatics). He is now an Assoc.
prof. at the same university (Research and
courses in: Applied Informatics, Cryptology, Artificial
Intelligence, Mathematical Informatics). His email address
is: senkerik@fai.utb.cz

