Could Neurolecturing Address the Limitations
of Live and Recorded Lectures?
David Gamez †

david@davidgamez.eu
ABSTRACT

Lectures are a common teaching method in higher education. However, they have
many serious limitations, including boredom, attendance, short attention span, low
knowledge transmission and the passivity of students. This paper suggests how a
combination of electroencephalography (EEG) and eye-tracking technology could
address some of these limitations – an approach that I have called neurolecturing.
Neurolecturing could measure students’ attention, learning and cognitive load and
provide real time feedback to students and lecturers. It could also play a role in the
flipped classroom and artificial intelligence tutoring.

1. Introduction
There is a long tradition of teaching through lectures in higher education. The
lecturer verbalizes the knowledge and students listen and take notes. Ideally at the
end of the lecture the students will have assimilated the information that is contained
in the lecture. Originally lectures were delivered by reading to the audience. They
have now metamorphosed into multimedia PowerPoint presentations and many are
delivered online (live or recorded) to remote campuses.
Lectures are a popular teaching method because they are scalable: a live lecture can
be delivered to thousands of people; an online lecture to millions. Other forms of
teaching, such as one-to-one tutorials and group work, can only be delivered to small
numbers of people. One reason why scalability is important is that many university
courses teach specialized knowledge that is held by a limited number of people.
Specialized courses can be supported in seminars and labs by non-specialized staff,
but their core content has to be delivered by experts in the field, and lectures enable
this to be done to a large group. The scalability of lectures also saves money. It takes
one hour of staff time to deliver a lecture to 200 students; it takes ten hours of staff time
† Middlesex University, London, UK.

Humana.Mente Journal of Philosophical Studies, 2017, Vol. 33, 43–58

ISSN: 1972-1293

44

Humana.Mente – Issue 33

to deliver seminars to 200 students with a class size of 20.
While lectures are standard practice in universities, they have serious limitations as a
teaching method (see Section 2). While alternative teaching methods can be more
effective (see Section 3), they are often not scalable and have their own problems.
In market research people are increasingly using a combination of
electroencephalography (EEG)1 and eye-tracking to measure how people respond to
adverts and products (Hannaford 2013). This paper explores whether EEG and eyetracking could be used to increase the effectiveness of lectures – an approach that I have
called ‘neurolecturing’.
The first part of the paper discusses the problems with lectures, including boredom,
attendance, short attention span, low knowledge transmission and the passivity of
students. Section 3 examines alternatives to lectures, such as group work, the flipped
classroom and problem-based learning. I then propose a new solution, which uses a
combination of EEG and eye-tracking to measure students’ attention, learning and
cognitive load. This data could be used in a variety of ways to enhance learning. Finally
Section 5 examines potential objections to neurolecturing and the appendix discusses
the technology and likely costs.
2. Limitations of Lectures
Lectures are a popular method for teaching large numbers of students. However, they
have a number of serious limitations.

Boredom

Lectures are often boring. Academics are not trained entertainers and there is a limit to
how exciting some topics can be – many students would rather watch TV than listen to a
programming lecture.2

Attendance

When lecturers make their slides available online there is little perceived benefit to
attending a lecture. In my own courses at least 25% of students do not regularly attend
lectures and this figure is often higher. Even if lectures were an effective teaching method,
they do not benefit all students.

1

EEG measures brain activity by placing electrodes on the scalp. It has good temporal resolution and low
spatial resolution (up to 300 electrodes).
2
There used to be a competition at Leeds University for the most boring lecture (Rawlinson 2015).

Could Neurolecturing Address the Limitations of Live and Recorded Lectures? 45

Attention Span

It is often claimed that people have a ten minutes attention span. However, this figure is
controversial and there is not much evidence to back it up (Wilson and Korn 2007). Even
if the ten minutes figure was true, students drift in and out – they do not completely shut
down ten minutes into the lecture. So although the total amount of attention in a lecture
is likely to be more than ten minutes, it is reasonable to conclude that students do not
attend to everything that is said in a fifty minute lecture.

Passive Learning

In a lecture, students are mostly passive recipients of knowledge from the teacher.
However, experiments have shown that active learning is a more effective way of
acquiring knowledge (Held and Hein 1963; Kohler and Fiss 1964; Voss et al. 2011).3
More active teaching methods have been shown to reduce failures, increase examination
scores and increase the long-term retention of information (Deslauriers et al. 2011;
Freeman et al. 2014; Miller et al. 2013). The only exception to this trend is an older study
by Bligh (2000), who claims that there is no significant difference between lecturing and
other teaching methods.

Knowledge Retention

Experimental studies have suggested that lectures are a poor way to transmit knowledge.
For example, Scerbo (1992) found that students recognized 70% of lecture material
immediately after it was delivered, but could only recall 50%. A study by Kaplan and
Pascoe (1977) found that around 70% of lecture material was retained after six weeks.
Other studies have shown that students retain 40-46% of the material (Wilson and Korn
2007) and it has even been claimed that students retain as little as 5% (Miller 2008).4
3. Common Methods for Addressing the Limitations of Lectures
A number of teaching methods are often used to address the limitations of lectures.

3

While the importance of active learning is often stressed, it is possible to learn passively and even
unconsciously (Dell'Acqua and Grainger 1999, Merikle and Daneman 1996). However, material that is
learnt passively and/or unconsciously is less likely to be consciously recalled. At best it produces a sense of
familiarity with the topic, not something that can be consciously recalled in an exam.
4
It could be argued that lecture material might be passively learnt and later produce a sense of familiarity that
could be reinforced and consciously assimilated in other exercises, such as group work or practical exercises.
This would be harder to measure, except possibly in multiple choice tests, where you would expect above
chance guessing. However, it could be argued that a sense of familiarity does not justify the time and effort
spent on lectures by the teacher and students.

46

Humana.Mente – Issue 33

Problem-based learning

In this approach students learn by solving problems. The teachers provide detailed
learning resources and the students find their own solutions with the teacher’s support
(Kilroy 2004). This encourages students to find solutions for themselves and frees up
staff time for supporting students. This approach is typically applied in small groups
and it requires staff with expertise in the problems that are set, so it is difficult to
implement with more specialized courses that have a substantial knowledge
component. For example, few staff would have enough expertise on machine learning
to help students with problems set on this topic. The students also need a substantial
amount of background knowledge before they can start to solve problems and this
approach will only work when all of the resources for solving the problems are readily
available to students, which might not be the case for more specialized courses.

Group Work

Teachers often use group exercises to break up lectures and reset attention. While
group work can be a good way of consolidating knowledge, it can be difficult to stop
students from talking about irrelevant things. With lectures to large audiences little or
no effective support to the groups can be given, and it can be difficult to refocus the
class on the lecture material. It is also questionable whether a lecture with group
exercises is more effective than a continuous lecture in which students’ attention
fluctuates in a cyclical way.

Flipped classroom

In the flipped classroom live lectures are replaced with recorded lectures that are
distributed online. This frees up class time for exercises that consolidate the lecture
material and students can watch the videos multiple times until they have fully
understood them (Bergmann and Sams 2012). The flipped classroom promotes active
learning and students have easy access to all of the course contents, instead of just the
slides. Recorded lectures are not limited by the timetable, so they can be broken up
into chunks that focus on specific topics.
The flipped classroom is not a perfect replacement for live lectures. One problem
is that it creates more work for the lecturer (recording lectures and preparing extra
class time). When a module has more than 20 students it can also increase the staff
teaching hours. For example, if a lecture to 100 students is replaced by five seminars,
then there are four extra hours of teaching per week. Another disadvantage of the
flipped classroom is that it creates more work for the students, who have to watch the
lectures in their own time, and there are no opportunities for asking questions as the
lecture unfolds. The most serious disadvantage is that it can be difficult to persuade

Could Neurolecturing Address the Limitations of Live and Recorded Lectures? 47

students to watch the lectures, which devalues the seminars that consolidate the lecture
material. Studies have shown that 70% of students do not do preparatory reading
before class (Clump et al. 2004; Stelzer et al. 2009), and it is likely that similar
numbers will fail to watch the video before the seminar in a flipped classroom. While
this problem can be avoided (Mok 2014) or partly addressed by short quizzes (Heiner
et al. 2014) and learning contracts (Stephenson and Laycock 2013) it is likely to be a
significant issue when there are many unmotivated students.

Tutoring in Small Groups

In small groups the teacher can measure students’ level of attention by monitoring
their eye movements and they can easily check whether students understand what they
are being taught. In an ideal world all knowledge would be transmitted in tutorials with
1-2 students. However, this approach requires a lot of staff time, which makes it
impractical on courses with large numbers of students.
Some of these teaching methods place unrealistic demands on staff time and in
some areas of higher education only a limited number of experts are available to teach
a given field. We need more scalable ways of increasing the effectiveness of live or
recorded lectures.
4. Neurolecturing
This section suggests how EEG and eye-tracking technology could be used to address
the limitations of live and recorded lectures.
EEG is a low cost non-invasive method for monitoring brain activity through
electrodes that are placed on the scalp. It is a very rough measure, so it cannot be used
to read a person’s thoughts.5 However, it can be used to measure:
•
•

Sleeping/waking states (Šušmáková 2004).
Real and imagined motor movements (Alomari and Al Kamha 2013; Loboda et al.
2014).

•

Learning (Mazher et al. 2015; Walter et al. 2011).6

•

Cognitive load (Berka et al. 2007; Das et al. 2013).

5

Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) can be used to reconstruct the videos people are watching
(Nishimoto et al. 2011) and their dreams (Horikawa et al. 2013).
6
Learning is narrowly defined in these experiments as the assimilation of new information. For example,
Walter et al. (2011) measured subjects’ EEG when they were reading theorems and watching comic strips
about angular geometry.

48
•

•

Humana.Mente – Issue 33

Attention (Chen et al. 2015; Hamadicharef et al. 2009; Landau et al. 2007; Li et al.
2012; 2013).
Mental fatigue (Shen et al. 2008).

Eye-tracking systems use a camera mounted on glasses or in front of the user to
monitor what subjects are paying attention to and how they are interpreting a scene.
While EEG could be used for neurolecturing by itself, a combination of EEG and eyetracking would provide more accurate data about how subjects are responding to a
lecture.
In a neurolecturing class students would be issued with EEG headsets and eyetracking glasses. 7 As they watched a live or recorded lecture their data would be
processed into the following measurements:
•
•

Attention score. The extent to which they are attending to the lecture material.
Cognitive load. How hard the students are working to process the lecture
material.

•

Learning. Whether their brains are storing the lecture material.

Figure 1 illustrates how these measurements could change during a lecture.

Figure 1. Illustration of how students’ attention, cognitive load and learning could change during a 50
minute lecture. A) This student’s attention and cognitive load increase at 20 minutes when more
challenging material is introduced. They don’t understand it, give up and cease to pay attention for the rest
of the lecture. B) The lecture material is within this student’s zone of proximal development and their
attention cycles regularly along with their cognitive load and learning. C) This student is familiar with most
of the material. They pay little attention, learn little and have a low cognitive load.

7

EEG and eye-tracking hardware is discussed in the appendix.

Could Neurolecturing Address the Limitations of Live and Recorded Lectures? 49

These measurements could be used to improve teaching quality in lectures
in the following ways.

Neurofeedback to Students

Research has shown that people can change their brain activity when their EEG
data is displayed to them in real time (neurofeedback). This can help them to
improve their attention span, psychomotor skills, memory, intelligence, mood
and creativity (Gruzelier 2014a; Gruzelier 2014b). Neurolecturing could
deliver these benefits by displaying the measurements of learning, attention and
cognitive load to the students, either on their headsets or using augmented
reality. A vibration or sound could alert them when these measures fell below a
threshold. 8 This would be a form of behaviourist learning (Skinner 1938) in
which students are trained to put their brains into beneficial states. Eventually
they would learn to control their brains without equipment - a transferable skill
that could benefit them throughout life.9
There is also evidence that neurofeedback can be used to induce brain states
that are beneficial for memory consolidation (Reiner et al. 2014). This opens up
the possibility of a lecture that has periods of knowledge delivery followed by
periods in which students use neurofeedback to put their brains into a memory
consolidation state.

Feedback to Lecturer

Constructivism plausibly claims that students assimilate new knowledge on the
basis of what they already know (Fosnot 2005). But this is virtually impossible
to apply to a large mixed ability class. Neurolecturing can address this problem
by displaying each student’s attention, learning and cognitive load to the teacher,
who can use it control the pace of a live lecture and fine tune individual student’s
learning. For example, when the average attention dropped below a threshold
the lecturer could slow down, recapitulate, switch to a group exercise or start a
period of memory consolidation. After the lecture the teacher could review the
data from individual students, identify people who were struggling and suggest
resources that would help them to assimilate difficult concepts. More
challenging material could be directed to students with a low cognitive load. In
8

The threshold could be dynamically set for each student by measuring their maximum and minimum
attention, cognitive load and learning. The threshold could then be set to half way between the maximum and
minimum and the alert could be generated when attention, cognitive load and learning fell below the threshold
for 60 seconds (for example). The maximum and minimum values could be recalculated over time.
9
Futurelab (2009) discuss the potential role of neurofeedback in education in more detail.

50

Humana.Mente – Issue 33

this way constructivism could become a practical teaching method in which the
lecturer could identify the zones of proximal development (Vygotsky 1978) and
threshold concepts for each student (see Figure 1). The students’ data could also
help lecturers to evaluate new course material and it could be taken into account
by teaching observations.

Artificial Intelligence (AI) Tutoring

People are already experimenting with delivering parts of a course with
computer programs known as chatbots (McFarland 2016). These chatbots could
use the measurements of attention, learning and cognitive load to control the
amount and complexity of material that they present to the student. This would
keep the material within the student’s zone of proximal development and the
chatbot could introduce novel exercises or periods of memory consolidation
when the student’s attention dropped.

Support for Students with Attention Deficits

Neurolecturing could help teachers identify students with attention deficit
disorders so that they can be given extra support. 10 It has been shown that
neurofeedback is an effective treatment for ADHD (Arns et al. 2014), so an
appropriately designed neurolecturing program could benefit students with
attention deficits without the need to explicitly identify them.

Allocation of Course Marks

Neurolecturing can accurately measure how much students pay attention to live
and recorded lectures. Since attending to the lecture (and not just attending the
lecture) is beneficial to students, this could be used to allocate a proportion of
the grade for the course. This would work particularly well with the flipped
classroom since students could pause the video and watch it multiple times until
they had attended to everything in the lecture. This mark could only be available
if the students watched the video prior to the seminar in which the material was
consolidated. EEG biometrics could be used to prevent students from getting
other people to watch the videos for them (Gui et al. 2014; Mandic and
Palaniappan 2007; Mohammadi et al. 2006; Poulos et al. 2002; Ruiz-Blondet
et al. 2016).
A prototype of a neurolecturing system has been developed by Li et al.
10

This would not be a formal clinical diagnosis. The teacher could identify students that were struggling to
attend to lectures and have a conversation with them about this issue. Extra support could be given and they
could be directed to see a doctor if this seemed appropriate.

Could Neurolecturing Address the Limitations of Live and Recorded Lectures? 51

(2009; 2012), who created a study website and recorded the EEG of students as
they interacted with the website. Other neurolecturing systems have been built
by Liu et al. (2013) and Chen et al. (2015), who showed that EEG could be an
effective way of monitoring attention during e-learning. A system that uses EEG
and eye-tracking technology to identify distraction during reading has also been
developed by Rodrigue et al. (2015). The hardware and software for
neurolecturing are covered in the appendix.
5. Potential Objections to Neurolecturing
Some people might think that neurolecturing reads minds and invades privacy.
However, as I explained earlier, EEG and eye-tracking cannot be used to read people’s
minds – they only obtain information that is already accessible to the lecturer, such as
level of attention, eye direction and cognitive load. In one-to-one tutorials teachers
often use this information. But a single teacher cannot process this information from
200 students in a live or recorded lecture. Neurolecturing enables teachers to use data
that they already have access to on a larger scale.
Other people might feel that neurolecturing degrades the relationship between
students and teachers. However, I am only suggesting that neurolecturing could
improve situations in which students are passively receiving information – not
laboratory sessions or seminars in which they are solving problems and actively
engaging with their teachers and peers. There are also ethical issues surrounding the
storage and use of neurolecturing data, which would have to be treated in the same way
as other personal data.
A full debate about the benefits and limitations of neurolecturing will only be
possible when it has been systematically tested. Neurolecturing should be discarded if
it is not a significant improvement on existing teaching methods. But if it is accurate11
and effective, then it can be argued that it would be wrong not to use this technology.
People’s heart rate and EEG are monitored in hospital so that they can be given the
best treatment. If neurolecturing can be used to teach more effectively, then it would
be wrong to refuse access to it. Future generations might judge that universities
without neurolecturing facilities are poorly equipped.

11

EEG can be a noisy signal (for example, the study by Liu et al. (2013) had a classification accuracy of 77%),
which would raise issues f the attention score was used to allocate marks. This problem can be partly overcome
by combining EEG with eye-tracking (Rodrigue et al. 2015) and the accuracy could be further increased by
adding other signals, such as galvanic skin response, heart rate and facial expression.

52

Humana.Mente – Issue 33

6. Conclusions
Lectures are a widely used teaching method. But they have a number of problems,
such as boredom, attendance, attention span, passivity and low knowledge
transmission. While there are alternative teaching methods, these are mostly
complementary to lectures and the specialized knowledge that is required to
teach some courses means that live or recorded lectures are likely to be part of
the curriculum for a long time to come.
In this paper I have suggested how the technology that is currently
revolutionizing market research could lead to major improvements in how we
teach and learn. Some people might find the idea of neurolecturing ethically
objectionable. However, in a world in which students are paying their own fees
and often working to support themselves, many students will want to learn in the
most efficient way possible. If neurolecturing is shown to increase the rate of
transmission of knowledge and enhance creativity, memory and attention, then
it is likely that many students will request that this technology is used on their
courses. As the hardware for brain monitoring and eye-tracking gets cheaper, it
is likely that neurolecturing will be tried in the classroom. If it has clear
demonstrable benefits, it could become a mainstream teaching method in fifty
years.

Appendix: The Development of Neurolecturing Technology
The EEG headsets that are used in scientific experiments provide high
resolution data (~300 channels), but they are expensive. A more realistic
approach for neurolecturing would be to use consumer-grade EEG devices,
such as the NeuroSky MindWave headsets (£112), 12 the EMOTIV headsets,
which are available in 14 channel or 5 channel models (£550 / £205),13 or EEG
earphones, which are likely to retail for less than £100 (Strickland 2016). It is
also possible to build EEG headsets from scratch.14
Professional eye-tracking glasses can be expensive (~£10,000). 15 Eyetracking bars that mount on the desk or screen can be obtained for less than
12

NeuroSky EEG headsets: http://neurosky.com/biosensors/eeg-sensor/biosensors/.
EMOTIV EEG headsets: http://emotiv.com/.
14
Information and equipment for DIY EEG headsets: http://openbci.com/. A hacker-oriented guide to
building an EEG headset is available here: http://www.instructables.com/id/DIY-EEG-and-ECG-Circuit/.
15
For example, the Tobii Pro glasses: http://www.tobiipro.com.
13

Could Neurolecturing Address the Limitations of Live and Recorded Lectures? 53

£140 and Pupil Labs have developed a sophisticated system that can be printed
and assembled at home.16 A number of websites explain how to build cheap eyetracking hardware.17
Neurofeedback to the students could be done cheaply and simply with LEDs
mounted on the eye-tracking glasses. Or it could be displayed in augmented
reality (AR) using the student’s mobile phone mounted in a Google Cardboard
headset.18 The Oculus Rift (£400) is a higher quality and more expensive AR
option.19
The neurolecturing software would have to integrate the eye tracking and
EEG data and display it to the students and lecturer in real time. Software and
toolboxes for EEG analysis and eye tracking can be downloaded for free – for
example, BCILAB, 20 Brainstorm21 and openEyes22 – which could be adapted
for the neurolecturing environment.
Taken together, the hardware can be obtained or made for less than £200 per
set. The main cost for a pilot study would be the development of the software that
integrates everything together. It is likely to take 3-6 months for an experienced
programmer to integrate the software and hardware into a working
neurolecturing system.23
REFERENCES

Alomari, M. H. and Al Kamha, K. (2013). Automated Classification of L/R Hand Movement
EEG Signals using Advanced Feature Extraction and Machine Learning. International
Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications 4(6): 207-12.
Arns, M., Heinrich, H. and Strehl, U. (2014). Evaluation of neurofeedback in ADHD: the long
and winding road. Biological Psychology 95: 108-15.

16

Pupil Labs: https://pupil-labs.com.
DIY
eye-tracking
systems:
http://www.instructables.com/id/The-EyeWriter-20
and
http://hackaday.com/2013/02/12/build-an-eye-tracking-headset-for-90.
18
Google Cardboard virtual reality headset that works with mobile phone:
https://vr.google.com/intl/en_uk/cardboard/.
19
Oculus Rift virtual reality headsets: www.oculus.com.
20
BICLAB EEG toolbox: http://sccn.ucsd.edu/wiki/BCILAB.
21
BrainStorm EEG data analysis application: http://neuroimage.usc.edu/brainstorm/.
22
openEyes toolkit for eye tracking: http://thirtysixthspan.com/openEyes/.
23
A laboratory with eye-tracking technology was installed by Andrew Duchowski at Clemson University:
http://www.gazept.com/2015/01/eye-tracking-in-the-classroom-with-gazepoint/.
17

54

Humana.Mente – Issue 33

Bergmann, J. and Sams, A. (2012). Flip your classroom: reach every student in every class every
day. Eugene, Oregon: International Society for Technology in Education.
Berka, C., Levendowski, D. J., Lumicao, M. N., Yau, A., Davis, G., Zivkovic, V. T., Olmstead,
R. E., Tremoulet, P. D. and Craven, P. L. (2007). EEG Correlates of Task Engagement
and Mental Workload in Vigilance, Learning, and Memory Tasks. Aviation, Space, and
Environmental Medicine 78(5): 231-44.
Chen, C.-M., Wang, J.-Y. and Yu, C.-M. (2015). Assessing the attention levels of students by
using a novel attention aware system based on brainwave signals. British Journal of
Educational Technology. doi: 10.1111/bjet.12359.
Clump, M. A., Bauer, H. and Bradley, C. (2004). The extent to which psychology students read
textbooks: A multiple class analysis of reading across the psychology curriculum.
Journal of Instructional Psychology 31(3): 227–32.
Das, D., Chatterjee, D. and Sinha, A. (2013). Unsupervised approach for measurement of
cognitive load using EEG signals. Proceedings of IEEE 13th International Conference
on Bioinformatics and Bioengineering, Chania, pp. 1-6.
Deslauriers, L., Schelew, E. and Wieman, C. (2011). Improved learning in a large-enrollment
physics class. Science 332(6031): 862-4.
Fosnot, C. T. (2005). Constructivism: Theory, perspectives, and practice. New York; London:
Teachers College Press.
Freeman, S., Eddy, S. L., McDonough, M., Smith, M. K., Okoroafor, N., Jordt, H. and
Wenderoth, M. P. (2014). Active learning increases student performance in science,
engineering, and mathematics. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science USA
111(23): 8410-5.
Futurelab. (2009). Neurofeedback: Is there a potential for use in education? Retrieved 7/6/16
from https://www.nfer.ac.uk/publications/FUTL94/FUTL94.pdf.
Gruzelier, J. H. (2014a). EEG-neurofeedback for optimising performance. I: a review of
cognitive and affective outcome in healthy participants. Neuroscience and
Biobehavioral Reviews 44: 124-41.
Gruzelier, J. H. (2014b). EEG-neurofeedback for optimising performance. II: creativity, the
performing arts and ecological validity. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 44:
142-58.
Gui, Q., Jin, Z. and Xu, W. (2014). Exploring EEG-based biometrics for user identification
and authentication. Proceedings of IEEE Symposium on Signal Processing in
Medicine and Biology, Philadelphia, pp. 1-6.

Could Neurolecturing Address the Limitations of Live and Recorded Lectures? 55
Hamadicharef, B., Zhang, H., Guan, C., Wang, C., Phua, K. S., Tee, K. P. and Ang, K. K.
(2009). Learning EEG-based spectral-spatial patterns for attention level measurement.
Proceedings of IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems, Taipei, pp.
1465-8.
Hannaford, A. (2013). Neuromarketing': can science predict what we'll buy? . The Telegraph
(online). Available at http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/science/sciencenews/9984498/Neuromarketing-can-science-predict-what-well-buy.html
[Accessed 1st June 2016].
Heiner, C. E., Banet, A. I. and Wieman, C. (2014). Preparing Students for Class: How to Get
80% of Students Reading the Textbook Before Class. American Journal of Physics 82:
989-96.
Held, R. and Hein, A. (1963). Movement-Produced Stimulation in the Development of
Visually Guided Behavior. Journal of Comparative and Physiological Psychology 56:
872-6.
Horikawa, T., Tamaki, M., Miyawaki, Y. and Kamitani, Y. (2013). Neural Decoding of Visual
Imagery During Sleep. Science 340(6132): 639-42.
Kaplan, R. M. and Pascoe, G. C. (1977). Humorous Lectures and Humorous Examples: Some
Effects upon Comprehension and Retention. Journal of Educational Psychology
69(1): 31-5.
Kohler, I. and Fiss, H. (1964). The Formation and Transformation of the Perceptual World.
Translated by H. Fiss. New York: International Universities Press.
Landau, A. N., Esterman, M., Robertson, L. C., Bentin, S. and Prinzmetal, W. (2007).
Different effects of voluntary and involuntary attention on EEG activity in the gamma
band. Journal of Neuroscience 27(44): 11986-90.
Li, X., Hu, B., Zhu, T., Yan, J. and Zheng, F. (2009). Towards Affective Learning with An EEG
Feedback Approach. Proceedings of First ACM International Workshop on
Multimedia Technologies for Distance Learning, New York, pp. 33–8.
Li, X., Zhao, Q., Liu, L., Peng, H., Qi, Y., Mao, C., Fang, Z., Liu, Q. and Hu, B. (2012).
Improve affective learning with EEG approach. Computing and Informatics 29: 557–
70.
Liu, N.-H., Chiang, C.-Y. and Chu, H.-C. (2013). Recognizing the Degree of Human
Attention Using EEG Signals from Mobile Sensors. Sensors 13: 10273-86.
Loboda, A., Margineanu, A., Rotariu, G. and Lazar, A. M. (2014). Discrimination of EEGBased Motor Imagery Tasks by Means of a Simple Phase Information Method.
International Journal of Advanced Research in Artificial Intelligence, 3(10): 11-5.

56

Humana.Mente – Issue 33

Mandic, D. P. and Palaniappan, R. (2007). EEG Based Biometric Framework for Automatic
Identity Verification. Journal of VLSI Signal Processing 49: 243–50.
Mazher, M., Aziz, A. A., Malik, A. S. and Qayyum, A. (2015). A statistical analysis on learning
and non-learning mental states using EEG. Proceedings of IEEE Student Symposium
in Biomedical Engineering & Sciences (ISSBES), Shah Alam, pp. 36-40.
McFarland, M. (2016). What happened when a professor built a chatbot to be his teaching
assistant.
The
Washington
Post
(Online).
Available
at
https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/innovations/wp/2016/05/11/thisprofessor-stunned-his-students-when-he-revealed-the-secret-identity-of-histeaching-assistant/ [Accessed 1st June 2016].
Miller, C. J., McNear, J. and Metz, M. J. (2013). A comparison of traditional and engaging
lecture methods in a large, professional-level course. Advances in Physiology
Education 37: 347-55.
Miller, H. (2008). Rethinking the Classroom: Spaces Designed for Active and Engaged
Learning and Teaching. Retrieved 1st December 2015 from
http://www.hermanmiller.com/research/solution-essays/rethinking-theclassroom.html
Mohammadi, G., Shoushtari, P., Ardekani, B. M. and Shamsollahi, M. B. (2006). Person
Identification by Using AR Model for EEG Signals. Proceedings of World Academy of
Science, Engineering and Technology 11: 281-5.
Mok, H. N. (2014). Teaching Tip: The Flipped Classroom. Journal of Information Systems
Education 25(1): 7-11.
Nishimoto, S., Vu, A. T., Naselaris, T., Benjamini, Y., Yu, B. and Gallant, J. L. (2011).
Reconstructing visual experiences from brain activity evoked by natural movies.
Current Biology 21(19): 1641-6.
Poulos, M., Rangoussi, M., Alexandris, N. and Evangelou, A. (2002). Person identification
from the EEG using nonlinear signal classification. Methods of Information in
Medicine 41(1): 64-75.
Reiner, M., Rozengurt, R. and Barnea, A. (2014). Better than sleep: Theta neurofeedback
training accelerates memory consolidation. Biological Psychology 95: 45-53.
Rodrigue, M., Son, J., Giesbrecht, B., Turk, M. and Höllerer, T. (2015). Spatio-Temporal
Detection of Divided Attention in Reading Applications Using EEG and Eye Tracking.

Proceedings of Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Intelligent User
Interfaces, Atlanta, ACM, pp. 121-5.

Could Neurolecturing Address the Limitations of Live and Recorded Lectures? 57
Ruiz-Blondet, M. V., Jin, Z. and Laszlo, S. (2016). CEREBRE: A Novel Method for Very High
Accuracy Event-Related Potential Biometric Identification. IEEE Transactions on
Information Forensics and Security 11(7): 1618-29.
Scerbo, M. W. (1992). The Role of Time and Cuing in a College Lecture. Contemporary
Education Psychology 17: 312-28.
Shen, K.-Q., Li, X.-P., Ong, C.-J., Shao, S.-Y. and Wilder-Smith, E. P. V. (2008). EEG-based
mental fatigue measurement using multi-class support vector machines with
confidence estimate. Clinical Neurophysiology 119(7): 1524–33.
Skinner, B. F. (1938). The Behavior of Organisms. An experimental analysis. New York;
London: D. Appleton-Century Co.
Stelzer, T., Gladding, G., Mestre, J. P. and Brookes, D. T. (2009). Comparing the efficacy of
multimedia modules with traditional textbooks for learning introductory physics
content. American Journal of Physics 77(2): 184-90.
Stephenson, J. and Laycock, M. (2013). Learning Contracts: Scope and Rationale. In Using
Learning Contracts in Higher Education, edited by J. Stephenson and M. Laycock.
London and New York: Routledge.
Strickland, E. (2016). Wireless Earbuds Will Record Your EEG, Send Brainwave Data to Your
Phone. IEEE Spectrum. Available at http://spectrum.ieee.org/the-humanos/biomedical/devices/wireless-earbuds-will-record-your-eeg-send-brainwave-datato-your-phone [Accessed 17th May 2016].
Šušmáková, K. (2004). Human Sleep and Sleep EEG. Measurement Science Review 4(2): 59-74.
Voss, J. L., Gonsalves, B. D., Federmeier, K. D., Tranel, D. and Cohen, N. J. (2011).
Hippocampal brain-network coordination during volitional exploratory behavior
enhances learning. Nature Neuroscience 14(1): 115-20.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in Society. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
Walter, C., Cierniak, G., Gerjets, P., Rosenstiel, W. and Bogdan, M. (2011). Classifying
mental states with machine learning algorithms using alpha activity decline.
Proceedings of ESAAN, Bruges, pp. 405-10.
Wilson, K. and Korn, J. H. (2007). Attention During Lectures: Beyond Ten Minutes.
Teaching of Psychology 34(2): 85-9.

