VOL. 11, NO. 13, JULY 2016

ISSN 1819-6608

ARPN Journal of Engineering and Applied Sciences
©2006-2016 Asian Research Publishing Network (ARPN). All rights reserved.

www.arpnjournals.com

ANALYSIS OF BRAIN REGIONS AND EVENT RELATED POTENTIAL
(ERP) ASSOCIATED WITH THE IMAGINATION OF ACTIONS BY
EEG SIGNALS AND BRAIN-COMPUTER INTERFACE (BCI)
Diego Alfonso Rojas, Leonardo Andrés Góngora and Olga Lucia Ramos
Department of Mechatronic Engineering, Nueva Granada Military University, Bogota, Cundinamarca, Colombia
E-Mail: u3900213@unimilitar.edu.co

ABSTRACT
Brain-computer interfaces (BCI) are devices designed with the aim of enable ways of interaction and
communication in people with disabilities, and improve the execution of different tasks in healthy individuals. Thus arises
the concept of imagined action, which consists of using different techniques of measuring and processing, capable of
registering, extract and classify features related to changes that take place in the cerebral cortex, specifically the motor
cortex, at the time of thinking about a movement or action. This work presents the results of analyzing EEG signals from
the thought of an action, specifically to push an object, using domain transformation techniques, as well as a methodology
that facilitated the registration of the mentioned event, obtaining as main contribution the characterization of areas with
greater activation and variation of potential at the time to imagine the movement.
Keywords: EEG signals, brain-computer interface, event related potential, latency, gradient of potential.

INTRODUCTION
The current technological advances, have
generated a dependence linked to the development of
everyday activities that human performs. For this reason
appears the human-computer interaction systems (HCI),
whose objective is to allow the exchange of information,
as a means of command for the resolution of any task
through a computer system [1], [2].
Human-computer interaction tools, are complex
systems whose development depends on particular
applications, following this, during the last years elements
known as brain-computer interfaces (BCI) have been
popularized due to its operational characteristics,
representing a bridge of communication between the user
and the machine [3].
Although there are a wide variety of systems for
the measurement of bio-potentials as characteristic
elements for medical diagnosis and development of HCIrelated applications, those that enable the measurement of
EEG signals in a non-invasive way and have a high
temporal resolution receive great attention by researchers
and developers [4].
Within the technologies for these tasks, is the
near-infrared functional spectroscopy (fNIRS) [5], [6] and
the same systems of measurement of EEG signals. There
are many applications of BCI systems. These technologies
have been successfully used in communication, creation of
art work, such as control interfaces of wheelchairs, and
medical appliances for the prevention, detection, diagnosis
and rehabilitation of diseases [7], [8].
The possibility of using brain activity to control
applications, has opened the panorama to a number of
developments, in where in addition to medical
applications, those signals could be used as command
posts in complex human-machine interfaces (HCI) [3], [9].
Examples as the presented in [10], performs a technical
comparison between major BCI systems that are in the
market nowadays, highlighting the Emotiv EPOC +

system, which used in conjunction with mobile platforms
could serve as a basis for the monitoring in real time of the
actions carried out by users.
In general, the basis of all signal processing
system is developed under the scheme of extraction and
characterization of important elements present in these
forms of wave [11]. For BCI systems, higher intensity
signals occur when motor processes are performed by
users. In this way, have been founded that the activity of
the cerebral motor cortex, can be defined in specific
frequency ranges [12].
Taking into account these characteristics,
different control interfaces such as the one presented in
[13], shows the use of BCI systems and the acquisition of
EEG signals to control a Quadcopter in a threedimensional space. More complex studies as that
described in [14] shows possible analyses and features that
can be extracted from a non-physical process. In this work,
imagined speech is defined as imaginative process in the
pronunciation of words, their decoding and recognition as
previous stages in the construction of silent speech
interfaces (SSI).
Another example related to the imaginative
activities, is presented in [15], this work is about the brain
activity produced by motor processes along with the
imaginative processes. It is founded that the imaginative
process of motor actions could be associated with the
movements of the persons or the imagination of the
movements of other people.
The work that is described throughout this
document aims to provide the analysis of the EEG signals
in an imaginative process, by using maps of ERP (Event
Related Potentials), as a first approach to the development
of control interfaces using BCI systems.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
In order to perform the analysis of the EEG
signals associated with the imagination of actions, in this

8189

VOL. 11, NO. 13, JULY 2016

ISSN 1819-6608

ARPN Journal of Engineering and Applied Sciences
©2006-2016 Asian Research Publishing Network (ARPN). All rights reserved.

www.arpnjournals.com
case the action of pushing a particular object, the methods
and materials described below were used. The stage of
acquisition was performed using stimuli and visual
supports which enabled the focusing on the action that we
wanted to measure.
Brain Computer Interface (BCI)
A BCI device is an element that allows humanmachine interaction through the processing of signals
generated by the brain activity during the execution or
thinking of different tasks. They commonly have hardware
and specialized software to carry out the capture,
processing and classification of bioelectrical signals
produced in the cerebral cortex, with the aim of turning
them into commands or understandable instructions for a
machine or computer.
Currently, there are developments and advances
in the construction of this kind of device, one of these is
the Emotiv EPOC+ which has 14 electrodes measuring
with gold-plated and silver and 2 reference electrodes,
positioned according to the international 10-20 for
electroencephalography and according to that standard, the
areas of the cortex or areas of Brodmann which is capable
of recording are summarized in Table-1.
Table-1. Brodmann areas registered by Emotiv EPOC+.
Area of brain cortex

Electrodes

Granular Frontal

AF3

AF4

Intermediate Frontal

F3

F4

Triangular

F7

F8

Opercular

FC5

FC6

Parastriate

O1

O2

Occipitotemporal

P7

P8

Middle Temporal

T7

T8

The potentials associated with conscious actions
such as the intention of movement, are in the frequency
band Beta, whose frequency range vary between 13 and 30
Hz, so the sampling rate of 128 Hz which has the device
allows to cover a range of 0 to 64 Hz, achieving the
capture of information relevant to the event that we
wanted to analyze.
Event related potentials
Evoked potentials are variations or changes in the
EEG signals that are direct indicators of the bio-electrical
brain response to stimuli or cognitive, affective and motor
events.
ERPs are tools of medical analysis, used to
diagnose diseases such as epilepsy, Alzheimer's and other
diseases that affect the central nervous system, causing the
degeneration of mental faculties and probably cause
dementia.
In comparison with normal EEG signals, the
amplitude of an ERP is lower (1-30uV), and thus a
processing is necessary for their quantification, which can

be through averaging the signal or the application of
statistical calculations. The analysis of the waveform that
has an ERP takes into account three characteristics,
latency, amplitude and distribution of potential in the
scalp, in addition, is possible to make an analysis from
relative latencies between its sub-components, through the
implementation of algorithms of statistical separation,
such as independent component analysis.
Latency is the point in time in which occurs the
change of amplitude, i.e. the time of neuronal activation
before a stimulus point. The amplitude of the ERP is
linked to the neuronal activation produced by external or
internal stimulus, and the distribution of potential is the
pattern of change in the gradient of voltage by the
excitation of neurons in an instant of time.
These potentials can be denoted with a letter N,
as the N400, if are negatives, or positives represented with
a letter P, as the P300.This type of notation indicates
potential behavior, the number indicates the time in
milliseconds between the stimulus and the peak amplitude.
The ERPs are classified into two categories according to
their latency, if it is less than 100 ms are exogenous and
are influenced by physical events, on the other hand, are
endogenous if they are superior to the mentioned value of
latency, as example we have the P300, and are responses
that vary in amplitude and time, depending on the mental
activity that is not necessarily associated with a
stimulation or physical signal.
Experimental acquisition
The experiment was performed taking into
account the considerations set out below, the subject was
in a room free of distractions and noise to prevent the
registration of signs not desired, as well as facilitate the
concentration of the volunteer in the task that he should
do, the length of the recorded signals was the same
throughout the experiment, in order to compare and
analyze temporarily similar data. Finally, we used a visual
support to allow the concentration of the volunteer and
maintain the thought associated with to push an object in
space and thus record signal associated with such activity.

Figure-1. Scheme of the proposed experiment.
Bearing in mind the above conditions was the
registration of EEG signals associated with the
imagination of the action required, in a volunteer for 23
years. In addition, the electrodes which vary due to ocular
artifacts (AF3, AF4, F7 and F8) were discarded with the

8190

VOL. 11, NO. 13, JULY 2016

ISSN 1819-6608

ARPN Journal of Engineering and Applied Sciences
©2006-2016 Asian Research Publishing Network (ARPN). All rights reserved.

www.arpnjournals.com
aim of preventing that recorded samples were
contaminated by real movements. In Figure-2 is depicted a

sample of the signals with the selected sensors.

Figure-2. EEG signals related to “Push” action.
The duration of each one of the samples was 100
seconds, Figure-1 shows just a quarter of one of acquired
signals, with 4 peaks of amplitude product of the imagined
action, and the average duration of this variation is equal
to 1 second.

Figure-1 presented a different behavior as shown in
Figure-4.

RESULTS
For the analysis of the data captured during the
experiment was used the complementary software of
Matlab, EEGLab, getting the results that are shown below.
The first result was the capture of EEG signals associated
with the relaxation state of the volunteer, finding that
variation of the signal is less than 30uV in the entire
sample, as can be seen in Figure-3.
Figure-4. Segmentation of EEG signal for “Push” action.

Figure-3. EEG sample of rest state.
On the other hand, the signal that was recorded in
the imagination of the related action with pushing an
object in three-dimensional space, as was depicted in

In Figure-4 can be seen clearly the behavior that
adopts the T7 channel signal when the volunteer thought
in pushing an object, the response time was 1 second and
the amplitude was 600uV, which is almost 20 times bigger
that the presented in the EEG signals of relaxation state.
To develop a more accurate interpretation of what
occurs in the cerebral cortex at the time of thinking in the
suggested action, was performed the computation of ERPs
generated by this activity, analyzing the variation through
its amplitude and latency as shown in Figure-5. This
Figure shows the change in the T7 channel (red) and in
less extent its counterpart of the right hemisphere T8
(blue), which vary in the order of 10 to 15uV, potential
with significantly lower values if they are compared with
those obtained in Figures 2 and 4.

8191

VOL. 11, NO. 13, JULY 2016

ISSN 1819-6608

ARPN Journal of Engineering and Applied Sciences
©2006-2016 Asian Research Publishing Network (ARPN). All rights reserved.

www.arpnjournals.com

Figure-5. ERP of the imagined action “Push”.
The highest potential values are presented in the
latencies of 500ms with a value of 13uV, and 160ms with
a little more than 15uV, which indicates that the neuronal
activation in the area of Brodmann 21, which is measured
by sensors T7 and T8 increases significantly and as shown
in [16], [17], the middle temporal area is associated with
the visualization of movements and non-verbal tasks. It is
an endogenous positive ERP given its nature, and is
associated with imaginary tasks of the motor area.
The color map for gradients variation is a useful
tool at the moment of interpreting information associated
with ERPs as the one presented in Figure 5.Figure 6
contains the distribution of potential that occurs on the
scalp at the time to ask the volunteer to imagine the
movement of an object in 3D space with their mind. To
analyze the potential were taken 9 instants of time, equally
distanced in 370 ms as shown below.

Figure-6. Mapping of ERPs.

This information shows a behavior according to
the increase and appearance of peaks in the potential
shown previously. Being specific, the two moments in
Figure 6 which clarify the behavior of the signal are those
of latency equal to 480 ms and 1590 ms, showing a
positive change in the variation of the gradient related to
the event that we were measuring.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE PERSPECTIVES
Brain computer interface are low-cost acquisition
devices, if it is compared with specialized medical
equipment, allowing to register the biopotentials generated
in the cerebral cortex during actions or specific thoughts,
in this case the imagination of a movement. However, it
has some drawbacks in terms of frequencies that can
capture, because they only reach variations equal or lower
to 64 Hz, so changes in frequency ranges such as those
caused by the imagination of more complex actions, are
hardly detected.
Evoked potentials maps allow to interpret in a
graphical way the variation of the potential gradient in
terms of time, improving the interpretation of the results
obtained by the calculation of ERP, since it relates the
variation of a specific signal, with the time and the area or
areas in which takes place.
As a future work, it is proposed the use of other
processing techniques, such as statistical separation
through principal or independent component analysis for
improving the feature extraction and its interpretation.
Similarly the implementation of classification algorithms
such as support vector machines and neural networks
could improve the identification of changes in EEG
signals for a particular event, without having to worry
about the contamination in the signal by involuntary facial
movements or noise in the capture device.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Special thanks to the Research Vicechancellorship of the “Universidad Militar Nueva

8192

VOL. 11, NO. 13, JULY 2016

ISSN 1819-6608

ARPN Journal of Engineering and Applied Sciences
©2006-2016 Asian Research Publishing Network (ARPN). All rights reserved.

www.arpnjournals.com
Granada”, for financing the project IMP-ING 2133 of
2016 year.
REFERENCES
[1] X. Yang and G. Chen. 2009. Human-Computer
Interaction Design in Product Design. in 2009 First
International Workshop on Education Technology and
Computer Science. 2: 437-439.
[2] G. Chao. 2009. Human-Computer Interaction: Process
and Principles of Human-Computer Interface Design.
in 2009 International Conference on Computer and
Automation Engineering. pp. 230-233.
[3] T. Desney and N. Anton. 2010. Brain-Computer
Interfaces and Human-Computer Interaction. in BrainComputer Interfaces. pp. 3-19.
[4] F. Putze and T. Schultz. 2014. Adaptive cognitive
technical systems. J. Neurosci. Methods. 234: 108-15.
[5] F. Matthews, B. Pearlmutter, T. Wards, C. Soraghan,
and C. Markham. 2008. Hemodynamics for BrainComputer Interfaces. IEEE Signal Process. Mag.
25(1): 87-94.

Autonomic and Secure Computing; Pervasive
Intelligence and Computing. pp. 1554-1559.
[11] A. S. Aghaei, M. S. Mahanta, and K. N. Plataniotis.
2016. Separable Common Spatio-Spectral Patterns for
Motor Imagery BCI Systems. IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng. 63(1): 15-29.
[12] C. Park, D. Looney, Naveed ur Rehman, A. Ahrabian
and D. P. Mandic. 2013. Classification of motor
imagery BCI using multivariate empirical mode
decomposition. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil.
Eng. 21(1): 10-22.
[13] K. LaFleur, K. Cassady, A. Doud, K. Shades, E.
Rogin, and B. He. 2013. Quadcopter control in threedimensional space using a noninvasive motor
imagery-based brain-computer interface. J. Neural
Eng. 10(4): 046003.
[14] X. Pei, J. Hill, and G. Schalk. 2012. Silent
communication: toward using brain signals. IEEE
Pulse. 3(1): 43-6.

[6] G. F. Slenes, G. C. Beltramini, F. O. Lima, L. M. Li
and G. Castellano. 2013. The use of fMRI for the
evaluation of the effect of training in motor imagery
BCI users. In: 2013 6th International IEEE/EMBS
Conference on Neural Engineering (NER). pp. 686690.
[7] D. Marshall, D. Coyle, S. Wilson, and M. Callaghan.
2013. Games, Gameplay and BCI: The State of the
Art. IEEE Trans. Comput. Intell. AI Games. 5(2): 8299.
[8] S. N. Abdulkader, A. Atia, and M.-S. M. Mostafa.
2015. Brain computer interfacing: Applications and
challenges. Egypt. Informatics J. 16(2): 213-230.
[9] C. Guger, G. Bin, X. Gao, J. Guo, B. Hong, T. Liu, S.
Gao, C. Guan and K. Keng Ang. 2011. State-of-theArt in BCI Research: BCI Award 2010. in Recent
Advances in Brain-Computer Interface Systems. pp.
194-222.
[10] L. Galway, P. McCullagh, G. Lightbody, C. Brennan
and D. Trainor. 2015. The Potential of the BrainComputer Interface for Learning: A Technology
Review. In: 2015 IEEE International Conference on
Computer and Information Technology; Ubiquitous
Computing and Communications; Dependable,

8193

