The Journal of Undergraduate Neuroscience Education (JUNE), Spring 2017, 15(2):A104-A109

ARTICLE
Neurogaming Technology Meets Neuroscience Education: A Cost-Effective,
Scalable, and Highly Portable Undergraduate Teaching Laboratory for
Neuroscience
Bianca de Wit1,2, Nicholas A. Badcock1,2,3, Tijl Grootswagers1,2,3, Katherine Hardwick1,2,3, Lina
Teichmann1,2,3, Jordan Wehrman1,2,3, Mark Williams1,2,3, & David Michael Kaplan1,2,3
1Department

of Cognitive Science, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia; 2ARC Centre of Excellence in Cognition and
its Disorders (CCD); 3Perception in Action Research Centre (PARC).
Active research-driven approaches that successfully
incorporate new technology are known to catalyze student
learning. Yet achieving these objectives in neuroscience
education is especially challenging due to the prohibitive
costs and technical demands of research-grade equipment.
Here we describe a method that circumvents these factors
by leveraging consumer EEG-based neurogaming
technology to create an affordable, scalable, and highly
portable teaching laboratory for undergraduate courses in
neuroscience. This laboratory is designed to give students

hands-on
research
experience,
consolidate
their
understanding of key neuroscience concepts, and provide a
unique real-time window into the working brain. Survey
results demonstrate that students found the lab sessions
engaging. Students also reported the labs enhanced their
knowledge about EEG, their course material, and
neuroscience research in general.
Key words: electroencephalography (EEG); eventrelated potential (ERP); cognitive neuroscience; enquirybased learning; research-enhanced learning.

The current consensus among education researchers is that
undergraduate students learn academic subject matter
including science better when active, enquiry-based
approaches are employed (Kahn and O’Rourke 2004;
McNeal and D’Avanzo, 1997). Similar conclusions have
been reached about undergraduate neuroscience education
(Ramirez, 1997), especially highlighting the importance of
student research experiences (Boitano and Seyal, 2001;
Brew 2006; Zimbardi and Myatt, 2014). The benefits of
integrating technology into neuroscience curriculum have
also been reported (Griffin, 2003). However, relatively few
introductory neuroscience courses offer students genuine
opportunities to participate in hand-on research activities or
obtain meaningful laboratory experience (for prominent
exceptions, see Hurd and Vincent, 2006; Nyhus and Curtis,
2016). A primary reason for this deficit is that traditional
laboratory-based activities typically require dedicated
laboratory space and research-grade equipment, both of
which can be prohibitively expensive in today’s university
environment (Steinmetz and Atapattu, 2010).
We report on an innovative project that aimed to integrate
an active learning approach into an introductory
undergraduate course in neuroscience within the major in
Cognitive and Brain Sciences at Macquarie University
(Sydney, Australia). The goal was to develop teaching labs
that incorporated technology which was both cost-effective
to implement and feasible for first-year undergraduates to
learn to use over the course of a single semester. We
decided on leveraging the latest in consumer neurogaming
technology to create an affordable, scalable, and fully
portable teaching laboratory that gives students invaluable
opportunities to reinforce their understanding of
fundamental concepts and methods in neuroscience by
recording and visualizing their own brain activity in real-time.

Specially, the laboratory used the EMOTIV Epoc+ (14
channel EEG) headset system (Figure 1; EMOTIV, San
Francisco, USA) – a neurogaming headset recently
established as a legitimate research tool in cognitive
neuroscience research by two of the authors (Badcock and
De Wit; Badcock et al., 2013, 2015 – to provide engaging
brain imaging lab activities at a fraction of the cost of
traditional neural recording systems.
Here, we demonstrate how the integration of the
EMOTIV Epoc+ into an undergraduate curriculum can
create exciting new opportunities for neuroscience
education.
We outline the hardware and software
requirements for these teaching labs and discuss how they
affected student learning experiences.

Figure 1. EMOTIV Epoc+ EEG system. Left panel: EMOTIV
headset. Right panel: EMOTIV headset as worn by participant.

BACKGROUND
Electroencephalography (EEG) is a non-invasive brainimaging method with excellent temporal resolution that
occupies a central role in contemporary cognitive
neuroscience (Senior et al., 2006; Luck, 2014). Frequently,
researchers use EEG to investigate the neural responses

JUNE is a publication of Faculty for Undergraduate Neuroscience (FUN) www.funjournal.org

The Journal of Undergraduate Neuroscience Education (JUNE), Spring 2017, 15(2):A104-A109 A105

(electrical potentials recorded from electrodes on the scalp)
associated with specific sensory, motor, or cognitive events
(e.g., a stimulus on a computer screen or a movement). By
averaging neural activity across a large number of trials, the
response to these events can be computed from the EEG
signal, known as an event-related potential (ERP). Given
the centrality of EEG, and more specifically ERP, in
cognitive neuroscience research, introducing students to
these techniques early in their studies is pedagogically
valuable.
However, incorporating EEG labs into
neuroscience curricula has traditionally been an expensive
venture, with research-grade systems costing between $50100K (USD) per unit. Due to the additional need for
dedicated lab space to house the fragile, bulky equipment,
this price underestimates the true cost. On top of this,
traditional EEG setups use a conductive gel to create low
impedance connections between the electrodes and the
scalp. Not only is this process messy (leaving gel in the hair
that can only be properly removed by thorough washing), it
is also lengthy (with set-up taking up to 30 minutes), which
is undesirable for use in a classroom setting. As will be
discussed shortly, EEG-based neurogaming systems do not
exhibit any of these limitations.
One solution to these problems would be to have
students focus on learning how to perform EEG data
analysis without requiring them to collect data. Miller et al.
(2008) adopt this approach and report on a “virtual EEG”
software program involving “simulated” EEG data collection.
However, a major limitation of this solution is that it prevents
students from acquiring hands-on experience collecting real
EEG data – a key aspect of the scientific research process.
Importantly, the emergence of relatively inexpensive and
easy-to-use wireless EEG neurogaming systems stand
poised to open up exciting new possibilities for neuroscience
education (e.g., Schwarz et al., 2014). These systems for
recording brain activity have been designed primarily to
serve as supplementary controllers for software applications
including games.
Because they offer movement-free
computer control, they have been playfully described as
“joysticks” for the brain (O’Brien, 2014). Despite the original
context for development, the relatively low cost of these
neurogaming systems make them highly appealing as tools
for undergraduate neuroscience education.
Many neurogaming systems are currently available, each
with their own features and limitations. Some systems are
relatively inexpensive but record data from a limited number
of electrode channels, making them less useful for
educational and experimental purposes. For example, the
EMOTIV Insight ($299 USD, www.emotiv.com) and
NeuroSky’s
MindWave
(from
$99.99
USD,
www.neurosky.com) are both low cost but provide only five
channels of EEG data. By contrast, systems such as the
EMOTIV Epoc+ ($799 USD, www.emotiv.com) are more
expensive but offer 14 channels of EEG data. We used the
EMOTIV Epoc+ (hereafter EMOTIV) because the wide
distribution of the 14 electrode sensors offers considerable
flexibility in terms of which brain areas can be recorded from.
We also used the EMOTIV because it has recently been
benchmarked against traditional research-grade EEG

systems in terms of its design and usability (Hairston et al.,
2014). It has also been shown that the EMOTIV is capable
of recording research-quality neural data reflecting visual
and auditory processing in both adults and children
(Badcock et al., 2013, 2015; De Lissa et al., 2015; Yau et
al., 2015).
The validation of EMOTIV as an effective research tool,
together with its ease of use (low impedance connections
between electrodes and the scalp are made with small
cotton dental rolls soaked in saline solution – a process that
leaves little to no residue and takes a maximum of 10
minutes to setup) make it possible to implement a fully
functional, scalable, and cost-effective human brain-imaging
lab in an undergraduate setting at a fraction of the cost of
traditional EEG recording systems. Furthermore, due to the
highly portable nature of the EMOTIV (and accompanying
laptop computer), multiple units can be set up easily in most
classroom environments, doing away with the need for
costly dedicated lab space.

HARDWARE
The teaching labs employed EMOTIV Epoc+ systems
(EMOTIV, San Francisco, USA), which were run on laptop
computers (Macbook Pro, OS X El Capitan, 10.11.5, Intel
Core i7, 2.7 GHz, 8GB RAM, and 1TB hard drive). The
EMOTIV is powered by a built-in rechargeable battery and
has flexible plastic arms fitted with gold-plated sensors
aligned to the international 10-20 system (Jasper, 1958).
The system is capable of recording EEG data from 14
channels (plus two reference channels) at a sampling rate
of 128 Hz (or 256 Hz with updated firmware) with a single
16 bit analog-to-digital converter.
This multiple-step
conversion process takes place within the headset.
Specifically, the original signal is filtered through a low and
high-pass filter (cut-off frequencies of 83 and 0.2 Hz
respectively) before the signal is digitized with a sampling
rate of 2084 Hz. This digital signal is then filtered with a 5thorder notch filter (50-60 Hz) before it is down sampled to 128
Hz (a sampling frequency that provides acceptable wireless
transfer speed of the digital signal) and wirelessly
transmitted to the USB receiver that is connected to the
laptop. Although updated firmware enables the EMOTIV to
down sample to 256 Hz, we elected to use the default setting
of 128 Hz, as it was sufficient for instructional purposes.
To introduce students to the technique of ERP, the
commercial EMOTIV system was modified with a custommade event-marker system (Figure 2; Thie et al., 2012; Thie,
2013; also see Badcock et al., 2013 and De Lissa et al.,
2015). This marker system allows real-time visualization of
the temporal correlations between the events occurring
during the experimental task and the recorded EEG signals.
The system consists of an infrared transmitter unit and a
receiver unit. The transmitter unit is connected to the audio
output of the laptop and receives an audio signal every time
a stimulus is presented. The unit then sends and amplifies
and digitized infrared signal to the receiver unit attached to
the side of the EMOTIV headset (Figure 2e). The output
wires of the receiver unit are attached to two of EMOTIV’s
sensors so that it can trigger an electrical pulse to mark

de Wit et al.

stimulus onset in the recorded EEG data upon receipt of the
infrared signal. This electrical pulse is visible at the time of
data acquisition (in the data channels of the two sensors that
the output wires are connected to), which allows students to
observe the process of event-marking in real-time and
solidify the concept of “timelocking” EEG activity to task
events. It should be noted that other approaches including
software-based approaches could be used. For example,
real time data acquisition controlled by MATLAB code could
embed digital triggers directly into the data (e.g.,
www.fieldtriptoolbox.org/development/realtime).

Neurogaming Technology Meets Neuroscience Education

A106

updated software package called PureEEG, which new
customers are now required to download and use
(www.emotiv.com/product/emotiv-pure-eeg).
MATLAB (R2015b) was used for running the
experimental tasks and processing of the EEG data. The
experimental tasks used in the Testing sessions were
simplified versions of published experimental protocols
(e.g., a face-recognition task used by De Lissa et al., 2015).
This allowed students with limited experimental
backgrounds to perform the experiment within the
scheduled class times. For ease of use, and to prevent
students from feeling overwhelmed when interacting directly
with MATLAB code (the course presupposed no familiarity
with MATLAB or any other programming languages), a
graphical user interface (GUI) was developed. This GUI
(see Figure 3, bottom panel) allowed students to select and
start the experimental task they wanted to run by simply
clicking on the appropriate button labeled with the name of
the task, without having to interact directly with MATLAB
code. During the Analysis sessions, students used the open
source software package EEGLAB (version 13_5_4b;
Delorme and Makeig, 2004) to perform the data processing
steps.

Figure 2. EMOTIV lab set-up. Top panel: Breakdown of lab items;
(a) event-marker’s transmitter unit, (b) EMOTIV’s wireless USB
receiver, (c) saline solution and cotton dental rolls, (d) laptop
computer, (e) event-marker’s receiver unit, and (f) EMOTIV
headset.

SOFTWARE
Two software packages were used during lab sessions:
Emotiv Xavier TestBench (version 3.1.21) for visualizing and
recording EEG, and MATLAB (version R2015b) for running
the experimental task and processing of the EEG data. The
TestBench software environment (Figure 3, top panel)
provides three main interactive panels: (1) contact quality
panel, (2) event log panel, and (3) EEG display panel. The
contact quality panel visually represents the position of the
sensors on the scalp and uses color variation to indicate
sensor connectivity and quality of the EEG signal. Colors
range from black through to green, with black indicating poor
sensor connectivity (high impedance) and green indicating
good connectivity (low impedance). The event log panel
displays the connectivity of the wireless USB receiver and
the pairing of the receiver with the EMOTIV headset. Finally,
the EEG display panel provides a real-time visualization of
the incoming EEG signals as well as artifacts such as eye
blinks. The EEG display also registers electrical pulses
triggered by the event-marker system (recall the recorded
EEG signal and event-markers are saved in the same file for
analysis). Although the focus in these labs was on the
visualization and recording of the primary EEG signal using
the EEG panel, TestBench can also display many other
measures including a breakdown of the EEG signal into its
component frequency domains (in the FFT panel) and the
horizontal and vertical position of the head (in the Gyro
panel). These features are also included in EMOTIV’s

Figure 3. Top panel: Screenshot of TestBench environment; (a)
contact quality panel, (b) event log panel, and (c) EEG display
panel. Bottom panel: Screenshot of custom-made graphical user
interface (GUI) to run the experimental tasks.

LAB IMPLEMENTATION
The EMOTIV labs were designed to complement and
reinforce basic concepts introduced through more traditional

The Journal of Undergraduate Neuroscience Education (JUNE), Spring 2017, 15(2):A104-A109 A107

modes of instruction including lectures and discussion
sections. To achieve this aim, lab session topics were
selected to align closely with subject matter being covered
in lectures and readings in the same week. The course
structure reflected the organization of the textbook used in
the unit (Purves et al., 2012), and, accordingly, covered the
following modules: (1) neural signaling (e.g., electrical
signals, synaptic transmission); (2) sensation (e.g., the
visual and auditory systems); (3) movement (e.g., motor
neuron circuits and motor control); and (4) complex brain
functions (e.g., attention). There was one EMOTIV lab per
module, and each lab consisted of two separate sessions (a
testing session and an analysis session). Labs were
designed to run for 1 hour in total (the scheduled length of
discussion sections at Macquarie University). Class sizes
were between 25-30 students, with sufficient equipment to
run the labs in small groups (n ≤ 5).
In Lab 1 (Primer Lab), students were introduced to EEG
techniques in general and the EMOTIV system in particular.
This lab helped build a foundation of basic understanding of
brain activity as electrical activity, which related to textbook
chapters on neural signaling covered in the initial weeks of
the course. It also gave students the opportunity to
familiarize themselves with the EMOTIV system and its
applications in neuroscience research. In Lab 2 (Vision
Lab), Lab 3 (Motor Lab), and Lab 4 (Cognition lab) the
fundamentals of ERP techniques and the workings of the
custom-made event-marker system were covered. These
“experimental” labs were explicitly designed to mimic key
aspects of the experimental research process.
To illustrate how ERPs afford a useful experimental
window into brain function, each lab session consisted of
scaffolded activities structured around accessible and wellestablished experimental findings. During testing sessions,
students ran simplified yet realistic versions of experiments
related to the topic under discussion. In follow-up analysis
sessions, students learned to apply the necessary data
processing steps (e.g., applying filters, epoching data),
perform simple data analyses, and critically discuss the
significance of their results. To ensure the to-be analysed
data demonstrated the highlighted experimental effect,
previously collected data was used rather than data
collected during the testing sessions. Additionally, data was
partly processed before delivery to the students. Both the
testing and analysis sessions required students to complete
supplementary activity sheets designed to guide students
through essential aspects of the research process and
encourage critical thinking along the way (for more details
about the structure of the testing and analysis sessions
including the associated activity sheets, see the
Supplementary materials).
Each EMOTIV lab highlighted contemporary research
findings (as recommended by Cleland, 2002) about the
brain mechanisms underlying different sensory, motor, and
cognitive functions – topics aligned with lectures and
readings for the course. For example, the Vision Lab
focused on the visual processing of faces, which is typically
marked by a face-specific response (ERP) that occurs
around 170ms after stimulus onset, termed the N170 (Luck
2014; Experiment adapted from De Lissa et al., 2015). The

other labs had a similar research-driven nature. The Motor
lab leveraged a different ERP component – the lateralized
readiness potential (LRP, see Supplementary materials)
(Luck 2014; Experiment adapted from Miller, 2012) – to
allow students to investigate how the brain prepares a motor
response and appreciate how activity related to motor
preparation is lateralized to the opposite hemisphere from
the limb being controlled. The Cognition lab used different
ERP components – the mismatch negativity (MMN) and
P300 ERP components (Luck 2014; Experiment adapted
from Badcock et al., 2013, 2015) – to deepen student
understanding of the role of attention and auditory
processing in the brain.

OUTCOMES
One cohort of students (n = 268) has now completed the
course including all of the EMOTIV labs. To assess student
perception and experience of the lab sessions, an
anonymous in-class survey was administered in the last
Analysis session. Only the results from completed surveys
were taken into account (n = 150). The survey consisted of
14 statements and students were asked whether they
agreed with the statements according to a 5-point Likert
scale, ranging from (1) strongly agree to (5) strongly
disagree.
To discourage students from automatically
selecting the same answer for every statement, the survey
included both positive and negative statements (e.g., The
content of the lab sessions was too difficult) so that the Likert
scale responses did not have the same valence across the
survey. The statements and the respective median and
standard deviation are presented in Table 1.
For interpretation purposes only, the statements were
grouped into three post hoc categories: “Enjoyment,”
“Usefulness,” and “Improved understanding of neuroscience
concepts and methods.” Following this grouping and taking
the positivity and negativity of all the statements into
account, the results can be summarized in three general
findings: (1) Students enjoyed the lab sessions overall; (2)
students found the lab sessions useful overall; and (3)
students found that the lab sessions contributed to their
understanding of basic neuroscience concepts and
methods.

EVALUATION AND DISCUSSION
This project demonstrates that it is possible to implement a
fully functional teaching laboratory in an undergraduate
neuroscience course using the latest in commercial
neurogaming technology.
Specifically, lab activities
employing the EMOTIV can give students the opportunity to
gain valuable research experience using the popular
cognitive neuroscience EEG/ERP techniques. The results
from in-class surveys showed that students enjoyed the
interactive research-based learning activities in the lab
sessions. Importantly, students also found that the lab
sessions enhanced their knowledge about EEG specifically,
and research in cognitive and brain sciences in general. As
previously highlighted in this report, the integration of
technology and research-based learning activities into
undergraduate neuroscience curriculum has long been

de Wit et al.

Statements
Enjoyment
I enjoyed the intellectual challenge
presented during the lab sessions
The lab sessions were enjoyable.
I enjoyed the problem-based learning style
used in the lab sessions.
Usefulness
The lab sessions took up too much of the
tutorial time.
I feel like I gained valuable practical skills
from the lab sessions.
The lab sessions should be part of this unit
again next year.
The lab sessions were a waste of time.
The content of the lab sessions was too
difficult.
Improved understanding of concepts and
methods
I learned a lot about EEG as a result of
these lab sessions.
The lab sessions clearly demonstrated the
importance of EEG in Cognitive and Brain
Sciences.
The lab sessions taught me what’s involved
in conducting an EEG experiment.
The lab sessions helped me understand
the course material.
The lab sessions have given me a deeper
understanding of what research in
Cognitive and Brain Sciences is like.
I would have understood the course
material better if we didn’t have to
participate in the lab sessions.

Neurogaming Technology Meets Neuroscience Education

A108

technology is set to shape the future of neuroscience
education. Providing undergraduate students with the
opportunity to acquire valuable research experience using
EEG techniques is now well within reach. Inspired by the
successful implementation of EMOTIV technology into our
first-year curriculum, we are currently envisioning ways to
expand its use into more advanced coursework including a
second-year course in cognitive neuroscience. We are
confident that the project can provide a working template for
implementing
neurogaming
technology
in
other
undergraduate programs worldwide.

Median

SD

2

0.98

2
2

0.90
0.96

4

1.21

2

1.06

2

0.87

REFERENCES

4
4

0.90
1.00

2

0.86

2

0.86

2

0.77

3

1.10

2

0.94

4

1.09

Badcock NA, Mousikou P, Mahajan Y, de Lissa P, Thie J, McArthur
GM (2013) Validation of the Emotiv EPOC® EEG gaming
system for measuring research quality auditory ERPs. PeerJ
1:e38.
Badcock NA, Preece KA, de Wit B, Glenn K, Fieder N, Thie J,
McArthur GM (2015) Validation of the Emotiv EPOC EEG
system for research quality auditory event-related potentials in
children. PeerJ 3:e907.
Boitano JJ, Seyal AA (2001) Neuroscience curricula for
undergraduates: a survey. Neuroscientist 7:202-206.
Brew A (2006) Research and teaching: beyond the divide.
Hampshire, UK: Palgrave Macmillan.
Cleland CL (2002) Integrating recent advances in neuroscience
into undergraduate neuroscience and physiology courses. Adv
Physiol Educ 26:271-277.
De Lissa P, Sörensen S, Badcock N, Thie J, McArthur G (2015)
Measuring the face-sensitive N170 with a gaming EEG system:
a validation study. J Neurosci Methods 253:47-54.
Delorme A, Makeig S (2004) EEGLAB: An open source toolbox for
analysis of single-trial EEG dynamics including independent
component analysis. J Neurosci Methods 134:9-21.
Griffin JD (2003) Technology in the teaching of neuroscience:
enhanced student learning. Adv Physiol Educ 27:146-155.
Hairston WD, Whitaker KW, Ries AJ, Vettel JM, Bradford JC,
Kerick SE, McDowell K (2014) Usability of four commerciallyoriented EEG systems. J Neural Eng 11:046018.
Hurd MW, Vincent DJ (2006) Functional Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (fMRI): a brief exercise for an undergraduate laboratory
course. J Undergrad Neurosci Educ 5:A22-A27.
Jasper HH (1958) Report of the committee on methods of clinical
examination
in
electroencephalography:
1957.
Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 10:370-375.
Kahn P, O’Rourke K (2004) Guide to curriculum design: enquirybased learning. Higher Education Academy 30-3: York.
Luck SJ (2014) An introduction to the event-related potential
technique (Second ed.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
McNeal AP, D’Avanzo C (1997) Student-active science: models of
innovation in college science teaching, Ft. Worth, TX: Saunders
College.
Miller BR, Troyer M, Busey T (2008) Virtual EEG: A software-based
electroencephalogram
designed
for
undergraduate
neuroscience-related courses. J Undergrad Neurosci Educ
7:A19-A25.
Miller J (2012) Selection and preparation of hand and foot
movements: Cz activity as a marker of limb system preparation.
Psychophysiology 49:590-603.
Nyhus E, Curtis N (2016) Incorporating an ERP project into
undergraduate instruction. J Undergrad Neurosci Educ 14:A91A96.
O’Brien C (2014, July 31) Your brain is your joystick in
neurogaming.
LA
Times.
Retrieved
from
http://www.latimes.com.

Table 1. Median and standard deviation (SD) of the Likert scale
survey questions (n = 150). Statements were scored according to
a 5-point Likert scale, ranging from (1) strongly agree to (5) strongly
disagree. The order of statements in this table does not reflect the
order of statements in the administered survey.

identified as a valuable but challenging endeavor due to the
high technical demands and costs associated with the
required research equipment (e.g., Steinmetz and Atapattu,
2010). To our knowledge, the project reported here is one
of the first of its kind to offer a realistic solution to these
challenges and make it feasible to create a functional EEG
teaching laboratory that covers all stages of the scientific
research process including data collection and analysis, and
can be offered to large student cohorts. Moreover, based
on student feedback, it also appears that the labs were both
interesting and contributed to their understanding of subject
matter covered in the course – thus successfully meeting the
intended educational objectives of the labs. Compared to
traditional research-grade EEG equipment, the EMOTIV is
highly affordable, portable, low maintenance, and easy to
use. Together, these features make it possible to create
authentic research-based learning experiences in
undergraduate neuroscience programs.
The rapid development of technology is opening up new
possibilities in neuroscience education, especially at the
undergraduate level. The current project demonstrates that
the emergence of relatively inexpensive neurogaming

The Journal of Undergraduate Neuroscience Education (JUNE), Spring 2017, 15(2):A104-A109 A109

Purves D, Augustine GJ, Fitzpatrick D, Hall WC, LaMantia AS,
White LE (Eds.) (2012) Neuroscience (Fifth ed.). Sunderland,
MA, USA: Sinauer Associates, Inc.
Ramirez JJ (1997) Undergraduate education in neuroscience: a
model for interdisciplinary study. Neuroscientist 3:166-168.
Schwarz D, Subramanian V, Zhuang K, Adamczyk C (2014)
Educational neurogaming: EEG-controlled videogames as
interactive teaching tools for introductory Neuroscience. Tenth
Artificial Intelligence and Interactive Digital Entertainment
Conference.
Senior C, Russell T, Gazzaniga MS (Eds.). (2006) Methods in
mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Steinmetz KRM, Atapattu RK (2010) Meeting the challenge of
preparing undergraduates for careers in cognitive neuroscience.
J Undergrad Neurosci Educ 9:A36-A42.
Thie J (2013) A wireless marker system to enable evoked potential
recordings using a wireless EEG system (EPOC) and a portable
computer. PeerJ PrePrints 1:e32v1.
Thie J, Klistorner A, Graham SL (2012) Biomedical signal
acquisition with streaming wireless communication for recording
evoked potentials. Doc Ophthalmol 125:149-159.

Yau SH, McArthur G, Badcock NA, Brock J (2015) Case study:
auditory brain responses in a minimally verbal child with autism
and cerebral palsy. Front Neurosci 9:208.
Zimbardi K, Myatt P (2014) Embedding undergraduate research
experiences within the curriculum: a cross-disciplinary study of
the key characteristics guiding implementation. Studies in Higher
Education 39:233-250.
Received September 27, 2016; revised December 14, 2016; accepted
December 22, 2016.
This work was supported by an Innovation and Scholarship Program (ISP)
grant from Macquarie University awarded to Dr. de Wit and Dr. Kaplan
(2016). The authors thank Mr. C. Richardson and Mr. M. Ockenden for
their technical assistance during this project.
Address corresponding to: Dr. Bianca de Wit, Department of Cognitive
Science, 16 University Avenue, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW 2109,
Australia. Email: bianca.dewit@mq.edu.au
Copyright © 2017 Faculty for Undergraduate Neuroscience
www.funjournal.org

