The Journal of Undergraduate Neuroscience Education (JUNE), Fall 2018, 17(1):A10-A19

ARTICLE
Recommendations for Developing
Undergraduate Institution

an

EEG

Laboratory

at

a

Primarily

Patrick Ledwidge, Jeremy Foust, & Adam Ramsey
Department of Psychology, Baldwin Wallace University, Berea, OH 44017.
Given its relatively low cost and minimal required space, an
EEG laboratory provides the most feasible human cognitive
neuroscience technique to implement at primarily
undergraduate institutions (PUI). However, neuroscience
programs at PUIs may be deterred from incorporating EEG
methods into their research programs and/or classrooms
due to limited funds and resources. This article provides
recommended guidelines for faculty researchers looking to
set up an EEG lab at their host PUIs with an emphasis on
feasibility. We offer considerations regarding infrastructure,
equipment, personnel, and potential sources of funding. A
case study is also provided, describing the successful

implementation and development of an EEG/ERP lab at a
Midwest PUI, Baldwin Wallace University. Our goal is to
offer diverse options for starting a new, or revitalizing an
existing, EEG lab. We contend that such a laboratory at a
PUI will advance undergraduate students’ access to
interdisciplinary neuroscience research and curricular
opportunities.

Recorded from the ongoing electroencephalogram (EEG),
event-related potentials (ERPs) reflect the electrical activity
of neurons that underlie cognitive and sensory processing.
Cognitive neuroscientists use EEG and ERPs to investigate
the neural processes underlying, for example, attention,
memory, inhibition, and language. The primary advantage
of EEG is its high-level of temporal precision (typically 2501000 Hz) at a relatively low-cost. Consequently, for
neuroscience programs at PUIs, EEG provides one of the
most feasible human brain-imaging tools to incorporate into
new or existing laboratories in which space, funds, and
advanced research personnel may be limited.
Hans Berger published the first recordings of the human
EEG in 1929 (Berger, 1929). During his initial successful
recordings, needles were inserted deep into the periosteum
(Collura, 1993). Using an oscillograph and galvanometer,
the EEG was plotted on streams of paper. At this time,
however, calibrations of EEG recordings between subjects
were not possible and interpretation was limited to single
subject data only. Since this time, EEG recording methods
have become increasingly more safe, feasible, and reliable.
This has increased the implementation of EEG across
neuroscience labs and advanced our understanding of the
relationships between the human brain and behavior.
Relative to other neuroimaging methods (e.g., fMRI,
MEG), EEG labs are relatively inexpensive to start-up and
maintain. Consequently, EEG/ERP provide a feasible
human cognitive neuroscience technique that students at
PUIs may use in the classroom or research space. The use
of EEG methods in neuroscience courses may vary from the
analysis of archival data (Miller et al., 2008), to data
collection and analysis (Marshall et al., 2011; Shields et al.,
2016). Impressively, Nyhus and Curtis (2016) demonstrated
the successful implementation of a one-semester laboratory
course in cognitive neuroscience in which students
experienced project design, computer programming, EEG

data collection, ERP processing, statistical analysis and
manuscript development. Adding an EEG/ERP lab to a
neuroscience program at a PUI would advance
neuroscience curricula and research experiences, reflecting
the evolving interdisciplinary field of neuroscience.
From the perspective of the faculty member, this may
also create research collaborations using multiple species,
an increasing interest of funding agencies such as the
National Science Foundation (NSF). In fact, the NSF is
prioritizing funding mechanisms for interdisciplinary
research programs that “explore questions that span
organizational levels, scales of analysis, and a wider range
of species optimal for experimental exploration of brain
function” (National Science Foundation Division of
Integrative Organismal Systems, 2018).
An EEG lab may also welcome prospective neuroscience
students who would otherwise opt out of working with nonhuman organisms due to lack of interest, allergies, and/or
animal welfare concerns. Consequently, there may be a
sizable population of students whose interests in
neuroscience are currently unmet. An EEG lab may meet
these interests. Such a lab would also diversify the
curriculum of a neuroscience program, expanding students’
scope of career opportunities in the neurosciences.
Established gold-standards for developing an EEG
laboratory (Luck, 2014a) may not always be achievable for
neuroscience programs at PUIs in which resources are often
limited (e.g., funding, personnel, space). Consequently, the
purpose of this article is to offer recommendation guidelines
(equipment, infrastructure, undergraduate training, funding)
for neuroscience programs and/or faculty interested in
developing an EEG laboratory, with particular emphasis on
feasibility. We conclude with an in-depth case study of how
an EEG laboratory was developed at Baldwin Wallace
University. This article is not intended to be an introduction
to EEG/ERP data collection/analysis.
For such a

Key words: electroencephalography (EEG); eventrelated potentials (ERP); neuroscience education, primarily
undergraduate
institution
(PUI)

JUNE is a publication of Faculty for Undergraduate Neuroscience (FUN) www.funjournal.org

Ledwidge et al.

comprehensive review, we direct the reader to Steven
Luck’s (2014a), “Introduction to the Event-Related Potential
Technique.”

DESIGNING THE EEG LABORATORY
EEG recordings are highly influenced by the environment in
which the data are collected. To increase the likelihood of
finding a true effect, human electrophysiology strives for a
high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). In brief, the electrical signal
you record to a given manipulation should be larger than
those voltage fluctuations unrelated to your study. The SNR
decreases as a result of, for example, unreliable recordings,
extraneous auditory sounds, electrical interference, air
quality in testing space, type of electrodes used, participant
compliance, and researcher error. Consequently, sufficient
planning is necessary when developing an EEG lab to
ensure that your future data maintain the highest possible
SNR.
In the proceeding section, we review the
considerations that concern EEG researchers before setting
up a new lab.
Location and infrastructure
Universities, Schools, and Departments may vary in the size
and type of space available for an EEG lab. For example,
programs may allocate funds to construct a new space or
adapt an existing space. Alternatively, available funds may
not exist for infrastructure changes. Elevators and other
large machinery produce a large electrical current and may
add unwanted noise to your data. Thus, if possible, it is
preferable for your lab to be located far from such large
sources of electrical noise.
At a minimum, an EEG lab used for investigative
research should maintain its own space separate from other
classrooms or laboratories.
An independent lab will
minimize distractions during testing. The size of the lab will
depend on the scope and expected productivity of the
research program. With certain EEG acquisition systems, it
is possible to collect data in a space as small as 100 square
feet. However, additional space is often needed for storing
equipment, maintaining files, and training students. If the
purpose of the laboratory is for both research and teaching,
departments should consider how many persons may be
occupying the space at any given time. Two student
researchers per EEG recording session are typical.
Consequently, a minimum of three persons (two
researchers and one participant) should be able to work
comfortably in the EEG acquisition room. Additional space
and equipment may be needed for computer programming,
data processing, and also instruction.
The data acquisition space should be large enough that
a participant could sit 100-200 cm from the computer
monitor displaying the stimulus presentation sequence.
This distance will minimize the electrical interference from
the monitor (LCD monitor is recommended because it
produces less electrical noise than CRT monitors) that may
add noise to the EEG and subsequently reduce the SNR.
This distance should be short enough, however, that the
participant can comfortably view the stimuli. For visual
stimuli it is strongly recommended that participants are
screened for normal/corrected-normal vision prior to

Starting an EEG/ERP Laboratory at a PUI

A11

acquisition. All research personnel and equipment (other
than the monitor) should be situated behind the participant
to avoid potential sources of distraction.
If possible, it may be advantageous for the participant
and researchers to be separated into two different rooms. In
such a set-up, the participants are seated immediately on
the other side of a wall that separates them from the
researchers. This is advantageous for two reasons. First,
the researchers are able to discuss the incoming EEG
during acquisition without distracting the participant, which
provides
an
advantageous
training
environment.
Extraneous auditory stimuli, such as that from
conversations, will likely decrease the SNR, lead to messier
data, and potentially mask otherwise present effects.
Second, it allows for data collection to occur in a dark or
dimly lit room which is particularly advantageous for studies
examining visual processing. Cleaner visual ERPs (e.g.,
N100, P100) are recorded when there is a larger contrast
between figure and ground (e.g., white words on a black
background in a dark). This may be less critical when
examining later cognitive ERP components, such as the
P300 (reflecting attentional allocation/context-updating;
Polich, 2007) and N400 (lexical-semantic access/retrieval;
Kutas & Federmeier, 2011).
The caveat with the two-room set-up is that investigators
may want a method of observing the participant during
testing. Motor movements produce large artifacts in the
EEG and, consequently, reduce data quality. Consequently,
it is critical to determine whether or not the participant is
following instructions and/or moving during acquisition.
Researchers view the ongoing EEG as it comes in real-time
and are thus able to visually detect these artifacts. However,
determining the cause of an EEG artifact (e.g., neck
movement, eye blink, chewing, wiggling nose) by observing
the data alone often takes years of training. Consequently,
it is helpful to observe the front of the participant during
acquisition, particularly for undergraduate researchers who
are new to EEG.
One option is to install a camera in the testing room that
faces the participant and live-streams out to the second
room. This would require the space and funds to install both
the camera itself and an additional monitor in the researcher
room. A second option would be to install a two-way window
into the shared wall. As a result, researchers may observe
the participant from behind and thus determine if the
participant is making gross motor movements, not including
those localized to the face (e.g., blinking, wiggling nose).
This option also allows for greater training opportunities for
new undergraduate researchers. That is, PIs may use this
as an initial training tool for students in real time without
creating any additional unnecessary distractions that could
interfere with data quality.
It is important to note that the two-room testing set-up
may require a method of communication between the
participant and researchers (Luck, 2014b). You may choose
to install a microphone system in each room to allow for
rapid communication. Since the rooms are immediately
adjacent to one another, having the researcher enter the
testing space when appropriate can easily facilitate
communication. In such instances, we recommend that the

The Journal of Undergraduate Neuroscience Education (JUNE), Fall 2018, 17(1):A10-A19

researcher be present in the room with the participant to
review task instructions. For studies in our lab, we include
a sufficient number of practice trials to ensure the participant
is completely clear on how to perform the task. During such
practice, the researcher is always in the testing room with
the participant to answer any questions and provide direct
feedback if necessary. If the researchers need to give
additional instructions to the participant during acquisition,
the stimulus presentation sequence is always paused,
providing the opportunity for a researcher to enter the testing
space.
It is common for many studies, particularly those that are
longer than 7-10 minutes, to program tasks into blockdesigns, which allows for scheduled breaks to occur
systematically and periodically during acquisition. These
provide additional opportunities for researchers to enter the
room to communicate with the participant. However, it is
important that these breaks should be rather short so that
the participant does not become distracted from task
demands.
When designing his EEG lab, the first author (PL)
considered installing an electrically shielded recording
chamber, also known as a Faraday Cage. As Luck (2014b)
reviews, shielded chambers may not be necessary and may
actually lead to poorer data quality. Recording chambers
that are poorly ventilated are particularly problematic for
longer data collection sessions (e.g., > 20 mins) because the
lack of ventilation leads to more perspiration. On the scalp,
when glands fill with sweat they alter the electrode-scalp
impedances (the connection between electrode and scalp),
which ultimately cause large voltage changes over a period
of seconds called cephalic skin potentials (Kappenman &
Luck, 2010). Skin potentials are particularly problematic
with high-impedance electrodes as they already maintain a
relatively poor connection with the scalp compared to lowimpedance electrodes. The advantages and disadvantages
of low and high impedance electrodes are discussed in a
later section.
Sound attenuation
When setting up your EEG laboratory, extraneous noise
entering the testing room should be limited. Outside noise
can, among other things, distract the participant, interfere
with the data collection, and reduce the SNR of your EEG.
Soundproof rooms prevent outside noises from entering
the testing space and, consequently, remain the goldstandard for EEG recording. In particular, any noise above
2 kHz is largely eliminated (Ingris, 2014). The price
associated with a sound booth may vary based on model
and size. For example, a WhisperRoom sound booth costs
approximately $4,000-$28,000 depending on size and level
of sound attenuation (WhisperRoom, 2018). In addition,
Mini Audiology Booths from IAC Acoustics range from
$4,000-$5,000 based on size (IAC Acoustics, 2018) with
additional options for larger sound booths at a steeper cost.
However, a complete soundproof room may not be
necessary and, in fact, may actually produce more artifactladen data compared to that collected in a sound-attenuated
room. Sound booths, like shielded recording chambers,
provide poor air ventilation and, consequently, can lead to

A12

rapid increases in temperature and skin potentials as
previously discussed.
Inexpensive “low-tech” methods are cheaper alternatives
to sound booths and may be moderately effective in limiting
the influence of outside noises on the EEG recording. For
example, acoustic panels are a type of sound absorption
product that dampens sound within a space. Because the
primary concern is extraneous sounds entering the testing
space, acoustic panels should be mounted on the outside,
not inside, walls of the recording room. Prices may range
from $20-80 per panel based on manufacturer and size
(ATS Acoustics, 2018). Thick blankets, such as quilts,
provide another low-tech method and can also block outside
sounds (Luck, 2014b).
Rather than blocking noise from entering the recording
space, some labs may choose to mask outside noise (Luck,
2014b). In one of PL’s previous laboratories, testing
occurred in non-soundproof rooms within a larger
collaborative research space.
When multiple testing
sessions occurred simultaneously (especially in adjacent
rooms), it was difficult to avoid noise interference.
Consequently, a white noise machine continuously ran
during EEG recording. White noise machines have proven
to be surprisingly effective in reducing the interference from
noise outside the testing environment. In fact, because the
machine was small and turned on prior to participants’
arrival, they rarely recognized the white noise until it was
turned off at the end of the session. One caveat of white
noise machines is they may add additional electrical noise
to your EEG recording and reduce the SNR. Consequently,
you’ll want to place the white noise machine as far from the
participant as possible. Prices may range from $30 to over
$80 depending on make and model (Conair, 2018;
Homedics, 2018). An EEG researcher strives for collecting
the cleanest possible recordings. To do so, it is critical to
consider sound attenuation when developing your lab.
Electrical grounding
When designing your lab, you’ll want to make sure that all
outlets that may be used for data collection equipment are
electrically grounded. Electrical grounding (“grounding,”
“earthing”) prevents the participant from experiencing any
electric shock in the case of an electric short. In brief, a
grounded electrical outlet has three holes. When a plug is
inserted into the top two holes (one is “active” the other is
“neutral’) of the socket, a circuit is created. The two paths
are transmitted to the circuit breaker and then onto the
source of electricity (e.g., the electrical line outside your
building). The bottom hole of the outlet is for the ground plug
on your socket. This is for the grounding wire (“return path”)
which is connected to the neutral path. The ground path
connects to a metal object (often a pole or rod) that is buried
into the ground (“Earth Ground”). In the case of a lightning
strike, the electrical charge from the EEG amplifier will flow
to earth ground and not the participant.
Lighting
When setting up your testing environment, it is important to
consider how you illuminate the area. Traditional ACcurrent lights (e.g., incandescent, fluorescent, etc.) can

Ledwidge et al.

produce line noise, which will interfere with your EEG
recording. To reduce the amount of electrical noise that is
introduced into your data, fluorescent ballast systems
should be avoided, as well as lamps that are powered by a
typical wall outlet. Instead, effort should be taken to utilize
lights powered by DC current (Luck, 2014b).
If you do not have a large area to illuminate or if your lab
has limited funding, one option is to use inexpensive battery
powered LED lights, such as Tap Lights, that are often used
to light small areas of the home. The benefit of these lights
is their simplicity of use, installation, and operation.
However, these generally small lights can also prove difficult
in evenly lighting up an entire testing chamber or room.
Care must be taken to ensure that the testing area is
comfortably lit.
Labs that require a large illuminated area might consider
using interior LED light strips or light bars, powered by a DC
power supply. LED strips can be found in most home
improvement stores, and the range of offerings is quite
large. Therefore, most institutions will be able to find
products that suit their budget and their testing area’s needs
simply due to availability. Although LED strips are very
convenient, easy to install, and mostly cost-effective, it
should be noted that some of these products have dimming
and color changing capabilities. Unless your lab requires
these functions, products with this added functionality might
be best avoided as they produce extra electrical noise.
Finally, labs with smaller, enclosed testing areas will want to
take care that their lighting choice does not produce enough
heat to increase skin potentials (Luck, 2014b).
Similar to LED light strips, many different types of 12V
DC power supplies are available to the consumer, with
widely varying prices. Some institutions might prefer
battery-powered supplies which can minimize the amount of
electrical noise produced. These units might prove to be
more expensive in the long run, however, as they will require
regular battery changes. Other types of power supplies plug
into a typical wall outlet and output DC current to the lighting
fixtures in your lab. Naturally, these types of power supplies
should be located as far from the participant as possible,
since converting the current produces electrical noise and
reduces the SNR of the EEG. Products also vary in
complexity of set up (i.e., some only require cords, while
some require internal wiring), so it is critical to purchase the
power supply that best suits the needs and capabilities of
your institution and personnel.
The recommendations in this section were intended to
provide researchers with options for maximizing the clarity
of their data. As LED technology continues to improve, it will
become even easier for researchers to purchase products
that fit their labs’ illumination and budgetary needs. If a lab
has limited funding for DC lighting, it will be critical to arrange
the testing area such that all sources of AC powered lighting
are as far away from participants as possible in order to
maximize the clarity of the data.
Additional space
It is also important to consider how much laboratory space
you may want for procedures that are unrelated to EEG data
collection. At a minimum, you will want access to a sink and

Starting an EEG/ERP Laboratory at a PUI

A13

an active water line. If you are using saline-based
electrodes, they will need to be rinsed and sterilized after
each application. Even with gel-based electrodes, you will
want to have a faucet or sink in the lab for washing off gel.
However, if an accessible sink is nearby, you may not find it
necessary to have one in your lab.
An additional consideration is the amount of space
required for computer programming, data processing,
and/or data analysis. One may also consider if the lab space
will be used for non-EEG related research activities. It is
common to maintain a separate space used for consenting
participants and also administering surveys, interviews, and
behavioral assessments. Additional space may also be
warranted for classroom instruction, lab meetings, and an
office for a lab manager. When funds are limited, PIs should
weigh the benefits of additional space against the added
costs that could be devoted towards EEG equipment and
software.

EEG RECORDING EQUIPMENT
Choosing the hardware that will best suit a new EEG lab
involves considering the goals of one’s research program
and institution. These considerations range from practical
(e.g., cost) to more technical aspects; the weight of each of
these factors will vary between labs. In an effort to assist
programs interested in setting up a new EEG laboratory, this
section will provide a review of significant factors that will aid
in choosing a configuration. Then, we will present an
overview of five representative EEG systems to provide
researchers with a range of options that cover a variety of
needs: Electrical Geodesic Inc.’s (EGI) Geodesic EEG
System, BioSemi’s ActiveTwo, Brain Products’ actiCHamp,
BioPac and Advanced Brain Monitoring’s B-AlertX, and
Emotiv’s EPOC.
The price of the EEG system is often one’s first
consideration. The cost will depend on your need for
hardware, software, amplifier(s), and tech support. The
prices provided hereinafter are those for a complete system
configuration. Even though funds may be limited at a PUI,
we contend that starting an EEG lab is still possible. While
some complete packages can cost more than $100,000,
most companies offer multiple configurations with widely
varying prices.
For example, while BrainProducts’s
actiCHamp system may cost approximately $80,000 for a
128-channel configuration, the 32-channel package is
approximately $43,000 (J. Drucker, Brain Products’s,
personal communication, January 30, 2018). Lower cost
systems also exist such as Emotiv’s $799 EPOC (Emotiv,
2018), which may be an option for laboratories with limited
funds or those who wish to purchase several packages for
neuroscience laboratory courses. Both of these examples
will be described in greater detail below, but the range of
prices should serve as an indicator that systems exist that
meet the needs of most budgets.
Another factor to be considered when buying EEG
equipment concerns number of electrodes and their
impedance levels (low v. high). A greater number of
electrodes are often reflected in a higher price, such as in
the actiCHamp system. The specific electrode configuration
will most likely depend on the goals of your lab (e.g.,

The Journal of Undergraduate Neuroscience Education (JUNE), Fall 2018, 17(1):A10-A19

teaching, research) and research questions. Importantly,
there is non-trivial trade-off between number of electrodes
and quality of EEG recordings. It has been suggested,
however, that the quality of EEG recordings from a highdensity system is no worse than those from low-density
systems (Luck, 2014c). Electrodes used in high-density
configurations (e.g., 128-256 channels) tend to maintain
higher impedances than low-density systems (e.g., 9-32
channels), which may lead to greater noise (e.g., skin
potentials) and unwanted variability within your EEG
recordings. For example, Kappenman and Luck (2010)
reported more skin potentials in recordings from a highimpedance, rather than low-impedance, system which
dramatically reduced statistical power. However, highimpedance electrodes are quicker to apply and reduce the
risk of infection or disease transmission associated with the
scalp-abrasion necessary for low-impedance electrodes.
High-density systems are necessary for labs interested in
determining spatial sources of evoked potentials (i.e.,
source localization). According to the undergraduate
student, those in laboratory courses tend to favor the use of
fewer, individual electrodes, whereas student researchers
prefer the use of electrode caps (Shields et al., 2016).
The type of electrode a system uses should be taken into
account.
Active electrodes maintain hardwired
“pre-amplifiers,” rendering them less susceptible to electrical
noise
than
passive
electrodes
(Luck,
2014b).
Consequently, they are more commonly used in EEG
configurations than passive electrodes. Active electrodes
best serve researchers who have less control over their
testing room’s layout, and might have to deal with additional
electrical noise. Active electrodes are, however, more
expensive than their passive counterparts which are usually
used in lower-cost and wireless systems, such as Emotiv’s
EPOC.
Finally, when choosing an EEG configuration, consider
the amount of time it takes to apply the electrodes, check
the impedances, and record the EEG. Application time can
vary widely between systems, from five minutes to more
than thirty. Major determinants of setup time are the number
of electrodes and the conductive medium used. Some
systems such as BioSemi’s ActiveTwo utilize a conductive
gel paste to reduce impedances. Electrode application
tends to be longer with gel-based systems since it must be
applied to each electrode after the cap is fitted to the
participant.
Naturally, this becomes increasingly
problematic with increased number of electrodes. Clean-up
time also is longer with gel-based systems, due to rinsing
remaining paste out of the participant’s hair. The benefit of
a gel system is that it creates a stable connection with the
scalp that improves over the testing session (Luck, 2014b).
In contrast to gel, other systems such as EGI’s high-density
electrode nets use a saline-based solution to decrease
impedances and improve the electrode-scalp connection.
The benefit of this system is that it reduces setup time since
a researcher can soak an entire electrode net before
application. The disadvantage of saline is that impedances
may increase over the course of testing, requiring
researchers to reapply saline to electrodes manually as the
testing session proceeds. Some wireless systems utilize

A14

variations on the gel and saline systems, and will be
described individually in the system overviews. Table 1
provides a summary comparison of the five EEG
configurations that we review in the following section.
Review of five representative systems
The five EEG systems reviewed in this section all boast the
ability to record reliable EEG and may be used for both
teaching and investigative research.
However, when
appropriate, we report on research demonstrating that some
configurations outperform others. We will compare these
five systems on their cost, electrode type, electrode
application medium, number of electrodes, and set-up time.
Electric Geodesics’ GES 400 series configuration is one
of three wired EEG systems that will be discussed. Prices
for a complete EGI Geodesic configuration range from
approximately $30,000-$175,000 depending on electrode
array and purchase of additional hardware (e.g., amplifier),
software, and technical support (M. Hartman, EGI, personal
communication, November 17, 2016; J. Nichols, EGI,
personal communication, January 18, 2018). EGI offers
configurations of 32, 64, 128, and 256 active-electrodes.
This is a high impedance system that utilizes saline solution
as its conductive medium. Application time typically takes
5-15 minutes for two researchers. Labs whose research
focuses on source localization might consider a high density
EGI system. EGI also offers installation and training for
laboratories who purchase their equipment. For labs with
limited funding, a new EEG investigator might instead
consider EGI’s GES 405, 32-channel system, which would
include support and training (Electrical Geodesics, Inc.,
2018).
BioSemi’s ActiveTwo is also a wired system with a range
of configurations and prices range from approximately
$20,000-$87,000 for 16- and 256-channel systems
respectively (BioSemi, n.d.). The low-impedance active
electrodes are applied using a gel so set-up time will take
longer than saline-based electrodes. A cap is first fitted to
the participant’s head. Syringes are used to inject the
conductive gel into holes for the electrodes. Finally, the
electrodes are snapped into place in the cap. Since each
electrode is handled individually, it can take two researchers
20 minutes to set up a 64-electrode cap (Hairston et al.,
2014). Although the initial setup time is longer than EGI’s,
the gel provides a more stable connection to the scalp
recordings over the course of the recording session. Like
EGI, the ActiveTwo system offers a 256-channel
configuration, providing another possibility for labs
interested in source localization techniques. Electrode caps
are also offered in a configuration of 16 electrodes, which
might be enticing for labs wanting the low maintenance of a
gel system and a limited budget.
Like EGI and ActiveTwo, Brain Products’s actiCHamp is
a wired system with active electrodes that are available in
many configurations ranging from approximately $43,000$80,000 for 32-channel and 128-channel configurations
respectively. A higher-density 160-channel system is also
offered. Due to the construction of their actiCAP, it takes
approximately 10-20 minutes to apply the electrodes
depending on the configuration (J. Drucker, BrainProducts,

Ledwidge et al.

System

Approximate cost for full
configuration

Electrode Type

Starting an EEG/ERP Laboratory at a PUI

A15

Conductive
Medium

Electrode
Configurations

Application time

Electrical Geodesics:
Geodesic System

32-channels ≈ $30K
128-channels ≈ $130K
256-channels ≈ $175K

High impedance:
Active

Saline

32 -256

5-15 mins.

BioSemi:
Active Two

16-channels ≈ $20K
256-channels ≈ $87K

Low impedance:
Active

Gel

16 – 256

10-30 mins.

Brain Products:
actiCHamp

32-channels ≈ $43K
160-channels ≈ $80K

Low impedance:
Active

Gel

32 - 160

10 mins.

BioPac and Advanced
Brain Monitoring:
B-Alert X10

≈ $11-16K

Low impedance:
Passive

Gel

9

5-30 mins.

Emotiv:
EPOC

≈ $799

High impedance:
Passive

Saline

14

5 mins.

Table 1. Review of five representative EEG systems.

personal communication, January 30, 2018). Electrodes
snap into placeholders on caps of varying sizes. A unique
capability of the actiCAP are LED lights that change color
based on the electrode’s impedance level (Emmerling,
2017). A slit by each electrode allows for the application of
gel.
BioPac products are known for their user-friendliness
and utility within undergraduate neuroscience courses.
Students may use these packages to record and study
aspects of human physiology, including motor neuron
activity and heart rate. Instructors already using BioPac
packages may consider incorporating the BioPac and
Advanced Brain Monitoring B-Alert X10 into their teaching
and/or research. The X10 system can be used as a wired
or wireless system. In wireless mode, the unit transmits
signal to your recording device via Bluetooth. Unlike the
previously discussed systems, the B-Alert X10 is not offered
in multiple arrangements. The 9-channel passive-electrode
configuration costs approximately $11,000-$16,000
depending on the inclusion of additional software for
monitoring cognitive states based on EEG spectra power
densities (J. Anderson, BioPac, personal communication,
January 30, 2018). The electrodes attach to a plastic strip
that is fitted around the head. The system includes strips of
different sizes to accommodate a range of head sizes. The
B-Alert X10 is a gel-based system in which adhesive rings
are placed around electrodes into which gel is inserted. It
has been praised for its ease and speed of initial application,
but its software package is reportedly slow to display
impedances (Hairston et al., 2014). It should be noted that
Advanced Brain Monitoring also offers the B-Alert X24,
which is a 20-channel configuration for those who would like
additional scalp coverage.

Finally, the EPOC from Emotiv Systems is a 14-channel
wireless headset and costs approximately $799 (Emotiv,
2018). In addition to the benefit of low cost, the EPOC
system is also fast to set up (Hairston et al., 2014). The
system is comprised of 14 plastic arms attached to a
headset, each with an electrode on the end. This system
uses sponge pads pre-soaked in saline as its conductive
medium, which allows for shorter setup times than a gelbased system. The headset is only available in one size,
however, and the arms, although flexible to an extent, do not
easily reach their intended areas on very large and very
small heads, which may lead to unreliable recordings
(Hairston et al., 2014).
Researchers have investigated the utility of the EPOC as
a brain-computer interface (BCI) device, such as during
mental imagery (Bobrov et al., 2011). The EEG recorded
from the EPOC has demonstrated the ability to identify
mental states above chance levels (Bobrov et al., 2011).
However, its efficacy is significantly lower compared to data
recorded from both the actiCAP (Bobrov et al., 2011) and
BioSemi (Nijboer et al., 2015). Compared to the EPOC,
participants also rated the BioSemi as more comfortable
(Nijboer et al., 2015).
The EPOC has demonstrated the ability to reliably record
the P300 ERP (Duvinage et al., 2013) with a significant
intraclass correlation (0.74-0.80) with the Neuroscan system
(Badcock et al., 2013). However, the EPOC produced a
significantly lower SNR than a medical-grade configuration
(Duvinage et al., 2013). This may result from the electrode
configuration of the EPOC which does not include midline
electrodes where the P300 is maximally recorded.
Consequently, relative to other systems, this device may be
poorly suited for research investigations, particularly when a

The Journal of Undergraduate Neuroscience Education (JUNE), Fall 2018, 17(1):A10-A19

high SNR is necessary to identify ERPs of interest
(Duvinage et al., 2013).
It should also be noted that the EPOC outputs data in a
processed manner, and requires a monthly subscription to
software to access the device’s raw EEG data. The EPOC
is lauded for its user-friendliness and low start-up cost, but
the fragile headset and imprecise electrode placements may
necessitate future maintenance costs (Duvinage et al.,
2013). The EPOC may be well suited for a laboratory
course. Although used in research investigations, it tends
to underperform relative to higher-cost alternatives
(Badcock et al., 2013; Bobrov et al., 2011; Duvinage et al.,
2013).
The EEG system best suited for one’s needs is a
balancing act between its performance relative to other
systems, intended use (teaching, research), and budgetary
concerns. Any of these five systems may be used for both
teaching and research purposes.
For example, EGI
configurations are widely used in both research and clinical
settings, and investigations include those on neural
mechanisms of sleepiness (Camfferman et al., 2017),
emotional processing (Tsolaki et al., 2017), autism spectrum
disorder (Clawson et al., 2017), and sports-related
concussion (Ledwidge & Molfese, 2016; Hudac et al., 2017).
Published studies using the BioSemi Active Two system
include those on ambiguous discourse comprehension
(Dwivedi & Gibson, 2017), body perception (Stekelenburg &
de Gelder, 2004), and as a device for BCI applications
(Nijboer et al., 2015).
However, a system used primarily for a neuroscience lab
course likely does not require the number of electrodes or
hardware/software requirements of a high-density
configuration, such as that offered from EGI and BioSemi.
A lower-cost alternative such as the B-Alert X10 or EPOC
may be better suited for teaching purposes. For laboratories
intending to use their EEG equipment for both investigative
research and teaching, it is critical to identify a system that
produces reliable recordings and is also rather durable for
the purposes of a lab course.

PERSONNEL AND TRAINING

Following a considerable training period (≈ 20-40 hours
depending on the PI’s intended level of autonomy for the
students), undergraduate research assistants are fully
capable of collecting reliable EEG recordings. As a result of
the extended training period, it is in the lab director’s best
interest to train dedicated students who are able to commit
to multiple semesters of research. This section will outline
the components of a successful EEG lab including
recommendations for training, the opportunities for lab
managers, the lab manual, and the application process.
The extent of the lab procedures that you will expect
students to perform will vary based on the goals of the lab.
At the onset of training, it is important to emphasize the
overall purpose of the research and “why” the lab is
performing these procedures (Ledwidge et al., in press).
This will help student better understand the goals of lab and
to troubleshoot in the case of equipment malfunction. The
lab director should expect to devote regular and continuous
training to each individual student or in small groups of 3-4

A16

students. This ensures that each researcher receives
individualized hands-on training and that experimental drift,
the divergence from research protocols over time, is avoided
(Ledwidge et al., in press).
As in all human neuroscience labs, students should first
be trained on lab protocols, safety, and ethical standards
regarding human subjects. Students may also be involved
in the development of study-specific IRBs, as obtaining
approval is a necessary step prior to beginning any research
procedures. Following, you will likely dedicate the largest
portion of training to electrode placement and EEG
acquisition. It is important that the lab director emphasizes
the importance of precision and accuracy during electrode
placement, as differences between student researchers
may add extraneous variability to your data and,
consequently, reduce its reliability.
Once research
assistants are trained on how to accurately place electrodes
on the scalp, they should learn how to record reliable EEG.
This includes instruction on monitoring the EEG to detect for
participant compliance and movement artifacts (e.g., eye
blinks). For evoked potential studies, students are also likely
to work with stimulus presentation software such as E-prime
and Psychopy.
The lab director may choose to hire a lab manager to
assist with training research assistants, coordinating
schedules, and possibly even managing one or more
projects.
The lab manager is often an advanced
undergraduate student who has one or more years of lab
experience but may also be a recent graduate. A welltrained and experienced lab manager may oversee data
collection, process and analyze the EEG data, present at
conferences, and also contribute to the writing process.
Regardless of the size of your EEG lab, we recommend
the development of a lab manual (Ledwidge et al., in press).
Initially, it serves as an outline for training new
undergraduate researchers. The lab manual should include
all aspects of training. This may include procedures directly
related to human subjects research (e.g., informed
consenting, ethics), using the EEG equipment, accurately
applying electrodes and identifying artifacts. The lab
manual is a working document; it should be updated
annually and available to all members of the research team.
An application and/or interview process will help the lab
director determine if a prospective student is a good fit for
the research team. When reviewing applications, the PI may
consider the students’ time they are willing to research in the
lab. The amount of time that each EEG recording session
lasts is project-specific. It is not uncommon, however, for an
evoked potential study to last between 1-2 hours with
additional time needed for data maintenance, entry, and
processing.
Therefore the PI should determine the
minimum amount of time that research assistants should
work in the lab in order to contribute in a meaningful
capacity.
Since an EEG lab may present many new experiences to
undergraduate students, predicting students’ ability in the
lab can be difficult. At a minimum, research assistants
should be detail-oriented and careful with scalp
measurements and EEG recordings.
For instance,
measuring the head and placing electrodes should be done

Ledwidge et al.

in a precise manner in order to obtain the cleanest possible
recordings. GPA is one potential metric to measure
students’ prospective lab performance. However, academic
success may only weakly predict a student’s research skills.
As a result, PI’s may consider evaluating applicants on
multiple outcomes other than academic performance.
Factors such as precision, interacting with the
participant, and thinking logically to fix problems are
important. In addition, the lab director may consider the
amount of time a student can dedicate to research and
his/her motivation for joining the lab (e.g., career interests).
A student’s prior course work also may provide a point of
consideration. PL found that students who have a deeper
interest in understanding the mechanisms of human
behavior contribute to the lab in more significant ways.

BUDGET AND FUNDING
The available sources of funding will largely influence the
design and set-up of the EEG lab. Successful funding
proposals are those that align their needs with the larger
initiatives of the institution (Reiness, 2012). As Reiness
(2012) recommends, funding proposals that require
immediate decisions will likely be met with rejection. Early
conversations about the development of the lab should
include relevant college-level administrators (e.g., provost,
academic dean, department chair). These stakeholders are
critical for solidifying initial funding for building the laboratory
space. In this section, we outline recommendations for
securing funds for your lab. Before asking for funds, we
recommend creating a budget of expected costs and
priorities. Barring access to large amounts of funds, a sound
booth may not be necessary, but EEG hardware should be
that which is commonly used in peer-reviewed publications
if the lab will be used for research purposes.
During the initial planning phase, consult with
electricians, carpenters, and heating/cooling specialists
(either at your school or externally) to develop a budget for
your infrastructure costs. Identify EEG equipment/software
that suits your lab and budget and contact their sales teams
for quotes. Ask the sales representative about the computer
hardware/software that the EEG equipment requires for use
because you may need to create additional lines in your
budget for this hardware. Note that there are open source
toolboxes for ERP processing and analysis, such as
EEGLAB (Delorme and Makeig, 2004) and ERPLAB
(Lopez-Calderon and Luck, 2014).
Once you calculate the expected costs for infrastructure
and equipment, budget the annual cost for maintaining the
lab. For example, you may choose to purchase annual
customer support access for EEG acquisition/processing
software. Will you require a laundering service for towels
and/or lab coats? You may also choose to hire a full- or parttime lab manager or lab technician. Depending on the size
of your budget, you may have to seek start-up and/or
continuous funding through competitive internal grants.
Although these grants may be too small to fund an entire
lab, they may cover the full or partial dividend of your
remaining budget.
If expenses remain unfunded you may choose to apply
for external funding. There are several grant-funding

Starting an EEG/ERP Laboratory at a PUI

A17

mechanisms whose goal is to support undergraduate
laboratories and equipment purchases. For example, the
National Institutes of Health (NIH) Parent R15 grant,
Academic Research Enhancement Award (AREA), funds
biomedical research at public or non-profit private
institutions that receive less than $6 million in NIH funding
per year. This mechanism is for small research projects that
focus on enhancing undergraduate involvement (U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, National
Institutes of Health, 2018).
The National Science
Foundation (NSF) offers the Research in Undergraduate
Institutions (RUI) and Research Opportunity Awards (ROA)
grants which fund faculty research at PUIs and also
encourages collaborative proposals with faculty/students at
other institutions (National Science Foundation, 2018a).
Through the Major Research Instrumentation program, the
NSF also funds proposals solely for the purchase of largescale research equipment. Typically, these proposals are
for a single piece of equipment ranging from $100,000$4,000,000. However, proposals for less than $100,000 are
also accepted in the fields of math, social/behavioral
sciences, and economics from eligible non-Ph.D. granting
institutions (National Science Foundation, 2018b). Your
institutions Office of Research may help you to identify
additional appropriate private and government funding
mechanisms to jump-start your lab.

EXAMPLE
Baldwin Wallace University is a Higher Learning
Commission accredited private regional institution located in
an inner-suburb of Cleveland, Ohio. Baccalaureate degrees
are conferred from more than 80 areas of study. Graduate
programs include Master’s of Business, Master’s of
Education, Master’s of Public Health, Physician Assistant,
and Speech-Language Pathology. The Department of
Psychology and Neuroscience Program are both housed in
the School of Social Sciences within the College of Arts and
Sciences.
Undergraduate student researchers in the EEG
Laboratory primarily hail from the Department of Psychology
and Neuroscience Program, although the departments of
biology, chemistry, mathematics, and public health are also
represented.
The Psychology Department and
Neuroscience Program confer approximately 60 and 20
Bachelor of Science degrees every year, respectively. The
neuroscience program at Baldwin Wallace began in 1999
and has a rich history of supporting undergraduate research
on the neurobiological bases of behavior (Morris et al.,
2015). Faculty in the Neuroscience Program maintain active
research programs on (a) the behavioral pharmacology of
taste in rats; (b) sensory modulation of behavior (C.
elegans); and (c) neuronal differentiation (Danio rerio).
With the support of university administration, the College
of Arts and Science, and the School of Social Sciences, PL
developed a cognitive neuroscience laboratory focused on
the use of EEG/ERP methods that would contribute to both
the Department of Psychology and Neuroscience program.
The lab was funded internally. Eight months elapsed from
the initial development of the lab until its completion,
including all infrastructure changes, equipment purchases

The Journal of Undergraduate Neuroscience Education (JUNE), Fall 2018, 17(1):A10-A19

and installation.
An existing space (approximately 320 square feet) was
reconstructed to fit the necessary specifications of the EEG
lab (See Figure 1). Two walls were erected to partition off
the EEG acquisition room (C) and researcher room (B) from
a larger collaborative research space (A). Individual
temperature control HVAC systems were installed in each
room to maximize air ventilation. This was particularly
important in room C for limiting skin potentials during EEG
recording.
The lab was hardwired for internet hook-ups and all
electrical outlets were grounded. The previous recessed
lighting poorly illuminated the room and were subsequently
replaced with LED lights. The shared wall between rooms
B and C includes a two-way 34”x34” window for participant
observation. Room B includes one computer for EEG
acquisition and another for stimulus presentation. VGA
cords connect these two computers with the participant
monitor. A conduit beneath the window allows the VGA
cable to run between the two rooms. A speaker was
mounted above the window in Room C for auditory stimulus
presentation.
EEG is recorded from EGI Net Amps 300, NetStation 5.4
software, and HydroCel Geodesic 256 electrode-channel
nets (EGI, Inc., Eugene, OR, USA). To attenuate extraneous
sounds from entering the room, acoustic panels were
mounted on the outside wall of room C. Two additional
workstations exist for groups of 2-3 students to work on
computer
programming,
ERP
processing/analysis,
statistical analysis, and manuscript development. Cabinets
and
countertops in rooms A and B provide sufficient
storage for equipment and research materials. A faucet was
installed for cleaning the HydroCel electrode nets. A filing
cabinet stores all hard copies of coded data.
Students’ interest began within the initial weeks of the
lab’s development. PL is the lab director and a volunteer lab
manager assists with training and coordinating research
projects. During the lab’s first semester, ten undergraduate
research assistants were trained on human subjects
research, EEG equipment set-up, electrode application,
data acquisition, and data maintenance. Competitive
internal funds were awarded for funding participant
compensation. Students were also awarded funds for
completing mentored summer research projects and
conference travel. Data collection began one year following
initial development of the lab.
At the curricular level, PL is housed in the Department of
Psychology and teaches courses on Behavioral Statistics,
Physiological Psychology, Cognitive Neuroscience, and
Neurocognitive Disorders. Senior thesis projects are also
ongoing in the EEG lab. Current research projects in the lab
include those investigating ERP markers of (a) language
comprehension, (b) cell-phone induced divided attention,
and (c) sports-related concussion induced changes to the
language network.

CONCLUSION
Primarily undergraduate institutions often tout to students
the importance of receiving a multidisciplinary education.
Neuroscience programs at PUIs have the opportunity to

A18

Figure 1. Blueprint of EEG lab at Baldwin Wallace University.

meet the recent rapid growth of interdisciplinary sciences,
such as cognitive neuroscience. EEG brain recording
methods are relatively cheap and feasible compared to
other neuroimaging methods. However, the design and setup of an EEG lab poses non-trivial consequences on EEG
data quality. As a result, care and planning is recommended
for principal investigators and stakeholders who are
interested in developing a new EEG lab. Successful
development of such a lab will lead to increased
interdisciplinary curricula in the neurosciences and diversify
undergraduate student research experiences. As a result,
students may obtain an increased understanding of the
functional neural underpinnings of human behavior, which
will subsequently prepare them for graduate/professional
school and an increasingly interdisciplinary workforce.

REFERENCES
ATS Acoustics (2018) ATS Acoustic Panels. Available at
https://www.atsacoustics.com/panels.
Berger H (1929) Uber das electrenkephalogrammdes menschen.
Arch Psychiatr Nervenkr 82:527-570.
BioSemi (n.d.) Frequently Asked Questions. Available at
https://www.biosemi.com/faq/prices.htm/.
Badcock NA, Mousikou P, Mahajan Y, de Lissa P, Thie J, McArthur
G (2013) Validation of the Emotiv EPOC EEG gaming system for
measuring research quality auditory ERPs. PeerJ 1:e38.
Bobrov P, Frolov A, Cantor C, Fedulova I, Bakhnyan M,
Zhavoronkov A (2011) Brain-computer interface based on
generation of visual images. PLOS One 6:e20674.
Camfferman D, Moseley GL, Gertz K., Pettet MW, Jensen MP
(2017) Waking EEG cortical markers of chronic pain and
sleepiness. Pain Med 18:1921-1931.
Clawson A, South M, Baldwin SA, Larson MJ (2017)
Electrophysiological endophenotypes and the Error-Related

Ledwidge et al.

Negativity (ERN) in Autism Spectrum Disorder: A family study. J
Autism Dev Disord 47:1436-1452.
Collura
TF
(1993)
History
and
evolution
of
electroencephalographic instruments and techniques. J Clin
Neurophys 10:476-504.
Conair (2018) Soothing Sounds Sound Machine. Available at
https://www.conair.com/c/25i42e54/soothing-sounds-soundmachine/46.
Delorme A, Makeig S (2004) EEGLAB: an open source toolbox for
analysis of single-trial EEG dynamics including independent
component analysis. J Neurosci Methods 134:9-21.
Duvinage M, Castermans T, Petieau M, Hoellinger T, Cheron G,
Dutoit T (2013) Performance of the Emotiv Epoc headset for
P300-based applications. Biomed Eng Online 12:56.
Dwivedi VD, Gibson RM (2017) An ERP investigation of quantifier
scope ambiguous sentences: Evidence for number in events. J
Neurolinguist 42:63-82.
Electrical Geodesics, Inc (2018) Clinical Geodesic EEG System
400.
Available
at
https://www.egi.com/images/stories/company/documents/ges_4
00_brochure_08_15_MM_400.pdf.
Emmerling T (2017, April) Meet our newest electrode: actiCAP
slim.
Brain
Products.
Available
at
http://pressrelease.brainproducts.com/acticap-slim/.
Emotiv
(2018)
Store.
Available
at
https://www.emotiv.com/product/emotiv-epoc-14-channelmobile-eeg/.
Hairston, WD, Whitaker KW, Ries AJ, Vettel JM, Bradfor, JC,
Kerick SE, McDowell K (2014) Usability of four commercially–
oriented EEG systems. J Neural Eng 11:46018.
Homedics (2018) Deep Sleep Sleep Therapy Machine. Available
at http://www.homedics.com/deep-sleep- sleep-therapymachine.html
Hudac CM, Cortesa CS, Ledwidge PS, Molfese DL (2017) History
of concussion impacts electrophysiological correlates of
working
memory.
Int
J
Psychophysiol.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2017.09.020.
IAC Acoustics (2018) Mini audiology booths. Available at
http://www.iacacoustics.com/mini-audiology-booths.shtml.
Ingris, S (2014, October) How effective are portable vocal booths?
Sound
on
Sound.
Available
at
https://www.soundonsound.com/reviews/how-effective-areportable-vocal-booths.
Kappenman ES, Luck SJ (2010) The effects of electrode
impedance on data quality and statistical significance in ERP
recordings. Psychophysiol 47:888-904.
Kutas M, Federmeier KD (2011) Thirty years and counting: Finding
meaning in the N400 component of the event related brain
potential (ERP). Annu Rev Psychol 63:621-647.
Ledwidge PS, Masterson C, Meinders A, Molfese DL (in press)
Becoming Part of a Large and Successful Research Team. In
The Psychology Research Handbook: A primer for graduate
students and research assistants (Leong F, ed). Newbury Park,
CA: Sage Publishers.
Ledwidge PS, Molfese DL (2016) Long-term effects of concussion
on electrophysiological indices of attention in varsity college
athletes: An event-related potential and standardized lowresolution brain electromagnetic tomography approach. J
Neurotrauma 33:2081-2090.
Lopez-Calderon J, Luck SJ (2014) ERPLAB: an open-source
toolbox for the analysis of event-related potentials. Front Hum
Neurosci 8:213.
Luck SJ (2014a) Introduction to the event-related potential
technique. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Luck SJ (2014b) Setting up and running an ERP lab. In: An
introduction to the event-related potential technique pp 16-1 –
16-21. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press. Available at

Starting an EEG/ERP Laboratory at a PUI

A19

https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/introduction-event-relatedpotential-technique-second-edition.
Luck SJ (2014c) Basic principles of ERP recording. In: An
introduction to the event-related potential technique pp 146-183.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Marshall JC, Malerba JR, and Schroeder JA (2011) Use of
personal EEG monitors in a behavioral neuroscience course to
investigate natural setting sleep patterns and the factors
affecting them in college students. J Undergrad Neurosci Educ
10:A65-70.
Miller NR, Troyer M, Busey T (2008) Virtual EEG: A softwarebased electroencephalogram designed for undergraduate
neuroscience- related courses. J Undergrad Neurosci Educ
7:A19-25.
Morris JK, Peppers K, Mickley GA (2015) International excellence
in the Baldwin Wallace University Neuroscience Program. J
Undergrad Neurosci Educ 13:A146-149.
National Science Foundation (2018a) Facilitating Research at
Primarily Undergraduate Institutions (Solicitation 14-579).
Available
at
https://www.nsf.gov/funding/pgm_summ.jsp?pims_id=5518.
National Science Foundation (2018b) Major Research
Instrumentation
(Solicitation
15-504).
Available
at
https://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2015/nsf15504/nsf15504.htm.
National Science Foundation, Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems (2018) Next Generation Networks for Neuroscience
(NeuroNex)
(Solicitation
16-569).
Available
at
https://www.nsf.gov/funding/pgm_summ.jsp?pims_id=505281.
Nijboer F, van de Laar B, Gerritsen S, Nijholt A, Poel M (2015)
Usability of three electroencephalogram headsets for braincomputer interfaces: A within subject comparison. Interact
Comput 27:500-511.
Nyhus E, Curtis N (2016) Incorporating an ERP project into
undergraduate instruction. J Undergrad Neurosci Educ 14:A9196.
Polich J (2007) Updating P300: an integrative theory of P3a and
P3b. Clin Neurophysiol 118:2128-2148.
Reiness CG (2012) Working with your administration to garner
support for neuroscience programs. J Undergrad Neurosci Educ
11:A38-A40.
Shields SM, Morse CE, Applebaugh ED, Muntz TL, Nichols DF
(2016) Are electrode caps worth the investment? An evaluation
of EEG methods in undergraduate neuroscience laboratory
courses and research. J Undergrad Neurosci Educ 7:A29-37.
Stekelenburg JJ, de Gelder B (2004) The neural correlates of
perceiving human bodies: an ERP study on the body-inversion
effect. Neuroreport 15:777-780.
Tsolaki AC, Kosmidou VE, Kompatsiaris IY, Papadaniil C,
Hadjileontiadis L, Tsolaki M (2017) Age-induced differences in
brain neural activation elicited by visual emotional stimuli: A highdensity EEG study. Neuroscience 340:268-278.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, National
Institutes of Health (2018) Academic Research Enhancement
Award
(PA-18-504).
Available
at
https://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/pa-files/PA-18-504.html.
WhisperRoom (2018) WhisperRoom Sound Booth Models.
Available at https://www.whisperroom.com/sound-boothmodels#.Wnh88HxG200.
Received March 22, 2018; revised July 20, 2018; accepted August 11,
2018.
Address correspondence to: Dr. Patrick S. Ledwidge, Department of
Psychology, Baldwin Wallace University, 275 Eastland Rd., Berea, OH
44017. Email: pledwidg@bw.edu
Copyright © 2018 Faculty for Undergraduate Neuroscience
www.funjournal.org

