The sea is your mirror
Marc Parenthoen, Fred Murie, Flavien Thery

To cite this version:
Marc Parenthoen, Fred Murie, Flavien Thery. The sea is your mirror . Motion In Games
2015, Nov 2015, Paris, France. ACM SIGGRAPH Conférence Motion In Games 2015, 2015.
<hal-01207930>

HAL Id: hal-01207930
https://hal.inria.fr/hal-01207930
Submitted on 5 Oct 2015

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of scientific research documents, whether they are published or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

The Sea Is Your Mirror
Marc Parenthoen1∗, Fred Murie2†and Flavien Thery2‡
(1) Lab-STICC, ENIB, UEB
(2) SPECULAIRE, SIANA

Figure 1: Feel like Poseidon’s apprentice.

Abstract
The Sea Is Your Mirror is an artistic interactive experience where
surface cerebral electromagnetic waves from a participant wearing
an EEG sensor headset are depicted in real-time as ocean waves in
an animated 3D environment. The aim of this article is to describe
the sea wave model used for the sea state animation and how it is
connected to the brain computer interface (BCI). The sea state is
animated by the groupy choppy wave model that provides nonlinear sea states with wave groups and asymmetric wave shapes. The
BCI maps the temporal spectrum of the electroencephalogram onto
the elevation spectrum of the sea surface. The resulting setup enables the participant to fly over a dynamic sea state: a metaphor for
conscious and unconscious neurofeedback.
CR Categories: I.3.7 [Computer Graphics]: Three-Dimensional
Graphics and Realism—Animation; I.3.7 [Computer Graphics]:
Three-Dimensional Graphics and Realism—Virtual reality;
Keywords: sea wave, EEG, BCI, natural phenomena, animation,
virtual reality, art and science

1

Introduction

The Sea Is Your Mirror is an artistic interactive experience, which
enables users to project their minds onto a virtual ocean projected
onto a wall in an exhibition space. Equipped with an electroencephalogram (EEG) sensor headset, participants watch their brain
activity being converted into ocean movements. Users therefore
come face-to-face with an intimate panorama, ruled by their own
inner life. He may seek to control it or merely to contemplate the
seascape. Any brain activity measured on the EEG instantly produces effects on the projected image, which can therefore be seen
∗ marc.parenthoen@enib.fr,

http://www.cerv.org
http://www.speculaire.fr
‡ flavien.thery@free.fr, http://www.siana.eu
† fredmurie@stationgraphique.com,

in real-time. In this way, subjects of the experience are immersed
in a feedback loop generated by each of their thoughts. They share
an allegorical image of his mind with other viewers within the exhibition space. The depths of the users’ minds nonetheless remain
unfathomable.
The use of an EEG interface is relatively new in art and science
projects. It has been used to control the movement of a steel door in
Suspension of Attention [Chatonsky 2013], to illustrate a metaphor
of an artist’s emotional state in Eunoia [Park 2013] or to learn meditation through neurofeeedback in LIAison-EEG:EGG [Min 2013].
In The Sea Is Your Mirror, the EEG allows users to fly over an animated ocean, which is a metaphor of the their own mind.
To obtain such an artistic operational setup, we required some contributions from virtual reality. The scientific challenges we examine
in this paper are:
1. firstly a Brain Computer Interface (BCI) question:
how can the EEG be connected to virtual sea state parameters in a reliable way which also increases users’ feeling of
influence?
2. and secondly an animation question:
how can choppy but believable ocean waves be animated in
real-time?
As far as we know, this is the first study in which an EEG has been
converted into sea waves. Here the BCI attaches the wavelength of
each ocean wave to an EEG area at a given frequency range. Wave
heights are calculated by averaging the energy emmitted by given
areas and frequency ranges over time windows that are proportional
to the attributed sea wave periods. In addition to sea surface animation, the color of the moonlight is controlled using simple EEGbased emotion recognition. The ability to turn (left/right) while in
flight is controlled by mere thought. We will discuss the suitability
of the process to participative experiments and its robustness from
the point of view of multiple users.
With regards to the animation of ocean waves; since the pioneering works of the eighties, graphic primitives used for large ocean
scenes have been the sinusoidal map [Mastin et al. 1987] or its
choppy equivalent: the hypo-cycloidal map [Fournier and Reeves
1986; Peachey 1986]. In this contribution, we adapt a lesser-known
model based on a reified 2D Morlet wavelet as a graphic primitive
for ocean wave animation [Parenthoen et al. 2004]. These early

works directly represent wave groups1 . We equip them with a relevant novel instant phase model to capture usual vertical choppy
asymmetries as well as horizontal asymmetries. In such a group
model, energy distribution is not necessarily uniform, which can
lead to very different wave structures having the same spectra. Furthermore, horizontal and vertical displacements are organized so
that self-intersection no longer seems to be a crucial problem, even
for very stormy conditions.

2
2.1

Related Work
EEG: a BCI for Control and Emotion

Because EEG is a non-invasive sensor, the rise of brain computer
interface (BCI) studies [Birbaumer 2006] makes EEG sensor headsets a center of interest for experiments in virtual reality [Lécuyer
et al. 2008]. As BCIs initially aimed to reflect conscious neurophysiological processes, their main use has been conscious control of
virtual words through a learning process. OpenVibe is an example
of a development suite which experiments with this goal [Renard
et al. 2010].
Even if the range of EEG energy is very wide (from less than
0.05Hz to more than 100Hz) only frequencies from 0.5Hz to 40Hz
are common, and they are partitioned into five classes: δ ∈ [0.5, 4[,
θ ∈ [4, 8[, α ∈ [8, 13[, β ∈ [13, 20[ and γ ∈ [20, 40[. Put simply,
these classes can relate to cognitive states: δ for deeper sleep, θ for
light sleep and meditation, α for conscious dreaming, β for conscious cognition and γ for active reasoning. These frequency limitations (0.5Hz to 40Hz) are mainly due to artifacts, which make
it difficult to separate cerebral activity from other causes, such as
muscular activity or electrode movement, into categories of EEG
signals. Automatic artifact detection, even in the 0.5Hz to 40Hz
range, remains a challenge [Fatourechi et al. 2007]. In real-time
this causes particular difficulty, and needs to be done for BCI: this
may explain why 25% of people cannot calibrate a BCI [Vidaurre
and Blankertz 2010].
These previous EEG as BCI studies nonetheless show that it is
quite easy to distinguish between thinking about left movements
and thinking about right movements, simply by analyzing changes
in β and γ range energy in the premotor cortex (frontal lobes). An
increase in activity on the right means thoughts about movement
on the left, while an increase in activity on the left means thoughts
about movement on the right. This will be used in The Sea Is Your
Mirror to turn left or right during the flight over the virtual sea.
The other use of the EEG is to recognize users’ emotions [Jones and
Fox 1992]. For EEG-based emotion recognition in games see the
review by Bos et al. [2010]. All the available methods require training periods and are very sensitive to artifacts. One thing that seems
to unify 20 years of experiments is that some valence distinction in
positive/negative emotions is correlated with the evolution of the α
and β range energy upon the preforontal cortex: an increase on the
left means positive, while an increase on the right means negative
emotion. We will use this to adjust the color of the moonlight in
The Sea Is Your Mirror.

2.2

Sea State Animation

Both of the existing graphic primitives are solutions of linear approximations of the so-called Navier-Stokes equations governing
ocean surface waves, in Eulerian coordinates for the sinusoidal map
1 In oceanography [Komen et al. 1994], wave groups are distinct from
wave trains: a wave group is an empirical phenomenon, while a wave train
is a theoretical mathematical object.

(Airy wave theory), or in Lagrangian coordinates for the hypocycloidal map (Gerstner’s swell).
Tessendorf proposed a Fourier-based method which respects an
oceanographic elevation spectrum with discretization for wave
propagation speed according to the wavelength that is relevant for
repeating dynamic ocean motifs [Tessendorf 2001]. The visualization grid has been adapted to the camera’s perspective in order to decrease computing complexity when flying over the ocean
[Hinsinger et al. 2002]. Over the next decade these Fourier-based
methods, enriched by horizontal movements, were used in cinematographic productions. Some isolated breaking waves have been
added by using numerical schemes from computational fluid dynamics (CFD) [Darles et al. 2011], but the current choppy models
for large-scale sea scenes which are based on first-order primitives
only provide vertical asymmetries2 and need significant computations for solving self-intersections [Nielsen et al. 2013]. Furthermore, the explicit notion of ”wave group” is lacking in most current
models.
However, oceanographers agree that nonlinear effects in the NavierStokes equations make waves organize themselves into groups
[Meyers et al. 1993; Liu et al. 1995; Donelan and Drennan 1996]
and express horizontal asymmetries [Stansell et al. 2003]. Despite
considerable progress in CFD, simulating a sea surface of several
square kilometers with wave groups and asymmetric waves in realtime remains impossible [Nielsen and Bridson 2011]. In addition,
dealing with boundary conditions during such free exploration over
the virtual ocean would be difficult.
Related works have therefore shown that this seems to be the first
time an EEG has been connected to a virtual sea scene and that
real-time animation of stormy sea state remains a challenging task.

3

Connecting the EEG to the Sea Scene

In this section, we explain how we connected the EEG to the virtual environment. First, we will describe the general features of
how we calculated cerebral activity values from the raw data from
the headset. These cerebral activity indicators will then be converted according to three objectives: wave height, flight direction
and moonlight color.

3.1

From EEG to Cerebral Activity Indicators

From each EEG electrode, we sampled the last second of the signal at 128 Hz, and computed electrical energy at every frequency
between 4 Hz and 40 Hz thanks to a Discrete Fourier Transform.
Data was not filtered in advance, but when an electrode was not
operational (not grounded), its data value was set to zero.
By summing the square moduli of the previous Fourier coefficients
over frequencies lying respectively in θ, α, β, and low, medium and
high γ ranges, we obtained six respective values that were proportional to the corresponding electrical energy for each electrode at
every frequency range. Then we simply added the energies of the
electrodes in a given area in order to obtain the value indicating surface electrical brain activity in the given area at a given frequency
range.
2 In oceanography [Stansell et al. 2003], wave asymmetries are defined
using 4 times: T1 from crest to down zero-crossing, T2 from down zerocrossing to trough, T3 from trough to up zero-crossing and T4 from up zerocrossing to crest. Vertical symmetry occurs when T2 + T3 = T1 + T4 , that
is to say that time below zero equals time above zero. Horizontal symmetry
occurs when T1 + T2 = T3 + T4 , that is to say that downward time equals
upward time.

For The Sea Is Your Mirror at Siana [Catala 2015], we used 4 areas
on the scalp: front left, front right, back left and back right. This
gave 4areas × 6f req. ranges = 24 indicators. These 24 indicators
were calculated and sent to the animation process at approximately
10 Hz. It must be noted that if none of the electrodes corresponding
to a given area are operational for more than one second, then the 6
corresponding indicators are null.

viewer used a controller to maintain altitude above the sea surface.
This controller was equipped with 7 perception points: 2 frontward,
2×2 sideward (each side) and one downward, in order to measure
the sea height and automatically adapt altitude according to wave
peaks and target altitude.

These indicators are very spiky, so average values needed to be
used. A less complex way of averaging in real-time with the variable time-step δt is to estimate the mean by exponential forgetting
with a life time τ :

In order to evoke mood, in accordance with related works, the color
of the moonlight was adjusted depending on the emotion valence
based on left/right average differences at α and β frequencies in the
prefrontal cortex.

v̄(t) = αv(t) + (1 − α)v̄(t−δt) , with : α = min(1, δt/τ ) (1)

Let Mright be the logarithm of the sum of α and β activity indicators over the right prefrontal area. Compute Mright and its left
counterpart using formula (1), with life time τ = 30 s as mood
changes are supposed to be more gradual than changes in direction.

where δt is the time elapsed since the last calculation of the average,
and α is the forgetting coefficient. In order to understand the life
time τ , if the v value becomes a constant v0 , time τ allows the
approximated average v̄ to nearly reach the target v0 in ∼ τ /δt
steps.

3.2

From Cerebral Indicators to Sea Scene

Cerebral activity indicators are converted for three objectives: flight
direction, moonlight color, and wave height.

3.2.2

EEG Recognition of Mood Valence

To determine changes in mood, we computed the left-right difference:
D = Mright (t) − Mlef t (t)
We updated min and max values for D over the duration 2τ . The
moonlight obeys the following formulas:
D − Dmin
Dmax − Dmin
+ (1 − m) × poscolor
m=

3.2.1

EEG Controls Flight Direction

lightcolor = m × negcolor

In order to control flight direction, the state-of-the-art method requires two areas situated to the right and to the left of the premotor
cortex, and to use β and γ left-right differences. Let Tright be the
logarithm for the sum of β and γ activity indicators over the right
premotor area, and Tlef t the left equivalent.
What is important is not absolute difference, but relative difference:
that is to say the difference relative to average activity. In order to
calculate this, we use equation (1) applied twice to Tright and twice
to Tlef t with two different life times τf ast = 1 s and τslow = 10 s :
f ast
f ast
Tright
(t) = αf ast Tright (t) + (1 − αf ast )Tright
(t − δt)

(2)

f ast
f ast
Tlef
t (t) = αf ast Tlef t (t) + (1 − αf ast )Tlef t (t − δt)

(3)

slow
Tright
(t)

= αslow Tright (t) + (1 −

slow
Tlef
t (t)

= αslow Tlef t (t) + (1 −

slow
αslow )Tright
(t

− δt)

(4)

slow
αslow )Tlef
t (t

− δt)

(5)

Then we compute right fast divided by right slow:
R=

f ast
slow
Tright
(t)/Tright
(t)

(6)

and left fast divided by left slow:
f ast
slow
L = Tlef
t (t)/Tlef t (t)

(7)

Turning is controlled by the following algorithm:
if R > 1 and R/L > 1 :
turn left at a speed proportional to R/L − 1
if L > 1 and R/L < 1 :
turn right at a speed proportional to L/R − 1
default :
slowly reach predefined direction target
Rotation speed is also confined by extremum values and averaged
by using equation (1) with a life time τ = 2 s, in order to avoid
oscillations.
Furthermore, the feeling of flying over the ocean like an albatross
depends on the behavior of the 3D viewer rendering the scene. Our

(8)
(9)

where m ∈ [0, 1] because it is computed after min and max updates,
negcolor is the color chosen by artists for drawing negative mood
(m = 1) and poscolor is the color chosen by artists for drawing
positive mood (m = 0).
3.2.3

EEG Connection to Wave Height

From a poetic perspective, the main idea was to translate the story
of the users’ brain activity (EEG) into an ocean wave story, as a
metaphor for conscious activity. From a distant sleepy long swell
to an iridescent sea wind due to a local storm, we translated temporal spectra of cerebral activity potentials into spatial spectra of sea
wave elevations, while retaining the topology of wavelength maps.
In other words, slow cerebral waves (sleep and meditation) should
be represented by long sea waves (swell), while fast cerebral waves
(active cognition and reasoning) should be represented by short sea
waves (sea breeze and ripples).
We manually associated one brain activity indicator extracted from
the EEG with one sea state wave vector. During the experiment at
Siana [Catala 2015], we used 8 components for gravity waves with
wavelengths ranging from one meter to one hundred meters, and
3 components for capillary waves, ranging from one centimeter to
twenty centimeters.
Once an association between the pair (frequency range, area)EEG
and the pair (wavelength, direction)sea is chosen, the sea wave
height will result from a transformation of EEG energy e on the
logarithm. This transformation uses the standard deviation σ of e
and the average estimation ē of e in accordance with equation (1)
with a life time τ = 30 s. The target sea wave amplitude atarget is
given by:
 e − ē 
(10)
atarget = amax × fc
σ
where amax is the maximum amplitude determined by the artist for
that wave vector, and where fc is linear from [−c, c] to [0, 1], is null
before −c and has a value of one after c. We set c = 2, so that only
5% of e values could saturate f . τ = 30 s was chosen to estimate
averages and standard deviation because each user only plays for a

few minutes and the system must react as soon as possible after the
game begins. If we use atarget for actual wave height immediately,
the sea state animation looks chaotic and unrealistic as the wave
heights change too quicky.
Once again, we used formula 1 to average atarget into actual wave
amplitude a. To set τ values that increase the users’ impression
of influence on the sea state, we quickly experimented with nine
users’ τ values from one tenth of a second to one minute. These values were randomly selected in {0.1, 0.5, 1, 2, 5, 10, 20, 30, 45, 60}
seconds, and the whole EEG was used (full scalp and every range).
A 2-minute animation was created for a single sinusoidal wave with
10 m wavelength, 1 m maximum height and 3 s period. Subjects
were asked: ”Do you have the impression that your thoughts are influencing the waves?”. The result, which remains to be confirmed,
is that τ values below 2 seconds give unrealistic dynamics for sea
swells with no sensation of influence, and values above 30 seconds
make the perception of influence disappear.

0
π
16
π
8
3π
16
π
4

Wave shapes (without envelope) for different maximum crest advance
values φmax in our choppy model. All waves have the same steepness
(ζ · k = 1). From the classical choppy model φmax = 0 with cycloidal
shape and no horizontal asymmetry (top) to a crest advance reaching
φmax = π/4 with a large horizontal asymmetry (bottom).

To keep the wind as a metaphor for conscious cerebral activity, we
decided to set τ values proportional to sea wave periods; more precisely, artists chose the sea wave period for each τ value twice.

Figure 2: Horizontal asymmetry as a function of crest advance

We have explained how the EEG can control flight direction, illustrate users’ mood and offer dynamic amplitude values for connected sea wave vectors. These dynamic sea wave heights could
be mapped to any sea model animated in real-time. We shall now
explore the reflection of the sea in our metaphorical mirror.

with its envelope extension %, its maximum amplitude a at its center
~
xc moving at group speed in open sea from ~
x0 at t = 0:

4

Choppy Groupy Wave Model

In this section, we describe the model used for sea state animation.
It stems from the groupy wave model in which the sea state results
from the sum of interacting wave groups [Parenthoen et al. 2004].
A dynamic instant phase equips each wave group in order to enable
vertical and horizontal asymmetries in an original choppy fashion.

4.1

~
xc = ~
x0 + t ·

Our graphic primitive is a wave group model that stems from ten
years of interdisciplinary research. This wave group model is a
good approximation for deep water solitons3 . One single group
acts on sea surface elevation z(~
x, t) as follows:

z(~x, t) = ζ(~
x, t) · sin φ(~
x, t)
(11)

We assume that the sea surface can be described by superimposing
such wave groups linearly4 when several groups act, the resulting
elevation is the sum of elevations due to each group.

Choppy Instant Phases

Vertical asymmetries are well represented by classical choppy models: simply take equation 11 and use circular orbits instead of vertical movements. The result would be choppy wave groups with
significant vertical asymmetries near the center, but no horizontal
asymmetry would be observed. We then rewrite equation 11 in the
(~k, ~z) vertical plane with horizontal movements and instant phase:

where ζ is the group envelope and φ its phase, that obeys:
φ(~x, t) = ~k.(~
x−~
x0 ) + θ0 − ωt



ζ(~
x, t) = a · e

−(~
x−~
xc (t))2
2%2

u = ζ · cos(φ + δφ)
z = ζ · sin(φ)

(16)

(12)

where ~x0 is the group center position at t = 0, θ0 is the phase at
group center at t = 0, and ~k is its mean wave vector (k being its
wave number). Its pulsation ω also follows the open sea dispersion
relation:

ω 2 = gk 1 + (k/km )2
(13)
p
where km = ρw g/T ≈ 370rad.m−1 . While the ζ envelope is a
Gaussian lens which is attached to the group center ~
xc :


(15)

where ~c = ω~k/k2 , is its phase speed. The envelope extension
% of the group is chosen greater than the wavelength 2π/k and is
proportional to the number of waves nwaves ≥ 2 actually expressed
by the group.

4.2

Groupy Wave Model

π
~c
and % = nwaves
2
k



(14)

3 Water wave envelopes follow a nonlinear Hamiltonian equation [Zakharov 1968]. In deep water, envelope solitons may occur and our wave
group model is an adequate approximation of such solitons, even if it is no
longer a solution for the Navier-Stokes’s equation linearization.

where u is the horizontal displacement following ~k direction, z is
the vertical displacement, and ζ is the local wave amplitude at position ~
x and time t, with its phase φ and instant phase δφ as follows:

x + θ − ωt
 φ = ~k.~
δφ = ζ · k · φmax · p(φ)
(17)

φ)2
p(φ) = (1−sin
−
1
2
where the p function is smooth with image values in [−1, 1], larger
flats around -1 (near crests: φ ≡ π/2 mod 2π) and smaller peaks
around 1 (near troughs: φ ≡ −π/2 mod 2π). The amount of horizontal asymmetry can be characterized by crest advance and trough
delay, that we suppose both equal to φmax . Instant phase δφ is proportional to local steepness (ζ · k) in order to increase horizontal
4 Non-linear

aspects of the complete groupy model come from interactions between wave groups and other modelized phenomena.

asymmetry only when non-linearity rises. In real sea states, maximum crest advance rarely exceeds π/6 radians. The larger the crest
advance, the higher the horizontal asymmetry (Fig. 2). By increasing the crest advance rate of a group, an artist can create a highly
non-linear wave and even an overhang without self-intersection and
whose behavior will remain consistent with further animation.
It should be noted that the choppy version of the groupy wave model
has fully-differentiable expressions thanks to equations (16) and
(17). If analytical slopes, normals or speeds are required, simply
express partial derivatives of u and z along ~k for geometric variables, and along t for water particle speed. Envelope ζ variations
can be neglected as the envelope should evolve slowly according to
wave dynamics. These expressions can be either inside the fluid (a
full 3D field) where ζ depends also on altitude z, for example like
a decreasing exponential function. It would therefore be possible to
connect this model to spray generators or boat animations.

4.3

Wave group maps and textures

In order to populate the ocean by wave groups, we organized groups
with the same mean wave vector ~k into group map, drawing on
Belemaalem et al. [2010]. For rendering gust effects and ripples,
the sea surface was also textured with normal mapping in proportion to γ-EEG activity.
4.3.1

Wave Group Maps

The EEG connection to wave heights gives an amplitude a for each
attached wave vector. For a given wave vector ~k, our map is the
sum of wave groups which all have this wave vector ~k. Each wave
group in the map has its own maximum amplitude an in accordance
with a Rayleigh distribution with parameter equal to the EEG given
height a and its own phase θn uniformly distributed in [0, 2π[. Its
own position center ~
xn is regularly distributed5 , so that the center
positions ~xn of groups occupy fixed positions relative to each other
at vertices of a regular square grid√
travelling at group speed. Grid
step size equals 2% × max(1/2, 1/ λ), where % is the group envelope extension. The smaller λ, the greater the grid step. We chose
this grid step size because when a point is more than 2% from the
center, the group influence becomes negligible and then can disappear from the sum. The parameter λ, 0 < λ ≤ 4, can be interpreted
as group density.
With this hypothesis, groups are identified by integer indices on the
group map grid, and for a given map, the number of wave groups
actually acting at any position is at most four (Fig. 3).
Finding indexes of the 4 groups acting on M is
simply written as integer quotients of their coordinates relative to the referent group center by the
grid step size, followed by 4 neighboring explorations at [+0,+0], [+0,+1], [+1,+0] and [+1,+1].
From the 4 pairs (i, j) resulting from the previous quotients and exploration, one can compute
unique indices i + p × j that can follow groups
and be used as a seed for computing random numbers an and θn attached to each group.

Figure 3: Finding indexes of groups acting at a given point
We used Unity3D6 in order to enable artists to interact easily with
5 In contrast to wave groups in Belemaalem et al. that are λ-Poisson
randomly distributed. This simplification facilitated GLSL model implementation.
6 https://unity3d.com/

the project, including its vertex and shader programs. We thus implemented in GLSL this algorithm for wave group maps.
4.3.2

High Frequency Normal Mapping with EEG γ Activity

The sea surface was also textured with normal mapping. In order
to convert three different γ-EEG activities, the same texture was
scaled and rotated three ways, then translated at the phase speed
computed according to the scale and rotation applied. The peak
wave number k of the normal bump texture at scale one was determined manually, and the phase speeds vi = ωi /ki were computed
thanks to the dispersion relation (13).
The bump normal is the weighted sum of these three transformed
normal map textures, and the weighting coefficients are the cerebral
activity indicators of low, medium, and high γ-EGG on the full
scalp respectively.
The resulting normal is the average of the wave groups’ geometric
normals and the bump normals. This average is weighted to increase the bump normals when the total γ activity indicator is high.
As a result of these calculations, when the users experience intense
active reasoning, they see the effects of gusts on the sea surface.

5

Results and Discussion

EEG raw data acquisition was implemented using Python with
emokit, as we used an Emotiv Epoch wireless headset with 14 electrodes discretized at 128Hz. The Fourier transform was written in
real-time with NumPy. We computed the 4 areas × 6 frequency
range EEG energy, then Python shared the 24 cerebral activity indicators by UDP at 10Hz.
More than 200 people experimented with the setup during the Siana
exhibition [Catala 2015]. Before wearing the headset, users’ hair
was lightly sprayed with water. The Emotiv headset required some
alterations and some welding repairs but our algorithmic choices
proved robust: even if only 4 electrodes actually operate (one in
each area), the whole set of indicators remains available. This was
very important in the public context, with such a delicate sensor.
To connect the EEG to the sea waves, artists took the following
values for 8 gravity wave group maps:
map
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

2π
k

125 m
115 m
35 m
30 m
14 m
12 m
3m
2.5 m

dir.
SW
WSW
W
WNW
NW
NNW
N
NNE

a·k
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.65
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95

EEG activity indicator
θ back left
θ back right
α front left
α front right
β back left
β back right
β front left
β front right

where 2π/k is the wavelength, dir. the direction of wave propagation and a · k is the mean steepness at group centers. All instant
phases were between π/8 for swell and π/4 for wind-sea waves.
The group densities range from 4 for swell to 2 for short wind-sea
waves.
From an oceanographic point of view, a sea state tells a story: offshore, a moderate wind was blowing from the south west six hours
ago, then it slowly turned west two hours ago, and then veered north
west twenty minutes ago, strengthening. Now it is blowing from
north north east and it is stormy.
Drawing on a discretisation of Hinsinger et al. model [2002], the
sea surface mesh of ten square kilometers is a home-made mesh
with hexagonal symmetries and one million vertices; its triangle

density decreases from its center to its edge in 4 steps: close, quite
near, far, distant. It is used during flight to follow the 3D viewer
with a succession of discrete steps with as few moving triangles as
possible.
In the Unity3D per pixel shader, the 3 computed textures for the
normal map correspond to:
NNE minus 5o 30cm wavelength low γ-EEG
NNE
11cm wavelength medium γ-EEG
NNE plus 5o
4cm wavelength
high γ-EEG
The 3D viewer is set at an altitude of two meters and in an easterly direction, towards the full moon which is at an elevation of 40
degrees. The moonlight is specular and gray in color, varying between black and white depending on the user’s mood as calculted
from the α-EEG at the front right and left of the scalp.
With the fastest rendering mode in Unity3D and a simple Intel
Sandybridge Mobile graphic chipset, the animation runs at six
Hertz in full screen mode [1366×768] (while the setup is running,
the CPU is free for other computations). With the best rendering
mode in Unity3D and a Geforce GTX 660, animation runs at 35Hz
in full screen mode [1280×1024]; this increases to 55Hz if a good,
rather than the best rendering mode is chosen.
The framed paragraph below is the ≈ 5-minute story of a user’s
experience from the point of view of a spectator:
Noone is wearing the headset; the light is off and flight speed is
null.
Someone is wearing the headset. The light turns on in a few seconds and flight begins.
The sea is flat and it is windy; in less than 10 seconds, short very
choppy waves appear.
Over the next 10 seconds, flight speed is constant (10m/s); the
sea state becomes rougher and rougher.
The scenario differs with different users. The moonlight oscillates from dark to bright. The sea state alternates between a
smooth surface with high long waves and more choppy conditions with short waves and gusts. Some people try to turn left or
right.
And then the user removes the headset. Gusts immediately stop
and the sea surface becomes oily. Short waves disappear in a few
seconds. Then only the swell remains as the flight speed reduces
and light slowly turns off after more than half a minute.
The setup is ready for the next user to try, as illustrated by our
movie [Thery et al. 2015].

The experience varies widely depending on whether one is a spectator or the user. Unlike the spectators, the users understand and experience their thoughts and fantasies while playing with the setup.
We would like to have more information about how users react to
the setup, but the only available information was the one orally reported by technicians working on site. We need another context in
which we can scientifically measure user perception.

6

Conclusion

As part of an art and science project, we have successfully connected EEG readings to a virtual sea scene. In this scene, the
EEG controls flight direction, the moonlight colour is controlled
by emotions and cerebral activity is converted in the form of wind
action onto wave heights. We have described a non-linear choppy
groupy wave model for animating ocean waves with group effects
and strong horizontal asymmetries in real-time. The resulting setup

was tested by two hundred users and we are encouraged by its reliability, which suggests it would be suitable for more widespread
distribution.
Many hypotheses need to be scientifically explored from a human
point of view; for example how could the users’ perception of influence on the sea state be improved? or is the sea model able to
generate a plausible sea state? Such a setup could also be used for
original neurofeedback experiences.
Regarding the future of the choppy groupy wave model, we hope,
for example, that it will allow artists to create overhanging effects
which are not dissimilar to the actual physics of oceanography. Future works should explore its ability to simulate actual sea states,
in terms of elevation, speed, slope and curvature fields over several
square kilometers of ocean.

Acknowledgements
Lots of thanks to François Goujon, who created the audio part of
this project; to Frédéric Devillers, engineer at the European Center
for Virtual Reality (CERV), who introduced us to Unity3D with
a beautiful Mastin-like sea animation; to Yoann Neveu-Dérotrie
who completed his internship at CERV (summer 2014) and initiated
us to Emokit; to Nathan Colin, Jeremy Crestel, Alban Delamarre,
Nicolas Marsille (fall 2014) and Xiao Hang Wu, Yannick Guern,
Simon Teneau (Autumn 2014) students at ENIB who experimented
with the EEG connection to sea states.

References
B ELEMAALEM , Z., C HAPRON , B., PARENTHOEN , M., AND
R EUL , N. 2010. The groupy-choppy wave model for simulating
dynamical sea surface. In OCOSS’2010 Proceedings. 5p.
B IRBAUMER , N. 2006. Breaking the silence : Brain-computer
interfaces (BCI) for communication and motor control. Psychophysiology 43, 6, 517–532.
B OS , D. P.-O., R EUDERINK , B., L AAR , B., G ÜRK ÖK , H.,
M ÜHL , C., P OEL , M., N IJHOLT, A., AND H EYLEN , D.
2010. Brain-Computer Interfaces. Springer London, ch. Braincomputer interfacing and games, 149–178.
C ATALA , L. 2015. Flavien Thery, Plastique de la lumiere et experiences sensorielles. mcd, magazine des cultures digitales 11
(avril), 16–17.
C HATONSKY, G. 2013. Dislocation VII : Suspension of attention.
http://chatonsky.net/projects/suspension-of-attention/.
DARLES , E., C RESPIN , B., G HAZANFARPOUR , D., AND G ON ZATO , J.-C. 2011. A survey of ocean simulation and rendering
techniques in computer graphics. Comput. Graph. Forum 30, 1,
43–60.
D ONELAN , M., AND D RENNAN , W. 1996. Nonstationary analysis
of the directional properties of propagating waves. Journal of
Physical Oceanography 26, 9, 1901–1914.
FATOURECHI , M., BASHASHATI , A., WARD , R. K., AND B IRCH ,
G. E. 2007. EMG and EOG artifacts in brain computer interface
systems : A survey. Clinical Neurophysiology 118, 480–494.
F OURNIER , A., AND R EEVES , W. 1986. A simple model of ocean
wave. Computer Graphics 13, 75–84.
H INSINGER , D., N EYRET, F., AND C ANI , M.-P. 2002. Interactive animation of ocean waves. In Symposium on Computer
Animation (SCA), 161–166.

J ONES , N., AND F OX , N. 1992. Electroencephalogram asymmetry
during emotionally evocative films and its relation to positive and
negative affectivity. Brain and Cognition 20, 2, 280–299.
KOMEN , G., C AVALERI , L., D ONELAN , M., H ASSELMANN , K.,
H ASSELMANN , S., AND JANSSEN , P. 1994. Dynamics and
modelling of ocean waves. Cambridge University Press.
L ÉCUYER , A., L OTTE , F., R EILLY, R. B., L EEB , R., H IROSE ,
M., AND S LATER , M. 2008. Brain-computer interfaces, virtual
reality, and videogames. Computer 41, 10, 66–72.
L IU , A., P ENG , C., C HAPRON , B., AND M OLLO C HRISTIENSEN , E.
1995. Direction and magnitude of
wind stress over wave groups observed during SWADE. Global
Atmosphere and Ocean System 3, 175–194.
M ASTIN , G., WATTERGER , P., AND M AREDA , J. 1987. Fourier
synthesis of ocean scenes. Computer Graphics 14, 16–23.
M EYERS , S., K ELLY, B., AND O’B RIEN , J. 1993. An introduction to wavelet analysis in oceanography and meteorology: with
application to the dispersion of Yanai waves. Monthly Weather
Review 121, 10, 28–58.
M IN , L.
2013.
Project LIAison, EEG:EGG.
Life Sciences Institue, University of Michigan, http://www.projectliaison.org/#!eegegg/cii6.
N IELSEN , M. B., AND B RIDSON , R. 2011. Guide shapes for high
resolution naturalistic liquid simulation. ACM Trans. Graph. 30,
4 (July), 83:1–83:8.
N IELSEN , M. B., S ÖDERSTR ÖM , A., AND B RIDSON , R. 2013.
Synthesizing waves from animated height fields. ACM Trans.
Graph. 32, 1 (Feb.), 2:1–2:9.
PARENTHOEN , M., J OURDAN , T., AND T ISSEAU , J. 2004. I PAS:
Interactive Phenomenological Animation of the Sea. In International Offshore and Polar Engineering Conference (ISOPE),
J. S. Chung, M. Prevosto, and H. S. Choi, Eds., vol. 3, International Society of Offshore and Polar Engineering, 125–132.
PARK , L. 2013. Eunoia. http://thelisapark.com/#/eunoia.
P EACHEY, D. 1986. Modeling waves and surf. Computer Graphics
20, 4, 65–74.
R ENARD , Y., L OTTE , F., G IBERT, G., C ONGEDO , M., M ABY,
E., D ELANNOY, V., B ERTRAND , O., AND L ÉCUYER , A. 2010.
Openvibe: An open-source software platform to design, test, and
use brain–computer interfaces in real and virtual environments.
Presence: Teleoper. Virtual Environ. 19, 1 (Feb.), 35–53.
S TANSELL , P., W OLFRAM , J., AND Z ACHARY, S. 2003. Horizontal asymmetry and steepness distributions for wind-driven
ocean waves from severe storms. Applied Ocean Research 25,
137–155.
T ESSENDORF, J. 2001. Simulating ocean water. In SIGGRAPH,
Courses Notes, 3–1–3–18,45–62.
T HERY, F., M URIE , F., PARENTHOEN , M., AND G OUJON , F.
2015. La mer est ton miroir. Siana, Speculaire, Lab-STICC,
https://vimeo.com/124299171.
V IDAURRE , C., AND B LANKERTZ , B. 2010. Towards a cure for
BCI illiteracy. Brain Topography 23, 2, 194–198.
Z AKHAROV, V. E. 1968. Stability of periodic waves of finite amplitude on the surface of a deep fluid. Journal of Applied Mechanics
and Technical Physics 9, 2, 190–194.

