18

IEEE REVIEWS IN BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 2, 2009

In the Spotlight: Neuroengineering

Nitish Thakor, Fellow, IEEE

N

EUROENGINEERING as a discipline continues to grow
rapidly, expanding into new scientific frontiers as innovative technologies are developed for research and for clinical
applications. The “hot” areas, at least as measured by popularity
and visibility, continue to be the fields of brain–computer interface (BCI) or brain–machine interface (BMI), the application of
BMI to neural prosthesis, deep brain stimulation (DBS), neural
interface technologies, and brain imaging. While this list is certainly not exclusive, the choice of speakers and the subject of
their talks explored at major national and international conferences evidence popularity of these topics. This article reviews
some of the highlights of what has been covered and explored
at various conferences and published in major journals.
IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology, the premier
conference in the field of Biomedical Engineering, took place
in Minneapolis, MN, in August 2009, and featured a plenary
talk by Dr. Gary Glover from Stanford University on “MR
imaging of brain function: Challenges, opportunities and
questions.” Glover reviewed the state of the art technology
of functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) as well as
exciting emerging applications in the social sciences as well
as biosciences. Among the emerging applications include the
fields of economics (neuromarketing), lie detection, psychoanalysis, and biofeedback. At the same time, Glover illuminated
the ethical questions of misuse and exaggerated claims reached
using these techniques. In the Neuroengineering Track of the
conference, Dr. Andrew Schwartz from Pittsburgh University
gave a keynote talk on “Useful signals from motor cortex”
where he described how animals could control robots’ movement with direct brain control in a self-feeding task. Schwartz
described his study in which monkeys controlled a robotic arm

Manuscript received October 02, 2009; revised October 05, 2009. Current
version published November 18, 2009.
N. Thakor is with Department of Biomedical Engineering, The Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, MD 21205 USA (e-mail: nthakor@jhu.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/RBME.2009.2034697

continuously in 3-D space to reach out to food and retrieve it to
their mouths [1]. He summarized the research that increasingly
demonstrates that neurons provide a high fidelity representation of the intended behavior of the limb. This basic work in
primates lays the foundation for providing natural movement in
prosthetic limbs. Dr. Jose Principe from University of Florida
gave a keynote talk on “Toward cognitive neuroprosthesis” that
reviewed his team’s recent work on a new “co-adaptive” close
loop paradigm for brain machine interfaces (BMIs) based on
reinforcement learning. The co-adaptive model of BMI utilizes
an environment wherein the computer algorithms as well as
the brain of the subject are interactive: the computer algorithm
would learn and adapt based on subject behavior, and the
subject, rodent brain in this case, would learn and adapt from
interactions with the environment.
The IEEE Special Topics Conference in Neural Engineering
took place in Turkey in May of 2009. The Plenary Speaker, Dr.
Jack Gallant, gave a talk on “Let’s see what you think! Bayesian
reconstruction of perceptual experiences from human brain
activity.” Gallant presented a new Bayesian decoding model
that can reconstruct natural images that were seen by an observer from the brain activity measured using fMRI. This is an
exciting area of research going beyond the conventional BMI to
explore whether brain signals or images themselves represent or
describe the world “as the brain sees.” Reverse engineering the
fMRI may help clarify how distinct representations in different
parts of the brain can be combined to provide a coherent reconstruction of the visual world and open the window into how
brain processes visual perception. A second plenary speaker,
Dr. Arto Nurmikko, presented “Developments in implantable
wireless cortical interfaces for neural prosthetics.” The technology for neural interface and recording continues to progress
rapidly. Nurmikko’s talk selectively highlighted microscale
neural probes and wireless implantable active microchips. He
presented the challenge of building transcutaneous telemetry
systems for “broadcasting” multichannel neural signals. He
also presented the recent advances in recording and deciphering

1937-3333/$26.00 © 2009 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDAD POLITECNICA DE VALENCIA. Downloaded on February 12, 2010 at 10:59 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE REVIEWS IN BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 2, 2009

selected command signals issued from the motor cortex by
small targeted population of neurons for specific motor tasks.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL SYSTEMS AND
REHABILITATION ENGINEERING, a flagship journal of the IEEE
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, continues to
publish papers with high citation rates and impact. The paper
by K. R. Muller, C. W. Anderson, and G. E. Birch, “Linear
and nonlinear methods for brain-computer interfaces,” [2] was
selected as the Best Paper for receiving most citations in the
past five years. Another highly cited paper over the past five
years, “Comparison of linear, nonlinear, and feature selection
methods for EEG signal classification,” by D. Garrett, D. A.
Peterson, C. W. Anderson, and M. H. Thaut [3] also gives an
indication of community interest in developing advanced EEG
signal processing methods, particularly for the application to
brain computer interface applications.
Interest in two sub-disciplines of the Neuroengineering field,
BMI and DBS, remains high. This is reflected by topics of
the plenary symposia and workshops as well as a very high
attendance at the annual conference of IEEE Engineering in
Medicine and Biology Society. The workshop on “Beyond
brain machine interface: Motor, cognitive and virtual” organized by this author, was inaugurated by Dr. Elmar Schmeisser
from the Army Research Laboratory and included presentations
in four key areas: Neural Interface and Neural Prosthesis, Motor
Prosthetics and Rehabilitation, Cognitive Interface, and Virtual
Reality. The workshop was led by the author of this article with
an “Overview of neural interface technologies—Noninvasive
and invasive” and by Dr. Jiping He from University of Arizona
with an overview of “Neurophysiological Foundations.” This
workshop highlighted emerging trends, taking the field of
Brain–Machine Interface beyond the connection to the computer or controlling prostheses. Emerging work in the field is
now exploring how BMI can be used to interact with physical
as well as virtual reality environments.
In addition to rigorous biomedical research on BCI and BMI,
innovators and entrepreneurs have also begun making an impact on finding commercial applications. Toyota researchers in
Japan demonstrated an EEG-based BCI that allows the user to
control a wheelchair’s movements by thinking the commands
with a response time of merely 125 milliseconds [4]. Neurosky,
Inc, (San Jose, CA, USA) has announced a video game platform
that allows users to control elements in the game via an EEG
recording electrode that rests on their forehead. IEEE Spectrum
Magazine recently reported on companies like Emotiv working
toward video game applications for BCI [5]. However, that article also casts a distinctly skeptical glance at the means and
success of the method and its potential technical and business
success. It is clear that the field of BCI/BMI is accompanied by a
great deal of press and hype. Accordingly, students, researchers,
and even investors need to tread cautiously.
The nascent field of neural prosthesis reported significant scientific advancements. In a paper in Nature, Moritz et al. [6]
demonstrated for the first time that cortical activity in monkeys
can be used to directly stimulate and control previously paralyzed muscles on the monkey’s body via functional electrical
stimulation. This restored goal-directed movements to a paralyzed arm by re-establishing the connection between neurons
in the motor cortex and neurons in the target muscle while by-

19

passing normal physiological nerve transmission routes. Moreover, motor neurons and cortical neurons previously unassociated with movement performed this task equally well. These
findings hold great potential for those with paralyzed limbs as
a result of spinal cord injury or peripheral nerve damage to
regain intuitive control over their limbs. John Donoghue [7]
reviewed the progress towards building the neural interfaces,
and the challenges faced by the technology and the brain interface. Despite the technical hurdles and our incomplete knowledge of BMI, human studies have shown promise. Neural spike
activity signals recorded by probes implanted in humans have
been successfully decoded to control computer cursor velocity
in tetraplegic patients [8].
Another popular area of research with clinically high impact
and considerable industrial technology development is the field
of deep brain stimulation (DBS). DBS has powerful clinical applications, such as targeting stimulation to subthalamic nuclei
to suppress Parkinsonian tremors. The popularity of the field
was evidenced by the well attended pre-conference Workshop
on DBS organized by Aviva Abosch (University of Minnesota
Medical School, USA), Gregory F. Molnar (Medtronic, Inc.,
USA), and Gregory A. Worrell (Mayo Clinic, USA). The workshop organizers noted that DBS has been approved by the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of Parkinson’s
disease, essential tremor, and dystonia. To date, over 30 000 devices have been implanted worldwide in humans. The workshop
led of with an overview of DBS by a leading Neurosurgeon,
Dr. Ali Rezai, from the Cleveland Clinic Foundation. The covered the topics of Regulatory History of DBS & Development
of the Field, In-Depth Clinical Outcome of DBS for Movement
Disorders, In-Depth Clinical Outcome of DBS for ObsessiveCompulsive Disorder, Safety considerations—Procedural and
Radiofrequency Heating, Basal Ganglia Physiology and DBS,
Theories of Mechanism of Action of DBS, Electrical stimulation for the treatment of psychiatric disorders, Brain Stimulation Devices for Epilepsy, Device Technology Innovation.
This year has seen great progress in deciphering mental content from brain activity. An article in Science by Formisano et
al. [9] describes how their group was able to use fMRI to look at
the auditory cortex and determine if the subject was listening to
something that they had heard before and if it was from a speaker
whom they recognized. Their findings have shed light on details
pertaining to speech perception and the computational properties of the neural populations in the auditory cortex. A similar brain-decoding milestone has been achieved with regards
to the visual cortex. Past fMRI studies have decoded position,
orientation, and object category from neural activity in the visual cortex. In addition, Kay et al. [10] reported in Nature that
they have developed a decoding method that goes even farther
and allows for identification of the specific image viewed by the
subject out of a large set of novel natural images. This method is
based on analyzing the tuning of individual voxels for space, orientation, and spatial frequency estimated from brain responses
evoked by natural images.
As it occasionally happens in science, unexpected discoveries
or advances in one field suddenly take hold in another discipline.
Technology developed by basic scientists rapidly disseminates
and crosses over to novel applications. In a series of papers, Dr.
Karl Deisseroth’s group at Stanford and Dr. Edward Boyden’s

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDAD POLITECNICA DE VALENCIA. Downloaded on February 12, 2010 at 10:59 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

20

group at MIT have described molecular probes capable of using
light to activate neurons at high speeds and resolutions and explored some remarkable properties and novel applications.
In a paper published in Nature Neuroscience, “Bi-stable
neural state switches,” Berndt et al. [11] from Deisseroth’s
group describe optically switchable molecules called channelrhodopsins. Channelrhodopsins are a class of naturally
occurring as well as genetically engineered molecules. These
molecules are incorporated in cell membranes of cells, including neurons, and using short light pulses can be turned
on or off with a millisecond-level temporal resolution. This
remarkable property can then be used to turn neurons on or off
with a high temporal resolution using light, previously a domain
of electrical excitation only. Since light can be delivered at a
distance (through laser light sources), rapidly (through scanning), or even in vivo (using fiber optics) this molecular probe
has opened up exciting new capabilities for basic research a
broad range of in vivo applications.
In a paper published in Neuron, “Millisecond-timescale
optical control of neural dynamics in the nonhuman primate
brain,” Graybiel et al. [13] from Boyden’s group used lentivirus
to target such channelrhodopsins to target excitatory neurons of
the macaque cortex. They used fiber optics to couple the light
to the neurons in the cortex and specifically activated excitatory neurons in the neocortical neural networks. Remarkably
the molecules are expressed, and optically modulated, over
extended period of time (months so far), which opens up the
possibility of probing and modulating cortical neurons in vivo.
The authors speculate that this technique will advance applications to research on nonhuman primate neural computation,
cognition, and behavior, ultraprecise neurological and psychiatric therapeutics and even optical neural control of prosthetics.
In a paper published in Science, “Optical deconstruction of
Parkinsonian neural circuitry,” Gradinaru et al. [12] from Deisseroth’s group showed that the same optical technique could be
used to study the mechanism of DBS. The mechanism behind
the action of stimulation on neuronal circuits in these deep regions is not fully known. Using solid-state optics, the authors
carried out studies in freely moving rodents exhibiting Parkinsonian symptoms to systematically drive or inhibit specific circuit
elements and found that therapeutic effects could be accounted
for by direct selective stimulation of afferent axons projecting to
thalamic nuclei. Indeed this opens the doors to study other disease circuits by selectively controlling neurons and neural networks in vivo in other disease models.
Research on the brain has a human element to it as well. Every
investigative procedure or therapy has its volunteers and pioneers. For example, Jesse Sullivan volunteered extensively to
demonstrate the function and success of peripheral nerve reinnervation surgery and to rewire the nerve from the amputee’s
residual limb to his chest. The ’“rewired” signals from the nerve
actuate the muscles on the chest and they in turn are decoded to
control an advanced dexterous prosthetic limb. Jonathon Kunniholm, also an amputee veteran of the recent wars, has very articulately and passionately voiced the need for technological advancements and affordable and accessible solutions for the amputees [14]. On a sad note, a pioneer research volunteer, know as

IEEE REVIEWS IN BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 2, 2009

“H. M.”, who helped revolutionize our knowledge about brain
and memory died last year. H. M. underwent an experimental
brain operation to correct a seizure disorder in 1953, but ended
up with an irreparable brain damage from the surgery. He developed profound amnesia, losing the ability to form new memories. Essentially, he could not form long term memories from
short term events and experiences. Experiments on behavioral
and brain imaging studies he volunteered for shed considerable
light on the role of the hippocampus in memory formation and
retention. This article therefore salutes the volunteers like Jesse,
Jonathon, and H.M. who are helping pave the frontiers of Neuroengineering research and development, including fundamental
understanding about the brain and its diseases and the technological innovations and solutions for therapy.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author thanks N. Davidovics, N. Li, and Y. Choi for their
help with the literature and news review in preparation of this
article.

REFERENCES
[1] M. Velliste, S. Perel, M. C. Spalding, A. S. Whitford, and A. B.
Schwartz, “Cortical control of a prosthetic arm for self-feeding,”
Nature, vol. 453, pp. 1098–1101, Jun. 19, 2008.
[2] K.-R. Muller, C. W. Anderson, and G. E. Birch, “Linear and nonlinear
methods for brain-computer interfaces,” IEEE Trans. Neural Systems
Rehab. Eng., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 165–169, Jun. 2003.
[3] D. Garrett, D. A. Peterson, C. W. Anderson, and M. H. Thaut, “Comparison of linear, nonlinear, and feature selection methods for EEG
signal classification,” IEEE Trans. Neural Systems Rehab. Eng., vol.
11, no. 2, pp. 141–144, Jun. 2003.
[4]
[Online]. Available: http://electric-wheelchair-on.net/accessability-devices/toyota-demos-mind-controlled-electric-wheelchair/
[5] D. Heingartner, “Mental block: Emotiv says its game controller works
at the speed of thought, but it doesn’t,” IEEE Spectrum, vol. 46, pp.
42–43, Jan. 2009.
[6] C. T. Moritz, S. I. Perlmutter, and E. E. Fetz, “Direct control of paralysed muscles by cortical neurons,” Nature, vol. 456, pp. 639–642, Dec.
4, 2008.
[7] J. P. Donoghue, “Bridging the brain to the world: A perspective on
neural interface systems,” Neuron, vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 511–521, Nov. 6,
2008.
[8] S.-P. Kim, J. D. Simeral, L. R. Hochberg, J. P. Donoghue, and M. J.
Black, “Neural control of computer cursor velocity by decoding motor
cortical spiking activity in humans with tetraplegia,” J. Neural Eng.,
vol. 5, pp. 455–476, Nov. 17, 2008.
[9] E. Formisano, F. De Martino, M. Bonte, and R. Goebel, ““Who” is
saying “What”? Brain-based decoding of human voice and speech,”
Science, vol. 322, no. 5903, pp. 970–973, Nov. 7, 2008.
[10] K. N. Kay, T. Naselaris, R. J. Prenger, and J. L. Gallant, “Identifying
natural images from human brain activity,” Nature, vol. 452, pp.
352–355, Mar. 20, 2008.
[11] A. Berndt, O. Yizhar, L. A. Gunaydin, P. Hegemann, and K. Deisseroth, “Bi-stable neural state switches,” Nature Neurosci., vol. 12, pp.
229–234, 2008.
[12] V. Gradinaru, M. Mogri, K. R. Thompson, J. M. Henderson, and K.
Deisseroth, “Optical deconstruction of parkinsonian neural circuitry,”
Science, vol. 324, no. 5925, pp. 354–359, Apr. 17, 2009.
[13] M. Graybiel, R. Desimone, and E. S. Boyden, “Millisecond-timescale
optical control of neural dynamics in the nonhuman primate brain,”
Neuron, vol. 62, no. 2, pp. 191–198, Apr. 30, 2009.
[14] J. Kuniholm, “Open arms,” IEEE Spectrum, vol. 46, pp. 36–41, Mar.
2009.

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDAD POLITECNICA DE VALENCIA. Downloaded on February 12, 2010 at 10:59 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

