NeuroPhone: Brain-Mobile Phone Interface
using a Wireless EEG Headset
Andrew T. Campbell, Tanzeem Choudhury, Shaohan Hu, Hong Lu,
Matthew K. Mukerjee∗, Mashfiqui Rabbi, and Rajeev D. S. Raizada
Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH, USA

ABSTRACT

speller [7] brain-computer interface: the phone flashes
a sequence of photos of contacts from the address book
and a P300 brain potential is elicited when the flashed
photo matches the person whom the user wishes to dial.
We also demonstrate a version of the same app which
detects the much larger and more easily detectable EEG
signals triggered by the user winking their eyes when
the target photo appears. This “wink”-triggered dialing works robustly in noisy conditions. The P300,
or “think”-triggered, dialer is very promising but at
present less reliable. One could argue that other “hands
off” types of actuation such as voice recognition is more
suitable an interface to mobile applications. However,
our goal is to best understand how firing neurons can
drive mobile applications and what the current limitations in the state of the art are when using off-the-shelf
wireless EEG headsets and phones.
In this paper, we discuss our broader vision of a
brain-mobile phone interface and then present the initial design, implementation, and evaluation of the NeuroPhone system. Our initial results look promising showing that the iPhone is capable of processing raw neural
signals and classifying the P300 using a cheap, noisy
commercial EEG headset. However, a number of challenges remain in developing a practical and robust brainmobile phone interface not only capable of working in
controlled laboratory settings but also out in the wild.
Addressing these challenges is part of our on-going research.

Neural signals are everywhere just like mobile phones. We
propose to use neural signals to control mobile phones for
hands-free, silent and effortless human-mobile interaction.
Until recently, devices for detecting neural signals have been
costly, bulky and fragile. We present the design, implementation and evaluation of the NeuroPhone system, which allows neural signals to drive mobile phone applications on the
iPhone using cheap off-the-shelf wireless electroencephalography (EEG) headsets. We demonstrate a brain-controlled
address book dialing app, which works on similar principles to P300-speller brain-computer interfaces: the phone
flashes a sequence of photos of contacts from the address
book and a P300 brain potential is elicited when the flashed
photo matches the person whom the user wishes to dial.
EEG signals from the headset are transmitted wirelessly to
an iPhone, which natively runs a lightweight classifier to discriminate P300 signals from noise. When a person’s contactphoto triggers a P300, his/her phone number is automatically dialed. NeuroPhone breaks new ground as a brainmobile phone interface for ubiquitous pervasive computing.
We discuss the challenges in making our initial prototype
more practical, robust, and reliable as part of our on-going
research.

1.

INTRODUCTION

Like mobile phones, neural signals are ever present
in our everyday lives. Given the recent availability of
low-cost wireless electroencephalography (EEG) headsets [2,11,12] and programmable mobile phones capable
of running sophisticated machine learning algorithms,
we can now interface neural signals to phones to deliver
new mobile computing paradigms—users on-the-go can
simply “think” their way through all of their mobile
applications.
In this paper, we present the design, implementation
and evaluation of the NeuroPhone system (see video
demo [1]), a brain-mobile phone interface based on the
wireless Emotiv EPOC EEG headset [2] and the iPhone.
We demonstrate a mind-controlled address-book dialing app, which works on similar principles to a P300∗

2.

BRAIN-MOBILE PHONE INTERFACE

We envision that many mobile applications can be
reinvented; for example, instead of hand dialing your
friend Tim while driving you can simply wink or think
of him while your phone displays your contacts. We
also imagine new many-to-one mobile applications; for
example, a teacher of a foreign language is interested
in seeing exactly how many students actually understood the last question she asked. The students are all
wearing EEG headsets and their data is being streamed
in real-time to the teacher’s mobile phone. She simply
takes out her mobile phone and it gives her up to the

Contact Author.

1

second statistics on each of her students. She quickly
glances at the aggregate class statistics and realizing
that the students really did understand her difficult
question, proceeds with her lecture. Other scenarios
may soon be possible; for example, a person enters a
room (e.g., bar, club, meeting, classroom) and instantly
has a sense of the overall emotional state of the space
(i.e., happy, tension, frustration, sad, bored, hostile).
There is prior work classifying EEG signals into different bands of frequencies corresponding to different emotions such as meditation and activity [9]. In addition,
the Emotiv headset [2], which is designed primarily for
gaming purposes, is also capable of detecting certain
facial expressions (e.g., smile, laugh, shock – eyebrows
raised, anger – eyebrows furrowed) and non-conscious
emotions. If one could read the emotional state of people moving through a building then the notion of mood
music would take on a literal sense.
Many practical challenges remain to make this vision
a reality. For example, research-grade EEG headsets [4]
are expensive (e.g., tens of thousands of dollars) but offer a much more robust signal than the cheaper (e.g.,
$200-$500) headsets. As a result there is a significant
amount of noise in the data of the cheaper headsets,
requiring more sophisticated signal processing and machine learning techniques to classify neural events (e.g.,
P300). However, the cheaper headsets provide an encrypted wireless interface between the headset and computer allowing for mobility but complicating the design
of a clean brain-mobile phone interface. Mobile phones
are not designed to support continuous neural sensing
applications. The energy cost of continuously streaming
raw neural signals over wireless and running classifiers
on the phone is challenging. We imagine that brainmobile phone interfaces will be used when and where
the user is: walking in a busy street, in a car, on a bicycle, while shopping, sitting quietly in a library, etc. We
show that many of these use cases present significant
noise artifacts in the data complicating the design of
a practical brain-mobile interface today. Filtering out
components of the signal associated with artifacts (e.g.,
neural signals associated with walking or unintentional
facial expressions) is needed to advance this vision.
We envision that wireless EEG headsets will become
cheaper and more robust and that machine learning
techniques developed for high end research-grade wired
EEG headsets [4] can be effectively exploited by resource limited phones. As this vision gathers speed
and noise issues are solved, EEG will be integrated into
wearable fabric (e.g., baseball caps, woolen hats, bicycle helmets) or become the new wireless “earphones
plus” (i.e., earphones plus a limited set of electrodes).
This raises a number of interesting issues. For example,
the NeuroPhone system relay (discussed later) transmits raw unencrypted neural signals over-the-air to the

iPhone in IP packets. This leads to the notion of insecure “neural packets everywhere,” opening up important privacy challenges that need to be addressed.

Figure 1: NeuroPhone in use

3.

NEUROPHONE DESIGN

We create the NeuroPhone as a means of taking a first
step towards this vision. The NeuroPhone system uses
the iPhone to display pictures of contacts in the user’s
address book. The pictures are displayed and individually flashed in a random order. The user concentrates
on the picture of a person s/he wishes to call in the
case of the think mode of our application, called “Dial
Tim”. Utilizing the P300 neural signal, NeuroPhone
recognizes which person the user is focused on and calls
them. The wink mode is similar to the think mode
but the user simply winks with the left or right eye to
make the intended call. The wink mode relies on the
much more clearly defined muscle movement signals in
the raw EEG data, rather than much more subtle neural signals [13]. Figure 1 shows a user with the headset
and phone, and Figure 2 shows the application running.
In what follows, we present an overview of the P300 signal and the wireless Emotiv EPOC EEG headset used
by our Dial Tim application. We also discuss a number
of design considerations that directed our initial implementation discussed in Section 4.

3.1

P300

When somebody concentrates on a task-specific stimulus (e.g., a highlighted image in Dial Tim) among a
pool of stimuli (e.g., non highlighted images), the taskrelated stimulus will elicit a positive peak with a latency of about 300ms from the stimulus onset in subject’s EEG signal. This positive peak is known as the
P300 signal in neuroscience literature [7]. P300 is emanated in the central-parietal region of the brain and
can be found more or less throughout the EEG on a
number of channels. Figure 4 illustrates such a P300
signal captured using our headset, where the signal is
bandpass filtered and averaged over multiple trials. A
classic example experiment driven by P300 signals is the
2

Figure 2: The Dial Tim application works on similar principles to P300-speller brain-computer interfaces: the phone
flashes a sequence of photos of contacts from the address book and a P300 neural signal is elicited when the flashed
photo matches the person whom the user wishes to dial. EEG signals from the headset are transmitted wirelessly
to an iPhone, which natively runs a simple classifier to discriminate P300 signals from noise. When a person’s
contact-photo triggers a P300, their phone number is automatically dialed. In this case, the user wants to dial Tim,
thus when his picture is flashed, Tim is automatically dialed.
scale because of its low price, and can be extremely
handy if we can extract useful signals (e.g., P300) from
it through smart signal processing and classification algorithms running on the phone.

3.2

Electrode

P300 speller [3]. A grid of 6×6 alphanumeric characters is presented to a subject. The subject focuses on a
specific character, while the rows and columns are randomly flashed. Whenever a row or column containing
that specific character flashes, a P300 signal is elicited
in the subject’s EEG. The speller then predicts the specific character that the subject intends to select by determining the row and column that correspond to P300
signals in subject’s EEG and takes the letter at the intersection point. While we focus on the P300 neural
signal as a driver of the Dial Tim application, we plan
to study the suitability of other neural signals as part
of on-going work.

Wireless EEG Headset

We use the Emotiv EPOC headset [2] which has 14
data-collecting electrodes and 2 reference electrodes (see
Figures 1, 3, and 6). The electrodes are placed in
roughly the international 10-20 system and are labeled
as such [9]. The headset transmits encrypted data wirelessly to a Windows-based machine; the wireless chip is
proprietary and operates in the same frequency range
as 802.11 (2.4Ghz). The software that comes with the
Emotiv headset provides the following detection functionalities: various facial expressions (referred to as “Expressiv” by Emotiv); levels of engagement, frustration,
meditation, and excitement (“Affectiv”); subject-specific
training and detection of certain cognitive neuro-activities
such as “push”, “pull”, “rotate”, and “lift” (“Cognitiv”) [2]. Also built in the headset is a gyroscope that
detects the change of orientation of subject’s head. The
headset is not meant to be an extremely reliable device,
thus it is challenging to extract finer P300 signals from
the EEGs this headset produces. But, as we stated in
our vision, this headset can be easily deployed at large

AF4
F8
F4
FC6
T8
P8
O2
O1
P7
T7
FC5
F3
F7
AF3
0

1

2
3
Time (second)

4

5

Figure 3: Raw data from the headset

3.3

Design Considerations

In what follows, we discuss a number of design considerations that relate to building a reliable and robust
NeuroPhone system.
Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR): Since the Emotiv
headset is not intended for finer signal detection, there
is more noise than usual on every electrode of the EEG.
To compound this issue, EEG’s are relatively noisy to
begin with [8]. Assuming that this noise is relatively
random, it has the potential to completely invalidate
the data that we use to detect winks and P300 signals
in the first place. We study various solutions to increase
the SNR, such as bandpass filtering [9] and independent
component analysis (ICA) [14]. A sensible approach to
increase the SNR is to average the data over many trials, which is also a commonly used technique in neu3

8

AF3

Task Related Stimulus
Background Stimulus

AF4

150

6

Voltage (µV)

Voltage (µV)

F7

100

4

2

0

F8
F3
FC5

50

F4
FC6

T7
0

T8
CMS

ï2

DRL

P7

P8

ï50
ï4
0

200

400
600
Time (millisecond)

800

1000

Figure 4: Multi-trial averaged bandpass filtered P300 Signal from one electrode. The difference from the peak
of the P300 signal to the background
noise is about 6µV

0

200

400
600
Time (millisecond)

1000

Figure 5: Unfiltered wink signal from
one electrode. The difference from the
peak of the wink signal to the background noise is about 140µV

roscience [10]. Naturally, this introduces delay in the
acquisition of a reliable P300 signal, because we need
to average several trials before actually start detecting
the P300. However, in wink mode we can avoid averaging because wink signals (Figure 5) are much more
easily detectable in raw EEG data than P300 signals
(Figure 4).
Signal Processing: Although we are averaging data
for a better SNR, we can still improve the EEG signals
for better P300 detection. We use a bandpass filter to
get rid of any noise that is not in the P300 frequency
range [14]. Again this signal processing is unnecessary
for wink mode because wink signals are much more easily detectable in raw EEG data.
Phone Classifiers: Typically, real-time EEG signal
processing and classification algorithms are designed for
powerful machines, not resource limited mobile phones.
For example, Lotte et al. [8] use a weighted combination of various classifiers for EEG classification. These
classification algorithms are not practical to run on the
mobile phone because of power efficiency and resource
issues. To address this challenge, we combine two approaches for efficient classification on the phone: i) we
do not supply all channels from the headset to the phone
for classification, rather, only the relevant subset of
EEG channels; and ii) we implement lightweight classifiers, more specifically, a multivariate equal-prior Bayesian
classifier is used for wink mode and a simple decision
stump is used for the think mode.

4.

800

O1

O2

Figure 6: Electrode positions
on the headset [2]

Laptop Relay

Mobile Phone
Application

Forward
EEG Headset
Classification
Decryption
Preprocessing

Figure 7: NeuroPhone system architecture
ing the EEG data, the phone carries out all the relevant signal processing and classification. The headset samples all channels at 128 samples/second, each of
which is a 4-byte floating-point number corresponding
to the voltage of a single electrode. The data rate of
the EEG data streamed from the relay laptop to the
mobile phone is 4kbps per channel. For each application mode, only relevant channels are streamed. Figure
7 shows the current system architecture. The phone
uses simple machine learning techniques to determine
user input (wink/non-wink or P300/non-P300). For the
wink mode, we reverse mount the headset and only use
the channels which are directly above the subject’s eyes
i.e., O1 and O2. We develop a data collection program
where the subject can easily label each wink. A multivariate Bayesian classifier is then trained and used for
classification. We set equal-prior such that it will not
bias toward either wink or non-wink classes. In the
preprocessing step, we calculate variances over a 90%
overlapping sliding window of the two channels. The
variances are used as features and are fed to the classifier in the classification stage. During the offline training phase, 2D Gaussian distributions are estimated for
both the wink and non-wink class, as illustrated in Figure 8. The two Gaussians are mostly separated, which
results in good online classification performance.
For the think mode of the application, which utilizes
the P300 signal, we attempt to use similar 2D Gaus-

IMPLEMENTATION

In this section, we discuss the implementation details of the wink mode and the think mode for the Dial
Tim application. Due to the fact that the headset only
transmits encrypted data wirelessly and this data can
be decrypted solely by Emotiv’s closed-source SDK on
a Windows machine, we use a laptop to relay the raw
EEG data to the phone through WiFi. Upon receiv4

EEG data caused by walking are erroneously picked up
by the classifier as blinks. Despite the performance decline of the wink classifier when applied to more noisy
data, we can, however, still observe that it is robust in
reasonably noisy scenarios.

ï6

x 10
5

Nonïwink Gaussian

4

3

Wink Gaussian

Precision
Recall
Accuracy

2

1
6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000

0
ï3000
ï2000
ï1000

0

1000

2000

3000

Walking
86.15%
96.70%
92.58%

Table 1: Wink classification results
For think mode, we test on the same set of subjects.
We carry out the P300 experiments with the subjects
using the Dial Tim application while sitting still, sitting with loud background music, and standing up. We
average the data over a set time interval. The accuracy
values of the experiments are shown in Table 2. First,
the accuracy increases as the data accumulation time
increases, which coincides with the intuition that averaging over more data improves the SNR for the expected
P300 signals, leading to higher accuracy. Second, P300
signals are quite susceptible to external noises, illustrated by the fact that when subjects are sitting still,
we have the best accuracies, whereas accuracy decreases
when considerable auditory noise is introduced. Accuracy further declines when the subjects stand up, which
potentially adds more noises due to subjects’ muscle
controls and physical movements. Finally, even though
different experiment settings result in different P300 detection accuracies, more data accumulation and averaging generally yields better detection accuracies.

0
ï1000

Figure 8: Gaussians for winks and non-winks
sians. However, the distributions of the classes prove
to be too overlapped for reasonable classification. As
discussed in the design consideration section, to cancel
out unnecessary noise we preprocess the data by filtering it with a 0-9Hz bandpass filter and averaging the
signal over multiple trials. We do this preprocessing
separately for all 6 stimuli corresponding to the six images of the Dial Tim application. Following this we
only crop the signal segment that corresponds to the
highest peak value at around 300ms after the stimulus onset. For classification, we use a decision stump
whose threshold is set to the maximum value among
the cropped signal segments for all 6 images.

5.

Sitting Relaxed
92.35%
99.39%
95.58%

EVALUATION

To evaluate our system, we test the wink and think
modes in a variety of scenarios (e.g., sitting, walking)
using two different Emotiv headsets and three different
subjects. In what follows, we discuss our initial results.
For the wink mode, we collect multiple sessions of
data from all subjects while they sit relaxed or walk,
then train an equal-prior Bayesian classifier using a set
of five sessions of data from a single subject sitting relaxed. This classifier is then applied to the rest of the
data to test whether it can generalize to unseen data by
calculating the classification precision (i.e., percentage
of classified “winks” that are actually real winks), recall
(i.e., percentage of real winks that are actually classified
as winks) and accuracy (i.e., percentage of all events
that are correctly classified). The experiment results
are shown in Table 1. As can be seen from the table,
the classifier performs well on data collected for sittingrelaxed scenarios but walking results in a decline in performance. The decline of recall suggests that while the
subjects are walking, a small amount of blinks are contaminated such that the classifier fails to pick them up;
thus, representing false negatives. There is a larger decline in precision, which suggests that in additional to
the increase in false negatives reflected by the recall,
there is also a increase in false positives; noisy peaks in

Time
20s
50s
100s

Sitting
77.78%
77.82%
88.89%

Music (Sitting)
44.44%
66.67%
88.89%

Standing
33.33%
66.67%
66.67%

Table 2: Think classification accuracies. Times in
the first column indicate the different time durations
of data accumulation for averaging. Contact pictures
are flashed once every half a second in random order;
each of the 6 pictures has a 1/6 chance for each flash.
Accuracy measures the proportion of correctly classified
sessions. Note that chance level classification accuracy
would be 1/6 ≈ 16.67%.
While our initial results are promising for a limited
set of scenarios many challenges remain. Currently, to
get usable P300 signals from the user, we need to average their data over a large number of trials. This
is typically how neural signals are handled. However,
this general “unresponsiveness” of the system proves
to be rather frustrating for the end user. There has
been recent works on single-trial classification of EEG
data [5, 10]. We are currently investigating how to reliably carry out classification using such single-trial data
approaches. We also carry out P300 experiments while
5

subjects are walking and driving which yields low accuracies due to noise. We plan to study the application of different processing and classification algorithms
capable of dealing with large induced noise from such
activities. The CPU usage for our application on the
iPhone is 3.3%, and the total memory usage is 9.40MB,
of which 9.14MB are for GUI elements, meaning that
the actual preprocessing and classification components
of our application are quite lightweight, using minimal
amounts of memory. However, continuous use of NeuroPhone streaming raw EEG channels to the phone using
WiFi and running processing and classification pipelines
would lead to battery drain. We plan to study duty cycling the phone to solve this problem.

6.

lenge.

8.

RELATED WORK

There is a limited amount of related work in this area.
A number of groups [3, 5, 14] use research/professionalquality EEG devices that offer higher quality signals but
are expensive and based on wired headsets. In contrast,
consumer-oriented EEG headsets [2, 11, 12] are considerably cheaper and noisier, but at the same time are
more geared toward gaming applications rather than
the types of classification we have used them for. Typically, these headsets are wireless, enabling mobile uses.
[6, 11] are more closely related to NeuroPhone. [6] develops a wireless EEG headband prototype with 4 electrodes targeting non-hairy skin area of the forehead,
which is not suitable for P300 detection. [11] is a commercially available headset with a single electrode not
powerful enough for the types of applications we have
in mind such as Dial Tim. These projects connect neural signals to mobile phones just to display visualization
and simple frequency-domain analysis of the signal, not
to drive mobile applications themselves. In essence, the
phone is used as a mobile display and not as a phone.

7.

REFERENCES

[1] Demo-Video. Neurophone. http:
//www.youtube.com/watch?v=tc82Z_yfEwc.
[2] EmotivSystems. Emotiv - brain computer
interface technology. http://emotiv.com.
[3] L. Farwell and E. Donchin. Talking off the top of
your head: toward a mental prosthesis utilizing
event-related brain potentials.
Electroencephalography and clinical
Neurophysiology, 70(6):510–523, 1988.
[4] GugerTechnologies. g.tec - guger technologies.
http://www.gtec.at/.
[5] K. Li, R. Sankar, Y. Arbel, and E. Donchin. P300
Based Single Trial Independent Component
Analysis on EEG Signal. Foundations of
Augmented Cognition. Neuroergonomics and
Operational Neuroscience, pages 404–410, 2009.
[6] C. Lin, L. Ko, C. Chang, Y. Wang, C. Chung,
F. Yang, J. Duann, T. Jung, and J. Chiou.
Wearable and Wireless Brain-Computer Interface
and Its Applications. Foundations of Augmented
Cognition. Neuroergonomics and Operational
Neuroscience, pages 741–748, 2009.
[7] D. E. J. Linden. The P300: where in the brain is
it produced and what does it tell us?
Neuroscientist, 11(6):563–76, Dec 2005.
[8] F. Lotte, M. Congedo, A. Lécuyer, F. Lamarche,
and B. Arnaldi. A review of classification
algorithms for EEG-based brain-computer
interfaces. J Neural Eng, 4(2):R1–R13, Jun 2007.
[9] J. Malmivuo and R. Plonsey. Bioelectromagnetism
- Principles and Applications of Bioelectric and
Biomagnetic Fields. Oxford University Press, New
York, 1995.
[10] A. Mouraux and G. Iannetti. Across-trial
averaging of event-related EEG responses and
beyond. Magnetic resonance imaging,
26(7):1041–1054, 2008.
[11] NeuroSky. Neurosky - experience the mindset.
http://www.neurosky.com/.
[12] OCZTechnology. nia game controller OCZ
technology. http:
//www.ocztechnology.com/products/ocz_
peripherals/nia-neural_impulse_actuator.
[13] A. B. Usakli, S. Gurkan, F. Aloise, G. Vecchiato,
and F. Babiloni. On the use of electrooculogram
for efficient human computer interfaces. Comput
Intell Neurosci, page 135629, 2010.
[14] N. Xu, X. Gao, B. Hong, X. Miao, S. Gao, and
F. Yang. BCI competition 2003-data set IIb:
enhancing P300 wave detection using ICA-based
subspace projections for BCI applications. IEEE
Transactions on Biomedical Engineering,
51(6):1067–1072, 2004.

CONCLUSION

We have presented the evaluation of an initial prototype that brings together neural signals and phones
to drive mobile applications in new ways. One could
argue that connecting the wireless Emotiv EPOC EEG
headset and iPhone is just a simple engineering exercise. We believe the NeuroPhone system is an important development precisely because it is simple to engineer using cheap but noisy commercial components.
NeuroPhone opens up new opportunities and challenges
in ubiquitous sensing and pervasive computing. For example, sniffing packets could take on a very new meaning if brain-mobile phone interfaces become widely used.
Anyone could simply sniff the packets out of the air and
potentially reconstruct “thoughts” of the user. Spying
on a user and detecting something as simple as them
thinking yes or no could have profound effects. Thus,
securing brain signals over the air is an important chal6

