HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September
17.
Published in final edited form as:

Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2015 August ; 2015: 3767–3770. doi:10.1109/EMBC.2015.7319213.

A Step Towards EEG-based Brain Computer Interface for Autism
Intervention*
Jing Fan,
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Department, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN
37212 USA

Author Manuscript

Joshua W. Wade,
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Department, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN
37212 USA
Dayi Bian,
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Department, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN
37212 USA
Alexandra P. Key,
Vanderbilt Kennedy Center for Research on Human Development and Department of Hearing
and Speech Sciences, Vanderbilt University, 230 Appleton Place, PMB 74, Nashville, TN 37203
USA

Author Manuscript

Zachary E. Warren,
Treatment and Research Institute for Autism Spectrum Disorders (TRIAD), Pediatrics, Psychiatry
and Special Education, Vanderbilt Kennedy Center, 230 Appleton Place, PMB 74, Nashville, TN
37203 USA
Lorraine C. Mion, and
Vanderbilt University School of Nursing, Nashville, TN 37204 USA
Nilanjan Sarkar [Member, IEEE]
Mechanical Engineering Department, Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Department,
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37212 USA

Abstract
Author Manuscript

Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a prevalent and costly neurodevelopmental disorder.
Individuals with ASD often have deficits in social communication skills as well as adaptive
behavior skills related to daily activities. We have recently designed a novel virtual reality (VR)
based driving simulator for driving skill training for individuals with ASD. In this paper, we
explored the feasibility of detecting engagement level, emotional states, and mental workload
during VR-based driving using EEG as a first step towards a potential EEG-based Brain Computer
Interface (BCI) for assisting autism intervention. We used spectral features of EEG signals from a

*Research supported in part by the National Institute of Health Grant 1R01MH091102-01A1, National Science Foundation Grant
0967170 and the Hobbs Society Grant from the Vanderbilt Kennedy Center.
Corresponding author to provide: phone: 615-275-5216; fax: 615-343-6687; jing.fan@vanderbilt.edu, dayi.bian@vanderbilt.edu,
joshua.w.wade@vanderbilt.edu.

Fan et al.

Page 2

Author Manuscript

14-channel EEG neuroheadset, together with therapist ratings of behavioral engagement,
enjoyment, frustration, boredom, and difficulty to train a group of classification models. Seven
classification methods were applied and compared including Bayes network, naïve Bayes, Support
Vector Machine (SVM), multilayer perceptron, K-nearest neighbors (KNN), random forest, and
J48. The classification results were promising, with over 80% accuracy in classifying engagement
and mental workload, and over 75% accuracy in classifying emotional states. Such results may
lead to an adaptive closed-loop VR-based skill training system for use in autism intervention.

I. Introduction

Author Manuscript

Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a grouping of neurodevelopmental disabilities
characterized by pervasive impairments in social communication and behavioral functioning.
The estimated prevalence of ASD is 1 in 68 [1]. While researchers have extensively studied
how to improve social skills, language development, and emotion recognition in young
children with ASD [2, 3], far fewer studies have focused on meaningful skills related to
adaptive adult independence such as driving. Many individuals fail to achieve typical
milestones related to adult independence, with the ability to drive an automobile
representing a particularly important skill for individuals with ASD as well as typically
developing adults.

Author Manuscript

Recent literature has shown that individuals with ASD face difficulty in learning and
maintaining driving skills [4–6]. Compared with their typically developed (TD) peers,
individuals with ASD have difficulty in identifying driving hazards that include a person [5]
and appear to evidence differences in gaze pattern and physiology signals while driving [6].
In our previous work [7], we found that the average gaze positions on the driving field of
view among the ASD group is significantly higher in the vertical direction and towards the
right in the horizontal direction compared to the TD group, which was consistent with the
results found in [6].

Author Manuscript

A growing number of studies have investigated Virtual Reality (VR)-based intervention for
children with ASD [8]. VR technology offers the potential to create an immersive,
interactive, and realistic environment for behavioral learning and generalization in real world
situations. VR-based intervention platforms in autism treatment have the advantages of
providing precise control of complex stimuli, providing individualized treatment, and
creating a structured and safe learning environment [8, 9]. We have recently developed a
novel VR-based driving system for the purpose of addressing driving skills of adolescents
with ASD [7]. A future goal is to incorporate an EEG-based Brain Computer Interface (BCI)
into this VR-based driving system. EEG-based BCI may provide a non-invasive way to
estimate the engagement level, emotional states and mental workload of adolescents with
ASD in order to facilitate individualized system adaptation for driving skill learning.
Traditionally, BCI applications have been developed as a new control and communication
channel for individuals with severe motor disabilities [10]. With the emergence of more
affordable commercial EEG devices such as Emotiv EPOC [11] and NeuroSky Mindwave
[12], BCI systems are becoming available for other applications such as video games,
neuromarketing, etc. In this paper, we explored the feasibility of detecting engagement level,
Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 17.

Fan et al.

Page 3

Author Manuscript

emotional states and mental workload of adolescents with ASD using EEG signals while
they drive using a VR-based driving simulator. EEG signals have been previously used to
recognize attentive state, engagement level, mental workload, and emotions in various
applications [13–15]. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II outlines the
architecture of the VR-based driving system and the structure of the EEG-based BCI.
Section III describes the experimental setup and procedure. Section IV presents the methods
for EEG data analysis as well as classification results. Finally, section V discusses the
implication of the results and highlights the future directions.

I. System Description

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

The architecture of the VR-based driving system is depicted in Fig. 1. There were five
primary modules: VR Driving Module (VDM), Physiological Data Acquisition Module
(PDM), EEG Data Acquisition Module (EDM), Gaze Data Acquisition Module (GDM), and
Observer-based Assessment Module (OAM). The communication among the modules was
implemented based on the client/server architecture through a local area network. VDM was
composed of a virtual environment and a Logitech G27 controller. Participants operated a
virtual vehicle inside the virtual environment using a steering wheel and pedal board. The
virtual environment was built as a driving game with six difficulty levels. Each difficulty
level contained three assignments, which were further decomposed into eight trials. The
trials were designed to address specific driving skills such as decreasing speed in a school
zone, lane merging, left/right turning, etc. During each driving session, participant’s EEG
signals, physiology signals, eye gaze data and performance data were recorded by EDM,
PDM, GDM and VDM, respectively. OAM was responsible for recording behavioral
assessments of participants using a 0–9 rating scale with five categories: engagement,
enjoyment, frustration, boredom, and difficulty. Three emotional states including enjoyment,
frustration, and boredom were selected due to their importance in driving. Mental workload
was found to increase linearly as level of difficulty increased in several tasks [13], and was
shown to have been modulated by task difficulty in a closed-loop robot-assisted gait training
system [16]. Given the individual differences, we measured the perceived difficulty level of
the game instead of the actual game difficulty level as the mental workload of adolescents
with ASD. In this paper, we only focus on the EEG-based data analysis.

Author Manuscript

The proposed EEG-based BCI for the VR-based driving system consists of three main
modules: Signal Preprocessing module, Feature Generation module, and Classification
module. In this context, BCI serves as an implicit communication channel to enrich the
human-computer interaction. The raw EEG signals collected from the scalp of the
participant are first fed into a Signal Preprocessing module to remove outliers, correct EOG
and EMG artifacts, and enhance the signal-to-noise ratio. Feature Generation module then
transforms the time series signals into a set of meaningful features for Classification module
to detect the engagement level, emotional states and mental workload of the participant.
Feature Generation module is comprised of two steps: 1) extract features from the time
series, and 2) reduce the number of features by either selecting a subset of useful features or
representing the features in a lower-dimensional space. Finally, the classification results are
sent to the VR driving module and could be used together with physiology signals, eye gaze
data and performance data to make decisions on the adaption of the virtual driving game. In
Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 17.

Fan et al.

Page 4

Author Manuscript

this work, the behavioral assessments data from OAM were used as ground truth to train a
group of models that could be used in Classification module to classify engagement,
enjoyment, frustration, boredom, and difficulty.

II. Experimental Design
A. Task and Procedure

Author Manuscript

Each participant took part in six experimental sessions of approximately 60 minutes on
different days. At the start of each session, the driving simulator seat was adjusted for the
comfort of participants. Then, EEG sensors and physiology sensors were placed on the head
and the body of each participant respectively, followed by an eye tracker calibration process.
In the first session, participants watched a short tutorial that explained the basic rules and
vehicle’s controls. Before the beginning of the task, three minutes of baseline data, including
EEG signals and physiology signals were collected while the participants were asked to sit
quietly in the simulator with their eyes opened. The driving part of the session consisted of a
three-minute practice followed by three assignments. Practice mode was designed for the
purpose of familiarizing the participants with the controlling of the vehicle in the game.
There were no restrictions on participants’ driving behaviors. In contrast, in the assignment
mode, participants followed GPS instructions and tried to obey traffic rules. The first and the
last sessions were pre- and post-tests, respectively, and consisted of the same assignments
from a variety of difficulty levels. The rest of the sessions selected assignments from the
same difficulty level while the difficulty increased from one visit to the next.

Author Manuscript

Fig. 2 illustrates the experimental setup. A 14-channel Emotiv EPOC neuroheadset was used
for collecting EEG signals from 0.2 to 45Hz at a sampling rate of 128Hz. These EEG
sensors were placed at positions AF3, F7, F3, FC5, T7, P7, O1, O2, P8, T8, FC6, F4, F8,
and AF4, defined by the 10–20 system of electrode placement [17]. Two additional reference
sensors were located at positions P3 and P4. All the signals were measured with respect to
reference sensor P3. We recorded the 14-channel EEG signals, headset rotational
acceleration in X and Y directions, the contact quality of each sensor, and messages received
from the VDM. The received messages were composed of timestamps and event
descriptions and were used to align the EEG signals with driving situations and therapist’s
rating. Examples of these messages were start/end of an assignment, start/end of a trail, and
failure events.

Author Manuscript

In each session, a therapist observed the participants and their performance on the driving
game from an adjacent room and used a novel program to provide online rating on the five
categories. Two rating files were logged: 1) overall rating at the end of each assignment, and
2) periodic rating during each assignment on participants’ instantaneous states.
B. Participant Statistics
Sixteen male teenagers participated in the experiment. We did not exclusively recruit males,
but ASD is estimated to occur with a 5:1 male to female ratio explaining this
overrepresentation. The age of the participants ranged from 13 to 18 years (M = 15.24 years,
SD = 1.63 years). All participants had a clinical diagnosis of ASD and scored at or above

Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 17.

Fan et al.

Page 5

Author Manuscript

clinical cutoff on the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule [18]. Twelve participants
finished all six sessions, three participants finished two sessions, and the last participant
finished four sessions. The final data set included 82 sessions. Participants were reimbursed
for each visit and this study was approved by Vanderbilt University’s Institutional Review
Board.

III. Results
In this paper, we used a therapist’s overall subjective rating data to train classification
models. One feature vector from each assignment was extracted and labeled with its
corresponding rating scores. For each category, the continuous score in range [0, 9] were
mapped to two classes, high or low, for binary classification.

Author Manuscript

A. EEG Signal Processing

Author Manuscript

The following procedure was used to reject and correct artifacts in the EEG signals, as well
as to increase the signal-to-noise ratio. First, spikes in EEG signals were removed by slew
rate limiting with a rising slew rate parameter of 50μV and a falling slew rate parameter of
−50μV. Then, a 0.2–45Hz band-pass filter was applied on the EEG signals. Data from each
assignment were then segmented into one-second epochs with 50% overlap. For an
individual epoch to be included in the analyses, all sensors had to be in good contact with
the subject’s scalp, there were no interpolated data points due to slew rate limiting, and less
than 33% of the channels exceeded the voltage threshold of 150μV. Data in accepted epochs
were re-referenced to the average reference. EOG and EMG artifact correction algorithms
[19, 20] were then applied on the re-referenced data. We rejected the epoch again if any
single channel in the epoch contains artifacts and thus failed to pass all four tests: channel
deviation test, variance test, amplitude range test, and median gradient test [21]. The
remaining epochs (M = 268.48, SD = 147.72) were used to calculate the feature vector.
Mean-centering was performed on each extracted epoch followed by a hanning window
function. Power spectral density variables (μV2) were then computed from the time series
epoch data by summing power spectral density values across each 2Hz bin from 4Hz to
44Hz. Delta band activities (1–4Hz) were excluded due to potential frequency overlap with
electrode-shift artifacts. Spectral features for each assignment were calculated by averaging
the power spectral density variables across all the extracted epochs in that assignment,
resulted in a 280 (14 channels × 20 frequency bins) dimensional feature vector. In the end, a
total number of 201 out of 246 (82 sessions × 3 assignments) samples were used to train
classification models.

Author Manuscript

B. Classification Results
The WEKA data mining software [22] was utilized to classify engagement, enjoyment,
frustration, boredom, and difficulty as well as compare different classification methods.
Preprocessing on the sample data included normalizing and standardizing the features and
then balancing the number of instances in two classes. The principle component analysis
(PCA) method was applied for dimensionality reduction to avoid overfitting. Seven
supervised learning methods were compared for classification of each category: Bayes

Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 17.

Fan et al.

Page 6

Author Manuscript

network with SimpleEstimator estimator and K2 search algorithm, naïve Bayes, Support
Vector Machine (SVM) with a three degree radial basis function kernel, multilayer
perceptron that has a number of (features + classes)/2 hidden layers and a 0.3 learning rate,
K-nearest neighbors (KNN) with Euclidean distance function, random forest with 100
random trees and J48, a pruned C4.5 decision tree.
A 10-fold cross validation technique was used to estimate the accuracies of each
classification method on all categories. Fig. 3 summarized and compared the classification
accuracies. The highest accuracy for classifying engagement, enjoyment, frustration,
boredom, and difficulty were 85.96% (KNN), 77.25% (KNN), 75.74% (KNN), 77.63%
(random forest), and 81.46% (KNN), respectively. Given the complexity of the experimental
setup and stimuli types, and variation in age and conditions of the subjects, such
classification accuracies were very promising compared with the state of the art [15].

Author Manuscript

IV. Discussion

Author Manuscript

In this work we integrated an EEG data acquisition module into the VR-based driving
system and explored the reliability of detecting engagement level, emotional states, and
mental workload of adolescents with ASD while driving. We included three emotional states
(enjoyment, frustration, and boredom) and used difficulty rating scores to represent mental
workload. EEG signals and the therapist’s overall behavioral assessments were used to train
a group of classification models for each category. We extracted spectral features from
assignment related EEG signals and achieved classification accuracies of over 80% for
detecting engagement and mental workload, and over 75% for detecting emotional states. In
most cases, KNN classification method obtained the best accuracy. These results suggest
that EEG-based BCI could be used in the VR-based driving system to enrich the human
computer interaction, and more importantly, improve the system efficiency through
individualized system adaptation based on multimodal sensory data and performance data. It
will be promising and interesting to study the EEG signals of a TD group in reponse to the
same system and potentially find the specific reaction pattern of the ASD group. However, in
this work, our aim is to explore the use of EEG signals towards an adaptive closed-loop
system for better driving skill training for individuals with ASD.

Author Manuscript

While the results are promising, note that we only included features in frequency domain for
this study. Better classification results may be achieved by adding other types of features
such as time domain features and synchronicity features. Examples of time domain features
are entropy and autoregressive coefficients. Synchronicity features provide information on
the relationship between two or more channels. Periodic ratings logged during the
assignments are more informative and could augment overall ratings when training
classification models. What’s more, constructing ensembles of classifiers may improve
classification. In the future, we plan to implement the proposed structure of EEG-based BCI
for the VR-based driving system. We will also incorporate physiology signals, eye gaze data,
and performance data for individualized adaptation of the virtual driving game.

Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 17.

Fan et al.

Page 7

Author Manuscript

References

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

1. CDC. Autism spectrum disorders: Data and statistics. Mar 25. 2015 Available: http://www.cdc.gov/
ncbddd/autism/data.html
2. Sundberg, ML., Partington, JW. Teaching language to children with autism and other developmental
disabilities. Pleasant Hill, CA: Behavior Analysts; 1998.
3. Bauminger N. The facilitation of social-emotional understanding and social interaction in highfunctioning children with autism: Intervention outcomes. Journal of autism and developmental
disorders. 2002; 32:283–298. [PubMed: 12199133]
4. Cox NB, Reeve RE, Cox SM, Cox DJ. Brief Report: Driving and young adults with ASD: Parents’
experiences. Journal of autism and developmental disorders. 2012; 42:2257–2262. [PubMed:
22359179]
5. Sheppard E, Ropar D, Underwood G, van Loon E. Brief report: Driving hazard perception in autism.
Journal of autism and developmental disorders. 2010; 40:504–508. [PubMed: 19890705]
6. Reimer B, Fried R, Mehler B, Joshi G, Bolfek A, Godfrey KM, Zhao N, Goldin R, Biederman J.
Brief report: Examining driving behavior in young adults with high functioning autism spectrum
disorders: A pilot study using a driving simulation paradigm. Journal of autism and developmental
disorders. 2013; 43:2211–2217. [PubMed: 23338532]
7. Wade, J., Bian, D., Zhang, L., Swanson, A., Sarkar, M., Warren, Z., Sarkar, N. Universal Access in
Human-Computer Interaction. Universal Access to Information and Knowledge. Springer; 2014.
Design of a Virtual Reality Driving Environment to Assess Performance of Teenagers with ASD; p.
466-474.
8. Wang, M., Anagnostou, E. Comprehensive guide to autism. Springer; 2014. Virtual reality as
treatment tool for children with autism; p. 2125-2141.
9. Strickland, D. Studies in health technology and informatics. 1997. Virtual reality for the treatment of
autism; p. 81-86.
10. Nicolas-Alonso LF, Gomez-Gil J. Brain computer interfaces, a review. Sensors. 2012; 12:1211–
1279. [PubMed: 22438708]
11. Emotiv EPOC. Mar 25. 2015 Available: http://www.emotiv.com/
12. NeuroSky MindWave. Mar 25. 2015 Available: http://store.neurosky.com/products/mindwave-1
13. Berka C, Levendowski DJ, Lumicao MN, Yau A, Davis G, Zivkovic VT, Olmstead RE, Tremoulet
PD, Craven PL. EEG correlates of task engagement and mental workload in vigilance, learning,
and memory tasks. Aviation, space, and environmental medicine. 2007; 78:B231–B244.
14. Huang, D., Zhang, H., Ang, K., Guan, C., Pan, Y., Wang, C., Yu, J. Fast emotion detection from
EEG using asymmetric spatial filtering. Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2012
IEEE International Conference on; 2012; p. 589-592.
15. Frey J, Mühl C, Lotte F, Hachet M. Review of the use of electroencephalography as an evaluation
method for human-computer interaction. 2013 arXiv preprint arXiv:1311.2222.
16. Koenig A, Novak D, Omlin X, Pulfer M, Perreault E, Zimmerli L, Mihelj M, Riener R. Real-time
closed-loop control of cognitive load in neurological patients during robot-assisted gait training.
Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, IEEE Transactions on. 2011; 19:453–464.
17. Jasper HH. The ten twenty electrode system of the international federation.
Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology. 1958; 10:371–375.
18. Lord C, Risi S, Lambrecht L, Cook EH Jr, Leventhal BL, DiLavore PC, Pickles A, Rutter M. The
Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule Generic: A standard measure of social and
communication deficits associated with the spectrum of autism. Journal of autism and
developmental disorders. 2000; 30:205–223. [PubMed: 11055457]
19. Gómez-Herrero, G., De Clercq, W., Anwar, H., Kara, O., Egiazarian, K., Van Huffel, S., Van
Paesschen, W. Automatic removal of ocular artifacts in the EEG without an EOG reference
channel. Signal Processing Symposium, 2006. NORSIG 2006. Proceedings of the 7th Nordic;
2006; p. 130-133.
20. De Clercq W, Vergult A, Vanrumste B, Van Paesschen W, Van Huffel S. Canonical Correlation
Analysis Applied to Remove Muscle Artifacts From the Electroencephalogram. Biomedical
Engineering, IEEE Transactions on. 2006; 53:2583–2587.
Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 17.

Fan et al.

Page 8

Author Manuscript

21. REILLY, R., NOLAN, H. FASTER: Fully Automated Statistical Thresholding for EEG artifact
Rejection. 2010.
22. Hall M, Frank E, Holmes G, Pfahringer B, Reutemann P, Witten IH. The WEKA data mining
software: an update. ACM SIGKDD explorations newsletter. 2009; 11:10–18.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 17.

Fan et al.

Page 9

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 1.

System architecture

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 17.

Fan et al.

Page 10

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 2.

Experimental setup

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 17.

Fan et al.

Page 11

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 3.

Classification accuracies

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 17.

