HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 29.
Published in final edited form as:

Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2015 ; 2015: 4114–4117. doi:10.1109/EMBC.2015.7319299.

Real-time EEG Source-mapping Toolbox (REST): Online ICA and
Source Localization
Luca Pion-Tonachini [Student Member, IEEE],
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering and Swartz Center for Computational
Neuroscience (SCCN) of University of California, San Diego (UCSD)

Author Manuscript

Sheng-Hsiou Hsu [Student Member, IEEE],
Dept. of Bioengineering (BIOE), SCCN, and Institute for Neural Computation (INC) of UCSD
Scott Makeig,
SCCN and INC of UCSD
Tzyy-Ping Jung [Fellow, IEEE], and
BIOE, SCCN and INC of UCSD
Gert Cauwenberghs [Fellow, IEEE]
BIOE and INC of UCSD

Abstract
Author Manuscript

The Electroencephalogram (EEG) is a noninvasive functional brain activity recording method that
shows promise for becoming a 3-D cortical imaging modality with high temporal resolution.
Currently, most of the tools developed for EEG analysis focus mainly on offline processing. This
study introduces and demonstrates the Real-time EEG Source-mapping Toolbox (REST), an
extension to the widely distributed EEGLAB environment. REST allows blind source separation
of EEG data in real-time using Online Recursive Independent Component Analysis (ORICA), plus
near real-time localization of separated sources. Two source localization methods are available to
fit equivalent current dipoles or estimate spatial source distributions of selected sources. Selected
measures of raw EEG data or component activations (e.g. time series of the data, spectral changes
over time, equivalent current dipoles, etc.) can be visualized in near real-time. Finally, this study
demonstrates the accuracy and functionality of REST with data from two experiments and
discusses some relevant applications.

Author Manuscript

I. Introduction
Electroencephalogram (EEG) source analysis combining Independent Component Analysis
(ICA) and source localization has generally been solved offline because of its computational
cost. With faster processors and algorithmic advances, near real-time online applications are
becoming even more viable. Bringing these analysis methods to the domain of real-time
processing would allow for the use of more specific neurophysiological information in

L. Pion-Tonachini and S.-H. Hsu made equal contributions to this work.

Pion-Tonachini et al.

Page 2

Author Manuscript

closed-loop brain-computer interfaces (BCI) and neurofeedback paradigms, and could also
provide experimenters online feedback useful for data quality control.

Author Manuscript

Analyzing EEG data at the level of cortical source dynamics is a complicated problem, but
allows for much more biologically plausible, physiologically meaningful, and functionally
significant results than treating scalp data channels as if they indexed single brain sources. A
source-resolved imaging approach models the collected EEG as the sum of electric fields
produced by many small patches of cortex whose local field activities are fully or partially
synchronous, each such patch thus functioning as an effective EEG source with a scalp
projection identical to that of a single equivalent current dipole (ECD). Source localization
requires solutions to both the forward and inverse imaging problems: the forward problem
(FP) determining the scalp projection patterns of the possible brain sources based on
accurate modeling of head tissue geometries and conductivities, and the inverse problem (IP)
estimating the locations and orientations or cortical surface distributions of one or more
source projection patterns.

Author Manuscript

Many existing EEG processing toolboxes attempt to solve these problems, including core
EEGLAB [1], BCILAB [2], LORETA-KEY [3], and Fieldtrip [4]. They all operate offline or
attempt to solve the IP by directly operating on, e.g., response-averaged EEG channel data.
Approaching the IP directly from the EEG channel data complicates the problem by
requiring determination of the number of sources to localize [4], a problem whose
computational cost and number of false local minima increase dramatically with the number
of sources being estimated. Other approaches simply attempt a low-resolution joint spatial
estimate of all the active sources [3]. Blind source separation can be used as an initial
unmixing step to simplify an inverse problem by separating it into much simpler problems of
finding the locations of the individual effective sources [5][6][7].
ICA has been shown to work exceedingly well when applied to EEG [8] as EEG data and
ICA share many important assumptions. ICA assumes that input data are the result of a
linear mixing of spatially stationary independent time series or independent components
(ICs). Here, we present the Real-time EEG Source-mapping Toolbox (REST), a collection of
automated EEG analysis methods accessible through a graphic user interface (GUI). By
applying Online Recursive ICA (ORICA) [9], we can estimate a solution to the source
separation problem in near real-time, allowing low-latency access to source information,
making possible innovations in experimental designs including a wide variety of clinical and
non-clinical BCI paradigms. REST also allows the user to estimate the brain locations of the
estimated sources using either LORETA [3][10] or minimum-variance ECD fitting [4].

Author Manuscript

REST provides estimates of source activations and their current power spectra, plus source
scalp maps (source scalp projection patterns) and cortical source locations. Below, we show
the layout of the REST GUI and detail the measures used in its analysis pipeline. We then
test its accuracy and efficacy by applying it to simulated EEG data with known source
locations and activations. Finally, we demonstrate the real-world utility of REST and its ease
of use by applying it in a common BCI paradigm recording session.

Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 29.

Pion-Tonachini et al.

Page 3

Author Manuscript

II. Methods
REST is coded in MATLAB [11] using the EEGLAB environment. It uses a processing
pipeline, shown in Fig. 1A, designed to run from beginning to end with minimal user input.
Preprocessing and source separation are implemented as a BCILAB pipeline followed by
source localization implemented in part using routines in MoBILAB [10].
A. Preprocessing
The toolbox pulls EEG data from a data stream received through the Lab Streaming Layer
framework [12]. The data are first preprocessed by IIR high-pass filtering. Artifact Subspace
Reconstruction (ASR) [13] may be introduced as an additional preprocessing step to remove
large movement-based artifacts.

Author Manuscript

B. Source Separation
Next, the EEG data are whitened using an online RLS whitening algorithm (to improve
convergence) and then linearly unmixed using ORICA. ORICA is a centerpiece of this
toolbox. It is, so far as we know, the only ICA implementation that is real-time capable with
acceptable convergence rates for relatively large numbers of channels [14]. The output of
ORICA is a set of linear IC filters that are used to separate the IC activation time courses
and scalp maps from the EEG channel data. When the data sources are spatially and
statistically stationary, the ICs that ORICA provide asymptotically approach those that
(offline) Infomax ICA [15] returns. Unlike Infomax ICA (though compare AMICA [16]),
ORICA can also adapt to source non-stationarities.
C. Source Localization

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Estimated IC source locations are calculated using one of two cortically-constrained source
models (either distributed or ECD). Distributed source location model estimates are
calculated using cortically-constrained LORETA with Bayesian hyper-parameter estimation
[17] from MoBILAB, while the ECD model estimates are computed using minimum
residual variance fitting. Both the ECD and distributed source methods require a MoBILAB
head model object to be created in advance, which can be computed easily using the
included helper function. The head model uses spatial meshes representing the geometry of
the cortex, scalp and one or more intervening head tissue types (e.g., skull, CSF, white
matter). A lead field matrix (LFM) is calculated (automatically) using OpenMEEG [18], as
well as a surface Laplacian operator for the cortical mesh. By default, the included helper
function creates a 3-layer (scalp, skull, cortex) boundary element method (BEM) head model
based on the MNI Colin 27 brain. The primary input to the source localization methods is an
estimated ICA scalp map for the source being localized.

III. Materials
A. Toolbox
The REST main window, on the left of Fig. 1B, displays either raw EEG or estimated IC
activations. It also shows scalp maps and power spectra for the estimated ICs, as well as
convergence statistics. All the visualized information updates in near real-time. The

Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 29.

Pion-Tonachini et al.

Page 4

Author Manuscript

(partially occluded) window in the top rights of Fig. 1B provides an easy way to select
which ICs are displayed on the main window. On the bottom right of Fig. 1B is the source
localization window which shows the current estimated source location for an IC as either an
ECD or a distributed source.
B. Experiments
To show the utility of REST, we designed two experiments. One, using simulated sourceresolved EEG data, for which we know the ground truth, tested the integrity of the REST
pipeline. The other used actual EEG collected during a steady-state visually evoked potential
(SSVEP) BCI paradigm to test the utility of the toolbox in interactive paradigms.

Author Manuscript

1) Simulated EEG Data—For the simulation, we used the default head model with ECD
sources constrained to be normal to the cortical surface. We simulated 10 minutes of 64
channel EEG using SIFT [19] by placing ECDs at various vertices of the cortical mesh and
generated source activation time-series for each. Two sources were handcrafted to imitate
eye-blinks and occipital alpha activities while the rest were vector autoregressive processes
driven by super-Gaussian noise. These are then mixed together using the LFM associated
with the head model. As this was a test for accuracy rather than speed of convergence, we
evaluated the accuracy of the ORICA decompositions and resulting source location
estimates at the end of the simulated data collection. For information on the convergence
properties of ORICA, see [14].

Author Manuscript

2) Actual EEG Data—To collect the actual human EEG we used a low-cost 14 channel
Emotiv headset. This setup wirelessly streams data to a computer via Bluetooth. The
streaming data were transferred to an LSL stream for REST. During the experiment, 2
minutes of eyes-closed resting allowed ORICA to identify relevant ICs. This was followed
by 2 trials in which the subject looked at flashing phone-pad style digits on a tablet. The
subject first focused on the symbol “1” and then afterwards at the symbol “#” which were
flashing at 9 Hz and 11.75 Hz respectively. This tested the adaptivity of the pipeline, as
going from eyes-closed rest to viewing flashing stimuli could be expected to produce a
noticeable change in brain sources and source activities.

IV. Results
A. Simulated 64-Channel Stationary EEG

Author Manuscript

As shown in Fig. 2 and 3, ORICA and both source localization techniques perform as
intended. Fig. 2 visualizes the full REST pipeline applied to 3 of the 64 simulated sources.
In the first estimation step, ORICA successfully decomposes the sources, providing accurate
scalp map estimates and source activations. In the second estimation step, the ECD estimates
were very close to the ground truth (shown in the green simulation box) in both location and
orientation. The distributed source estimates, despite not theoretically matching the model
used during simulation, provided patches of active cortex that were well situated about the
simulated dipole location.

Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 29.

Pion-Tonachini et al.

Page 5

Author Manuscript

Fig. 3 illustrates the accuracy of all 64 estimated dipole positions and orientations, which
were generally correct within 3 cm and 20 degrees respectively. The majority of the errors in
dipole position were related to the depth of the dipole as the true source positions tended to
be closer to the scalp than their estimates. Disk sizes in Fig. 3, which represent scalp map
error, showed a clear correlation between localization error and scalp map error and provides
a means of judging whether localization error is due to poor results from ORICA or error
from the underdetermined nature of the IP. Here we used the same simulated FP head model
to solve the IP, something not possible in actual use where the true FP head model can only
be estimated. Nevertheless, these results indicate that REST can generate accurate source
locations and activations provided a minimum level of data quantity and quality and
sufficient head model accuracy.
B. Actual 14-Channel EEG during SSVEP

Author Manuscript

The application of REST to data collected in an SSVEP paradigm showed that ORICA can
converge to useful source solutions in real-life applications. Fig. 4 compares REST outputs
during eyes-closed rest and attention to 9 Hz and 11.75 Hz flashing stimulii. Clearly,
ORICA extracted an occipital IC, first during rest with a weak 10 Hz peak (top panel), and
then during attention to 9-Hz (middle panel) and 11.75-Hz (lower panel) flashing stimuli.
The ECD during the latter condition (not shown) changed in orientation as indicated by the
change in its scalp map.

V. Conclusions

Author Manuscript

We have shown that REST can be accurate when applied to simulated data, and potentially
usable in practice. There are many possible applications for real-time monitoring of sources
of interest during an EEG experiment. The REST toolbox design allows possible extensions
to implement near real-time computation, visualization, and application of other sourceresolved EEG measures. REST could aid online data quality analysis, as when collecting
EEG from particular sources if of specific importance. Additionally, the ORICA
implementation in REST might be used to make a wide range of BCI paradigms more robust
[20]. We plan to add more flexible and detailed data preprocessing, since ICA can be highly
influenced by large amplitude artifacts, and also automated IC classification. In theory, the
ORICA decomposition and, with some modifications, the source localization methods in the
REST pipeline should be as applicable to MEG as to EEG data. Finally, this work follows in
spirit, and some details, previous work [13] demonstrating a real-time application of the
BCILAB [2] and SIFT [19] toolboxes, into which the source identification and localization
methods in REST might easily be introduced.

Author Manuscript

Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by the Army Research Laboratory under Cooperative Agreement Number
W911NF-10-2-0022, NSF EFRI-M3C 1137279, and by the National Science Foundation Graduate Research
Fellowship under Grant No. DGE-1144086.

Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 29.

Pion-Tonachini et al.

Page 6

Author Manuscript

References

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

1. Delorme A, Makeig S. Eeglab: an open source toolbox for analysis of single-trial eeg dynamics
including independent component analysis. J Neurosci Methods. 2004; 134(1):9–21. [PubMed:
15102499]
2. Kothe CA, Makeig S. Bcilab: a platform for brain–computer interface development. J Neural Eng.
2013; 10(5):056014. [PubMed: 23985960]
3. Pascual-Marqui RD, Lehmann D, Koenig T, Kochi K, Merlo MC, Hell D, Koukkou M. Low
resolution brain electromagnetic tomography (loreta) functional imaging in acute, neuroleptic-naive,
first-episode, productive schizophrenia. Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging. 1999; 90(3):169–179.
4. Oostenveld R, Fries P, Maris E, Schoffelen J-M. Fieldtrip: open source software for advanced
analysis of meg, eeg, and invasive electrophysiological data. Comput Intell Neurosci. 2010; 2011
5. Makeig S, Bell AJ, Jung T-P, Sejnowski TJ, et al. Independent component analysis of
electroencephalographic data. Advances in neural information processing systems. 1996:145–151.
6. Makeig S, Debener S, Onton J, Delorme A. Mining event-related brain dynamics. Trends Cogn Sci.
2004; 8(5):204–210. [PubMed: 15120678]
7. Marco-Pallares J, Grau C, Ruffini G. Combined icaloreta analysis of mismatch negativity.
Neuroimage. 2005; 25(2):471–477. [PubMed: 15784426]
8. Delorme A, Palmer J, Onton J, Oostenveld R, Makeig S. Independent eeg sources are dipolar. PloS
one. 2012; 7(2):e30135. [PubMed: 22355308]
9. Akhtar MT, Jung T-P, Makeig S, Cauwenberghs G. Recursive independent component analysis for
online blind source separation. IEEE ISCAS. 2012:2813–2816.
10. Ojeda A, Bigdely-Shamlo N, Makeig S. Mobilab: an open source toolbox for analysis and
visualization of mobile brain/body imaging data. Frontiers in human neuroscience. 2014; 8
11. Guide MU. The mathworks. Inc, Natick, MA. 1998; 5:333.
12. Kothe, C. Lab streaming layer (lsl). 2013.
13. Mullen T, Kothe C, Chi YM, Ojeda A, Kerth T, Makeig S, Cauwenberghs G, Jung T-P. Real-time
modeling and 3d visualization of source dynamics and connectivity using wearable eeg. IEEE
EMBS. 2013; 2013:2184–2187.
14. Hsu S-H, Mullen T, Jung T-P, Cauwenberghs G. Online recursive independent component analysis
for real-time source separation of high-density eeg. IEEE EMBS. 2014:3845–3848.
15. Lee TW, Girolami M, Sejnowski TJ. Independent component analysis using an extended infomax
algorithm for mixed subgaussian and supergaussian sources. Neural computation. 1999; 11(2):
417–441. [PubMed: 9950738]
16. Palmer JA, Makeig S, Kreutz-Delgado K, Rao BD. Newton method for the ica mixture model.
ICASSP. 2008:1805–1808.
17. Trujillo-Barreto NJ, Aubert-Vázquez E, Valdés-Sosa PA. Bayesian model averaging in eeg/meg
imaging. NeuroImage. 2004; 21(4):1300–1319. [PubMed: 15050557]
18. Gramfort A, Papadopoulo T, Olivi E, Clerc M, et al. Openmeeg: opensource software for
quasistatic bioelectromagnetics. Biomedical engineering online. 2010; 9(1):45. [PubMed:
20819204]
19. Delorme A, Mullen T, Kothe C, Acar ZA, Bigdely-Shamlo N, Vankov A, Makeig S. Eeglab, sift,
nft, bcilab, and erica: new tools for advanced eeg processing. Comput Intell Neurosci. 2011;
2011:10.
20. Makeig S, Enghoff S, Jung TP, Sejnowski TJ. A natural basis for efficient brain-actuated control.
IEEE Trans Rehabil Eng. 2000; 8(2):208–211. [PubMed: 10896189]

Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 29.

Pion-Tonachini et al.

Page 7

Author Manuscript
Fig. 1.

Author Manuscript

A. The pipeline used in the Real-time EEG Source-mapping Toolbox (REST). B. The
toolbox GUI. The main window (left) shows the scrolling EEG channel or independent
component (IC) activation data plus 8 (constantly updated) IC scalp maps. A source location
estimate for IC4 is shown (lower right). Behind this (upper right), another REST window
shows all the estimated IC scalp maps.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 29.

Pion-Tonachini et al.

Page 8

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Fig. 2.

Author Manuscript

The simulated data experiment: data simulation to source estimation. (Green box) The
simulated data source activations are mixed. (Blue box) The simulated EEG data are first
decomposed within REST into estimated independent components (ICs) using ORICA.
Then the source location of each IC is estimated as either an equivalent current dipole (ECD,
left) or as a low-resolution cortical distribution (right).

Author Manuscript
Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 29.

Pion-Tonachini et al.

Page 9

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Fig. 3.

Author Manuscript

Source localization accuracy in the simulated data experiment using an equivalent current
dipole (ECD) model for each estimated independent component (IC). Each disk represents
an IC. Disk size shows how well the recovered IC scalp map correlated with the simulated
source scalp map. For 48 of the 64 recovered sources, map correlations were above 0.95
with ECD model errors less than 3 cm and 20 degrees (lower left).

Author Manuscript
Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 29.

Pion-Tonachini et al.

Page 10

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Fig. 4.

Author Manuscript

Screen captures of the REST GUI during an actual EEG experiment. At 1.3 min (top panel)
during eyes-closed rest, the baseline PSD for IC had a peak at 10 Hz (alpha). At 2.1 min
(middle panel), the subject attended the symbol ”1” flashing at 9 Hz (note change in the IC4
spectrum). At 2.8 min (bottom panel), the subject attended the symbol ”#” flashing at 11.75
Hz (note IC4 spectral shift and possible scalp map change).

Author Manuscript
Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 29.

