Kingsley Dennis

OPENING PANDORA’S BOX:
How technologies of communication
and cognition may be shifting towards a
‘Psycho-Civilized Society’
KINGSLEY DENNIS
Sociology Department, Lancaster University, Lancaster, UK

Introduction
The rate of technological innovation in some fields is developing exponentially
with new developments in wireless sensor networks, ubiquitous and pervasive
computing, motes, nodes, grids, and media platforms. Information flows are
increasing not only in their quantity and density, but also in their immersive
quality. The historical developments of information communication systems
can be said to have traced a similar path to how nation states have organised
their global power base and dominance. Firstly, power over the land, the
dominance in waging war on one’s neighbours through ground battle, the
domesticated horse and the infantry soldier. Then domination of the seas and
the strongest Navy gave advantage to sea-faring Empires, such as Portugal,
Spain, and Britain. The end of Naval dominance gave rise to the advent of the
railroad and the dynamic change in transport technology, both in routes and
in speed. The transcontinental scope of the railroads finally gave out to air
power, winning the World Wars through dominance in the skies. And now the
‘final frontier’ is space, for ‘the vast potential resource base of outer space is
presumably so enormous, effectively inexhaustible, that any state that can
control it will ultimately dominate the earth’ (Dolman, 2001: 41).
Likewise, modern communication technologies have moved from the land (the
telegraph); to the sea (wireless radio; radar); back to land (cables; fibre
optics); and to the intermediate land/air stage (masts/antenna); to the outer
frontier of space (satellites); and finally now even beyond these frontiers
towards a solar system Internet (Turner, 2007). Whoever controls these

1

Kingsley Dennis
channels for communication can, in some degree, to be said to ‘dominate the
earth’. And the possible uses of wireless communications for the
dissemination, targeting, and receiving of clandestine ‘communications’ is an
active industry.
The aim of this paper is to examine some of the examples and instances where
the use of wireless technologies have been developed to target an individual’s
biological body, with specific focus upon the neuronal functioning of the
brain. I also show how some of these uses have had detrimental effects, and
what this implies for both present and upcoming developments in particular
wireless/sensor technologies. This paper shows that an upcoming area of
importance is neurotechnology, a discipline that places brain functioning and
knowledge of the human brain as primary. Technologies are now being
researched and trialled that seek to penetrate and, to a degree, intervene in
neural functioning. Whilst some have termed this positively as a coming
‘neural society’ (Lynch, 2004), I consider whether this is not shifting
dangerously towards a psycho-civilised society, where greater emphasis is
placed upon social control and pre-emptive strategies. I trace a timeline that
follows developments from a historical context to the present; and finally to
future scenarios and implications. It may be that the social pursuit of
increasingly connective and immersive technologies has the potential to open
up a Pandora’s box of problematics.
Opening Pandora’s Box – The Background
The narrative literally begins with the story of a Pandora’s Box – a US project
titled Project Pandora that was organized and administered by the psychology
division of the psychiatry research section of Walter Reed Army Institute of
Research (WRAIR) to research programs on the health effects of microwave
exposure following the ‘Moscow Embassy’ incident. From 1953 to 1976, the
Soviets directed microwave radiation at the U.S. embassy in Moscow from the
roof of an adjacent building. Whilst this clandestine microwave targeting was
allegedly known for some time by US officials, the event was not made public
until 1976 when the U.S. State Department finally accused the Soviet Union of

2

Kingsley Dennis
bombarding the U.S. embassy in Moscow with microwave radiation for illicit
purposes. It was initially reported as a harmless procedure for charging Soviet
spy-bugs: ‘Soviet antennas, which are beaming the waves in both to charge up
the batteries of their listening devices and to jam embassy-based U.S.
electronic monitoring of Russian communications’ (Time, 1976b; 1976a).
However, the State Department soon indicated that, in addition to
interference mechanisms, the microwave radiation could have serious adverse
effects on the health of the occupants of the embassy (O'Connor, 1993). This
was supported by Soviet data in which Soviet non-ionising electromagnetic
energy (NIEM) ‘research literature reported adverse health effects in
laboratory animals and in Soviet radar workers at levels well below the 10
mW/|cm2 U.S. ANSI safety recommendations’ (O'Connor, 1993: 35). Despite
this being below the US recommended levels the Soviet standards excluded
military personnel whilst the US did not, according to the National Council on
Radiation Protection and Measurements (NCRP), 1986 (O'Connor, 1993).

Soviet studies in the area of electromagnetic microwave radiation reported
psychological symptoms in human subjects that included lethargy, lack of
concentration, headaches, depression, and impotence (O'Connor, 1993: 35).
O’Connor notes how the Soviet medical journals termed these collective
symptoms microwave sickness whilst the U.S. literature referred to the
symptoms as neurasthenia (1993). Time magazine reported in March 1976
that the State Department launched
a medical investigation of the thousands of U.S. diplomats and
their families who served in Moscow since the early 1960s. In the
wake of the microwave disclosures, former embassy employees
and their families have recalled suffering strange ailments during
their tenure in Moscow, ranging from eye tics and headaches to
heavy menstrual flows. Some point out that former Ambassadors
to Moscow Charles Bohlen and Llewellyn Thompson both died of
cancer, within the last two years one other Moscow diplomat died
of cancer, and five women who lived there have undergone
cancer-related mastectomies—although no medical authorities
attribute these deaths and illnesses to radiation. (Time, 1976a)

3

Kingsley Dennis
US officials and military, long before the public exposure, were aware and
concerned about the consequences of microwave bombardment of civilian and
military targets. In 1972 the US Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA) released an
internal report (later declassified through the Freedom Of Information Act
(FOIA) Program1) that had been previously prepared by the US Army Office of
the Surgeon General Medical Intelligence Office titled ‘Controlled Offensive
Behaviour – USSR’ (initially released in July 1972). The report states that
This report summarizes the information available on Soviet
research on human vulnerability as it relates to incapacitating
individuals or small groups. The information contained in this
study is a review and evaluation of Soviet research in this field of
revolutionary methods of influencing human behavior and is
intended as an aid in the development of countermeasures for the
protection of US or allied personnel. Due to the nature of the
Soviet research in the area of reorientation or incapacitation of
human behavior, this report emphasises the individual as opposed
to groups. (DIA, 1972)
It is interesting to note that the Report authors believed the Soviet research to
be in the area of ‘reorientation’; suggesting that the US were worried over
concerns that the Soviets may be planning a mass zapping of US citizens with
the hope of ‘brainwashing’ them into a newly orientated ideological outlook.
The 174 page Report is extensive, with much material extended upon various
forms of beamed energies and wireless strategies. On the opening section on
Electromagnetic Energy the report concludes that
Super-high frequency electromagnetic oscillations (SHF) may
have potential use as a technique for altering human behavior.
Soviet Union and other foreign literature sources contain over
500 studies devoted to the biological effect of SHF. Lethal and
non-lethal aspects have been shown to exist. In certain non-lethal
exposures, definite behavioural changes have occurred. (DIA,
1972: 18)
During this time the US establishment was not naïve to the potential of
conducting neurological at-a-distance effects upon human behaviour.

1

See http://www.dia.mil/publicaffairs/Foia/foia.htm for list of declassified reports.

4

Kingsley Dennis
In the 1970s Jose Manuel Rodriguez Delgado was a controversial figure in
neuroscience; a professor of physiology at Yale University, he was an
acclaimed neuroscientist. In 1970 ‘the New York Times Magazine hailed him
in a cover story as the ‘impassioned prophet of a new ‘psychocivilized society’
whose members would influence and alter their own mental functions’
(Horgan, 2005: 67). Yet two decades earlier, in 1952, Delgado co-authored the
first peer-reviewed paper describing long term implantation of electrodes in
humans (Horgan, 2005). As an example of the achievement into wirelessneurological devices Delgado’s most famous experiment took place in 1963 at
a bull-breeding ranch in Cordoba, Spain. Delgado implanted radio equipped
electrodes, which he termed ‘stimoceivers’, into the brains of several ‘fighting’
bulls and stood in a bullring with one bull at a time and attempted to control
the actions of the bull by pressing buttons on a handheld transmitter. In one
instance Delgado was able to stop a charging bull in its tracks only a few feet
away from him by the press of a button (see pictures below). The New York
Times published a front page story on the event, ‘calling it “the most
spectacular demonstration ever performed of the deliberate modification of
animal behavior through external control of the brain”’ (Horgan, 2005: 70). In
1969 Delgado described wireless brain-behaviour modification and its
implications in his book Physical Control of the Mind: Toward a
Psychocivilized Society (1969). Delgado’s research during this time was
supported not only by academic grants but also by the US military’s Office of
Naval Research. This research is now over forty years old, and alot can happen
in four decades.

5

Kingsley Dennis

(Horgan, 2005)
Technologies that can wirelessly transmit information from and to the body is
an area of research that has attracted various interested parties post-World
War 2. Such energy-information distribution and targeting within the
electromagnetic spectrum can variously be used for medical, industrial,
military, and telecommunications purposes. I next turn to examine some of
the military-industrial research and uses of wireless technologies.

Beams, Firewalls & Brain Scanning: Inside the Military-Industrial
Complex
Researcher Igor Smirnov of the Russian Academy of Sciences is by all
accounts an odd person, referred to by a Newsweek article as ‘A Subliminal
Dr. Strangelove’ (Elliott and Barry, 1994). Smirnov was apparently contacted
by the FBI during the Davidian sect siege in Waco, Texas in 1993. Experts
from the FBI Counter-Terrorism Center met with Smirnov in Arlington,
Virginia to discuss ways of affecting the behaviour of Davidian sect leader
David Koresh. Smirnov’s plan was to send subliminal messages through the
phone lines during negotiations; and for targeting David Koresh the plan was
to use the voice of Charlton Heston to subliminally play God (Elliott and
Barry, 1994). Smirnov’s strategies whilst sounding eccentric are closely tied
with military research into behaviour modification via wireless transmissions.
Smirnov’s laboratory in Moscow is named the Institute of Psycho-Correction

6

Kingsley Dennis
and using electroencephalograph scanning (EEG) he measures brain waves
which he then computes to create a map of various human impulses-brain
waves correlation. This data can then be used for experimenting upon
affecting brain-body modification at-a-distance. Asked in a 2004 interview
whether it was possible to defeat terrorism Smirnov replied that
Only informational war is capable of defeating terrorism
completely. And we possess this weapon. Peoples’ actions can in
fact be controlled by unnoticed acoustic influence. Look-it’s easy.
All I have to do is record my voice, apply special coding, which
converts my voice to mere noise and afterwards, all we have to do
is record some music on top of that. The words are
indistinguishable to your conscious; however, your unconscious
can hear them clearly. If we were to play this music over and over
again on the radio for instance, people will soon start developing
paranoia. This is the simplest weapon. (Pravda, 2004)
Smirnov’s capabilities were demonstrated to US observers as far back as 1991
when infra-sound – a very low frequency transmission – was shown to be able
to transmit acoustic messages via bone conduction (Thomas, 1998: 84).

Military strategist Timothy Thomas examined these implications in his paper
‘The Mind Has No Firewall’ in which he states that ‘We are on the threshold of
an era in which these data processors of the human body may be manipulated
or debilitated. Examples of unplanned attacks on the body's data-processing
capability are well-documented’ (Thomas, 1998: 84). He references a Russian
military article on the same subject which declared that ‘”humanity stands on
the brink of a psychotronic war” with the mind and body as the focus’
(Thomas, 1998: 84). The context here is that the human body is a complex
communication system that is constantly receiving signal inputs, both
external and internal. Thus,
The "data" the body receives from external sources--such as
electromagnetic, vortex, or acoustic energy waves--or creates
through its own electrical or chemical stimuli can be
manipulated or changed just as the data (information) in any
hardware system can be altered. (Thomas, 1998: 85)

7

Kingsley Dennis
Military thinking in this area is beginning to shift towards a systemic
viewpoint which considers the human as an open system rather than as a
closed, bounded system.

In this new systemic approach the human communicates with, and can be
communicated by, the environment through information flows and
communications media. By this understanding military thinking has begun to
openly

declare

that

‘one's

physical

environment,

whether

through

electromagnetic, gravitational, acoustic, or other effects, can cause a change in
the psycho-physiological condition of an organism’ (Thomas, 1998: 86).
Simpson’s investigations into the sociological discipline of communication
research, which crystallised in the US in the early 1950s, shows that it was
financed and mentored by governmental psychological warfare programs:
Government psychological warfare programs helped shape mass
communication research into a distinct scholarly field, strongly
influencing the choice of leaders and determining which of the
competing scientific paradigms of communication would be
funded, elaborated, and encouraged to prosper. (Simpson, 1994:
3)

Dominance over the airwaves, and the capability to exert coercive control over
information communications is a vital area in military planning. Documented
and declassified evidence shows that what may have begun as a program in
standardized propaganda and psychological warfare has now developed into
research on wireless information targeting and ‘psychocivilized’ control
practices. To this effect the term ‘psycho-terrorism’ was coined by Anisimov
of the Moscow Anti-Psychotronic Center and uses such devices as are said to
‘take away a part of the information which is stored in a man's brain. It is sent
to a computer, which reworks it to the level needed for those who need to
control the man, and the modified information is then reinserted into the
brain’ (Thomas, 1998: 87). In such cases there is concern that the ‘mind has
no firewall’ and may be vulnerable to accidental, unwanted and/or rogue
interventions. Thomas’s paper concludes by stating that ‘In reality, the game

8

Kingsley Dennis
is about protecting or affecting signals, waves, and impulses that can
influence the data-processing elements of systems, computers, or people. We
are potentially the biggest victims of information warfare, because we have
neglected to protect ourselves’ (Thomas, 1998: 89).

The Air Force Research Laboratory brief on this subject titled ‘Controlled
Effects’ also noted the power to use the electromagnetic spectrum for
wirelessly interfering into human subjects’ thinking and behaviour. By this
stage the strategy had been dubbed ‘non-lethal weapons’, as explored more
fully in the work of non-lethal defence at Los Alamos by retired Army Colonel
John B. Alexander (Alexander, 1999). In this brief
the panel investigated the potential for using electromagnetic
and other nonconventional force capabilities to achieve
strategic, tactical, lethal, and nonlethal force projection… For
the Controlled Personnel Effects capability, the S&T panel
explored the potential for targeting individuals with nonlethal
force, from a militarily useful range, to make selected
adversaries think or act according to our needs. (AFRL, 2004)

These theories and concerns to affect command and control at-a-distance
were echoing the conclusions from a much larger and significant military
report that was published and made available in 1996 titled ‘New World
Vistas’. ‘New World Vistas’ was a major undertaking by the US Air Force
Scientific Advisory Board, to examine future developments in weapons, and
totalled 14 volumes of studies. The fifteenth ‘ancillary’ volume concluded by
putting forth some potential developments for a possible future man-machine
integration. In a section dealing with ‘Biological Process Control’ the Report
states that
One can envision the development of electromagnetic energy
sources, the output of which can be pulsed, shaped, and focused,
that can couple with the human body in a fashion that will allow
one to prevent voluntary muscular movements, control
emotions (and thus actions), produce sleep, transmit
suggestions, interfere with both short-term and long-term

9

Kingsley Dennis
memory, produce an experience set, and delete an experience
set. (USAF, 1995)
In military-speak the term ‘experience set’ implies a person’s stored memories
and life experiences; thus suggesting that such a technology could delete and
then replace a person’s memories, or ‘experience set’. Research and
development along these lines have so far materialised a technology dubbed
by the military as active denial system (ADS).

The Active Denial System is a non-lethal, directed-energy weapon system
recently unveiled by the U.S. military and which directs, or pulses,
electromagnetic radiation at a frequency of 95 Gigahertz (GHz) towards the
target subjects. The radiated beam of millimetre-wave energy can travel over a
range of 500m and heats the water molecules in the epidermis skin up to 54C
(130F) (BBC, 2007). The result can be an intensely painful burning sensation.
Such a system was designed for such uses as crowd control. A fully
operational and mounted system was demonstrated to journalists by US
military personnel at Moody Air Force Base, Georgia, on January 24th 2007. A
Reuters correspondent who volunteered to be shot with the beam during the
demonstration described it as ‘similar to a blast from a very hot oven - too
painful to bear without diving for cover’ (BBC, 2007). The diagram below
shows the active denial system (ADS).

10

Kingsley Dennis
These technologies show uses of wireless-to-body communication and
directed energy weapons for military attack or defence purposes. Another area
for research and development is in both military and industrial uses for
operator enhancement.

Real-time brain scanning of pilots and similar operators under stress is an
increasingly active area for research involving military and industrial
partnerships. Since the early 1990s research has been made into detecting and
interpreting brain and body signals, especially brainwaves, for computerized
monitoring of pilots. This information can be used to measure pilot fatigue
and to compensate for this with increased automation of the airplane in order
to avoid pilot-error. Initially this was conducted by measuring the pilot's brain
waves through unobtrusive sponge sensors in the flight helmet:
By measuring the amplitude of the brain waves generated,
fatigue of the pilot can be recognized. By increasing the
brightness of the instrumental panel lights, the amplitude of
the brain waves can be returned to their normal height, thus
compensating for fatigue. To get the "evoked response" from
the pilot's brain, the instrument panel lights could be made to
flash so fast that the pilot would not be aware of the flashes.
(Welsh, 1998: 37)
Researchers have said that the brain can ‘register’ up to 145 flickers per
second, which can then be followed-up by beaming a near infrared light into
the subject's eye, causing a spot of light to be reflected off the cornea in order
to track eye movement and measure the degree of pilot concentration. This
type of research, which is still ongoing, has been referred to by at least one
current R&D laboratory as ‘Real-Time EEG for Operator State’2. Brain
monitoring of people in situations where fatigue could be fatal now involves
real-time analysis and observation of motorists. A technology now being
considered is one called ‘Sensation’.

2

Part of ongoing research at the QinetiQ Group – see website: http://www.qinetiq.com/

11

Kingsley Dennis
This technology is non-intrusive and includes a
small camera that monitors a driver's eye
movements, looking out for repeated blinking,
which can be evidence of

tiredness.

To

compliment this the driver's seat is also lined
with a material which monitors changes in body
temperature. The steering wheel too checks for
handling pressure. Finally, other sensors, if
needed, can be fitted to the finger and ear to
send out measurements of pressure to indicate
fatigue and levels of concentration. The driver is now wirelessly monitored,
both by camera and wireless sensors, to create a more extensive immersive
experience to driving (Millward, 2006).

This research and these innovations indicate that a shift is occurring in how
the human is enmeshed into an increasingly information saturated
environment. Most literature speaks of human interaction with the
environment through devices – mobile phones, computers, etc – whilst failing
to recognise that the human body is itself becoming the most capable dataprocessing subject. The rest of this paper explores how these trends to
envelop the body-brain into an environment of information flows are being
developed into social and commercial applications.

Emotional Gaming & Dangerous Intentions: Inside the Social-Civil
Sphere
The use of EEG brain scanning has now moved into the gaming industry with
up-to-date developments in sensory gaming. Recently Emotiv publicly
released information on their upcoming ‘Project Epoc’, a developmental
technology that interprets electrical signals emitted by the brain and converts
them into actions on a computer. In this way the user/gamer is able to direct

12

Kingsley Dennis
actions via their thoughts in the online environment. Below are pictures of
two prototypes which the company expects to market some time in 20083.

The company webpage claims that they provide the ultimate humancomputer interface, brandishing the buzz words of cognitiv and affectiv4, and
that they are pioneers in brain computer interface technology. In their press
release of March 7th 2007 they state that
Emotiv has created the first brain computer interface technology that
can detect and process both human conscious thoughts and nonconscious emotions. The technology, which comprises a headset and
a suite of applications, allows computers to differentiate between
particular thoughts such as lifting an object or rotating it; detect and
mimic a user’s expressions, such as a smile or wink; and respond to
emotions such as excitement or calmness.5
In the same press release the company foresees in the future that ‘Emotiv’s
technology has the potential to be applied to numerous industries, including
interactive television, accessibility design, market research, medicine, and
security’ 6. A similar corporate gaming company, NeuroSky, claims to have
gone even further than Emotiv and reduced ‘the brainwave pickup to the
minimum specification imaginable—a single electrode. Existing versions of
this electrode are small enough to fit into a mobile phone and…they will
soon be shrunk to the size of a thumbnail, enabling people to wear them
3

See http://crunchgear.com/2007/03/08/emotiv-project-epoc-sensory-gaming-for-the-masses/
http://www.emotiv.com/
5
http://emotiv.com/3_0/pr/pr022607a.htm
6
http://emotiv.com/3_0/pr/pr022607a.htm
4

13

Kingsley Dennis
without noticing (Economist, 2007). The company website claims its ‘bio
sensor and signal processing system for the consumer market’ will unlock
‘worlds of new applications such as consumer electronics, health, wellness,
education and training’7.

Clearly there is a potentially varied market envisioned here for wirelessbrain technology that goes beyond the sphere of gaming. Somewhat on the
extreme to this, wireless acoustic transmissions have now been developed to
‘stop’ people from over-gaming; in other words, as a treatment for gaming
addiction. In highly technologised Asian countries such as South Korea
teenagers are spending an unhealthy amount of time at their computers in
gaming environments. There have even been instances where gamers have
died after extensively long sessions in front of a computer without a break,
such as in MMORPGs (Massive Multiplayer Online Role-Playing Game).
South Korean company Xtive, established in 2005, spent a year of research
to develop a system of acoustic sound waves that act as subliminal
transmissions during the gaming experience:
We incorporated messages into an acoustic sound wave telling
gamers to stop playing. The messages are told 10,000 to 20,000
times per second…Game users can’t recognize the sounds. But
their subconscious is aware of them and the chances are high
they will quit playing…Game companies can install a system,
which delivers the inaudible sounds after it recognizes a young
user has kept playing after a preset period of time. (Tae-gyu,
2007)
This emphasises that research into techno-information flows are increasingly
being developed that wirelessly interact with a person as a biological
construct, utilising the already present bio-neural functioning, without the
need to be mediated through hardware-heavy enhanced humans. And this is a
trend that is attracting more corporate players wishing to enter the field.

7

See http://www.neurosky.com/

14

Kingsley Dennis
Gaming giant Sony Corporation has submitted and been granted a patent on
a device for transmitting sensory data directly into the human brain. Sony’s
patent describes the device as firing ‘pulses of ultrasound at the head to
modify firing patterns in targeted parts of the brain, creating "sensory
experiences" ranging from moving images to tastes and sounds’ (Hogan and
Fox, 2005). This is based upon a technique known as transcranial magnetic
stimulation that activates the nerves by using rapidly changing magnetic
fields to induce currents in brain tissue. The patent also claims that this
technology could give blind or deaf people the chance to see or hear. Niels
Birbaumer, a neuroscientist at the University of Tübingen in Germany who
has himself developed similar devices, examined the Sony patent and
commented that ‘I looked at it and found it plausible’ (Hogan and Fox,
2005). Since Sony’s initial patent application in 2000 (granted in March
2003), a series of further patents have been applied for. However, this line
of research is not totally new.

For several years there has been research conducted into decoding thoughts
from the brain for sending signals to an external device such as
manipulating cursors on a screen, which has been developed for disabled
people, as in the case of Matthew Nagle (Pollack, 2006). In recent years
several other companies have emerged claiming to offer brain-computer
wireless interaction for either gaming purposes or for various health
impairment benefits. One example is S.M.A.R.T. BrainGames, a company
based in California that offers EEG caps designed to treat people with
attention deficit and hyperactivity disorder8. The company claims superior
neurofeedback technology at affordable prices(!) Again, the emphasis is
upon utilising brain patterns for gaining access into other realms and
spheres, in a manner that goes beyond the earlier notions of cy’borg’ian
devices attached clumsily onto the body like obtrusive appendages, such as
the Star Trek ‘Borgs’ or MIT Professor Steve Mann (see below respectively).

8

http://www.smartbraingames.com/

15

Kingsley Dennis

In an increasingly wireless world the interfaces and interconnectivity between
person and environment is likely to become more pervasive, non-intrusive,
and ever more invisible. The body-brain, instead of being a site for added
technological hardware, is shifting towards becoming a biologically-enhanced
data-processor for wireless reception and transmission. Computer software
giant Microsoft is aware of this and already ahead of the game.

In 2004 Microsoft was awarded US Patent 6,754,472, titled ‘Method and
apparatus for transmitting power and data using the human body’9. In this
patent Microsoft is granted exclusive rights to a technology that uses the
electrical capacity of the human body to act as a computer network (Adam,
2004). Microsoft envisages ‘using the human skin's conductive properties to
link a host of electronic devices around the body, from pagers and personal
data assistants (PDA) to mobile phones and microphones, although the
company is uncharacteristically coy about exactly what it may have in mind’
(Adam, 2004). This supports what Bill Gates himself has said about the
9

For patent see:
http://www.google.com/patents?vid=USPAT6754472&id=30YSAAAAEBAJ&dq=6,754,472

16

Kingsley Dennis
computer finally disappearing into the environment and world around us that
we inhabit (Gibson, 2005). This may be the ultimate wireless network, using
the complete skin of the body, from fingers to toes, receiving and transmitting
the new energies of information. The patent also proposes that an area of skin
could even act as a keypad making a person capable of typing by tapping on
their arm (Adam, 2004).

This is a powerful example of how technologies and technological thinking is
shifting away from external hardware devices towards using the natural bioproperties of the human body for integration into a global informational
environment. As way of some examples, here are just two from many of the
patents filed that claim to develop wireless transmission technologies: patents
4,395,600 and 5,507,291. Patent No 4,395,600 is titled ‘Auditory subliminal
message system and method’ and is geared towards subliminal messaging to
influence consumer shoppers:
Ambient audio signals from the customer shopping area within
a store are sensed and fed to a signal processing circuit that
produces a control signal which varies with variations in the
amplitude of the sensed audio signals. A control circuit adjusts
the amplitude of an auditory subliminal anti-shoplifting
message to increase with increasing amplitudes of sensed audio
signals and decrease with decreasing amplitudes of sensed audio
signals. This amplitude controlled subliminal message may be
mixed with background music and transmitted to the shopping
area.10
In a similar manner for affecting an individual’s mental state patent No
5,507,291 – ‘Method and an associated apparatus for remotely determining
information as to person's emotional state’ – comes very close to what has
been discussed on military uses of information-warfare:
In a method for remotely determining information relating to a
person's emotional state, a waveform energy having a
predetermined frequency and a predetermined intensity is
generated and wirelessly transmitted towards a remotely located
subject. Waveform energy emitted from the subject is detected
10

See Google patents:
http://www.google.com/patents?vid=USPAT4395600&id=V_ItAAAAEBAJ&dq=4,395,600

17

Kingsley Dennis
and automatically analyzed to derive information relating to the
individual's emotional state.11
In this scenario information flows are two-way with the body-brain emitting
as well as receiving. Yet with the human body-brain becoming a site for data
transfer and reception, there are concerns that it is increasingly becoming a
target for various corporate interests. And not only corporate interests are
involved in these developments, however, for there are also recent innovative
technologies in this area that offer serious implications for social privacy and
liberty at a state level.

At first the idea sounds like nothing more than science-fiction. Indeed, it even
appeared as a central feature in the film ‘Minority Report’. This is the notion
of pre-cognition: to be able to know a person’s actions before those actions are
committed. Yet now a team of neuroscientists have developed a technique
that can scan a brain and learn from the patterns of neuronal activity what a
person is thinking or intending to do. This research is the culmination of
recent studies where brain imaging has been used to identify particular brain
patterns to such behaviour as violence, lying, and racial prejudice (Sample,
2007). To achieve this the team ‘used high-resolution brain scans to identify
patterns of activity before translating them into meaningful thoughts,
revealing what a person planned to do in the near future’ (Sample, 2007).
This is the first acknowledged instance of having the technical capacity to
judge whether people have the intention to commit a criminal act regardless
of actual hard physical evidence of the crime. According to Prof Haynes: ‘We
see the danger that this might become compulsory one day, but we have to be
aware that if we prohibit it, we are also denying people who aren't going to
commit any crime the possibility of proving their innocence’ (Sample, 2007).
Since this technology is so new there are no current ethical or moral debates
on this issue and the implications for its civil use are worrying. If developed
these ‘techniques may eventually have wide-ranging implications for
everything from criminal interrogations to airline security checks. And that

11

See Google patents:
http://www.google.com/patents?vid=USPAT5507291&id=940lAAAAEBAJ&dq=5,507,291

18

Kingsley Dennis
alarms some ethicists who fear the technology could one day be abused by
authorities, marketers or employers’ (Cheng, 2007).

A hypothetical situation in the future might place these scanning devices
within regular x-ray scanning machines at airports. On passing through to the
passenger lounge all travellers will be scanned not only for potentially
dangerous physical objects but also for dangerous intentions. Yet who has
not had a ‘dangerous intention’? Or rather, to quote a more familiar phrase:
‘He who is without sin among you, let him be the first to throw a stone’12. In
this manner all travellers will have to safeguard their thoughts at all times;
who is to know whether such scanning devices are embedded into the walls of
the airport lounge and corridors? Or in the toilets; on board the airplane? This
uncertain and somewhat dystopian scenario is one that could shift
technologised states into psycho-civilised societies where thoughts and
intentions become part of terrorist discourse. It can be seen as an extreme
case of convergence between the social compromises required to facilitate
efficient physical-digital infrastructures and the need for securitised
mobilities. It also resembles the extremity of constructing an all-inclusive
technological web of complex information flows that bypasses traditional
forms of interface and externalises the biologically internalised, like wearing
the insides out. This would be as if replacing the myth of the hardware-heavy
cyborg with a new homo sensorus hybrid through wirelessly interconnecting
an individual’s nervous system and neuronal patterning with environmental
sensors, databases, and systems that may not be free from overriding
agendas.

The current surge in research and development of wireless sensor networks is
likely to have a significant future impact upon not only how the human body
is configured in terms of medical applications but, perhaps more importantly,
how the sensor-rich human is cognitively-configured in terms of the

12

John 8:1-9

19

Kingsley Dennis
information-rich environment. Below is a diagram representing possible
applications of biologically internalised wireless sensors based upon present
development potentials:

Homo-sensorus?

Now let us invert this model from a biologically-wired human to an
informational one. One of the scenarios of ubiquitous, pervasive computing is
to embed the environment with non-invasive informational systems that
merge physical-digital infrastructures. Already much of our atmosphere is
saturated with wireless informational flows in various spectrum bandwidths –
we are constantly walking through TV programs, mobile phone conversations,
and highly classified information. Yet we are not decoding these
transmissions. The transformation that these various scenarios in this paper
suggest is that the human body is becoming re-configured – or re-wired – into
a biological antenna. Not only will this greatly facilitate our access onto the
Net but will also re-form the human presence, or identity, into a transparent
wavelength; one that is more readily readable to various technologies. This
may seem far-fetched yet such a future may not be a far leap away.

20

Kingsley Dennis
Conclusion : The Future A Quantum Leap Too Far?
Socio-technical evolutionary trends predict a future that is wholly immersed
in and conversant with an integral informational-digitised environment.
Informational flows are envisioned to go beyond the bits and bytes of present
computing into the qubits (quantum bits) and subatomic circuitry of quantum
computing (Schwartz, Taylor and Koselka, 2006). Researchers into quantum
computing are working with subatomic spins for exponential and staggering
computational and storage capacity. A possible future may look a little like
this:
Inside the hatband is Sharon's communication center and
intelligent assistant, which has scanned and sorted the 500,000 emails she received overnight. By the time she reaches the car, it
has beamed the 10 most urgent ones and her travel schedule to
her visual cortex. The text scrolls down in the bottom of her field
of vision…At the airport there is no ticket check-in or security line.
Sharon simply walks through the revolving door, which scans her
for dangerous items, picks up her identity, confirms her
reservation, and delivers her gate number, all in the space of a
second. (Schwartz, Taylor and Koselka, 2006)

Perhaps the most common prediction prevalent amongst computer engineers
is that computers – pervasive and non-perceptible – will be seeded and woven
throughout the environment. They will be painted onto walls, on furniture
and objects, inside the body, ‘communicating with one another constantly and
requiring no more power than that which they can glean from radio
frequencies in the air’ (Schwartz,

Taylor and Koselka, 2006). Quantum

researcher and physicist Stuart Wolf anticipates that the next two decades will
usher in a type of communications he calls ‘network-enabled telepathy’.
Despite the fanciful name the method basically involves people’s wearable
devices (such as a ‘quantum headband’) sharing identity and downloaded
information with others in the person’s social network; and all driven by the
power of thought alone. However, as Wolf points out, ‘it will probably take a
new generation raised to think of quantum headbands as normal for its
potential to be truly realized’ (Schwartz, Taylor and Koselka, 2006). Yet Wolf
isn’t alone in his thinking.

21

Kingsley Dennis

Princeton physicist Freeman Dyson has speculated upon the possibility of
what he calls radioneurology. Radioneurology refers to a hypothetical future
technology of observing neural processes inside a brain by means of locally
deployed radio transmitters (Dyson, 1997). For this to be feasible, speculates
Dyson, requires a technology to allow for the building and deployment of
small transmitters inside a living brain similar to integrated-circuit
technology on a silicon chip:
We know that high-frequency electromagnetic signals can be
propagated through brain tissue for distances of the order of
centimeters. We know that microscopic generators and receivers
of electromagnetic radiation are possible. We know that modern
digital data-handling technology is capable of recording and
analyzing the signals emerging from millions of tiny
transmitters simultaneaously. All that is lacking in order to
transform these possibilities into an effective observational tool
is the neurological equivalent of integrated-circuit technology.
(Dyson, 1997: 133-4)
Given these speculations, and what has been discussed in this paper, it is
likely that the major technology for the future is neurotechnology. The
information age that emerged out of post-war technologies, and which has
guided most of the technologies of the early twenty-first century, made it
possible to collect, utilize, and transfer information/data at unparalleled
speeds. Communication, information, and data have been flowing at
exponential rates. However, they are yet to merge into a systemic
environment.
Neurotechnologies are set to change this with the rise of ‘nanobiochips’ and
brain-imaging and scanning technologies that will eventually lower the cost of
neurological techniques and analysis as well as making the procedures
efficient and profitable. Neurotechnologies, combined with wireless sensors,
may possibly usher in a communications revolution greater than that caused
by the arrival of the transistor and the microchip. Lynch, executive director of
the Neurotechnology Industry Organization (NIO), writes that ‘When data
from advanced biochips and brain imaging are combined they will accelerate

22

Kingsley Dennis
the development of neurotechnology, the set of tools that can influence the
human central nervous system, especially the brain (Lynch, 2004). Although
neurotechnologies are likely to be put to therapeutic and medical uses, such as
for improving emotional stability and mental clarity, they also open
opportunities for intrusive strategies of control and manipulation.
Part of this paper has been focused on the dangers of an increasingly wireless
world. These dangers may include the potential for invasive technologies,
based upon transmitted and received energies and wavelengths, to shift social
order towards a psycho-civilized society. By psycho-civilised I mean a society
that manages and controls social behaviour predominantly through nonobvious methods of psychological manipulations, yet at a level far beyond that
of the ‘normalised’ social manipulations of propaganda and social institutions.
What I refer to are the technologised methods of psychological interference
and privacy intrusions in the manner of creating a docile and constrained
society. And here this brings us back to the problematics involved in opening a
Pandora’s Box.
In this paper I have asked whether innovations in wireless and neurotechnologies are not in danger of shifting human behaviour towards a psychocivilised society, where greater emphasis is placed upon forms of social control
and pre-emptive strategies. What are the moral and ethical implications of
using wireless scanning surveillance technologies for evaluating pre-emptive
behaviour based on thoughts and intentions alone? Is this not a dangerous
path towards psycho-terrorising the social public? As Thomas (1998) reminds
us, the mind has no firewall, and is thus vulnerable to viruses, Trojan horses,
and spam. It is also vulnerable to hackers, cyber-terrorists, and state
surveillance. Whilst this may sound a little too far-out, they are reasonable
questions to ask if technologies are racing ahead of us in order to better get
into our heads.
Becoming wireless also means becoming increasingly transparent in terms of
our physical immersion within an information-saturated environment. From
the evidence of present trends and developments it seems likely that a greater

23

Kingsley Dennis
systemic interconnectedness and interdependence is being formed between
human-object-environment facilitated through and by information flows. This
may herald the coming of a ‘wonderful wireless world’, yet it may also signal
unforeseen dangers in protection, privacy, and security of the human
biological body within these new relationships. It is my suggestion that such
issues and concerns need to become more palpable, visible, and intrusive; the
very opposite of our technologies.

24

Kingsley Dennis

References
Adam, D. (2004) Computerising the body: Microsoft wins patent to exploit
network potential of skin. The Guardian: July 6th 2004
AFRL (2004) 'Controlled Effects (Air Force Research Laboratory Long-Term
Challenges)' http://www.afrlhorizons.com/Briefs/Jun04/DE0401.html
(accessed 27/01/07)
Alexander, J. (1999) Future War: Non-lethal Weapons in Modern Warfare.
London: Saint Martin's Press.
BBC

(2007)
'US
military
unveils
heat-ray
gun'
http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/americas/6297149.stm
(accessed
26/01/07)

Cheng, M. (2007) Scientists claim first in using brain scans to predict
intentions. North West Florida Daily News: March 5th 2007
Delgado, J. (1969) Physical Control of the Mind: Toward a Psychocivilized
Society. New York: Harper & Row.
DIA (1972) Controlled Offensive behaviour – USSR. The US Army Office of
the Surgeon General Medical Intelligence Office: (pp. 1-174)
Dolman, E. C. (2001) Astropolitik: Classical Geopolitics in the Space Age.
New York: Frank Cass Publishers.
Dyson, F. (1997) Imagined Worlds. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Economist (2007) Mind games. Economist, March 15th 2007
Elliott, D. and Barry, J. (1994) A Subliminal Dr. Strangelove. Newsweek,
Aug. 22, 1994.
Gibson, O. (2005) Gates unveils his vision of a future made of silicon. The
Guardian: October 28th 2005
Hogan, J. and Fox, B. (2005) 'Sony patent takes first step towards real-life
Matrix'. New Scientist, (2494), p.10.
Horgan, J. (2005) The Forgotten Era of Brain Chips. Scientific American,
October
Lynch, Z. (2004) 'NEUROTECHNOLOGY AND SOCIETY (2010-2060)'
http://lifeboat.com/ex/neurotechnology.and.society
(accessed
9/03/07)
Millward, D. (2006) Gadget will stop drivers falling asleep at the wheel. The
Telegraph: 07/04/2006

25

Kingsley Dennis
O'Connor, M. (1993) 'Psychological Studies in Nonionizing Electromagnetic
Energy Research'. Journal of General Psychology, 120 (1), 33-47.
Pollack, A. (2006) Paralyzed Man Uses Thoughts to Move a Cursor. New
York Times: July 13, 2006
Pravda
(2004)
'Mind
control:
The
Zombie
http://english.pravda.ru/science/19/94/379/14567_.html
21/01/07)

Effect'
(accessed

Sample, I. (2007) The brain scan that can read people's intentions. The
Guardian: Friday February 9, 2007
Schwartz, P.;Taylor, C. and Koselka, R. (2006) Quantum leap: Brain
prosthetics. Telepathy. Punctual flights. A futurist's vision of where
quantum computers will take us. . Fortune, 154 (3), August 7, 2006
Simpson, C. (1994) Science of Coercion: Communication Research &
Psychological Warfare 1945-1960. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Tae-gyu, K. (2007) 'Acoustic Wave Prevents Game Addiction' The Korea
Times,
http://times.hankooki.com/lpage/200703/kt2007031220190210160.h
tm (accessed 16/03/07)
Thomas, T. (1998) 'The Mind Has No Firewall'. Parameters, (Spring 1998),
84-92.
Time (1976a) The Microwave Furor. Time, Mar. 22, 1976
Time (1976b) Moscow Microwaves. Time, Feb. 23, 1976
Turner, A. (2007) 'Inter-planetary Internet expands to Mars and beyond'
http://www.itwire.com.au/content/view/9802/1066/
(accessed
12/03/07)
USAF (1995) New World Vistas: Air and Space Power for the 21st Century.
USAF Scientific Advisory Board:
Welsh, C. (1998) The 1950s Secret Discovery of the Code of the Brain. Report
for Mind Justice (May 1998): (pp. 1-74)

26

