International Journal on Social Robotics
Preprint, ﬁnally accepted

An EEG Adaptive Information System for an Empathic Robot
Dominic Heger · Felix Putze · Tanja Schultz

Abstract This article introduces a speech-driven information system for a humanoid robot that is able
to adapt its information presentation strategy according to brain patterns of its user. Brain patterns are
classiﬁed from electroencephalographic (EEG) signals
and correspond to situations of low and high mental
workload. The robot dynamically selects the information presentation style that best matches the detected
patterns. The resulting end-to-end system consisting
of recognition and adaptation components is tested in
an evaluation study with 20 participants. We achieve
a mean recognition rate of 83.5% for discrimination
between low and high mental workload. Furthermore,
we compare the dynamic adaptation strategy with two
static presentation strategies. The evaluation results
show that the adaptation of the presentation strategy
according to workload improves over the static presenThis work has been supported in part by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) within the Collaborative Research Center 588 “Humanoid Robots - Learning and Cooperating Multimodal Robots”
Dominic Heger · Felix Putze · Tanja Schultz
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
Institute for Anthropomatics
Cognitive Systems Lab (CSL)
Adenauerring 4
D-76131 Karlsruhe, Germany
http://csl.anthropomatik.kit.edu
Dominic Heger
Tel.: +49-721-608-46293
E-mail: dominic.heger@kit.edu
Felix Putze
Tel.: +49-721-608-44328
E-mail: felix.putze@kit.edu
Tanja Schultz
Tel.: +49-721-608-46300
E-mail: tanja.schultz@kit.edu

tation strategy in both, information correctness and
completeness. In addition, the adaptive strategy is favored over the static strategy as user satisfaction improves signiﬁcantly. This paper presents the ﬁrst systematic analysis of a real-time EEG-adaptive end-toend information system for a humanoid robot. The achieved
evaluation results indicate its great potential for empathic human-robot interaction.
Keywords Human-Robot spoken interaction · Adaptive interaction strategies · Electroencephalography ·
Mental workload recognition · Human evaluation study

1 Introduction
Computing machines are about to fundamentally change human’s self-understanding and selfconstitution as an acting social entity, embodied
and embedded in a technological supported environment and process. Also, the accelerating cycles of
advancements in information and robotic technologies
may soon enable humans to transcend biological
limitations and thus transform our lives in ways we
cannot imagine. Our current daily life is characterized
by interacting with computing machines in diﬀerent
contexts, applications, and environments. We use them
for work, for communication, for health purposes, as
well as for sports and entertainment in our leisure
time. However, in contrast to humans who intuitively
sense and react to cognitive or aﬀective states of people
in their environment, machines so far interact with
us in a way that completely ignores the richness and
implications of human internal states. As a result,
machines today are still widely insensitive to the
context and actions in their environment. This leads
to an unnatural form of man-machine communication

2

and interaction, inadequate system reactions, and ineﬃcient interaction performance. This is in particular
a problem for humanoid robots that are designed to
blend into the human world and therefore need to
interact with us in a social and empathic way. Advancements of this situation require the development
of humanoid robots that are - among others - aware
of human internal states, such as emotions, vigilance,
attention, and mental workload. The latter internal
state is very crucial as it inﬂuences how humans process information. Also it impacts the human memory
span and other factors of cognition which signiﬁcantly
aﬀect the course of interaction between a robot and
its user. Therefore, we concentrate in this work on
the automatic recognition of mental workload and the
appropriate adaptation of the robot’s behavior to the
recognized human mental workload.
This article describes the setup and evaluation of the
adaptive humanoid robot Robert as previously introduced in [1]. His task is to present information to the
user via speech. During the course of interaction, the
user experiences diﬀerent levels of mental workload, induced by an external secondary task over which the
robot has no control. Robert uses electroencephalographic (EEG) signals recorded from the users to recognize their brain activity patterns, which correspond
to conditions of low and high mental workload. The detected brain activity patterns allow Robert to adapt
its information presentation strategy to optimally serve
the user’s needs in the given situation. We presented
the ﬁrst implementation and evaluation of an adaptive
information presentation system based on EEG in the
domain of humanoid robotics in [1]. The present article
improves the reliability of our former work by doubling
the number of subjects in the human evaluation study.
The results conﬁrm our earlier ﬁndings. Furthermore,
we elaborate on the details of the dialog system in this
study.
2 Related Work
According to Breazeal [2], the design of sociable robots
requires human-awareness, which comprises the concept of empathy as an important factor, i.e. the understanding of human internal states and the propper
reaction to them. In the last decade, the development
of adaptive social robots gained rising attention. Researchers identiﬁed a number of user states that the
robot needs to consider for optimizing its interaction
behavior. Some systems, which detect and adapt to internal states, were implemented and validated in human evaluation studies to show the eﬀectiveness of the
adaptation techniques [3][4][5].

Dominic Heger et al.

Torrey et al. [3] evaluated a humanoid robot that
adapts its dialog behavior to the user’s expertise. By
modifying the vocabulary and language style, the robot
better supports novice users and is more eﬃcient for
expert users. The authors showed that adaptation increased performance measures and improved subjective perception of the robot. Liu et al. [4] developed
a closed-loop human-robot interaction framework in a
basketball training scenario. They used various features
from cardiac activity, heart sound, bioimpedance, electromyographic activity, and body temperature to discriminate three levels of anxiety using regression trees.
Most participants performed better and showed less
anxiety when the task diﬃculty level was adapted to
the detected anxiety level. Bonarini et al. [5] described
a stress recognition algorithm for a rehabilitation robot
on the basis of biosignals such as blood volume pressure, and galvanic skin response among others. Diﬀerent stress levels were induced by perturbing the user’s
control over the robot. For discrimination of six diﬀerent states, the system achieved a recognition rate of
88%. The authors claimed that the recognition system
could be applied to adapt the robot’s behavior, e.g. by
adjusting the diﬃculty of the training program.
Electroencephalography (EEG) is commonly used
to actively control human-machine interfaces by brain
signals. EEG directly measures the brain’s electrical activity in contrast to other non-invasive measurement
methods, such as functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) or magnetoencephalography (MEG). It beneﬁts from a high temporal resolution, low-cost data
acquisition equipment, and is useful for mobile applications. Additionally, modern wireless EEG-devices allow for rather unobtrusive data acquisition. Brain Machine Interfaces (BMIs) [6] usually use neural eﬀects
that have distinct activation patterns in the brain and
are user-controllable. Among the most frequently employed eﬀects are sensorimotor rhythms, slow cortical
potentials, evoked potentials, and event related potentials [7]. In robotics, several non-invasive EEG-based
BMIs have been proposed to control various kinds of
robots [8][9][10][11].
In contrast to the classical BMI paradigm that aims
for an explicit command and control of robots, we intend to implicitly recognize spontaneous eﬀects in the
EEG that are not actively controlled but correspond
to present internal states of the user, such as mental
workload.
Several authors have proposed EEG-based workload
recognition systems for use in adaptive dialog and information systems but not in the domain of humanoid
robots. Berka et al [12] developed the B-Alert system for
monitoring alertness and cognitive workload in opera-

An EEG Adaptive Information System for an Empathic Robot

tional environments using a wireless EEG sensor headset. They applied the system to several tasks, such as
sleep deprivation studies, military motivated monitoring (Warship Commander Task), reaction and digit sequence identiﬁcation, as well as to image memorization
tasks. They predicted four states of alertness using a
linear discriminant function on spectral features in the
range of 3-40 Hz derived from one second long epochs of
data. Wilson and Russel [13] evaluated an autonomous
air vehicle task with adaptive aiding controlled by realtime recognition of low and high workload states. They
used ﬁve frequency bands between 4 and 43 Hz from
EEG and electrooculographic (EOG) signals, as well as
interbeat intervals from electrocardiogaphic (ECG) signals. Based on neural network classiﬁcation they could
show that the closed-loop adaptive automation significantly improved performance in a complex military
task. Chen and Vertegaal [14] improved context awareness for mobile devices. They developed a recognition
system for diﬀerent attentional user states. The authors
detected two levels of motor activity using EEG signals
and two levels of mental load determined by heart rate
variability. Their system used the classiﬁed user state
to adapt a mobile phone to the appropriate notiﬁcation level. Kohlmorgen et al. [15] used EEG to measure
workload during driving for online adaptation of in-car
systems. They used spatial ﬁlters and classiﬁcation by
Linear Discriminant Analysis. Their system improved
the reaction time for most subjects due to mitigation
of high workload situations for the driver. Gevins and
Smith [16] evaluated subjects performing diﬀerent tasks
of computer interaction and sequential memorization of
stimuli (n-back tasks). They used spectral features of
the theta and alpha frequency bands from segments of
four seconds length and applied subject-speciﬁc multivariate functions and neural networks to discriminate
three workload levels. Honal and Schultz [17] analyzed
task demand from EEG data recorded in lecture and
meeting scenarios. They used Support Vector Machines
(SVMs) and Artiﬁcial Neural Networks for classiﬁcation
and regression of short time Fourier transform features
(2 second epochs). To improve the convenience of brain
activity data acquisition they developed a comfortable
headband and compared its performance to a standard
EEG cap.

3

The implemented presentation strategies iterate over all
database entries and report them one after another.
The strategy of presenting this information to the
users is adapted to their brain patterns recognized from
the EEG data (see section 4). Robert has two diﬀerent behavior styles which can be switched seamlessly
between two utterances: The Low behavior style is designed for brain patterns which correspond to low mental workload, and the High behavior style is designed
for brain patterns corresponding to high workload conditions. Although the style of presentation diﬀers between Low and High, the content of information stays
the same:
The Low behavior style focuses on high information
throughput, i.e. only short pauses between utterances
and between diﬀerent database entries are made. Whenever possible, multiple information chunks are merged
into one utterance and phone numbers are presented in
a blockwise fashion. However, as Robert is designed
to be a social robot, maximizing eﬃciency is not the
only criterion but will be complemented by politeness.
Thus, Robert takes the time to convey information in
complete sentences to mimic a polite communication
partner.
The High behavior style on the other hand is tuned
towards situations in which the user has to divide his
cognitive resources into two tasks which he executes in
parallel. As this multi-tasking may cause memory capacity reduction, split attention, and limited processing
capabilities, the High behavior style accommodates the
situation by presenting information in a separated fashion, giving only one attribute at a time and reporting
phone numbers as single digits. Furthermore, pauses
are extended between utterances and database entries
such that the user has more time to deal with the secondary task. Reporting time is conserved by limiting
the information to the attribute name and value, thus
minimizing utterance duration.
Presentation strategy
AlwaysLow
AlwaysHigh
EegAdaptive
Oracle

Behavior style
Fixed to Low
Fixed to High
Derived from EEG
Derived from given information
on secondary task

3 Adaptive Information System

Table 2: Presentation strategy and corresponding behavior
style of the information system.

Robert’s task is to give its users information about
students they met. The information is reported to the
user via text-to-speech synthesis. Information is compiled in a multiple-entry database, listing the attributes
of students, such as name, id, and telephone number.

The interaction strategy of the information system deﬁnes in which fashion switches take place between the two behavior styles over the course of a
session. For the experiments described below, we im-

4

Dominic Heger et al.
Robert’s Behavior style
Pause duration
Number presentation
Items per utterance
Formulations
Example utterances

Low
short (500ms)
blockwise
multiple
polite
The name of the next person
is Heidi Kundel. Her telephone
number is 52-11-66-3.

High
long (2000ms)
isolated
single
concise
Heidi Kundel
Telephone: 5-2-1-1-6-6-3

Table 1: Low and High behavior styles for information presentation.

plemented four strategies: AlwaysHigh, AlwaysLow,
EegAdaptive, and Oracle.
The AlwaysHigh and the AlwaysLow strategies
deﬁne baseline systems which ignore the current state
of the user but rather stick to one behavior style. The
EegAdaptive strategy uses the recognized brain patterns to select an appropriate behavior (i.e. High when
brain patterns corresponding to high mental workload
are detected, and Low otherwise). As a gold standard,
we also deﬁne the Oracle strategy which switches between behavior styles according to the reference information on the secondary task, i.e. instead of relying
on potentially noisy information from EEG data, it selects the optimal behavior for each utterance according
to the contextual information of whether the secondary
task is currently running or not. Tables 1 and 2 summarize Robert’s presentation strategies and corresponding behavior styles.
The information system is implemented in a general purpose dialog management engine developed at
the Cognitive Systems Lab. It is based on an Information State Update [18] engine. The dialog strategy is
implemented as a set of rules which consist of preconditions and bindings. Preconditions determine if a rule
is executed and consist of constraints concerning the
dialog state, e.g. the index of the current database entry and the time passed since the last system utterance.
From each valid rule, its bindings are executed. Bindings modify the dialog state and generate synthesized
speech output using the OpenMary text-to-speech system [19]. Our engine supports rules which are adaptive
to a dynamically updated workload estimate: Each rule
which produces a system speech output is assigned two
alternative speech acts corresponding to the two diﬀerent behavior styles. Those speech acts can diﬀer in linguistic and phonetic style as well as the amount of content. The selection depends on the employed strategy
(see Table 2) and the interaction state at execution time
of the speech act, i.e. the decision is delayed as much as
possible. Furthermore, the system supports switching
points within utterances to guarantee swift reactions
to state changes within an ongoing speech act. How-

ever, this feature was not applied in the experiments to
insure fair comparison of consistent utterances.

4 Real-Time Brain Pattern Recognition
The realization of the EegAdaptive strategy requires
a real-time EEG-based recognition system which estimates the level of mental workload. For this purpose
we adapted our existing online EEG workload recognition system as described in [20]. The systems applies
an active EEG-cap (BrainProducts actiCap) to assess
the subjects’ brain activity using 16 electrodes placed at
positions FP1, FP2, F3, Fz, F4, F7, F8, T3, T4, C3, Cz,
C4, P3, P4, Pz, and Oz according to the international
10-20 system [21] with reference to the left mastoid. The
impedance of each electrode was kept below 20 kΩ during all sessions. Ampliﬁcation and A/D-conversion was
performed on a 16 channel VarioPort biosignals recording system by Becker Meditec using a sampling rate of
256 Hz. The ﬂexible framework BiosignalsStudio [22],
which is designed for multimodal biosignal recording,
forms the input layer for EEG data acquisition. Figure 1 depicts the training and application processes of
the workload recognition system for the EegAdaptive
strategy.
Among the most challenging problems for training
and operation of the workload recognition systems are
artifacts, such as eye movement and muscular artifacts.
Both are predominantly present when EEG signals are
recorded under less restricted conditions, as it is the
case in the experiments described below. Therefore, we
apply fully automatic artifact reduction methods based
on the combination of two blind source separation techniques: Independent Component Analysis (ICA) and
Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA). ICA is wellknown to be very eﬀective for artifact removal of eye
blinks and saccades. The infomax algorithm [23] is applied to the training data to calculate a transformation matrix that decomposes the 16-channel EEG signal into 16 independent components. The components
related to eye movement activity are identiﬁed by frequency and power characteristics. During the operation

An EEG Adaptive Information System for an Empathic Robot

of the brain pattern recognition system the EEG signals are transformed using the precalculated transformation matrix. The components which are identiﬁed
as eye blinks or saccades are high pass ﬁltered by 16
Hz using a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT)-based ﬁlter.
For muscular artifacts, we apply blind source separation based on canonical correlation analysis that has
shown to be more eﬀective than low pass ﬁltering or
ICA-based methods [24]. It leverages the fact that in
general muscle activity has a lower autocorrelation than
brain activity. After decomposition, those components
with an autocorrelation below a certain threshold are
set to zero. Hereafter, the signals are recomposed into
cleaned EEG signals by back transformation.
The EEG data of all channels are split into windows
of two seconds length with an overlap of 1.5 seconds.
We applied a Hamming window function and computed
the discrete Fourier transform on all windows using the
short-time FFT. For each frequency coeﬃcient between
4 and 45 Hz we calculate the logarithmic power, resulting in a feature vector of 83 frequency bins. The dimensionality of the feature space is then reduced by averaging over three adjacent frequency bins. Finally, the
features of all channels are concatenated. We employ
Support Vector Machines (SVMs) [25] with linear kernels to discriminate diﬀerent brain patterns corresponding to two diﬀerent levels of mental workloads, i.e. with
and without secondary task. The resulting binary classiﬁcations of the SVM are integrated by averaging over
the past 10 seconds (linear temporal smoothing). This
procedure increases the robustness of the recognition
results and provides a task speciﬁc load value that displays smooth trends over the estimated workload. The
output of this linear temporal smoothing is a rational
valued workload estimation ranging between 0 and 1,
which is thresholded to control switching between the
two behavior styles in the EegAdaptive strategy. To
determine a subject speciﬁc threshold from recognition
results of the training session we calculate the average workload estimation for the training parts without
the secondary task (w1 ) and the average workload with
both tasks (w2 ). The subject speciﬁc threshold t is cal2
culated as t = w1 +w
. Robert applies the Low behav2
ior style if the estimated workload level is below t, and
the High behavior style otherwise.
To train the recognition system, we recorded per
subject one training session, consisting of four parts, as
described in the experimental sessions section 5. During
training all combinations of the two behavior styles and
the two task conditions (with and without secondary
task) are performed. The data of the training session
is used to calculate the transformation matrix for the

5

Fig. 2: Speedometer visualizes the recognized workload in
real-time.

ICA-based artifact removal and to identify independent
components that contain ocular artifacts.
The described workload recognition system features
a speedometer to visualize the recognized workload (see
Figure 2). However, we did not reveal this information
to the subjects during the experiments to avoid distractions and contaminations on the workload. The complete recognition process is implemented in MATLAB
and runs in real-time on a standard desktop computer.
More details on the workload recognition system can
be found in [20].

5 Experimental Setup
The aim of the experimental study was to evaluate (1)
the performance of the real-time EEG-based brain pattern recognizer for discrimination between high and low
mental workload, (2) the impact of the presentation
strategies on the users’ task performance, and (3) the
users’ overall subjective appeal to the end-to-end system.
For this purpose we designed a multi-level evaluation study in which participants had to perform two
tasks, partly in dual-tasking fashion to induce diﬀerent
levels of mental workload. In the primary task participants were asked to manually ﬁll in a paper form according to spoken instructions given by Robert. Performance criteria are correctness and completeness of
the information ﬁled on paper. In the secondary task
participants processed a variant of the cognitive Eriksen ﬂanker task [26], in which horizontal arrays of ﬁve
arrows are displayed (e.g. <<><<). Participants were
expected to report the orientation of the middle arrow by pressing the corresponding left or right key
on the keyboard. Performance criteria are correctness
and reporting speed. Apart from the objective performance measures correctness, completeness, and reporting speed, we collected subjective user judgments by
a questionnaire. Based on the questions we evaluated
how users perceived the interaction quality and eﬃciency, to what degree users noticed the adaptation

6

Dominic Heger et al.

Fig. 1: Workload recognition system architecture. Parameters and models of the system are estimated from EEG data of the
training sessions with and without secondary task (top). In the EegAdaptive session the robot’s behavior style (High or Low)
is determined from unlabeled EEG data (bottom).

of the EegAdaptive and Oracle strategy, and how
changes in strategy and behavior style impact the subjective user experience.
Figure 3 shows the experimental setup. Robert
was present in form a humanoid robot head [27] which
talked to the participants using text-to-speech synthesis. The participants faced paper forms to be ﬁlled in as
well as a desktop computer to execute the ﬂanker task.

Fig. 3: Recording setup with Robert [27] (left side), the computer for the secondary task (center) and participant wearing
an EEG cap (right side).

In total 20 subjects participated in the experiment
and completed ﬁve sessions which were recorded consecutively in one sitting. In the ﬁrst session A EEG
data were recorded to train a person-dependent brain
pattern classiﬁer for each subject (see Figure 1 top).
In four subsequent sessions B1 to B4 we varied the
presentation style in which Robert gives instructions
to the subject. In each session Bi one of the strategies AlwaysHigh, AlwaysLow, EegAdaptive, and
Oracle was applied consistently throughout the session. To eliminate the impact of bias eﬀects such as
fatigue, the order of strategies was randomly chosen.
All sessions consist of a ﬁxed sequence of two alternate
segments with and without secondary task. Transitions

between segments were marked by an acoustic signal.
Each segment lasted approximately one minute. Table 3
summarizes the experimental design. Each subject performed ﬁve sessions of four minutes duration each, resulting in about 20 minutes data per subject, summing
up to about 400 minutes data for all 20 participants.
Prior to the main experiment we performed a pilot
study on ﬁve subjects to calibrate task diﬃculty and
duration. The main purpose was to ensure that all test
conditions signiﬁcantly diﬀer from each other and do
not result in overloaded or underchallenged users. The
ﬁnal study was performed on 20 new subjects between
21 and 29 years old, who participated voluntarily in the
study. All participants are students or employees of the
Institute for Anthropomatics at Karlsruhe Institute of
Technology (KIT). Each participant signed a consent
form prior to the experiments. None of the participants
had any prior experience with the EEG-based workload
recognition system.
Table 4 lists all questions of the questionnaire the
participants answered immediately after each session
Bi , so for each subject we collected in total four questionnaires. Each question was assigned to a 6-point
scale. The items deal with the adaptation capabilities
of the robot (Q1), the appropriateness of its behavior
(Q2, Q3), its social competence (Q5, Q6) and an overall judgment (Q4, Q7). Items Q8 to Q11 were adopted
from a subset of the Nasa TLX scale [28] to evaluate
the experienced workload along several dimensions.

6 Experimental Results
This section presents the experimental results of the
above described study aiming at the evaluation of the
low vs. high workload discrimination performance of
the real-time EEG-based brain pattern recognizer (section 6.1), the impact of the presentation strategies on
the users’ task performance (section 6.2), and the users’
overall subjective appeal to the end-to-end system (section 6.3).

An EEG Adaptive Information System for an Empathic Robot
For each
Subject
Session A
Session B1
Session B2
Session B3
Session B4
Total

Single
Dual
1 Minute
1 Minute
EEG brain pattern training
AlwaysHigh
AlwaysHigh
AlwaysLow
AlwaysLow
EegAdaptive EegAdaptive
Oracle
Oracle

7
Single
1 Minute

Dual
1 Minute

AlwaysHigh
AlwaysLow
EegAdaptive
Oracle

AlwaysHigh
AlwaysLow
EegAdaptive
Oracle

Total
4 min
4 min
4 min
4 min
4 min
20 min

Table 3: Experimental Setup and amount of Evaluation Data
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q5
Q6
Q7
Q8
Q9
Q10
Q11

How strongly did the robot adapt to the switch between the conditions with and without secondary task?
How appropriate was the behavior of the robot in conditions without secondary task?
How appropriate was the behavior of the robot in conditions with secondary task?
Would you like to work together with a robot with this behavior?
How do you judge the behavior of the robot concerning “friendliness”?
How do you judge the behavior of the robot concerning “empathy”?
How do you judge the behavior of the robot in general?
Experienced time pressure*
Experienced accomplishment*
Experienced eﬀort*
Experienced frustration*

load index

Table 4: Questionnaire for subjective evaluation of presentation strategies. Items marked with * are extracted from the Nasa
TLX workload scale.

1
0.5
0
0

1

2

3
4
time [min]

5

6

Fig. 4: Individual Workload estimation (blue) and Threshold
level (red) in single-task (white background) and dual-task
(gray background) mode over a EegAdaptive session.

6.1 Workload Recognition Results
The EEG-based workload recognition system was
trained on the 4 minutes data of session A for each
of the 20 participants. We applied fully automatic artifact removal based on ICA and CCA as described in
section 4. The resulting cleaned EEG signals of all channels were used to train person-speciﬁc SVM classiﬁers
and thresholds to discriminate the brain patterns corresponding to low and high mental workload. Figure 4 displays an example of the estimated workload level over
time during the EegAdaptive session of one subject.
The blue curve shows the recognizer’s output, the red
horizontal line marks the user speciﬁc threshold level.
The segments in which the participants performs singletasking (paper form ﬁlling according to Robert’s instructions) are indicated by a white background, the
dual-tasking segments (subject performs the secondary
ﬂanker task in addition) are indicated by a gray background. The vertical lines mark the ground truth.

The blue curve of the recognizer’s output in Figure 4
clearly reﬂects the diﬀerent task conditions, i.e. the recognizer discriminates well between single and dual-task
conditions. However, the graph also shows a delay between changes in task demand and recognized workload. This can be explained by the temporal smoothing
implemented in the recognition system. Furthermore, a
switch of the task condition might not have an immediate impact on a person’s mental state. As a result,
Robert’s behavior in the EegAdaptive sessions is
slightly diﬀerent from the Oracle sessions due to this
delayed switching and due to some recognition errors.
To determine the recognizer’s accuracy, we calculated the percentage of recognition outputs (provided
for each window, i.e. one output every 0.5 seconds)
where task condition and thresholded workload estimation results match. The accuracy is given by the sum
of the number of recognition outputs below the threshold during single-tasking plus the number of recognition outputs above the threshold during dual-tasking,
divided by the total number of recognition outputs. Figure 5 gives the breakdown of the recognition rates for
the EegAdaptive sessions over all 20 subjects. The
recognition accuracy ranges from 70.8% to 94.0% with
a mean of 83.5% (sd=6.5).
Note that the recognition accuracy averaged over all
time slices is not a priori a measure of the end-to-end
system’s quality in terms of strategy adaptation. This
is due to the fact that only a fraction of the recognized
workload decisions have an impact on the system’s

8

Dominic Heger et al.
Strategy
100 94.0

Recognition accuracy in %

90

83.5

80
70.8
70

AlwaysLow
AlwaysHigh
EegAdaptive
Oracle

Correctness
(robot)
86%
96%
96%
94%

Completion
(robot)
98%
58%
85%
85%

Correctness
(ﬂanker)
69%
87%
82%
86%

Table 5: Average completion and correctness rates for the
robot instruction and the Eriksen ﬂanker task.

60
50
40
30
20
10
0

16 18 11 7 3 1 2 6 12 15 17 13 14 8 10 9 5 19 20 4

Avg

Subject Ids

Fig. 5: Recognition accuracies for the EegAdaptive sessions
of 20 subjects in descending order. Chance level is at 50%.

strategy changes. Only the recognition results at the utterance boundaries inﬂuence the strategy since within
utterances the behavior remains unchanged. Therefore,
we performed an experiment in which we limited the
recognition accuracy calculation to the relevant decision points. This resulted in an average accuracy of
81%, which is reasonably close to the overall recognition accuracy of 83.5%. We therefore conclude that the
overall performance of the recognizer is indeed a robust
estimator of the system performance in the adaptation
task.

bers show that the presentation strategy AlwaysLow
outperforms all other strategies in terms of completion
rate due to the high throughput. In contrast, for the
AlwaysHigh strategy subjects only manage to complete about half of the items. However, AlwaysLow
trades this high completion rate with a dramatically
lower correctness rate. Since AlwaysLow leaves only
few resources for the subjects to properly carry out
the secondary ﬂanker task, AlwaysLow is outperformed by the other strategies in terms of ﬂanker correctness rate. In comparison, both adaptive strategies
EegAdaptive and Oracle are able to maintain a reasonable completion rate while keeping the correctness
rate at the same level as the conservative AlwaysHigh
strategy. Furthermore, it can be observed that the fully
automatic strategy adaptation applying EegAdaptive
compares favorably with the Oracle strategy, indicating that the EEG-based recognition of brain patterns
results in a fairly reliable switching behavior. Overall,
we conclude that adaptive strategies improve the information presentation by switching behavior styles without hurting task performance.

6.2 Task Performance
6.3 Subjective Evaluation
To study the impact of the presentation strategies on
the users’ task performance, we applied two task performance metrics, correctness and completion rate. The
former was calculated for both, the primary robot instruction task and the secondary Eriksen ﬂanker task,
while the latter was only applicable to the primary task.
In case of the primary robot instruction task, the correctness rate was calculated as the ratio between the
correctly quoted items and the number of completed
items which were noted down on paper by the subjects
who listened to the robot’s instruction. The completion
rate was calculated as the ratio between completed and
total number of items in the robot’s database. In case of
the Eriksen ﬂanker task, the correctness rate was calculated as the number of keys correctly pressed, divided
by the number of presented stimuli.
Table 5 gives the correctness and completion rates of
robot and ﬂanker task performance averaged over all 20
subjects for the four presentation strategies. The num-

The aim of the subjective evaluation was to assess the
users’ subjective appeal to the end-to-end system, i.e.
the experienced robot behavior and the mental workload. For this purpose the same questionnaire consisting of 11 questions was presented after each of the Bi
sessions. Table 6 summarizes the questionnaire results
averaged over all 20 participants.
The result for question Q1 shows that both adaptive strategies (EegAdaptive and Oracle) are indeed perceived as being adaptive. This observation is
in accordance with the objective eﬀectiveness of adaptivity measured by the EEG-based brain pattern recognition rate (see section 6.1).
For appropriateness of behavior, we diﬀerentiate between behavior in absence of a secondary task, i.e.
single-tasking (Q2) and in presence of a secondary task,
i.e. dual-tasking (Q3). For single-tasking, the relative
drop from the best to the worst strategy is as small as

An EEG Adaptive Information System for an Empathic Robot
Item
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q7
Q5
Q6
Q8
Q9
Q10
Q11

Scale from . . . (1) to . . . (6)
not adaptive – very adaptive
not appropriate – very appropriate (single task)
not appropriate – very appropriate (dual task)
don’t work with – work with
very bad – very good
not friendly – very friendly
not empathic – very empathic
low pressure – high pressure
low accomplishment – high accomplishment
low eﬀort – high eﬀort
low frustration – high frustration

9

AlwaysLow
2.0 (0.97)
4.9 (1.00)
2.3 (1.10)
2.2 (1.15)
2.8 (0.95)
3.1 (1.15)
2.2 (0.93)
5.3 (0.66)
3.0 (1.19)
5.1 (1.05)
4.0 (1.25)

AlwaysHigh
2.5 (1.66)
4.1 (1.75)
4.3 (1.03)
3.3 (1.18)
4.0 (0.71)
3.8 (0.80)
2.6 (1.19)
3.2 (1.14)
3.8 (1.16)
3.5 (1.12)
2.5 (1.05)

EegAdaptive
4.5 (1.10)
4.9 (1.14)
3.9 (1.25)
3.6 (1.14)
3.9 (0.87)
3.7 (1.22)
3.4 (0.99)
4.0 (0.99)
3.7 (1.04)
4.4 (0.75)
3.0 (1.00)

Oracle
5.4 (1.09)
5.1 (1.07)
5.1 (0.89)
4.8 (0.69)
4.8 (0.61)
4.3 (0.86)
4.4 (0.87)
3.5 (1.23)
4.0 (1.27)
4.0 (1.09)
2.5 (0.61)

Table 6: Subjective evaluation of the robot’s behavior and experienced mental workload; average score (standard deviations).

24.1%. For dual-tasking, the participants clearly prefer the High behavior: The gap between the worst and
the best ranked strategy increases to 54.9%. We explain this observation by the fact that the beneﬁt of
both behavior styles is perceived asymmetrically: While
High improves throughput and convenience of the information presentation, Low can make the diﬀerence
between successful task completion and mental overload. Still, the order of strategies for single-tasking is as
expected: AlwaysLow, EegAdaptive and Oracle
have very similar scores with non-signiﬁcant diﬀerences while the slow AlwaysHigh strategy is perceived
worst. For dual-tasking, the EegAdaptive strategy
scores slightly worse than Oracle and AlwaysHigh
which perform both optimally in dual-tasking segments
(AlwaysLow is indisputably the worst strategy). EegAdaptive usually switches to the correct strategy but
with a small delay. As described above, this delay is determined by the window size of temporal integration in
the classiﬁer and the fact that a switch of behavior style
takes place only between utterances. We assume that a
more immediate classiﬁcation mechanism, a more ﬂexible adaptation scheme and scenarios with longer segments of constant mental workload will mitigate this
eﬀect.
The two questions Q4 and Q7 deﬁne a metric for
overall perceived quality of the system. Both items are
strongly correlated (r = 0.86). The results reveal a
clear quality gap between AlwaysLow and the other
strategies. While Oracle outperforms the others by
far, the average diﬀerence between AlwaysHigh and
EegAdaptive is much smaller. This observation is
somewhat surprising given the signiﬁcant diﬀerences
in objective performance criteria. However, it can be
explained by the fact that the EegAdaptive strategy depends solely on the recognition performance of
the brain pattern classiﬁcation. This dependency is expressed in higher standard deviations of most items for
EegAdaptive compared to Oracle (which works in
a deterministic way). Table 7 further investigates this

issue. Most of the items are signiﬁcantly correlated with
recognition accuracy. When splitting the data into two
groups according to the session’s recognition rate (below average vs. above average, denoted acc. ≤ ∅ and
acc. > ∅), the distance to the scores of Oracle is
reduced for the better sessions and thus the gap between EegAdaptive and AlwaysHigh increases. In
summary, we observe a distinct user preference for EegAdaptive over the non-adaptive strategies given a
suﬃciently high recognition accuracy. This observation
supports our assumption that recognition performance
is a key factor in subjective perception and that further
improvement of brain pattern classiﬁcation will directly
translate to improvements of user satisfaction.
To further analyze the perception of the four presentation strategies, Q5 and Q6 asked for how friendly and
empathic the behavior was perceived over the session.
Q6 reveals that the adaptive strategies (EegAdaptive
and Oracle) were indeed perceived as most empathic.
Adaptivity and perceived empathy are highly correlated (r = 0.73 between Q1 and Q6). This indicates
that developing adaptive strategies for human-robot
communication is an important step towards the implementation of truly social robots. For friendliness,
no signiﬁcant diﬀerences between strategies were observed. We ascribe this to the fact that both behavior
styles could lead to a perception of friendliness: While
High speaks in complete and thus more polite sentences, Low produces minimal phrases which might be
perceived as more considerate given the stressful tasks.
Questions Q8 to Q11 investigate the experienced
workload in single- and dual-tasking segments. The dimensions time pressure (Q8), accomplishment (Q9),
eﬀort (Q10), and frustration (Q11) show similar patterns: AlwaysHigh expectedly performs best, receiving scores which indicate relatively low workload.
Oracle gets very close to those bounds. This shows
that an adaptive strategy is able to reach near-optimal
workload levels while it ﬂexibly makes the most of cognitive resources whenever available in single-task situa-

10

Dominic Heger et al.
Item

Scale from . . . (1) to . . . (6)

Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q7
Q5
Q6
Q8
Q9
Q10
Q11

not adaptive – very adaptive
not appropriate – very appropriate (single task)
not appropriate – very appropriate (dual task)
don’t work with – work with
very bad – very good
not friendly – very friendly
not empathic – very empathic
low pressure – high pressure
low accomplishment – high accomplishment
low eﬀort – high eﬀort
low frustration – high frustration

ρ between acc.
and E-O
-0.40
-0.18
-0.51*
-0.35
-0.51*
-0.74*
-0.54*
0.29
-0.24
0.46*
0.24

dlow := O-E
(acc. ≤ ∅)
1.1
0.4
1.5
1.3
1.3
0.8
1.5
-0.8
0.3
-0.9
-0.6

dhigh := O-E
(acc. > ∅)
0.6
0.1
0.8
1.1
0.6
0.5
0.4
-0.1
0.3
0.1
-0.3

dlow -dhigh
0.5
0.3
0.7
0.2
0.7*
0.3
1.1*
-0.7
0.0
-1.0*
-0.3

Table 7: Relation of recognition accuracy (acc.) and the diﬀerence between user ratings of Oracle and EegAdaptive (O − E).
The two columns dlow and dhigh show the mean diﬀerence between Oracle and EegAdaptive (O −E) for sessions below resp.
above average workload recognition accuracy. * marks statistical signiﬁcance (Pearson correlation ρ) or signiﬁcantly diﬀerent
from each other (dlow -dhigh one-tailed t-tests) with signiﬁcance level α = 0.05.

tions. AlwaysLow is indisputably much worse in all regards compared to adaptive strategies. EegAdaptive
approaches the lower workload bound and performs
(with exception of Q10) more similar to AlwaysHigh
than to AlwaysLow. This indicates that the fully automatic adaptive strategy EegAdaptive is a very reasonable approximation to the Oracle strategy.
7 Adaptive Human-Robot Communication
To further exploit the above described brain pattern
recognition and adaptive presentation strategy in a
real-life setup, we integrated both components into an
interactive spoken dialog system for a humanoid robot.
The robot acts as agent which can be queried by the
user for information and services via naturally spoken
commands. Our demonstration platform is equipped
with a monitor displaying the ThinkingHead1 , a virtual, morphable head. The display indicates the detected user state (high or low workload) by changing
the background colors and thus makes the robot’s behavior changes transparent to the user. The EEG-cap
for data acquisition is replaced by an Emotiv EPOC2
headset to improve user comfort. The wireless EPOC
device (originally developed as an advanced gaming device) uses 16 saline electrodes attached to ﬂexible arms.
Even for non-expert users the device is ready for use
after a very short setup time, as a time consuming application of electrode gel is not necessary. Supporting
this new device required only minor parameter modiﬁcations to the described recognition system (number of
electrodes, sampling rate).
Human-robot communication is controlled by a
light-weight rule-based dialog strategy. Similar to the
1
2

http://thinkinghead.edu.au/
http://www.emotiv.com/

EegAdaptive strategy, the dialog strategy allows to
switch between two distinct interaction behavior styles
based on the measured brain patterns corresponding to
low or high workload. The goal of the low workload behavior style is to provide as much information as possible while keeping the user engaged in conversation.
In this mode, the robot employs a talkative, verbose
speaking style, jokes occasionally and uses expressive
mimics. The goal of the high workload behavior style is
diﬀerent: In this mode, the robot tries to use the limited resources of the user as eﬃciently as possible by
minimizing the amount of non-critical information and
emphasizing important aspects by speaking loud and
slow.
This real-life human-robot communication setup
diﬀers in one main aspect from the setup described
earlier, i.e. the user speaks to control the robot. This
has two major implications for the system. On the one
hand, the interaction strategy has to deal with the concept of initiative. In the current system, this is performed in a straight-forward rule-based fashion, where
the high workload behavior takes more control of the
conversation than the low workload behavior, relieving the user from non-critical decisions. On the other
hand, the recognition system must handle brain activity
patterns and muscle artifacts generated during speech
production. This eﬀect needs to be compensated by
training the brain pattern recognition system with data
which include speech segments.

8 Conclusion
This article describes the design, implementation, and
evaluation of a speech-driven information system for
human-robot interaction. The humanoid robot is able
to adapt its behavior styles according to brain patterns

An EEG Adaptive Information System for an Empathic Robot

of its user. Those behavior styles are designed to accommodate diﬀerent conditions of mental workload of the
user. In an evaluation study with twenty participants
we achieved a mean recognition rate of 83.5% for the
discrimination between low and high mental workload.
Furthermore, we showed that the adaptive strategy
based on the brain pattern recognition improves user
satisfaction in comparison to static interaction strategies. Comparison to the oracle strategy with respect to
the users’ task performance and subjective evaluation
show that the EEG-based adaptation is a promising
approximation to the optimal adaptation strategy. The
achieved evaluation results indicate its great potential
for empathic human-robot interaction.
In future investigations, we aim for a systematic and
quantitative evaluation of an adaptive spoken dialog
system for a humanoid robot. The system will be evaluated in more natural scenarios which require both the
user and the robot to actively participate in the interaction. We foresee two main challenges: Firstly, we need
to identify a scenario which allows for robust quantitative evaluation of natural interaction without repetitive
tasks. Secondly, a natural dialog will show the users’
adaptation to both, changing workload conditions and
changing robot behavior. Therefore, the envisioned scenario requires advances in interaction and adaptation
strategies, and needs to consider less evident side effects of adaptive behavior.

References
1. D. Heger, F. Putze, T. Schultz, An adaptive information
system for an empathic robot using EEG data, in International Conference on Social Robotics (Springer, 2010),
pp. 151–160
2. C. Breazeal, Designing sociable robots (The MIT Press,
2004)
3. C. Torrey, A. Powers, M. Marge, S. Fussell, S. Kiesler, Effects of adaptive robot dialogue on information exchange
and social relations, in 1st ACM SIGCHI/SIGART conference on Human-robot interaction (2006), pp. 126–133
4. C. Liu, P. Rani, N. Sarkar, Human-Robot interaction using aﬀective cues, in 15th IEEE International Symposium
on Robot and Human Interactive Communication (ROMAN) (2006), pp. 285–290
5. A. Bonarini, L. Mainardi, M. Matteucci, S. Tognetti,
R. Colombo, Stress recognition in a robotic rehabilitation
task, in Robotic Helpers: User Interaction, Interfaces and
Companions in Assistive and Therapy Robotics, a Workshop at ACM/IEEE HRI (2008), pp. 41–48
6. J.
Wolpaw,
N.
Birbaumer,
D.
McFarland,
G. Pfurtscheller, T. Vaughan, Brain-computer interfaces
for communication and control, Clinical neurophysiology
113(6), 767 (2002)
7. S. Mason, A. Bashashati, M. Fatourechi, K. Navarro,
G. Birch, A comprehensive survey of brain interface technology designs, Annals of Biomedical Engineering 35(2),
137 (2007)

11
8. C. Bell, P. Shenoy, R. Chalodhorn, R. Rao, Control of
a humanoid robot by a noninvasive brain–computer interface in humans, Journal of Neural Engineering 5, 214
(2008)
9. J. Millan, F. Renkens, J. Mouriño, W. Gerstner, Noninvasive brain-actuated control of a mobile robot by human EEG, Biomedical Engineering, IEEE Transactions
on 51(6), 1026 (2004)
10. D. McFarland, J. Wolpaw, Brain-computer interface operation of robotic and prosthetic devices, Computer
41(10), 52 (2008)
11. D. McFarland, W. Sarnacki, J. Wolpaw, Electroencephalographic (EEG) control of three-dimensional
movement, Journal of Neural Engineering 7, 036007
(2010)
12. C. Berka, D. Levendowski, M. Cvetinovic, M. Petrovic,
G. Davis, M. Lumicao, V. Zivkovic, M. Popovic, R. Olmstead, Real-time analysis of EEG indexes of alertness,
cognition, and memory acquired with a wireless EEG
headset, International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction 17(2), 151 (2004)
13. G. Wilson, C. Russell, Performance enhancement in an
uninhabited air vehicle task using psychophysiologically
determined adaptive aiding, Human Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 49(6),
1005 (2007)
14. D. Chen, R. Vertegaal, Using mental load for managing
interruptions in physiologically attentive user interfaces,
in CHI’04 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems (2004), pp. 1513–1516
15. J. Kohlmorgen, G. Dornhege, M. Braun, B. Blankertz,
K. Müller, G. Curio, K. Hagemann, A. Bruns, M. Schrauf,
W. Kincses, in Toward Brain-Computer Interfacing (The
MIT Press, 2007), pp. 409–422
16. A. Gevins, M. Smith, Neurophysiological measures of
cognitive workload during human-computer interaction,
Theoretical Issues in Ergonomics Science 4(1), 113 (2003)
17. M. Honal, T. Schultz, Determine Task Demand from
Brain Activity, Proceedings of the First International
Conference on Biomedical Electronics and Devices,
BIOSIGNALS 2008, Funchal, Madeira, Portugal, January 28-31, 2008, Volume 1 pp. 100–107 (2008)
18. S. Larsson, D. Traum, Information state and dialogue
management in the TRINDI dialogue move engine
toolkit, Natural language engineering 6(3&4), 323 (2000)
19. M. Schröder, J. Trouvain, The German text-to-speech
synthesis system MARY: A tool for research, development and teaching, International Journal of Speech Technology 6(4), 365 (2003)
20. D. Heger, F. Putze, T. Schultz, Online Workload Recognition from EEG data during Cognitive Tests and
Human-Machine Interaction, in 33rd Annual German
Conference on Artificial Intelligence (KI2010) (2010),
pp. 410–417
21. H. Jasper, The 10-20 electrode system of the International Federation, Electroencephalography and Clinical
Neurophysiology 10, 371 (1958)
22. D. Heger, F. Putze, C. Amma, M. Wand, I. Plotkin,
T. Wielatt, T. Schultz, BiosignalsStudio: A ﬂexible
Framework for Biosignal Capturing and Processing, in
33rd Annual German Conference on Artificial Intelligence (KI2010) (2010), pp. 33–39
23. S. Makeig, A. Bell, T. Jung, T. Sejnowski, et al., Independent component analysis of electroencephalographic
data, Advances in neural information processing systems
pp. 145–151 (1996)

12
24. W. De Clercq, A. Vergult, B. Vanrumste, W. Van Paesschen, S. Van Huﬀel, Canonical correlation analysis applied to remove muscle artifacts from the electroencephalogram, Biomedical Engineering, IEEE Transactions on 53(12), 2583 (2006)
25. C. Chang, C. Lin. LIBSVM: a library for support vector
machines (2001)
26. C. Eriksen, D. Schultz, Information processing in visual
search: A continuous ﬂow conception and experimental
results, Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics 25(4),
249 (1979)
27. T. Asfour, K. Welke, P. Azad, A. Ude, R. Dillmann,
The Karlsruhe Humanoid Head, in 8th IEEE-RAS International Conference on Humanoid Robots (Humanoids)
(2008), pp. 447–453
28. S. Hart, L. Staveland, Human mental workload (1988),
chap. Development of NASA-TLX (Task Load Index),
pp. 139–183

Dominic Heger received his Diploma in Informatics from Universität Karlsruhe (TH) in 2009. He
is a research assistant and Ph.D. student at the Cognitive Systems Lab (CSL) at the Karlsruhe Institute
of Technology. He is currently working in the DFG
funded Collaborative Research Center CRC 588 “Humanoid Robots - Learning and Cooperating Multimodal Robots”. His research interests include humanrobot interaction, biosignals processing, and cognitive
modeling.
Felix Putze received his Diploma in Informatics
from Universität Karlsruhe (TH) in 2008. He is a research assistant and Ph.D. student at the Cognitive
Systems Lab (CSL) at the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology. He is currently working on a project developing
a cognitive interaction system. His research interests
include cognitive modeling, dialog modeling and recognition of human inner states.
Tanja Schultz received her Ph.D. and Diploma degrees in Informatics from University Karlsruhe, Germany in 2000 and 1995 respectively. Since 2000 she is
a Research Scientist at Carnegie Mellon in the Language Technologies Institute and since 2007 also holds
a Full Professorship position at the Karlsruhe Institute
of Technology (KIT) in Germany. She is the director
of the Cognitive Systems Lab, which focuses on the
development of human-centered technologies and intuitive human-machine interfaces based on biosignals, by
capturing, processing, and interpreting signals such as
speech, muscle, and brain activity.

Dominic Heger et al.

