Embodiment in Brain-Computer Interaction
Kenton O’Hara, Abigail Sellen, Richard Harper
Microsoft Research
7 J J Thomson Avenue
Cambridge, UK
ABSTRACT

With emerging opportunities for using Brain-Computer
Interaction (BCI) in gaming applications, there is a need to
understand the opportunities and constraints of this
interaction paradigm. To complement existing laboratorybased studies, there is also a call for the study of BCI in real
world contexts. We present such a real world study of a
simple BCI game called MindFlex®, played as a social
activity in the home. In particular, drawing on the
philosophical traditions of embodied interaction, we
highlight the importance of considering the body in BCI
and not simply what is going on in the head. The study
shows how people use bodily actions to facilitate control of
brain activity but also to make their actions and intentions
visible to, and interpretable by, others playing and watching
the game. It is the public availability of these bodily actions
during BCI that allows action to be socially organised,
understood and coordinated with others and through which
social relationships can be played out. We discuss the
implications of this perspective and findings for BCI.
Author Keywords

Brain-Computer Interaction, gaming, embodied interaction
ACM Classification Keywords

H5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI):
Miscellaneous.
ACM Classification Keywords

Human Factors
INTRODUCTION

The concept of Brain-Computer Interaction (BCI) in which
measurements of brain activity are used to control
interactive systems has been with us for decades. Initially,
the key focus of this kind of interaction technique was to
offer new interaction modalities for people with disabilities
such as those with motor control impairments. For example,
BCI techniques have been used to control cursors, keyboard
entry or navigation for wheelchairs [2, 25, 33, 26]. More
recently, though, with advances in non-invasive BCI
technology and the development of more practical BCI
headsets, there is now a realistic possibility for using such
technologies for a wider variety of applications and for
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise,
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior
specific permission and/or a fee.
CHI 2011, May 7-12, 2011, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
Copyright 2011 ACM 978-1-4503-0267-8/11/05….. $10.00.

users with no physical disabilities [1, 23]. In the last few
years, one such area to which researchers have turned their
attention has been the use of BCI as a technique for gaming
[e.g. 5, 10 22, 15, 7, 16]. Some notable examples from the
research literature include Brainball [12, 13], MindBalance
[16], and “Use the force” [17, 20]. At the same time, we are
also now beginning to see the first commercial BCI-based
games with offerings from NeuroSky and Emotiv. These
organisations offer both headsets and development kits for
the creation of new games and applications based on BCI
technology. This is likely to accelerate development of BCI
games for fun and educational purposes.
Accompanying such developments, there is an increasing
need to further understand the opportunities and constraints
of BCI as an interactional paradigm within the context of
gaming [22, 23]. That is, it raises questions such as: what
are the capabilities and limitations of these techniques
within the context of gaming; in what ways should BCI
techniques be combined with other interaction modalities
for engaging gaming experiences; and what new paradigms
need to be developed that go beyond the emulation of basic
games controllers [17]?
In deepening this understanding, as with any other area of
HCI, there is a need to adopt a broad set of techniques
capable of addressing both micro and macro levels of
analytic enquiry, from questions of fine-grained
interactional efficacy to larger questions of the value and
use of these systems in real world social contexts.
Inevitably, because of the pragmatic considerations
associated with BCI research, to date there has been
tendency to focus on issues amenable to analytic enquiry
within laboratory settings by individuals using the headsets.
These studies yield important results, but are only a part of
the story. As Lécuyer et al suggest, there is a need to begin
complementing this strand of work with other types of HCI
and CSCW enquiry [17]. That is, they argue for more
ethnographic and real world studies of BCI for gaming and
other application scenarios. Such studies will help in an
understanding of this technology since games are, in the
main, social, as indeed are many of the other contexts in
which BCI might be deployed.
With this in mind, in this paper, we discuss findings from a
real world study of a BCI-controlled game played as a
social activity in the home. This study draws on the
philosophical and analytic concerns found in CSCW where
techniques for analysing the social in all its embodied forms

are well developed [e.g. 6, 28]. Before presenting the
study, we first wish to establish some more context with
respect to BCI and embodied interaction.
BCI AND EMBODIED INTERACTION

On the face of it, it is perhaps rather curious to align BCI
with embodied interaction. After all, on the surface, the
magic of BCI stems from the apparent disembodiment of
action, where thoughts alone can have impact in the world.
Inherent in the BCI paradigm and in its treatment in the
literature is a focus on the internal workings of the brain
and how detectable patterns of brain activity can be reliably
interpreted to control artefacts in the digital domain. In this
respect, the BCI paradigm begins to bear some resemblance
to early approaches in HCI that were dominated by
cognitive theories and abstract representations of the brain’s
internal processes as opposed to specific concerns with the
external world, and the ways in which actions were
situated. However, as HCI matured, this approach was
subject to a number of critiques both in practical and
philosophical terms. In part, these critiques arose out of the
turn to the social as HCI shifted focus away from simply
addressing individual interaction with computers to the
more collaborative interaction possibilities being realized
with emerging CSCW technologies. With this shift came
new concerns and approaches driven by the practical
concern of how to think about groups of people interacting
through technology rather than just about individuals. But,
accompanying this were related philosophical issues. In
particular, there were concerns about the abstract nature of
cognitive theories and the inherent “invisibility” of these
processes. This led to a greater emphasis on examining
what was observable – namely social action and the ways it
is situated within a particular context [e.g. 8, 30]. It is this
perspective we bring to bear in the work we report here.
Of additional import with these critiques and new
approaches to HCI are philosophical foundations associated
with them.
These raise intriguing and challenging
questions with respect to BCI because of the extent to
which they concern themselves with the “embodiment” of
action. Notions of embodied action in HCI [e.g. 5, 28]
essentially draw on the philosophical foundations of
phenomenologist thinkers such as Husserl, Heidegger and
Merleau-Ponty. These authors take as their starting point
that consciousness and perception are active, interpretive
and embodied, arising from our presence and action in the
world. This particular stance of embodied interaction is of
significance for a number of reasons that relate to our
concerns and methodological orientation in this paper.
Firstly, it articulates an inherent relationship between
actions in the world and our internal cognitive and
conscious experiences. Secondly, it argues that through our
actions we are able to create shared meanings with other
people - the public availability of these actions to the
perceptions of others allows action to be socially organized,
understood and coordinated with others.

Where these arguments lead us to then are the important
concern with the bodily actions that accompany braincomputer interaction. While BCI technologies have done
more to reveal the internal workings of the brain and render
them interpretable (albeit by machines), the inherent
relationship with bodily actions in the world suggests our
understanding of Brain-Computer Interactions lies also with
an understanding of these actions in the world. This
relationship has implications both for the pragmatics of BCI
control as well as how these interactions are experienced
socially. For example, from a pragmatic perspective,
bodily movements and muscle artefacts can influence EEG
signals [e.g. 21]. Within a social context, too, these
accompanying actions are of additional significance. The
work done to render the internal states of the brain and any
intentionality visible and interpretable by others present,
through actions, gestures, expressions and utterances, is a
key component in the organisation of social conduct around
these kinds of interactions [14]. Further, this is of
importance to how social meaning is created through these
technologies and how particular social relationships are
played out both for those playing as well as those watching.
In order to explore these issues, we present a real world
study of people using a simple BCI-based game called
MindFlex®. MindFlex was a useful candidate of study for
our purposes for a number of reasons. First, it is one of
only a few BCI applications readily and commercially
available for real world deployment. Second, gaming offers
the necessary kind of social context through which we
could study the social organisation of action with BCI.
RELATED WORK: BCI AND GAMING

While the use of steady state visual-evoked potentials and
motor imagery-based BCIs have been demonstrated in other
contexts, the demands of gaming present different
challenges that motivate the recent crop of games-related
research [7, 23]. There are questions for example, as to
how things such as audio and visual stimulation in video
games might impact on performance and motivation in
positive and negative ways by dividing resources [e.g. 16].
A number of research initiatives in recent years have begun
to explore the use of simple BCI controls in game-like
scenarios. Typically, the applications provide the user with
a small set of commands and controls somewhere in the
region of one to three [17]. For example, there have been
several attempts to demonstrate the use of BCI techniques
for navigating in game-like virtual environments [e.g. 19].
The concern of this research, though, was not focussed on
the gaming experience per se. Rather, they wanted to
demonstrate how feedback provided by the 3D virtual
world could improve motivation and performance over
simple 2D feedback. What this does show, though, is the
susceptibility of BCI performance to certain factors and
parameters within game-like settings.
Other researchers have more explicitly attempted to create
engaging game situations within the particular control
constraints of BCI to understand the efficacy of the

interaction within this context. In the MindBalance game,
players’ EEG readings are used to provide binary control
over an animated character that is balancing on a tightrope
[16]. As the character walks towards the player, it stumbles
either leftwards or rightwards off the tightrope. The aim of
the game is to correct the character’s balance by focusing
on the checkerboard on the opposite side of the screen to
the direction of falling. This work is important for us in a
number of ways. First, it points to an idiomatic approach to
BCI game design. That is, the game mechanic would be
relatively trivial for other more traditional games
controllers but presents an engaging challenge within the
context of EEG-based control.
Second, the study
quantitatively demonstrated that such binary control was
feasible within the visually stimulating environment of the
game and importantly that this success could be achieved
using techniques requiring little training – an especially
important consideration for use of BCI in gaming.
The MindBalance study, for good reason, like much BCI
research, was conducted in closely controlled
environmental conditions. As we have discussed, some
authors have made explicit calls to conduct additional BCI
research for gaming in more demanding real world
contexts. This was one of the motivations underlying the
work of the group at INRIA in their development and
explorations of the “Use the Force” game [17, 20]. In this
game, BCI techniques were used to control the virtual takeoff of a spaceship using real or imaginary foot movements.
One thing of significance was that it was conducted outside
of a controlled laboratory environment in a public
exhibition space with a large number of participants. This
context enabled the researchers to take on some of the
challenges associated with BCI in more real world
environments and the distractions associated with these. In
spite of these challenges, the experiments reported that a
significant number of participants were able to successfully
control the spaceship with BCI. The work also highlighted
some of the cognitive strategies employed by participants in
their control of the ship. This is an issue we return to later
in the study presented here, albeit within the social context
of game play. Of importance with this work though, as the
authors argue, is that the environmental context of the study
paves a way for more ethnographic enquiry into BCI, a key
motivation for the work presented here.
Perhaps one of the most intriguing and imaginative pieces
of work in BCI gaming is that which has looked at
Brainball [12, 13]. What is notable about this research is
that it is less focused on demonstrable efficacy of the BCI
technique within the gaming domain and more on the
creation of an engaging experience within the constraints
and affordances of the BCI technology. In this game, two
players at either end of a game table control a ball on the
table. The aim of the game is to score a goal by moving the
ball into the opponent’s goalmouth by relaxing more than
your opponent. With greater relative relaxation, the ball
moves towards the opponent’s goalmouth.

Notwithstanding the imaginative concept behind the game
itself, the research on it highlights a number of important
issues. For example, and as articulated by several authors,
play is as much a social and collaborative experience as it is
an individual experience [e.g. 29, 31, 32]. It is the social
aspects of games through which play becomes meaningful –
an opportunity for people to come together with social
purpose: for competition, for identity work and for other
forms of social occasioning. The playing of BrainBall was
very much a social occasion; in part because it involved
multiple players in competition, but also because the
playing of the game became an event, attracting both
players and audience. The notion of audience in relation to
BCI is of interest to us because it suggests engagement with
a game is not just about a player’s experience but also how
it can be watched and enjoyed [27].
While the BrainBall work points to a number of issues
relevant to our discussion, the evaluation part of the
research does not share the same analytic concerns as our
own. The research discusses some high level feedback
about people’s response, but there is very little in the way
of detailed interaction analysis that contributes to our
understanding of the physical manifestations of behaviour
using BCI in social settings – the physical and social
features of playing the game in a real-world setting.
THE STUDY
MindFlex® game

Figure 1. The MindFlex® Game Board

The MindFlex® Game is a commercially available BCI
game and, as such, is amenable to use in a real world study.
MindFlex uses a wireless headset with single electrode at
the front and two clips that attach to each earlobe. The
headset is based on Electroencephalography (EEG)
technology that measures electrical signals from the brain to
determine relative levels of concentration. The aim of the
game is to move a floating ball around an obstacle course
assembled on the game board (see Figure 1). As the player
concentrates, electrical signals from the brain activate a fan
on the game. Higher levels of brain activity, or
“concentration”, increase the fan strength, thereby blowing
the ball higher. To lower the ball, players must relax,
reducing concentration and brain activity. With the ball
raised, a second control knob is turned by hand to move the
fan source round the game board. This allows the floating
ball to be moved around the obstacle course as the player
raises or lowers the ball over encountered obstacles.

Participants

Sixteen participants took part in the study, made up of four
distinct groups of people who knew each other. For each
group there was a “host” participant responsible for
assembling the group of people with whom they wanted to
play the game just as they would if playing any other game
at home. A social group had to consist of at least two
people. The groups, then, consisted of different family
members and friend relationships as determined by the
group host. The groups were as follows:
Group 1 – One female (early 30s) and one male (early 40s),
in a relationship and cohabiting.
Group 2 – Father (early 40s) playing with his three children
– boy (7), girl (16), boy (18).
Group 3 – Married couple (50s), daughter (14), her two
stepsisters (18, 20), the boyfriend (20) of one of the
stepsisters. One of the stepsisters had learning difficulties.
Group 4 – Mother (50), father (52), son (14), daughter (12).

too, the playful role of spectators in interacting with the
players and the social and interactional implications of this.
Bodily Orientation and Focus

In our observations, the proxemic arrangement of players
with respect to the game and others was an important
consideration for controlling concentration and relaxation.
Deliberate adjustments in body posture were performed to
relax and achieve focus. Consider a sequence from a
participant in Group 4 (Figure 2).

Method

Host participants were given the MindFlex® game to take
home for approximately 1 week. They were asked to play
the game at home with other people they knew. It was up
to them to decide when, where, with whom, and how often
to play the game, just as with any other game. Participants
were given a camcorder and asked to video themselves
when they played the game in a social setting. The groups
were fluid in that some people would join or leave the
group at particular points during any game play; this
fluidity being a natural component to the play context.
After finishing with the game, participants returned it and
the video recordings of their sessions. In total, there was
approximately 4 hours worth of video data collected from
the sessions. The video sessions were subject to a detailed
interaction analysis by the researchers, that focused on the
physical manifestation of behaviour around the game,
looking in detail at bodily action, gestures and utterances
occurring during game play. This was oriented to players,
as well as co-presents others who were watching or even
collaborating. The aim of this analysis was to describe the
embodied nature of the interactions and collaborations, and
how they were coordinated. Further, it aimed to show how
social meaning was created and relationships played out
through these embodied interactions.
FINDINGS

In presenting the findings, we draw on a series of vignettes
and video sequences that illustrate key manifestations of the
embodied nature of BCI. We begin with a discussion of the
body in achieving focus and controlling concentration and
relaxation. Next, we consider notions of intentionality
including difficulties arising from lack of bodily
manifestations of intentionality and the efforts to make
intentionality visible. We then explore extraneous gestures
people employ to accompany BCI creating enhanced
narrative around the game and with a view to facilitating
their engagement. We then look at the ways players create
performance through their body during BCI. We examine

Figure 2. Holding breath and clenching for concentration

The younger daughter, staring at the ball, lifts her whole
body up as she takes a deep breath and holds it. While
holding her breath, she lowers her body downwards and
towards the device. She clenches her hand and tenses up
her whole body as if this will squeeze out some imaginary
energy to raise the ball. This posturing has little to do
directly with facilitating the wireless transmission of signals
between headset and game. Rather, it is a strategy to
achieve focus and concentration.
Such spatial arrangements were not simply static but rather
were dynamically organised in response to the behaviour of
the game and player performance. For example, players
would lean in and increase the intensity of their visible gaze
when the ball was not responding as they intended. What is
of significance in these behaviours is the way gestures are
closely choreographed with the behaviour of the game. We
can see this illustrated in the following sequence (see
Figure 3). In the beginning, the player (Group 1) looks at
the ball with her hand on the control knob, trying to keep
the ball raised through concentration. However, the ball
begins to lower. As the ball lowers, she removes her hand
from the control knob and begins to clench and unclench
her hand. Closely choreographed with this is a scrunching
up of her face. The intensity of the squeezing and grimace
increase as the ball becomes precariously low but the
gestures gradually relax as she manages to raise the ball.
Only then does her hand return to the control knob. What
we see here is the use of gesture in attempt to get back into
a state of concentration. In using her hands in this way, she
is temporarily unable to control the other mode of input,
namely the control knob. Only once she has achieved a
more stable state of focus does she return to the multimodal
input control.

Figure 3. Gesture and Posture choreographed with game

Proxemic arrangement and gaze orientation were also used
as means to try and reduce concentration on the ball in
order to lower it. Most typically, this involved averting the
gaze away from the game. Consider the following sequence
in which a player from Group 2 was struggling to reduce
the height of the ball (see Figure 4).

Figure 4. Averting gaze to reduce concentration

The sequence begins with the player staring at the ball, with
his hand on the control knob ready to move the ball around
the game board when it lowers. As he is unable to reduce
his concentration and thereby lower the ball, he removes his
hand from the control knob and looks away to his left. As
he is looking to the left, the ball lowers in height as his
concentration is reduced. Importantly as the ball lowers,
the pitch of the fan reduces indicating that it is falling.

When it gets to a low enough pitch, he then briefly brings
his gaze back to the ball to quickly monitor its height before
returning his gaze again to the left. The ball and the pitch
of the fan drop lower allowing him to feel confident that he
is in a state of relaxation. With that, he turns again to face
the ball and brings his right hand back onto the control
knob to begin to steer it. As he does this, his concentration
increases and the ball begins to rise. To his frustration, he
removes his hands from the knob and turns his gaze to the
right and up into the air. Important here is the turn away
from the visible as a means to guide the player interaction
with the device.
This potentially raises interaction
difficulties because of a lack of visual monitoring of the
system. However, the audio feedback provided by the
noise of the fan allows the player to continue monitoring
the system behaviour.
Mental Imagery and Narrative

During game play, gestures were performed as part of an
additional narrative fantasy layer acted out over and above
the basic elements of the game play. In the following
vignette (Group 2), a father is playing with his younger son,
and the father is offering guidance and instructions for how
to get the ball to rise. In offering these instructions, the
father adds an additional layer of narrative to the game that
goes beyond what is necessary if we consider the
interaction purely in terms of the control mechanisms. He
suggests: “Relax your face and put everything through your
hands and into the ball flying”. The instructions here, then,
make reference to an imaginary energy that flows from the
brain through the body and hands to the system. In response
to this, the son moves his hands over the system and hovers
them next to the ball to facilitate the channelling of this
“energy” (see Figure 5).

Figure 5. Magician fantasy gestures

This additional narrative fantasy adds an extra source of
mysticism and engagement for the son playing (and the
father watching). With his father watching, the son plays it
out through his bodily actions, waving his fingers about the
ball, simulating the movements of a magician. He cups his
hands underneath the ball without touching it and raises
them, moving the “energy flow” in an attempt to move the

ball upwards. These additional layers of narrative
interpretation and mental imagery were evident in other
strategies used by players in their attempts to more
explicitly control the interaction in the game too. Such
strategies involved thinking directly about moving the ball
up or thinking about related concepts of height or flying
objects. Another example is from the daughter in Group 2 :
“Birds , Plane takes off into the air. Up very high. Sky diver
from very high up.” She is saying this as she is looking into the
air “Up up up up up!”
“At the end of the day it helps to think about moving up – I
don’t know why. Think about stuff that moves up.” Son 2, Gp 2

Of significance here is how these kinds of strategies
contribute to engagement with the device, adding a layer of
intentionality to the way interaction is achieved, and a
narrative in which players can engage. With this particular
BCI mechanism, control is achieved through any nonspecific concentration level. That is, it is not necessary to
think of the ball moving up. However, by virtue of thinking
about the ball moving up, they are in consequence
increasing their concentration. So while it is simply this
increased concentration that is causing the ball to rise, the
association it makes with their intentional thoughts gives
the impression that the intentional thought is responsible.
Ironically, adopting this approach can also lead to a lack of
control. For example, in other cases, players were seen to
think explicitly about lowering the ball in order to get it to
fall. This turns out to be counter-productive since these
kinds of thoughts lead to increased concentration levels.
We can see this in another episode where the father (Group
2) is interacting with his young son who is playing the
game. The father says to his son “Lower it in your mind”.
In response to this comment the son begins to stare intently
at the ball, trying to control it rather than relax.
The
concentration levels that accompany this lead to the ball
remaining in the air. Within the narrative of control, this is
the appropriate opposite but is mismatched with the actual
underlying control mechanics.
This has implications for thinking about the design of
games and other applications utilising these relatively
simplistic non-specific BCI mechanisms. That is, it
suggests how design of the game experience might focus on
the construction of appropriate narratives within the game
to encourage stronger engagement with the game at the
same time as teaching players how to achieve better control.
Intentionality and Invisibility

Watching and interpreting the game (whether for
coordination purposes or enjoyment of the spectacle), was
not always straightforward and unambiguous.
Other
players and spectators were not always able to understand
the intentions and actions of others in relation to the game,
particularly when there was no bodily manifestation of their
intention. Key here is that focus and concentration are
often at odds with communicating with others. Consider an
example of this interpretive difficulty.

Participant J, the young son from Group 2 is playing the
obstacle course version of the game while his father
watches from the other side of the table. The father has
been instructing his son in terms of how to control the ball
and also the rules of the obstacle course such as correct
direction for the ball to pass through the hoop. As J
approaches the upcoming hoop obstacle with the ball
floating below the hoop, the father says “Top down that
one” as he points to the hoop in question. Because J is
concentrating on trying to raise the ball higher and rotating
it around in line with the hoop, he is unable to acknowledge
his father’s instruction either verbally or through gesture.
The father is therefore reliant on the behaviour of the ball to
confirm that his son has understood. However, because of
the difficulty J is having controlling the ball, it is lower than
the height of the loop giving the impression that he is
approaching the hoop from the bottom up. The father takes
this to mean that J has ignored his instructions so repeats
them: “Top down”, to which J replies “I know. I’m
thinking, I’m thinking.” In verbally acknowledging his
father, J is distracted and the ball drops to the game surface.
The example demonstrates how interaction manipulations
[27] in this BCI are difficult to discern by those watching
the game. Because these manipulations are not visible,
those co-present might normally infer intentionality of a
player from the interaction effects – namely the system’s
output. However, one difficulty with this approach in the
context of this game arises from the relative lack of
precision over the control of the system and a lack of strong
mapping between the intentionality of the player and the
game. This means that intentionality is not always
represented in the interaction effects with this kind of
interface. These factors lead to the misinterpretation of the
player’s intentions by the father. To exacerbate the
problem, having to correct this misinterpretation also
interferes with the player’s attempt to concentrate, further
undermining his ability to control the ball.
The imprecision of mapping between intentionality and
interaction effects was also dealt with by players
volunteering explanations of their behaviour through visible
utterance or gesture. Consider the following episode. The
father (Group 2) is playing the obstacle course version of
the game while his children watch. He has his hand on the
control knob, but keeps it still, ready to move the ball
around once it is at the correct height. The ball is floating
in the air and oscillating gently at a certain height. The
father is staring at it and then looking away. The children
are motionless watching him. This continues in silence for
several seconds. At this point, the father glances across at
them, chuckles and says: “I can’t get it to go down.”
Because the ball has been up in the air for so long and not
making any progress visible to the observing audience, he
feels a need to explain what is going on to those watching.
Gestures too were used to make intentions visible to the
audience when they were not being revealed through the
state of the system. We can see an example of this in the

following sequence by the daughter in Group 3 (Figure 6).

flow to the movements. This is then followed by a couple
quicker and jerkier arm lifts, palms raised up in the air like
she is willing it to rise. A short while later, the ball falls
lower than she wants it to drop. This creates panic and
excitement on her part. In her excitement she screams “at
the top of her voice. She moves in closer to get it to rise
and then shouts “Nooooo - birds birds birds - birds”. As
she shouts she smiles, and her father laughs.

Figure 6. Using gesture to reveal intentionality

The daughter in this sequence is playing the obstacle
course. She has raised the ball and prepares to move it
around to the next obstacle. Once the ball is positioned
above the obstacle, she needs to lower it through the hoop.
As this does not happen immediately, she signals her intent
through gesture. She looks at the ball and brings both
hands off the console. As she raises them up, she turns
them over and then gently lowers them in a downward
gesture. While moving her hands down, she closes her eyes
and gently nods her head to signal that the action should be
initiated. She repeats this gesture phrase again, but with a
stronger nod of the head to emphasise her intent.
Play as performance

Beyond simply trying to account for, or explain one’s
actions to others, we also observed that bodily movements
and verbalizations while interacting with the device were
sometimes about creating a performance for those
watching. At times, gestures were deliberately exaggerated
not only to help make visible the intentions of the player to
the audience, but also to make it more engaging to watch.
This is illustrated well in the following segment (Figure 7).
Here, we see the daughter from Group 2 playing the
obstacle course with her father sitting on the opposite side
of the table, and her younger brother also in the room (but
out of sight of the camcorder). She is trying to get the ball
to rise higher so that she can get it through one of the
hoops. She is initially intently focussed on the ball. After a
while she glances up and then flicks her head upwards as if
to usher the ball upwards. Immediately after this gesture
she leans back and then begins to raise both hands from
their resting place on the table. With her palms facing
downwards she raises both arms together into the air high
above her head. Her whole body moves upwards as she
performs this gesture. She then gently lowers her arms
before repeating a more forceful upward gesture. This
gesture is then repeated two more times with a wave like

Figure 7. Gesture as performance
Spectatorship verbalisations and play

Much of what we have discussed so far has been how
actions and intentions are visibly manifest by players within
this social context. These manifestations help make the
game understandable for those watching as well as making
it more entertaining as a spectator experience. Even the
minutiae of facial expressions when trying to concentrate
were at times engaging to observers as well as the more
deliberately performative aspects undertaken by the players:
“Is that your concentration face with your weirdy wizard
eyes?” V (Gp 1)

Spectatorship is not simply about passively watching but is
more a two-way relationship between players and observers
who are actively participating. This participation can be
seen, for example, in active attempts to influence the
thought patterns and behaviours of the players, providing a
source of encouragement, distraction and humour. Of note
too, is the sensitivity to particular familial relationships and
a means through which these particular relationships are
played out. Consider the following example. The mother
from Group 4 is playing the game with a time limit. She is
being watched by her son and daughter sitting with her at
the table and her partner, sitting on the sofa. The game
indicates she has 10 seconds left to go. She is looking up at
the ceiling in an attempt to lower the ball. The machine
then begins a 5 second countdown at which point she
realises she needs to raise the ball again quickly. The son,
conscious of the urgency, shouts “Mum, Hugh Jackman,

Hugh Jackman, Hugh Jackman’s naked!” as he points to
the other side of the room. They all burst out laughing.

says: “Yours is obviously not very ordinary thinking, is it
darling?”

What we see here is the use of the game characteristics to
create humour. The family are fondly aware of the
mother’s penchant for Hugh Jackman and offer it as subject
matter to get her to concentrate. While used to encourage
her concentration, its primary motivation is the opportunity
for an affectionate expression of humour. This example
also confirms that this audience understands the generic
nature of the BCI in being based on general notions of
concentration levels. This general, as opposed to a more
specific BCI control mechanism, means it is open to
interpretation. It is this that allows it to be appropriated in
this personal way for humorous purposes.

With this audience interaction in mind, a pertinent concern
is the sensitivity of the BCI to these kinds of external
factors and impact on performance. Indeed, robustness
under real world conditions is a motivating factor for this
kind of study. Play too, evokes its own particular type of
audience engagement relative to other domains of usage.
That is, in our observations, there were attempts both to
encourage and distract people using the BCI. This choice
of encouragement or distraction is done with particular
social meaning and bound up in particular relationships
between players and audiences and performed with
particular social sensitivity. The point we are trying to make
here is that while these interaction mechanisms are delicate
and susceptible to distraction within such a social context,
this is not something that is inherently problematic as a
feature of the mechanism itself. Rather, the ways people
orient towards this delicacy become an important part of the
game, and a key part of what makes it engaging and fun.
So, for example, in Group 2, the older brother and sister
would actively tease and distract each other during BCI
play (through staring, leaning in, and distracting utterances)
because they were closer in age. By contrast, when their
younger brother was playing, they were more encouraging
and respectful in their utterances and proxemic
arrangements. To further illustrate, the children in Group 2
were trying to distract their father while he was playing,
making noise and offering amusing suggestions about what
to think. The father tolerated this for a while but then said.

In a similar vein, it is the close timing between system
response to such verbalisations that becomes a source of
humour. In this respect, the system is taken as a reflection
of the thought processes and brain activity of the player.
This can be seen in the following example, again from
Group 4 but this time with the father playing. The father is
staring at the ball attempting to concentrate and raise it but
having no success. After a few seconds of not raising the
ball, the son says “Dad, remember when City lost 6-0 to
Cardiff? Do you remember that?’ The father looks at his
son and replies “Yeah.” The ball is still not moving. The
daughter then says “Explain the whole match. Think about
the match and remember it”. He says “Nah.” but it is at
this moment that the ball rises. The daughter, son and
mother burst out laughing. The father is a strong City fan
and was not happy about the huge 6-0 defeat by local rivals
Cardiff. They are trying to tease him through this
suggestion and, while he tries not to think about it, the
system response and its timing are used humorously by his
family to suggest that he must be thinking about it. Again, it
is the non-specific notion of concentration levels BCI that
enable this appropriation. Ambiguity and interpretability
are important here in allowing these behaviours.
Related to these issues were the more general inferences
made about cognitive ability and activity in relation to the
particular state of the machine. For example, inactivity of
the ball for an extended period of time led to expressions of
embarrassment on the part of the players. This would also
prompt acts of self-deprecation as seen in Group 1:
“Its very worrying man. Look its not moving at all.” V – laughs
“I think it’s you’re not thinking.” – M smiles
“At all.” - V laughs again

Similar behaviour can be observed in the following episode
from Group 3. The father in Group 3 manages to lift the
ball up momentarily only for it to fall back down again.
This prompts laughter from the watching family members.
He smiles, with mild embarrassment and says “It’s
stopped.” – then adds laughing “My brain has stopped.” A
little while later he causes the ball to roll off the board. His
wife comments: “You made it fall off – that’s very clever”.
After replacing the ball, it falls off again - she laughs and

“Ok can you both be quiet please… This is supposed to be a
game of concentration.” S
“No no but we’re helping.” M responds.
“No no shut up.” S says again.
“At the end of the day it helps to think about moving up – I
don’t know why. Think about stuff that moves up.” Sm
“Will you just shut up.” S

M tries again to distract S by waving her hands magically
over the ball. He pushes her away because it is distracting.
After this they watch more quietly.
DISCUSSION

In this paper, we have begun to examine Brain-Computer
interaction within the context of a real world setting [17] namely within the context of social game play in the home.
In doing this, we have been able to offer an alternative and
complementary perspective on this kind of interaction. Our
concerns with this perspective are not only about the
efficiency and effectiveness of the BCI as a games
controller, but rather lie with how the interaction
mechanism affects the social construction of behaviour and
meaning-making around the device and how social context
affects interaction with the device. In addressing these
concerns, we draw on notions of embodied interaction [e.g.
6, 28], which highlight the importance of people’s
participation and action in the world. This is, in part, about

their physical action but also social action and how people
to create and communicate meaning with the system and
other social actors.
While it may at first seem curious to reinstate notions of
bodily action in systems designed to bypass the body, what
we hope to have shown in the findings is the importance of
such a perspective. What is significant here is that a BCI
interface puts the player in the unusual position of treating
their own thoughts--their own brain--as a physical effector
much like they would their arms or hands. Rather than
using physical actions to engage with the elements of the
game or interface, the player must use their levels of
concentration in this way. This has several implications.
First, whereas we have no need to think explicitly about
how to move a game piece with our hands on a chessboard,
players in this game need to explicitly think about how to
use their own thoughts to achieve a desired effect. This
means that what is usually taken for granted in game play
(how to effect simple moves in a game) becomes instead
central to the game. This also has the further complication
that thinking about one’s thoughts changes the nature of
those thoughts, and, as a result, changes the way in which
thoughts effect action. As we have seen, this recursive
relationship is then used as a source of humour and a
resource for interference in the game by others. Further,
any lack of visible embodiment is often compensated for by
the player, providing additional cues to their audience to
account for and explain their actions. All of these findings
point to the importance of embodiment both for players to
work out how to use their minds as body, and for bodily
action to be used as a resource for social engagement.
These findings point also to ways in which we might extend
the design space for these kinds of games. For example, we
have seen ways in which players used bodily action
(postures, gestures, orientation and stillness) as a set of
strategies to control brain state and interaction with the
system. This suggests that players might be encouraged to
explore various physical strategies to impact their
interaction in the game. More interestingly, there might be
ways in which BCI might be used in combination in
interesting and novel ways with new physical interaction
paradigms such as the whole-body interaction. An
important consideration here is to understand when the
physical demands of other interaction modalities might
facilitate BCI versus when they interfere. Facilitation may
be a focus for efficient interaction, whereas interference
might be a focus for game-like challenging interaction.
We have seen too the importance of bodily action arising
from the lack of visibility, with this technology, of
interaction manipulations [27] (namely brain state) and the
loose coupling between intentionality and interaction effects
[27] (namely the ball rising). While this can lead to
difficulties in interpretation by other social actors present,
efforts are made through physical gestures and
verbalisations to make these intentions visible to and
interpretable by others. This has implications for thinking

about how such technologies can be enjoyed in social
contexts as an understandable spectacle. But there are
pointers here too for thinking about how these interaction
mechanisms might work within more explicit collaborative
contexts where coordination and collaboration are the
desired design goals. Further, within competitive contexts,
this particular relationship between invisible interaction
manipulations and visible effects could be exploited in
design to interesting effect by enabling things such as
surprise and deception for example.
The BCI game too had further consequences in the context
of social game play. For example, bodily actions were used
to performative effect to make the game more visibly
interesting to watch. These kinds of actions in relation to
the game can play an important role in the success of these
games in a social context and therefore in their successful
adoption. What was also revealed was the delicacy of these
interaction mechanisms in terms of how the audience
evaluated them, sometimes leading to deliberate attempts at
distraction. While this points to some pragmatic concerns
for BCI as a control mechanism, what is important in the
context of game play is that such interventions are socially
mediated and are an important channel through which
particular social relationships are played out – both through
affectionate teasing or moral support. The playing out of
social relationships between player and audience was
enabled too through because of the generalised control
mechanism of concentration/relaxation. This lends a sense
of ambiguity to the game that makes player and system
performance open to interpretation [9]. This possibility for
interpretation is an important resource that can be used by
player and audience alike to create social meaning and to
playfully nurture social relationships. These important
sources of engagement may not be so possible with more
explicit BCI commands that are less open to interpretation.
CONCLUSION

In conducting our real world study of BCI gaming in a
social context, we have explored a complementary set of
issues to those being addressed in existing BCI research. In
particular, when we consider BCI in such social contexts,
we hope to have shown the importance of reinstating the
social organisation of bodily and mindful behaviour in our
understanding and analysis of these technologies. Given the
potential for bodily movement to both facilitate and inhibit
BCI control [21, 24], understanding the circumstances of
this action has consequences for thinking about the
application of BCI design in these contexts. As Nijholt et al
[24] argue, shortcomings and idiosyncratic characteristics
of BCI can be incorporated into game challenges by design.
But our concerns are not simply with the direct impacts on
BCI control. Rather, we have also highlighted the work
done to make internal brain states and any intentionality
visible and interpretable by others present, through actions,
gestures, expressions and utterances. This is important for
how social meaning is created and how social relationships
are played out for both players and audiences.

REFERENCES

1. Allison, B and Graimann, C. (2008). Why Use a BCI if
you’re Healthy? IEEE Intelligent Systems, 23(3), 76-78.
2. Birbaumer, N., Hinterberger, T., Kübler, A., Neumann,
N., (2003), The Thought-Translation Device (TTD):
Neurobehavioral Mechanisms and Clinical Outcome,
IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and
Rehabilitation Engineering, Vol. 11(2), June 2003.
3. Button, G. and Harper, R.H.R (1996) The Relevance of
‘Work-Practice’ for Design. In Journal of CSCW, 4.
4. Caillois, R. (1958) Man, Play and Games. University of
Illinois Press, Urbana and Chicago, 1958.
5. Cutrell, E., and Tan, D. (2008) BCI for Passive Input in
HCI. In Proceedings of CHI ’08. Florence, Italy.
6. Dourish, P. (2001) Where the Action Is: The
Foundations of Embodied Interaction. MIT Press,
Cambridge.
7. Fairclough, S. (2008) BCI and Physiological Computing
for Computer Games: Differences, Similarities &
Intuitive Control. In Proceedings of CHI ’08, Florence.
8. Garfinkel H (1967) Studies in Ethnomethodology.
Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
9. Gaver, W., Beaver, J. and Benford, S. (2003) Ambiguity
as a Resource for Design. In Proceedings of CHI ’03,
Fort Lauderdale, FL
10. Girouard, A. (2009). Adaptive brain--computer
interface. In Proc. CHI ’09 Ext Abstracts, Boston, MA.
11. Heath, C. and Luff, P. 2000. Technology in Action.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
12. Hjelm, S. I. & Browall, C. (2000) Brainball - using
brain activity for cool competition. In Proceedings of.
NordiCHI, 2000, Stockholm, Sweden.
13. Hjelm, S. (2003) Research + design: the making of
Brainball. Interactions 10(1), 26-34.
14. Kendon, A. (1990) Spatial Organization in Social
Encounters: the F-formation System. A. Kendon, A.
(Ed) Conducting Interaction: Patterns of Behavior in
Focused Encounters, Cambridge University Press,
(1990), 209-237.
15. Krepki, R., Blankertz, B., Curio, B., and Muller, K.
(2007) The Berlin Brain-Computer Interface (BBCI):
Towards a New Communication Channel for Online
Control in Gaming Applications. In J. Multimedia Tools
and Applications, vol. 33, no. 1, 2007, pp. 73-90.
16. Lalor, E. C. & Kelly, S. P. & Finucane, C. & et al.
(2005) Steady-State VEP-Based Brain-Computer
Interface Control in an Immersive 3D Gaming
Environment. In Journal on Applied Signal Processing,
19, 3156-3164.
17. Lécuyer, A. & Lotte, F. & Reilly, R. B. & Leeb, R. &
Hirose, M. & Slater, M. (2008) Brain-Computer
Interfaces, Virtual Reality, and Videogames. Computer
41(10), 66-72.
18. Lee, J., & Tan, D. S. (2006) Using low-cost
electroencephalograph for task classification in HCI
research. In Proceedings of UIST 2006, 81-90.

19. Leeb, R., Lee, F., Keinrath, C., Scherer, R., Bischof, H.,
and Pfurtscheller, G. (2007) Brain-Computer
Communication: Motivation, Aim and Impact of
Exploring a Virtual Apartment. In IEEE Trans. Neural
Systems and Rehabilitation Eng., 15, pp. 473-482.
20. Lotte, F. & Renard, Y. & Lécuyer & A. (2008). Selfpaced Brain-Computer Interaction with Virtual Worlds:
a Quantitative and Qualitative Study "Out of the Lab".
In 4th International Brain-Computer Interface
Workshop and Training Course, 373-378.
21. Lotte, F. J. Fujisawa, J., Touyama, H., Ito, R., M.
Hirose, M. and Lécuyer, A. (2009) Towards
Ambulatory Brain-Computer Interfaces: A Pilot Study
with P300 Signals. In Proceedings of ACE ’09.
22. Nijholt, A. & Tan, D. (2007). Playing with your brain:
brain-computer interfaces and games. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on Advances in Computer
Entertainment Technology.
23. Nijholt, A. & Tan, D. (2008). Brain-Computer
Interfacing for Intelligent Systems. In IEEE Intelligent
Systems, 23 (3).
24. Nijholt, A., Plass-Oude Bos, D. and Reuderink, B.
(2009) Turning Shortcomings into Challenges: BrainComputer Interfaces for Games. In Entertainment
Computing (1), pp 85-94.
25. Obermaier, B., Müller, G., and Pfurtscheller, G. (2003)
Virtual keyboard controlled by spontaneous EEG
activity. In IEEE Trans. Neural. Syst. Rehab. Eng.
11(4).
26. Rebsamen, B., Burdet, E., Guan, C., Zhang, H., Teo, C.
L., Zeng, Q., Laugier, C., and Ang Jr., M. H. (2007)
Controlling a Wheelchair Indoors Using Thought. IEEE
Intelligent Systems 22, 2 (Mar. 2007), 18-24.
27. Reeves et al (2005) Designing the Spectator Experience.
In Proceedings of CHI ’05, Portland OR, USA.
28. Robertson, T. (1997) Cooperative Work and Lived
Cognition: A Taxonomy of Embodied Actions. In
Proceedings of ECSCW ’97, Lancaster, UK.
29. Salen, K., and Zimmerman, E. (2004) Rules of Play.
London: MIT Press.
30. Suchman, L. (1987) Plans and Situated Actions: The
Problem of Human-Machine Communication.
Cambridge University Press, New York.
31. Sutton-Smith, B. (2001) The Ambiguity of Play. Harvard
University Press.
32. Voida, A. and Greenberg, S. (2009) Wii all play: The
console game as a computational meeting place. In
Proceedings of CHI ’09, Boston, MA.
33. Wolpaw, J.R. (2007). Brain Computer Interfaces for
Communication and Control. ASSETS’07, AZ, USA.
34. Yuksel, B. F., Donnerer, M., Tompkin, J. and Steed, A.
(2010) A novel brain-computer interface using a multitouch surface. In Proceedings of CHI ’10, Atlanta, GA.

