An Implementation of Affective Adaptation in
Survival Horror Games
Vanus Vachiratamporn, Koichi Moriyama, Ken-ichi Fukui, and Masayuki Numao
The Institute of Scientific and Industrial Research
Osaka University, Osaka, Japan
Tel.: +81-6-6879-8426
Fax: +81-6-6879-8428
Email: {vanus, koichi, fukui, numao}@ai.sanken.osaka-u.ac.jp
Abstract—In this research, we investigated two important aspects of affective gaming, which are the recognition of the player’s
affective states and the adaptation of the game based on the
player’s current affective state, by using survival horror games as
an experimental environment. In the previous work, we analyzed
the affective states of players collected through our own affect
annotation tool during their gameplay and constructed affectivestate prediction models that predicted their affective states from
their brainwave and heart rate signals collected concurrently. In
this work, we developed an affective survival horror game based
on the previous findings and conducted another experiment to
compare between affective and non-affective versions of the game.
In the affective version, the timing of horror events were implicitly
changed based on the player’s affective state. The result showed
that the implicit change of timing made no significant difference
in the evaluation of the players, but the game itself shows good
potential for future research in the affective gaming field.

I.

I NTRODUCTION

The concept of affective gaming refers to the form of
gameplay where the player’s current affective state is used to
manipulate gameplay [1]. Two main components are necessary
for developing an affective game, i.e., emotion recognition and
affective adaptation [2]. Most researchers in game research
study, however, only work on one component at a time. For
example, some researchers worked on recognizing emotion
with no implementation on the game [3]–[5], whereas other
researchers made use of physiological signals to manipulate
the game parameters directly without an awareness of emotion
of the player [6], [7]. In order to bridge the gap between the
two components and develop the complete affective gaming
system, the emotion model related to the game context has to
be identified and the game has to be able to recognize emotion
of the player in real-time.
We choose the survival horror game genre as the game
environment because it has an interesting and unique emotion
set. Survival horror is loosely defined as an action-adventure
game with horror-themed atmosphere and story. Most research
on survival horror games tried to find a way to elicit more
fear intensity from players [8]–[10]. However, as far as our
knowledge is concerned, there is no research that tries to work
on recognizing horror-related emotion before, even though
knowing emotion of the player in real-time could benefit the
game on how it can twist the gameplay to scare the player
much more.
In the previous work [11], [12], we collected the affective

978-1-4799-3547-5/14/1.00 ©2014 IEEE

states of players playing a survival horror game through
our own affect annotation tool and constructed affective-state
prediction models that predicted their affective states from their
brainwave and heart rate signals collected concurrently.
Based on the findings of the previous work, this work
developed an affective survival horror game using the affectivestate prediction model for real-time affective state recognition.
This game adjusts itself in the way that it will scare players
the most. We conducted an experiment to compare between
affective and non-affective versions of the game.
This paper consists of five sections. Section II reviews
several existing relevant works. Section III shows our previous
work that analyzed the affective states of players playing a
survival horror game. Section IV is the main contribution of
this paper that introduces the affective survival horror game
we developed and shows the result of the experiment we
conducted to compare between affective and non-affective
versions. Finally, Section V concludes this paper.
II.

R ELATED W ORK

In this section, we review several existing works related to
the measurement of gameplay experience and the adaptation
of games using physiological sensors.
A. Measuring Gameplay Experience
Several researchers have been trying to measure the gameplay experience of players, which is normally derived from
self-report questionnaires using various tools and methods.
Nacke and Lindley [3] created three separate levels of a
first-person shooter (FPS) game designed to assess boredom,
immersion, and flow experiences. They used game experience
questionnaires (GEQ) for subjective measurement of various
gaming experiences (e.g., immersion, flow, challenge, and
tension) and used facial electromyography (EMG) and galvanic
skin responses (GSR, also known as skin conductance) for
objective valence and arousal measures, respectively. They
showed that the responses from EMG and GSR were significantly different over the three levels, whereas GEQ had significant differences only on challenge and tension. Drachen et al.
[13] collected heart rate (HR), GSR, and GEQ of players across
three different FPS games. They showed that (i) a high HR was
indicative of tensed and frustrated emotions; (ii) a low HR
was indicative of positive affect, flow, feeling of competence,
immersion and low levels of challenge; and (iii) GSR was

correlated to negative affect. Similarly, Martinez et al. [4] also
made use of HR and GSR features to predict reported affective
states across two dissimilar games (predator/prey and racing
games) with artificial neural network models. They showed
that the affective models trained on one game could predict
the reported affective states of the other game and suggested
using the average HR and the two-step GSR variation for
affect prediction. Jennett et al. [14] investigated immersion of
players in games and whether immersion could be measured
quantitatively through a series of experiments. Their overall
findings showed that it could be measured subjectively by
questionnaires and objectively by completion time and eye
movements, and also that it could happen even when the
players were in negative emotions.
Self-report questionnaires at the end of a session can only
assess the affect of players over a whole game experience.
For the questionnaires, the game has to be limited to a short
duration because the player has to remember his/her affective
experience. Furthermore, only one specific emotion can be effectively assessed at a time. For example, as mentioned above,
Nacke and Lindley [3] needed three game levels for assessing
boredom, immersion, and flow experience. These constraints
do not sit well with the dynamic nature of interactive gaming
experience.
There are only a few researchers who are interested in
modeling emotions of players continuously throughout the
game. Mandryk and Atkins [5] used a fuzzy logic model to
transform physiological data (HR, GSR, and EMG) to the
arousal-valence space and then to the game-related emotions
while the player was playing the game. The fuzzy rules were
created based on the psychophysiological findings in which
arousal is correlated to GSR and HR and valence is correlated
to EMG and HR, and the model was then compared with
the subjective reports. With the continuous measurement of
emotions in real-time, the transition of affect caused by game
elements (e.g., sound and images) can be analyzed individually.
More importantly, it opens up the possibility of adapting those
elements in real-time based on the player’s current affective
state.
B. Real-time Game Adaptation Using Physiological Sensors
As well as using physiological sensors to assess the gameplay experience of players, some researchers are interested in
using the sensors to adapt the game. Kuikkaniemi et al. [6]
investigated the influence of explicit and implicit biofeedback
mechanisms on the experience of playing an FPS game. In
the explicit biofeedback case, the player was informed that
his/her current physiological state directly influenced the game.
In the implicit biofeedback case, on the other hand, the
player did not know that the game was influenced by his/her
physiological states. They showed that, by explicitly informing
the players how their GSR and respiration changed parameters
of the game, they were more immersed and positively affected.
Similar study was done by Nacke et al. [7] where physiological
sensor inputs were used to augment traditional game control directly (EMG, respiration, temperature, and gaze) and indirectly
(electrocardiography (EKG) and GSR). They showed that the
participants preferred the direct physiological control over the
indirect control, and suggested that the direct physiological
control should be mapped to intuitive actions in the game

while the indirect physiological control should be used as a
“dramatic” device that alters the game world.
III.

I NVESTIGATION ON P LAYER A FFECT

We need to first identify what kind of emotions players feel
while they are playing survival horror games. Different games
contain different sets of emotions and the target emotion to
which the games want to lead the players might be different
as well. For example, eliciting intense fear from players is
the main entertainment factor of survival horror games. In
this section, we review our previous work [11], [12] in which
we analyzed the affective states of players playing a survival
horror game and constructed affective-state prediction models
that predict their affective states from electroencephalography
(EEG) and EKG collected concurrently.
A. Survival Horror Affect Model
Our survival horror affect model is based on the fear
framework of Garner and Grimshaw [15] and the definition of
anxiety, suspense, and fear by Toprac and Meguid [10]. In a
game context, these three emotions can be distinguished by the
interaction and concreteness of how a threat is perceived. Prior
to the confrontation with a threat, the player feels “anxiety” if
he/she thinks that the threat is near or is going to appear soon
but does not know or cannot imagine how it is going to come
out. The player is in “suspense” if he has a strong feeling
that the threat is going to appear soon. On the other hand,
“fear” is an emotional response to the threat or an attempt
to cope with the situation after the confrontation. Figure 1
shows the affect model that we used for defining the affective
state of players while they are playing a survival horror game.
The affects are separated into two groups, pre-fear affects
and post-fear affects. Anxiety and suspense belong to the
pre-fear affects as they are the affective states before the
confrontation. We consider one more state called “neutral” in
the pre-fear affects, which covers the case where the player
has no feeling of uncertainty towards the threat at all. After
the confrontation, the player transitions to the post-fear affects
which are categorized as three levels of fear experienced, i.e.,
low, medium, and high. After the player is able to escape from
the threat, he/she will transition back to the pre-fear affects
and anticipate the new confrontation. Note that the player may
fluctuate among the pre-fear affects before the confrontation
and among the post-fear affects after the confrontation.
LowFear

Neutral

Engage

PreFear
Anxiety

Fig. 1.

Disengage
Suspense

PostFear
MidFear

HighFear

Survival Horror Affect Model

B. Constructing Affective-State Prediction Model
We developed an affect annotation tool (AAT) where
the participant can annotate his/her affect continuously by

watching his/her recorded gameplay and facial expression
simultaneously (see Fig. 2). EEG, EKG, and keyboard-mouse
activities (KMA) were collected while the participant was
playing a survival horror game. EEG is the recording of
electrical activities of the brain and we used the Emotiv
EPOC1 , which is a high resolution and wireless portable EEG
system, for recording EEG data. EKG measures the electrical
activities generated by the heart. We recorded the EKG signals
with the Procomp5 Infiniti encoder and EKG-Flex/Pro sensor2
by attaching three electrodes on the participant’s chest and
abdomen.

C. Transition Likelihood
With the continuous self-reported affective states collected
with AAT, we can investigate how the affective states of the
participants transitioned from a pre-fear affect to a post-fear
one. As the objective of survival horror games is to elicit the
highest fear from players, knowing when the players are likely
to transition into high-fear state can be good information for
designing the affective adaptation.
To measure the likelihood of transition from a pre-fear
affect to a post-fear one, we used the transition likelihood
function introduced by D’Mello et al. [17]. The likelihood
function, presented in Eq. 1, serves as a better measurement
than probability because it takes the base rate of transition into
account. All pairs of affect transitions from a pre-fear affect
Fpre to a post-fear affect Fpost are counted and used to compute
the transition likelihood,
L(Fpre → Fpost ) =

Fig. 2. Screenshot of our affect annotation tool (AAT) [12]. The left screen
shows the recorded gameplay video and the right screen shows the video
of facial expression of the participant at that moment. In this screenshot,
unfortunately, the gameplay video is not shown well because it is dark.
After the gameplay, the participant watches them simultaneously and indicates
his/her affective states at that time by using the bars below the screens.

The game we used is “Slender: The Eight Pages (STEP)3 ”.
In STEP, the player is situated in the woods in the night and
has to collect eight pages of paper scattered around the woods,
while being pursued by a threat called “Slender Man”. As
each page is collected, the Slender Man will pursue faster and
teleport more frequently. The game ends when the Slender
Man comes in contact with the player or when the player’s
sanity drops to zero by looking at the Slender Man for too
long.
Eleven participants took part in this experiment. Since
STEP has a very short play time and unpredictable scary
events, the participants can play the game multiple times while
still getting scared. Each participant repeated a gameplay and
annotation for three times, thereby providing us with three sets
of data per participant.
Using the collected affective states with AAT, we constructed prediction models that predict the pre-fear and postfear affects from EEG, EKG, and KMA, respectively. Ten-fold
cross validation, which is a usual method to evaluate classifiers
in machine learning, showed that the prediction model trained
from EKG features with C4.5 decision tree [16] obtained the
best result; the f-measure values were 0.92 for pre-fear affects
and 0.85 for post-fear ones. The used features for this model
were HR, inter-beat interval (IBI), the mean of HR in 20
seconds with 1-second sliding windows (µHR ), the standard
deviation of IBI in 20 seconds with 1-second sliding windows
(σIBI ), and the total number of interval differences of successive
heart beats greater than 50 milliseconds (NN50), which are all
calculated from the EKG signal.
1 http://www.emotiv.com/
2 http://www.thoughttechnology.com/
3 http://parsecproductions.com/slender/

Pr(Fpost |Fpre ) − Pr(Fpost )
1 − Pr(Fpost )

(1)

where Fpre is neutral, anxiety, or suspense and Fpost is low-fear,
mid-fear, or high-fear. Pr(Fpost ) is the transition probability
from any Fpre to the Fpost and Pr(Fpost |Fpre ) is the conditional
probability of transition from the Fpre to the Fpost . Transition
likelihood L returns a value ranging from −∞ to 1 where L > 0
indicates a likely transition with increasing likelihood as it
approaches to 1, L = 0 indicates that the transition is equal to
chance, and L < 0 means that the transition is less likely to
occur compared to the base rate of transition into the Fpost .
Table I shows the result of transition likelihood values for
each pair between Fpre and Fpost with the positive transition
likelihood values highlighted. It indicates that the participants
were likely to transition into high-fear if they confronted with
the threat while experiencing suspense.
TABLE I.

T RANSITION LIKELIHOOD FROM A PRE - FEAR AFFECT TO
POST- FEAR ONE [11]
Fpre \Fpost

Low-Fear

Mid-Fear

High-Fear

Neutral

0.06

0.22

−0.26

Anxiety

0.09

0.10

−0.16

Suspense

−0.05

−0.12

0.14

A

This result suggests that keeping players in suspense beforehand is the best way to maximize the effectiveness of
producing a scary event. This result also supports Perron’s
study [18] that showed many successful examples of forewarning techniques used in horror movies and horror games.
It suggests that long anticipation of a harmful confrontation
(i.e., suspense) is more disturbing than short anticipation (i.e.,
surprise).
IV.

A FFECTIVE S URVIVAL H ORROR G AME
D EVELOPMENT

As mentioned above, keeping players in suspense beforehand is the best way to maximize the scariness of a scary
event. In the case of affective survival horror games, the prefear affect can be used as an input so that the game will
detect if the previous forewarning technique was enough to
keep the player in suspense. If not, the game can delay the
scary event and make use of other game elements such as

sound and a distorted vision to try to elicit suspense before
actually showing the scary event to the player.
In this work, we developed a new game named “Slender
Affect” (SA) using the Unity4 game engine (Version 4.1.2f1).
It is a STEP-like game, but we did not use STEP itself because
we did not have a control over the game and could not make
any modification we needed. We set two goals for this game
development, which were
•

To create a STEP-inspired game that is adaptable,
more simple, and shorter while keeping the same level
of enjoyment and scariness as the original game, and

•

To compare affective and non-affective versions of the
game.

As shown in the previous section, our previous work [11],
[12] indicated that the prediction model trained from EKG
features with C4.5 decision tree was the best. Therefore, in
this work, we use EKG signals and the model to predict the
affective states of the player and control the game.

is detected. Therefore, we constructed the prediction model
again using only long-time features, i.e., µHR and σIBI , with
C4.5 decision tree as a classifier. Ten-fold cross validation,
again, showed that the f-measure values become 0.86 for prefear affects (reduced from 0.92) and 0.75 for post-fear affects
(reduced from 0.85).
B. Game Design
Most of the STEP design concept still remains. However,
we aimed to reduce the difficulty of the game so that it is
easier for non-gamers to collect more pages. In the previous
experiment, we found a problem that many players spent a lot
of time walking randomly while they could not find or found
only few pages, which consequently reduced the chance of
encountering with the Slender Man. Hence, the map of SA
was designed in a way that eight pages of paper are placed on
eight areas instead of placed randomly on ten areas in STEP,
and that the first page can be found easily at the start of the
game. Figure 4 shows the map of SA.
2nd play

We first introduce the overall process from EKG signals to
affective-state prediction and game control. Then, we introduce
SA and its implementation policies that make the game more
friendly for players who are not familiar with games, and
introduce two versions of SA; one is the affective version and
the other is the non-affective version. Finally, we explain the
experiment we conducted and show its result.

3rd play

A. Overall Process
Figure 3 summarizes the overall process of collecting and
predicting the affective states of the player in real-time. From
EKG sensors attached to the participant, EKG raw signals
are delivered to the feature extraction method. The feature
extraction method outputs EKG features that are used in
the prediction method. The prediction method uses the EKG
features and the prediction model constructed from the data
of the previous experiment. In the previous experiment, the
features were normalized by the minimum and maximum
values of the entire session that are not known in advance.
Therefore, we gradually update the minimum and maximum
values for the normalization. Finally, the predicted affective
states are used for game control. The overall process has to be
done in real-time.
EKG Features

EKG Sensor

EKG Raw Signals

Feature
Extraction

Prediction Model

Game
Control

Prediction

Predicted Affects

4th play

1st play

Fig. 4. The map of Slender Affect. Triangles indicate the start points of each
gameplay and circles indicate the positions where the pages are placed.

The Slender Man is controlled by a simple rule-based
system. Main inputs to the system are the distance between
the Slender Man and the player, and the visibility of the
Slender Man. The distance is divided into three ranges: pursuit,
damage, and capture. The basic rules of the Slender Man are
as follows:
•

The Slender Man roams randomly if the player is out
of the pursuit range.

•

The Slender Man will move straight to the player
direction if in the pursuit range. The player hears
stomping sound with probability 0.5.

•

If the player is in the damage range, the player’s sanity
will start decreasing. The player can know it because
static noise is shown up on the screen and becomes
stronger as the sanity level decreases.

•

If the player is in the capture range or the player’s
sanity drops down to zero, the player loses the game.

Fig. 3. The overall process for predicting the affective states of the player
and using them for game control in real-time.

However, unfortunately, due to the restriction of the EKG
device we used on extracting EKG features in real-time, we
were not able to use HR, IBI, and NN50 for real-time prediction, which have to be calculated every time a new heart beat
4 http://unity3d.com/

•

If the player is facing to the Slender Man, which is the
scary event of this game, the Slender Man will stop
moving, but the player’s sanity will start decreasing.

•

The Slender Man can teleport to the player if the
player is not looking at it.

The teleportation is the key event of SA. There are three
types of it.
•

The Slender Man appears in front of the player after
static noise covers the screen for 0.2 seconds (called
a forced scary event or FSE). FSE really occurs only
when the player’s sanity is full.

•

The Slender Man changes its position randomly behind the player after static noise covers the screen for
0.2 seconds (called a fake scary event or FKSE).

•

The Slender Man changes its position randomly behind the player without noise (called simple teleportation or ST).

Two versions of the game, affective and non-affective
ones, were created. The difference is mainly in the rules of
teleportation. In both versions, teleportation is triggered when
the player collects a page (except for the first one) or 60 − 7n
seconds elapses since the previous trigger, where n is the
number of collected pages. In the non-affective version, the
teleportation rules are as follows:

the affective version, the game elements that create tension
will be activated when the player is continuously in neutral
for 38.5 − 2.5n seconds. They are the flashlight blackout, static
noise, stomping sound, and FKSE, which are randomly chosen.
The rules and parameters described above were based on
the results of preliminary experiments with three players who
were out of the experiment. Also, the preliminary experiments
showed that the flow of the game was destroyed (e.g., FSE
happened too much frequently) if the game was controlled by
the EKG features collected every second as in the previous
work. Therefore, we changed the frequency of EKG feature
collection to every 5 seconds in the experiment.
C. Experiment Procedure
The main objective of this experiment is to compare how
much fear and fun the players felt while they are playing the
affective and non-affective versions of SA. With the record of
affective states of the players and game event logs, we can
investigate the transition likelihood of affective states caused
by each game element as well.

•

When triggered, FSE, FKSE, and ST are chosen with
probability 0.3, 0.1, and 0.6, respectively.

First we set up the tools used for collecting data. The EKG
sensor position image will be shown to the participant and
he/she has to attach the sensor on his/her body according to
the image. There is a chance that EKG sensors are not placed
properly and the signal might not be clear enough for detecting
the participant’s heart beats. So, we first test capturing EKG
signals and see whether HR can be calculated or not. If not,
we need to inform the participant to adjust the placement of
EKG sensors and perform the test again.

•

When the player is turning to the Slender Man, ST
occurs with probability 0.15.

After the sensor is attached properly, we inform the participant that

In the affective version, on the other hand, the rules are as
follows:
•

•

•

When triggered, FSE is chosen if the player is in
suspense. If he/she is in anxiety, FKSE and ST are
chosen with equal probability. If in neutral, FKSE
and ST are chosen with probability 0.25 and 0.75,
respectively.
In addition, after the first page is collected or 4
minutes elapses since start, FSE is forcibly triggered
if the player is continuously in suspense for 8 − 0.6n
seconds. If he/she saw the Slender Man in the latest
30 seconds, however, this duration is doubled.
When the player is turning to the Slender Man, ST
occurs if he/she is in neutral. That is, the player does
not see the Slender Man at all when in neutral.

In summary, based on the findings in the previous experiment,
the affective version makes use of the player’s affective state
to delay the scary event when the player is in neutral, and
force the scary event when the player is in suspense.
We remove the ability to turn on/off flashlight from STEP
so players do not have to worry about the battery of flashlight and the control becomes more simple. Instead, we add
flashlight malfunctions, i.e., flickering for 15 seconds and
blackout for 8–15 seconds. These malfunctions are activated
every 60 seconds with probability 0.33 each. In addition, in

•

he/she has to play a survival horror game while his/her
heart rate signal, facial expression, and gameplay
video are being recorded,

•

the game will start with a tutorial stage where he/she
can learn the basic control of the game,

•

after the tutorial stage, he/she has to play the game
for 4 times,

•

before each game starts, he/she needs to sit back and
rest for 2 minutes,

•

a couple of questions will be shown up on the screen
between each game, which he/she has to answer by
pressing the number on the keyboard, and

•

while playing the game, he/she should not move
his/her body if not necessary.

On the other hand, we do not tell the participant
•

how we use his/her heart rate signal,

•

that there are affective and non-affective versions of
the game, and

•

which questions are going to be asked between the
games and after the whole session.

When the participant does not have any more questions and
is ready to play the game, we run the game and start the overall

process of Fig. 3 that will send the participant’s affective state
to the game in real-time. The game starts with the tutorial
stage. The main objective of the tutorial stage is to teach the
participant how to control using keyboard and mouse and to
give him/her a chance to try out the actual control in the real
setting while keeping him/her from seeing the actual game
that he/she is going to play. Another objective is to tell the
background story of the game. This part is necessary to raise
the participant’s anticipation toward the scary things in the
game and to cause every participant to have the same feeling
before playing the actual game. At the end of the tutorial stage,
the participant has to answer two questions asking
•

how much experience the participant has in FPS
game control (no experience, tried but not familiar,
or familiar), and

•

whether the participant likes horror movies/games (no,
neutral, or yes).

After finishing the tutorial stage, the participant goes to
the series of rest, play, and evaluation for 4 times. Before
starting each game, the participant has to sit back and rest
for 2 minutes. The feature extraction method starts recording
the minimum and maximum values of µHR and σIBI during the
rest period and the recorded values are used for normalization
throughout the game. The participant plays the affective (A)
version twice and the non-affective (N) version twice. We
predefined two play orders for this experiment, NAAN and
ANNA, one of which is chosen randomly for each participant.
The order was predefined so that each participant plays both
NA and AN pair and the random order was used to reduce
the order effect. Whether the participant won or lost the game,
he/she has to rate the fun, fear, and difficulty of that game
with a 5-point scale from least to most. After finishing all
the 4 games, the participant also has to rate the overall fear,
fun, and difficulty of the games in the post-questionnaire
with the 5-point scale. We also ask the participant if he/she
recognized any different settings among the 4 games and if
he/she recognized anything that changed or reacted to his/her
emotions.
D. Participants
Twelve participants (eleven males and one female) aged
between 22 and 36 years old (mean = 25.42, SD = 3.75)
took part in the main experiment. Six of them are Thai, four
are Japanese, one is Filipino, and the last one is Korean.
There was one participant who considered himself as a gamer,
four participants were not, and seven participants considered
themselves as casual gamers. Six participants did not like
horror movies nor games, four participants felt neutral, and two
participants liked to watch horror movies and/or play horror
games. There were four participants who did not know the FPS
type controls and four participants who knew the controls but
were not familiar with them. There were two participants who
had played STEP before and other two participants who knew
STEP but had not played it before. Six participants played in
the NAAN order and the other six played in the ANNA order.
E. Results
From the post-questionnaire, the average of overall fear
ratings was 4.33 (SD = 0.65) and the average of overall fun

ratings was 3.5 (SD = 0.91). When comparing the values
with the previous experiment, overall fear ratings of SA
were significantly higher than overall fear ratings of STEP
(p < 0.05) while there was no statistical difference between
overall fun ratings. From the individual gameplay ratings at
intermission, the average of fear ratings was 3.65 (SD = 1.00)
and the average of fun ratings was 3.52 (SD = 1.01), similar
to the previous experiment in which fear ratings were higher
than fun ratings. These results show that SA has comparable
enjoyment and scariness levels with STEP.
Next we look into each gameplay separately. There was
one gameplay in which the participant did not get any pages
and headed toward the Slender Man because the participant
did not want to play anymore. We remove that pair of the
gameplay out (both affective and non-affective), so there are
23 affective gameplays and 23 non-affective gameplays in
total. Table II shows the average and standard deviation of
fear, fun, and difficulty ratings, the number of collected pages,
and the duration in seconds of individual gameplays, with
respect to the repetition of play. There are no significant
differences in the ratings. Although some participants stated
that they felt less fear in the latter plays, repeating the game
was not the main factor that influenced the ratings as the
result shows that the average fear rating went up at the fourth
gameplay. The increasing number of collected pages indicates
the improvement of skills owing to the repetition of gameplay.
TABLE II.
AVERAGE AND STANDARD DEVIATION OF THE RATINGS ,
THE NUMBER OF COLLECTED PAGES , AND THE DURATION OF INDIVIDUAL
GAMEPLAYS , WITH RESPECT TO THE REPETITION OF PLAY.
Play

Fear

Fun

Difficulty

Pages

Duration (s)

1st

3.42 (0.90)

3.33 (0.89)

3.67 (0.99)

3.08 (1.88)

433 (349)

2nd

3.92 (0.79)

3.5 (1.17)

4.17 (0.84)

3.25 (2.09)

340 (181)

3rd

3.46 (0.93)

3.82 (0.98)

4.00 (1.00)

3.81 (1.54)

348 (206)

4th

3.82 (1.33)

3.46 (1.04)

4.18 (0.75)

4.27 (1.42)

452 (235)

As the repetition of gameplay did not show any significant
differences, we divided the results by the version (Table III).
Overall, the participants spent more time and collected more
pages in the non-affective version, and they rated the version
with higher fear, fun, and difficulty. Although the differences
are not significant, these results indicate that there might be
some balance issues between the two versions that influenced
the participants to collect more pages and have longer play
time on the non-affective version. The number of FSEs the
game activated can be a good indicator of this issue because
FSE increases the chance that the player is captured. The
average numbers of FSEs activated per gameplay in the
affective and non-affective games were 2.63 (SD = 2.09) and
2.25 (SD = 1.32), respectively. This shows the unbalance of
FSE activation between the two versions, which might shorten
the play time in the affective version.
Another issue we found on the game is that none of the
participants noticed that there were two different versions of
the game. It was our design choices that we did not make
the explicit differences between the two versions because we
wanted the participants to play and evaluate the game with
no bias. However, the different timing of scary events might

TABLE III.
AVERAGE AND STANDARD DEVIATION OF THE RATINGS ,
THE NUMBER OF COLLECTED PAGES , AND THE DURATION OF INDIVIDUAL
GAMEPLAYS , WITH RESPECT TO THE VERSION .
Version

Fear

Fun

Difficulty

Pages

Affective

3.50 (0.96)

3.36 (0.85)

3.96 (1.00)

3.29 (1.73)

361 (283)

3.91 (0.97)

3.82 (1.05)

4.13 (0.80)

3.67 (1.93)

413 (208)

not have as enough impact on the overall evaluation of each
gameplay as we assumed.
Next we looked into the transition likelihood of the affective states of the participants in the non-affective game.
We recorded pre-fear and post-fear affects of the participants, which were obtained from their EKG features with
the affective-state model, before and after each game element
was shown. Then, we used the data to calculate the transition
likelihood using Eq. 1. Table IV shows the transition likelihood
of FSE that is the controllable scary event trigger and causes
the transition from a pre-fear affect to a post-fear one. The
result shows that
•

To mid-fear, neutral and anxiety had the positive
transition likelihood,

•

To high-fear, only suspense had the positive transition
likelihood, and

•

To low-fear, suspense had the positive transition likelihood, too.

It is similar to the previous experiment (Table I) when transitioning to mid-fear and high-fear, but it is completely opposite
when transitioning to low-fear. Analyses of transition show
that the ratio of transition from neutral and anxiety to high-fear
was much higher than that in the previous experiment, whereas
that from suspense was not so different. Then, Pr(high-fear)
becomes relatively large and Pr(low-fear) becomes relatively
small. As a result, L(neutral → low-fear) and L(anxiety →
low-fear) become small whereas L(suspense → low-fear) becomes large. It is not clear why the transition from neutral and
anxiety to high-fear increased, but it may relate to the fact that
the overall fear ratings of SA were significantly higher than
those of STEP. Also, it may be due to the frequency change
of EKG feature collection, which may have deteriorated the
prediction model itself, flawed the post-fear affect detection
due to delayed prediction, and/or simply reduced available data
for the likelihood analysis.
T RANSITION LIKELIHOOD CAUSED BY FORCED SCARY
EVENTS

Fpre \Fpost
Neutral
Anxiety
Suspense

Low-Fear
−0.02
−0.18
0.33

Mid-Fear
0.02
0.21
−0.38

High-Fear
−0.00
−0.05
0.09

Table V shows the transition likelihood between pre-fear
affects when game music changed to a more intense one,
triggered after the number of collected pages became an odd
number. Mostly, the participants stayed in the same state after
the music changed.
Table VI shows the transition likelihood between pre-fear
affects when the flashlight started flickering. The participants

T RANSITION LIKELIHOOD CAUSED
Before\After
Neutral
Anxiety
Suspense

Duration (s)

Non-Affective

TABLE IV.

TABLE V.

Neutral
0.39
−0.49
−0.22

Anxiety
−0.13
0.32
−0.13

BY MUSIC EVENTS

Suspense
−0.12
−0.01
0.25

were likely to stay in the same state after the flickering
occurred. The transitions from neutral to suspense mostly
happened only on the first time flickering occurred. After the
participants figured out that the flickering did not have any
relation to the appearance of the Slender Man, they transitioned
from suspense to anxiety.
TABLE VI.

T RANSITION LIKELIHOOD CAUSED BY FLICKERING
FLASHLIGHT EVENTS

Before\After
Neutral
Anxiety
Suspense

Neutral
0.08
−0.06
−0.21

Anxiety
−0.10
0.33
0.05

Suspense
0.05
−0.29
0.08

Unfortunately, many game elements were not occurred
as often as the music and flashlight malfunctions, so it is
difficult to make any good interpretation without more data.
Nevertheless, these results show an example on how the
effectiveness of game elements can be examined individually
using the real-time affect detection tool. This information can
be later used to improve the game in various ways.
V.

C ONCLUSION

In this work, we illustrated the methodology for developing
an affective survival horror game. Based on the previous work
in which we analyzed the affective states of players with our
affect annotation tool (AAT) and constructed the affectivestate prediction model from EKG signals, we developed an
affective survival horror game named “Slender Affect (SA)”.
It is similar to “Slender: The Eight Pages (STEP)”, a famous
survival horror game in the world, and the result of experiment
shows that it has comparable enjoyment and scariness levels
with STEP.
Two versions of SA, affective and non-affective, were
constructed. The affective version uses the affective-state prediction model to predict the player’s current affective state and
uses the state to change the timing of scary events. The nonaffective version controls the scary events regardless of the
player’s affective states.
We conducted an experiment to compare between the
affective and non-affective versions of SA. Twelve participants
took part in the experiment. In the experiment, each participant
played both versions two times each and rated the fun, fear,
and difficulty of games with a 5-point scale.
The result shows that the ratings of the affective version
was less than those of the non-affective version, although
the differences were not significant. It may be because the
frequency of the scary event in the affective version was more
than that in the non-affective one and it shortened the play time
of the affective version. Also, none of the participants noticed
that the timing of scary events was controlled by their affective
states. It was from our design choices, but the different timing
of scary events might not have as enough impact on the overall
evaluation of each gameplay as we assumed.

Using SA, we can individually analyze the transition likelihood of the affective states of participants caused by a specific
game element. This information can be later used to improve
the game in various ways.
As a future work, SA itself should be improved. In particular, we have to remove the unbalance of FSE activations
between the affective and non-affective versions. Also, we
would like to analyze the result from various points of view.
For example, the result may depend on features of the participants such as gender, ethnicity, game experience, and horror
preference. In order to analyze such effects, we have to conduct
a massive experiment in which a lot of participants take part.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

This work was partly supported by JSPS Core-to-Core
Program, A. Advanced Research Networks.
R EFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

K. M. Gilleade, A. Dix, and J. Allanson, “Affective Videogames and
Modes of Affective Gaming: Assist Me, Challenge Me, Emote Me,” in
Proceedings of Digital Games Research Association 2005 Conference,
2005, pp. 547–554.
E. Hudlicka, “Affective Game Engines: Motivation and Requirements,”
in Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Foundations of
Digital Games, 2009, pp. 299–306.
L. Nacke and C. A. Lindley, “Flow and Immersion in First-Person
Shooters: Measuring the player’s gameplay experience,” in Proceedings
of the 2008 Conference on Future Play, 2008, pp. 81–88.
H. P. Martinez, M. Garbarino, and G. N. Yannakakis, “Generic Physiological Features as Predictors of Player Experience,” in Proceedings of
the 4th International Conference on Affective Computing and Intelligent
Interaction, Part I, 2011, pp. 267–276.
R. L. Mandryk and M. S. Atkins, “A fuzzy physiological approach for
continuously modeling emotion during interaction with play technologies,” International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, vol. 65, no. 4,
pp. 329–347, 2007.
K. Kuikkaniemi, T. Laitinen, M. Turpeinen, T. Saari, I. Kosunen, and
N. Ravaja, “The Influence of Implicit and Explicit Biofeedback in FirstPerson Shooter Games,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2010, pp. 859–868.

[12]

L. E. Nacke, M. Kalyn, C. Lough, and R. L. Mandryk, “Biofeedback
Game Design: Using Direct and Indirect Physiological Control to
Enhance Game Interaction,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2011, pp. 103–112.
A. Dekker and E. Champion, “Please Biofeed the Zombies: Enhancing
the Gameplay and Display of a Horror Game Using Biofeedback,” in
Proceedings of Digital Games Research Association 2007 Conference,
2007, pp. 550–558.
T. Garner, M. Grimshaw, and D. Abdel Nabi, “A Preliminary Experiment to Assess the Fear Value of Preselected Sound Parameters
in a Survival Horror Game,” in Proceedings of the 5th Audio Mostly
Conference, 2010.
P. Toprac and A. Abdel-Meguid, “Causing Fear, Suspense, and Anxiety
Using Sound Design in Computer Games,” in Game Sound Technology
and Player Interaction: Concept and Developements, M. Grimshaw, Ed.
Hershey, PA: IGI Global, 2011, pp. 176–191.
V. Vachiratamporn, R. Legaspi, K. Moriyama, and M. Numao, “Towards
the Design of Affective Survival Horror Games: An Investigation
on Player Affect,” in Proceedings of the 2013 Humaine Association
Conference on Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction, 2013,
pp. 576–581.
V. Vachiratamporn, R. Legaspi, K. Moriyama, K. Fukui, and M. Numao,
“An Analysis of Player Affect Transitions in Survival Horror Games,”
Journal on Multimodal User Interfaces, in press.

[13] A. Drachen, L. E. Nacke, G. Yannakakis, and A. L. Pedersen, “Correlation between Heart Rate, Electrodermal Activity and Player Experience
in First-Person Shooter Games,” in Proceedings of the 5th ACM
SIGGRAPH Symposium on Video Games, 2010, pp. 49–54.
[14] C. Jennett, A. L. Cox, P. Cairns, S. Dhoparee, A. Epps, T. Tijs, and
A. Walton, “Measuring and defining the experience of immersion in
games,” International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, vol. 66,
no. 9, pp. 641–661, 2008.
[15] T. Garner and M. Grimshaw, “A Climate of Fear: Considerations for
Designing a Virtual Acoustic Ecology of Fear,” in Proceedings of the
6th Audio Mostly Conference, 2011, pp. 31–38.
[16] J. R. Quinlan, C4.5: Programs for Machine Learning. San Francisco,
CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1993.
[17] S. D’Mello, R. S. Taylor, and A. Graesser, “Monitoring Affective
Trajectories during Complex Learning,” in Proceedings of the 29th
Annual Conference of Cognitive Science Society, 2007, pp. 203–208.
[18] B. Perron, “Sign of a Threat: The Effects of Warning Systems in
Survival Horror Games,” in Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Computational Semiotics, 2004.

