KÉPZÉS ÉS GYAKORLAT  2018. 16. ÉVFOLYAM 3. SZÁM

DOI: 10.17165/TP.2018.3.4

VERONIKA MAK1 – TUNDE SZECSI2 – LASZLO VARGA3
Overview of EEG Research in Early Childhood Education: An
International Perspective4
The aim of this article is to provide an understanding related to the basics of data collection
with electroencephalogram (EEG) technology in the field of early childhood education. With
today’s rise in lab research with EEG, the commercially available portable EEG machines are
being used more readily. With them it is becoming cheaper and easier to conduct research and
collect EEG recordings. A review of the literature allows for comparison between research
grade EEG technology and portable EEG technology, revealing the validity of portable EEG
research. The advantages and disadvantages of portable EEGs vs research grade EEG is
reviewed in light of research with the population of young learners.
Keywords: portable EEG, neuropedagogy, Emotiv, early childhood, electroencephalogram

Over the past several decades, the use of brain imaging technology has aided in
understanding the basic and complex working of the human brain. Nevertheless, neuroscientists
are far from a complete understanding of the developed brain (Rueda, Checa & Combita, 2012).
As technology has evolved in the field of neuroscience, portable EEG technology has made it
possible to have low-cost wireless EEG recordings. This increase in the availability of EEG
research has allowed for a variety of new topics to be researched, and new populations to be
studied (Lee & Chin, 2014). This article provides an overview of EEG technology with an
important comparison of portable EEG recordings with research grade EEG systems. Next, a
review of the current research within the field is neuropedagogy is reviewed, and the future
direction of neuropedogogical research is discussed in light of the shortcomings of existing
research.

1

M.Sc. Cognitive Neuroscience. Graduated from Eotvos Lorand University, Budapest, Hungary
Ph.D., Professor of Early Childhood Education; College of Education, Florida Gulf Coast University, Fort
Myers, FL, tszecsi@fgcu.edu
3
Habil. PhD, Associate Professor, Dean; Benedek Elek Faculty of Pedagogy, University of Sopron, Hungary,
varga.laszlo@uni-sopron.hu
4
The described article was carried out as part of the „Roadmap for Structural Changes of the University of
Sopron" - nr. 32388-2/2017 INTFIN. The Ministry of Human Capacities of the Hungarian Government
supported the realization of this project.
2

37

TRAINING AND PRACTICE  2018. VOLUME 16. ISSUE 3
What is EEG?

Electroencephalogram (EEG) technology is used to record the electrical signals emitted by
neurons as the brain’s communication system functions (Lee & Chin, 2014). The
communication process of neurons happens by electrical action potentials and chemical
neurotransmitters. The more a brain area is activated by a stimulus, the higher the electrical
activity in that area of the brain. EEG recordings provide an insight into the electrical activity
of the brain areas involved in stimulus processing. EEG recording works with an electrode cap,
with 16-128 small electrodes touching the surface of the scalp, these electrodes are connected
to an amplifier and the recorded data is digitalized. EEG recording devices are sensitive to
electrical activity; therefore research grade recording lab rooms are electronically shielded, in
order to decrease disruptive noise (Lee & Chin, 2014). The optimal recording environment for
EEG data is a silent dark room, with the participant sitting in a comfortable motionless (with
opportunity to rest and blink provided within the stimulus) position located in front of the
stimulus source, i.e. computer screen (Lee & Chin, 2014). The recorded data of EEG signals
have high temporal resolution, and low spatial resolution. Therefore, the data are able to provide
precision to the hundredth millisecond for reaction time. The spatial resolution can be improved
by increasing the number of electrodes used for recording. EEG recordings are widely used in
research, and utilized as a diagnostic tool in the case of epilepsy and other brain abnormalities
(Rueda, Checa & Combita, 2012). EEG is a technique favored by researchers in neuroscience
as well as in the medical field because it is pain-free, non-invasive, and low-cost compared to
other brain imaging techniques (Lee & Chin, 2014).
The brainwave frequencies obtained by EEG recording are classified into five signal types,
depending on the level of activity in the brain. Table 1 shows the classification of the
frequencies. Image 1 shows waves as they would appear as part of recorded EEG data.
Signal

Frequencies

Brain State

Gamma

>30Hz

Highly Active

Beta

14-30Hz

Active, Engaged

Alpha

7.5-13.5Hz

Relaxed, Meditation

Theta

3.5-7.5Hz

Light Sleep, Dreaming

Delta

<3Hz

Deep sleep, Coma

Table 1: Classification of Brainwave Frequency

38

KÉPZÉS ÉS GYAKORLAT  2018. 16. ÉVFOLYAM 3. SZÁM

Figure 1: Example of brainwave frequencies: Top to bottom:
Gamma, Beta, Alpha, Theta, Delta
Image Source: brainsync.com

The scope of interpretation of EEG data is important to consider when designing a research
project with EEG technology. EEG data are able to provide information about the general area
of brain activation in response to a stimulus, and highly specific temporal data with regards to
the speed of processing of stimuli (Lee & Chin, 2014). For example, two event-related
potentials (ERPs) which are often investigated are the P300 and N400 components. The P300
is a positive peak, approximately 300ms after the onset of a stimulus in the case of an oddball
paradigm. An oddball paradigm is a set of stimulus in which there is a strict pattern followed
with a rule break on 20% of the trials. The N400 component is a negative peak approximately
400ms post-stimulus in response to anomaly words and other meaningful stimuli such as
images, sounds and smells. Overall the frequency and the peaks of the recorded data are able
to be interpreted to understand the brain-state of the participant and the reaction to a variety of
stimuli (Lee & Chin, 2014).

Research Grade EEG Technology vs. Commercially Available Emotiv EPOC

Commercially available EEG machines are making EEG research more widespread and
accessible to smaller research labs. The portable EEG technology systems are more attainable
due to its price, wireless features and ability to use outside of a controlled lab setting (Xu &
Zhong, 2018). Studies have shown the portable EEG machines, such as those manufactured by
Emotiv Inc., can yield similar results as compared to research grade laboratory findings (Xu &
Zhong, 2018). For example, Barham, Clark, Hayden, Enticott, Conduit, and Lum (2017)
reported a comparative study of research grade EEG system compared with a modified Emotiv

39

TRAINING AND PRACTICE  2018. VOLUME 16. ISSUE 3
EPOC and the NeuroScan SynAmps RT EEG system. Overall, their findings revealed that the
low-cost wireless versions of EEG recordings were statistically similar to the N200 and P300
recoded by the research grade EEG system. It is important to note that due to the previous
concern raised for the signal-to-noise ratio, some modifications are suggested in order to obtain
more valid data from the Emotiv. The modification to the Emotiv EPOC was originally
implemented by Debener et al. (2012); the modifications included “removing the Emotiv
wireless transmitter from the plastic electrode arms, along with the felt electrodes, [t]he
transmitter was then connected to research-grade Ag/AgCl electrodes via shielded wires”
(Barham, et al., 2017). This process aids in improving the signal-to-noise ratio; therefore, the
Emotiv system is able to provide more accurate data with regards to detecting ERPs (Barham
et al., 2017). With this modification, the ERPs in relation to an auditory oddball paradigm could
be recorded and were comparable to those recorded by the research grade EEG system.
In summary, the use of portable EEG systems allows for a larger variety of lab settings to
complete research comparable to that of professional research grade laboratories. Some of the
benefits of portable EEG systems includes the low-cost upfront, low-cost maintenance, easy
mobility due to wireless set-up, and simple portability compared to research grade EEG
technology system set-up (Xu & Zhong, 2018). With portable, cheaper EEG data collection it
may be simpler to explore a variety of phenomena, on the other hand research grade EEG
systems may be more effective for diagnostic purposes, and more precise and reliable for data
collection.

Current Research with EEG System with Children

Portable EEG systems can be used to study a wide variety of research topics, from
neuromarketing to neuropedagogy. With regards to educational research, portable EEG
technology tends to be focused on online learning, motor skill acquisition, and topics of literacy
with a focus on reading (Xu & Zhong, 2018). More specifically, some of the cognitive aspects
which have been evaluated within this research field are attention, motivation, self-regulation
and meditation (Xu & Zhong, 2018). Attention is frequently targeted topic for investigation in
research labs with access to portable EEG technology because the brainwave frequency is one
of the more visible elements to interpret from the data and design stimuli. The differences in
active, attention brainwaves is easily distinguishable from a distracted, relaxed, or inattentive
brainwave pattern (Xu & Zhong, 2018).

40

KÉPZÉS ÉS GYAKORLAT  2018. 16. ÉVFOLYAM 3. SZÁM
The Emotiv EPOC system has been utilized for use in determining whether a participants
is engaged in the stimulus task (Cernea, Kerrren & Ebert 2011; Kuber & Wright, 2013). For
example, Lee and Chin (2014) used the Emotiv neuroheadgear to investigate varying levels of
engagement to identify the level of boredom or engagement by power frequency spectrum.
Overall, the results were interpreted to show that engagement levels could be gauged by the
activity in the frontal lobe (Image 1), and that children were more engaged when presented with
a lesson containing interactive visual stimuli as compared to a lesson without an interactive
visual component (Lee & Chin, 2014).

Image 1 Placement of sensors of Emotiv Headset
Source: www.emotiv.com

Research about the process of learning in early childhood has investigated the role of
motivation and engagement in correlation to the rate of learning. More specifically, studies
about motivation in learning have targeted the levels of engagement as a measure of interest
and gauge of the participant’s level of learning (Bandura, Caprara, Barbaranelli, Gerbino, &
Pastorelli 2003). In addition, other research studies about learning has targeted thevarious
aspects of reading, for example, the effect of quality reading as a shared activity (Hutton, et al.,
2017). This study included participants from low socioeconomic status families and
investigated the effect of maternal shared reading time on the brain functioning of the children
while listening to stories. The results revealed that the maternal attention had a positive
influence on the brain activation of the child during the shared reading activity (Hutton et al,.
2017).
Portable EEG technology can be used to provide automatic feedback and information about
immediate influence of the learning process in early childhood. Huang and colleagues (2014)

41

TRAINING AND PRACTICE  2018. VOLUME 16. ISSUE 3
used the Emotiv EEG system to augment attention during reading assignments. With
participants’ age ranging from 6 to 8.5 years the Emotiv was used as a brain-computer interface
(BCI) in order to redirect children’s attention during the reading of passages. When the
participants’ engagement level decreased, they were triggered to redirect their attention and
maintain a higher level of engagement in reading. As the data showed, the BCI improved the
overall engagement of the participants; however, the researchers pointed out the need for
reducing noise of the EEG signals recorded with the Emotiv (Huang et al., 2014). Overall, there
is a growing number of research studies in which scientists are aiming to conduct meaningful
research with young children with use of portable EEG technology systems to better understand
young children’s behavior in learning and the ways educators and parents can further promote
development and learning.

Future Research

Research with portable EEG technology is on the rise with an increasing amount of
published information about the possibilities and capabilities of the developing technology (Lee
& Chin, 2014). In order to improve the validity of research with portable EEG technology, it
is important to replicate previous studies and improve upon the methodological design and
strength of data. The review of the literature indicates a need for larger sample sizes, especially
with young children (Xu & Zhong, 2018). However, EEG research with young children is
exceptionally difficult due to the necessity for a large number of trials, electrical noise shielded
lab setting, and the importance of limited motion during the recording. It can be difficult for
young children to maintain attention and limit their movement for 20-40 minutes of repetitive
trials. For these reasons, there is a significant lack of reliable portable EEG research data
reported with young participants. Nevertheless these obstacles can be overcome and meaningful
data can be recorded with proper measures taken to ensure reliable data collection. It is possible
to have shorter trial groupings with breaks for stretching and fidgeting and the stimulus during
the data collection can be exciting and engaging.
It is necessary to advance currently available findings with new research questions and
appropriate research designs for using portable EEG systems. It is important to have large
sample sizes in order to reduce the effect of noise in the data. Portable EEG systems are making
EEG research more widely available to labs and possible early childhood classrooms, and allow
for larger participant pools, and larger populations represented in the data. As portable EEG
research data collection increases it is imperative to maintain proper steps taken to ensure the
42

KÉPZÉS ÉS GYAKORLAT  2018. 16. ÉVFOLYAM 3. SZÁM
proper lab settings for EEG research, such as a quite environment, shielding from electrical
noise of the surroundings and reducing the movement of participants during data collection.
Overall, the field of neuropedagogy is in its early years of development. Due to the key
relevance of early childhood brain development, it is important to conduct research with brain
imaging technology. Therefore, it is essential to continue the growth of this field of study with
solid methodological study designs, reasonable conclusion of results, and to create reproducible
studies. As the review of studies indicated the portable EEG technology systems allow for high
quality data collection attainable for research labs with limited resources. This unique and
invaluable addition to research allows for more data to be collected and analyzed in the light of
recent findings. Neuropedagogy is a promising field for evolving the understanding of the
developing brain.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Barham, M.P., Clark, G.M., Hayden, M.J., Enticott, P.G., Conduit, R., Lum; J.A.G. (2017).
Acquiring research-grade ERPs on a shoestring budget: A comparison of a modified
Emotiv and commercial SynAmps EEG system. Psychophysiology. 54(9):1393-1404.
DOI: 10.1111/psyp.12888
Bandura, A., Caprara, G.V., Barbaranelli, C., Gerbino, M., Pastorelli, C. (2003). Role of
affective self-regulatory efficacy in diverse spheres of psychosocial functioning. Child
Development. 74(3), 769-82. DOI: 10.1111/1467-8624.00567
Cernea, D., Kerrren, A., Ebert, A., (2011). Detecting insight and emotion in visualization
applications with a commercial EEG headset. Evaluations of Graphics and Visualization
— Efficiency; Usefulness; Accessibility; Usability. 65(8), 53-60.
Debener, S., Minow, F., Emkes, R.,Gandras, K., Vos, M. (2012). How about taking a low-cost,
small and wireless EEG for a walk? Psychphysiology, 49(11), 1617-1621. DOI:
10.1111/j.1469-8986.2012.01471.x
Huang, J., Yu, C., Wang, Y., Zhao, Y., Liu, S., Mo, C., Liu, J., Zhang, L., Shi, Y. (2014).
FOCUS: Enhancing children’s engagement in reading by using contextual BCI training
sessions. One of a CHild. Toronto, Canada. Session: Narratives and Storytelling. 19051908. [Retrieved from http://or.nsfc.gov.cn/bitstream/00001903-5/513781/1/100001966
7779.pdf]

43

TRAINING AND PRACTICE  2018. VOLUME 16. ISSUE 3
Hutton, J.S., Phelan, K., Horowitz-Kraus, T., Dudley, J., Altaye, M., DeWitt, T., Holland, S.K.
(2017). Shared reading quality and brain activation during story listening in preschool-age
children. The Journal of Pediatrics. 191: 204-211. DOI: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2017.08.037
Kuber, R., Wright, F. (2013) Augmenting the Instant Messaging Experience Through the Use
of Brain–Computer Interface and Gestural Technologies. International Journal of HumanComputer Interaction. 29(3). 178-191. DOI: 10.1080/10447318.2012.702635
Lee, P. J., Chin, S. W. (2014). Early childhood educator assistant with brain computer interface.
International Conference on Software Intelligence Technologies and Applications &
International Conference on Frontiers of Internet of Things 2014, Hsinchu, 52-57. DOI:
10.1049/cp.2014.1535 [Retrieved from https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7284219/]
Rueda, M.R., Checa, P., Cómbita, L.M. (2012). Enhanced efficiency of the executive attention
network after training in preschool children: immediate changes and effects after two
months. Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience.15(2), 192-204. DOI: 10.1016/j.dcn.
2011.09.004
Xu, J., Zhong, B. (2018). Review on portable EEG technology in educational research.
Computers in Human Behavior, 81, 340-349. DOI: 10.1016/j.chb.2017.12.037

44

