Proceedings

Analysis of Cognitive Load Using EEG when
Interacting with Mobile Devices †
Luis Cabañero 1,*, Ramón Hervás 1, Iván González 1, Jesús Fontecha 1, Tania Mondéjar 2
and José Bravo 1
Department of Information Systems and Technologies, University of Castilla–La Mancha,
13071 Ciudad Real, Spain; ramon.hlucas@uclm.es (R.H.); ivan.gdiaz@uclm.es (I.G.);
jesus.fontecha@uclm.es (J.F.); jose.bravo@uclm.es (J.B.)
2 Department of Psychology, University of Castilla–La Mancha, 13071 Ciudad Real, Spain;
tania.mondejarl@uclm.es
* Correspondence: luis.cabanero@uclm.es; Tel.: +34-926-295-300
† Presented at the 13th International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing and Ambient Intelligence
UCAmI 2019, Toledo, Spain, 2–5 December 2019.
1

Published: 21 November 2019

Abstract: The study of cognitive responses and processes while using applications is a critical field
in human–computer interaction. This paper aims to determine the mental effort required for
different typical tasks with smartphones. Mental effort is typically associated with the concept of
cognitive load, and has been studied by analyzing electroencephalography (EEG) signals. Thus, this
paper shows the results of analyzing the cognitive load of a set of characteristic tasks on
smartphones. To determine the set of tasks to analyze, this paper proposes a taxonomy of
smartphone-based actions defined after considering the related proposals in the literature and
identifying the significant characteristics of the tasks to classify them. The EEG data was obtained
through an experiment with real users doing tasks from the aforementioned taxonomy. The results
show significant differences in the cognitive load of each task category and identify those tasks that
involve a higher degree of mental effort. The results will be the starting point of the M4S project that
aims to contribute to the early diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment through monitoring everyday
dual-tasking in terms of interaction with smartphones.
Keywords: electroencephalography; mobile computing; cognitive load; mental effort; humancomputer interaction

1. Introduction
The widespread use of smartphones and mobile devices today allows us to provide applications
and services to address many issues, such as those in healthcare. The smartphone is a great source of
information; its sensors provide us with data about location, movement, voice, battery, and
application use, among others; this is being used to assess the behavioral aspects of users in their
daily life [1]. Concerning health, for example, the analysis of smartphone use allows us to track GPS
locations and trajectories followed by users and can be used, for example, to measure anxiety levels
as a prelude to mental health problems [2]. Additionally, data coming from the interaction between
users and their own mobile devices provide us with valuable information related to human behavior.
In fact, the smartphone can be an ally for diagnostic purposes [3], although it should serve a
complementary role in the doctor–patient relationship. Particularly, in dementia, Blanka Klimova [4]
evidenced the potential of mobile apps for diagnosis support, minimizing examiner bias, increasing
patient independence, cutting hospitalization costs, and improving the overall quality of life of elders.
As we can see, analyses of interactions (explicit or implicit) with smartphones can be invaluable in
Proceedings 2019, 31, 70; doi: 10.3390/proceedings2019031070

www.mdpi.com/journal/proceedings

Proceedings 2019, 31, 70

2 of 11

the field of human–computer interactions, as well as in the field of health, with diagnosis and
treatment purposes.
This paper is part of the project “Mobile computing-based Multitasking for Mild cognitive
impairment Monitoring and early Screening (M4S)” that aims to contribute to the early diagnosis of
mild cognitive impairment through monitoring everyday dual-tasking in terms of interactions with
smartphones on the move. An initial stage of this project is to determine the cognitive load required
for various, typical tasks performed on a mobile device, i.e., the main objective of this paper. The
findings of this paper not only contribute to the aforementioned project, but also to the research
community in the field, giving rise to a better understanding of cognitive processes which are
associated with the use of mobile devices.
In order to analyze the cognitive load (i.e., the amount of working memory resources or “mental
effort” associated with a specific task, concepts explored in depth in Section 2.1), we analyzed the
EEG activity of users performing a set of typical tasks with a smartphone. The fundamentals of the
EEG-based cognitive load analysis are also described in Section 2.1. To determine the set of tasks to
analyze, this paper proposes a taxonomy of smartphone-based actions. We considered the related
proposals in the literature (Section 2.2), and identified the significant characteristics of the tasks to
classify them, in order to propose the HuSBIT-10 taxonomy: Human-Smartphone Basic Interactions
Taxonomy for 10-s tasks (Section 3). An experiment with real users was conducted with the dual
objective of (i) studying the cognitive load of different typical tasks with the smartphone, and (ii)
validating the classification made in the taxonomy in terms of the mental effort associated with the
identified task categories. The protocol, material, and methods of the experiment are explained in
Section 4, and the obtained results are presented in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper.
2. Fundamentals and Background
2.1. Cognitive Load
2.1.1. Cognitive Load Fundamentals
Each person has a specific way of responding to external stimulus, but the brain processes this
information following a common pattern for most people. One similar point is usually the mental
effort and cognitive load, which are closely-related but different concepts; the first occurs in
interactions between the characteristics of a task and the characteristics of the subject. Each task has
a different load, i.e., it can be more complex or simple (depending on the steps or the level of precision
required in order to perform the action), and each subject processes it differently, according to their
skills and aptitudes [5]. On the other hand, mental effort is related to the cognitive resources we use
to undertake a specific task.
With these basic concepts in mind, we can mention the Sweller’s [6] theory of cognitive load,
which focuses on working memory, and specifically, on Mayer’s [7] theory of multimedia learning.
These theories are part of the cognitive sciences that seek to improve multimedia environments [8]
within the information processing paradigm, taking it as a “natural information processing system”
[9].
In our work, tasks with smartphones have different mental burdens and are related to some
external stimulus, therefore the tasks are translated into cognitive information. For this, we use
several sensitive channels. In our case, the auditory and visual channels trigger working memory.
The processing of information in working memory is related to the activity we are consciously
carrying out [10]. In addition, recent research has shown that working memory is divided into three
processors or channels [8]. The information processed in this memory is distributed between two
partially independent processors, i.e., the auditory and the visual, which manipulate verbal and
pictorial information, respectively. Additionally, there is a third processor known as the centralexecutive, which is responsible for coordinating the processing of information that enters and leaves
the working memory.

Proceedings 2019, 31, 70

3 of 11

For this reason, we must consider the presentation of information to avoid overloading these
channels. In addition, it is critical to consider whether the information is new, so that it can be
acquired only if the subject’s mental activity can relate it to mental schemes previously stored in longterm memory [7,11]. The difference here is that if a person has done a task repeatedly, their processing
is different because they have response patterns associated with that task and the execution is faster
or easier to do. This is achieved with practice time and depends on the intuitiveness of the tasks,
which has been considered in the development of our work.
All the previous fundamentals are considered in this paper to define the taxonomy tasks with
smartphone and to define the experiment protocol, as we describe in next sections.
2.1.2. EEG-Based Cognitive Load Analysis
Attending to the EEG activity, four main areas of the brain have been discussed in the literature
to study neurological activity: parietal, occipital, temporal and frontal [4,12]. This neurological
activity has been observed to produce a range of electrical waves per second at different frequencies
with greater or lesser level of coverage that depends on the task being performed.
A clear example of the differences that occur in the electrical response of the brain associated
with neurological activity can be seen in the electrical oscillations emitted during sleep compared to
those made when awake. The brain produces very low-frequency electrical waves (<1 Hz) in the
electroencephalogram (EEG) of sleep stages, between the 0.55–0.95 Hz range and with peaks at 0.7–
0.8 Hz in the frequency band known as delta [13]. On the other hand, higher frequencies and faster
waves predominate in waking conditions, where bands oscillate between 0.5–40 Hz. The intervals
that correspond to each band are as follows: 0.5–4 Hz (delta band), 4–8 Hz (theta band), 8–13 Hz
(alpha band), 13–30 (beta band), and finally 30–40 Hz (gamma band). As stated before, the
composition of the electrical response strongly depends on the cognitive task.
EEG techniques can capture the electrical response of the brain by means of electrodes placed
on the scalp. These electrical signals are generated by ionic movements in and around neurons during
the activation and deactivation of neurons involved in a cognitive task. EEG measures the fluctuating
voltages in these electrical signals. There is not a straightforward way to estimate cognitive load from
EEG electrical signals, however, some approaches can be found in the literature. The three most
commonly used analysis techniques are: (i) event-related desynchronization (ERD), (ii) theta-alpha
ratio (TAR) and (iii) those techniques based on machine learning. In relation to detecting changes in
cognitive load using the ERD technique, Klismech found that the spectral power in the theta band
increases while the spectral power in the alpha band decreases [14]. Further relevant contributions
have studied the use of ERD from alpha and theta bands to measure cognitive load. For example,
Antonenko et al. have applied ERD technique in two different case studies related to the learning
context [15].
On the other hand, some recent studies have explored the use of TAR technique as a measure of
cognitive load [16–18]. In particular, Trammell at el. have found associations between age and
estimated cognitive load by using this technique. TAR is obtained by dividing the spectral power of
theta band in the middle frontal area (Fz) by the spectral power of alpha band in central parietal area
(Pz).
Other novel and powerful approaches to estimate cognitive load are those based on machine
learning. There are many research works using these techniques for this particular purpose [19]
which uses Naïve-Bayes, and [20], which uses deep convolutional neural networks. Through machine
learning models, robust and useful metrics can be extracted from EEG signals, although they have
some problems related to the sample size and data gathered from the acquisition trials. Specifically,
(i) it takes a large number of participants to adequately train a classifier or fit a regression model that
can be able to work properly on EEG data from anyone; (ii) the studies found are mostly based on
supervised learning, therefore, a big labeled dataset is required to train the model. Such
considerations have made us discard machine learning techniques as a method for this work.

Proceedings 2019, 31, 70

4 of 11

2.2. Mobile-Device Interaction Background
Interaction with mobile devices has been widely studied in the literature. Today, many projects
and research apply a user-centered design and development, highlighting the role of usability and
user experience in terms of mobile device interactions. According to Hoober [21], users interact with
their mobile devices in three different ways: (1) using only one hand, (2) using both hands, and (3) in
a passive manner. Likewise, this study also indicates three types of human-device interactions: active
use passive use, and talking, as well as the body posture that the users have when they interact with
their mobile phones: walking, standing and sitting.
In 2005, Karam and Shraefel carried out a broad study leading to the creation of a general
taxonomy of gestures in human computer interactions [22]. In this work, authors also presented a
review of possible interactions with any device, not just mobile. Focusing on mobile phones, the most
common inputs were: camera, touch surface and sensors-on-body (e.g., accelerometer, GPS). The last
input is considered as a pervasive or implicit way of interaction with the mobile device. In case of
interaction with touch screens, Wroblewski [23] proposed a reference guide very popular as
standardized guide about gestures in these kind of displays.
Furthermore, there is a vast amount of works which are focused on analyzing user-Smartphone
interactions in different domains, using a variety of measurement mechanisms, and facing multiple
purposes. Today, works such as the one presented by Hinckley et al. [3] show new ways to detect
interaction with smartphone screens before it happens. which is referred to as “pre-touch sensing”.
Cameras and vision-based systems are also useful to analyze interactions with mobile applications.
Authors such as Souza [4] and Chang [5] highlight the importance of eye-tracking data for usability
studies, comparing them with traditional techniques.
The analysis of population behaviors can also be studied by observing interactions between
users and their mobile phones. In this regard, new usage and behavioral patterns can be found [6],
as well as different types of smartphone users [7]. In the field of psychology, Harari et al. [8]
determine that the use of smartphones is an important observation tool in psychological science,
considering all data provided by these mobile devices. Measuring and analyzing patterns for
smartphone addiction is also possible by interacting with the mobile phone [9,10].
All interactions with mobile phones occur at different levels. We can study these interactions
with the operating system, built-in sensors, and physical device buttons, as well as with the installed
applications. Given our objectives, and considering the related work, in which we did not find
research regarding the classification of smartphone tasts on a cognitive level, we propose a specific
taxonomy of basic tasks related to the most common types of interaction with mobile phones in the
following section.
3. Proposed Taxonomy: HuSBIT-10
According to the objectives of our study, we need to define a set of usual tasks focused on the
user-smartphone interaction. Thesetasks are quick and simple tasks that require less than 10 s. The
name of the taxonomy is HuSBIT-10: Human-Smartphone Basic Interactions Taxonomy for 10-s tasks.
First, we have identified four types of interactions that a user could carry out with his mobile
phone: (τ) touch, (ι) look, (ς) speak, and (η) hear. All of them are closely related to human senses,
critical to analyze the cognitive load and information processing [8]. In addition, considering some
approaches from the literature, the interaction types can be classified in two categories: (α) active and
(ρ) passive, depending on whether the user explicitly interacts with the device or not. With this, we
can determine if a specific interaction type from the first four types previously mentioned is active or
passive.
Moreover, any interaction task with the mobile phone could employ one or several types of
interaction from the above. Hence, we have defined AMPEC-10 as a term to group the five types of
tasks that a user can carry out with the smartphone in a maximum time of 10 s (limit obtained
experimentally), making use of the four interaction types. According to the acronym AMPEC-10, the
tasks have been grouped into the following types:

Proceedings 2019, 31, 70







5 of 11

(A) Automated. This represents the tasks with or without a minimal cognitive effort that we
typically perform automatically or unconsciously.
(M) psychoMotor. This kind of task requires a quick or direct interaction with the smartphone,
where the main difficulty is to perform a touching interaction carefully or with proper accuracy.
(P) Production. It includes tasks which require basic content creation, requiring creative skills to
produce new content.
(E) Exploration. This kind of tasks requires the analysis of a set of data to obtain specific
information.
(C) Consumption. It defines the tasks that require content consumption.

The prevalence of interaction types (touch, look, speak, and hear) on these task types is another
factor to consider. A first approach reveals that touch and look interaction types are the most common
interactions between user and smartphone. Likewise, as we saw in Section 2.2, speak and hear occur
less often. This fact confirms what other studies in the literature, as studied in [24,25].
With these assumptions, we have modeled a new taxonomy approach from scratch, called
HuSBIT-10 to classify any task with a duration under 10 s, that users perform with their smartphones.
In Table 1, an overview of identified tasks (classified by task type) and some examples are shown.
Table 1. AMPEC-10 tasks classification according to HuSBIT-10 approach.
Task Category

Id
A1

Automated
A2

psychoMotor

M1
M2
M3
M4
M5
P1

Production

P2
P3
E1
E2

Exploration

E3

E4
C1
Consumption

C2
C3

Task Type
Query an
item
Action on
any physical
button
Pattern
Move
Dismiss
Copy & Paste
Select
Text
Production
Voice
Production
Visual
Production
Search on a
textual set
Search on a
visual set
Analysis of
textual
contents
Analysis of
visual
contents
Text
Consumption
Audio
Consumption
Media
Consumption

Characteristics
(α) (τ, ι)

Examples
Check time/Check if there are notifications/Check if I have
WiFi

(α) (τ)

Turn on-off device/Turn up-down Volume

(α) (τ, ι)
(α) (τ, ι)
(α) (τ, ι)
(α) (τ, ι)
(α) (τ, ι)

Device unlock (with unlock pattern)
Add and move a shortcut
Close opened apps, Close notification preview
Share information among applications
Select a part of a text
Add a new contact/Set an alarm/Write a
message/Reminder

(α) (τ, ι)
(α) (τ, ς)

Make a call/Make a voice command/Create voice message

(α) (τ, ι)

Take a photo

(α) (τ, ι)
(α) (τ, ι)

Search for a contact/Search for a song/Search for date in
the calendar/Last call made to someone
Search for a specific application/Browse images/Change
direct-access settings (e.g., airplane mode)

(α) (τ, ι)

Change settings details (e.g., data roaming)/Do a search in
an Internet Browser

(α) (τ, ι)

Search for a route/site on a map

(ρ) (ι)

View/Read notifications, Read a text message

(ρ) (η)

Listen to an audio message/Listen to a podcast

(ρ) (ι, η)

Watch a video

The aim of HusBIT-10 approach is to provide support to classify the AMPEC-10 tasks in terms
of planning and cognitive load from a bidimensional perspective, as well as promoting replicability
in other trials and experiments.

Proceedings 2019, 31, 70

6 of 11

4. Experiment: Cognitive Load in Smartphone Interactions
4.1. Experiment Protocol and Method
The study was conducted in the MAmI research lab at the University of Castilla–La Mancha, a
group focused on health informatics and human-computer interaction (http://mami.uclm.es). The
participants were informed about the scope and goals of this research and about the collected data.
The work was conducted with six participants, from 22 to 31 years old who received and signed the
information sheet and consent form, which provided detailed information about the study’s
objective, procedures, and types of data to be collected. All participants had the opportunity to
consider their participation before making a final decision. Thereby, the preservation of the dignity
and autonomy of the end-users was ensured by their voluntary participation and the fact that they
could leave the study at any time without any consequences.
This study followed the empirical method for gathering evidence regarding EEG data while user
interact with a smartphone. The followed protocol can be summarized as follows: (1) all participants
received an instruction sheet with the actions to do with the smartphone and ensuring they fully
understood it (Figure 1d). The actions were randomly sorted for each participant; (2) all participants
were wearing the EEG headset (Figure 1a) and sat at a desk with the smartphone (Figure 1c); (3)
participants were required to perform the EEG calibration with the Xavier TechBench SoftwareTM
(www.emotiv.com/product/emotivpro/) (Figure 1b); (4) the participants, without receiving any
additional instruction, performed all the tasks of the sheet. This entire process for each participant
took approximately 25 min.

Figure 1. Experiment setup with the following materials: (a) Emotiv Epoc + EEG headset; (b) Laptop
with the required software: Xavier TechBench SoftwareTM to collect raw data and eeglib to process
and analyze; (c) Mobile phone Samsung J6 with Android 9.0 Pie; (d) task sheet with the experiment
instructions and the consent form.

4.2. Material
The cognitive load is studied using a device for capturing EEG signals for scientific purposes,
model Emotiv EPOC+. This device has 14 EEG channels and two references for positioning and
accurate spatial resolution. These channels have eight frontal electrodes (AF3, F7, F8 and FC5 on the

Proceedings 2019, 31, 70

7 of 11

left hemisphere, and FC6, F4, F8 and AF4 on the right hemisphere), two temporal electrodes (T7 and
T8), two occipital electrodes (O1 and O2) and two parietal electrodes (P7 and P8). The headset uses a
sequential sampling method at a rate of 128 samples per second. To collect the EEG raw data, we
used the Xavier TechBench SoftwareTM. For the EEG data processing, there is a specialized software
developed to process EEG data, called eeglib, which can also applied to other kind of data sources
[26,27]. eeglib is actually a Python-based library for EEG processing that provides some data
structures to help for that purpose. This library can load CSV and EDF files that are typical formats
in which EEG is stored, and allows the user to import the data from Python and NumPy data
structures. It can apply three different pre-processing techniques to the signals: bandpass filtering, zscores normalization and Independent Component Analysis. It also includes a set of processing
techniques to extract features from data: FFT, Higuchi Fractal Dimension, Petrosian Fractal
Dimension, Hjorth parameters, Detrended Fluctuation Analysis, Lempel-Ziv Complexity, Multiscale
Sample Entropy, Synchronization Likelihood, and Pearson Cross Correlation Coefficient. The library
includes a tool to generate datasets (in pandas DataFrame format) that can be used easily to apply
machine learning techniques or to perform statistical analysis.
The smartphone used in the experiment was a Samsung J6 with the operating system Android
9.0 Pie. The list of specific tasks to perform is shown in Table 2. There are three tasks per category,
omitting the category Automated due to the very low cognitive load associated to unconscious or
mechanic tasks. Thus, the total number of evaluated tasks were 12. The design of the list of tasks
follows the considerations and fundamentals about cognitive load in Section 2.1.
Table 2. List of tasks performed in the experiment according to HuSBIT-10 taxonomy.

Task Category
Consumption

Exploration

Task Type
C1
C2
C3
E1
E3
E4

psychoMotor

M2
M4
M5
P1

Production

P2
P3

Specific Task in the Experiment
Read a message that contains a poem by Espronceda
Listen to a podcast from the daily news
Watch a video
Search for a given date in the calendar
Switch off the data roaming in the device settings
Search how to reach a given place (about 500 m away) in the
map from the current location
Add and move an app shortcut (2 times)
Copy a message into the browser search box (Google widget)
Select one word, then two and, finally, two and a half words in a
Wikipedia article
Write down the places where you would go in a zombie
apocalypse
Create a voice message with the list of objects you would collect
in a zombie apocalypse
Take an artistic photo of one object around you

4.3. EEG Data Processing
Participants performed all the tasks described in Table 2, specifically, three defined tasks per
category considered in the HuSBIT-10 proposed taxonomy. EEG activity was recorded during each
task for a 10-s interval (EEG segment). The recorded EEG data can be found in the link in Section
Supplementary Material.
The EEG segments, denoted as <Participant_Id, Task Type>, were then analyzed to estimate
cognitive load in accordance with the following procedure: first (i), each EEG segment was
preprocessed applying a 2–15 Hz bandpass filter to remove frequencies that were not under analysis
(neither alpha nor theta band were removed); then (ii), zScore normalization was performed on the
filtered EEG signals to made possible relative comparisons across EEG segments for all the
participants in the next steps. After pre-processing (iii), each normalized EEG segment was split into

Proceedings 2019, 31, 70

8 of 11

1-s windows with 50% overlapping; later (iv), a variation of the TAR index was computed for each
analysis window within the EEG segment, as indicated below:
TAR = (thetaF3 + thetaF4)/(alphaP7 + alphaP8)

(1)

where thetaF3 and thetaF4 were the spectral power of the theta band in the F3 and F4 electrodes (frontal
area in both brain hemispheres); and alphaP7 and alphaP8 the spectral power of the alpha band in the
P7 and P8 electrodes (parietal area in both brain hemispheres). Once theta-alpha ratio values were
obtained for each analysis window (v), the TAR index was averaged for the entire EEG segment that
enclosed them all. This average TAR index (for the current EEG segment) was considered as a
cognitive load estimation for a particular task performed by one participant (<Participant_Id, Task
Type>). If the average TAR indices across all participants are grouped by task and again averaged,
cognitive load estimations for each particular task will be obtained.
4.4. Result
The experiment results show differences among the cognitive load associated with each of the
categories of smartphone tasks. These finding should be considered preliminary due to the reduced
number of subjects in the experiment, the slight differences, and the wide standard deviation of the
data, as shown in Table 3. This table summarizes the average cognitive load data for each category,
considering all the users. It can be observed that the tasks with the highest cognitive load are those
of the Exploration category with a significant difference, followed by Production. The ones that show
the least cognitive load are the psychoMotor and Consumption tasks, with very similar cognitive
load measures.
Table 3. Results of cognitive load in each task performed in the experiment according to HuSBIT-10
taxonomy.

Task Category

Averaged
Cog. Load

Standard
Deviation

Consumption

1.253

0.251

Exploration

1.394

0.247

psychoMotor

1.247

0.297

Production

1.284

0.255

Task
Types
C1
C2
C3
E1
E3
E4
M2
M4
M5
P1
P2
P3

Averaged
Cog. Load
1.206
1.273
1.280
1.097
1.597
1.488
1.224
1.241
1.277
1.287
1.240
1.324

Observing the average value obtained in each of the 12 evaluated tasks, we see two cases of tasks
that have a significantly higher cognitive load than the rest of tasks: analysis of textual contents (E3)
and analysis of visual content (E4). The task regarding analysis of textual contents has been carried
out by means of asking to switch off the data roaming in the device settings. This task is complex
because users must navigate into the numerous categories in the smartphone setting and localize one
element through understanding the setting organization. The second case regarding analysis of
visual content corresponds to the search for a route in a map, a more complex exploration task than
the search for an element as a whole. The lowest cognitive load is observed in the task about searching
into a set of textual elements, in the experiment case, to search for a given date in the calendar. Figure
2 shows the graphical representation of the average values of each task.

Proceedings 2019, 31, 70

9 of 11

Figure 2. Graphical representation of averaged cognitive load for the 12 evaluated tasks.

5. Conclusions
The present work is the beginning of a new research line that aims to help in the evaluation of
cognitive abilities and contribute to the early diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment through the
continuous analysis of the interaction with smartphones. The first steps have focused on two aspects
that correspond to the main contributions of this article: the taxonomy of tasks with smartphones
named HuSBIT-10, and the analysis of the cognitive load of typical tasks. The taxonomy is based on
similar classifications focused on other devices found in the literature, as well as on the cognitive
components related to each of the tasks. This taxonomy can support researchers in human-computer
interaction to have a model that classifies the types of interactions with smartphones. Secondly, the
data obtained after the experiment to analyze the cognitive load of different tasks provides us with
information about the associated mental effort of each one. It will serve as a starting framework to
evaluate their performance over time and associate it with cognitive impairment. It is important to
notice that the EEG headset used in this study has no medical or scientific purpose, so, although it is
reliable, its accuracy is not very high. Also, the population used in this experiment can be insufficient
to be statistically significant. Future work will focus on improving this experiment, both with a more
accurate EEG measuring devices, and by increasing the population and the set of tasks to be
performed. Moreover, future work will involve analyzing cognitive load when interacting with
specific mobile application for people with special needs. Examples of this are augmented reality for
guiding people with dementia [28,29], mobile-based biomedical signals measurement [30], and
avatar-based apps for emotion management [31].
Supplementary Materials: The EEG dataset generated and analyzed for this study can be found in
www.esi.uclm.es/www/mami/web/index.php/datasets.
Author Contributions: I.G., J.F. and R.H. generated the initial ideas for the study. R.H. and T.M. designed the
experiment, and R.H. and L.C. led the writing of this manuscript. T.M. identified the psychological fundamentals
related with this study. R.H. coordinated the experiment conduction. L.C. developed the tools for the EEG
analysis, and, with the support of I.G., conducted the data analysis and its interpretation. J.F. designed the
smartphone interaction taxonomy. J.B., expert on assistive technologies and human-computer interaction,
helped with the specific decisions, and critically reviewed the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by the MINISTERIO DE CIENCIA, INNOVACIÓN Y UNIVERSIDADES,
grant number RTI2018-098780-B-I00 (national research project) and the PEJ2018-003213-A (for hiring research
staff). The EEG headset was purchased with the funding of the UNIVERSITY OF CASTILLA–LA MANCHA,
grant number 2019-AYUDA-27430.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.

Harari, G.M.; Lane, N.D.; Wang, R.; Crosier, B.S.; Campbell, A.T.; Gosling, S.D. Using Smartphones to
collect behavioral data in psychological science: Opportunities, practical considerations, and challenges.
Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 2000, 11, 838–854.

Proceedings 2019, 31, 70

2.

3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.

19.

20.
21.

22.
23.
24.
25.

10 of 11

Huang, Y.; Xiong, H.; Leach, K.; Zhang, Y.; Chow, P.; Fua, K.; Teachman, B.A.; Barnes, L.E. Assessing Social
Anxiety using GPS Trajectories and Point-of-Interest Data. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM International
Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing, Heidelberg, Germany, 12–16 September 2016;
pp. 898–903.
Lupton, D.; Jutel, A. ‘It’s like having a physician in your pocket!’ A critical analysis of self-diagnosis
smartphone apps. Soc. Sci. Med. 2015, 133, 128–135.
Klimova, B. Mobile Phone Apps in the Management and Assessment of Mild Cognitive Impairment and/or
Mild-to-Moderate Dementia. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 2017, 11, 461.
Lotero, L.A.A. Teoría de la carga cognitiva, diseño multimedia y aprendizaje: Un estado del arte. Magis
Rev. Int. Investig. Educ. 2012, 5, 75–92.
Sweller, J. Cognitive Load Theory, Learning Difficulty, and Instructional Design. Learn. Instr. 1994, 4, 295–
312.
Mayer, R.E. The Cambridge Handbook of Multimedia Learning; Cambridge University Press: New York, NY,
USA, 2005.
Chong, T.S. Recent Advances in Cognitive Load Theory Research: Implications for Instructional Designers.
Malays. Online J. Instr. Technol. 2005, 2, 106–117.
Paas, F.; Tuovinen, J.E.; Tabbers, H.; van Gerven, P.W.M. Cognitive Load Measurement as a Means to
Advance Cognitive Load Theory. Educ. Psychol. 2003, 38, 63–71.
Sweller, J. Discussion of ‘Emerging Topics in Cognitive Load Research: Using Learner and Information
Characteristics in the Design of Powerful Learning Environments’. Appl. Cogn. Psychol. 2006, 20, 353–357.
Clark, R.C.; Mayer, R.E. E-Learning and the Science of Instruction: Proven Guidelines for Consumers and
Designers of Multimedia Learning; John Wiley and Sons: New York, NY, USA, 2007.
Kumar, N.; Kumar, J. Measurement of Cognitive Load in HCI Systems Using EEG Power Spectrum: An
Experimental Study. Procedia Comput. Sci. 2016, 84, 70–78.
Achermann, P.; Borbély, A.A. Low-frequency (<1 Hz) oscillations in the human sleep
electroencephalogram. Neuroscience 1997, 81, 213–222.
Klimesch, W. EEG Alpha and Theta Oscillations Reflect Cognitive and Memory Performance: A Review
and Analysis. Brain Res. Rev. 1999, 29, 169–195.
Antonenko, P.; Paas, F.; Grabner, R.; van Gog, T. Using Electroencephalography to Measure Cognitive
Load. Educ. Psychol. Rev. 2010, 22, 425–438.
Holm, A.; Lukander, K.; Korpela, J.; Sallinen, M.; Müller, K. Estimating Brain Load from the EEG. Sci. World
J. 2009, 9, 639–651.
Dan, A.; Reiner, M. Real Time EEG Based Measurements of Cognitive Load Indicates Mental States during
Learning. J. Educ. Data Min. 2017, 9, 32–44.
Trammell, J.P.; MacRae, P.G.; Davis, G.; Bergstedt, D.; Anderson, A.E. The Relationship of Cognitive
Performance and the Theta-Alpha Power Ratio Is Age-Dependent: An EEG Study of Short-Term Memory
and Reasoning during Task and Resting-State in Healthy Young and Old Adults. Front. Aging Neurosci.
2017, 9, 364.
Grimes, D.; Tan, D.S.; Hudson, S.E.; Shenoy, P.; Rao, R.P.N. Feasibility and Pragmatics of Classifying
Working Memory Load with an Electroencephalograph. In Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, Florence, Italy, 5–10 April 2008; pp. 835–844.
Jiao, Z.; Gao, X.; Wang, Y.; Li, J.; Xu, H. Deep Convolutional Neural Networks for Mental Load
Classification Based on EEG Data. Pattern Recognit. 2018, 76, 582–595.
Hoober, S. How Do Users Really Hold Mobile Devices? 2013. Mobile Matters. Available online:
https://www.uxmatters.com/mt/archives/2013/02/how-do-users-really-hold-mobile-devices.php?
(accessed on 9 October 2019).
Karam, M.; Schraefel, M.C. A Taxonomy of Gestures in Human Computer Interactions s.n. 2005. Project
Report. Available online: https://eprints.soton.ac.uk/261149/ (accessed on 9 October 2019).
Wroblewski,
L.
Touch
Gesture
Reference
Guide.
Available
online:
https://www.lukew.com/ff/entry.asp?1071 (accessed on 9 October 2019).
Lee, H.E.; Lee, Y.J. A Study on Content and Interaction Types on Smartphone. Adv. Sci. Technol. Lett. 2015,
120, 208–210.
Love, S. Understanding Mobile Human-Computer Interaction; Butterworth-Heinemann: Oxford, UK, 2005.

Proceedings 2019, 31, 70

26.
27.
28.

29.
30.
31.

11 of 11

Cabañero, L.; Hervás, R.; Bravo, J.; Rodríguez-Benitez, L. eeglib: Computational analysis of cognitive
performance during the use of video games. J. Ambient Intell. Humaniz. Comput. 2019, under review.
Cabañero, L.; Hervás, R.; Bravo, J.; Rodríguez-Benitez, L. Computational EEG Analysis Techniques When
Playing Video Games: A Systematic Review. Proceedings 2018, 2, 483.
Luna, J.M.; Hervás, R.; Fontecha, J.; Bravo, J. A Friendly Navigation-System Based on Points of Interest,
Augmented Reality and Context-Awareness. In Proceedings of the 6th Conference on Ubiquitous
Computing and Ambient Intelligence (UCAmI 2012), Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain, 3–5 December 2012; Volume
7656, ISBN 978-3-642-35377-2.
Hervás, R.; Bravo, J.; Fontecha, J.; Villarreal, V. Achieving Adaptive Augmented Reality through
Ontological Context-Awareness applied to AAL Scenarios. J. Univers. Comput. Sci. 2013, 19, 1334–1349.
Bravo, J.; Villarreal, V.; Hervás, R.; Urzaiz, G. Using a communication model to collect measurement data
through mobile devices. Sensors 2012, 12, 9253–9272.
Johnson, E.; Hervás, R.; de la Franca, C.G.L.; Mondéjar, T.; Ochoa, S.F.; Favela, J. Assessing empathy and
managing emotions through interactions with an affective avatar. Health Inform. J. 2018, 24, 182–193.
© 2019 by the authors. Submitted for possible open access publication under the terms
and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

