A Game-based Neurofeedback Training System
For Cognitive Rehabilitation in the Elderly
S.Jirayucharoensak1

P. Israsena1

S. Pan-Ngum2

S. Hemrungrojn3

1

National Electronics and Computer Technology Center
112 Thailand Science Park, Phahonyothin Road, Klong 1, Klong Luang, Pathumthani 12120, Thailand
2
Department of Computer Engineering
3
Department of Psychiatry
2,3
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand
suwicha.jirayucharoensak@nectec.or.th, pasin.israsena@nectec.or.th, setha.p@chula.ac.th, solaphat.h@chula.ac.th

ABSTRACT
There is a relationship between sustained attention and cognitive
performance. The ability to sustain attention potentially leads to
enhance cognitive functions. Attention Training provides a
promising alternative therapy to enhance cognitive ability and it
can be efficiently implemented with Neurofeedback Training
(NFT) system. The purpose of this research is to develop a NFT
system for attention training to enhance cognitive performance in
older adults. The efficiency of the system was evaluated by
establishing a clinical trial for healthy elderly and Mild Cognitive
Impairment (MCI) patients to perform cognitive rehabilitation.
There were totally 24 older adults, age 55-70 yrs, enrolled to this
trial. Both healthy and MCI groups performed NFT interventions
in 12 sessions, two sessions a week. The results showed it is
possible to train older adults to modify their amplitude of certain
brain wave ranges using a neurofeedback protocol targeting
several wave ranges for cognitive performance improvement.
Most participants succeeded to decrease the ratio of their
theta/alpha power band in both groups. The relations between
specific patterns of EEG activity and levels of cognitive
performance can be investigated with the NFT system as a
training technique. The system is aimed to encourage older adults
to produce specific patterns of cortical activity in connection with
an improved level of cognitive performance.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
J.3 [Life and Medical Sciences]: Health

General Terms
Design, Experimentation.

Keywords
Cognitive Rehabilitation, Neurofeedback Training System.

1. INTRODUCTION
Brain-computer interface (BCI) has been one of the most
outstanding biomedical engineering research fields for decades. It
provides a technology allowing humans to control external
devices by modulating their brain waves. Most BCI applications
have been developed for non-invasive brain signal processing
which is practical to be implemented in real-world scenarios.
There are plenty of successful EEG-based BCI applications such
as word speller programs and wheelchair controllers. Not only can
BCI be employed to mentally control devices, but it can be
implemented for medication and rehabilitation purposes as well.
The neurofeedback training system acquires brain waves from an
EEG amplifier and then performs feature extractions to classify
subject’s cognitive states. Subsequently, the system displays the
estimated cognition level of the subject through game programs
and subjects are able to recognize their own current cognitive
state. During training sessions, subjects need to learn how to
modulate their brain activity to meet the objective of training
system in each session.

NFT system research has undergone considerable proliferation
over the years [1]. Most of them focused on improving subject’s
cognitive state of attention, especially for Attention Deficit
Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) patients. There is a strong
relationship between sustained attention and cognitive
performance [2-3]. Attention is the ability to focus on specific
information and maintain that focus for the required amount of
time. In order for cognitive thought processes to perform, an
individual must be able to pay attention to a particular detail of
information and fully absorb the material being learned.
Consequently, the ability to sustained attention potentially leads to
enhance cognitive performance. Attention Training provides a
promising alternative method to enhance cognitive ability and it
can be implemented with NFT system.
One of the most useful treatments with NFT systems is healing
ADHD patients. Several clinical trials successfully treated ADHD
children to improve their learning capability and self-control in
classroom. A work [4] indicated the NFT approach was as
effective as methylphenidate. Also, another research [5] showed
the NFT method was superior to a computerized Attention Skills
Training (AST). Moreover, several NFT systems were designed to
improve cognitive performance in adults and elderly. The purpose
of a study [6] is to evaluate the effect of a NFT system on the
cognitive performance of healthy elderly. Subjects performed
NFT interventions for theta reduction. The results showed the
subjects exhibited greater improvement in EEG and behavioral
measures. Another work [7] used NFT system to individually
enlarge the amplitude of upper alpha frequency band by playing
mental rotation games. The result showed 11 of 14 participants
significantly improved their cognitive performance compared with
non-NFT control group.
The main purpose of the proposed NFT system for attention
training is to provide an alternative method for enhancing
cognitive performance in older adults by performing game-based
NFT interventions. Video game neurofeedback training system
has been proven to be one of the most successful treatments for
enhancing cognitive controls and functions in elderly subjects [8].
During training sessions, subjects were entertained by playing
games and they were able to play for a long period of time.
Subjects need to stay focus on a selective object on the screen.
The system estimates the subject’s sustained attention level by
investigating the power spectrum of beta and alpha frequency
bands and then adjusts the characteristics of the displayed object
such as racing car speed with the value of attention.

2. Methodology
2.1 Procedure
A clinical trial was established to evaluate the efficiency of NFT
for attention to enhance cognitive performance in healthy elderly
and MCI patients. The clinical trial was approved by the
Institutional Review Board, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn
University, Bangkok, Thailand. The clinical trial procedure is

depicted in Figure 1. First, all of enrolled participants had to take
a Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) test for distinguishing
MCI patients from healthy elderly. Second, pre-test score of
cognition ability of each subject was measured by Cambridge
Neuropsychological Test Automated Battery (CANTAB) test.
Subsequently, both healthy and MCI groups performed NFT
interventions in 12 sessions, two session a week. Finally, post-test
score of cognition ability of each subject was measured by
CANTAB. Moreover, EEG analysis was used to monitor their
attention and cognitive performance levels.

2.2 Participants
The program recruiting announcement was posted on
advertisement boards at Chulalongkorn Hospital. Also, a group of
healthy adults participating in Thai Red Cross Society’s Healthy
Elderly Contest were invited to the program. There were totally 24
older adults, age 55-70 yrs, enrolled to this NFT program. Two
participants received a very low score and were allowed to attend
the program due to Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) possibility. Two
participants in healthy group and one participant in MCI group
left the NFT intervention procedure. Consequently, the number of
participants completing all training sessions were 8 subjects in
healthy group and 11 subjects in MCI group.

2.3 Montreal Cognitive Assessment
MoCA [9] was developed to differentiate between normal agerelated cognitive decline and MCI. It has been demonstrated to be
valid and reliable for screening of MCI in various cross-cultural
clinical samples. The MoCA assesses several cognitive domains:
visuospatial, executive functions, language abilities, attention,
memory and orientation. The MoCA has more emphasis on tasks
of frontal executive functioning and attention than the TMSE,
which may make it more sensitive in detecting non-AD dementia.

2.4 CANTAB
CANTAB [10] battery uses touch screen technology to give rapid,
accurate, and language independent cognitive assessment. The
CANTAB battery now comprises 22 tests to assess different
aspects of cognitive functioning, including: 1) tests of shifting and
sustained attention, 2) reaction time, 3) visual memory and
learning, 4) executive processes such as planning and spatial
working memory, and 5) decision making and response control.
CANTAB tests have good test-retest reliability and parallel forms
of many tests help guard against learning effects over repeated
testing sessions. Floor and ceiling effects are avoided by gradually

analyzing by comparing the total correct score in each test
increasing the demands of the tests. The key outcome measures
with the normative data (given by age, gender and/or IQ) or
baseline data of individual.

2.5 Neurofeedback Training System
The architecture of the proposed NF system for attention training
is illustrated in Figure 2. An EEG Amplifier acquires raw EEG
signals at AF3, AF4, O1 and O2 with 128 Hz sampling rate. All of
EEG artifacts must be removed from raw brain signals before the
system estimates the state of attention. The system exploits ICALWT collaboration to enhance the efficiency of EEG artifact
removal. The attention level is estimated by investigating the
relative power ratio of Beta/Alpha frequency bands. Subsequently,
the attention level is used to adjust the characteristic of a target
object on the computer screen.

Figure 2. Neurofeedback System for Attention Training
Video game neurofeedback training system is one of the most
successful supplementary brain exercise for enhancing cognitive
controls and functions in elderly subjects. During training
sessions, subjects were entertained by playing games and they
were able to play for a long period of time. The more they were
trained, the more their cognitive function improvement. Both
healthy and MCI groups performed NFT interventions in 12
sessions, two sessions a week. In each session, subjects had to
perform 6 of 2-minute NFT interventions, illustrated in Figure 3.
There was a 3-minute break for participant’s comfort between
each game. The NF system for attention training had 6 games.
Subjects played one game in 2 consecutive sessions (one week).
The last additional brief session (13th session) was to compare the
first and last NF intervention with the first game of the training
program.
The video game NF system for attention training calculates the
subject’s sustained attention level by investigating the power
spectrum of beta and alpha frequency bands and then adjusts the
characteristics of the displayed object such as racing car speed
with the attention level. Therefore, subjects were able to recognize
their own current cognitive state of attention and attempt to stay
focus throughout each training session. During training sessions,
subjects needed to learn how to modulate their brain activity to
meet the objective of training system in each session.

Figure 3. Neurofeefback Training Sessions

Figure 1. Procedure of the clinical trial

The ability to sustain attention with distractions offers better
attention training efficiency. Our games in the NFT system
implemented distractions interrupting the sustained attention of
subjects periodically. One of the NFT games called “The
Museum” added color in a part of picture at a time, if the subject

stayed focus on the picture. While watching the picture, the
subject would be interrupted by a person walking pass the picture
and a person taking a photo. Moreover, subjects performed NFT
sessions in a common room in the hospital. During training
sessions, they were also interrupted by hospital’s staffs entering
and exiting the room.

Figure. 4. An Attention Training Game with distractions

2.6 Attention State Detection
The state of attention can be identified by detecting lower power
spectrum of alpha band and higher power spectrum of beta band
simultaneously [11]. The definition of Attention level is
 =

Kβ ∗ Pβ
Kα ∗ Pα

Kβ : Constant for scaling the value of Beta band power.
Pβ : Relative power spectrum of Beta band.
Kα : Constant for scaling the value of Alpha band power.
Pα : Relative power spectrum of Alpha band.

The system acquires EEG signals from the EEG amplifier
“Emotiv EPOC” at 4 positions – AF3, AF4, O1 and O2. The
amplifier has 128 Hz sampling rate and its bandpass filter is set to
0.1 – 60 Hz .The sample block size is assigned to 64. However,
the system utilizes a buffer of 192 previous samples to make the
data analysis more accurate. Consequently, at every half a second,
the system performs the removal algorithm from these 256
samples of each channel. The mean value of relative power
spectrum of the beta and alpha bands measured at AF3, AF4, O1
and O2 were computed. The triggering threshold was
automatically adjusted according to the rate of success of the
participant in order to avoid causing a sense of frustration or
failure. If the threshold was much higher than current attention
level, the program gradually adjusted the threshold lower and vice
versa.

2.7 EEG Artifact Removal Technique
The cognitive state estimation must be precise and robust enough
to provide proper neurofeedback responses in real-time.
Electrooculography (EOG) and Electromyography (EMG)
artifacts are unavoidable and unpredictable due to subject’s
physical conditions. This factor makes the cognitive state
classifier less reliable. EEG artifacts are mainly constituted of
ocular and muscular artifacts. The neurofeedback system for
attention training utilizes an EEG artifact suppression technique
[12] with Independent Component Analysis (ICA) and Lifting
Wavelet Transform (LWT). The technique employs LWT, instead
of conventional wavelet transform, to elaborately extract neural
signals from artifact components. The computation complexity of
LWT is considerably lower than those of conventional wavelet
transform. Consequently, the EEG artifact suppression technique,
ICA-LWT, has the capability of eliminating ocular and muscular
artifacts from multi-channel EEG brain signals in real-time mode.
It is critical for NFT systems to automatically suppress the EEG
artifacts in real-time. Therefore, subjects are able to recognize
their own current cognitive state.

3. RESULTS
3.1 EEG Signal Analysis
EEG signal analysis provides an accurate evaluation tool for
measuring the cognitive performance improvement. The power
spectrum of five bands (Delta 1-4Hz, Theta 4-8Hz, Alpha 8-12Hz,
Beta 12-32Hz and Gamma 32-60Hz) was calculated by utilizing
MATLAB FFT function with a Hanning window and the window
size is 256 samples. A relative power of each band was compared
with the summation of power spectrum of all five bands. Relative
power spectrum of Theta and Alpha can be used to measure the
cognitive performance. The lower relative power spectrum of
Theta and higher relative power of Alpha, the better cognitive
abilities [13]. In each NFT session, the system recorded EEG
signals at AF3, AF4, O1 and O2 for calculating the relative power
spectrum of Theta, Alpha and Beta frequency bands. The relative
power ratio of Theta/Alpha was utilized as an indicator of
cognitive performance. The relative power ratio of Beta/Alpha
was used for measuring the state of attention.
Experimental results show it is possible to train older adults to
modify their amplitude of certain wave ranges using an NFT
protocol. During training sessions, subjects needed to perform
sustained attention by focusing the target object on the screen.
From EEG data analysis, the average attention level of most
participants in each training increased in most subjects.
Furthermore, experimental results show the relationship between
sustained attention and cognitive performance exists. The ability
to sustained attention potentially leads to enhance cognitive
functions. The average of cognitive performance level of each
participant in each training day is depicted in Figure 5. Improved
cognitive performance can be seen from downward trends of the
graphs. Most participants succeeded to reduce the ratio of their
theta/alpha power band in both groups. In healthy group, 7 of 8
participants successfully improved their cognitive performance.
Only one participant, named ID4, failed to reduce the ratio. In
MCI group, 8 of 11 were capable of enhancing their cognitive
performance. Three participants named ID10, ID16 and ID17 did
not accomplish to decrease the ratio.

3.2 CANTAB Score Analysis
The CANTAB program was utilized for subject’s cognitive
function assessments of pre- and post-NFT trial. In this clinical
trial, all subjects required to assess different aspects of cognitive
functioning: spatial working memory, pattern recognition
memory, rapid visual information processing and delayed
matching to sample. From a preliminary analysis, the difference of
pre- and post-CANTAB score of these cognitive functions did not
significantly improve in most subjects. We are currently analyzing
the CANTAB scores with a statistical approach. A completed
statistical analysis of the score will be reported in later stage.

4. CONCLUSION
The proposed neurofeedback system for attention training is
aimed to encourage older adults to produce specific patterns of
cortical activity in connection with an improved level of cognitive
performance. After 6-week NFT intervention program, most
participants in both healthy and MCI groups were able to decrease
the ratio of Theta/Alpha power, which indicates improved level of
cognitive ability. Consequently, the results suggest that training to
sustain attention using NFT methodology leads to enhance
cognitive performance in both healthy and MCI groups.
Moreover, EEG data analysis provides an accurate evaluation tool
for measuring the cognitive performance improvement.

[7] Zoefel B., Huster R.J., Herrmann C.S.,“Neurofeedback training of

5. REFERENCES
[1] Thomas H. Budzynski, Introduction to Quantitative EEG and

nd

[2]
[3]
[4]

[5]
[6]

Neurofeedback: Advanced Theory and Applications, Elsevier 2
Edition, 2009.
Y. Tang, M.I. Posner, “Attention training and attention state
training,” Trends in Cogntive Sciences, vol 13(5), 222-227, 2009.
Pondé M.P., Cruz-Freire A.C., Silveira A.A.,“Relationship Between
Learning Problems and Attention Deficit in Childhood,” Journal of
Attention Disorder, Aug; 16(6):505-9, 2012.
Duric N.S., Assmus J., Gundersen D., Elgen I.B.,” Neurofeedback
for the treatment of children and adolescents with ADHD: a
randomized and controlled clinical trial using parental reports,”
BMC Psychiatry. 10;12:107, Aug 2012.
Gevensleben H, Holl B, Albrecht B, et al, “Neurofeedback training
in children with ADHD: 6-month follow-up of a randomised
controlled trial,” Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry, 19:715–724,2010.
Becerra J, Fernández T, Roca-Stappung M, et al, “Neurofeedback in
Healthy Elderly Human Subjects with Electroencephalographic Risk
for Cognitive Disorder,” Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, vol 28,
357-367,2012.

[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]

the upper alpha frequency band in EEG improves cognitive
performance,” Neuroimage. 15;54(2):1427-31,2011.
J.A. Anguera, J. Boccanfuso, J.L. Rintoul, et al, “Video game
training enhances cognitive control in older adults,” Nature vol 51,
97-101,2013.
Nasreddine, Z. The Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA).
[Online]. 2012. Available from: http://www.mocatest.org [2012, July
14]
Cambridge
Neuropsychological
Test
Automated
Battery
(CANTAB). [Online]. 2012. Available from: http://www.cantab.com
[2012, July 14]
Vazquez Marrufo M., Vaquero E., et al. “Temporal Evolution of
Alpha and Beta Bands During Visual Spatial Attention”. Brain Res
Cogn Brain Research. 12(2): 315-20, 2001.
S. Jirayucharoensak, P.Israsena, S.Pan-ngum, S.Hemrungrojn,
"Online EEG Artifact Suppression for Neurofeedback Training
Systems", Bio-medical Engineering International Conference 2013.
W. Klimesch, “EEG alpha and theta oscillations reflects cognitive
and memory performance: a review and analysis,” Brain Research
Review,Vol29,169-195,1999.

Fig 5 (a) Relative Power Ratio of Theta/Alpha in Healthy Group

Fig 5 (b) Relative Power Ratio of Theta/Alpha in MCI Group

