Jagadeeswari et al. Health Inf Sci Syst (2018) 6:14
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13755-018-0049-x

Health Information Science
and Systems

RESEARCH

A study on medical Internet of Things
and Big Data in personalized healthcare system
V. Jagadeeswari1, V. Subramaniyaswamy1*, R. Logesh1 and V. Vijayakumar2

Abstract
Personalized healthcare systems deliver e-health services to fulfill the medical and assistive needs of the aging
population. Internet of Things (IoT) is a significant advancement in the Big Data era, which supports many real-time
engineering applications through enhanced services. Analytics over data streams from IoT has become a source of
user data for the healthcare systems to discover new information, predict early detection, and makes decision over
the critical situation for the improvement of the quality of life. In this paper, we have made a detailed study on the
recent emerging technologies in the personalized healthcare systems with the focus towards cloud computing, fog
computing, Big Data analytics, IoT and mobile based applications. We have analyzed the challenges in designing a
better healthcare system to make early detection and diagnosis of diseases and discussed the possible solutions while
providing e-health services in secure manner. This paper poses a light on the rapidly growing needs of the better
healthcare systems in real-time and provides possible future work guidelines.
Keywords: Healthcare system, Internet of Things, Sensors, Security, Big Data analytics, Mobile computing, Cloud
computing, Fog computing
Introduction
Healthcare sector is one of the largest sectors in the
developing world with the annual increase in revenue
and employment [1]. In early days, diagnosis of rare diseases can only be detected by a complete physical and
analytical analysis made within the hospital premises.
Nowadays, a smartwatch can help us to diagnose any
irregularity with our Health. For example, the irregular heartbeat of an elder people. In case of an epidemic
disease such as Ebola, technology plays a major role
in controlling the rapid spread of this incurable disease by informing the people to take appropriate steps.
The patients should not consume medicine without the
presence of doctors advised by disease control and prevention (CDC) [2]. In contrast, recent technological
advancement brings the preliminary diagnostics to the
patient’s doorstep. Due to advancement in technology,
healthcare services are shifting from hospital-centric
care to personalized individual-centric services [3, 4]. For
*Correspondence: vsubramaniyaswamy@gmail.com
1
School of Computing, SASTRA Deemed University, Thanjavur, India
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018.

example, several clinical procedures such as blood testing, diabetic monitoring, pressure monitoring can be
done at a remote location in a real-time manner. Due to
the advancement in telecommunication and data services
like Data as a Service (DaaS) in the developing countries
provides remote monitoring healthcare system feasible
and serviceable. With the rapid development of the new
telecommunication services, wearable IoT sensors, cloud
computing, fog computing, and mobile computing provide real-time monitoring of users, diagnosis, communication with doctors and prescribe medicines and deliver
at doorsteps are applicable in the better way.
Internet of Things (IoT) expands the independence of
humans to interact, contribute and collaborate on things.
IoT gradually developed heterogeneous technologies
with sophisticated protocols and algorithms. It plays
important in global communication among millions of
devices with wired/wireless sensors, electronic appliances like Television, Refrigerator, etc., connected to the
Internet [5]. Then it plays an amazing role in many fields
such as Agriculture [6, 7], healthcare [8, 9], entertainments [10], automobiles [11], sports [12], home [13, 14],
industrial appliances [15], business [16], etc. The reasons

Jagadeeswari et al. Health Inf Sci Syst (2018) 6:14

for the rapid development of the IoT are high accuracy,
low cost, and reduce time by predicting the future in a
better way. The IoT gadget like sensors and actuators
were embedded into physical devices such as home appliances, vehicles, and smart industrial machines to monitor and exchange data using wireless networks with the
help of Bluetooth, Zigbee, IEEE 802.11 (WI-FI), WiMAX,
etc. The sensors are implantable in the body or wearable
that senses the physiological states like blood pressure,
heart rate, body temperature, pressure rate, electrocardiogram (ECG), electroencephalogram (EEG) [17]. Monitoring ailing people are more comfortable for people
who had elders, children alone in the home. The sensor
connected to the users, frequently monitor the user 24/7
and provides alerts on user’s changing health condition
to the family, doctors, and emergency services. The growing needs of better technologies for addressing real-time
issues in processing larger data without compromising
security and privacy requires significant attention from
the global research community.
Big Data analytics [18–21] emerged as the good solution for the process of abundant data and improves
decision-making characterized by 6 V’s: volume, variety,
velocity, veracity, validity, and volatility. The main characteristic is volume, that refers to a quantity of information
being used and analyzed to obtain the desired result. It
raises a flood of data from various sources includes sensors, scanners, mobile phones, digitizers, video, email,
social networks, and the internet. Variety refers to the
type of data stored, analyzed and processed. The type of
data may be text, images, videos, sound, geometrics, and
the combination of each type. Veracity refers to the accuracy of data is good enough for Big Data. Big Data also
presents a challenge to store, process and assist the data
effectively [22]. To overcome the problems of Big Data,
cloud computing [23, 24] emerges as a fundamental support to store and process the resources data, accessed
from any location through the internet. Accessing
resources stored in the cloud categorized into the public
cloud, private cloud, and hybrid cloud. The resources of
the public cloud can be accessed, shared and processed
by third-parties. A private cloud allows the resources
accessed by the organization. A hybrid cloud combines
both public and private clouds, often used to supplement internal data with public orchestration. Software
as a Service (SaaS), Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS),
Platform as a Service (PaaS) is the cloud services or
resources available to users on demand via the internet.
As the data increases day-by-day, the vast amount of data
have to be collected, analyzed, managed, and stored, in
the cloud which increases the complexity of cloud-based
services. To address this issue, we introduce fog computing [25–28] at the edge of the cloud for pre-processing

Page 2 of 20

of generated data. Fog improve the efficiency by reducing the data transfer to the cloud transform from physical devices. Fog enables a secure data transaction within
millions of devices connected, ensures high scalability
and even distribution of data. Big Data analytics is a voluminous data mining approach which requires both cloud
globalization and fog localization.
Among many self-tracking devices, a smartphone
[29, 30] is a user-friendly device that provides real-time
remote healthcare system connected with users and clinical staff. Globally, development and the utilization of the
smartphones have enhanced the performance of healthcare applications by providing efficient services to users.
It monitors both active data and daily behavioral activities from embedded mobile sensors [31]. It has a pocketsized display with wireless network communication and
battery power to process the hardware–software system.
Smartphone health monitoring application involves a
remote healthcare system improved with the advancement of mobile, communication networks, sensing, and
embedded devices. The mobile-based application development has paved the possible way for directly accessing
and analyzing the patient’s information from the sensors
connected with users. Mobile healthcare applications
provide faster delivery of information with reduced cost,
unlimited Internet-based services, and have efficient battery backup.
The main objectives of this survey are multifarious:
••  Examine the role of cloud computing depicts the
healthcare system with general architecture.
••  Illustrating a high-level comparison between cloud
and fog computing and providing secure privacy of
patients with fog computing.
••  Augmentation of the IoT healthcare application with
IoT-based healthcare monitoring architecture.
••  A focus on healthcare monitoring system in Big Data
era.
••  Interactive healthcare applications are reviewed with
a smartphone.
••  Providing the pros and cons of the healthcare system
took for the survey.
••  Exploring current challenges in the personalized
healthcare system.
••  Discussion on a promising solution for the real-time
healthcare monitoring problems.
The remainder of this article is organized as follow.
“Role of cloud computing in healthcare systems” section
review the role of cloud computing in the healthcare system. “Securing privacy of patients with fog computing”
section describes the security privacy of patients with
fog computing. “Enhancement of healthcare applications

Jagadeeswari et al. Health Inf Sci Syst (2018) 6:14

using Internet of Things” section review the healthcare
application using the IoT. “Development of healthcare
sector in the Big Data era” section evaluates the healthcare sector in the Big Data era. “Interactive healthcare
applications with smartphones” section assess an interactive healthcare application using smartphones. “Current
challenges in the personalized healthcare” and “Discussions on the promising solutions for the real-time
problems” sections discuss the current challenges and
real-time solutions for the personalized healthcare system. Finally, “Conclusions” section provides our concluding remarks.

Role of cloud computing in healthcare systems
In the real world, the lack of healthcare and support system to the senior population is still an existing challenge.
To overcome the challenge, Pham et al. [32] delivered a
real-time smart home healthcare service for elders staying alone. The healthcare service adopts Software-asa-Service (SaaS) cloud architecture with four layers: the
service presentation layer, cloud engine layer, the data
processing layer, and the cloud storage layer. Non-invasive sensors used to collect physiological, motion and
audio signals of the users. Contextual information [33,
34] is collected such as the user’s activities and location
details through the optitrack camera system. MYSQL is
a relational database to store structured data like user
information and NoSQL is used to store sensor data.

Fig. 1 Cloud computing architecture related to healthcare

Page 3 of 20

Based on these collected data, the users are monitored
continuously. For instance, a user’s physiological signals
are generally considered as contextual information for
prediction and analysis of the state. In a scenario of vigorous running a fast heart rhythm is expected from the
user whereas, an abnormal heart rhythm from the user
in an immobile state triggers the alarm. The authors also
developed a robot assistant which track the dehydration
level of the user. In this system, the water content level of
the user is frequently checked by the robot to instruct the
user to drink water during dehydration. Gradient boosting decision tree algorithm is used in robots to recognize
the body activities. Robot assistant is a case study implementation of the cloud-based smart home environment
(CoSHE). Non-invasive sensors are used to monitor the
entire home, so the energy consumption is too high.
The role of cloud computing in healthcare is described
in Fig. 1. The IoT devices and sensors acquired user
health data information and relayed to the cloud with the
help of a wireless communication network. The monitored information is stored in the cloud repository, and
the data are preprocessed to extract, analyze, and to
determine a diagnosis based on the knowledge base in
which medical books, references, and advice are predefined for diagnosis. Based on the user health state, the
alert message is generated to doctors, ambulance, and
caregivers. The system helps to diagnosis at the initial
stage, so we provide better health care by taking early

Jagadeeswari et al. Health Inf Sci Syst (2018) 6:14

precautions. Table 1 describes the methodology used,
approaches, sensors, advantage and disadvantage of the
cloud-based healthcare system.
To predict the feasible disease in the users, Verma and
Sood [35] designed a framework to generate an alert
message. Using condition-based methodology, the cloudcentric diagnostic system is proposed to forecast the possible diseases in the user. Medical devices and sensors are
used to monitor the frequent changes in health parameters of the users based on time interval. The monitored
information collected and passed to the local processing
unit, it may be a smartphone or portable devices. The
data are analyzed in the cloud and generate a User Diagnosis Result (UDR) which consist of user’s profile information, possible disease, severity, and the probability of
occurrence of diseases. The probability is calculated by
diagnoses of user-sensor data, context-specific information, and doctor’s report. The security is provided by
the Trusted Third Party (TTP) entity by encrypting user
password with the private key. Finally, UDR result is generated by three conditions: scale-based, pattern-based
and frequency-based conditions. Examine the probability occurrence of diseases, the user divided into the safe
and unsafe state. The alert generation algorithm tests the
user’s state, and the messages are sent to doctors, caregivers and ambulance in need of emergency assistance.
The authors conduct experiments by deploying the smart
student diagnosis system where students are monitored
through sensors. The results are analyzed based on comparing it with a decision tree, k-nearest neighbor, naïve
Bayes, support vector machine. Decision tree acquires
superior performance compared to other algorithms.
The cloud-based system designed a framework [36] to
prevent and control the Zika virus. In this system, the
user registers their personal information in the mobile
application, and a unique id is generated for each user.
Users enter into the application using their respective
unique id and enter ‘Y’ or ‘N’ for the symptoms in the
form of attributes. Based on the user symptoms-response
for the health-related attributes in mobile phones, the
user is classified into infected or uninfected using a Naïve
Bayesian Network algorithm. The wireless mosquito sensors are used to track the mosquito dense site location,
dense mosquito site, breeding site location, temperature,
and humidity. The tracked information used to plot in
Google map using Geographic Positioning system (GPS)
about mosquito dense and infected user location areas.
Using Google map, the uninfected users’ can re-route
their path to safeguard them. The risky location information is sent to the government, healthcare department
to take adequate measures and prevent the spreading

Page 4 of 20

of the virus. The system yields high precision regarding
identifying the risky location with the help of the Global
Positioning System. The system is estimated by 2 million
users dataset in Amazon EC2 cloud afford high accuracy
in the diagnosis of Zika virus and GPS risk assessment.
H1N1 is an air-borne disease spread easily, affect
large population and need superfluous amount to diagnose [39]. Sandhu et al. [37] reviewed the widespread of
the H1N1 virus and proposed a cloud-based system to
monitor and control the virus. With the help of mobile
phones or web browser, the user’s response data is collected and sent to the cloud where the decision making
is effective. The symptoms are classified into primary,
secondary, tertiary and high-risk conditions. Based on
user’s symptoms-response, infected and uninfected
peoples are classified. Infected users are continuously
monitored until they get rid of the H1N1 disease. Information and suggestion box of the system component is
used to collect all information about users, doctors, hospitals and send up-to-date information and suggestion
about the H1N1 disease to the user via SMS or e-mails.
The doctors are allowed to upload only the patient’s
details, treatment process not personal information of
the patients’. An Outbreak Role Index (ORI) is used to
determine the probability of the user to spread or receive
the virus. Social network analysis generates the graph
for the infected user, and it is useful to the uninfected
users about regional exposure. The system implemented
in AmazonEC2 and performance of classification results
with high accuracy.
The IoT devices, sensors, and cloud computing jointly
present a real-time healthcare infrastructure to widely
increasing disabled and older adults. Hossain and
Muhammed [38] designed a framework for continuously monitoring of disabled and/or elder people through
sensors. The advancement of cloud computing creates
a platform to gather a tremendous amount of information tracked by the sensors and accessed by anyone at
any time everywhere. The IoT devices and sensors used
to track electrocardiogram (ECG) continuously, and the
information needs privacy, so ECG signals are enhanced
before processing. The gathered patient’s information
is stored in MYSQL before moving to the cloud and
accessed by healthcare units. Watermarking and signal
enhancement are used to secure the data on the client
side. The information is watermarked on the client side
and sent to the cloud for feature extraction and classification. Again reconstruction, watermark extraction in client side. So the specific user information is shared only
with desired healthcare services, and quality is improved.
However, the system accuracy is untested.

Verma and Sood [35] Cloud-centric IoT
based disease
diagnosis healthcare framework

Sareen et al. [36]

Sandhu et al. [37]

Hossain and Muham- Cloud-assisted indus- Framework for
mad [38]
trial Internet of
monitoring elder
Things (IIoT) -enapeople in the
bled framework for
platform of ECG
health monitoring

2.

3.

4.

5.

Smart monitoring
and controlling
of Pandemic
Influenza A (H1N1)
using social network analysis and
cloud computing

Secure Internet of
Things-based
cloud framework
to control Zika
virus outbreak

2018 Cloud-based smart
home environment

Year Methodology

Cloud-based
healthcare service
to keep track the
H1N1 virus for
early diagnosis

Framework to resist
Zika virus by
identifying the
risky-prone areas

2016 Industrial IoT- Enabled framework

2016 Social Network
Analysis

2017 IoT- based cloud
framework

Framework to
2017 Scale-based,
predict the feasible
pattern-based,
disease in the
frequency-based
users and generate
methods
an alert message
Smart student
interactive system
to monitor and
diagnose the
students

Delivering home
Real-time smart
healthcare through
home healthcare
a cloud-based
service for people
smart home envistaying alone
ronment (CoSHE)
Develop a robot
assistant to monitor the dehydration level of the
user

Pham et al. [32]

Description

1.

Title of the paper

Authors

S. no.

Table 1 Associated work of cloud-based healthcare system

One-class support
machine vector
classifier

Random decision
tree algorithm

Naïve Bayesian
Network

State-of-the-art
classification
algorithms, Secure
Socket Layer

Gradient boosting decision tree
classification
algorithm

Algorithm
The system is useful
for elder people
and disabled
people

Advantage

A simple algorithm
is used

High security is
provided to user’s
information

No immediate alert
generation.
Need security

Instead of NBN, the
decision tree can be
used to classify the
users

The system needs
security

No alert generation

Disadvantage

ECG recording
The patient’s
Short time monitoring
device, IoT devices,
information’s are
sensors
secured by adding
noise to it

–

Wireless mosquito
sensors and
devices

Blood pressure, body Real-time feedback
weight, temperasystem
ture sensor, ECG
pattern, blood
pressure, Respiratory sensor, Emotiv
EPOC sensor, stress
measuring sensor

Passive infrared
sensor, Grid-EYE
thermopile array
sensors, wireless
IMU, smart garment, a smartwatch

Sensors

Jagadeeswari et al. Health Inf Sci Syst (2018) 6:14
Page 5 of 20

Jagadeeswari et al. Health Inf Sci Syst (2018) 6:14

Securing privacy of patients with fog computing
IoT generates a vast amount of data to be processed in
real-time and delay is caused due to the transfer of data
between cloud computing and end-user. To diminish
the delay, Verma and Sood [40] proposed a fog assisted
remote monitoring healthcare services and real-time
alert generation. The system architecture consists of
three layers: device layer where the IoT devices and medical sensors collect information about the user, fog layer
analyze the patient’s information using classification
rules, and cloud layer notifies warning alerts to the family
members. The intermediate fog layer is more suitable for
real-time analysis of sensors data with low latency and
high quality of service. Two types of communication are
engaged between fog and cloud layer: conventional communication updates the cloud with patients information
and smart communication retrieve the queried patients
history information from the cloud. The patients address
their health-related information on their mobile phones,
and the unique patients identification code is generated
for each patient. Then event classification classifies the
patients into normal and abnormal through Bayesian
Belief Network (BBN) based on patients information. The
Degree of Impact (DOI) is the probability of event calculated based on health, environment, and behavior related
attributes of the patients. When DOI exceed the level,
then fog layer sent a signal to cloud for further analysis.
In the cloud, again the patients classified into the safe and
unsafe state. The temporal health index is calculated for
unsafe state patients, and the real-time alert message is
generated to responder and hospitals. The proposed system validated by 67 patients monitored at smart homes
in the AmazonEC2 cloud and yields a better result. Effective decision making and real-time alert generation are
achieved in fog assisted IoT enabled system.
In the developing countries, the diagnostic test for chikungunya is not easily accessible and reasonable. Sood
and Mahajan [41] designed a framework for fog assisted
healthcare system in diagnosing and preventing the chikungunya virus. Early diagnosis of chikungunya is too
hard for healthcare services. To solve this, the authors
proposed an effective early diagnosis at home or remote
areas to minimize the mortality rate. The users are continuously monitored and the data are collected in the
cloud. The authors designed a fog assisted cloud-based
healthcare system in which fog is introduced between the
mobile and cloud to analyze the real-time data at the edge
of the network. The data are processed in fog and finally
stored in the cloud. The author classifies the user’s into
five different categories: infected, uninfected, exposed,
susceptible, and exposed based on the symptoms track
by wearable sensors embedded in the user. The user’s
infection is categorized based on their symptoms using a

Page 6 of 20

J48 decision tree. Compared to other classification algorithm J48 results with high accuracy and reduce response
time. Temporal network analysis is used to differentiate the risky infected location, safeguard the uninfected
user, stay away from the infected user and generate an
alert message to the government agencies in the direction
of taking immediate control steps. For diagnosing chikungunya, the system provides better performance and
active distribution of messages in the healthcare system.
Fog is also known as edge computing, which is the
extension of cloud computing created by Cisco. The execution part of fog computing in healthcare monitoring
system is depicted in Fig. 2. The fog is an intermediatory
between the end user and cloud to reduce the latency and
improve the quality of service. Fog analyze the real-time
sensitive data at the edge computing instead of sending a huge amount of data to the cloud. IoT devices like
smartwatch and smart dress track user information and
transmitting sensing information continuously to fog
using wireless protocols such as Bluetooth, Wi-Fi, etc.
Fog layer generally communicates with several protocols
and have multiple interfaces to provide effective response
[42]. The data are analyzed, notified, processed, classified
into infected and uninfected users using an algorithm,
and the real-time decision is made in fog, and finally,
data are stored in the cloud. From the cloud, the message generated to doctors, hospitals and family members.
The Table 2 illustrates the pros and cons of the fog-based
healthcare system.
Sareen et al. [43] proposed a secure system to predict
and prevent the Zika virus with the integration of IoT
sensors, cloud computing, fog computing and mobile
phones. The system reduces the communication cost and
latency time by switched the fog computing in between
the cloud and end user. Mobile phone and sensors are
front-end section connected to back-end cloud via middle section fog computing. The user registers their name
and personal information in the mobile-based application. For each registered user, the unique reference number is automatically generated. The users communicate
with doctors, healthcare agencies, public authorities,
hospitals by providing their reference number. The fuzzy
K-nearest neighbor algorithm is used to classify the users
into infected and uninfected based on their symptoms.
Preventive measures are provided to the users who are
diagnosed as uninfected. The user’s locations are automatically tracked through Geographic positioning system in mobile phones. Along with that, mosquito sensors
discover the breeding sites in risky areas and the sensed
information are used to plot the infected users in Google
map and message sent to uninfected users about the risky
location to safeguard them. The details of risky location
are sent to the government to take preventive and control

Jagadeeswari et al. Health Inf Sci Syst (2018) 6:14

Page 7 of 20

Fig. 2 Fog computing-based healthcare monitoring architecture

measures. The system is implemented in Amazon EC2
cloud and provide the efficient result of high accuracy for
94.5% of million users in the early diagnosis of Zika virus
outbreak.
Sensors or actuators are connected to many physical devices to gather a huge amount of information. Not
only in the medical field, sensors also play a vital role in
transportation, security, business, and manufacturing.
Traditional cloud computing is a centralized distribution, so the system moves from cloud to fog computing to
conserve network bandwidth, address a security concern,
operating reliability, access more data and process it efficiently. In the cloud, the data are collected, stored, analyzed, processed to make a decision and notified wherein
fog; the data are analyzed, notified, processed and finally
stored in the cloud. For real-time interactive services,
fog provides better performance compared to the cloud.
Nandyala and Kim [44] proposed a C2F architecture for
U-healthcare monitoring for smart homes and hospitals.
Through sensors, users are monitored in homes and hospitals. The data are analyzed, and the message is sent to
doctors indeed for an emergency. However, the real-time
smart homes and hospitals system yet to be deployed and
its accuracy remains untested.
The feature of electrocardiogram (ECG) [46, 47] is
extracted as a study of healthcare IoT. Many cardiac diseases are diagnosed using ECG, and the patients should
be monitored 24/7 continuously. The huge amount of
data have been transmitted over the network, so the

possibility of occurring error also high. The single error
like bit error, packet dropping, and transmission latency
lead to increase mortality. To overcome the issue; Gia
et al. [45] proposed the fog layer between the gateway
and remote cloud server to improve the quality of service,
reduce the transmitted data and save network bandwidth.
The ECG feature extraction template contains ECG preprocessing, wavelet transformation, and ECG feature
extraction. They have exploited a light-weight transform
mechanism to extract heart rate, P wave, and R wave. The
extracted patients information is sent to the doctors to
take immediate treatment in case of an emergency. Geographical location of the user is determined by tracking
device, and immediate actions are taken by caretakers.
However, electrooculography [48], electromyography
[49], electroencephalography [50], electrocardiogram are
important to diagnose human abnormalities, yet ECG
extraction only proposed. Currently, real-time remote
monitoring of EEG to record the electrical activity of the
brain is proposed yet not implemented.

Enhancement of healthcare applications using
Internet of Things
The students while working on radio frequency identification (RFID) at MIT in late 2000, announced the
word “IoT” [51, 52]. Healthcare monitoring architecture
using IoT depicts in Fig. 3. IoT devices integrated with
the sensors like wearable IoT sensors, climatic sensors,
temperature sensors, etc., to track users physiological

Sood and Mahajan
[41]

Sareen et al. [43]

Nandyala and Kim
[44]

Gia et al. [45]

2.

3.

4.

5.

Framework for the
early detection
of chikungunya
and to generate
an alert message
to the user about
risky locations

Proposed remote
patient healthcare
monitoring at
smart homes all
through an emergency

Description

Fog computing in
healthcare internet
of things: a case
study on ecg feature extraction

From cloud to fog
and IoT-based realtime U-healthcare
monitoring for
smart homes and
hospitals
Fog-based real-time
diagnosis of
cardiac diseases
using ECG

2015 A case study of ECG

Light-weight transform mechanism

–

Fuzzy k-nearest
neighbor algorithm

J48 decision tree
algorithm

2017 Temporal network
analysis

2017 Integration of fog,
cloud, mobile and
IoT devices

Bayesian Belief
Network

Algorithm

2018 Event triggeringbased data transmission

Year Methodology

Described the
2016 Real-time U-healthsalient features,
care monitoring
differences and
similarities of cloud
and fog computing in healthcare
monitoring

An intelligent and
Narrated the history,
secure system for
spreading reasons
predicting and preof Zika virus. Proventing Zika virus
posed a fog-based
outbreak using fog
system to control
computing
the Zika virus
outbreak

A fog based healthcare framework for
chikungunya

Verma and Sood [40] Fog assisted- IoT
enabled patient
health monitoring
in smart homes

1.

Title of the paper

Authors

S.no.

Table 2 Illustrating the pros and cons of the fog-based healthcare system
Disadvantage

Fog conserve network bandwidth

Deliver effective
healthcare service

Deliver effective
healthcare service

Need security

Patients are not considered and tested

The decision tree will
be used instead of a
k-nearest neighbor
algorithm for better
result

Need security

Compared to
Hackers can easily
neural network,
change the patient’s
linear regression,
information in the
k-nearest classificacloud so need
tion algorithm BBN
security to access
provide a good
the data
result

Advantage

Bio-signals from sen- Real-time feedback
sor nodes
system

Sensors or actuators

Mosquito sensor

Biosensors, body
sensors, climate
sensor, mosquito
sensor, temperature sensor, GPS
sensor, RFID

Bio-sensors, RFIDs,
smart devices,
smart monitors

Sensors

Jagadeeswari et al. Health Inf Sci Syst (2018) 6:14
Page 8 of 20

Jagadeeswari et al. Health Inf Sci Syst (2018) 6:14

Page 9 of 20

Fig. 3 IoT-based healthcare monitoring architecture

information, atmospheric information, and temperature.
Physiological information such as body temperature,
diabetes, blood pressure, heart rate monitored by the
body sensor and biosensor. For instance, smartwatch
determines the body temperature, oximeter, accelerometer, and track GPS location. Sensors embedded in clothing track ECG, EMG, pressure rate of the patients. The
observed data transferred to the cloud through networks
for storage and message is conveyed to clients, i.e., doctor’s mobile phone/PDA, family members, and hospitals.
Table 3 mentioned below represent the methodology,
algorithm, advantage, and disadvantage of the IoT enabled healthcare system.
Traditionally ICU patients are monitored by the nurse
24/7 alternatively. Still, it is a challenging task because
Small mistake or error also lead to patients’ death. Prajapati et al. [53] proposed a real-time IoT-based system to
monitor the ICU patients continuously. Bedside patient
monitor is used to screen the invasive and noninvasive
blood pressure, temperature, capnography, ECG, FASTspO2, respiration, conventional diagnostic, BIS and
cardiac output. Bedside patient monitor continuously
transmits the heart rate, oxygen level, blood pressure,
pressure in the brain of the patients through interconnection networks to the server. The probe can be inserted
into the brain to measure the intracranial pressure. Here,
mobile phones or personal digital assistant (PDA) is used
to communicate with doctors. The real-time system
analyzes the patient’s data, track the parameters until
crosses its boundary immediately notification is sent
to the Emergency Care Unit and appropriate doctors.
The system provides patients’ information to the concerned doctors to take precautionary steps. The authors
designed architecture to monitor the ICU patient, minimize the possibility of human errors and improve fast
communication.

The rapid increase of diseases, insufficient health advisors, need for continuous monitoring of discharged, elder
people lead to the necessity for Technology-Enabled
Care (TEC). Baali et al. [54] designed power-aware wearable devices connected with the IoT for the real-time
healthcare system and revised the state of signal processing, power management, communication, and computing architecture for IoT sensors. Wearable sensors
play a vital role in TEC to measure and monitor ECG,
blood pressure, heart rate, the oxygen level of patients
without affecting their regular activities. The sensors
directly connected to web-based services to transfer
messages through wi-fi or 4G network. Biopotential signal processing includes ECG, EEG, cardiovascular diseases (CVD), Electroencephalography require a Holter
monitor to screen 24/7 patients continuously with the
help of different types of electrodes. Through electrodes
in sensor provide low power consumption and excellent user-friendly wearable devices. Biopotential electrodes skin-interface categorized into dry, wet, insulated
and non-contact electrodes altering ionic current in the
body into the electronic current. Blood pressure (BP)
sensor used to monitor the hypertension of the patients
by wearing an inflatable bag around the arm. Ambulatory BP is frequently monitored lead bruise under the
cuff. Oxygen level measurement calculates the cardiorespiratory health grade based on blood oxygenation in
real-time. Inertial sensors are used to track the human
physical activities. In real-time sensors monitor, collect
the information, analyzed, processed (filtering, segmentation, compressed) and features are extracted before
transmitting to the cloud or any database.
The concept of IoT is emerging in smart transportation, smart education, smart cities, smart business
and smart manufacturing. Smart health bridge the gap
between electronic health and electronic-governance in

Authors

Prajapati et al. [53]

Baali et al. [54]

Rani et al. [55]

Woo et al. [56]

Sood and Mahajan
[57]

s.no.

1.

2

3.

4.

5.

–

Algorithm

Proposed a reliable
OneM2 M based
IoT system for PHD

2017 OneM2 M based IoT
system

2018 Smart health

Fuzzy C-means
algorithm

Fault tolerant algorithm

Fuzzy K-Nearest
Neighbor algorithm

Reviewed the state
2018 Technology-enabled Korotkoff method,
of IoT sensors
care (TEC)
Beer–Lambert law
which are the
heart of healthcare
monitoring

Wearable IoT sensor Healthcare system
2017 Social network
based healthcare
for detecting and
analysis
system for identifycontrolling chikuning and controlling
gunya virus
chikungunya virus

A reliable IoT system
for personal
healthcare devices

Year Methodology

Proposed to monitor 2018 Intelligent Real-Time
the ICU patients
IoT Based System
continuously
(IRTBS)

Description

Smart health: a novel Early diagnosis and
paradigm to conpreventive meastrol the chikunguures to control the
nya virus
chikungunya virus

Empowering technology enabled
care using IoT and
smart devices: a
review

An intelligent realtime IoT based
system (IRTBS) for
monitoring ICU
patient

Title of the paper

Table 3 Reviewed advantage and disadvantage of the IoT-based healthcare system

Deliver effective
healthcare service

Byzantine faulttolerant algorithm
is used instead of
normal fault tolerant
algorithm

Security implementation is needed

Harvesting ambient The use of gel in
energy reduces
electrodes cause
the power gap and
skin irritation and
meets the power
discomfort for the
requirements
users. IoT sensors
require high power
consumption

Wearable IoT senHigh bandwidth
Power consumption is
sors, RFID tags, GPS
efficiency, fast alert
high by using varisensor, climate
generation
ous sensors
detector sensor

Personal healthcare
devices and sensors

Disadvantage

The system helps
The system is yet to
the doctor to
be deployed, and
spare more time in
its accuracy remains
the decision with
untested
accurate observation

Advantage

Wearable IoT devices Real-time feedback
and mosquito
system
sensors

Biopotential signal
processing, Blood
pressure sensor,
Oxygen level
measurement,
Inertial sensors

Bedside patient
monitor, wearable
sensors

Sensor

Jagadeeswari et al. Health Inf Sci Syst (2018) 6:14
Page 10 of 20

Jagadeeswari et al. Health Inf Sci Syst (2018) 6:14

smart cities to monitor the patients real-time. Rani et al.
[55] implemented the concept of smart health with the
advancement of the IoT. The wearable devices and IoT
sensors used to monitor the user’s activities, and the
data are processed at the edge of the network to reduce
the cost and latency time. In traditional health system
patients visit doctors directly for the illness and routine
checkup. In E-health the patients and doctors communicate with the help of information and communication
technologies. In the Telehealth system, the patients are
monitored in the remote care through telecommunication technology. The smart health is the extension of
E-health and Telehealth, where real-time sensors monitor
the patients, diagnose and alert message sent to doctors
immediately with efficient decision making, fast communication, and fast delivery of data. The authors designed
the architecture of smart health in which patients register through mobile phones and get a unique id number.
Using their id number, they update their symptoms frequently. Mosquito sensors are used to find the breeding
sites and map that into google for uninfected users, the
government via GPS.
In the personal healthcare system, sensors are denoted
as Application DedicatedNode-Application Entity (ADNAE) that monitor and gathered the surrounding data and
communicated to the Middle Node-Common Service
Entity (MN-CSE). Woo et al. [56] proposed a reliable
oneM2 M based IoT system for real-time monitoring Personal Healthcare Devices (PHD). MN-CSE is the efficient
communicator between AND-AE and Infrastructure
Node-Common Service Entity (IN-CSE). The OneM2 M
protocol is used for communication and doctors can
access the PHD biomedical data. The workflow of the
system is depicted as a communication message flow
between PHD and the gateway. System failures occur due
to power shortage, hardware malfunction, software bugs,
or environmental hazards. The fault-tolerant algorithm is
used to recover the data from system failure. Here, faulttolerance purposed with daisy chain where all gateways
are connected in a chain to store backup copies of previous gateway ADNs. At the same time, two gateways
(server) fault can be recovered.
In developing countries, diagnosis solution is not easily affordable and accessible. Sood and Mahajan [57]
designed a system architecture consists of three layers:
a wearable IoT sensor layer, the fog layer, and the cloud
layer. Wearable IoT sensor layer collects data from the
location sensor, health sensor, meteorological sensor,
environment sensor and drug sensor. The health data,
location data, meteorological data, environment data,
and medicinal data are collected and moved to the fog
layer. Fog is the intermediate layer between IoT sensors
and cloud to process and analyze all the tracked data in

Page 11 of 20

real-time. The data further preprocessed and stored in
the cloud layer. The fuzzy C-means algorithm is used to
classify the users into infected and uninfected based on
their symptoms. In the fog layer, once the user is diagnosed, then an alert message is sent to the users mobile
whether they are infected or not. If they are infected, the
sensors monitor them frequently and alert message pass
to doctors and hospitals. In the cloud layer, social network analysis [58–60] (SNA) graph is generated for the
infected users and mosquito breeding sites. The system
uses information fragmentation and key sharing mechanism to avoid unlicensed access to data and provide
security. The system experiments with different classification algorithms like Naïve Bayes, fuzzy C-means,
fuzzy K-nearest neighbor, and neural network. The fuzzy
C-means produce high accuracy compared to other classification algorithms.

Development of healthcare sector in the Big Data
era
Big Data analytics [61] in healthcare have been used to
predict diseases, cure epidemic diseases, avoid preventable deaths and improves the quality of life. The role of Big
Data architecture in healthcare is depicted in Fig. 4. The
system collects the wearable IoT sensor data, climatic
data, temperature data, environmental data, location data
and medical data in different forms such as structured,
unstructured, and semi-structured data. Then the data
are integrated and visualized in cloud computing. The
data are pre-processing in-database analytics by extracting, cleaning, statistical analysis, and the decisions are
forward to doctors, remote users, and ambulance. Table 4
represents the merits and demerits of the Big Data in the
healthcare system.
Wearable sensor devices continuously monitor the
users and gather a large amount of structured and
unstructured data called Big Data. From huge data, useful information is segregated for decision making is a
tough process. Cloud computing used to store and manage the data on the remote server hosted on the internet
cause more latency. To reduce the latency and improve
the efficiency fog layer is introduced before the cloud to
gather, analyze and process the data. Finally, the data are
stored in the cloud to take a fast decision in real-time. IoT
devices connected to a network to collect and exchange
large data, i.e., Big Data. It is difficult to store, manage,
analyze the meaningful information in the Big Data
related to healthcare. Manogaran et al. [62] proposed a
new architecture for IoT devices to store and process the
sensor data (Big Data) for healthcare applications. The
authors designed the Meta Fog-Redirection (MF-R) with
Grouping and choosing (GC) architecture for IoT and
Big Data ecosystem and to protect and prevent the Big

Jagadeeswari et al. Health Inf Sci Syst (2018) 6:14

Page 12 of 20

Fig. 4 Big Data architecture related to healthcare

Data from trespassers. IoT devices collect the user’s heart
rate, respiratory rate, body temperature, blood pressure,
sugar rate through sensors and move to fog for further
processing. During an emergency, the alert message sent
to doctors through fog computing. In the cloud platform,
Apache Pig and Apache HBase are used to store the Big
Data.
For real-time remote monitoring, handling Big Data is
the important challenge in healthcare decision making.
Patients prioritization in telemedicine is an issue in Big
Data analytics. Kalid et al. [63] connect the patient prioritization and real-time remote monitoring of healthcare services through Big Data six ‘Vs.’.Telemedicine for
chronic diseases (heart disease, blood pressure, diabetic)
needs continuous remote monitoring of patients through
sensors. Sensors gather user’s information in real-time
and telemedicine provide healthcare services via doctors.
Increasing patients leads to the increase in the problem
of scalability, i.e., Priority overhead whom to serve first.
To provide sufficient telemedicine services, they check
the population aging and disaster into account. Patients
prioritization occurs in three areas: surgery, transplantation, and surgical room. To solve, triage is used to decide
the order of patients based on the severity.
In the emerging world, the IoT and Big Data analytics
play a vital role in the smart healthcare system. Firouzi
et al. [64] reviewed the advanced healthcare system with
the application of wearable devices and sensors and the
need for Big Data to inform these devices. The healthcare IoT system had three components: (i) body sensor
area network used to record the patient’s behavior data
and environmental information such as temperature,
humidity, date, time via body-wear sensors or implanted

sensors. (ii) Internet-connected smart gateway, i.e., fog
layer or local access network performs data preprocessing, protocol conversion, data filtering and mining and
local notification to the patients. (iii) Cloud and Big Data
support layer to store the all sensor information, analyzed, predict the decision and generate a message to the
caregivers in need of an emergency.
Electronic Health Records (EHR) have the volatile
growth of medical and health data need to a massive
analysis of data based on Big Data analytics. First, the
hospital dataset for outpatients are collected and more
doctors are needed to treat them. Hu et al. [65] designed
the Simultaneously Aided Diagnostic Model (SADM)
to increase the working efficiency of outpatient doctors
and decrease their working strength. The functions of
the designed model are data acquisition, data storage,
data preprocessing, feature extraction, machine learning,
performance testing and finally instantaneous aided diagnosis to reference indices for the doctors. Data acquisition gathers outpatients’ medication records, treatment
schemes, treatment expenses, treatment process results,
inspection results and image information. Machine
learning trains the data with past medical dataset using
Support Vector Machine and Neural Network algorithm
to classify the hyperlipidemia.
In the today’s emerging medical world, Big Data analytics role is to process a large volume and variety of
data and store it as an efficient way to extract, update
and delete the data easily. The data are stored in a multidimensional matrix called tensor based on concept hierarchy of attributes in the abstraction level. Sandhu et al.
[66] proposed a tensor- and GrC- based data mining
approach to address the three challenges like abstraction,

Firouzi et al. [64]

Hu et al. [65]

Sandhu et al. [66]

3.

4.

5.

Reviewed the
importance of IoT
devices and Big
Data analytics for
smart healthcare
system

Stochastic gradient
descent algorithm

Algorithm

2018 Simultaneously
aided diagnosis
model

2018 Big Data analytics

–

Support vector
machine and
neural network
algorithm

–

2018 The real-time remote Quantitative methmonitoring system
ods

2018 Meta fog redirection

Year Methodology

TDRM: tensor-based The proposed frame- 2017 Tensor- and GrCdata representawork for effectively
based data mining
tion and mining for
mining healthcare
approach
healthcare data in
data
cloud computing
environments

Simultaneously aided Machine learning
diagnosis model
based simultanefor outpatient
ous aided diagnodepartments via
sis for outpatients
healthcare Big Data
analytics

Internet-of-Things
and Big Data for
smarter healthcare: from device
to architecture,
applications, and
analytics

Proposed a triage
and prioritization
of remote health
monitoring for
telemedicine
patients with Big
Data analytics

Kalid et al. [63]

2.

Based real time
remote health
monitoring systems: a review on
patients prioritization and related
“Big Data” using
body sensors
information and
communication
technology

Manogaran et al. [62] A new architecture of Designed the MF-R
Internet of Things
with GC architecand Big Data ecoture to store and
system for secured
process Big Data
smart healthcare
for healthcare
monitoring and
application
alerting system

Description

1.

Title of the paper

Author

S.no

Table 4 Related work of Big Data era in healthcare system

–

–

Body-wearable sensors or implanted
sensors

Body sensors

Wearable devices,
IoT sensors

Sensors

Disadvantage

Better privacy

Deliver effective
healthcare service

Cost-effective

Variation reduces
cost via early
detection

In three challenges,
privacy is not
attained effectively

Sensors may use
instead of collecting
records manually

The system is yet to
be deployed, and
its accuracy remains
untested

Triage does not
provide an accurate
result

Grouping and choos- Amazon S3 doesn’t
ing to protect and
provide accessible
prevent Big Data
storage
from intruders

Advantage

Jagadeeswari et al. Health Inf Sci Syst (2018) 6:14
Page 13 of 20

Jagadeeswari et al. Health Inf Sci Syst (2018) 6:14

heterogeneity, and privacy. Granularity Computing (GrC)
is an art of solving computing problems at the different
level of granularity and extracting relevant information
by removing irrelevant details from the available dataset. The proposed framework divided into three phases
for effectively mining healthcare data. Data matrix is the
first phase in which raw text data, medical data, audio,
videos are stored in Health data Tensor (HdTr). In the
second phase, using concept hierarchy, the data matrix
is spanned over the different level of granularity. The
third phase, the granules are used for query processing and final result formation. The performance evaluation is tested by experimenting with tensor-based data
representation results in fast computation and lower
cost compared to PARAFAC2 and CANDELINC. The
diabetic dataset is converted to tensor format using tensor toolbox available in MATLAB [67] for the proposed
application.

Interactive healthcare applications
with smartphones
The smartphone is the most popular communicating
device grown rapidly and emerge as a convenient tool
in healthcare application in terms of sensing, smartness,
and connectivity. Interactive healthcare application using
a smartphone is depicted in Fig. 5. The smartphone with
sensors tracked the patient’s body temperature, blood
pressure, skin temperature, accelerometer, moisture,
climatic factors, etc., with the help of Bluetooth/WiFi,
3G/4G network. The information is stored in cloud computing and delivered to doctor’s and family members

Fig. 5 Mobile healthcare architecture

Page 14 of 20

mobile phones through SMS or emails with the help of
network connectivity. The advantages of using mobile
in healthcare application are real-time communication,
increasing diagnosis accuracy by monitoring continuously, seamless flow of patients’ information, and direct
patients’ record management. As shown below, Table 5
depicts the interactive usage of the smartphone in a
healthcare application.
In both developed and developing countries, the number of greying population is increased with chronic
diseases like diabetes, hypertension, heart disease,
cholesterol, etc., and need continuous monitoring to
diagnose at an early stage. Leu et al. [68] proposed the
smartphone-based real-time monitoring of physiological data through Wireless body sensors. Sensors 24/7
continuously monitor the patients connected to the
smartphones by which users carry wherever they go
and always close to the sensor. The authors designed a
Mobile Physiological Sensor System (MoPSS) which collects users physiological information like blood pressure,
ECG, heart rate, temperature, blood glucose and oxygen
saturation data from the smart shirt wearable by the user.
The smart shirt allows us to collect the real-time physiological data which is then uploaded to the health cloud
after displaying on a smartphone. The smart shirt wearable patients feel comfortable and move easily. The system provides real-time feedback and alert be generated
directly, so the caregivers take care of the patients at the
early stage. Real-time transmission of data is possible
with the help of wireless protocols like Bluetooth, WiFi,
ZigBee, GPRS, and 3G/4G. The Medium Access Protocol

Esposito et al. [69] A smart mobile,
self-configuring,
context-aware
architecture for
personal health
monitoring

Zhang et al. [70]

Venson et al. [71]

Kao et al. [72]

2.

3

4.

5.

Integrating a mobile
health applications
for self-management to enhance
Telecare system

Diagnostic concordance between
mobile interfaces
and conventional
workstations for
emergency imaging assessment

Healthcare-based on
cloud electrocardiogram system:
a medical center
experience in middle Taiwan

A smartphone-based
wearable sensors
for monitoring realtime physiological
data

Leu et al. [68]

1.

Title of the paper

Author

s.no.

Year Methodology

2018 Cloud-electrocardiogram system
(C-ECGS)

Proposed androidbased self-seeking
healthcare services
from mobile-based
application

2017 Design science
research methodology

Investigate image2018 Between-subject
based diagnosis
task-analysis
in one hand and
conventional workstation on another
hand

The study was
conducted to surf
the patients ECG
pattern on the
smartphone

The study was con2018 Architecture level
ducted to monitor
modifiability analyand manage irregusis (ALMA)
lar cardiac rhythm
by manipulating
both sensors and
mobile devices

Real-time healthcare 2018 Mobile Physiologimonitoring system
cal Sensor System
to record vital signs
(MoPSS)
of users via integration of smartphone
and sensors

Description

Table 5 Illumination of smart-phone related healthcare system

–

–

–

Context-extraction
algorithms, pattern
matching, and fire
ruling algorithm

–

Algorithm

–

–

–

Biomedical and noninvasive devices

Wireless body sensors

Sensors

Disadvantage

More effective
e-health adoption
of mobile-based
technology

Fast diagnosis

Increase the quality
of medical service
by reducing diagnose time

This study may not
apply to all remotehealthcare application

Unknown processing
time

Need security because
a hacker can alter the
ECG graph

Efficient communica- Short time monitoring
tion between doctors and patients

Convenient and cost- Energy consumption
effective healthcare
issue because using
solution
smartphone continuously to transfer and
display the data

Advantage

Jagadeeswari et al. Health Inf Sci Syst (2018) 6:14
Page 15 of 20

Jagadeeswari et al. Health Inf Sci Syst (2018) 6:14

(MAC) protocol is used to reduce the power consumption, latency and packet loss rate.
The new emerging trend of smartphone healthcare
application along with cellular communication networks
and wireless sensors is a tremendous improvement in
technology. Esposito et al. [69] proposed an ontologybased model for personal health monitoring. Here, the
biomedical and non-invasive sensors attached to the
patients collected periodic information about their movements, vital signs and sent to mobile phones. The information is stored and verified with personalized medical
rules already deployed in mobile phones. The information is moved to caregivers frequently, and severity information is conveyed to the doctors through SMS or email.
The authors presented four-tier architectural layers in
which low layer information only known by next layer: (i)
Sensing tier collects biomedical information and store it
in mobile phones. (ii) Perceptual tier extracts vital signs
and contextual information. (iii) Reasoning tier detects
possible anomalies by incorporating specific rules. (iv)
Actuating tier communicates with doctors regarding
emergency by sending email or text messages. High-level
ontology and low-level ontology for data shared with the
components is described, and the system is implemented
in Java and released to run on Android Operating System
(AOS). The proposed architecture has been employed
to monitor cardiac arrhythmias by Amiigo bracelet
in a real-time application. However, the model needs
improvement in the continuous monitoring because the
life of the battery reduced fastly as per the usage of the
smartphone.
Electrocardiogram (ECG) plays a vital role to measure the electrical activities of the heartbeat over a period
by placing electrodes on the skin surface. It is the best
method to diagnose the blockage of blood flow in the
heart muscle, i.e., Acute Myocardial Infraction patients.
Traditionally it takes more time to admit the patients in
the emergency ward and to diagnose the heart attack.
Later, PC is connected to the intranet of the hospital to
verify the ECG. In PC, doctors have to download and
install the Picture Archiving and Communication System (PACS) image browser to check the patients ECG.
All those methods take additional time to diagnose
and result in the increase of mortality rate. Zhang et al.
[70] proposed a cloud-based Electrocardiogram system attached to a smartphone to browse the patients
ECG pattern on the mobile screen. Cloud computing
and mobile environment jointly emerge and paid a way
to the healthcare system in early detection. The authors
designed the architecture describe the workflow of
cloud-based electrocardiogram system in which comprises six subsystems. In medical operation subsystem,
the ECG report is sent to ECG server in the form of a

Page 16 of 20

graph. The main system had the details of patients such
as name, age, gender, reference number, medical record,
shift table of cardiologists, and ECG graph to C-ECGS.
The SMS deliver the ECG graph to the consultant cardiologist for further reference during an emergency. As a
result, mobile saves the treasured time, reduces mortality
and allows doctors to diagnose remotely.
The image-based diagnosis process like MRI and CI
need to interpret image interact with the dedicated workstations. Each workstation had highly trained technical
users like medical physicist and radiologist to examine
the images connected with the picture archiving and
communication system. The results may be random and
take a long time to diagnose. To overcome this problem,
Venson et al. [71] proposed an image assessment through
mobile devices with speed, complexity, and power to
examine the real-time interpretation of radiology exams.
A smartphone recently had a huge variety of radiologyrelated application for image interpretation. The authors
designed the experiment to study the diagnostic concordance between mobile and workstations to diagnose
the image. In most cases, mobile diagnose results are
same as the full-featured workstation. However, lack of
some tools in the mobile viewer to diagnose image-based
assessment.
Chronic illness like diabetes, heart diseases, strokes,
asthma, are growing rapidly needs the availability of
healthcare resources. Kao et al. [72] developed an
Android-based self-management application for homebased healthcare services. The application described the
telecare technology which allows patients to consult with
doctors as an online service. The system examined with
various methodologies like telecare service model development, design science perspective, system architecture
and software development, requirement modeling and
implementation. The telecare architecture connects the
home box with blood pressure gauge and Android OS
smartphone to monitor the vital sign and inform clinical
staffs and remote patients.

Current challenges in the personalized healthcare
In the healthcare applications, data privacy and security
are the main issues as it transfers over the unsecured
channel. The patient’s medical data consists of personal
information, health conditions, diagnostic reports, and
its related treatments are sensitive. Hackers can modify
the health-related information which results in misdiagnosis, or inaccurate assessment of diseases leads to inappropriate treatment and thus increases mortality rate.
The transmission of medical information monitored
through IoT devices is susceptible to security issues. Data
security is considered as an essential factor for healthcare
applications as it transmits user’s sensitive information.

Jagadeeswari et al. Health Inf Sci Syst (2018) 6:14

At the hardware level, the security issues are found in
terms of compatibility due to the requirements of each
component such as the operating system, storage space
and network architecture. At the software level, the security issue arises due to the nature of software used, as
some of the software supports all programming language
while other supports only specific software. For secure
communication between IoT devices, SSL/TLS protocol
is widely used. Cryptographic techniques can be used to
provide secure communication and require more energy
and processing power which are not feasible for wireless
sensors and computing devices used in healthcare applications. Developing algorithms and schemes to protect
the health-related information from unauthorized users
is a challenging issue. Schematic errors in the stage of
design and implementation also result in security risks.
Healthcare system faces many challenges due to senior population and increase of chronic diseases in various countries. In the healthcare system, another issue is
a shortage of nursing facility and high QoS with low cost.
Today we are wasting more time in hospitals by physically
measuring biometric status and transfer the data between
systems to store and access later. Manual entry of data
have bit error, and difficult to access various types of data
like records, image data. IoT devices and biosensors used
in healthcare applications monitor blood pressure, body
temperature, heart rate, glucose level continuously. By
wearing sensors uninterruptedly may cause skin rashes
and also consumes more power. For example, continuously nursing Ambulatory BP monitor the patients over
24/7 at regular interval might cause bruises beneath the
cuff, disturbance in their sleep and painful at high BP.
Another challenge is a data processing at sensors due to
resource constraints like the high cost of energy. Biopotential signal processing such as ECG, EEG, monitoring
through sensors reduces the human error still need a low
power consumption user-friendly sensor devices.
Big Data carries an overflow of real-world healthrelated data in a structured and unstructured form for
monitoring patients 24/7. The evolution of technologies
shifted the traditional mode of accessing data to six V’s.
Storage challenge is postured by volume, velocity, and
variety of Big Data analytics. The traditional storage system is difficult to achieve in Big Data analytics; so cloud
storage system like Amazon S2, Amazon EC2, Elastic
Block Store provides a solution to the Big Data analytics
by offers unlimited storage system with fault tolerance.
Along with storage, another challenge is transferring Big
Data to cloud service with reduced cost and increased
speed. Here; the main issues are storage, retrieval of
information and additionally extracting meaningful patterns using various algorithms. In the cloud, most works
rely on Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (Amazon EC2)

Page 17 of 20

to provide resizable compute capacity in the cloud. The
cloud platform is not utilized efficiently to meet the rapidly growing needs for Big Data analytics and healthcare
information. Alternative platforms like openCloud, owncloud, Dropbox, were deployed for effective experimental
evaluation.
The major challenges while using smartphone-based
healthcare application are inadequate to predict the
diseases, low quality of data deliverance, performance
analysis, data storage and privacy prevention. Utilizing
smartphone supported self-monitoring sensors are costeffective and require a personalized treatment plan for a
patient who is suffering from a specific illness. Though
smartphone-based healthcare applications provide a
great opportunity to improve the health, senior citizens
cannot rely on smartphones all the time as they are not
aware of technology and unable to use them effectively.

Discussions on the promising solutions for the
real‑time problems
IoT devices and sensors make users life more comfortable
and provide a feasible solution to healthcare applications
such as monitoring blood pressure, heart rate, diabetes, home care, vital sign monitoring like ECG, EEG. To
visualize the usage of wearable devices in the healthcare
system of older adults is a better understanding of the
changes in their health conditions and promote their
health management by themselves. Through wearable
devices, the elders are eager to obtain the health advice
to improve their living standards healthily [73]. The success of the healthcare system depends on security as well.
Security in healthcare application using IoT devices,
sensors, and actuators has been emerging research and
worth for studying. In healthcare, patient’s health data
moved with the help of wireless network like Bluetooth,
ZigBee, Wi-Fi, WiMAX, UMTS (Universal Mobile Telecommunication System), so malicious users must not
be miscalculated. Since wireless network communication
is not interned, malicious threats even pose important
risks to the patients. In real-time healthcare applications, we want to provide strong security and privacy in
the application design, deployment and implementation, i.e., include at the starting point of application. IoT
sensor data related to healthcare requires authentication mechanism established at the server end to prevent
improper access by the third-party user. Dynamic network topologies can adapt quickly to secure handover
mechanism from one network to another network in the
case of patients wearing sensors moves independently.
To achieve high throughput for IoT health monitoring and efficient sensing, both communication cost and
computation should be cost-effective. Healthcare monitoring application calculates synchronization time for

Jagadeeswari et al. Health Inf Sci Syst (2018) 6:14

end-to-end delay of packets. In real-time analysis, time
synchronization delay between sensors and base station
can be eliminated with the help of 4G technologies in the
developing countries. Time synchronization is important in case of tracking the location of the patients who
wear sensors for data collection, data aggregation, data
routing, sensing and patient tracking. Healthcare application using sensors and mobile discover security as a
special issues needs:(a)Elliptic curve cryptography: Current studies exposed that IoT sensors and devices may be
practical with public key cryptography compared to the
private key cryptography in terms of high cost and time
complexity. Healthcare application with patients’ information should be authenticated with public keys will be
highly required. (b) Homomorphism: Homomorphic
encryption [74] will make sensitive data transfer between
users and cloud computing perfectly secure. Fully homomorphic encryption assists arbitrary computation with
any Boolean gate allow to compute every computation
(addition and multiplication) on the encrypted data.
Partial Homomorphic Encryption allows certain computing computation (addition or multiplication) on the
encrypted data. To resolve streaming patients’ healthcare information and to provide security, homomorphic
encryption will address in a better way. (c)Secret key
cryptography: Also called symmetric key cryptography
which is superior and easy to implement compared to
public key cryptography regarding cost and time complexity. However, the problem in secret key cryptography
occurs fault in the distribution of keys, i.e., a copy of the
secret key should be shared at each end without any loss.
Therefore, healthcare application needs to design a flexible and efficient key distribution protocol. (d)Secure Data
Delivery: Special attention is essential for sensor network
to route the data to the patient’s mobility in multi-way
without a loss for wireless healthcare applications. (e)
Security and Quality-of-Service (QoS): Using IoT devices
and sensor, not only security is the main concern. Jointly
provide QoS with security to the users become healthcare application effective and more supportive of the
people. (f ) On-demand authentication: Healthcare application require specific authentication for the ubiquitous
healthcare system gathers physiological, personal and
environmental information by context-aware approaches
for authenticating a particular patient.
Examining well-organized ways to utilize mobileBig Data come with better services in the IoT domain
especially in smart healthcare services. Mobile-Big
Data analytics was explored with a distributed framework on various parallel spark workers with the
iteration of MapReduce (Hadoop) task. Integrating contextual information [75] along with IoT sensor data help

Page 18 of 20

to understand the environment’s situation for quick data
analytics and reasoning in a healthcare application. We
cannot characterize the patient’s health only with the
help of physiological status. For example, Blood pressure
of a human is measured using various IoT devices and
sensors. By using contextual information like whether
the person is running or idle can be integrated along
with this sensor to get the exact seriousness of the situation. If the contextual information says that the person is
running, then it is natural that the person will have high
blood pressure, and there is no need to take any action.
At the same time if the contextual information says that
the person is idle and still the person has high blood
pressure, then there is a need for an action to be taken
immediately. The deployment of IoT Big Data analytics of
healthcare application requires new protocols for online
provisioning of cloud or fog on the new steam data.

Conclusions
Healthcare system has developed with the advance of
smart IoT devices and sensors, cloud computing, fog
computing and smartphones. Healthcare application
developed for patient-centric prediction, prevention,
diagnosis, and treatment. The wireless communication technologies have been advanced rapidly and available everywhere to handle the healthcare complications
remotely. Healthcare ecosystem is evolved as an innovation in Big Data era with efficient decision making and
support for a new lifestyle. Smartphone-based healthcare application can provide accurate and fast diagnostic prediction with controlling capability to address the
challenges like high cost, storage and demands of professionals to attain directly. Wearable devices like smartwatches, smartphones, smart shirt, smart bracelets,
smart clips, headbands, and smart clothing detect user’s
heart rate, body temperature, blood pressure and other
activities. This survey investigates the systematic overview of the smart healthcare system and alert generation in the field of cloud computing, edge computing, Big
Data analytics, IoT and mobile based applications with
unique architectures. Exploring the pros and cons of each
paper in the survey with different methodology and algorithm used. Healthcare applications and difficulties in
real-time tracking using IoT devices have been discussed
in detail. A security protocol for IoT healthcare monitoring devices needs further improvement by providing
secure communication between devices and server, for
protecting the individual privacy as well as to prevent
data misuse or hack by an unauthorized entity. Monitoring patient health in real time is boon for medical field
as a whole but to make the whole set-up work requires
a robust telecommunication network and efficient use of

Jagadeeswari et al. Health Inf Sci Syst (2018) 6:14

limited wavelength available. Nowadays all sensing data
will deliver users health data on their mobile phones to
monitor their health behavior and vital signs. Therefore,
a health monitoring device that not only transfers data
at a fast rate but also requires less load on the currently
available infrastructure is the need of the hour. Diseases
are diagnosed in their early stages by remotely checking patients health condition in real time. The exact and
being accurate medicine, i.e., being precision will be the
future of the healthcare system. As a future work, we
intend to improve the functioning of the existing healthcare system securely by applying homomorphic encryption, as well as developing and assessing an algorithm of
an enhanced scheme in a real-world healthcare environment. We also plan to study the possibilities of homomorphism security mechanism to build secure healthcare
application for the upcoming future generation.
Author details
1
School of Computing, SASTRA Deemed University, Thanjavur, India. 2 School
of Computing Science and Engineering, Vellore Institute of Technology, Chennai, India.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB),
Department of Science & Technology, New Delhi, for the financial support
(No. YSS/2014/000718/ES). Authors express their gratitude to SASTRA Deemed
University, Thanjavur, for providing the infrastructural facilities to carry out this
research work.
Received: 29 May 2018 Accepted: 12 August 2018
Published online: 20 September 2018

References
1. Ali Z, Hossain MS, Muhammad G, Sangaiah AK. An intelligent healthcare
system for detection and classification to discriminate vocal fold disorders. Future Gen Comput Syst. 2018;85:19–28.
2. Saxena SK, Elahi A, Gadugu S, Prasad AK. Zika virus outbreak: an overview of the experimental therapeutics and treatment. VirusDisease.
2016;27(2):111–5.
3. Yang G, et al. A health-IoT platform based on the integration of intelligent
packaging, unobtrusive bio-sensor, and intelligent medicine box. IEEE
Trans Ind Inform. 2014;10(4):2180–91.
4. Yan Y, Li Q, Li H, Zhang X, Wang L. Open Access: A home-based health
information acquisition system. Health Inform Sci Syst. 2013;1:12.
5. Khan M, Han K, Karthik S. Designing smart control systems based
on Internet of Things and Big Data analytics. Wirel Pers Commun.
2018;99(4):1683–97.
6. Nachankar PJ, Somani MG, Singh DM, Katkar SN. IOT in agriculture. Int Res
J Eng Technol. 2018;5(4):2395.
7. Paulraj GJL, Francis SAJ, Peter JD, Jebadurai IJ. Resource-aware
virtual machine migration in IoT cloud. Future Gen Comput Syst.
2018;85:173–83.
8. Bhatia M, Sood SK. Exploring temporal analytics in fog-cloud architecture for Smart Office HealthCare. Mob Netw Appl. 2018. https​://doi.
org/10.1007/s1103​6-018-0991-5.
9. Wu T, Wu F, Redoute J-M, Yuce MR. An autonomous wireless body area
network implementation towards IoT connected healthcare applications.
IEEE Access. 2017;5:11413–22.
10. Jalal L, Popescu V, Murroni M. IoT architecture for multisensorial media. In:
2017 IEEE URUCON, 2017, pp. 1–4.

Page 19 of 20

11. Kawthankar S, Raut C. A survey on smart automobiles using Internet of
Things for digital India. Int J Recent Trends Eng Res. 2017;3(5):27–33.
12. Gowda M et al. Bringing IoT to sports analytics. In: 14th {USENIX} symposium networked system design implementation, {NSDI} 2017, Boston,
MA, March 27–29, 2017, pp. 499–513.
13. Kim Y, Park Y, Choi J. A study on the adoption of IoT smart home service:
using value-based adoption model. Total Qual Manag Bus Excell.
2017;28(9–10):1149–65.
14. Jo H, Yoon YI. Intelligent smart home energy efficiency model using
artificial TensorFlow engine. Hum Centric Comput Inf Sci. 2018. https​://
doi.org/10.1186/s1367​3-018-0132-y.
15. Venkatesh K, Reddy PR. IOT based home automation using Android. Int J
Mag Eng Technol Manag Res. 2017;3(4):317–20.
16. Jin Y, Ji S. Mapping hotspots and emerging trends of business model
innovation under networking in Internet of Things. EURASIP J Wirel Commun Netw. 2018;2018(1):96.
17. Peng H, Tian Y, Li L, Yang Y, Wang D. Secure and energy-efficient data
transmission system based on chaotic compressive sensing in body-tobody networks. IEEE Trans Biomed Circuits Syst. 2017;11(3):1–16.
18. Wang Y, Kung L, Wang WYC, Cegielski CG. An integrated Big Data
analytics-enabled transformation model: application to health care. Inf
Manag. 2018;55(1):64–79.
19. Wang Y, Kung L, Byrd TA. Big data analytics: understanding its capabilities
and potential benefits for healthcare organizations. Technol Forecast Soc
Change. 2018;126:3–13.
20. Oppitz M, Tomsu P. Inventing the cloud century. Cham: Springer; 2018.
21. Yang C, Yu M, Hu F, Jiang Y, Li Y. Utilizing cloud computing to address big
geospatial data challenges. Comput Environ Urban Syst. 2017;61:120–8.
22. Yang C, Huang Q, Li Z, Liu K, Hu F. Big Data and cloud computing: innovation opportunities and challenges. Int J Digit Earth. 2017;10(1):13–53.
23. Upadhyaya J. Higher education: a critical survey and innovative model,
2017, pp. 137–140.
24. Stergiou C, Psannis KE, Kim BG, Gupta B. Secure integration of IoT and
cloud computing. Future Gen Comput Syst. 2018;78:964–75.
25. Kraemer FA, Braten AE, Tamkittikhun N, Palma D. Fog computing in
healthcare—a review and discussion. IEEE Access. 2017;5(2169):9206–22.
26. Choo K-KR, Lu R, Chen L, Yi X. A foggy research future: advances and
future opportunities in fog computing research. Future Gen Comput Syst.
2018;78:677–9.
27. Roca D, Milito R, Nemirovsky M, Valero M. Fog computing in the Internet
of Things. Cham: Springer; 2018.
28. Liu X, Deng RH, Yang Y, Tran HN, Zhong S. Hybrid privacy-preserving
clinical decision support system in fog–cloud computing. Future Gen
Comput Syst. 2018;78:825–37.
29. Chen M, Yang J, Zhou J, Hao Y, Zhang J, Youn C. 5G-smart diabetes:
toward personalized diabetes diagnosis with healthcare Big Data clouds.
IEEE Commun Mag. 2018;56(4):16–23.
30. Xu D, Huang X, Guo J, Ma X. Automatic smartphone-based microfluidic biosensor system at the point of care. Biosens Bioelectron.
2018;110(March):78–88.
31. Harari GM, et al. An evaluation of students’ interest in and compliance
with self-tracking methods. Soc Psychol Personal Sci. 2017;8(5):479–92.
32. Pham M, Mengistu Y, Do H, Sheng W. Delivering home healthcare
through a cloud-based smart home environment (CoSHE). Future Gen
Comput Syst. 2018;81:129–40.
33. Nappi M, Ricciardi S, Tistarelli M. Context awareness in biometric systems
and methods: state of the art and future scenarios. Image Vis Comput.
2018;76:27–37.
34. Nakahara FA, Beder DM. A context-aware and self-adaptive offloading decision support model for mobile cloud computing system. J
Ambient Intell Humaniz Comput. 2018. https​://doi.org/10.1007/s1265​
2-018-0790-7.
35. Verma P, Sood SK. Cloud-centric IoT based disease diagnosis healthcare
framework. J Parallel Distrib Comput. 2018;116:27–38.
36. Sareen S, Sood SK, Gupta SK. Secure Internet of Things-based cloud
framework to control Zika virus outbreak. Int J Technol Assess Health
Care. 2017;33(1):11–8.
37. Sandhu R, Gill HK, Sood SK. Smart monitoring and controlling of
pandemic influenza A (H1N1) using social network analysis and cloud
computing. J Comput Sci. 2016;12:11–22.

Jagadeeswari et al. Health Inf Sci Syst (2018) 6:14

38. Hossain MS, Muhammad G. Cloud-assisted Industrial Internet of Things
(IIoT)—enabled framework for health monitoring. Comput Netw.
2015;101:192–202.
39. Zogheib E, et al. Prospective observational study on the association
between serum mannose-binding lectin levels and severe outcome in
critically ill patients with pandemic influenza type A (H1N1) infection.
Lung. 2018;196(1):65–72.
40. Verma P, Sood SK. Fog assisted-IoT enabled patient health monitoring in
smart homes. IEEE Internet Things J. 2018;4662:1–8.
41. Sood SK, Mahajan I. A fog based healthcare framework for Chikungunya.
IEEE Internet Things J. 2017;4662:1–8.
42. Negash B, et al. Fog computing in the Internet of Things. Cham: Springer;
2018.
43. Sareen S, Gupta SK, Sood SK. An intelligent and secure system for predicting and preventing Zika virus outbreak using Fog computing. Enterp Inf
Syst. 2017;11(9):1–21.
44. Nandyala CS, Kim HK. From cloud to fog and IoT-based real-time
U-healthcare monitoring for smart homes and hospitals. Int J Smart
Home. 2016;10(2):187–96.
45. Gia TN, Jiang M, Rahmani AM, Westerlund T, Liljeberg P, Tenhunen H. Fog
computing in healthcare Internet of Things: a case study on ECG feature
extraction. In: Proceedings of the 15th IEEE international conference
computer information technology, CIT 2015, 14th IEEE international
conference ubiquitous computer communication, IUCC 2015, 13th IEEE
international conference dependable, automatic and secure, 2015, pp.
356–363.
46. Yu Q, et al. Automatic identifying of maternal ECG source when applying
ICA in fetal ECG extraction. Biocybern Biomed Eng. 2018;38(3):448–55.
47. Narayan R, Rout JK, Jena SK. Progress in intelligent computing techniques: theory, practice, and applications, vol. 518. Singapore: Springer;
2018.
48. Lv Z, Zhang C, Zhou B, Gao X, Wu X. Design and implementation of an
eye gesture perception system based on electrooculography. Expert Syst
Appl. 2018;91:310–21.
49. Ferrari E, Cooper G, Reeves ND, Hodson-Tole EF. Surface electromyography can quantify temporal and spatial patterns of activation of intrinsic
human foot muscles. J Electromyogr Kinesiol. 2018;39(February):149–55.
50. Fink A, et al. EEG alpha activity during imagining creative moves in soccer
decision-making situations. Neuropsychologia. 2018;114(April):118–24.
51. Amin R, Kumar N, Biswas GP, Iqbal R, Chang V. A light weight authentication protocol for IoT-enabled devices in distributed cloud computing
environment. Future Gen Comput Syst. 2018;78:1005–19.
52. Beuchat P, Hesse H, Domahidi A, Lygeros J. Optimization based selflocalization for IoT wireless sensor networks. In: 4th IEEE World Forum on
Internet of Things, pp. 712–717.
53. Prajapati B, Parikh S, Patel J. Information and communication technology
for intelligent systems. In: ICTIS 2017, vol. 1, p. 3, 2018.
54. Baali H, Djelouat H, Amira A, Bensaali F. Empowering technology
enabled care using IoT and smart devices: a review. IEEE Sens J.
2017;18(5):1790–809.
55. Rani S, Ahmed SH, Shah SC. Smart health: a novel paradigm to control
the chickungunya virus. IEEE Internet Things J. 2018;4662:1.
56. Woo MW, Lee JW, Park KH. A reliable IoT system for personal healthcare
devices. Future Gen Comput Syst. 2018;78:626–40.
57. Sood SK, Mahajan I. Wearable IoT sensor based healthcare system
for identifying and controlling chikungunya virus. Comput Ind.
2017;91:33–44.

Page 20 of 20

58. Dutta S, Ghatak S, Dey R, Das AK, Ghosh S. Attribute selection for improving spam classification in online social networks: a rough set theorybased approach. Soc Netw Anal Min. 2018;8(1):7.
59. Marozzo F, Bessi A. Analyzing polarization of social media users and news
sites during political campaigns. Soc Netw Anal Min. 2018;8(1):1.
60. Das K, Samanta S, Pal M. Study on centrality measures in social networks:
a survey. Soc Netw Anal Min. 2018;8(1):13.
61. Raghupathi W, Raghupathi V. Big Data analytics in healthcare: promise
and potential. Health Inf Sci Syst. 2014;2:3.
62. Manogaran G, Varatharajan R, Lopez D, Kumar PM, Sundarasekar R, Thota
C. A new architecture of Internet of Things and Big Data ecosystem for
secured smart healthcare monitoring and alerting system. Future Gen
Comput Syst. 2018;82:375–87.
63. Kalid N, Zaidan AA, Zaidan BB, Salman OH, Hashim M, Muzammil H.
Based real time remote health monitoring systems: a review on patients
prioritization and related ‘Big Data’ using body sensors information and
communication technology. J Med Syst. 2018;42:2.
64. Firouzi F, et al. Internet-of-Things and Big Data for smarter healthcare:
from device to architecture, applications and analytics. Future Gen Comput Syst. 2018;78:583–6.
65. Hu Y, Duan K, Zhang Y, Hossain MS, Mizanur-Rahman SM, Alelaiwi A.
Simultaneously aided diagnosis model for outpatient departments via
healthcare Big Data analytics. Multimed Tools Appl. 2018;77(3):3729–43.
66. Sandhu R, Kaur N, Sood SK, Buyya R. TDRM: tensor-based data representation and mining for healthcare data in cloud computing environments. J
Supercomput. 2017;74(2):592–614.
67. Saleh N, Kassem A, Haidar AM. Energy-efficient architecture for wireless
sensor networks in healthcare applications. IEEE Access. 2018;6:6478–86.
68. Leu F, Ko C, You I, Choo KKR, Ho CL. A smartphone-based wearable
sensors for monitoring real-time physiological data. Comput Electr Eng.
2018;65:376–92.
69. Esposito M, Minutolo A, Megna R, Forastiere M, Magliulo M, De Pietro G.
A smart mobile, self-configuring, context-aware architecture for personal
health monitoring. Eng Appl Artif Intell. 2018;67:136–56.
70. Zhang X-S, Leu F-Y, Yang C-W, Lai L-S. Healthcare-based on cloud electrocardiogram system: a medical center experience in middle Taiwan. J Med
Syst. 2018;42(3):39.
71. Venson JE, Bevilacqua F, Berni J, Onuki F, Maciel A. Diagnostic concordance between mobile interfaces and conventional workstations for
emergency imaging assessment. Int J Med Inform. 2018;113(2017):1–8.
72. Kao HY, Wei CW, Yu MC, Liang TY, Wu WH, Wu YJ. Integrating a mobile
health applications for self-management to enhance Telecare system.
Telemat Inform. 2017;12:011.
73. Zhou S, Ogihara A, Nishimura S, Jin Q. Analyzing the changes of health
condition and social capital of elderly people using wearable devices.
Health Inform Sci Syst. 2018. https​://doi.org/10.1007/s1375​5-018-0044-2.
74. Xu J, Wei L, Zhang Y, Wang A, Zhou F, Gao C. Dynamic fully homomorphic
encryption-based Merkle tree for lightweight streaming authenticated
data structures. J Netw Comput Appl. 2018;107:113–24.
75. Rault T, Bouabdallah A, Challal Y, Marin F. A survey of energy-efficient
context recognition systems using wearable sensors for healthcare applications. Pervasive Mob Comput. 2017;37:23–44.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

