Spinal Cord (2015) 53, S25–S26
& 2015 International Spinal Cord Society All rights reserved 1362-4393/15
www.nature.com/sc

CASE REPORT

Brain–computer interface targeting non-motor functions
after spinal cord injury: a case report
DB Salisbury1, S Driver1 and TD Parsons2
Study design: This is a case report.
Objectives: The objective of this study was to report on a brain–computer interface (BCI) paradigm that is successfully used with an
inpatient spinal cord injury patient.
Setting: This study was conducted in an inpatient rehabilitation hospital.
Methods: A 25-year-old man with a C5 burst fracture and subsequent tetraplegia (The American Spinal Injury Association)
participated in this case study. He completed a brief battery of psychological, pain, cognitive and other screening measures at points
before and after the BCI paradigm during his rehabilitation hospitalization.
Results: The paradigm was easily learned and well tolerated with no adverse effects.
Conclusions: This case is reﬂective of the trends in our ongoing feasibility study evaluating BCI technology in the inpatient
rehabilitation setting. Clinical implications and challenges of using this technology in a busy hospital unit are reviewed.
Spinal Cord (2015) 53, S25–S26; doi:10.1038/sc.2014.230

INTRODUCTION
In an attempt to widen the utility of computer-assisted devices and to
increase independence among spinal cord injury (SCI) populations,
brain–computer interface (BCI) technology has generated great
interest.1 BCIs do not depend on the central nervous systems normal
output pathways that have been compromised following injury.
Instead, participants overtly manipulate their brain activity as compared with using motor movements to produce signals that can be
used to control devices and/or virtual environments.2 To date, the
majority of BCI studies in persons with SCI have revolved around
motor-based activity and communication with case examples and
small studies.
The potential of BCI in neuropsychological facets of SCI recovery is
our group’s focus. Speciﬁcally, we foresee BCI technology as a possible
tool for pain and stress management, leisure activity exploration and
cognitive assessment/ intervention for patients with more severe motor
impairment such as tetraplegia. This interest is further fueled by
increasing support for psychological, social and non-motor-based
factors as key aspects in perceived quality of life following SCI.3
Introduction of BCI during inpatient rehabilitation allows for extensive training and modiﬁcation of the technology, which would be less
feasible on an outpatient basis.
To our knowledge, BCI technology has not been used with inpatient
SCI patients in a systematic manner as part of inpatient rehabilitation
treatment. This case study is a part of our larger feasibility study
including standard screens of mood, pain and cognition on our
inpatient unit to evaluate whether BCI technology is tolerated, enjoyed
and could be used in future work targeting previously mentioned
therapeutic goals.
1

CASE REPORT
A 25-year-old man with a C5 burst fracture and C3 facet joint fracture
secondary to a dive into a swimming pool participated in this case
study. He had no additional coexisting conditions or signiﬁcant
medical/neurological complications from the event. Upon admission
to the inpatient rehabilitation unit 2 months after his injury, he
presented with tetraplegia and required maximum assistance to
complete all daily activities. Physiatrist examination at admission of
his 5-week stay was consistent with a C6 left motor, C5 right motor
and C4 sensory The American Spinal Injury Association A grading on
the International Classiﬁcation of Spinal Cord Injury scale.
Measures of mood, pain and cognition were administered pre–post
BCI trial. The Emotive EEG gaming system (Emotiv EPOC; http://
emotiv.com) yields less sophisticated electroencephalography data
than traditional medical devices,4 but the minimal cost and portability
made it a preferred system. The ability to manage a virtual environment was assessed with a cube rotation and manipulation paradigm
presented on a laptop computer. After a training session for each task
(push cube, move left, move right and cube disappearance), the
subject performed three trials, lasting 8 s each. This brief paradigm
with graduated complexity was chosen to minimize the time of BCI
trials in the event of adverse effects, yet still yield data on subject
receptiveness and mastery of a basic BCI experience. The subject
successfully completed 92% of trials and typically moved the onscreen
stimuli in o2 s.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
This case study suggests that the simulation technology and BCIs may
be safely and successfully used with individuals undergoing inpatient
SCI rehabilitation. Our subject reported that he enjoyed the experience

Department of Neuropsychology, Baylor Institute for Rehabilitation, Dallas, TX, USA and 2Department of Psychology, University of North Texas, Denton, TX, USA
Correspondence: Dr DB Salisbury, Department of Neuropsychology, Baylor Institute for Rehabilitation, 411 N. Washington Avenue, Suite 5000, Dallas, TX 75246, USA.
E-mail: dsalisbury@bir-rehab.com
Received 16 October 2014; revised 10 November 2014; accepted 17 November 2014

Brain–computer interface and spinal cord injury
DB Salisbury et al
S26

(80 on 1–100 scale with 100 being maximal enjoyment) and denied
adverse effects from the virtual paradigm, which is consistent with
preliminary feedback from our larger feasibility study.
The subject demonstrated no speciﬁc cognitive strengths or
premorbid proclivity for manipulating a virtual environment, yet
easily learned the paradigms. Furthermore, rating scales did not
suggest any negative effects on mood or pain level during the activity.
In fact, the subject anecdotally described this as an enjoyable deviation
from his typical therapy regime. The next step is the development of
clinically related paradigms targeting our SCI inpatient team goals of
pain and stress management. For example, by integrating biofeedback
and progressive muscle relaxation principles, a BCI paradigm could be
a nonthreatening way to teach psychological techniques for the
subgroup of inpatients resistant to traditional psychological intervention after their injury.
It is important to note that this case presented a challenge related to
the integration of this activity in the hospital setting. Speciﬁcally,
environmental factors including ﬁnding a quiet area in a busy
rehabilitation ﬂoor, managing a patient’s schedule with other disciplines and the mental/physical fatigue that can affect engagement in
virtual immersion activities mandate careful planning of such patient
activities. Ideally, our larger feasibility study will help identify a model

Spinal Cord

amenable to use in inpatient settings with minimal disruption to
traditional rehabilitation therapies.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors wish to acknowledge the Baylor Institute for Rehabilitation Spinal
Cord Injury team for their support of this project.

1 Shih JJ, Krusienski DJ, Wolpaw JR. Brain-computer interfaces in medicine. Mayo Clin
Proc 2012; 87: 268–279.
2 Millan JD, Rupp R, Muller-Putz GR, Murray-Smith R, Giugliemma C, Tangermann M
et al. Combining brain-computer interfaces and assistive technologies: state-of-the-art
and challenges. Front Neurosci 2010; 4: 10.3389/fnins.2010.00161. eCollection
2010.
3 Tate DG, Boninger ML, Jackson AB. Future directions for spinal cord injury research:
recent developments and model systems contributions. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 2011;
92: 509–515.
4 Duvinage M, Castermans T, Petieau M, Hoellinger T, Cheron G, Dutoit T. Performance
of the emotiv epoc headset for P300-based applications. Biomed Eng Online 2013;
12: 56.

