SENSORCOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Feature 6election and ,nterpretation of GSR and ECG 6ensor 'ata in
Biofeedback Stress Monitoring

Tamás D. Gedeon

Xuanying Zhu, Leana Copeland, Nandita Sharma

Research School of Computer Science
Australian National University
Canberra Australia
tom@cs.anu.edu.au

Research School of Computer Science
Australian National University
Canberra Australia

Abstract—We have used sensor data previously to detect the
stress status of observers of stressful environments. In this
work we describe the process of conversion from a passive
and post-facto detection of this stress status to a dynamic
and real-time or close to real-time process for control of
stress using biofeedback. We describe the changes required
to feature selection and interpretation of galvanic skin
response (GSR) and electrocardiograph (ECG) sensor data
for the new setting, using training on data from the postfacto dataset filtered to match, and as far as possible
simulate a real-time dataset. We then compare 3
alternatives including a control component.
Keywords- observer stress; physiological
biofeedback; human centred computing.

signals;

I.
INTRODUCTION
Our previous work demonstrated that we could
construct reliable computational models for observer
stress extracted from a range of physiological signals. In
that work, we used physiological recordings of the entire
experiment to detect the observer’s stress level, the
experiment consisting of showing a number of short video
clips of known stressfulness, as validated by user surveys.
This data forms the ANU Stress DB.
We have extended our previous work, and sampled the
ANU Stress DB to mimic real-time or close to real-time
data collection, to form training data for a biofeedback
model. For usefulness in biofeedback the model needs to
display results no slower than 1 Hz, based on some
preliminary experiments with subjects. Using only the last
2 seconds of data produces a model in 80% in accord with
our previous full model using the entire experiment
recording.
We then tested this new model in a new experiment, to
compare our model with the use of EEG as the
biofeedback target, as well as a control curve which
displays the stress curve of a randomly chosen prior
subject. That is, the stress curve is synchronized with the
experiment and is a valid stress curve, but is not the curve
of the current subject and so does not reflect any changes
made by the current subject.

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-425-1

II. STRESS AND REDUCTION OF STRESS
The term stress was coined by Hans Selye in 1936,
and defined as “the non-specific response of the body to
any demand for change” [1]. There is evidence that too
much stress has significant health effects, e.g. [2].
We concentrate on objective measures of stress [3].
A. Observer Stress
We concentrate on a viewer of events, hence the stress
encountered is observer stress. In this century, more and
more our interactions with the world are virtual or
mediated via screens, or for other reasons we have no
ability to change what we see. Hence this is a valuable
area for stress research. We have done previous work on
computational models for stress in a range of
environments: abstract (reading) [4], virtual (screens including video / cctv) [5], and real environments [6].
B. Stress reduction - biofeedback
There are a number of stress management techniques,
from meditation [7] to biofeedback. Biofeedback is the
process of making unconscious body functions perceptible
for individuals so that they can learn and manipulate these
physiological activities for the purpose of improving
health [8]. Neuro-feedback, which uses EEG data, has
been shown to be one of the most effective stress
management methods [9].
C. Measures and Sensors
1) Galvanic Skin Response (GSR)
Skin conductance, also known as electro-dermal
response or psycho-galvanic reflex, measures the
electrical conductance of an individual’s skin, which
varies due to the amount of sweat on the skin. When the
individual is under stress, skin conductance will increase;
oppositely, the skin conductance will reduce when the
individual encounters less stress [10]. We used the Neulog
GSR Logger Sensor [11].
2) Heart Rate Variability
Heart rate variability (HRV) is the variation in the
interval between heartbeats. HRV has been shown to be
one of the most reliable indicators of stress in nearly a

105

SENSORCOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

quarter-century of clinical research [12]. Methods to
measure HRV include Electrocardiogram (ECG) and
Blood Pressure, but ECG is considered superior as it
excludes unnecessary heartbeats and displays a clear
waveform. We used the Neulog ECG Logger Sensor [13].
3) Brain Signals
The brain is the key organ of responding to stress, as it
perceives what is threatening and thus potentially stressful
[14]. Electroencephalography (EEG) is one of the primary
methods for brain activity analysis. It re-cords the
electrical voltage fluctuations resulting from ionic current
flows within the neurons of the brain via multiple
electrodes placed on the scalp [15]. EEG equipment
usually produces a high degree of intrusion since
participants need to wear a head cap attached to specific
positions of the scalp with electrically conductive gel. The
Emotiv EPOC headset [16] is a less intrusive device with
a lighter headset, which is placed on rather than attached
to the head. It is still noticeably more intrusive than the
GSR and ECG sensors.
D. Extraction of features
Some 59 representative features were derived by
calculating the statistics and measures values of twoseconds data (as our preliminary experiments showed that
1 sec data was too little, but 5 secs was too long to still
‘feel’ like real-time). Such summary statistical values
included the mean, standard derivation, kurtosis,
skewness, interquartile range, minimum and maximum,
where measures included the number of peaks for periodic
signals.
III.

HYBRID GENETIC ALGORITHM AND EXTREME
LEARNING MACHINE MODEL
The 59 derived features are too many for good results
on this data, hence we must engage in feature selection
[17]. The issue is that there is a limited number of subjects
for whom we have data, and with many features and a
sizeable neural network, the number of free parameters
well exceeds the number of data points available.
TABLE I. GA REPRESENTATION AND USE

Vector of best
representative
features
filtered by GA

0

0

1

0

1

…

Vector of
derived
representative
features

.1

.2

.3

.4

.5

…

Vector for
best
representative
features in the
current data
segment

0

0

.3

0

.5

…

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-425-1

We used a genetic algorithm with feed-forward neural
networks as individuals in the population to perform
feature selection and training. A simple 59-bit string
representation was used to determine whether a feature is
used by a particular neural network. Figure 1 shows how
the representation was used to construct the train and test
sets for each neural network.
A standard 3 layer neural network with two layers of
processing elements was used, as shown in Figure 1.
There are up to 59 input neurons, some 20 (say) hidden
neurons, and one output neuron indicating the degree of
stress.

Figure 1. Neural network structure.

We validated our final networks against our previous
work in virtual environments (stressful and calm video
clips) [5], and using 10 fold cross validation we showed
we can achieve 81% reliability.
This is less than our previous results which used the
full sensor recording from a participant watching the
entire clip, rather than just the preceding 2 seconds. This
81% reliability proved sufficient for our experiment (to be
reported below) to be successful.
Our initial approach was to use back-propagation
training for our neural network. We observed that it took
one week to finish approximately 8% of the whole
process, so the overall time for training this classifier was
predicted to be more than three months. Instead, we
trained our neural networks using the Extreme Learning
Machine (ELM) method [18].
The ELM method in this case works as follows: the
input weight matrix is assigned random values which are
then frozen and not trained (the left ‘weight matrix’
shown in Fig. 1), and only the output weight matrix is
trained.
This is possible to do via the delta rule normally used
for output layers, but it is even faster to use the MoorePenrose pseudo-inverse as the input matrix does not
change, allowing a much higher efficiency in the process
of estimating (training) output layer weights, by
computing a 'best fit' (least squares) solution.
It is necessary to significantly increase the number of
hidden neurons using the ELM approach. In this case, we

106

SENSORCOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

increased the number to 400. Then, we were able to
complete the training in one week, faster by a multiple of
about 15, notwithstanding the 20 fold increase in the
number of hidden neurons.
How does it work? Essentially, the random weights
provide some random functionality to each hidden neuron,
and the training of the output layer selects from these the
neurons with useful functionality and then their outputs
are combined using the output weights to provide the
optimized output value. This explains why we need so
many hidden neurons, as we now just select from a menu
rather than training individuals.
IV.

BIOFEEDBACK EXPERIMENT

Ethics approval to perform the experiment was received
from the ANU Human Research Ethics Committee.
Eighteen undergraduate and masters students were
recruited for the experiment. The participant cohort was

made up of twelve males (57.1%) and nine females
(42.9%) between the ages of 20 and 35 years. The average
age was 25.1 years old with a standard deviation of 3.7.
A. Experiment aim
Our goal was to compare effects of our GA-ELM
calculated stress curve, EEG curve, and a (plausible)
random curve on stress reduction.
B. Experiment Data Collection
Figs 2. and 3. display the experiment setups required
for the stress curve / random curve settings, and for the
EEG setting, respectively.
Multiple computers were required, as the computational
intensiveness of both our own real time stress curve and
the Emotiv EEG stress curve were such that a separate
data acquisition computer was required. For smooth
display of the film clips, we needed yet another computer

Figure 2. Schematic diagram of equipment setup for stress and random curve group.

Figure 3. Schematic diagram of equipment setup for EEG curve group.

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-425-1

107

SENSORCOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

C. Experiment process
After a countdown display, a blank screen was shown
for 15 seconds, which was followed by a sequence of film
clips with five-second blank screens in between.
The film clips consisted of stressful and non-stressful
film clips and each was approximately one minute in
length. These film clips were categorized by the type of
environment they create. Some had stressful content in the
direction towards distress, fear and tension, see Fig. 4 for
a sample screenshot from one of the stressful film clips.

Figure 5. Non-stressful film clip: Ducks on the lake.

Figure 4. Stressful film clip: Dark Knight.

The non-stressful clips had content that created an
illusion of meditation or comfortable environments, see
Fig. 5 for a sample screenshot from one of the nonstressful film clips. In total there were three stressful films
and three non-stressful film for each experiment session,
presented in an order balanced fashion.

One third of the participants were shown their own
real-time stress curve as calculated from the their
preceding 2 secs of data as described in §1.4, while
watching the sequence of film clips.
Another third were shown their EEG stress curve as
calculated by the Emotiv Affectiv Suite [19] (see Fig. 4),
again while watching the film clips. Since the clips were
order balanced, the participants watched them in different
orders, to reduce or eliminate any effects from the
sequence of presentation of the film clips.
The final third were shown a ‘random’ curve. This
curve was based on the ECG and GSR of two subjects
from our previous work [5], using the same film clips.
Thus, the curves were completely valid stress curves and
were in good synchrony with the experiment, they were
just not from the participant viewing them.

Figure 6. Emotiv Affectiv Suite: the top orange curve is the stress indicator for the EEG curve group.

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-425-1

108

SENSORCOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

The point of these ‘random’ curves is to provide a
baseline – it is possible the mere intention to reduce stress
will have an effect, so for our results to be meaningful we
need to show a different (better) result than for this
‘random’ control curve.
V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The data was analysed by visual inspection and
clustering analysis. Observation of the stress curve
suggested that the stress curve does reflect individuals’
stress in real time. It also revealed the correlation between
the effectiveness of physiological biofeedback in stress
control. This correlation was confirmed by the use of KMeans clustering. The clustering analysis was conducted
on the 2 different stress data sets generated by watching
stressful or non-stressful films. The result of clustering on
stress data, which were produced when individuals were
watching stressful films, showed that biofeedback with
our physiological stress curve was effective and it was
superior to neurofeedback.
We now provide the results of the clustering, in Table
2. The results are sorted by the curve provided to each
participant. Clusters 2 and 3 have a purity of 83%, and
correspond to our stress curve, and to the EEG curve,
respectively. This is essentially the highest value we could
have expected as our pre-experiment estimate for the
correctness of our calculated stress curve.
These results show that both our stress curve and the
EEG curve have good consistency in terms of their effects
on the ability of participants to modify their stress. By
observation, the direction of modification is as expected,
to reduce their stress.
Cluster 1 has a purity of 50%, for the random curve.
The lack of high purity in the case of the cluster which
represents the random curve indicates that that curve is of
some value in reducing the stress of participants,

otherwise this cluster would have high purity due to its
consistent uselessness in modifying stress levels.
TABLE II. CLUSTERING RESULTS ON STRESS DATA
GENERATED BY WATCHING STRESSED FILMS.

Participant ID

Clustered
label

Provided curve

p10

S3

Stress

p12

S2

Stress

p13

S2

Stress

p14

S2

Stress

p15

S2

Stress

p6

S2

Stress

p2

S3

Random

p7

S3

Random

p4

S2

Random

p1

S1

Random

p11

S1

Random

p5

S1

Random

p17

S3

EEG

p18

S3

EEG

p19

S3

EEG

p20

S3

EEG

p21

S3

EEG

p16

S2

EEG

Figure 5. Participant 14: Using our stress curve. The stress axis has arbitrary units, the time axis is in seconds.

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-425-1

109

SENSORCOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

An example of the visual inspection analysis is shown in
Fig. 5. In the period labeled from t1 to t2, the participant was
actively trying to control his stress, as reported during the
experiment. At time t2, a new clip started. Unfortunately, at
time t3, he laughed and pounded on the table, partially
dislodging the sensors.
We performed a statistical analysis of the clustering
results to the categorisation of the stress levels of the fil
clips. The calculation of the p-value derived from the
Wilcoxon Statistical Test was: p < 0.001. Thus we can
conclude that our results are highly statistically significant,
as we accept p < 0.05 as statistically significant..
CONCLUSIONS, LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK
We have shown via an experiment with 18 participants,
and with high statistical significance, that participants could
control or modify their stress well with an EEG curve (i.e.,
by neurofeedback, being an approach known to work well in
the literature), which validates our approach.
More significantly, we have shown that with high

statistical significance, that participants could control or
modify their stress well with the use of our real time stress
curve calculated only from the GSR and ECG. This is a
novel contribution, as GSR and ECG is much less intrusive
than EEG.
A limitation was that in our experiments, electrodes were
attached to the hands of the participants, but in practice this
may not be necessary. For example, the use of a GSR
enabled mouse could be used (in more active settings than
watching film clips). For ECG, a computer wrist rest could
be wired to measure this. Alternatively, the wearable
revolution in progress right now may soon provide
wristwatches or other wrist or arm borne devices, which are
both ubiquitous and effective in measuring ECG and GSR.
We modified our initial GA-NN approach for feature
selection and training to use ELM training and achieved an
approximately 15-fold increase in speed of training.
In future work we will consider the introduction of noise
into the training regime [20], as well as the hierarchical
structuring of the data [21], especially using fuzzy signatures
[22-24].

REFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]
[9]
[10]

[11]
[12]

[13]

H. Selye, A syndrome produced by diverse nocuous agents, Nature,
138:32, 1936.
The-American-Institute-of-Stress, Stress and Heart Disease:
www.stress.org/stress-and-heart-disease/, 2012.
N. Sharma and T.D. Gedeon, Objective measures, sensors and
computational techniques for stress recognition and classification: A
survey, Computer methods and programs in biomedicine, 108(3):
1287-1301, 2012. doi: 10.1016/j.cmpb.2012.07.003
N. Sharma and T.D. Gedeon, Computational Models of Stress in
Reading Using Physiological and Physical Sensor Data. In Advances
in Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (pp. 111-122). Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 2013.
N. Sharma and T.D. Gedeon, Modeling stress recognition in typical
virtual environments, Pervasive Computing Technologies for
Healthcare (PervasiveHealth), 7th International Conference, pp. 1724, IEEE, 2013.
N. Sharma and T.D. Gedeon, Modeling Observer Stress for Typical
Real Environments, Expert Systems with Applications, 41(5):22312238, 2014.
R.R. Michaels, M.J. Huber and D.S. McCann, Evaluation of
transcendental meditation as a method of reducing stress, Science,
192:1242-1244, 1976.
H.L. Epstein and E.B. Blanchard, Biofeedback, self-control, and selfmanagement, Biofeedback and Self-regulation, 2(2):201-211, 1977.
E. Hoffmann, Brain Training Against Stress, 2005.
W. Liao, W. Zhang, Z. Zhu and Q. Ji, A real-time human stress
monitoring system using dynamic bayesian network, IEEE Computer
Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern RecognitionWorkshops, 70, 2005.
Neulog, GSR logger sensor NUL-217. At: neulog. com/gsr/, 2011.
Z. Ori, G. Monir, J. Weiss, X. Sayhouni and D. H. Singer, Heart rate
variability: Frequency domain analysis, Cardiology clinics, 10:499537, 1992.
Neulog, Electrocardiogram logger sensor NUL-218. At:
neulog.com/electrocardiagram/, 2011.

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.

ISBN: 978-1-61208-425-1

[14] B. S. McEwen, Physiology and neurobiology of stress and adaptation:
central role of the brain, Physiological reviews, 87:873-904, 2007.
[15] E. Niedermeyer, F. L. da Silva, Electroencephalography: basic
principles, clinical applications, and related fields, Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins, 2005.
[16] Emotiv, Emotiv EPOC Headset. At: emotiv.com/ epoc.php, 2011.
[17] T.D. Gedeon, Data mining of inputs: analysing magnitude and
functional measures, International Journal of Neural Systems,
8(02):209-218, 1997.
[18] G.B. Huang, Q.Y. Zhu and C.K. Siew, Extreme learning machine: a
new learning scheme of feedforward neural networks, IEEE
International Joint Conference on Neural Networks, 2004.
Proceedings, 2:985-990, 2004.
[19] S.F. Verkijikaand L. De Wet, Using a brain-computer interface (BCI)
in reducing math anxiety: Evidence from South Africa. Computers &
Education, 81:113-122, 2015.
[20] W.M. Brown, T.D. Gedeon and D.I. Groves, Use of noise to augment
training data: a neural network method of mineral–potential mapping
in regions of limited known deposit examples, Natural Resources
Research, 12(2):141-152, 2003.
[21] Gedeon, T. D., and L. T. Koczy. "Hierarchical co-occurence
relations." Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 1998. 1998 IEEE
International Conference on. Vol. 3. IEEE, 1998.
[22] K.W. Wong, T.D. Gedeon and L.T. Kóczy, Construction of fuzzy
signature from data: an example of SARS pre-clinical diagnosis
system, Proceedings 2004 IEEE International Conference on Fuzzy
Systems, 2004.
[23] B.S.U. Mendis, T.D. Gedeon, J. Botzheim and L.T. Kóczy,
Generalised weighted relevance aggregation operators for hierarchical
fuzzy signatures, 2006.
[24] B.S.U. Mendis, T.D. Gedeon and L.T. Kóczy, Investigation of
aggregation in fuzzy signatures, Proceedings International
Conference on Computational Inteligence for Modelling Control and
Automation and International Conference on Intelligent Agents Web
Technologies and International Commerce (CIMCA'06). Sydney,
2006.

110

