Sensors 2014, 14, 12847-12870; doi:10.3390/s140712847
OPEN ACCESS

sensors
ISSN 1424-8220
www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors
Review

Dry EEG Electrodes
M. A. Lopez-Gordo 1,2,3,*, D. Sanchez-Morillo 1 and F. Pelayo Valle 4
1
2
3
4

ISAEAR Department, University of Cadiz, Cadiz 11002, Spain; E-Mail: daniel.morillo@uca.es
Nicolo Association, Av. Cristobal Colon, Churriana de la Vega 18194, Spain
TSTC Department, University of Granada, Granada 18012, Spain
ATC Department & CITIC-UGR, University of Granada, Granada 18012, Spain;
E-Mail: fpelayo@ugr.es

* Author to whom correspondence should be addressed; E-Mail: miguel.lopez@uca.es or
malg@ugr.es; Tel.: +34-958-240-840.
Received: 2 May 2014; in revised form: 1 July 2014 / Accepted: 14 July 2014 /
Published: 18 July 2014

Abstract: Electroencephalography (EEG) emerged in the second decade of the 20th
century as a technique for recording the neurophysiological response. Since then, there has
been little variation in the physical principles that sustain the signal acquisition probes,
otherwise called electrodes. Currently, new advances in technology have brought new
unexpected fields of applications apart from the clinical, for which new aspects such as
usability and gel-free operation are first order priorities. Thanks to new advances in
materials and integrated electronic systems technologies, a new generation of dry
electrodes has been developed to fulfill the need. In this manuscript, we review current
approaches to develop dry EEG electrodes for clinical and other applications, including
information about measurement methods and evaluation reports. We conclude that,
although a broad and non-homogeneous diversity of approaches has been evaluated
without a consensus in procedures and methodology, their performances are not far from
those obtained with wet electrodes, which are considered the gold standard, thus enabling
the former to be a useful tool in a variety of novel applications.
Keywords: EEG; dry electrodes; benchmarking; brain-computer interface

Sensors 2014, 14

12848

1. Introduction
The German psychiatrist Hans Berger in 1924 recorded for the first time electrical activity in
humans by means of electrodes attached to the scalp and a galvanometer. In 1929, and despite the
rudimentary tools and devices at the time, he was able to describe some low-frequency oscillations that
he called Alpha waves [1]. After these milestones, the principles and basic procedures of
electroencephalography (EEG) have barely changed.
In the EEG acquisition, the preparation time is a laborious process that begins with the localization
of sites for the electrical montage. Then, and in order to decrease the skin impedance to acceptable
values below 20 KΩ, these locations are rubbed with an abrasive paste that removes part of the outer
skin, otherwise called stratum corneum (SC). The SC is the mayor contributor to the skin impedance,
with a frequency response that ranges between 200 KΩ and 200 Ω at 1 Hz and 1 MHz, respectively,
for a square centimeter [2], although some authors state it to be up to 1 MΩ [3]. Then, popular
Ag/AgCl electrodes are impregnated with an electrolyte gel that facilitates the transduction of the ionic
currents, which freely move through brain tissues and the cerebrospinal fluid, into electric currents.
Furthermore, the electrode-skin impedance must be measured to guarantee a low value.
These are mainly hands-on tasks that require staff with expertise in EEG. Another remarkable
inconvenience is the annoyance caused to the subject under test. For instance, the abrasive paste and
the electrolyte gel, despite being minimally invasive and barely harmful, are sticky products that make
the hair and scalp dirty. Also, the time needed to reduce the impedance to an acceptable value,
typically 5–20 KΩ [4], can take a long time. The use of a massive electrolyte to speed up the
impedance reduction could cause electrical bridges between electrodes, especially with dense arrays,
thus being counterproductive. However, these are not the only problems. Once an acceptable electrode
impedance has been achieved, a countdown begins until the gel dries, thus causing the transductive
properties to disappear. For instance in [5], the impedance of wet electrodes deteriorated from 5 to
15 KΩ within 5 hours after gel application. For these reasons, wet electrodes are not suitable for
long-term measures [6].
In recent decades, there have been several approaches to develop dry electrodes based on
microelectro-mechanical systems (MEMS), non-contact, capacitive, etc. These approaches, when
combined with the new generation of on-site low energy instrumentation amplifiers, enable the
development of portable, active and dry electrodes in a back-to-back design. Therefore, dry and active
electrodes seem to be the solution to the disadvantages of wet EEG electrodes. However, these new
technologies must be conveniently evaluated and validated before use.
Wet electrodes are considered the gold standard and new dry approaches must be compared with
them before claiming that they are suitable. The first difficulty is to agree on the evaluation procedure.
Different dry electrode approaches are conceptually different and, in the literature, reports of
performance have been carried out without homogenous methodologies, so that their results cannot
easily be compared. These studies and reports show evidences that additional work is needed before
dry electrodes become an alternative to standard wet electrodes for the recording of EEG signals in
clinical and other applications with long-term exposures.

Sensors 2014, 14

12849

2. Basic EEG Acquisition Principles
The electroencephalogram (EEG) is a record of the oscillations of brain electric potentials acquired
from electrodes on the human scalp [4]. Electric potentials are the direct consequence of the existence
of electric dipoles created by the postsynaptic potentials generated at apical dendrites of pyramidal
cells in the cortex. The poles of the electric dipole can be seen as the source and sink of ionic currents
created by the excess and defect of cations at soma and apical dendrites, respectively. These ions can
freely move through the cerebrospinal fluid and brain tissues, thus causing ionic currents as providing
the most accurate evidence of the existence of electrical potentials.
These potentials can be measured by attaching a voltage meter to any two points of an ionic current
line. In a non-invasive approach, two locations on the scalp are chosen and a conductive gel is applied
between the skin and the electrode for an efficient charge transduction. Figure 1a shows a simple
model of the electrical circuit originated by the electric dipole of Figure 1b. The electrode-skin
impedance is electrically characterized by the half-cell voltage source in series with the gel impedance
(Vhc + Rg||Cg) plus the SC impedance (Vsc + Rsc||Csc). In this model, the SC offers the largest
impedance while impedance due to conductive gel, electrodes and copper leads are much lower.
Typical EEG electrodes have two major mechanical and electrical restrictions, namely the size and
impedance. The electric dipole caused by just one pyramidal cell cannot be measured with electrodes
attached to the scalp. However, when a large number of dipole units, approximately 60 million [4],
synchronously discharges their action potentials, it gives rise to potentials in the scale of microvolts,
large enough to be measured with non-invasive methods. In summary, the EEG is the macroscopic
measure of the synchronous activity of a large population of neurons. A theoretical estimate of the area
required to cover this population is approximately 6 cm2. Current implementations are not far from this
estimate. A typical diameter of a EEG electrode is 10 mm (1.6 cm2) and commercial products such as
Quick-Cap use an effective size of 7 mm [7]. In summary, innovative-dry approaches suffer from a
severe restriction for miniaturization.
Figure 1. (a) Simple model of the electrical circuit originated by the electric dipole in a
differential montage; (b) Schema of electric dipole, ionic currents and differential measure.
SC
Rsc+

Vts/(Rb//Cb)

A

IG1

Electrolite
Vsc+

Rg+

A’

Csc+

A’’

Re+

Amplifier
A’’’

Cg+

Cb
Rsc-

Rg-

Vsc-

Re-

B’

B
Csc-

VhcCg-

(a)

+

Rin/2-

Rb

Vhc+

Electrode

Rin/2+

Electric dipole
(Norton equivalent)

B’’

B’’’

-

Sensors 2014, 14

12850
Figure 1. Cont.
A’’’

Electrodes
and leads (Re)

A‘’

Conductive gel
(Rg//Cg+Vhc)

Scalp

B’’

B’’’

A‘

Stratum
Corneum

+

B’

Diferential
Amplifier
(Rin)

Resistive Path through
SC (Rsc//Csc+Vsc)
A

B
Ionic
currents
Resistive Path
through Body
(Rb//Cb)

Skull
Electric
Dipole (Vts)
Cortex
(gray matter)

(b)
The first obvious disadvantage when neither conductive gel nor abrasive paste are used is larger
electrode impedance. Typical values of the electrode-skin impedance range between 150 to 200 KΩ
and 5 to 10 KΩ before and after gel applications, respectively. There are reasons why this impedance
must be kept as low as possible. The first one is to reduce the negative effect of the voltage splitter at
electrical nodes A´´´and B´´´(see Figure 1a). The second is to reduce undesired effects of mismatch
impedances in differential EEG measures.
Differential measurements are a popular way to record EEG because they prevent artifacts caused
by electromagnetic interference (EMI), mainly by power lines. EEG front-end amplifiers normally
present very high common-mode rejection ratio (CMRR) with typical values above 100 dB. The
CMRR consists of the ability of the amplifier to attenuate identical signals that simultaneously appear
at the inputs of the amplifier. EMI is mainly coupled to the skin and the electrode leads. Therefore, and
providing that electrode leads offer exactly the same impedance to both inputs, it is presented at the
amplifier inputs as a component of the common mode. In this case, it is almost completely removed by
the front-end differential amplifier.
3. Dry Electrodes
In the literature, dry electrode approaches can be classified as spiky, capacitive, non-contact or
other heterogeneous approaches.
3.1. Spiky Contact
In this approach, the electrode surface consists of an array of spikes that either directly come into
contact with the scalp or pierce the SC for better electrical attachment and mechanical fixation to the
scalp. Spikes have been developed in the scale of nanometers, micrometers (MEMS) and millimeters.

Sensors 2014, 14

12851

3.1.1. Nano, Micro and Millineedles
In [8], an array of silicon microneedles were tested for an EEG recording during anaesthesia
monitoring (see Figure 2a). Electrode configurations with different aspects and characteristics were
analyzed, revealing that the most relevant factors that affected the impedance were the electrode size
and the coating material. For example, Ag/AgCl-coated electrodes showed significantly lower
impedance than Ag-coated ones (p < 0.01). As in the case of disc-type Ag/AgCl electrodes, the
impedance increased with the decrease of the electrode size. Adequate impedance for EEG
measurements was obtained with an electrode array of just 3 × 3 mm2. The length of the spikes, which
is a key factor in the design because it determines the fragility of the electrode, was also analyzed
finding no significant difference between 200 and 170 µm (p > 0.3). With the best configuration
(Ag/AgCl-coated, 3 × 3 mm2), the minimum impedances were 0.65 KΩ and 16 KΩ at 1 KHz and
0.6 Hz, respectively. Regarding the quality of the recorded signal, EEG recordings with commercial
Zipprep electrodes showed similar quality by means of visual inspection. The study concluded that the
microneedle array was convenient for the patient and also suitable for real-time, long-term EEG
recordings. This approach, however, has a disadvantage, namely, the strength of the needles. Although
in the study a low rate of broken spikes was reported (0.3%), when spikes are broken they cause an
impedance mismatch in differential measures as well as infections. The latter would justify the
sterilization process being carried out three hours previous to the beginning of the experiment. From
the usability point of view, this process is obviously less convenient than wet electrodes and not likely
to be used in non-clinical applications, such as brain–computer interfaces (BCIs) [9,10]. Another
relevant aspect to be considered is that electrodes were located on the forehead for sake of the
anaesthesia monitoring (the fixation mechanism was not reported). Therefore, limitations due to the
presence of hair were not evaluated.
Six years later, multiwalled carbon nanotube arrays (see Figure 2b) were designed to penetrate the
SC, resulting in a comfortable and pain-free interface due to the minuscule size of the spikes [11]. The
use of this smaller technology (nanotube diameter 50 nm, length 15 µm) resulted in a lower infection
risk as compared to micro approaches. The performance and quality of the recorded signal was
visually compared with a commercial wet EEG system, showing similar results in both the frequency
and time domains. Although it was stated that the nanotubes could be coated to improve the
transduction from ionic to electronic currents, the electrode impedance was not reported. This missing
information is critical to evaluate the relative effect of both the input impedance of the front-end
amplifier and the mismatch impedance. An aspect in common with [8] is that the position of the dry
electrode during the evaluation protocol was in the forehead (Fp2 position in the International
10–20 system) with the reference at the nose. Again neither the disturbance due to the presence of hair
was evaluated nor was the fixation mechanism specified (from the context it is assumed that headbands
or a helmet was used).
Coming back to the micro range in 2010, a new dry electrode composed of an array of 4 × 4
microtips on silicon substrate coated with iridium oxide was presented [12]. The most remarkable
novelty of this dry electrode was its capability for both recording and electro-tactile stimulation. The
use of iridium oxide is a promising material for stimulation that enables high charge delivery capacity
and low constant impedance over the entire frequency range [13]. The electrode was not electrically

Sensors 2014, 14

12852

characterized in an in vivo experiment, but in a back-to-back montage (i.e., electrode-get-electrode
montage, see Figure 6b) that showed a conductivity of 5–14 mS/cm and linear phase from
approximately 4 Hz onwards. Signals recorded with this electrode were visually compared with wet
electrodes in both the frequency and time domain, giving rise to similar results. Due to the fragility of
the tip and the necessary pressure to puncture the scalp, some of the tips are expected to break during
skin penetration, especially those with aspect ratios higher than the proposed electrode, namely
150–200 µm base, 100–200 µm height, 54.7°angle (see Figure 2c). As with the two previous studies,
measures were performed on places without hair. Actually, in this study, no EEG recording was
performed, but EOG, for which electrodes were located at the canthi of the eyes. The amplitudes of the
EOG signals recorded in the study were about two orders of magnitude above typical EEG amplitudes
(e.g., hundreds of µV vs. units of µV). In summary, in this study neither the influence of hair nor the
suitability to record EEG signals was evaluated.
Other studies, such as in [14], reported that MEMS dry electrodes had several advantages in
comparison with wet ones, such as the electrode–skin interface impedance, signal intensity and size of
the electrode. Each electrode consisted of an array of 20 × 20 micro probes coated with
Titanium/Platinum (each probe 250 μm height, 35 μm diameter, 200 μm of effective penetration). The
length of the probes was not enough for recording on hairy sites. Therefore, only Fp1 and Fp2
positions were tested. In addition, they also developed a driver’s drowsiness estimation system to
demonstrate the potential applications of the MEMS electrodes in operational applications.
The principle of the nano and microneedle approach is the ability to by-pass the SC, gaining access to
inner layers of the skin with lower impedance. However, these microscopic structures frequently split,
giving rise to infections and impedance mismatch between electrodes. In 2012, Forvi E. et al. [3] carried
out a technological assessment of microneedle-based dry electrodes that do not break when piercing the
SC. In this study, they produced a dry EEG electrode of 8 × 8 pyramidal microneedles, hosted in an area
as little as 10 mm2, with sharper microtips that facilitated SC piercing, thus avoiding tips breakings. Once
the electrode pierced the SC, it achieved an impedance of just 13 KΩ without any tips failing by the end
of the experiment. They reported ECG, EMG and EEG validation experiments. In the EEG experiment,
the methodological section states that electrodes were located at position Fp1, Fp2, T3 and T4 of the
10–20 system (non-hairy and hairy sites, respectively) with ground and reference at Fpz. However, in the
results sections, only signals recorded using Fp2 (site without hair) were analyzed. Therefore, and as in
the studies previously reviewed, limitations due to the presence of hair were not evaluated.
The approaches previously described in this section, based on nano and microneedles, are
alternatives to wet electrodes. They present low electrode impedance, high mechanical stability with
fewer artifacts due to motion, capability for long-term measures and a quick set up. However, these
approaches are not easy or cheap to produce. Moreover, the electrode fixation was not always specified
and none of them was evaluated in areas covered with hair. A justification for the latter resides in the
fact that the size of the tips has to maintain the balance between invasiveness, reliability against breaks
and the capability to complete SC piercing. The SC has a thickness of 10–40 µm, whereas a human
hair is on average 50–100 µm [15]. That means that typical tips of 100 µm should be enlarged by at
least 200–300 µm extra to enable complete SC piercing in areas covered by abundant hair. As a
consequence, an electrode of this length would risk being both invasive and fragile.

Sensors 2014, 14

12853

In order to avoid the problems of the nano and micrometer scale, a non-invasive variant of the
microscopic spikes was developed in the millimeter scale. In [16], a 3D printer with micrometric
resolution was employed to make a dry electrode composed of 180 conical needles treated with
titanium and gold to lower the impedance and prevent oxidation (see Figure 2d). This approach
permitted a fast and low-cost production with high precision, thus being immediately ready for small
scale home production. This approach is not invasive at all, and can be reused indefinitely seemingly
without maintenance. The needles are much bigger than the nano or micro needles mentioned
previously. In this study, each needle was 3 mm long, 600 µm base diameter and about 100 µm tip
diameter. Furthermore, the distance between needles, namely 250 µm, permitted the operation on hairy
sites without compromising the fragility or invasiveness of needles. The millineedle electrode was
visually compared in the frequency and time domain with gel-based electrodes showing similar results.
One advantage of this approach is that, due to their size, EEG measures can be performed on areas
with hair (e.g., the occipital area). One logical disadvantage of the millimeter scale approach is the
likely motion artifacts due to inadequate contact/attachment with skin since millineedles do not pierce
the SC. It could be solved by attaching the electrodes to a belt and fastening it to the user’s head.
Nevertheless, this method could be unpleasant and even painful for the patient. Instead, it is believed
that an ad hoc cap with integrated electrodes would ensure a good contact with the skin. Another
disadvantage is a higher electrode impedance, which approximately reaches 50 KΩ for the lower part
of the EEG spectrum (DC-20 Hz).
Figure 2. (a) Array of silicon microneedles. Adapted from [8]; (b) Multiwalled carbon
nanotube arrays. Adapted from [11]; (c) Details of a microtip. Adapted from [12]; (d) 3D
printed dry millielectrode. Adapted from [16].
Electrode
Electrode
casing
casing
Amplification
Amplification

170 um
170 um

Connector
Connector
15 um
15
Ø 50um
nm
Ø 50 nm

(a)

CNT substrate
CNT substrate

(b)

2000 um
nextum
tip
2000
next tip

100-200
um
100-200

um
3 mm

3 mm

150-200
um
150-200

um

600 um

600 um

(c)

(d)

Tip: Ø 100um
Tip: Ø 100um

Sensors 2014, 14

12854

As a summary, dry electrodes based on needles and their respective variants are approaches that
conveniently avoid the need for conductive gel and fixation paste. Cheap and minimally invasive
electrodes can be easily obtained by means of a 3D printer, with low risk of infection and work on
hairy sites in the millimeter scale. However, this solution is not optimal from the impedance point of
view, for which subscales could be tried.
3.1.2. Tips
In the centimeter scale, Matthews R. et al. [17] proposed an electrode of the size of a US 5c coin
based on a set of tips (i.e., ‘fingers’) is proposed which would be big enough to make electrical contact
with the scalp through hair. The contact impedance between the scalp and each finger was as high as
10 MΩ. In order to reduce this undesired effect, the electrode was directly connected, back-to-back to
an amplifier of ultra-high input impedance. The tips were allocated in two concentric rings (see
Figure 3a) for a better rejection of common mode. The signal quality was visually compared with wet
electrodes showing similar recordings with closed eyes. Also, real time classification of workload and
engagement was performed as a measure of the ability to extract useful information from EEG
recordings, obtaining accuracies between 73% and 89% in binary classification. An EEG harness fixed
the electrodes in hairy positions. It can be argued that, due to the high electrode impedance, on-site
amplifier with ultra-high impedance is required. The other aspect to keep in mind is that the
comparison with wet electrodes was performed on EEG envelopes of 50 µV peak-to-peak. Thus, the
performance of small potential recordings was not shown.
Three years after in 2011, the authors of [18] developed a flexible, low-cost electrode made of
polymer silver-coated bristles approximately the size of a toothbrush (see Figure 3b). The electrodes
were evaluated with typical BCI paradigms, namely motor imagery, odd-ball paradigm, as well as with
EEG components, namely auditory evoked potentials and P300. The results confirmed the ability of
these electrodes to record EEG signals with enough quality to be used in a wide variety of BCI
applications and EEG analysis. One of the disadvantages of this electrode is the rapid deterioration of
the electrode impedance with use. An initial impedance of 80 KΩ was reported that deteriorated to
150–200 KΩ after 10 months of use. At this point, all electrodes must be recoated in order to avoid
impedance mismatch. Another disadvantage is the dependence of the electrode impedance with the
pressure on the scalp. Some participants reported prickling and uncomfortable sensations.
Although the bristle-sensor improved the risk of infection, degree of invasiveness and surface
contact, it was too invasive and uncomfortable for long-term measures. In [19], the authors presented a
dry EEG sensor for operation in the presence of hair. This sensor was designed to contact the scalp
surface with 17 spring contact probes that kept high geometric conformity between the sensor and the
irregular scalp surface, thus maintaining low electrode impedance (see Figure 3c). Additionally, the
flexible substrate in which the spring probes were inserted permitted the attachment of the sensor to
the scalp without pain when force was applied. It was compared with wet electrodes, achieving similar
results in terms of signal quality recordings and electrode impedance with a better temporal derive,
thus enabling long-term EEG records.

Sensors 2014, 14

12855

Figure 3. (a) Ambulatory Wireless EEG System Adapted from [17]; (b) Polymer bristles.
Adapted from [18]; (c) Spring contact probes. Adapted from [19].

(c)
20 mm

(a)

13 mm

(b)
3.2. Capacitive/Non-Contact Electrodes
In previous sections, we pointed out that hair can be an inconvenience with nano and
microelectrodes as it can cause loss of contact with the scalp. Some researchers coped with this
difficulty by avoiding physical contact with the scalp, but at the cost of an extraordinary increase of
electrode impedance.
In [20], the authors recorded EEG electric potential with probes at a distance of 3 mm from the
scalp above positions P3-O1 of the International 10–20 System. The probes fed an amplifier whose
ultra-high impedance avoided additional degradation of the measured EEG signal. This study has some
shortcomings. The most important one is that it cannot be reproduced, since no details were provided
about the electrodes design or the acquisition system. Furthermore, there was no comparison with wet
electrodes, but a demonstration that the electrode was able to record modulations of the Alpha rhythm
in a closed–open eyes paradigm.
In [21], the authors presented a dry and non-contact EEG/ECG sensor that combined amplification,
filtering and analog-to-digital conversion within an enclosure of the size of a quarter dollar. The
measured input-referred noise, in the range 1–100 Hz varied from 2 to 17 μVrms at 0.2 mm and
3.2 mm distance, respectively. The same criticism as in [20] can be stated, namely, the EEG was
recorded through hair, but the ability of the electrode to discriminate between open and closed
conditions from Alpha band was only analyzed without comparison with wet electrodes.

Sensors 2014, 14

12856

Figure 4. (a) Capacitive electrode. Adapted from [22]; (b) Non-contact low Power
EEE/ECG electrode. Adapted from [23]; (c) Dry active electrode made from standard
Printed Circuit Board (PCB). Adapted from [24].
Electrode
plate
Electrode
plate

Shield
Shield

Guard

Amplifier

Guard

Amplifier

Snap connector
Snap connector

Active
shield
Active
shield

Insulation

Sensing plate

Insulation
Antenna Battery
(a)
Amplifier
Antenna
Battery
Amplifier

(c)
Sensing plate

Electrode surface
Electrode surface

(b)
The first study of capacitive electrodes related to BCIs [22] presented a helmet of 28 EEG channels
that measured steady-state visual evoked potentials (SSVEPs) through hair (see Figure 4a). Although
the detection time deteriorated by about a factor of ×3 in comparison with contact electrodes measures,
the peak performance, namely ITR = 12.5 bits/min and accuracy = 95%, was far above the minimum
accepted by the BCI community, namely 70% [25], to establish an efficient BCI communication
session. This approach has the following in common with the non-contact designs previously analyzed
in this section: (i) a very high impedance (approximately 1012 KΩ), (ii) the need for on-site
amplification and (iii) the recorded EEG signal was not compared with that obtained from
wet electrodes. Therefore, the scope of application of this electrode cannot be generalized beyond
SSVEP-BCI applications with low performance.
In [23], the authors developed a non-contact capacitive biopotential electrode with the capacity for
cooperative work in a body area sensor network. The sensor network utilized a conductive plane to
establish a common reference, thus eliminating the need for explicit ground. Each electrode was the
size of a coin and the network could be fed with a single 3.3 V supply. The integration on the net was
performed via a serial daisy chain bus (see Figure 4b). The electrodes were tested at a 0.18, 0.89 and
2.72 mm distance from the scalp, with an approximately linear phase with the frequency and
independently of the distance. The gain was distance dependent. With regard to the EEG-signal-quality
evaluation, unfortunately, there was neither comparison with wet electrodes nor discrimination
between conditions (e.g., open-closed eyes). The study only reported noise spectrum at different
distances from the scalp in the band 0.1–150 Hz. In [24], the same author reviewed a simple
implementation of a dry active electrode made of conventional PCB. This design has the capability of
working as capacitive (see the sensing plane on the bottom of Figure 4c) or as non-contact through
insulation fabric (e.g., cotton).

Sensors 2014, 14

12857

In summary, there are some major drawbacks for the use of capacitive/non-contact EEG electrodes.
Firstly, the amplitude levels are so low that they are probably not suitable for recording of spontaneous
EEG signals. Secondly, there is the high impedance that these electrodes present, thus causing the need
for an on-site amplifier with ultra-high impedance. In this case, and according to the Johnson-Nyquist
definition of thermal noise [26,27], the level of electrical noise introduced is proportional to the
magnitude of the impedances, thus causing the immediate degradation of the signal quality at the
amplifier output. These two drawbacks would justify the use of Alpha and SSVEP for evaluation in all
the reviewed studies. These are narrow-band rhythms of inherent high SNR suitable for recordings in
the presence of high level of noise. This would justify why capacitive/non-contact electrodes have not
been tried either with spontaneous EEG or event-related potentials. The third main inconvenience is
motion artifacts caused for the “floating” fixation to the scalp.
3.3. Other Heterogeneous Approaches
Other heterogeneous approaches were tried. In [5], the authors presented a dry electrode with
dimensions 14 × 8 × 8 mm, fabricated with electrically conductive polymer foam and covered by a
conductive fabric (see Figure 5a). The foam substrate allowed conformity between the electrode and
irregular surface of the scalp, thus keeping electrode impedance low, even under motion. It permitted
long-term EEG measurements without skin preparation or conduction gel, thus being ideal for daily
life applications. The impedance was compared with wet electrodes with and without skin preparation
at Forehead (F10) and hairy locations (POz), finding better results for the foam based electrode. Also,
the electrode impedance remained approximately the same after 5 h of recording, while wet electrode
impedance increases linearly with the time (approximately 2 KΩ/h). Another interesting aspect is the
cost of the electrode (around 0.3 euro/unit). Finally, the analysis of motion artifacts was also in favor
of the foam electrodes.
Figure 5. (a) Dry foam EEG electrode. Adapted from [5]; (b) Quasi-dry electrode Adapted
from [28].
8 mm

8mm
11 mm

8mm

14 mm

(a)

(b)

In [28], a polymer-based electrode was presented with a reservoir inside the electrode that released
a small portion of 30 µL of hydrating agent after an abduction force (see Figure 5b). This electrode
was able to monitor EEG signals with similar performance to Ag/AgCl electrodes but using only a

Sensors 2014, 14

12858

fraction of the hydrating solution necessary, thus avoiding dirtying the patient’s hair and the risk of
conductive bridges between adjacent electrodes. In [29], SRICO Inc. developed dry photonic
electrodes, otherwise called “Photrodes” for measuring EEG and ECG signals.
4. Benchmarking and Evaluation Procedures
There are inherent problems related to EEG measures that make the evaluation of dry electrodes
difficult. Developers of dry-electrodes claim there is no need for conductive and abrasive paste and no
degradation of the EEG signal. The latter must be contrasted with the gold standard, namely wet
electrodes, by means of a reproducible methodology. In this regards, key aspects such as simulated
versus in vivo recordings, the nature of the EEG signal (e.g., rhythms, endogenous potentials,
event-related potentials, etc.), the psycho-physiological paradigm (e.g., odd-ball, steady state response,
selective attention, etc.) or the electrical montage (e.g., sites, electrical references, devices, etc.) must
be taken into consideration.
Figure 6a shows an electrical montage used for electrode characterization [14,30]. In this circuit, a
test signal of a known amplitude and phase is generated by the source Vts. From the symmetry of the
circuit, it can be deduced that the amplitude of output V1 equals that of output V2 when the impedance
Rref matches the electrode-skin-electrode impedance (ESEI). The phase shift between test signal and
V2 will reveal the imaginary part of the ESEI. Typical values for test signal are 60 mV amplitude and
frequencies oscillate between 0.5 and 500 Hz. There are other simpler circuits, such as the one
proposed in [31]. In this circuit, a known voltage is supplied to all EEG electrodes except one, from
which the electrode-skin impedance is estimated. Another circuit proposed in [12] for the measurement
of the electrode-electrolyte impedance (EEI) is based on an impedance-to-voltage converter in a
configuration with face-to-face electrodes (see Figure 6b). These two montages use a test signal that
simulates EEG signals. There are other approaches based on in vivo recordings or playback of previously
recorded EEG signals.

Rref

Electrode electrolite Electrode

V1

+
-

Re1

V2

Re2

R

+

Ro
Electrodes
Scalp

Vts

+

Vts

-

+

R

Figure 6. (a) Measure of ESEI by means of test signal. Adapted from [30]; (b) Impedance-tovoltage converter to measure the EEI. Adapted from [12]. Playback schema.

Ce1
+

ESEI

(a)

(b)

Ce2
V1

Sensors 2014, 14

12859
Figure 6. Cont.
Record
EEG signal
(wet electrodes)

Test signal
Playback
Signal
Storage

Record
EEG signal
(dry electrodes)

Signals
Correlation
0.94

(c)
4.1. Simulated, in Vivo and Playback
Unfortunately, there are few studies that perform a complete characterization of the impedance of
dry electrodes including frequency response such as in [12], in which the conductivity and phase was
estimated by means of impedance spectroscopy in the range 1–1000 Hz. In [32], dry and wet
electrodes were compared by applying a test signal of 0.3 V to a pig skin on which both electrodes
were placed. Although the performance of the dry electrode was similar to that of the wet, the test
signal was generated only at 10 Hz, a reason why the evaluation cannot be considered complete. In [5],
signals of 1 V amplitude and frequencies from 0.5 to 10 kHz were employed to determine the
impedance by means of impedance spectroscopy. The contrast with wet electrodes showed that the
impedance of dry electrodes was approximately the same as the wet ones on non-hairy sites (F10) and
better than wet on hairy sites (POz). The study does not specify if the hair was manually removed from
the hairy site. A long-term test was performed to evaluate the drying effect on wet electrodes. The
results showed that the impedance of the dry electrodes remained constant during 5 hours, while the
wet electrode suffered an increment of the impedance at a rate of approximately 2 KΩ per hour. A
similar approach and results were reported in [19]. In these two experiments, only the absolute value of
the impedance was reported, thus lacking the imaginary part of the frequency response. However, it
must be kept in mind that the relevance of the electrode impedance is relative to the input impedance
of the front-end amplifier, so the imaginary part of the electrode impedance could be disregarded in the
case of much larger amplifier impedance. Impedance is a typical indicator of signal quality when wet
electrodes are used; however, when dry electrodes are used the ultimate goal is the recording of signals
with the same quality. For this reason, most of the studies do not deal with the electrode impedance
question and focus on the quality of the recorded signal.
In vivo experimentation is a complicated choice for measures comparison due to the non-reproducible
nature of EEG signals. Despite the inherent difficulty of testing with humans, some studies tried to
compare the performance of dry electrodes with wet electrodes in a same-place-different-time
approach. For instance, in [3] EEG signals were registered on the same locations, namely Fp1, Fp2, T3
and T4 sites, ground and reference at Fpz and right mastoid, respectively, with dry electrodes and
afterwards with wet ones. The user was asked to perform eyes blinking and teeth grinding. The
same-place-different-time approach is not free from controversy. It can be argued that our brain is in
constant change and properties such as plasticity or habituation could drive the participant to different

Sensors 2014, 14

12860

cognitive states and hence to different EEG signals even between consecutive trials of the
same experiment.
The same-place-different-time approach in vivo experiments has been counteracted with the
same-time-different-place approach. Some authors tried an electrical montage in which both dry and
wet electrodes are mounted at the same time but at very close locations. In [17], EEG recordings were
made by using dry and wet electrode pairs positioned at Cz and Fz sites with less than a 5 mm gap,
achieving correlation of dry-wet signals of above 90%. However, there is the possibility that a gap of
only 5 mm separation between dry and wet electrodes could easily give rise to electrical bridges due to
conductive gel spreading, although the authors claim that care was taken to prevent it. The
following studies also followed the same-time-different-place approach to compare dry-wet
electrodes [5,11,16,18,19,28]. The same-time-different-place approach is also controversial. On one
hand, the use of electrodes at separated locations leads to the measure of different ionic currents and
hence different electrical activity. On the other hand, very close located electrodes could lead to
electrical bridges caused by the spreading of gel on or even under the scalp. There are studies that
report a spread of 1 cm in each direction under the scalp. That gives rise to a 2 cm separation between
electrodes [33]. Therefore, a reasonable precaution of 3 cm apart should be kept for sake of isolation.
In [34], the authors performed cognitive paradigms such as the oddball and evoked event-related
potentials, from which little difference was found in the comparison of dry-wet electrodes. The
comparison included accuracy in a single-trial detection of the P300 and, although there was a
significant difference in favor of the wet electrodes (77.8% vs. 72.1%), the accuracy obtained by the
dry EEG system was good enough for efficient communication of a BCI user. The study states that
both dry and wet electrodes were recorded simultaneously at the same locations, with only a separation
of 1.5 cm. Because the gel spread under the scalp, electrical bridges under the scalp could have
occurred, thus explaining the good results with dry electrodes.
Finally, the last evaluation technique is the playback of a previously recorded EEG signal (see
Figure 6c). In [5,19], EEG pre-recorded signals by means of standard wet electrodes were stored in a
computer. Afterwards, it was played back by means of a function generator and the amplitude divided
by approximately a factor of five thousand to accommodate the range of the signal to typical EEG
values. The replicated EEG signal was presented to the dry electrodes, and afterwards amplified by the
same factor. Finally, both the pre-recorded EEG signal and that recorded with the dry electrodes were
statistically compared by means of correlation, obtaining values above 90% and 80% for EEG and
EOG signals, respectively.
4.2. Evaluation by Means of EEG Rhythms or Evoked Potentials
In the literature, comparison of the recorded signal quality between dry and wet electrodes is based
on rhythms and evoked potentials. The adequate recording of a specific EEG rhythm is made with the
selection of the psycho-physiological paradigm that better elicits it. Alpha and Beta rhythms are used
in literature for the assessment of dry electrodes, although, steady state responses, such as the visual
(SVVEP) have also been tried. Some studies used the open–closed eyes task to cause modulations in
the energy of Alpha rhythm [3,11,16–18,21,28]. These modulations are large enough to recognize both
conditions of the task with dry electrodes, thus facilitating visual contrast between conditions. One of the

Sensors 2014, 14

12861

advantages of the Alpha rhythm is that, due to its large amplitude, it can be recorded all over the scalp
(typically in the range of tens of microvolt), thus being a good option in the same-time-different-place
approach. In [22], a SSVEP paradigm was proposed for a BCI application. The performance of dry
electrodes was evaluated in terms of accuracy in detection of the potential and information
transmission rate in bits per minute units. A SSVEP is a train of repetitive evoked responses whose
frequency matches that of the visual stimulus. In this paradigm, the electrodes position is important
and must preferably be on the visual cortex zone (occipital area). One of the advantages of SSVEP is
that, when the SSVEP is optimally evoked, it is a potential of very high signal-to-noise ratio. Under
these conditions, the burden of the same-place-different-time approach issue can be overcome by just
designing an experiment of short visual stimuli, without significant or cognitive meaning (e.g., non
structured stimulus or flash). In this way, cortical adaptation is unlikely to happen while a SSVEP
signal is recorded.
Although Alpha rhythm seems to be a convenient solution to test dry electrodes it can be argued
that its energy can be easily modulated by cognitive tasks or mental states indicating relaxation or
arousal. Then, analysis and comparison of EEG signals recorded in different trials may give rise to
misleading conclusions because amplitudes could result from cognitive processes and not the
performance of the electrodes. Furthermore, as Alpha rhythm is allocated in a narrow band of the EEG
spectrum, the characterization of the electrode, which has a frequency response, is incomplete.
SSVEPs have a similar problem with the spectral characterization, which is more prominent for
frequencies lower than 30 and typically not beyond 47 Hz [35]. Therefore, electrodes cannot be
completely characterized and their performance can be rather different in other spectral bands, such as
in the case of slow cortical potentials at 0.01–4 Hz, gamma band from 32 Hz onwards or the multiple
auditory steady state responses paradigms about 100 Hz [36]. Despite the incomplete characterization
when rhythms or steady state responses are used for the evaluation of dry electrodes, it can be enough
for some BCIs applications. Both Alpha and SSVEP can be easily modulated by cognitive tasks, which
is why they have been used repeatedly in BCI literature [37,38]. For this reason, the characterization
of electrodes by means of EEG rhythms should be linked to the application scope in which these
rhythms operate.
The analysis in the frequency domain of EEG signals cannot point out peaks, amplitudes and
latencies of evoked responses with accuracy. Some clinical procedures rely on these details for
accurate diagnoses, such as the amplitudes and latencies of potentials for visual or auditory impairment
assessment. Then, the assessment of dry electrodes in the time domain is pertinent, especially for
clinical purpose or for BCIs based on event-related potentials. In the time domain, there are different
ways to report similitude between any two signals, such as determination coefficient, correlation
coefficient or mean-square error. Only few studies report some statistics, such as correlation [5,6,19,39],
or cross-spectrum [18].
5. Limitations and Commercial Solutions
In previous sections, we have analyzed the performance and main characteristics of dry electrodes.
In this section, we summarize their limitations in comparison with the wet ones as regards the
following aspects:

Sensors 2014, 14






12862

Mechanical: The size of dry electrodes is not smaller than that of wet, but the spikes that make up
the electrode are. The use of smaller spikes that pierce the SC causes the reduction of the electrical
impedance at the cost of invasiveness. Table 1 shows some aspects of dry electrodes spike size.
The mechanical fixation, which does not differ from the wet ones (e.g., headbands, helmet, etc.),
needs improvements in terms of comfort and discretion to consider it a wearable solution.
Evaluation: In some studies, the electrical characteristics of the electrodes, including frequency
response, were not reported. Furthermore, comparisons with wet electrodes were not made, and
other critical details that would have enabled results to be reproduced were not given in some
studies. Instead, in some cases, dry electrodes were validated by visual correlation of specific EEG
features (e.g., energy in Alpha band or steady-state evoked potentials) with simple protocols such
as open-close eyes or gaze at a flickering stimulus. The latter suggests that the use of some dry
electrodes could not be extended beyond certain specific applications (e.g., Alpha-BCIs or
SSVEP-BCIs, respectively). Some of the procedures for comparison with wet electrodes are not
free from controversy. The same-place-different-time approach compares non-stationary signals
recorded at different times. The same-time-different-place approach compares EEG signals mainly
generated by different population of neurons (where electrodes are quite separate). The possibility
of electrical bridges by gel spreading under the scalp (where electrodes are close together) is
always present.
Usability: Several aspects such as preparation time and comfort, particularly for severely disabled
people who have great difficulties in controlling their heads, should be taken into account. Given
their current size, dry electrodes are not more comfortable than wet electrodes in this situation.
Extra work should be done to develop more comfortable fixation systems other than those already
used with wet electrodes. Regarding preparation time, dry electrodes potentially save time for the
researcher. However, the time needed to obtain stable signals has not been reported or contrasted
with wet ones. For measures that take longer (e.g., video-EEG or sleep sessions), dry electrodes
are superior to wet, whose performance deteriorates as the gel dries. Another aspect to consider is
the use of active electrodes. Since they convert a high impedance source into a low impedance
output, the signal quality is much less skin-impedance dependent. This permits their use without
gel. Therefore, the dry-active combination should be considered for a useful reduction in time.
Table 1. Comparison of spike size, advantages and disadvantages of dry electrodes.
Scale

nano

micro

mili

Pros
and
Cons
Similar impedance as wet
electrodes
Invasive (piercing of SC)
No risk of infection
Non suitable for hairy sites
Less artefacts due to motion
Invasive (piercing of SC)
Similar impedance as wet
Risk of infection
electrodes
Electrode fragility
Less artefacts due to motion
Non suitable for hairy sites
No invasive
Higher impedance than wet
No Risk of infection
electrodes
Suitable for hairy sites
Artefacts due to motion

Sensors 2014, 14

12863

Dry electrodes can be produced in even a small research laboratory, for instance by means of a 3D
printer. Most of the commercial solutions combine dry, active, wearable and wireless electrodes in one
system, thus giving rise to a fully operational mobile EEG system. However, some of the commercial
products may be too expensive for small-size laboratories. Table 2 lists current commercial mobile
EEG systems.
Table 2. Commercial EEG systems based on dry electrodes.
Name

Sahara

Insight

DSI 10/20

BrainBand XL,
MindWave
and others

XWave headset
Enobio

MindFlex

EEG headset

ThinkGear AM
(TGAM) EEG
sensor

Dry Pad

Flexible Dry
EEG electrode
Muse

Purpose

Description
Dry, active electrode system that works for all frontal, central, occipital
BCI and General
and parietal sites. Electrode composed of 8 pins made of gold alloy.
purpose
Bandwidth: 0.1–40 Hz. When used with Nautilus: Sampling rate: 500
Hz. Up to 32 channels. 3-axis acceleration sensor.
A 5 channel (plus 2 references) wireless headset to track and monitor
brain activity and stream to mobile devices. Although the
BCI and General
advertisement states it is a dry EEG system, the technical specifications
purpose
state the sensors are made of semi-dry polymer. Bandwidth: 1–43 Hz,
Sampling rate: 128 Hz, Wireless interface: Bluetooth 4.0 LE.
Ultra-high impedance sensors (47 GΩ). Up to 23 electrodes at a
BCI and General
sampling rate of 960 Hz and a maximum bandwidth of 120 Hz.
purpose
Suitable for locations with hair
Dual sensor EEG unit (one active with adjustable positions). Bluetooth
Connectivity. Sampling rate 512 Hz and bandwidth up to 50 Hz.
BCI and for multimedia
Automatic with processing of attention, meditation and eye blink
control
detection. Based in TGAM sensor by Neurosky. Not suitable for
locations with hair.
BCI to control
Neuro Sky eSense Dry Sensor. Not suitable for locations with hair.
iPhone/iPad
BCI and General
UP to 20 channels at a sampling rate of 500 Hz. Wireless operation
purpose
with Bluetooth and 50 nV of quantification step
Based on attention and meditation to control the vertical position of
Electronic Game
a plastic ball by activation of a fan underneath. It uses TGAM
by Neurosky
8-channel EEG monitoring chipset. Each EEG channel consists of two
Wearable health
active electrodes and a low-power analog signal processor with high
monitor with EEG
input impedance (1.4 GΩ at 10 Hz)
Non-contact dry sensor. Sampling rate 512 bits. Bandwidth
Brainwave sensor
3–100 Hz. Operates at a minimum of 2.97 V. It works with Ag/AgCl,
module for simper
Stainless Steel, Gold, or/and Silver electrodes. It outputs attention,
games
meditation and eyeblinks. Not suitable for locations with hair.
Reusable Ag/AgCl EEG pad electrode suitable for locations without
BCI and General
hair. Electrode impedance 10–100 KΩ. The active version only
purpose
needs a supply battery of 1.8 V. Small size (versions with 2–5 cm
diameter circa.).
BCI and General
Flexible and reusable (up to 30 sessions) Ag coated elastometer.
purpose
Suitable for locations with hair. Electrode impedance 100–2000 KΩ.
Designed to manage
stress with real time Seven EEG electrodes built into a headband. Sampling rate 600 Hz.
feedback.

Vendor
g.tec medical
engineering GmbH

Emotiv

Quasar

MindPlay

PLX Devices
Starlab

Mattel

Imec

Neurosky

Cognionics

Cognionics

Interaxon

Sensors 2014, 14

12864

6 Conclusions
Currently, new advances in dry EEG electrodes give rise to unexpected fields of applications in
addition to clinical applications. New aspects such as ease of usability and gel-free operation are first
order priorities. Wet electrodes are considered the gold standard and further research must contrast dry
and wet electrodes before claiming the adequacy of the former. The first difficulty is to reach
agreement on the contrast methodology. Different dry electrode approaches are conceptually distinct
and, in the literature, reports of performance have been carried out with non-homogenous
methodologies, so their results cannot easily be discussed or compared. These studies and reports show
evidences that additional work is needed before dry electrodes become an alternative to standard wet
electrodes for the recording of EEG signals in clinical and other applications with long-term exposures
After reviewing most relevant dry-electrode approaches, we conclude that the evaluation
of performance as well as the electromechanical characterization is a clear task that needs
homogenization for a convenient comparison. In this regard, we propose a checklist of aspects that
should be covered (see Table 3). As an example of application, Table 4 shows the most important
details and characteristics of relevant studies.
Table 3. Description and evaluation of dry EEG electrodes.

Mechanical

Electrical

Evaluation

Usability

Fundament (physical fundament of the approach, MEMS, non contact, etc.)
Material (substrate, coating material)
Dimensions (array, individua spikes)
Fixation system (headband, helmet, etc.)
Active (y/n) (need of on site active amplification)
Impedance (response in frequency)
Range of frequencies (for which the electrode is valid)
Noise (noise figure)
Aplication (BCI, real-time outdoor use, clinical, etc.)
Biosignals (EEG, EOG, EMG, ECG, etc.)
Measure (in vivo, test signal, playback, etc.)
Procedure/Paradigm (pysicophsyiological paradigm uses to elicit the features)
Location (sites of the International 10-20 system)
Features (ERP, Alfpha, µ-rhythm, SSVEP, etc.)
Classification/Detection (e.g., in BCIs application)
Comparison wet-dry (statistic method, e.g., correlation, MSE, etc.)
Dry (y/n)
Cost
Long-term (suitable for long-term monitoring?)
Comfort (annoying, itching, need of tigh fixation?)
Hairy sites (y/n)
Others

Sensors 2014, 14

12865
Table 4. Details of relevant studies on dry electrodes and evaluation.
Electrical

Evaluation

Griss

Fundament: array of

Mechanical

Active electrode: No.

Application: anesthesia monitoring systems. Biosignals:

2002

microneedles. Material: silver

Impedance: minimum

EEG. Measure: in-vivo. Procedure: Comparison with

or silver-/silver chloride-coated

0.65–16 k at 1 kHz and

Zipprep electrodes. Features: Spontaneous EEG.

microneedles glued onto a

0.6 Hz. Unstable at

Location: forehead. Evaluation: visual comparison dry

circular double-sided printed

frequencies below

Zipprep electrode.

circuit board. Dimensions:

0.8 Hz. Noise:

micrometers. Comfort:
Comfortable. Skin showed
some redness.
Harland
2002

Fundament: Non-contact

2007

15

Application: multichannel EEG monitoring and

sensor. Material: metallic.

Impedance:10 Ω

real-time imaging of the brain. Biosignals: EEG, ECG.

Dimensions: disk of diameter

and. Noise: 70

Measure: in vivo. Procedure: Closed and open eyes.

1 to 2 cm. Comfort: remote

Sullivan

Active electrode: Yes.

nV/Hz

−1/2

at 1 Hz

Features: Alpha and Beta. Location: P3 and O1:

registering at 3 mm from the

Evaluation: Visual plots of Alpha and Beta modulation.

scalp, no physical contact.

No dry-wet contrast.

Fundament: Non-contact.

Active electrode: Yes.

Application: Biopotential recording systems and human

Material: Metallic plate on the

Electrode impedance:

machine interfaces. Biosignals: EEG, ECG. Measure: in

bottom of a PCB. Dimensions:

Not reported. Noise:

vivo. Procedure: Open-closed eyes paradigm. Features:

A quarter dollar. Comfort: No

2 μVrms at 0.2 mm

Alpha. Location: back of the head, reference behind the

physical contact, 3 mm gap.

sensor distance, and

ear. Evaluation: visual plots. No dry-wet contrast.

ECG records through clothing.

17 μVrms at 3.2 mm
distance over 1–100 Hz
frequency range

Oehler
2008

Fundament: Capacitive
electrodes. Material: metallic

Active electrode: Yes.
6

Impedance: 10 GΩ.

electrode plate. Dimensions:

Noise: 2 μV/Hz

Diameter of the electrode plate

10 Hz and

is 26 mm, sensor height is

70 nV/Hz

−1/2

at

Application: BCIs. Biosignals: EEG. Measure: in vivo.
Procedure: Gazing at visual structured stimuli
(checkerboards). Features: SSVEP. Location:O1, O2
and Oz, reference at FCz. Evaluation: Accuracy of

−1/2

at 1 kHz.

SSVEP detection, ITR (bpm). No dry-wet contrast.

15 mm. Comfort: Electrodes
fixed by means of a helmet.
Matthews
2008

Fundament: A bioelectrode

Active electrode: Yes.

Application: Real time classification of workload during

composed of 32 “fingers”

Impedance: 10 MΩ

motion, Military applications. Biosignals: EEG, ECG,

capable of measurements

per “finger”. Noise:

EMG, EOG. Measure: in vivo. Procedure: closing eyes.

through hair. Material:

400 nV/Hz

−1/2

(DAQ).

Classification of workload and engagement. Features:

Metallic contact. Dimensions:

Alpha. Location: Cz, C3, C4, Fz, F3, F4, and Pz,

US 5 cents approximately.

reference at P4. Evaluation: Correlation with wet

Comfort: Use of harness. It

electrodes. Classification accuracy of cognitive workload.

permits subject motion.

Sensors 2014, 14

12866
Table 4. Cont.
Mechanical

Ruffini
2008

Electrical

Evaluation

Fundament: Multiwalled carbon Active electrode: Yes.

Application: General EEG recordings. Biosignals: EEG,

nanotube arrays. Material:

Impedance: Not

ECG, EOG. Measure: In vivo. Procedure: Open-closed

Carbon without coating.

reported. Noise: It is low eyes paradigm. Auditory Evoked responses. Features:

Dimensions: Diameter of

and rather similar to that Alpha, N1 ERP. Location: Fp2, reference at nose.

ca. 50 nm, length of 10–15 µm.

of the commercial

Comfort: No side effects or pain electrodes.

Evaluation: visual comparison dry-wet. Contrast
hypothesis.

even after 6 months.
Dias

Fundament: Array of 4 × 4

Active electrode: No.

Application: Human–machine interfaces. Suitable for

2010

microtips. Material: silicon

Conductivity: Similar to electro-tactile stimulation. Biosignals: EEG, ECG, EOG,

substrate coated with IrO.

wet electrodes above

EMG. Measure: In vivo. Procedure: Eye movements,

Dimensions: Each tip has a width 3 Hz. Noise:

EOG measure. Features: EOG amplitude. Location: At the

in the range 150–200 µm, height

canthi of the eyes. Evaluation: Visual comparison dry-wet

of 100–200 µm, inter-microtip
spacing of 2 mm.
Comfort: Not reported
Grozea
2011

Fundament: Flexible conductive Active electrode: No.

Application: BCI. Biosignals: EEG. Measure: In vivo.

bristles. Material: flexible

Impedance: 80 KΩ

Procedure: Eyes open/eyes closed conditions. Auditory

metal-coated polymer bristles.

(150–200 KΩ after

evoked potentials. Odd ball paradigm and motor imagery.

Dimensions:

10 months of use).

Features: Alpha rhythm. N100 AEP. P300, µ-rhythm

12 × 12 mm, and 10 mm long.

Noise:

(8–14 Hz). Location: P3, {Oz, Alpha}, {Fz, N100}, {Fz,

Comfort: Pressure of the

Cz, P1, P300}, {Fz, C4, FC2, CP2, P3, µ-rhythm}.

electrodes and the mounting

Evaluation: Spectral coherence (7–44 Hz) between

frame found annoying. prickling

dry-wet. T-test for detection of potentials.

sensation
Liao

Fundament: Electrode with

Active electrode: No.

Application: BCIs, monitoring of human EEG states.

2011

17 spring contact probes.

Impedance: Similar and Biosignals: EEG, EOG. Measure: Pre-recorded EEG data

Material: BeCu. The probe head better to wet electrodes

and in vivo. Procedure: Eye blinking. Features:

was coated with gold.

on forehead and hairy

Amplitude of EOG. Location: On the forehead (F10) and a

Dimensions: 13 mm diameter,

site respectively. After

hairy site (POz). Evaluation: Correlation with wet

20 mm height. Comfort: Not

1 h, dry electrode

recordings.

reported.

impedance was better.
Noise:

Chin-Teng Fundament: Foam-based
2011

Active electrode: No.

Application: monitoring of human EEG states, BCIs

electrode. Material: foam

Impedance: Similar and applications, clinical and research applications. Biosignals:

covered by a conductive fabric

better to wet electrodes in EEG, EOG. Measure: Pre-recorded EEG data and in vivo.

and coated with Ni/Cu.

forehead and hairy site

Dimensions: 14 × 8 × 8 mm.

respectively. After 1h dry EEG and EOG amplitudes. Location: On the forehead

Comfort: The foam electrode is

electrodes impedance

(F10) and a hairy site (POz). Evaluation: Correlation with

soft enough to contact the skin

was better. Noise:

wet recordings.

properly.

Procedure: EEG records and eye movements. Features:

Sensors 2014, 14

12867
Table 4. Cont.
Mechanical

Electrical

Evaluation

Forvi

Foundation: 8 × 8 pyramidal

Active electrode: No.

Application: monitoring of ECG signal in dynamic

2012

microneedles. Material: silicon.

Impedance: 13 KΩ

conditions. Biosignals: EEG, ECG, EMG. Measure: In

Dimensions: Contact surface

when SC is penetrated.

vivo. Procedure: blinking eyes and in teeth grinding.

Noise:

Features: EEG, EMG, ECG. Location: EEG Fp1, Fp2, T3

2

1 cm .Micro scale. Comfort:
Minimal invasiveness, easy and

and T4, ground at Fpz, reference at right mastoid.

fast to use.

Evaluation: Visual comparison wet-dry.

Salvo

Fundament: 3D printed dry

Active electrode: No.

Application: Low cost biosignal applications. Biosignals:

2012

electrode. Material: insulating

Impedance: 1–3 KΩ and EEG, ECG. Measure: In vivo. Procedure: closed eyes.

acrylic based photopolymer.

2–5 KΩ at Fp1 and Fp2, Features: Alpha. Location: O2, O1, Fp2, Fp1, reference at

Coated with titanium and gold.

respectively, whereas

Dimensions: millimeters.

4–7 KΩ and 1–3 KΩ are electrodes.

Comfort: Better than wet

found at O1 and O2.

electrodes. It does not penetrate

Noise:

T6. Evaluation: visual comparison of dry vs. bridge

the SC.
Mota

Fundament: Electrode with a gel Active electrode: No.

2013

2

Application: Biopotential monitoring. Biosignals: EEG,

reservoir inside. Material:

Impedance: 39 Ωcm at EMG, ECG). Measure: \. Procedure and Features:

Polymer coated with AgCl.

10 Hz. 45 Ωcm2 at

Resting state EEG, Alpha activity EEG, Eye open/close

Dimensions: 8 mm diameter,

1 Hz. Noise:

test, Eye blink test. Location: Fp1, Fp2, O1, O2, ground at

11 mm height. Comfort: Not

Fpz. Evaluation: RMSD, correlation, visual.

reported.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by Nicolo Association for the R+D+i in Neurotechnologies for disability,
the research project P11-TIC-7983, Junta of Andalucia (Spain) and the Spanish National Grant
TIN2012-32030, co-financed by the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF). We also
thank Erik Jung, head of the Medical Microsystems working group, at the Department of System
Integration & Interconnection Technologies, Fraunhofer IZM (Berlin), for his support.
Author Contributions
Miguel Angel Lopez is the main author. He compiled all the information, suggestions and
guidelines provided by Daniel Sanchez and Francisco Pelayo.
Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
1.
2.

Berger, H. Über das Elektrenkephalogramm des Menschen. Arch Für Psychiatr Nervenkrankh
1929, 87, 527–570.
Biopotential Amplifiers. Design and Development of Medical Electronic Instrumentation; John
Wiley & Sons, Inc.: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2005; pp. 1–40.

Sensors 2014, 14
3.

4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

10.

11.

12.

13.
14.

15.
16.
17.

18.

12868

Forvi, E.; Bedoni, M.; Carabalona, R.; Soncini, M.; Mazzoleni, P.; Rizzo, F.; O’Mahony, C.;
Morasso, C.; Cassarà, D.G.; Gramatica, F. Preliminary technological assessment of
microneedles-based dry electrodes for biopotential monitoring in clinical examinations. Sens
Actuators A Phys. 2012, 180, 177–186.
Nunez, P.L.; Srinivasan, R. Electric Fields of the Brain; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK,
2006.
Lin, C.-T.; Liao, L.D.; Liu, Y.-H.; Wang, I.-J.; Lin, B.-S.; Chang, J.-Y. Novel Dry Polymer Foam
Electrodes for Long-Term EEG Measurement. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 2011, 58, 1200–1207.
Gargiulo, G.; Calvo, R.A.; Bifulco, P.; Cesarelli, M.; Jin, C.; Mohamed, A.; van Schaik, A. A new
EEG recording system for passive dry electrodes. Clin. Neurophysiol. 2010, 121, 686–693.
Ollikainen, J.O.; Vauhkonen, M.; Karjalainen, P.A.; Kaipio, J.P. Effects of electrode properties on
EEG measurements and a related inverse problem. Med. Eng. Phys. 2000, 22, 535–545.
Griss, P.; Tolvanen-Laakso, H.K.; Merilainen, P.; Stemme, G. Characterization of micromachined
spiked biopotential electrodes. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 2002, 49, 597–604.
Lopez, M.A.; Pomares, H.; Damas, M.; Prieto, A.; Plaza Hernandez, E.M. Use of Kohonen Maps
as Feature Selector for Selective Attention Brain-Computer Interfaces. In Bio-inspired Modeling
of Cognitive Tasks; Mira, J., Álvarez, J.R., Eds.; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany;
pp. 407–415.
Lopez-Gordo, M.A.; Ron-Angevin, R.; Pelayo Valle, F. Auditory Brain-Computer Interfaces for
Complete Locked-In Patients. In Advances in Computational Intelligence; Cabestany, J., Rojas, I.,
Joya, G., Eds.; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2011; pp. 378–385.
Ruffini, G.; Dunne, S.; Fuentemilla, L.; Grau, C.; Farrés, E.; Marco-Pallarés, J.; Watts, P.C.P.;
Silva, S.R.P. First human trials of a dry electrophysiology sensor using a carbon nanotube array
interface. Sens Actuators A Phys. 2008, 144, 275–279.
Dias, N.S.; Carmo, J.P.; da Silva, A.F.; Mendes, P.M.; Correia, J.H. New dry electrodes based on
iridium oxide (IrO) for non-invasive biopotential recordings and stimulation. Sens Actuators A Phys.
2010, 164, 28–34.
Wessling, B.; Mokwa, W.; Schnakenberg, U. RF-sputtering of iridium oxide to be used as
stimulation material in functional medical implants. J. Micromech. Microeng. 2006, 16, S142–S148.
Chiou, J.-C.; Ko, L.-W.; Lin, C.-T.; Hong, C.-T.; Jung, T.-P.; Liang, S.-F.; Jeng, J.-L. Using novel
MEMS EEG sensors in detecting drowsiness application. In Proceedings of the IEEE Biomedical
Circuits and Systems Conference, 2006. BioCAS 2006, London, UK, 29 November–1 December
2006; pp. 33–36.
Bhushan, B.; Wei, G.; Haddad, P. Friction and wear studies of human hair and skin. Wear 2005,
259, 1012–1021.
Salvo, P.; Raedt, R.; Carrette, E.; Schaubroeck, D.; Vanfleteren, J.; Cardon, L. A 3D printed dry
electrode for ECG/EEG recording. Sens Actuators A Phys. 2012, 174, 96–102.
Matthews, R.; Turner, P.J.; McDonald, N.J.; Ermolaev, K.; Manus, T.M.; Shelby, R.A.;
Steindorf, M. Real time workload classification from an ambulatory wireless EEG system using
hybrid EEG electrodes. Conf. Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. 2008, 2008, 5871–5875.
Grozea, C.; Voinescu, C.D.; Fazli, S. Bristle-sensors—low-cost flexible passive dry EEG
electrodes for neurofeedback and BCI applications. J. Neural Eng. 2011, 8, 025008.

Sensors 2014, 14

12869

19. Liao, L.-D.; Wang, I.-J.; Chen, S.-F.; Chang, J.-Y.; Lin, C.-T. Design, Fabrication and
Experimental Validation of a Novel Dry-Contact Sensor for Measuring Electroencephalography
Signals without Skin Preparation. Sensors 2011, 11, 5819–5834.
20. Harland, C.J.; Clark, T.D.; Prance, R.J. Remote detection of human electroencephalograms using
ultra high input impedance electric potential sensors. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2002, 81, 3284.
21. Sullivan, T.J.; Deiss, S.R.; Cauwenberghs, G. A Low-Noise, Non-Contact EEG/ECG Sensor. In
Proceedings of the Biomedical Circuits and Systems Conference, 2007. BIOCAS 2007, Montreal,
QC, Canada, 27–30 November 2007; pp. 154–157.
22. Oehler, M.; Neumann, P.; Becker, M.; Curio, G.; Schilling, M. Extraction of SSVEP signals of a
capacitive EEG helmet for Human Machine Interface. Conf. Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc.
2008, 2008, 4495–4498
23. Chi, Y.M.; Deiss, S.R.; Cauwenberghs, G. Non-contact Low Power EEG/ECG Electrode for High
Density Wearable Biopotential Sensor Networks. In Proceedings of the Sixth International
Workshop on 2009 Wearable and Implantable Body Sensor Networks, BSN 2009, Berkeley, CA,
USA, 3–5 June 2009; pp. 246–250.
24. Chi, Y.M.; Jung, T.-P.; Cauwenberghs, G. Dry-Contact and Noncontact Biopotential Electrodes:
Methodological Review. IEEE Rev. Biomed. Eng. 2010, 3, 106–119.
25. Kubler, A.; Mushahwar, V.K.; Hochberg, L.R.; Donoghue, J.P. BCI Meeting 2005—Workshop
on Clinical Issues and Applications. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 2006, 14, 131–134.
26. Nyquist, H. Thermal Agitation of Electric Charge in Conductors. Phys. Rev. 1928, 32, 110–113.
27. Johnson, J. Thermal Agitation of Electricity in Conductors. Phys. Rev. 1928, 32, 97–109.
28. Mota, A. R.; Duarte, L.; Rodrigues, D.; Martins, A.C.; Machado, A.V.; Vaz, F.; Fiedler, P.;
Haueisen, J.; Nóbrega, J.M.; Fonseca, C. Development of a quasi-dry electrode for EEG
recording. Sens. Actuators A Phys. 2013, 199, 310–317.
29. Kingsley, S.A.; Sriram, S.; Pollick, A.; Marsh, J. Photrodes for physiological sensing. Opt. Fibers
Sens. Med. Appl. IV. 2004, 158, doi:10.1117/12.529473.
30. Griss, P.; Enoksson, P.; Tolvanen-Laakso, H.K.; Merilainen, P.; Ollmar, S.; Stemme, G.
Micromachined electrodes for biopotential measurements. J. Microelectromech. Syst. 2001, 10,
10–16.
31. Ferree, T.C.; Luu, P.; Russell, G.S.; Tucker, D.M. Scalp electrode impedance, infection risk, and
EEG data quality. Clin. Neurophysiol. 2001, 112, 536–544.
32. Ruffini, G.; Dunne, S.; Farres, E.; Watts, P.C.P.; Mendoza, E.; Silva, S.R.P.; Grau, C.;
Marco-Pallares, J.; Fuentemilla, L.; Vandecasteele, B. ENOBIO—First Tests of a Dry
Electrophysiology Electrode using Carbon Nanotubes. In Proceedings of the 28th Annual
International Conference of the IEEE 2006, Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society,
New York, NY, USA, 30 August–3 September 2006; pp. 1826–1829.
33. Pellouchoud, E.; Leong, H.; Gevins, A. Implications of electrolyte dispersion for high resolution
EEG methods. Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol. 1997, 102, 261–263.
34. Zander, T.O.; Lehne, M.; Ihme, K.; Jatzev, S.; Correia, J.; Kothe, C.; Picht, B.; Nijboer, F. A Dry
EEG-System for Scientific Research and Brain–Computer Interfaces. Front Neurosci. 2011, 5, 53.

Sensors 2014, 14

12870

35. Muller, S.M.T.; Diez, P.F.; Bastos-Filho, T.F.; Sarcinelli-Filho, M.; Mut, V.; Laciar, E.
SSVEP-BCI implementation for 37–40 Hz frequency range. In Proceedings of the 2011 Annual
International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, EMBC,
Boston, MA, USA, 30 August–3 September 2011; pp. 6352–6355.
36. Lins, O.G.; Picton, P.E.; Picton, T.W.; Champagne, S.C.; Durieux-Smith, A. Auditory steady-state
responses to tones amplitude-modulated at 80–110 Hz. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 1995, 97, 3051.
37. Van Gerven, M.; Jensen, O. Attention modulations of posterior alpha as a control signal for
two-dimensional brain–computer interfaces. J. Neurosci. Methods 2009, 179, 78–84.
38. Lopez-Gordo, M.A.; Pelayo, F.; Prieto, A. A high performance SSVEP-BCI without gazing. In
Proceedings of the 2010 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), Barcelona,
Spain, 18–23 July 2010; pp. 193–197.
39. Estepp, J.R.; Christensen, J.C.; Monnin, J.W.; Davis, I.M.; Wilson, G.F. Validation of a Dry
Electrode System for EEG. Proc. Hum. Factors Ergon. Soc. Annu. Meet. 2009, 53, 1171–1175.
© 2014 by the authors; licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/).

