Sensors 2014, 14, 14601-14633; doi:10.3390/s140814601
OPEN ACCESS

sensors
ISSN 1424-8220
www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors
Review

A Review of Brain-Computer Interface Games and an Opinion
Survey from Researchers, Developers and Users
Minkyu Ahn, Mijin Lee, Jinyoung Choi and Sung Chan Jun *
School of Information and Communications, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology,
Gwangju 500712, Korea; E-Mails: minkyuahn@gmail.com (M.A.); mijinlee@gist.ac.kr (M.L.);
jinyoungchoi@gist.ac.kr (J.C.)
* Author to whom correspondence should be addressed; E-Mail: scjun@gist.ac.kr;
Tel.: +82-62-715-2266; Fax: +82-62-715-2216.
Received: 12 February 2014; in revised form: 25 July 2014 / Accepted: 28 July 2014 /
Published: 11 August 2014

Abstract: In recent years, research on Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) technology for
healthy users has attracted considerable interest, and BCI games are especially popular.
This study reviews the current status of, and describes future directions, in the field of BCI
games. To this end, we conducted a literature search and found that BCI control paradigms
using electroencephalographic signals (motor imagery, P300, steady state visual evoked
potential and passive approach reading mental state) have been the primary focus of
research. We also conducted a survey of nearly three hundred participants that included
researchers, game developers and users around the world. From this survey, we found that
all three groups (researchers, developers and users) agreed on the significant influence and
applicability of BCI and BCI games, and they all selected prostheses, rehabilitation and
games as the most promising BCI applications. User and developer groups tended to give
low priority to passive BCI and the whole head sensor array. Developers gave higher
priorities to “the easiness of playing” and the “development platform” as important
elements for BCI games and the market. Based on our assessment, we discuss the critical
point at which BCI games will be able to progress from their current stage to widespread
marketing to consumers. In conclusion, we propose three critical elements important for
expansion of the BCI game market: standards, gameplay and appropriate integration.
Keywords: brain-computer interface (BCI); game; entertainment; opinion survey; market

Sensors 2014, 14

14602

1. Introduction
Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) technology is a rapidly growing field and publicity about this
technology is increasing. Although the original aim of BCI technology was to provide a new pathway
of communication for patients suffering from complete paralysis, some researchers have focused
recently on the application of BCI to games for use by healthy people. Studies have demonstrated
examples of BCI applications in such well-known games as “Pacman” [1], “Pinball” [2], “Tetris” [3],
and “World of Warcraft” (“WoW”, [4]), as well as new customized games, such as “MindBalance” [5],
“Bacteria Hunt” [6], and others [7–12].
According to reports [13], video games already occupy a large scale market. BCI games may be a
very promising area for application of this technology in the near future. Allison et al. [14] mentioned
the gamer as the first user of BCI technology if BCIs provide useful functionality. In addition, van Erp
and his colleagues have predicted that the first mass application of nonmedical BCIs will be in gaming
and entertainment [15]. The fBNCI (www.future-bnci.org) project announced that BCI for gaming is
second among the top five most promising applications after BCI for assistive technology [16]. Among
BCI applications, the number of potential users in BCI games is highest [16,17] and its economic
viability is also high [15]. In addition, convenient electroencephalography (EEG) devices equipped
with electrodes that do not require gel have been released on the market [18]. Considering these
opinions about the positive perceptions of BCI games and the development of EEG devices for the
public, it seems clear that BCI games will soon be the first popular application of the technology,
although the clinical application of BCI is frequently addressed as futuristic promising application.
However, compared to conventional interfaces, most BCI games have been shown to have low
performance in terms of accuracy and speed [19]. Further, it has been difficult to find a successful
commercial product using current research approaches. This means that there may be some
discrepancy between research and development. Actually, researchers might have little experience in
game development. Most likely, they focus on how to integrate BCI with a game rather than on game
content. Therefore, studies usually focus on testing system performance or showing the feasibility of
BCI. This is likely to lead to a BCI game that is reliable, but less interesting to the user. On the other
hand, companies and users will be attracted to games that are entertaining and exciting. In this sense,
Gürkök et al. [20] suggested two descriptors that both researchers and developers need to consider
before designing BCI games. One is game playing motivation, which specifies challenge, fantasy and
sociality as key factors. Gürkök [21] pointed out that people play games that may fulfill their
psychological needs, and they perceive a correspondence between certain psychological needs and
game playing motivations: competence, challenge, relatedness and socialization. Such positive
motivations lead to a game that is satisfying to the user because it provides enjoyable content. The
second descriptor is the interaction paradigm (action and reaction of the user to events or feedback
given in the BCI application) on which the game is built. The latter is important, because most BCI
research is conducted with a limited number of control paradigms, each with its own problems or
limitations. This should be the focus of game designers until researchers develop a new paradigm that
is free from the limitations of existing control paradigms.
In Marshall’s recent study [21], BCI games and specified properties were reviewed according to the
game genre, such as action, strategy, role-playing, adventure, sports, simulations and puzzle games;

Sensors 2014, 14

14603

“gameplay” was indicated as the key aspect to be considered in game development. Further, several
recommendations were made for genre-specific BCI game development, and assessment of user
performance by BCI game developers. This is a valuable step in reducing the gap in knowledge
between research and game development, as specifying which genres work well with a specific BCI
will allow developers to produce a well-designed game. These studies encourage communication
between developers and researchers. However, there is one more group that must be engaged in this
interaction. Van Erp et al. [15] argued that developers (in some sense, the researcher is in the position
of the developer) should involve users in game development as early as possible in order to obtain their
systematic feedback.
However, investigations of inter-group interactions have not yet been conducted. A few studies
have been carried out to collect different perspectives and opinions of researchers with respect to
various issues in BCI [22]. The personal opinions expressed in [22] indicate that most BCI researchers
likely come from an engineering background and may have less training and interest in specific issues
than do other stakeholders. Thus, BCI researchers’ focus may be far different from gamers’ or may be
less interesting, convenient or necessary to the latter. For example, motor imagery is the paradigm
most widely incorporated in BCI research; however, gamers may not accept this paradigm for interaction
with a computer. Rather than a complicated system, what the game developer needs may be an
automated module that is easy to use and moderately reliable. In the Asilomar survey, Nijboer et al. [22]
clarified an ethical issue that has rarely been considered by BCI researchers. This type of study is
beneficial, in that it provides feedback from one group to another and makes certain groups
(for example, researchers, developers and companies) aware of issues that they have not confronted to
date, but may in future. The development of BCI games is a matter related not only to BCI researchers,
but also to game developers and even gamers. Thus, the voice of those groups is important in the
implementation of user-attractive games. For these reasons, we believe that it is valuable to determine
the factors that will enable BCI games to enter the market. To do so, it is necessary to understand the
public’s awareness of BCI and its applications, and to evaluate current BCI methodologies that
researchers have developed, as well as the marketability of BCI games [23]. Further, we believe that
researchers and developers have their own views and strategies for commercializing BCI games and
enhancing the BCI game market. This reciprocal feedback is expected to help us understand the
current position and difficulties that each group has faced, are facing, and will face.
To summarize, communication among the various stakeholders in BCI games is crucial now that
BCI has become interconnected with games. We believe that this study is timely in understanding the
opinions of these groups or at least in emphasizing the necessity of exchanging opinions and feedback.
Motivated by the need to gather opinions and concerns from these groups, we provide here the current
state of the art in BCI games, and gather opinions about BCI games from different stakeholders.
Further, we discuss promising steps in the advent of BCI games. For this purpose, we conducted an
extensive literature search survey, administered questionnaires to different groups and gave game
demonstrations in order to obtain feedback from users before and after playing games.
In Section 2, the fundamentals of BCI and BCI games are introduced briefly, and the current state
of BCI games is presented from the results of our literature search. Section 3 describes the survey
procedures and methods that were designed to address the questions that must be answered in order for
BCI games to become popular with the public. In Section 4, the survey results are presented and

Sensors 2014, 14

14604

interpreted, in order to assess the public’s awareness of BCI’s usefulness, what research control
paradigms are appropriate for BCI games, opinions on a reasonable price, and whether people believe
that BCI is available now or how many years will be needed to develop BCI if they do not believe it is
already on the market. Further, through the intensive questionnaire we administered to 294 participants,
we investigated the elements that researchers and game developers believe are important in the
development of BCI games. Finally, further interpretations and an in-depth discussion are presented in
Section 5.
2. Review of BCI Games
2.1. Closed Loop and Components of BCI
BCI forms a closed loop on its framework, and includes five elements, as presented in Figure 1.
These are “Control paradigm”, “Measurement”, “Processing”, “Prediction” and “Application”.
Through these five steps, the BCI interprets a user’s intention or mental state and uses the information
to run the application. Until termination of the system, this closed loop is repeated between the user
and the application, with the four modules forming an interface between them. The details of the BCI
elements are as follows:
Control paradigm: To convey information to the system, a user may push a button according to its
function, or in conventional interfaces, move a mouse. However, BCI requires a “Control
paradigm” for which the user is responsible. For example, the user may imagine body part
movement or concentrate on a certain object to generate brain signals that include the user’s
intention. In some BCI systems, the user’s intentional efforts may not be required; instead, the
system detects the user’s mental or emotional states automatically. From an interactive viewpoint,
these are categorized as active, reactive or passive approaches [24]. The details of control
paradigms will be addressed in Section 2.2.
Measurement: Brain signals can be measured invasively or non-invasively [25]. Invasive methods,
such as electrocorticogram (ECoG), single micro-electrode (ME) or micro-electrode arrays (MEA)
detect signals on or even inside the brain, thereby guaranteeing relatively good quality signal.
However, these procedures necessitate surgery and the risks associated with it; thus, invasive
approaches are clearly unsuitable for healthy people. Therefore, considerable BCI research has been
conducted through non-invasive measurements [25], such as EEG, magnetoencephalography
(MEG), functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and Near-Infrared Spectroscopy (NIRS),
among others. Of these methods, EEG is the most popular [26]. Compared to other measuring
devices, EEG is cheap and portable; further, wireless EEG devices are now available on the market
at reasonable prices. Therefore, EEG is the most preferred and promising form of measurement
method for application to BCI games.
Processing: The brain signals measured are processed to maximize the signal-to-noise ratio and
select target features. In this step, various algorithms [27,28] are applied, such as spectral and
spatial filtering, to reduce artifacts as well as to extract informative features. The selected target
features are used as inputs for classification or regression modules.

Sensors 2014, 14

14605

Prediction: This step makes a decision regarding the user’s intention or quantifies the user’s level of
emotion and mental states. For prediction, classifiers such as threshold, linear discriminant analysis,
support vector machine, or artificial neural network are usually employed. For an extensive survey
on the algorithms related to processing and prediction, please refer to the literature [27,29].
Application: Once the user’s intention is determined in the prediction step, the output is employed
to change the environment of the application: for example, games [19]; rehabilitation [30], or
treatment systems for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder [31]. Finally, the change in the
application is delivered to the user as feedback.
Figure 1. The Closed loop of BCI.

2.2. Examples of BCI Games
In this section, we introduce the three types of BCI in the context of interaction between a human
and a computer, adopting the definition in the literature [24,32]. Typical examples of existing games
will be given in order to help the reader understand them. With respect to the categories of control
paradigm, we will discuss active, passive and reactive BCI games. For more extensive BCI game
reviews, refer to [19,33].
2.2.1. Active BCI
Active BCI is a commonly used paradigm that requires a user to generate brain signals actively; in
order to be used for control, these should be discriminative. Active BCI can be adopted for direct
control of an application. In one study [2], a pinball game employed BCI for control of the left/right
paddles. The system was designed to discriminate two classes of motor imagery, such as left or right

Sensors 2014, 14

14606

hand movement. Motor imagery is the paradigm used most often in BCI research [26]. The key feature
between these two thought patterns is contra-lateral event related de-synchronization (ERD), along
with ipsi-lateral event related synchronization (ERS; [34]). When a user imagines right hand
movement, the amplitude of activity in the mu-rhythm in the sensory-motor area of the brain decreases
in the left hemisphere and increases in the right hemisphere. For motor imagery of the left hand, the
converse occurs. Therefore, the motor imagery yields spatially different brain activity according to
which hand is employed. Through signal processing and classifiers, BCI can detect spatially different
patterns and decide which direction the user intends. Then this direction information is used to control
paddles (left or right paddles). This is the same as conventional interfaces, such as left or right arrows
on a keyboard. As its name implies, the user initiates brain activity; thus, the information embedded in
the signal is captured and employed to control the movement of the paddles.
2.2.2. Reactive BCI
While a user generates an informative brain signal consciously in active BCI, this is not always the
case. In reactive BCI, information with respect to the user’s intention is embedded in the response
signal to stimulation. The user can cause his/her brain signals to maintain the intended information
simply by attending to or looking at certain stimuli. For example, the “MindBalance” game [5] uses
the steady state visual evoked potential (SSVEP). Checkerboards flickering at 17 and 20 Hz are placed
on the left and right sides of an avatar. To maintain the avatar’s balance, the system requires the user to
focus on either the left or right checkerboard. In response to the visual stimulation, the brain activity in
the occipital area includes the correlated frequency information. For example, the brain signal
oscillates at 17 Hz if the user attends to the checkerboard flickering at 17 Hz. Through this mechanism,
the BCI system knows at which checkerboard the user is looking, which enables the user to balance the
avatar. P300 paradigm, as an example of SSVEP, is also widely used in developing reactive BCI.
P300 component is the positive deflection that appears roughly 300 ms after stimulus presentation.
The amplitude and latency of this component are related to attention of the subject to the stimulus,
which may be applied to spellers [35].
2.2.3. Passive BCI
In passive BCI, the primary role of the system is not to give control to the user, and it does not
require any effort on the part of the user; instead, it monitors the user’s mental states automatically.
It quantifies the level of attention or differentiates emotional states to facilitate interaction between the
system and user. For example, the ratio of frequency band powers, such as sensory-motor rhythm
(12–15 Hz), beta (13–30 Hz) and theta (4–8 Hz) [8] are used for attention index quantification;
for relaxation level [4], alpha (8–13 Hz) power is used. In [8], the system quantified the concentration level,
and applied it to adjust the velocity of a car and produce sound effects that gave feedback to the user.
2.3. State of the Art in BCI Games
To understand the current status of BCI games, we conducted a literature search using SCOPUS
(www.scopus.com), the abstract and citation database of peer-reviewed literature. In order to survey

Sensors 2014, 14

14607

articles related to BCI games, we searched publications from 2007 to 2013 for the following keywords
and operators: ((“brain computer interface” OR “BCI”) AND (“game” OR “entertainment”)) in
“Article Title, Abstract, Keywords.” Initially, 272 articles were found; this list included conference
proceedings, as well as research, review and survey papers. Among these, we excluded articles that
were not related directly to BCI games, and brief conference versions of extended journal papers.
From this search, we found that approximately half of the application and research papers were
published in conference proceedings, but not in journals. Finally, a total of 180 articles was retrieved
and used to review the current progress of BCI games.
2.3.1. Publications
Figure 2 presents the number of publications on BCI applications. From 2007 to 2012, the number
of publications increased greatly. While a few articles were published during 2007–2008, over thirty
articles per year have been published since 2010. The increase in publications peaked in 2011 and
stabilized thereafter. We believe that the increase in research may have been influenced by the
development of wireless EEG devices. For example, “Neurosky Mindset” (www.neurosky.com) and
“Emotiv EPOC” (www.emotiv.com) were released in 2007 and 2009, each at a price more modest than
that of other research purpose devices.
Figure 2. The number of publications over seven years (2007–2013). The results include
conference papers, but exclude articles not related directly to BCI games. The search was
conducted through October 2013.

2.3.2. Game Development and Application
Although we found 180 published articles, not all of them were directly related to the
implementation of BCI games. Therefore, we separated studies on the development of BCI games
from others, such as review papers, in order to help us understand how many games were actually
developed during this trend of increased publications on BCI games. We found that approximately
47% of publications did not develop games, while the remaining studies did: newly-developed games

Sensors 2014, 14

14608

(42%), or BCI implementation with existing games (11%), such as Tetris, Hangman, and World of
Warcraft, are shown in Figure 3a. Excluding articles unrelated to game development, we categorized
those remaining according to the control paradigm used; only half applied BCI to games, regardless of
the interface used for the purpose of control or interaction between the game and user. Consequently,
with which paradigm(s) and for what purpose BCI is used are interesting questions. Among the studies
that implemented BCI games, we inspected the control paradigms that were employed. In articles
associated with a hybrid approach (for example, P300 and motor imagery), all control paradigms used
were counted. In Figure 3b, the majority of studies (61%) used active (motor imagery: 37%) or
reactive (P300: 11%; SSVEP: 13%) BCIs, while 35% of the studies used passive BCI (mental state),
such as quantifying attention, emotion and fatigue. A small percentage of the studies were related to
electromyography (EMG)-based methods, such as eye-blinking.
Figure 3. (a) All article types (N = 180) and (b) control paradigms. Articles were
categorized according to whether or not they implemented games and whether the game is
an existing or new one. Among articles (N = 92) associated with game development,
we investigated the control paradigm employed (here all control paradigms used in a hybrid
approach are counted). “Others” indicates those studies related to EMG-based methods.

2.3.3. Hardware
The chart in Figure 4a shows the measurement methods that have been introduced in developing
BCI games (N = 92; this information was identified clearly in 92 articles.). One can see readily that
EEG is a well-used measurement method in research that incorporates games. In this context,
observing which device is used for BCI game development is an important aspect in understanding
current trends. The chart in Figure 4b shows the use of wireless EEG devices in studies related to BCI
game development. Notable devices are “MindSet” and “Emotiv EPOC.” It is likely that the
preference for “Emotiv EPOC” is due to the fact that it has 14 channels, more than any other. For
example, “MindSet” has one channel and others have ten channels at most. Moreover, the location of
channels in “EPOC” includes centro-occipital areas. These advantages broaden the use of various
control paradigms, such as motor imagery, P300 and SSVEP.

Sensors 2014, 14

14609

Figure 4. (a) Measurement methods (N = 92) and (b) wireless devices (N = 35) used in
developing BCI games.

Table 1. EEG Devices and their specifications. $: <200, $$: 200~300, $$$: >300 (unit: US Dollars).
Device Name

Price

Year

Communication

Neurosky Mindset
(www.neurosky.com)

$

2007

wireless

1

512 Hz

OCZ Neural Impulse Actuator
(www.ocz.com)

$

2008

wired

3

1 kHz

Emotiv EPOC
(www.emotiv.com)

$$

2009

wireless

14

128 Hz

PLX XWave Sonic
(www.plxdevices.com)

$

2011

wireless

1

512 Hz

Neurosky Mindwave
(www.neurosky.com)

$

2011

wireless

4

512 Hz

MyndPlay BrainBandXL EEG
Headset
(www.myndplay.com)

$$$

2012

wireless

1

512 Hz

InteraXon Muse
(www.choosemuse.com)

$$

2014

wireless

4

512 Hz

Melon EEG headband
(www.thinkmelon.com)

$

2014
(expected)

wireless

3

512 Hz

$$
2014
(expected) (expected)

wireless

5

128 Hz

Emotiv Insight
(www.emotiv.com)

Number of Channels Sampling Rate

The dramatic increase in publications after 2007 (Figure 2) seems to have been caused by the
release of wireless EEG devices. Because of their ease of use and low cost, we believe that as the
market in EEG devices matures, more researchers will choose EEG as measurement method. Table 1
shows the EEG devices currently on the market or in preparation for marketing. Briefly, nine devices
are notable, most of which support wireless communication with reasonable sampling rates from
128 Hz to 1 kHz. Considering that most BCI research extracts features below 100 Hz [17], the
sampling rate is sufficient to implement BCI. Except for “Emotiv EPOC”, none of these devices
supports electrodes covering the central area; instead, most of them measure brain waves on the

Sensors 2014, 14

14610

forehead. In our web search, we found three products—“Melon EEG headband”, “InteraXon Muse”
and “Emotiv Insight”—that are gaining public attention by reaching their target figure through the
funding platform “Kickstarter” (www.kickstarter.com). Looking at the success of this fundraising effort,
“Emotiv Insight”, for example, achieved over 1600% of its goal; this fact demonstrates the strong
interest of the public in BCI and BCI hardware.
3. Methods
3.1. Survey Contents
Our goal was to understand the discrepancies and similarities in opinions, and to bridge the gap
among various stakeholders in the area of BCI games—producers (researchers and developers) and
consumers (users). In this survey, we confined our inquiry to researchers working in the BCI or
bio-signal processing fields, and regarded respondents who are neither researchers nor game
developers as those who may use BCI games for entertainment. For simplicity, we referred to
respondents in these three groups as researchers, developers and users.
The survey was designed to obtain personal opinions about the applicability of BCI or BCI games,
how usable or acceptable respondents considered the most often used control paradigms in the BCI
field, and expectations/considerations that BCI games will become common entertainment in our daily
lives. The questionnaire procedure was as follows. At the beginning of the survey, a consent form was
given to and signed by the participants. In step 2, personal information was gathered and then brief
explanations about BCI were presented with pictorial examples. After this initial process, the main
survey began, but the form of the questionnaire was designed slightly differently depending on the
group to which the respondent belonged. For researchers and developers, we asked the number of
years they had spent in their career and what they thought were the important elements for BCI games
and for stimulating the field of BCI game development. Users were not asked these questions; instead,
users/developers were asked whether/how they knew about BCI. Apart from these, most of the
questions were the same. There were 10 to 12 items depending upon the group. Questions common to
all groups are as follows.
The usability of BCI: Awareness of the applicability and influence of BCI and BCI games is an
interesting issue. To obtain opinions with respect to those issues, we first asked respondents to
express their evaluations of the future applicability and influence of BCI and BCI games. Second,
several examples were presented and respondents were asked to state their personal opinions of the
applicability for each purpose. In these questions, respondents’ opinions were recorded on a five-point
Likert scale as “very high”, “high”, “not strong”, “low” and “very low”. For example, we asked the
following question: “Please state your evaluation of the applicability and influence of BCI in the
future”. One of five opinions was received from each participant.
The preference rating for BCI paradigms: The overall system environments, such as the task that a
user has to perform, the sensor location and the stimulation may all depend on the control paradigm.
Therefore, evaluating the control paradigm is an important issue, as we do not know whether users
will readily accept the system environments of BCIs that are now considered promising. As we
stated in Section 2, we described three types of control paradigms that are used most widely,

Sensors 2014, 14

14611

especially in non-invasive BCI. With active, reactive and passive BCI control paradigms, we
specified their functionality in the context of interaction and asked users and developers to give
their personal evaluations of the paradigms on a five-point Likert scale ranging from “not
interesting”, “somewhat interesting”, “fairly interesting” and “very interesting” to “one of the most
interesting”. For this question, we introduced motor imagery as active BCI, P300 and SSVEP as
reactive BCI, and mental state as passive BCI. This question was presented more directly to the
researchers, who were asked about their interest in active, reactive and passive BCI.
Sensor position: With respect to the control paradigms, we may distinguish three important brain
areas; frontal, centro-parietal and occipital. In addition to these, we can also use the overall area
covering from frontal to occipital. In this question, the respondents were given four sensor
locations, and instructed to order them according to their preference. To help the respondents
understand the question, it was presented with illustrations of positions on the head.
Reasonable costs: For guidelines pertaining to cost, we provided the reference cost of two
recognizable devices, Microsoft “Xbox Kinect” (www.xbox.com, $300~500) and Nintendo “Wii”
(www.nintendo.com/wiiu, $300). We thought that it would be helpful for the respondents to
understand the trends in price of the new interface devices, although this is not absolutely
comparable information. Thus, we set up the items as, “less than $100,” “between $100 and $200,”
“between $200 and $300,” “between $300 and $400,” and “over $400.”
Expected years until availability: We also asked the respondents how many years they thought it
would be before such games would be available to the public. This question included 6 items
specifying a range of years.
3.2. Pilot Study
A pilot study was conducted with 20 respondents who are BCI researchers currently working at our
institute, as well as game developers and members of the public in Korea. The form was distributed to
them and they were asked to complete the questionnaires and give feedback with respect to the
completeness or ambiguity of sentences in the questions, any possible difficulties in conducting the
survey, and further comments. Through this procedure, we found that completion of the survey took
approximately 5 min; we were also able to correct and revise the survey items to ensure that their
meanings were conveyed in a clear and unambiguous manner. In addition, we added one more example
in the question for “BCI paradigm”: “speeding up the velocity of a car through the user’s concentration
level” [8], because we found that “changing a character according to user’s mental state” [4] might not
be a sufficiently clear example of passive BCI. Finally, the updated version was released to the public
through the internet.
3.3. Final Survey
The final form of the survey is presented in the appendix. Survey participants were recruited
through various channels. We posted promotional articles on social network services, such as
Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, BCI News (www.neurogadget.com), and other community bulletin
boards. In addition, we notified societies and community groups about the survey (e.g., BCI2000,

Sensors 2014, 14

14612

neurogaming conference, American Psychological Association, Society for Game Developers in
Korea, and International Game Developers Association). The survey was conducted between August
and October 2013.
3.4. Statistical Tests
In order to determine which opinions among the groups were statistically significant, we applied the
Wilcoxon rank-sum test with the hypothesis that the medians of two variables (each variable represents
one group opinion for the given question) are equal. For this statistical test, answers to the given
question were properly digitized (transformed into integers)–for example, “one of the most interesting”
was assigned a 5, “very interesting” a 4, “fairly interesting” a 3, “somewhat interesting” a 2, and “not
interesting” a 1.
4. Results
4.1. Respondent Profiles
A total of 294 people participated in the survey. The details of respondents’ profiles are presented in
Table 2. Five profiling questions indicated how many respondents belonged to each sub-group, using
percentages of all participants (N = 294). There were 208 male and 86 female respondents.
The majority of respondents (183: 62%) was between 20 and 29 years of age and 71 (24%) were
between 30 and 39 years. Over half of the respondents live in Asia, with 22% in North America, 18%
in Europe, 4% in South America, and approximately 1% or less in Australia and in Africa. In the
question referring to hours of game-playing, 95 respondents (32%) answered that they spent less than
30 min per day playing games, while 57 respondents (19%) did not play games. Nearly the same number
of respondents answered that they played games between 30 min to 1 h (43 respondents: 15%), 1 to 2 h
(50 respondents: 17%) and more than 2 h (49 respondents: 17%). Overall, there were 90 researchers
(31%) and 36 (12%) developers among the 294 respondents. 168 (57%) respondents were users
(neither researchers nor developers) and thus, potential gamers. Please note that, throughout this study,
results are presented as percentages by groups (users, researchers, developers). Within each group, we
found that the researchers’ group had the highest mean age (users: 27.6 ± 7.4; developers: 28.6 ± 6.7;
researchers: 30.5 ± 7.4) and they tended to spend less time playing games than others (researchers:
28.3 ± 33.1 min; users: 50.1 ± 46.3 min; developers: 77.1 ± 38.3 min).
Table 2. Profile records. A total of 294 respondents participated in the survey.
Question
What is your gender?

How old are you?

Answer

The Number of Respondents
Count

Percentage (%; N = 294)

Male

208

71

Female

86

29

Under 10 years old

0

0

Between 10 and 19 years old

16

5.5

Between 20 and 29 years old

183

62

Between 30 and 39 years old

71

24

Between 40 and 49 years old

16

5.5

Over 50 years old

8

3

Sensors 2014, 14

14613
Table 2. Cont.

Question

Where do you live primarily?

Answer

The Number of Respondents
Count

Percentage (%; N = 294)

Asia

161

55

South America

10

3

North America

64

22

Europe

53

18

Africa

2

1

Australia (Oceania)

4

1

I do not play games

57

19

How many hours a day do you spend

Less than 30 min

95

32

playing games (including computer games,

30 min~1 h

43

15

mobile games, and console games)?

1~2 h

50

17

More than 2 h

49

17

Researcher

90

31

Game developer

36

12

Neither (User)

168

57

If employed, in what sector are
you employed?

Figure 5. BCI and BCI game background. Responses to the questions: (a) years in research
or development; (b) experience with the development of BCI games for researcher-only
question; (c) whether the respondent knew of BCI or not; (d) how they knew about BCI.
The percentages were calculated as percentages of users (N = 168), developers (N = 36)
and researchers (N = 90).

Sensors 2014, 14

14614

In Figure 5, the backgrounds of respondents are presented as percentages of the total number of
respondents. First, the length of the researchers’ and developers’ careers was not long; as shown in
Figure 5a, over half of the researchers and developers answered that they had spent less than 2 years in
their field. For researchers, we asked whether s/he had developed any BCI games. Approximately 33%
of the researchers responded that they had experience in the development of BCI games. 78% of users
and 83% of developers already knew what BCI was, while only a small fraction of respondents were
unaware of BCI. Participants stated that they had heard of BCI technology in the news or on the
internet (users: 46%; developers: 53%), in movies or novels (users: 8%; developers: 14%), by
participating in experiments or games (users: 13%; developers: 8%) and by other means (users: 13%;
developers: 8%). When asked specifically about other means, the respondents stated that they had
heard of BCI from their friends or from their own studies.
4.2. Applicability and Expectations
All three groups were asked about their awareness of the applicability and influence of BCI and
BCI games. As shown in Figure 6, we found that all three groups had positive opinions with respect to
the future influence of BCI and BCI games. For BCI technology, 90% (users), 94% (developers) and
85% (researchers) of respondents responded “very high” or “high” with regard to the influence of BCI,
while only 3% in each group answered “low” or “very low”. In the question about BCI games, the
positive opinions decreased somewhat. 65% of researchers, 73% of users, and 84% of developers
responded that BCI games would have a “high” or “very high” influence.
Figure 6. Respondents’ evaluations of the influence of BCI (a) and BCI games (b).
All three groups answered that BCI and BCI games would have a considerable influence in
the future. The percentages were calculated by groups.

Sensors 2014, 14

14615

For the second question, respondents indicated on the same scale their perceptions of the influence
of each application example presented. Overall, the respondents agreed that BCI applications had high
potential, but the degree of their opinions varied. These results are presented in Figure 7. The potential
of lie detectors did not receive strong agreement, as less than 50% of respondents in each group stated
“very high” or “high”, while over 50% of respondents agreed on their potential in other applications.
Many of the respondents indicated that the application to rehabilitation systems and prostheses would
have high potential in the future. For rehabilitation systems, 95% of users, 86% of developers and 94%
of researchers agreed on its high applicability, while 97% of users, 100% of developers and 89% of
researchers also agreed on the high applicability of BCI to prostheses. Interestingly, in the developer
group, the majority of opinions were “very high” for rehabilitation systems, but only “high” for
prostheses. Apart from these two fields, games seemed to be the next most promising area of
BCI application. Many respondents answered “very high” or “high” (users: 73%; developers: 80%;
researchers: 71%).
Figure 7. Respondents’ evaluations of the applicability of BCI in specific areas: users (a);
developers (b) and researchers (c).

Sensors 2014, 14

14616

4.3. Control Paradigm and Channel Location
The survey also attempted to evaluate the BCI control paradigms. From the results in Figure 8,
we observed that a large group believed that motor imagery (users: 80%; developers: 70%) and visual
attention (users: 67%; developers: 64%) were “very interesting” or “one of the most interesting.”
For passive BCIs, the two applications did not seem to be attractive to users and developers and less
than 50% of the respondents in each group answered “very interesting” or “one of the most
interesting.” Most of the developers were very interested in motor imagery (“one of the most
interesting”: 53%). In the researchers’ opinion, reactive BCI was the most interesting of the three
types, but the percentages were similar (active: 69%; reactive: 74%; passive: 64%). Another point on
which the opinions of users and developers differed from those of researchers is that researchers
considered passive BCI (64%) to be as interesting as active and reactive BCI.
Figure 8. Interest in each paradigm (application): users (a); researchers (b) and developers (c).

Next, we asked about preferences for sensor positions that may be related to hardware design and
thereby may affect the users’ convenience. From the results shown in Figure 9, it is clear that it was
difficult to determine a distinct preference. However, we attempted to assign a rank to each sensor
location in sequence from first to fourth. We found that users’ preference order was: “back” >

Sensors 2014, 14

14617

“central” > “front” > “whole”, while developers seemed to prefer the order of: “back” > “front” >
“central” > “whole.” Among the researchers, however, we could not find a consistent order; instead,
their opinions were divided. Thirty-nine percent of the researchers most preferred “whole,” while the
other 40% liked the “whole” sensor position least. From the perspective of users and developers,
hardware that covers the whole head is considered to be very inconvenient. This was a clear result, as
many of the users (43%) and developers (53%) agreed that they least preferred “whole.” It is
worthwhile to provide the statement of one developer who emphasized the importance of design over
sensor location: “The device design is far more important, provided that BCI performance is not
heavily depending on sensor location”.
Figure 9. Preference order for sensor positions. A detailed illustration of sensor position is
presented in the appendix.

4.4. Price
Among the elements that influence a consumer’s motivation to purchase a product, one of the most
important is cost. For this reason, all three groups were asked what they believed was an acceptable
price for a device. In Figure 10a, the acceptable price that each group voted for is presented. The most
preferable costs were determined as $100~200 for users, $200~300 for developers and $200~300 for
researchers. No one preferred the highest priced device, but it is worth noting that more than 80%
agreed that a price over $100 was acceptable.
4.5. Expected Years until Availability
In a question similar to that of the Asilomar survey [22], we asked users, developers and researchers
how many years they expected it would require before BCI games enter the market and become
popular. Figure 10b illustrates the responses: (31%) of users expected BCI games to be available
within the next 3 to 6 years; 27% answered 7 to 12 years; 16% within 2 years, and 11% over 12 years.
14% of the users believed that BCI games are available already; only 1% predicted that they would
never be marketed. Among the developers, the majority expected that marketing would occur either

Sensors 2014, 14

14618

between 7 and 12 years hence (31%), or after 12 years (30%); approximately 14% of respondents
answered between 3 and 6 years (14%); within 2 years (11%), and available now (14%). In contrast,
the second largest number of researchers (21%) responded that BCI games were available now,
although most (33%) expected them to be available from 3 to 6 years in the future. The remainder
chose between 7 and 12 years (18%); within 2 years (16%), and over 12 years (11%). Comparing the
number of respondents who answered within 6 years, including “now,” we noted that researchers
(71%) expected the games would be available sooner than did the other two groups (users: 61%;
developers: 39%).
Figure 10. Acceptable cost for BCI games and devices (a) and expected number of years
until BCI games become generally available (b).

4.6. Important Elements
We thought that groups that are heavily involved in BCI game implementation might hold different
or similar opinions on the subject of the elements important to the public success of BCI games. Thus,
every developer and researcher was asked two additional questions. One addressed the importance of
the given elements of BCI games, and the second asked how those elements would be important in
stimulating the public success of BCI games. They were asked to indicate their agreement with these
questions. The results from the two groups are presented in Figures 11 and 12.
As seen in Figure 11, the common elements selected as most important by both developers and
researchers were: “good sensors” (developers: 67%; researchers: 58%), and “fast signal processing”
(developers: 67%; researchers: 50%). Apart from these, over 40% of developers agreed that
“knowledge of BCI” (42%); “short training time” (61%); “platform” (50%); “ease of playing game”
(58%), and “exciting application” (61%) are some of the most important elements of games, while
39% of researchers responded that only “exciting application” was the most important element.
Developers felt that most elements were more important than did researchers, with the exception of
“short installation time”, “device design” and “good sensors”.

Sensors 2014, 14

14619

Figure 11. Importance of elements in BCI games: opinions from (a) developers and
(b) researchers.

With respect to the second question addressed only to developers and researchers, we asked about
the importance of the various elements in stimulating the market for BCI games. As we observed in the
previous question about the elements required to develop BCI games (Figure 11), developers indicated
a higher level of importance for each element in Figure 12 than did the researchers. For most of the
elements, 80% of the developers responded either “one of the most important” or “very important,” but
not many agreed with the element pertaining to stimulating the BCI community (developers: 55%;
researchers: 53%). The two groups agreed that developing communities for interaction was a low
priority. With regard to this issue, one researcher said, “Game developers do not need to study BCI
research.” Similarly, a developer stated, “Software development kit (SDK) should be provided, so that
one can implement games without detailed BCI knowledge”. From these comments, it is clear that the
platform is much more important to game developers. Comparing other elements, researchers tended to
pay more attention to two elements: the public’s positive awareness (“one of the most important” or
“very important”: 70%) and the quality of the device (“one of the most important” or “very important”:
79%), although developers also agreed that these were important.

Sensors 2014, 14

14620

Figure 12. Importance of elements in stimulating the market for BCI games: opinions from
(a) developers and (b) researchers.

4.7. Statistical Significance of Between-Group Opinions
We conducted a quantitative analysis of our survey and similarities and differences among the
opinions of the groups were observed. In addition, a statistical test was conducted as described in
Section 3.4. We found that researchers’ preference for passive BCI was significantly greater than in the
other groups (users and researchers: p < 0.0001, developers and researchers: p < 0.001), as was
mentioned in Section 4.3. For questions related to price and the expected number of years for BCI to
reach the market, researchers’ opinions of an affordable cost were significantly higher than those of
developers (p < 0.05) and users (p < 0.05). On the other hand, developers expected a significantly
longer time would be required for BCI to reach the market than did researchers (p < 0.01) and users
(p < 0.05). With respect to questions about the important elements for a BCI game and for stimulating
the market, several elements differed significantly between developers and researchers. For BCI
games, “exciting application” (p < 0.05); “easiness of playing” (p < 0.0001); “development platform”
(p < 0.0001); “short training time” (p < 0.001), and “BCI knowledge” (p < 0.05) were significant.
For the market, “stimulate the market for BCI entertainment” (p < 0.001); “public’s positive awareness
about BCI” (p < 0.01), and “appearance of BCI game platform” (p < 0.001) were significant. Overall,
these statistical results lend support to the fact that there are different viewpoints among developers,
researchers, and users. In-depth discussion on different viewpoints among three groups will be
addressed in Sections 5.1 and 5.4.

Sensors 2014, 14

14621

5. Discussion
In this study, we reviewed the current research trends in BCI games and attempted to collect the
opinions of all stakeholders: users, developers and researchers. Through our literature search, we
observed some notable points. We found that in recent years, a marginal number of articles have
shown that there has been continuous research on BCI games, and that motor imagery, P300 and
SSVEP-based control paradigms have been introduced widely for control purposes. Moreover, the
passive paradigm that reads mental or emotional states accounted for a relatively large percentage of
the control paradigms used (35%). We also confirmed that EEG is the most preferred measurement
method in the development of BCI games, and we expect that this preference for EEG will continue
with the advent of wireless EEG devices. A questionnaire was conducted with nearly 300 participants
in order to investigate their awareness of and opinions about BCI games. Here are the points that we
learned from the survey:

















BCI was well recognized among users and developers, although only a small fraction of them
had experienced this technology. News and the internet were found to be the primary sources of
information about BCI.
All three groups (researchers, developers and users) agreed that both BCI and BCI games would
have a large influence as an applied technology in the future.
Prostheses and rehabilitation were distinguished as the most promising applications, followed
by games.
With respect to the control paradigm, users and developers indicated a preference for active and
reactive BCIs, while researchers preferred reactive BCI.
Users and developers gave the lowest priority to the whole channel covering the head;
interestingly, however, the researchers were divided. One group (39%) most preferred the whole
head sensor position, while the other (40%) liked it least.
The majority of each group thought that an affordable price for a BCI device is over $100.
Considering that the existing EEG devices or those that are being prepared for the market are priced
at approximately $200, the cost to develop BCI generally meets the price acceptable to users.
The researchers expected that BCI games would be available sooner than did the other two groups.
As important elements in BCI games, researchers were most concerned with the practical
obstacles that they face or will face in their studies, such as signal processing, sensors and ways
to make games interesting. On the other hand, developers seemed to take into account the user’s
view, as well as their own position, more than did the researchers. Compared to researchers,
they gave a higher rank to “the easiness of playing” and the “development platform”.
When asked about elements important in stimulating the BCI game market, developers and
researchers agreed that creating communities for interaction was a low priority. However, the
developers reiterated the importance of the platform, while the researchers responded that
“emergence of simple and precise device[s]” and the “public’s positive awareness about BCI”
are high priorities.

There is considerable work that remains to be performed before BCI enters smoothly into the field
of entertainment. BCI games need to be evaluated continuously by the public by giving them particular

Sensors 2014, 14

14622

experiences with the devices, and the current market status should be included in any considerations.
From the following, we discuss certain questions raised by and limitations of our study.
5.1. Important Elements for BCI Games and the Market
Among researchers, making a game interesting was not as significant as signal processing. In
contrast, developers considered the viewpoint of the implementer and gamer more than did the
researchers. Looking at the question from a user’s point of view, how easily and rapidly a gamer
adapts to a new interface or the way a game is played was very important. A gamer is prone to become
bored and stop playing if considerable game training is required. One researcher addressed this issue,
stating: “Generating signals should be intuitive, like motor imagery, or made intuitive by context, like
selecting items in a menu with (fast) P300 or SSVEP.” Thus, the interaction between a user and a game
should be as intuitive as possible. On the other hand, one developer made the interesting point that:
“It should guarantee no medical side effect”. There is a report that SSVEP may entail a higher risk of
photic or pattern-induced epileptic seizures [36]. This means that medical side effects need to be added
to the list of considerations in developing BCI games, and this should be more important when games
incorporate stimulation-based interactions, such as those in reactive BCI.
We observed that researchers are greatly concerned with hardware issues, as many of them agreed
that simple and precise devices are one of the most important elements. Good signal quality is essential
to decode the user’s intention or mental state accurately. In recent decades, most research results come
from well-customized laboratory setups having a research-purpose acquisition device. In general,
this special device is too heavy and expensive for the public to use with MEG or fNIRS, and even in
smaller and cheaper systems, such as EEG, it is very inconvenient for the subject, as well as the
researcher, to conduct experiments, as they require gel and numerous lines, and are highly sensitive to
noise. Therefore, whether the system works outside the laboratory and how to make it reliable, even in
very noisy environments, are major challenges. In this sense, researchers also looked forward to the
development of a device that is convenient for experimental applications and has a high signal-noise
ratio. From these results, we see that both the same and different opinions exist between these
two stakeholders in BCI game production. Not surprisingly, developers tended to hold the views of
game developers and users, while researchers addressed the issues most crucial to their research.
5.2. Active vs. Passive BCI
It is interesting to investigate the opinion on whether active or passive BCI is more promising for
marketing in the present or future. In the survey, we found that active BCI, including reactive BCI, was
preferred by users and developers. People may be attracted by the greater control that BCI can provide
by comparison to other conventional interfaces, as they may be more familiar with terms like
“mind-reading” and “thought control”. However, due to the limitations in the performance of (re)active
BCI, companies rarely release products or content based on this paradigm; instead, most applications
tend to monitor brain states and use these in the interactions with a user. However, passive BCI is
gaining interest among researchers as a practical applied method [24,32,37–40]. Apart from this
research trend, it is useful to collect opinions from people who have had experience with each
paradigm. Recently, we demonstrated two games to the public at two conferences—one using an

Sensors 2014, 14

14623

active paradigm, and the other a passive paradigm. For details of this demonstration, refer to the
appendix. We learned two lessons from this demonstration:



First, it is difficult to satisfy users when control of the game is limited.
Second, passive BCI may give the user the feeling that s/he is interacting with the game, thereby
making it more entertaining.

Such lessons may result from the discrepancy between the two games used, as their game contents
were quite different. Moreover, the game design described just one control paradigm, which may not
be representative of all control paradigms. For example, depending on system feedback, users may be
aware, consciously or unconsciously, that they are manipulating their mental state. However, the fact
that active BCI suffers from low reliability, while passive BCI may provide more control, and thus
more entertaining games, are important points, although more study is required with well-designed
game and environment parameters. Thus, we expect that passive BCI will be promising and can be
used in the important elements of games if users and developers understand the merits that only this
type of BCI offers.
There are several advantages of passive BCI [32,41]. First, limited performance is less important
than in active BCI. Even with the relatively low performance of the passive paradigm, a game can be
played because BCI may not be a main input to the whole system, as in “AlphaWoW” [4], which uses
the level of relaxation to change the character of an avatar. In the case in which passive BCI is used as
the main input (goal), even low performance would be acceptable, as the true value is not determined
and perceptible to the user. The second advantage of passive BCI is that a short response time for
immediate feedback is unnecessary and even relatively long response times may be input to the game,
because the information is reflected in order to make the game more enjoyable and exciting. Third,
passive BCI may provide information on real-time updated physical and mental states of users that
conventional interfaces (keyboard, mouse and so on) cannot, as it does not require a user to use
conscious effort to interact with the system [24]. With these benefits of passive BCI, we believe that
this system will occupy a larger market for some time.
5.3. Current State of the Market
In the Asilomar survey [22], 72.4% of researchers (N = 145) indicated that BCI for healthy users
was already available or would be within 5 years (e.g., by 2015). However, we observed that only 38% of
researchers (N = 90) responded similarly (now available: 21%, and within 2 years—e.g., by 2015: 17%).
This inconsistency may be due to several factors. As [22] indicated, researchers may have different
standards or do not yet have well-informed opinions because BCI is still a new and developing field.
Some researchers only regard control-purpose systems as BCI. Another possible reason is that we
included another option: “within 3 to 6 years.” Therefore, we cannot exclude the possibility that some
respondents chose that option rather than “within 2 years”. Further, it has been two years since the
Asilomar survey [22] was conducted. If the number of respondents who chose “within 3 to 6 years” is
included, then the percentage is 71%. This value indicates that there is a highly positive awareness of
BCI games among researchers.

Sensors 2014, 14

14624

On the other hand, 61% of users and 39% of developers agreed that BCI was now on the market or
would be available within 6 years. This leads us to wonder what the market situation really is. To gain
some idea of the state of BCI games on the market, we investigated BCI games through mobile
application stores, such as the “app stores” of two companies: Google (www.google.com) and Apple
(www.apple.com). However, we found few BCI-related applications; instead, the search yielded
irrelevant applications with names that included “brain” or “meditation”. On the other hand, we found
that EEG device companies often support or sell their applications and some have their own
application stores. Representative companies are Emotiv (www.emotiv.com) and Neurosky
(store.neurosky.com). These companies already occupy large sectors of the market and their products
are well-recognized among researchers, as well as by the general public. They provide various
applications, such as utilities, games and software for biofeedback and well-organized developer kits are
also supported to facilitate development of customized applications. This trend for companies to sell both
hardware and software is anticipated to continue for some time due to two characteristics of BCI:




First, the existing device requires a terminal to receive and process the brain signals and run the
application; in addition, BCI is not as widespread as are cell-phones.
Second, the BCI market has not matured sufficiently to expect the voluntary contribution of the
third parties that develop applications, as we observed in the success of Apple’s mobile devices.
This may be due to the absence of a standard platform.

In a report by Gartner (www.gartner.com), a market research organization, BCI was predicted to
appear on the stage of “technology triggers,” where a potential technology breakthrough initiates entry
into the market. The time required for BCI to reach this plateau was expected to be more than ten
years. Looking at the existing commercial products, companies are in the process of trying to find
a valuable item that is both usable and attractive to consumers. However, it is difficult to specify the
widespread popularity of any product. Meanwhile, the media continues to provoke curiosity and
interest on the part of the public by reporting futuristic stories about BCI. According to Gartner’s Hype
Cycle, this increasing expectation about BCI will peak and then drop, as we know that the current
technological status of BCI is limited in its ability to satisfy the public’s expectations in the near
future. Therefore, with the current limitations of BCI technology, how well this interface is
incorporated into games or applications is the question that researchers and developers must explore.
Although much of this sounds somewhat pessimistic, there has recently been some good news on the
subject. Microsoft (Microsoft Research: Computational user experiences, brain-computer interfaces group)
has shown an interest in BCI research and Samsung (Article “Samsung Demos a Tablet Controlled by
Your Brain.” www.technologyreview.com/news/513861/samsung-demos-a-tablet-controlled-by-yourbrain) demonstrated that its tablet product could be controlled by BCI. The actions of these major
companies likely will boost enhancements of BCI technology.
5.4. Towards the Advent of BCI Games
Current technology in BCI still has many problems, such as long training time, low reliability and
performance, inconvenient hardware, poor signal quality, and so on. Researchers have investigated
solutions to these frequently mentioned obstacles. Thanks to their efforts, we have seen advances that

Sensors 2014, 14

14625

may bring widespread use of BCI to the fore. Hardware companies have released both inexpensive and
sophisticated EEG headsets [18] and researchers have reported the development of new signal
processing algorithms [27,42] that reduce calibration time [43–46] and improve accuracy [47–51].
Looking at enhancements in performance, for example, a BCI spelling system was able to type about
0.5 characters per minute in 1999 [52], while ten years later a German group demonstrated
performance exceeding 7 characters per minute [53]. Now, after just 10 min of training, it is possible to
type up to 10 characters per minute with the commercial products available (www.intendix.com). Despite
these achievements, however, one may ask the question, “Can we play games with that application?”
Compared to conventional interfaces, such as keyboards, on which people normally can type several
hundred characters per minute, BCI appears to be less attractive. However, BCI is quite promising in
providing a new channel of communication for people. For example, if movement related brain signal
would be detected before the actual movement, BCI may achieve faster and more private
communication than the conventional interfaces requiring the actual movement [14,54]. Although it
sounds implausible now, the potential market for healthy people is expected to be high and publicity
about the technology is growing. In fact, it was reported that healthy people are the major group (more
than one million persons) that will use commercial BCI technology, primarily for gaming [16].
Moreover, this is the right time for the public to accept a new interface. The touch screen has been
incorporated already into smart phones and people play games with natural and intuitive body
movements. Further, voice recognition phone sales are expected to reach 1 billion units
(www.strategyanalytics.com). Given these trends, we need to consider how BCI can enter mainstream
markets, even though it still has certain limitations. We specify here three crucial elements that may
help BCI games lead market based expansion.
First, standards should be established as soon as possible. As we observed in the responses from
game developers, the technical standard seems to be critical in the development of BCI games.
Moreover, current BCI hardware and software are making the transition from isolated demonstrations
to commercial development [55]. In order to encourage BCI game development, hardware and
software at least must be standardized. In research, there have been such trials and advances in
software concepts. “BCI2000” [56] and “OpenVibe” [57] facilitate BCI research by providing
researchers with the ability to integrate different acquisition hardware, customized algorithm codes,
and even applications easily and simultaneously. However, these platforms are for research use only,
and therefore, it may be difficult for game developers to work with them as they do not have the same
expertise. The need to implement platforms that are easier for game developers to use should be a
primary concern within the BCI community [58]. On the other hand, hardware compatibility is also
important, even though it may be less critical than software. An initial step in this process has been
made; “OpenBCI” (www.openbci.com) is compatible with any type of electrode and can interface with
Arduino, an open-source electronic prototyping hardware platform that allows the creation of
interactive electronic objects. Apart from these technical points, other standards, such as agreement on
file formats, ethical procedures, media reporting guidelines, terms and definitions, and benchmarks for
the comparison of different systems [16] will probably influence the acceptance of BCI and BCI games.
Second, gameplay is a critical consideration in the development of BCI games. In our survey, one
game developer (not researcher) indicated the significant influence of gameplay with an example:
“A game is likely to fail if it does not have [an] interesting story or unique game system even though

Sensors 2014, 14

14626

the technology in [the] game device looks fancy. For example, ‘Doom3’ was the greatest in the notable
graphic aspects, but finally ‘Half-life’ succeeded (‘Doom’ and ‘Half-life’ are games centered on gun
and projectile weapon-based combat; these are played through a first-person perspective. Therefore, it
is called a first-person shooter (FPS) game. “Half-life” proved to be revolutionary in a number of
ways in the history of FPS games. It featured stunning graphics, a highly immersive game story, and
gameplay. For a brief history of FPS, please refer to “History of First Person Shooter (FPS) Games.”
(www.freeinfosociety.com/article.php?id=128)). ‘Gameplay’ is the one that jumps over the
technological halo effect”. In addition, there are several recent reports to emphasize gameplay in the
similar context. Ko et al. [59] reviewed gameplay in existing BCI games and demonstrated their
efficiency with respect to the existence of BCI in game playing. Gürkök et al. [20] tried to construct a
BCI game framework from their research experiences in both the BCI and games communities.
They indicated that “challenge,” “fantasy” and “sociality” made a difference in BCI games, increasing
users’ motivation to play. BCI depends on what control paradigm is used, so the method of interaction
may vary. This means that game developers and designers should understand the characteristics of
a specific BCI in order to place its function in an adequate position for interaction. For instance,
training procedures may be conducted while the system quantifies the user’s distribution of attention at
the beginning of playing a slot car racing game [8] or a designer may put an SSVEP component on the
enemy’s heartbeat, thereby allowing a gamer to know intuitively the vital point at which it can be
killed [33]. In this sense, one study investigated gameplay in this genre thoroughly and provided
guidelines for the use of a specific BCI [21]. These studies suggested that it is possible to develop an
enjoyable game and prevent the production of a substandard game where simply connecting with the
BCI at all is difficult. What are needed now are guidelines or well-organized items that will enable us
to evaluate the appropriate combination of a particular BCI and a game. In the game field, an
exemplary study was conducted [60] and heuristics such as the game interface, mechanics, gameplay
and narrative were integrated into a validated model. The model for evaluating a player’s enjoyment of
BCI games consisted of eight elements: concentration; challenge; skills; control; clear goals; feedback;
immersion, and social interaction. Because these are the common elements for the evaluation of
enjoyment, it is expected that they will be helpful in proposing development guidelines and evaluation
criteria for effective game play in BCI games.
Third, the integration may constitute a breakthrough in overcoming the limitations of BCI. Given
the low reliability and performance of BCI compared to conventional interfaces, the combination with
other signals or systems is the inevitable option required to allow BCI to be used in game playing [61,62].
In fact, for the purposes of control, BCI does not seem to be a good choice; instead, BCI may be used
as a secondary input. This issue was discussed in Section 5.2. However, it may be possible to use BCI if we
apply its outcomes probabilistically for cross checking or improving overall accuracy. This integration can
be accomplished with other biosignals between different BCIs referred to as hybrids [63,64], and with
other interfaces [59]. For multimodal information integration, the basic framework for data, features,
and decision levels has been conceptualized [24]. System integration is also important; this is related to
the low functionality of BCI. What BCI does is to provide information extracted from brain signals.
This means that BCI cannot be used as a stand-alone system. To make it applicable, integration with
existing systems or game devices is needed. Simply put, BCI can be connected to a smart phone.
However, we may expand the application area further by constructing a well-devised BCI interface.

Sensors 2014, 14

14627

For example, it may be possible to use BCI as a plug-and-play interface for Microsoft “Xbox” or Sony
“PlayStation” (www.playstation.com). Perhaps this direction is more promising than developing BCI
as its own market. Interestingly, one company continues development efforts to integrate BCI into
entertainment content. They have produced BCI entertainment ideas and products: “Necomimi”
(moving cat’s ear), “Shippo” (moving tail), and “Neurocam” (recording videos of interesting scenarios:
www.neurowear.com).
5.5. Limitations and Considerations in the Survey
In this section, we discuss certain implicit and explicit limitations of our survey. First, the
participant sample is somewhat biased. Among the 294 participants in this online survey, most were
from Asia, North America and Europe. Therefore, it cannot reasonably reflect the opinions of people
from other continents. Recruitment of participants was limited because it was conducted only online,
its promotion was campaigned primarily online, and the questionnaire was accessible only through the
internet. Thus, this survey did not cover groups that are not active in social network services or
involved in games. Particularly, it would be very interesting to investigate thoroughly the opinions of
patients (clinical users) who have tried BCI technology. This will be addressed in future work.
Second, the questionnaire did not address certain sophisticated issues. First, we did not consider the
possibility of multiple roles of participants. For example, one can be both a researcher and a gamer.
A researcher who also enjoys games may have different ideas or opinions compared to one who does
not play games. Such a point may influence some findings from this survey. Considering the increase
in BCI research [65–67] on user experience (UX), the questions related to UX would be quite
interesting, as they would provide information about what is more familiar, acceptable and even
intuitive. Further, we found that a few questions may have led respondents implicitly to more positive
opinions. For example, we observed that users gave the lowest number of points to “Lie detector”, with
only 45% positive opinions. Considering these issues, one should use care in drawing conclusions
from this study.
Third, this survey was conducted only once. As a result, it may be difficult to draw sound and
statistically significant conclusions. To achieve such confident global assessments of BCI games,
repeated surveys or administration of surveys both on- and offline would be greatly beneficial.
However, conducting such comprehensive surveys of large samples would be too costly and would
require a large research collaboration network. Due to such difficulties, this survey was conducted
once and only online. With this limitation, the Wilcoxon rank-sum test was conducted after digitization
of opinions. Nevertheless, we believe that this study is a meaningful step in assessing the interactions
among stakeholders in BCI games.
6. Conclusions
In the past few years, the potential of BCI for healthy users has attracted considerable attention.
Among various applications, entertainment and games are expected to constitute a large market of
potential users. In the role of producers, researchers and game developers play different roles, while
users are the undeniable consumers. The feedback we obtained from these stakeholders with regard to
BCI games is important for the development of high quality games. For this purpose, we presented and

Sensors 2014, 14

14628

summarized their opinions from a survey. Our results confirmed that both the same and different
opinions existed among the three groups. This means that further opinion exchange and continuing
feedback among these groups are essential. Researchers must think about BCI from the viewpoint of
implementers and consumers, while developers and users must remain attentive to BCI development
and continue to offer their feedback. We also summarized the results of game demonstration to
compare users’ evaluations of passive and active paradigms, and presented briefly the state of the market.
Three critical elements—standards, gameplay and appropriate integration—were discussed. Investigation
of these is the direction that the BCI community must take now in order to advance BCI game market
expansion. We hope that this effort will be helpful to researchers, as well as developers, and will
stimulate the collaboration or exchange of opinion between those two or even all three stakeholders.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the
Korean government (MEST; No. 2013R1A1A2009029). We appreciate the input of all participants in
the BCI game survey.
Author Contributions
Minkyu Ahn coordinated the online survey and analyzed all collected information. Mijin Lee and
Jinyoung Choi helped designing the online survey and monitoring survey procedures. Sung Chan Jun
made the supervision and direction of the work.
Appendix
A.1. Questionnaire
The questionnaire used for the online survey can be found in the supplementary materials. The form
consisted of four sections: “Introduction”, “Background”, “Brief Introduction about Brain-Computer
Interface technology” and “Questions”. The first three sections were given to all participants in the
same format, while the last section (“Questions”) was asked in a different manner according to the
group surveyed (users, developers or researchers). Identifier ([U], [D], [R]) on each question indicates
to which group it was given.
A.2. BCI Game Demonstration
BCI game demonstration by our research team at the HCI of Korea 2012 and Korea Computer
Congress 2012 is described in detail in the appendix. We presented the games that were developed,
how gamers’ feedback was evaluated, and evaluation results.
Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Sensors 2014, 14

14629

References
1.

2.

3.

4.
5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

Reuderink, B.; Nijholt, A.; Poel, M. Affective Pacman: A Frustrating Game for Brain-Computer
Interface Experiments. In Intelligent Technologies for Interactive Entertainment; Nijholt, A.,
Reidsma, D., Hondorp, H., Eds.; Lecture Notes of the Institute for Computer Sciences, Social
Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2009;
pp. 221–227.
Tangermann, M.; Krauledat, M.; Grzeska, K.; Sagebaum, M.; Blankertz, B.; Vidaurre, C.;
Müller, K.-R. Playing Pinball with Non-Invasive BCI. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems; MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2009; Volume 21, pp. 1641–1648.
Pires, G.; Torres, M.; Casaleiro, N.; Nunes, U.; Castelo-Branco, M. Playing Tetris with non-invasive
BCI. In Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE 2nd International Conference on Serious Games and
Applications for Health (SeGAH), Braga, Portugal, 16–18 November 2011; pp. 1–6.
Van de Laar, B.; Gurkok, H.; Plass-Oude Bos, D.; Poel, M.; Nijholt, A. Experiencing BCI Control
in a Popular Computer Game. IEEE Trans. Comput. Intell. AI Games 2013, 5, 176–184.
Lalor, E.C.; Kelly, S.P.; Finucane, C.; Burke, R.; Smith, R.; Reilly, R.B.; McDarby, G. Steady-state
VEP-based brain-computer interface control in an immersive 3D gaming environment.
EURASIP J. Appl. Signal Process. 2005, 2005, 3156–3164.
Mühl, C.; Gürkök, H.; Plass-Oude Bos, D.; Thurlings, M.E.; Scherffig, L.; Duvinage, M.;
Elbakyan, A.A.; Kang, S.; Poel, M.; Heylen, D. Bacteria Hunt: Evaluating multi-paradigm BCI
interaction. J. Multimodal User Interfaces 2010, 4, 11–25.
Congedo, M.; Goyat, M.; Tarrin, N.; Ionescu, G.; Varnet, L.; Rivet, B.; Phlypo, R.; Jrad, N.;
Acquadro, M.; Jutten, C. “Brain Invaders”: A prototype of an open-source P300-based video game
working with the OpenViBE platform. In Proceedings of the 5th International Brain-Computer
Interface Conference 2011, Graz, Autriche, 2011; pp. 280–283.
Kim, W.; Ahn, M.; Moon, H.; Koh, Y.; Cho, H.; Ahn, S.; Jun, S.C. Application of Concentration
or High Attention—Car Racing Biofeedback Game. In Proceedings of the ICEIC, Jeongseon
Korea, 1–3 February 2012; pp. 496–497.
Leeb, R.; Lancelle, M.; Kaiser, V.; Fellner, D.W.; Pfurtscheller, G. Thinking Penguin:
Multimodal Brain-Computer Interface Control of a VR Game. IEEE Trans. Comput. Intell. AI
Games 2013, 5, 117–128.
Doud, A.J.; Lucas, J.P.; Pisansky, M.T.; He, B. Continuous three-dimensional control of a virtual
helicopter using a motor imagery based brain-computer interface. PLoS One 2011, 6,
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0026322.
Royer, A.S.; Doud, A.J.; Rose, M.L.; He, B. EEG control of a virtual helicopter in 3-dimensional
space using intelligent control strategies. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 2010, 18,
581–589.
LaFleur, K.; Cassady, K.; Doud, A.; Shades, K.; Rogin, E.; He, B. Quadcopter control in
three-dimensional space using a noninvasive motor imagery-based brain-computer interface.
J. Neural Eng. 2013, 10, doi:10.1088/1741-2560/10/4/046003.
Global Entertainment and Media Outlook: 2013–2017. Available online: http://www.pwc.com
(accessed on 30 July 2014).

Sensors 2014, 14

14630

14. Allison, B.; Graimann, B.; Gräser, A. Why Use a BCI if you are Healthy? In Proceedings of the
BRAINPLAY 07 Brain-Computer Interfaces and Games Workshop at ACE (Advances in
Computer Entertainment) 2007, Salzburg, Austria, 13–15 June 2007.
15. Van Erp, J.; Lotte, F.; Tangermann, M. Brain-Computer Interfaces: Beyond Medical
Applications. Computer 2012, 45, 26–34.
16. Future BNCI. A Roadmap for Future Directions in Brain / Neuronal Computer Interaction,
Available online: http://bnci-horizon-2020.eu/images/bncih2020/FBNCI_Roadmap.pdf (accessed
on 30 July 2014).
17. Nicolas-Alonso, L.F.; Gomez-Gil, J. Brain Computer Interfaces, a Review. Sensors 2012, 12,
1211–1279.
18. Lee, S.; Shin, Y.; Woo, S.; Kim, K.; Lee, H.-N. Review of Wireless Brain-Computer Interface
Systems. In Brain-Computer Interface Systems—Recent Progress and Future Prospects;
Fazel-Rezai, R., Ed.; InTech: Rijeka, Croatia, 2013.
19. Plass-Oude Bos, D.; Reuderink, B.; van de Laar, B.; Gürkök, H.; Mühl, C.; Poel, M.; Nijholt, A.;
Heylen, D. Brain-Computer Interfacing and Games. In Brain-Computer Interfaces; Tan, D.S.,
Nijholt, A., Eds.; Human-Computer Interaction Series; Springer: London, UK, 2010; pp. 149–178.
20. Gürkök, H.; Nijholt, A.; Poel, M. Brain-Computer Interface Games: Towards a Framework.
In Entertainment Computing—ICEC 2012; Herrlich, M., Malaka, R., Masuch, M., Eds.; Lecture
Notes in Computer Science; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2012; pp. 373–380.
21. Marshall, D.; Coyle, D.; Wilson, S.; Callaghan, M. Games, Gameplay, and BCI: The State of the
Art. IEEE Trans. Comput. Intell. AI Games 2013, 5, 82–99.
22. Nijboer, F.; Clausen, J.; Allison, B.Z.; Haselager, P. The Asilomar Survey: Stakeholders’
Opinions on Ethical Issues Related to Brain-Computer Interfacing. Neuroethics 2013, 6, 541–578.
23. Nijboer, F.; Allison, B.Z.; Dunne, S.; Plass-Oude Bos, D.; Nijholt, A.; Haselager, P.
A Preliminary Survey on the Perception of Marketability of Brain-Computer Interfaces and Initial
Development of a Repository of BCI Companies. In Proceedings of the 5th International
Brain-Computer Interface Conference 2011, Graz, Austria, 22–24 September 2011; pp. 344–347.
24. Gürkök, H.; Nijholt, A. Brain-Computer Interfaces for Multimodal Interaction: A Survey and
Principles. Int. J. Hum.-Comput. Interact. 2012, 28, 292–307.
25. Becedas, J. Brain-Machine Interfaces: Basis and Advances. IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. Part
C Appl. Rev. 2012, 42, 825–836.
26. Hwang, H.-J.; Kim, S.; Choi, S.; Im, C.-H. EEG-Based Brain-Computer Interfaces: A Thorough
Literature Survey. Int. J. Hum.-Comput. Interact. 2013, 29, 814–826.
27. Bashashati, A.; Fatourechi, M.; Ward, R.K.; Birch, G.E. A survey of signal processing algorithms
in brain-computer interfaces based on electrical brain signals. J. Neural Eng. 2007, 4, R32–R57.
28. Roman-Gonzalez, A. EEG Signal Processing for BCI Applications. In Human—Computer Systems
Interaction: Backgrounds and Applications 2; Hippe, Z.S., Kulikowski, J.L., Mroczek, T., Eds.;
Advances in Intelligent and Soft Computing; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2012;
pp. 571–591.
29. Al-ani, T.; Trad, D. Signal Processing and Classification Approaches for Brain-Computer
Interface. In Intelligent and Biosensors; Somerset, V.S., Ed.; InTech: Rijeka, Croatia, 2010.

Sensors 2014, 14

14631

30. Ang, K.K.; Guan, C.; Chua, K.S.G.; Ang, B.T.; Kuah, C.; Wang, C.; Phua, K.S.; Chin, Z.Y.;
Zhang, H. Clinical study of neurorehabilitation in stroke using EEG-based motor imagery
brain-computer interface with robotic feedback. Conf. Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. 2010,
2010, 5549–5552.
31. Lim, C.G.; Lee, T.S.; Guan, C.; Fung, D.S.S.; Zhao, Y.; Teng, S.S.W.; Zhang, H.; Krishnan, K.R.R.
A Brain-Computer Interface Based Attention Training Program for Treating Attention Deficit
Hyperactivity Disorder. PLoS One 2012, 7, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0046692.
32. Zander, T.O.; Kothe, C. Towards passive brain–computer interfaces: Applying brain-computer
interface technology to human–machine systems in general. J. Neural Eng. 2011, 8,
doi:10.1088/1741-2560/8/2/025005.
33. Kaplan, A.; Shishkin, S.; Ganin, I.; Basyul, I.; Zhigalov, A. Adapting the P300-Based
Brain-Computer Interface for Gaming: A Review. IEEE Trans. Comput. Intell. AI Games 2013, 5,
141–149.
34. Pfurtscheller, G.; Lopes da Silva, F.H. Event-related EEG/MEG synchronization and
desynchronization: Basic principles. Clin. Neurophysiol. 1999, 110, 1842–1857.
35. Farwell, L.A.; Donchin, E. Talking off the top of your head: Toward a mental prosthesis utilizing
event-related brain potentials. Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol. 1988, 70, 510–523.
36. Fisher, R.S.; Harding, G.; Erba, G.; Barkley, G.L.; Wilkins, A. Epilepsy Foundation of America
Working Group Photic- and pattern-induced seizures: A review for the Epilepsy Foundation of
America Working Group. Epilepsia 2005, 46, 1426–1441.
37. Zander, T.O.; Kothe, C.; Welke, S.; Roetting, M. Utilizing Secondary Input from Passive
Brain-Computer Interfaces for Enhancing Human-Machine Interaction. In Foundations of
Augmented Cognition. Neuroergonomics and Operational Neuroscience; Schmorrow, D.D.,
Estabrooke, I.V., Grootjen, M., Eds.; Lecture Notes in Computer Science; Springer:
Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2009; pp. 759–771.
38. Zander, T.O.; Jatzev, S. Detecting affective covert user states with passive brain-computer
interfaces. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Affective Computing and
Intelligent Interaction and Workshops (ACII 2009), Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 10–12
September 2009; pp. 1–9.
39. George, L.; Lécuyer, A. An overview of research on “passive” brain-computer interfaces for
implicit human-computer interaction. In Proceedings of International Conference on Applied
Bionics and Biomechanics ICABB 2010—Workshop W1 “Brain-Computer Interfacing and
Virtual Reality”, Venice, Italy, 14–16 October 2010.
40. Protzak, J.; Ihme, K.; Zander, T.O. A Passive Brain-Computer Interface for Supporting
Gaze-Based Human-Machine Interaction. In Universal Access in Human-Computer Interaction.
Design Methods, Tools, and Interaction Techniques for eInclusion; Stephanidis, C., Antona, M.,
Eds.; Lecture Notes in Computer Science; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2013;
pp. 662–671.
41. Lotte, F. Brain-computer Interfaces for 3D Games: Hype or Hope? In Proceedings of the 6th
International Conference on Foundations of Digital Games (FDG’11), Bordeaux, France,
28 June–1 July 2011; pp. 325–327.

Sensors 2014, 14

14632

42. Lotte, F.; Congedo, M.; Lécuyer, A.; Lamarche, F.; Arnaldi, B. A review of classification
algorithms for EEG-based brain-computer interfaces. J. Neural Eng. 2007, 4, doi:10.1088/
1741-2560/4/2/R01.
43. Krauledat, M.; Tangermann, M.; Blankertz, B.; Müller, K.-R. Towards zero training for
brain-computer interfacing. PLoS One 2008, 3, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0002967.
44. Ahn, M.; Cho, H.; Jun, S.C. Calibration Time Reduction through Source Imaging in Brain Computer
Interface (BCI). In HCI International 2011—Posters’ Extended Abstracts; Stephanidis, C., Ed.;
Communications in Computer and Information Science; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany,
2011; pp. 269–273.
45. Vidaurre, C.; Sannelli, C.; Müller, K.-R.; Blankertz, B. Co-adaptive calibration to improve BCI
efficiency. J. Neural Eng. 2011, 8, doi:10.1088/1741-2560/8/2/025009.
46. Cho, H.; Ahn, M.; Ahn, S.; Jun, S.C. Strategy for Reducing Calibration Time with Invariant
Common Spatio-Spectral Patterns. In Proceedings of the Fifth International Brain-Computer
Interface Meeting, Pacific Grove, CA, USA, 3–7 June 2013.
47. Ahn, M.; Hong, J.H.; Jun, S.C. Feasibility of approaches combining sensor and source features in
brain–computer interface. J. Neurosci. Methods 2012, 204, 168–178.
48. Lemm, S.; Blankertz, B.; Curio, G.; Müller, K.-R. Spatio-spectral filters for improving the
classification of single trial EEG. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 2005, 52, 1541–1548.
49. Shin, Y.; Lee, S.; Lee, J.; Lee, H.-N. Sparse representation-based classification scheme for motor
imagery-based brain-computer interface systems. J. Neural Eng. 2012, 9, doi:10.1088/1741-2560/
9/5/056002.
50. Samek, W.; Vidaurre, C.; Müller, K.-R.; Kawanabe, M. Stationary common spatial patterns for
brain–computer interfacing. J. Neural Eng. 2012, 9, doi:10.1088/1741-2560/9/2/026013.
51. Blankertz, B.; Lemm, S.; Treder, M.; Haufe, S.; Müller, K.-R. Single-trial analysis and
classification of ERP components—A tutorial. Neuroimage 2011, 56, 814–825.
52. Birbaumer, N.; Ghanayim, N.; Hinterberger, T.; Iversen, I.; Kotchoubey, B.; Kübler, A.;
Perelmouter, J.; Taub, E.; Flor, H. A spelling device for the paralysed. Nature 1999, 398,
297–298.
53. Williamson, J.; Murray-Smith, R.; Blankertz, B.; Krauledat, M.; Müller, K.-R. Designing for
uncertain, asymmetric control: Interaction design for brain-computer interfaces. Int. J.
Hum.-Comput. Stud. 2009, 67, 827–841.
54. Ahmadian, P.; Cagnoni, S.; Ascari, L. How capable is non-invasive EEG data of predicting the
next movement? A mini review. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 2013, 7, doi:10.3389/fnhum.2013.00124.
55. Brunner, P.; Bianchi, L.; Guger, C.; Cincotti, F.; Schalk, G. Current trends in hardware and
software for brain-computer interfaces (BCIs). J. Neural Eng. 2011, 8, 025001.
56. Schalk, G.; Mcfarl, D.J.; Hinterberger, T.; Birbaumer, N.; Wolpaw, J.R. BCI2000: A
general-purpose brain-computer interface (BCI) system. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 2004, 51,
1034–1043.
57. Renard, Y.; Lotte, F.; Gibert, G.; Congedo, M.; Maby, E.; Delannoy, V.; Bertrand, O.;
Lécuyer, A. OpenViBE: An Open-Source Software Platform to Design, Test, and Use
Brain-Computer Interfaces in Real and Virtual Environments. Presence Teleoper. Virtual
Environ. 2010, 19, 35–53.

Sensors 2014, 14

14633

58. Oum, K.; Ayaz, H.; Shewokis, P.A.; Diefenbach, P. MindTactics: A Brain Computer Interface
gaming platform. In Proceedings of the 2010 International IEEE Consumer Electronics Society’s
Games Innovations Conference (ICE-GIC), Hong Kong, China, 21–23 December 2010; pp. 1–5.
59. Ko, M.; Bae, K.; Oh, G.; Ryu, T. A Study on New Gameplay Based on Brain-Computer Interface.
In Proceedings of DiGRA 2009, London, UK, 1–4 September 2009.
60. Sweetser, P.; Wyeth, P. GameFlow: A Model for Evaluating Player Enjoyment in Games.
Comput. Entertain. 2005, 3, doi:10.1145/1077246.1077253.
61. Nijholt, A. BCI for Games: A “State of the Art” Survey. In Entertainment Computing—ICEC
2008; Stevens, S.M., Saldamarco, S.J., Eds.; Lecture Notes in Computer Science; Springer:
Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2009; pp. 225–228.
62. Nijholt, A.; Reuderink, B.; Bos, D.O. Turning Shortcomings into Challenges: Brain-Computer
Interfaces for Games. In Intelligent Technologies for Interactive Entertainment; Nijholt, A.,
Reidsma, D., Hondorp, H., Eds.; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2009; pp. 153–168.
63. Pfurtscheller, G.; Allison, B.Z.; Brunner, C.; Bauernfeind, G.; Solis-Escalante, T.; Scherer, R.;
Zander, T.O.; Mueller-Putz, G.; Neuper, C.; Birbaumer, N. The hybrid BCI. Front. Neurosci.
2010, 4, doi:10.3389/fnpro.2010.00003.
64. Amiri, S.; Fazel-Rezai, R.; Asadpour, V. A Review of Hybrid Brain-Computer Interface Systems.
Adv. Hum.-Comput. Interact. 2013, 2013, doi:10.1155/2013/187024.
65. Van de Laar, B.; Gürkök, H.; Bos, D.P.-O.; Nijboer, F.; Nijholt, A. Perspectives on User
Experience Evaluation of Brain-Computer Interfaces. In Universal Access in Human-Computer
Interaction Users Diversity; Stephanidis, C., Ed.; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2011;
pp. 600–609.
66. Gürkök, H.; Plass-Oude Bos, D.; van der Laar, B.L.A.; Nijboer, F.; Nijholt, A. User Experience
Evaluation in BCI: Filling the Gap. Int. J. Bioelectromagn. 2011, 13, 54–55.
67. Plass-Oude Bos, D.; Gürkök, H.; van de Laar, B.L.A.; Nijboer, F.; Nijholt, A. User Experience
Evaluation in BCI: Mind the Gap! Int. J. Bioelectromagn. 2011, 13, 48–49.
© 2014 by the authors; licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/).

