The Journal for Transdisciplinary Research in Southern Africa
ISSN: (Online) 2415-2005, (Print) 1817-4434

Page 1 of 12

Original Research

Exploring judgement and internal bias of Life
Orientation teachers in sexuality teaching
Authors:
Eben H. Swanepoel1
Christa Beyers1
Lizette De Wet2
Affiliations:
1
Department of Psychology of
Education, University of the
Free State, South Africa
Department of Computer
Science and Informatics,
University of the Free State,
South Africa
2

Corresponding author:
Christa Beyers,
beyersc@ufs.ac.za
Dates:
Received: 22 Dec. 2016
Accepted: 09 May 2017
Published: 27 June 2017
How to cite this article:
Swanepoel, E.H., Beyers, C. &
De Wet, L., 2017, ‘Exploring
judgement and internal bias
of Life Orientation teachers in
sexuality teaching’, The
Journal for Transdisciplinary
Research in Southern Africa
13(1), a405. https://doi.
org/10.4102/td.v13i1.405
Copyright:
© 2017. The Authors.
Licensee: AOSIS. This work
is licensed under the
Creative Commons
Attribution License.

Read online:
Scan this QR
code with your
smart phone or
mobile device
to read online.

There are various challenges in the teaching of sexuality within a South African multicultural
context, as there is no uniform knowledge across learner backgrounds. As such, teachings
often revert to the teacher’s beliefs, in order to create meaning within the uncertainty, at the
expense of the individual learners’ personal identity formation. This paper explores the
teachers’ internal bias and its subsequent influence on the teaching of alternative sexualities in
Life Orientation classes. Through purposive sampling, four teachers in the Mangaung area of
the Free State province participated in semi-structured interviews and electroencephalogram
(EEG) measurements. Data were analysed by means of thematic analysis and descriptive
statistics collected through EEG readings in order to explore how teachers construct knowledge
about alternative sexualities while mediating internal conflict, specifically through measuring
frustration responses to stimuli. Findings suggest that the challenge of personal background
influences teaching practice as well as limitations at curriculum level, leading to personal
interpretations of content. Furthermore, sensitisation to content significantly affects levels of
frustration, while the active versus reactive nature of teaching sexuality becomes apparent in
how teachers ultimately accommodate personal bias. Recommendations include the need for
sensitisation, during teacher induction, to sensitive topics such as sexuality, and to provide less
biased messages during teaching.

Introduction
… the post-apartheid landscape brought the promise of freedom under broad constitutional reforms
enshrined in a bill of rights … The current context has therefore steadily and progressively shifted from a
model which conceives homosexuality as a behaviour to one in which identities can be produced. (Reddy
2010:18)

The challenge of conceptualising knowledge related to homosexuality is deeply rooted in the
complexity of the multiculturalism characteristic of modern South Africa (Sigamoney & Epprecht
2013). This, in turn, causes difficulties for the ideals of identities to emerge without judgement.
African culture has strongly critiqued the Westernised discourse and the subsequent construction
of meaning related to being homosexual as a perversion entering society based on Euro-American
influences (Reddy 2010), still carrying stigmatisation placed on preconceived identities and
subsequent stereotyped behaviours. South Africa is characterised by a diverse spectrum of
cultural backgrounds with complex historical influences. As such, the role of the teachers’
perceptions on teaching against such a myriad of cultural influences in the classroom is challenged
in terms of non-biased teachings against the learners’ backgrounds (Meier & Hartell 2009). We
question how the teachers’ internal judgements that influence practice (Perkins 2012), specifically
within the subject of Life Orientation, strengthen restrictions on gender identity formation within
culturally diverse classroom practices. Ultimately, and with approximately 10% of South Africa’s
youth experiencing same-sex attraction during puberty, the influences of discrepancy between the
teachers’ personal bias and the learners’ backgrounds can significantly give rise to a myriad of
contradictory messages between traditional and modernised knowledge systems related to what
homosexual, and sexuality itself, means (Francis 2011; Richardson 2009).
Life Orientation’s component of sexuality education was implemented at curriculum level as a step
to align the constitutional underpinning of respect for sexual diversity and the eradication of gender
discrimination at societal level by educating the youth as to their responsibilities within a culturally
diverse society (Department of Basic Education 2013). Francis (2011) argues that the focus of sex
education in South Africa has been significantly indicative of the judgements related to HIV/AIDS
and is underpinned by policies that advocate sexual practice and disease within a unison framework.
Formby (2011) refers to the World Health Organization’s definition of sexual health accordingly.

http://www.td-sa.net

Open Access

Page 2 of 12

‘Health’ is not defined by the mere absence of disease but
encompasses a respectful approach towards sexual diversity,
knowledge embedded in intimacy and pleasure related to sex,
and is based on the protection of all individuals within a nonjudgemental and non-discriminatory context. This is reflected
in the Life Orientation curriculum’s aim to nurture the learner
on not only the physical aspects of life but also the emotional
and psychological factors related to sexuality (Department of
Basic Education 2013). While the curriculum and assessment
policy statement (CAPS) envisions space for such topics as
intimacy, sexual preference and desire, teachers who
experience discomfort or conflicting morals related to the
teaching thereof can still ignore critical reflection on their part
when topics of sexual diversity emerge (Shefer & Ngabaza
2015).
In practice, the above ideals of social justice and sexual
inclusivity are thus not fully realised within a judgement-free
and respectful context (Francis 2011). The educator’s
knowledge or emotional underpinning related to sexuality
forms a transference of prejudice within the teaching–learning
environment (Beyers 2013; Meier & Hartell 2009). Potgieter
and Reygan (2012), as well as Shefer and Macleod (2015), refer
to textbook-level interaction regarding topics related to sexual
minorities. While topics of alternative sexualities are covered,
the manner in which the messages are conveyed often further
marginalises these groups by enforcing gender stereotypes
and heteronormative standards. It thus becomes apparent that
embodying the ideals embedded in respect of diversity is
complicated by emotive topics such as sexuality, widening the
gap between policy and subsequent transformative teaching
of what learners need to know in a judgement-free society
(Morrell, Bhana & Shefer 2012).
This gives rise to issues in policy–teacher interaction and
messages conveyed during classroom practice may revert to
information that is familiar and of personal value to the
teacher (Beyers 2013). While learners enter the classroom
with unique individual backgrounds, the teacher also
embodies a cultural self (Vassallo 2012) that manifests within
teachings and may be grounded in judgements and attitudes
related thereto. These judgements create boundaries within
which sexuality is conceptualised, often reiterating normative
expectations (Applebaum 2013) and placing ‘who’ and ‘what’
parameters on the shaping of a personal identity (Formby
2011). Making sense within the complexity of unison
knowledge related to concepts of sexual orientation occurs
by forming cognitive groupings based on schematic
stereotypes of what it means to be male or female (Crespi
2004) to make sense of the environment. Such groupings,
however, may form the basis of marginalised and normative
boundaries of behaviour (Habarth 2008). This may further be
complicated by the formation of culturally unison knowledge
related to concepts such as homosexuality (Baumeister &
Bushman 2011). In turn, judgements of heteronormativity are
counter to those of freedom and allowing identity to emerge
within the context. Reddy (2010) underpins the modern
views of homosexuality and sexuality in general. Modern
http://www.td-sa.net

Original Research

views on sexualities as fluid from labels and categories often
form ambiguity in meaning, and subsequently raise the
problem of addressing an inclusive and uniform knowledge
set applicable across cultural diversity within the teaching of
sexuality and gender.
This study aims to explore both how Life Orientation teachers
construct meaning within the teaching of sexuality in
alignment with the ideals embedded in Life Orientation, and
the role of emotional judgement in the teaching thereof. We
shall first place sexuality education within a framework that
advocates cultural sensitivity and judgement suspension in
order to provide a working framework that aligns with the
ideals embedded in social justice and citizenship education.
Allowing for meaning to emerge based on interviews, results
will be discussed using emergent themes and compared to
data gathered by means of electroencephalogram (EEG)
readings that measured emotional reaction, in real time, to
five videos based on alternative sexualities.

Sexuality education: Towards a
conceptual framework of cultural
intelligence
Sexual culture draws on the norms and values held by
individuals regarding sex and gender, based on specific
socialisation agents that ultimately influence the messages
conveyed during interaction (Formby 2011). Male dominance,
as reflected on earlier in the prevalence of South African cultures,
is often still rooted in traditional gender expectations and
remains a prominent form of power discourse within our
society (Reddy 2010). Such discourse challenges teacher
methodologies across cultural diversity and power inequalities
in order to instil values of respect and responsibility within
classroom practices related to gender equality (Hammett &
Staeheli 2011). This calls for greater sensitivity and self-reflection
on the part of the teacher when teaching sexuality in order to
understand how sexuality is constructed through culturally
rooted concepts of power-vested beliefs (Iverson 2012). Drawing
on research by Baxen (2006), Davids (2014:41) argues that the
role of the teacher in sexuality education is based on being
actively involved, as opposed to being mere passive-reactive
agents acting as ‘rational, intellectual professionals who
“mindfully” educate the “minds” of learners’. The view of
power thus encompasses not only a socially constructed
component but also a biological one, taking into account the
responses elicited at behavioural level (teaching). Accordingly,
Meier and Hartell (2009) argue the difficulty of teaching actively
within a multicultural environment. They refer to the complex
interaction between not only the socialisation teachers receive
during teacher induction but also the influences of their personal
psyche related to past experiences in shaping values and
prejudices that influence teaching.
DePalma and Francis (2014a:3), however, draw on the often
discomforting and morally deviant nature of teaching about
alternative sexualities, specifically the cultural taboo of
discussing sexuality with children. They also question the
Open Access

Page 3 of 12

static nature of uncritically teaching sexuality within the
context of South African historical exclusion in envisioning
an inclusive future, further emphasising the importance
of understanding cultures as ‘dynamic, complex and
interactive’. It thus becomes increasingly important to engage
the teaching of sensitive topics such as sexuality within a
framework that advocates dynamic change in both the
classrooms as well outside communities. The framework of
cultural intelligence accounts for the active role of the teacher,
as opposed to the reactive role of uncritically mediating mere
knowledge preceding behaviour (Swanepoel & Beyers 2015).
Cultural intelligence proposes three primary components:
knowledge, mindfulness and behaviour (Thomas 2006).

Knowledge
Knowledge reflects on issues such as the sociocultural context
of South African history and sexuality. This component frames
teachers’ knowledge of issues explored in previous studies
such as sociocultural traditions (DePalma & Francis 2014a),
colonialism (DePalma & Francis 2014b) and knowledge
about nonconforming genders (Collier et al. 2013). While it
is not possible to have a complete knowledge base of
specific cultural groups (or the subsequent categories such
as heterosexuality or homosexuality), cultural intelligence
advocates the application of limited knowledge to be used
optimally and to adapt dynamically to the current context
(Van den Berg 2008). This becomes especially relevant during
classroom pedagogies in acknowledging the knowledge,
values and attitudes that teachers hold of their own sexuality
and culture, and in turn that of the diverse spectrum of
sexualities embodied among learners themselves.

Mindfulness
Every context consists of various stimuli that evoke various
emotions (Brown & Ryan 2003). Mindfulness accounts for a
critical awareness of how the environmental stimuli influence
one’s emotions, thus adapting accordingly in order to
advocate a positive interactional exchange. Mindfulness
becomes increasingly important in the teaching of sensitive
topics such as sex and sexuality within the classroom
(Swanepoel & Beyers 2015).

Original Research

various ambiguous cross-cultural contexts with sensitivity
and suspended judgement (Swanepoel & Beyers 2015).

Methodology
Participants

A total of eight participants were approached for the research
project. However, the selected sample did not take part in the
final study as the use of the EEG headset caused discomfort
in revealing their emotions and judgements to the researcher
in a manner that they could not control. In total, four
participants were purposefully selected for this study.
According to Blanche et al. (2011), the use of this
nonprobability sampling method is adequate for small nongeneralisable populations for testing the theory about
processes. To examine how teachers mediate knowledge and
values related to the teaching of sexual diversity, the
researcher selected teachers with at least one year’s Life
Orientation teaching experience during which they covered
the theme of sexuality education at least once. As the study
aims to test the teachers’ judgement processes regarding
alternative sexualities, all selected participants were
identified as heterosexual. The final sample of participants
consisted of three female teachers and one male teacher.

Data gathering
The gathering of data took place in three phases. Phase one
consisted of semi-structured interviews that lasted between
45 and 60 minutes. These interviews focused mainly on
participants’ knowledge, prompting responses based on
the participants’ experiences, opinions and background
knowledge as related to the teaching of sexuality and
alternative sexualities within the classroom context. This
phase also elicited responses of participants’ views
regarding their own teaching practices and behaviour. In
the second phase, the participants watched five videos (20
minutes in total) while wearing the EPOC-Emotiv EEG
headset (see Figure 1 for an example of the headset, and
Figure 2 and Figure 3 for data collected and represented in

Behaviour
Behaviour refers to the overt actions taken during teaching
based on the above interaction between knowledge and
mindfulness. The skill to suspend judgement is also prominent
in cultural intelligence. This skill promotes the individual’s
awareness of his or her limited knowledge and emotional
judgements (Hülsheger et al. 2013), to gather further
information and thus elicit behaviour based on a better
understanding of the current context (Brislin, Worthley &
MacNab 2006). The lowest form of cultural intelligence
encompasses the individual drawing on culturally normative
stereotypes to facilitate behaviour, whereas higher cultural
intelligence promotes the individual’s understanding of the
complexities of culture, and interacting optimally across
http://www.td-sa.net

Source: Emotiv (n.d.)

FIGURE 1: The EPOC-Emotiv headset.

Open Access

Page 4 of 12

Measurements by Video (Data of all sec ons pooled)
Emo on=Frustra on

100

identify the manner in which emotions and bias underpin
interviews and narratives, and thus not to generalise finding
across the spectrum of participants.
The videos used in this study were selected on the basis of
issues relevant to sexuality and judgement, specifically their
reflection on prejudice, stereotyping, bullying and equality.
The videos reflected the following content:

80

60

Value

Original Research

40

Video 1: Heteronormative activities across the lifespan of
a man being filmed, ending with him proposing to the
cameraman who is revealed to be male.

20

0
1

2

3

4

5

Video
Source: Department of statistical analysis at the University of the Free State

FIGURE 2: Box-plot of frustration across the five videos.

Measurements by Emoon and Video
Emoon=Frustraon Video=5
100

Video 2: Ellen DeGeneres speaking out about bullying,
teenage suicide and unsafe school climates.
Video 3: A satirical video of the legalisation of gay marriages,
while a heterosexual family believes it is the end of their own
marriage.
Video 4: A video portraying various people who do not
conform to homosexual stereotypes addressing the public to
speak out against stereotyping and stigmatisation.

80

Video 5: A young man exploring his homosexual feelings and
visiting various gay spaces in order to find love, yet only
finding promiscuity and further heartbreak. While surfing,
he meets another man who ultimately proposes to him, with
his family agreeing to the union.

Value

60

40

20

Data analysis

0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12 13 14 15

Secon
Source: Department of statistical analysis at the University of the Free State

FIGURE 3: The stark decline through to the end of Video 5 for frustration.

visual form) that measures five specific emotions, namely
attention, short-term excitement, long-term excitement,
frustration and meditation. The final phase of the study
entailed a semi-structured interview to gain insight into the
teachers’ understanding of what they watched and their
emotive responses thereto. For the five selected videos, this
paper will report mainly on the findings gathered through
Videos 1 and 5, with specific reference to frustration. The
Wi-Fi-enabled headset provides the ability to measure the
intent and emotional underpinning of expressions and
responses (Zier 2012), incorporating sensory and perceptual
responses to content and stimuli. Harrison (2013), in a study
of the device’s validity, often reflected a dissociation
between self-reporting and measurement, referring to the
value of the device’s use among small samples. This proves
valuable as the study sought to measure the conscious
awareness of individual teachers as compared with the true
emotional responses that underlie their narratives. The EEG
system thus holds value for measuring smaller samples but
should be used with caution in generalising results. For this
study, however, the measurement is merely a means to
http://www.td-sa.net

The first level of analysis was informed by a thematic analysis
of the qualitative data according to Tesch’s (1992) method.
The interviews were primarily transcribed and read through
individually to gain an understanding of the global base
thereof. Transcripts were then read for meaning and the
emerging patterns were identified, coded and named.
Patterns of meaning that emerged from the transcription
were grouped as themes that became descriptive of the
content that participants expressed. Prominent themes that
will form the prime report of this article include personal
background influences, the limitations of the CAPS and
textbooks, and the active versus reactive role of the teacher.
For the EEG data, each video was broken down into sections
in which the emotional states of short- and long-term
excitement, meditation, frustration and attention were
captured on a moment-to-moment basis. For the purpose of
this study, we shall focus on the data captured from the
emotional state of frustration. This emotion reflects a
physiological arousal that connects with the idea of a sudden
realisation. This aligns with a moment of insight that occurs
during a sudden internal realisation and accounts for a
moment of arousal at a specific time (Harrison 2013). For the
purpose of this paper, the main examination will be informed
by frustration, which is used to explore dissonance of internal
judgements (Allen 2013) or previous perceptions that
are challenged in certain sections of the videos used.
Open Access

Page 5 of 12

The captured data were standardised and represented in
percentages, where 0% reflects a very low or no arousal, and
100% a very high arousal. A senior statistician using Statistical
Analysis Software (SAS) further analysed data from the EEG
readings by means of descriptive methods. For each video
and section within the video, the following descriptive
statistics were calculated: mean, minimum, median and
maximum. Initially, pooling the data from all sections of a
given video, the data from the five videos were plotted sideby-side as boxplots, reflecting each of the five emotions. The
plots clearly indicate that the measurements for the emotions
‘attention’ and ‘meditation’ were essentially constant and
uninformative. Therefore, data for these two emotions were
not analysed further. Because of the short timeframe of each
video, ‘long-term excitement’ was not included in the
analysis of the results. For the emotion ‘frustration’, and
separately for each video, the data from the various sections
of the videos were further plotted side-by-side as boxplots.

Original Research

how emotive underpinnings are mediated on part of teachers
during sexuality teaching. The question the narratives and
the EEG thus address is: How do teachers mediate emotional
responses during content ambiguity such as sexuality
education, and how aware are they of sexuality bias? To
sustain the reporting of the results, narrative extracts will
inform the discussion of the respective themes. The second
stage of reporting will base the qualitative data within the
findings of the EEG readings, and this will be discussed
accordingly. However, as narratives are often strongly
correlated to the EEG counterpart of the study and inform
the discussion, the discussion will reflect on the use of the
EEG at various stages where the data correlate with
participants’ responses. These two segments are accordingly
placed under two categories; however, they should be read
not as mutually exclusive but as interconnected and
correlative.

Theme 1: Personal background influences

Ethical considerations
Registration and clearance were provided by the higher
education institution where the study is based. Further
ethical clearance was gained from the Department of Basic
Education to perform research in the Free State province. The
participants were briefed about the scope of the study, and no
deception took place. Full anonymity was ensured with the
option to withdraw from the study at any time. To ensure
anonymity, all the participants’ names were changed. Should
the participants feel uncomfortable with the use of headsets
or videos, they were allowed to stop the process at any given
time. While the videos were selected to portray everyday
interactions, a registered psychologist was approached to
debrief any discomfort the participants may have experienced
during the course of the study, if need be.

Results and discussion
In discussing the qualitative section of the study, we shall
draw on the results and the discussion thereof based on
the following three themes: namely personal background
influences, the limitations of the CAPS and textbooks, and
the active versus reactive role of the teacher. The discussion
will be informed through the three components of cultural
intelligence.

Discussion
In the analysis of the qualitative data, three prominent themes
emerged from coding the participants’ narratives. While the
dominant measurement of emotional reactions will be
discussed as informed by the EEG readings at an internal
level, it is valuable to draw on the participants’ narratives
pertaining to their emotional awareness during the interviews
in order to provide a holistic construct of how they engage
with alternative sexuality teaching and their conscious
understanding thereof. Correlations between teacher
narratives will be identified alongside the EEG measurements
as a means to strengthen the reporting as well as examine
http://www.td-sa.net

The first theme elicited various subthemes pertaining to
religion and culture. It is within this context that various
judgements are formed through socialisation on the part of
the teacher. The challenge, elucidated in the following
narratives, reflects finding common ground between
establishing a mutual relationship between teachers and
learners in the classroom during sex education. This refers to
the interference that may occur between the teacher’s
prejudices and the learners’ backgrounds in a culturally
diverse classroom (Meier & Hartell 2009).
When asked about his experiences of teaching Life Orientation
within the realm of sexuality, Jonathan responded:
My experience is that when you deal with sexual orientation,
you as a facilitator have to be clear what your sexual orientation
is. If you are at peace with that you know about yourself then
you will be able to let learners discover themselves also. Because
the information which you give them if you know about your
own orientation will be true, it will not be based on some
religious ideas or some norms that have changed or the learners’
peers’ influences. You will be able to help the learner discover his
own sexuality, and how he fits into the world and what role he
can play.
As I said our school comes from a poor community. The norms
and values that are set within those settings are very traditional.
It has been influenced by the way the church wants us to live,
how our parents, their own parents, perceive their own sexuality,
the type of topics that are allowed to be discussed in the home
therefore. You have to be quite sure that the way in which you
attempt to address the topic will not be in conflict with what the
child learns from home. So you try and have that relationship
you have although the church says this about sexuality and this is
wrong and your parents may believe it, there is another stance that
one can take. (Participant 1, male, Life Orientation teacher in a
rural context school)

As reflected in Jonathan’s narrative, the stringent normative
expectations of some contexts reflect the unyielding norms
and judgements of traditional sexuality expectations in the
community (Butler & Astbury 2008). Jonathan draws on the
Open Access

Page 6 of 12

importance of being knowledgeable about one’s own
sexual orientation as a counterpart to successfully teaching
about alternative sexualities. This narrative portrays the
mindfulness component of cultural intelligence in that the
individual exhibits a heightened sense of awareness of
the self and emotions that mediate interaction at a given time
(Hülsheger et al. 2013). Further importance is given to
promoting learner understanding about knowledge systems
that can differ from their personal upbringing and beliefs as
a means to successful sexuality teaching. While Jonathan has
been teaching Life Orientation for 12 years, his narrative
indicates a confident and broad understanding of normative
values and the influence thereof within his teaching. Consider
the following extract from Sandra (who is a White teacher
who has been teaching Life Orientation for three years) when
asked to elaborate on how her background influenced her
perspective on homosexuality:
Let’s start with religion. Because I am a Christian, they tell you a
man and a man should not be in a relationship or be sexually
attracted to each other, that a woman is made for a man. My
parents have never told me that being gay is wrong. We haven’t
really ever spoken about it, but I think if you look at today and
you look at religion, you need to consider the time in which the
bible was written. If you look at the Old Testament, we are not
allowed to eat pork, or wear certain clothes, which we all do. So
gay being wrong should be taken into consideration, and
knowing that times have changed, it might not be the case
anymore and I think that if your relationship with God is strong
and you are on the right track then why would he not want you
to be happy and love the person of your choice. (Participant 2,
female, Life Orientation teacher for 3 years)

The discourse of religion again prevails. Compared to
Jonathan’s reference to the church as a socialisation agent
and the influence thereof on teaching, Sandra exhibits a
more personal perspective. She specifically draws on a
generalisation in that ‘we are not allowed to eat pork, or wear
certain clothes, which we all do’. Her narrative, albeit
accepting of alternative sexualities, forms a discourse of
inclusive Christianity. This is an issue, as such a message may
unknowingly exclude and marginalise other religious beliefs
and practices, especially when she concludes that ‘we all do’.
The lens through which sexuality and background influences
such as religion give rise to judgement becomes further
apparent in Jenna’s narrative:
I want the best for my learners, and that they live healthy and
responsible lives. I am a Christian, and it will always be important
for me to connect sexuality to that belief. It is very difficult in a
diverse classroom to discuss it (alternative sexualities), especially
in a conservative Afrikaans classroom if I think about where I
taught … it will offend the learners if I discuss how a homosexual
person can have a healthy orientation. I will prefer that learner ...
that learner must come talk to me afterwards … I want the best
for that learner, so sadly … I will teach a lesson based on
heterosexuality, the mainstream. I will need to receive training,
because it is … it is against … I will not want to advocate it. I
think there is a lot of turmoil … From my perspective something
happened which made you enter that orientation, like a passive
father figure or absent father. (Participant 3, female, Life
Orientation teacher within an urban context school)
http://www.td-sa.net

Original Research

Jenna displays a strong awareness of her religious background
and the manner in which it influences her teaching. Internal
conflict, however, emerged during her discourse in justifying
her beliefs and providing an acceptable answer or an answer
that will be acceptable to the research content, known as
demand characteristics (Stangor 2011). This may be because of
the researcher’s presence as an agent of change in her
dialogue. However, her discourse soon reverted to the
premise of an absent father figure to construct meaning about
sexual identity. It is, however, worth reflecting on her
judgement suspension during the viewing of Video 5 (a more
explicit portrayal of a gay man’s struggle in finding happiness
apart from mere promiscuity). Her focus begins with the
view of turmoil and non-acceptance. However, Jenna,
acknowledges the positive nuances of the video while
recognising her own discomfort:
What I saw was he had a lot of turmoil, his parents are also not
happy with him. He is looking for acceptance. We see at the end
that he is happy with the partner he chose, he cannot believe this
guy committed to him. It feels odd, that interaction [between the
two men]. I felt at one point to stop, but wanted to see how the
video plays out. (Participant 3, female, Life Orientation teacher
within an urban context school)

After viewing Video 2, depicting a satirical portrayal of a
heteronormative couple who fears that they will have to
divorce once gay marriages are legalised, the researcher
asked whether the video reflects truth. Jenna’s response was
‘drama queen based, not containing emotion’. The
characterisation of ‘drama queen’ is linked to the stereotype
of gay men who often make scenes (Dynes 2014), a stereotype
perpetuated by the traditional portrayal of homosexual men,
which, through examples such as Jenna’s narrative, echo the
stereotyped judgements placed on certain behavioural cues
to construct meaning at a very reactive level to the video.
Classifying behaviour within the video as such, the question
arises as to how such a classification would be received
within the Life Orientation classroom. Sandra’s response to
the messages of the video on a more critical level reflected a
deeper understanding of the problematic portrayal of the
heteronormative family. During the interview, she exhibited
a great deal of frustration in body language during her
narrative. When Sandra was questioned as to whether the
video intended to be humorous, she responded:
I don’t think it matters. Look at the message being sent. If I was
not as educated as I am, I would think it would be bad for all
people if gays were allowed to get married, which is not the case.
Why would that influence my marriage? Why would I hate my
kids? It’s ridiculous. Even if it is a joke, is the joke funny? No its
not, many a true word is spoken in jest. People make jokes about
things they don’t understand or don’t necessarily want to
understand, and why in today’s time and age where it is still a
struggle to get married if you are gay, or even to come out and
say I like men or I like women … why would you make something
like this? That can have such an immense effect on those people?
(Participant 2, female, Life Orientation teacher for 3 years)

While each of the narratives reflects distinct approaches to
how the teachers approach the teaching of sexuality in the
Open Access

Page 7 of 12

Life Orientation classroom, it becomes apparent that an
awareness of self and personal backgrounds interlink with
how the topic is taught at pedagogical level. Beyers (2013)
refers to the importance of challenging the teachers’ selfconcept to create a more valid approach to teaching sensitive
topics such as sexual diversity. Not only the awareness of the
self but also an intimate knowledge of the sociocultural
background against which topics are taught shape the
messages conveyed during teaching (Thomas 2006). As such,
teachers should approach topics with a firm awareness of
terms that carry biased and stereotyped labelling, as well as
an understanding as to how personal bias due to culture or
religion constructs these topics.

Theme 2: The limitations of the curriculum and
assessment policy statement and textbooks
The implementation of the CAPS statements for Life
Orientation saw the ideal to promote knowledge and skill
sets that will enable learners to adapt optimally within their
communities (Magano 2011). There is, however, critique as to
whether change is caused at practical levels pertaining to the
content taught according to the curriculum (Coetzee &
Esterhuizen 2010). In their analysis of CAPS-based textbooks,
Potgieter and Reygan (2012) found that, when the topic of
alternative sexualities is covered, the manner in which it is
approached is often stereotypical, marginalising nonconforming genders as separate from heteronormative
standards.
The following extracts reveal two of the teachers’ experiences
(Samantha and Sandra) with the CAPS documents pertaining
to the teaching of alternative sexualities when prompted
about how they use the resources to frame their teachings at
curriculum level:
The CAPS documents are very good at generalising and giving a
broad perspective, but it does not adequately cover what they
would need to get to the point of acceptance. It doesn’t branch
out to the different types of sexualities. Once again, to me it once
again says society is generalising and stereotyping one acceptable
sexuality. (Participant 4, female, Life Orientation teacher in a
rural context school)

Original Research

a topic. Samantha’s narrative reflects the manner in which
heteronormativity is advocated as the dominant content
base. In this instance, the participants felt that CAPS does not
provide a uniform or stable knowledge set that should be
taught regarding the appropriate characteristics of diverse
sexual categories. The emergence of topics pertaining to
sexual orientation and sexuality is thus based on normative
standards and, in turn, can further be stigmatised by the
teacher reverting to heteronormative messages in order to
accommodate topics that may arise (DePalma & Francis
2014a). Francis’s (2011) research indicates South Africa’s
dominant discourse of sex education as being based on
disease and safe-sex practices (reflecting the knowledge
component of cultural intelligence), an argument highlighted
by Samantha who explains that ‘it is always about sex before
marriage, sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), and that I
have a problem with’. While these issues are important
aspects of sex education, it becomes an issue when teachers
focus mainly on pathology in their teachings at the expense
of critically reflecting on aspects of holistic psychological,
emotional and physical well-being related thereto.
At this point, we would like to hypothesise the problematic
nature of addressing a curriculum that provides clear
guidelines for the educators in teaching alternative
sexualities. Samantha’s manner of addressing the topic
displays interaction in which the meaning is constructed, and
the learners form a guiding agent in how to approach the
topic. However, the teachers’ skill sets and pedagogical
methods of teaching lead such discussions. We question the
viability thereof to be done truthfully across schooling
contexts, as the bias of the teacher (viewed as an agent of
power in the classroom) can ultimately fill in the gaps of the
lesson’s content. On the other hand, a stringent curriculum
with guidelines as to different sexual orientations can become
problematic and will mean a uniform knowledge base for
contexts where cultural constructs thereof take on different
meanings. Jonathan highlights this when asked how he
experiences CAPS in terms of teaching sexuality:
CAPS is about three years old, its new, I think it is a curriculum
that can be developed more to be focused on Life Orientation.
Yes, CAPS is a nice practical curriculum. It’s not educator based,
it is discussion based, so it creates that space. At the moment it
creates the space for new ideas about sexuality and gender. But
one must … it creates the space where people will be identified,
labelled, but because we focus on other themes, we talk about
the healthy lifestyle … the themes are interrelated. You can
discuss these by using the constitution. (Participant 1, male, Life
Orientation teacher in a rural context school)

I think it (CAPS) is superficial. You cover it … you do it a lot,
instead of going deeper into the issues and what the learners are
experiencing, for example if they are gay … the judgement from
others, how they exert themselves in their communities. Instead
of talking about that, it is always about sex before marriage,
STDs, and that I have a problem with. I think it is all round still,
I don’t think that CAPS and being teachers go deep into the
subject matter. I actually leave a lot of space in my planning for
learning interaction. I will talk to them about it and will stop and
ask, what you want to know, what do you experience, let’s talk
about that. I cannot sit at home and think ‘maybe this is what
they experience’. I need to know, so then in the classroom we will
have a discussion about it. So then we will address it and talk
about it, so that they know I am on their side and that I want to
be there for them. (Participant 2, female, Life Orientation teacher
for 3 years)

It is thus essential to find a harmonious combination between
the educator’s teaching and the construction of knowledge
within an interactional space, enhancing a bias-free pedagogy
that will still be based within the guidelines for the educator
to follow. Consider Jenna’s narrative, as to how the topic can
be completely silenced during classroom interaction:

Both extracts reflect the participants’ opinions that the CAPS
are limited in scope as to guidelines pertaining to sexuality as

It [alternative sexuality] was never named. If the CAPS textbook
had it I would have covered it. I was taught in Life Orientation
didactics that one must be careful of pushing your values on

http://www.td-sa.net

Open Access

Page 8 of 12

the child. (Participant 3, female, Life Orientation teacher within
an urban context school)

The above narrative contrasts with Jenna’s discourse earlier
stipulating that her pedagogy will be linked to her Christian
beliefs. While her school context is Christian in itself, it is
broadly stated that all learners will share the denomination
of Christianity and, in turn, receive messages with equal
acceptance. It also becomes apparent that the ‘silence’ in the
textbooks about alternative sexualities provides an
opportunity not to touch on the topic. As Jenna explained
earlier, she will conduct the lesson according to the normative
standards of heterosexuality and would rather have learners
approach her individually with questions about alternative
non-conforming sexuality topics according to what she feels
is best. Would such freedom be of value to the ideals of
creating proactive learners, or does silence indicate an
acceptance of marginalising groups? In this way, the
emotional and psychological perceptions of learners can be
challenged through content in order to frame a less ignorant,
less biased, and more sensitised perspective on the issues of
judgement and homophobia.
Swanepoel and Beyers (2015) consider the manner in which
questions facilitate interaction in the classroom at both
educator-learner and textbook level (which is often riddled
with ambiguity about sexual categories, or normalises
sexuality within a heterosexual perspective and classification
of information). They draw on the importance of moving
away from reactive questions such as ‘Do you think
homosexuality is wrong?’ or ‘How do you feel about samesex marriage?’ to an approach that will allow the use
of cultural intelligence’s components of knowledge,
mindfulness and behaviour with less reactive judgement. For
example, ‘How has South Africa’s past influenced the way in
which we feel and act towards same-sex marriages?’ and:
Should you feel uncomfortable when meeting someone whose
sexual orientation you do not agree with, what can you do to
ensure that both you and the person feel respected during
interaction? (Swanepoel & Beyers 2015)

Original Research

the learner. So you became, the educator became … a facilitator.
He facilitates discussions around the theme and learners give
their views, but he won’t force his view whether it is indigenous
beliefs, whether it is sexual orientation, whether it is the view of
the church, families, you have the theme in front of you, you
present the outcomes … and you discuss and facilitate them.
(Participant 1, male, Life Orientation teacher in a rural context
school)

The importance of not enforcing personal background beliefs
on the learners forms an important aspect of Jonathan’s
discourse. This embodies the role of the modern Life
Orientation teacher who suspends judgement to facilitate
topics of value to a multicultural classroom context. This in
itself is a further cornerstone, as discussed earlier, to being a
culturally intelligent educator, in that one takes on an active
role as opposed to a reactive role that biases personal beliefs
in the teaching of alternative sexualities. Sandra’s reaction to
the next question that arose during the interview further
reflects the skill of suspended judgement, in that the teachers
acknowledge their limited knowledge about a topic and
gather information before responding. She further draws on
the component of mindfulness by referring to her own
emotional comfort with the context of the question. Sandra’s
answer reflects a high embodiment of cultural intelligence as
to when learners approach her regarding topics of sexuality
of which she is not knowledgeable or with which she feels
uncomfortable, for example her narrative as follows which
aligns with the findings of discomfort teachers experience in
Swanepoel and Beyers (2015) and Francis (2017):
Okay firstly I wouldn’t discuss it in the class as a group, and I would
honestly say to the learner give me a chance that I will come back to
you. Just to go and prepare, how should I approach this, what is the
right way to go about this. So that I will not be uncomfortable, but
also so that the learner is not uncomfortable either. So I will first go
and do my homework and come back to what you wanted to know,
lets discuss it. I have now talked to people and whatever, and now
know the right way to do it in the classroom. (Participant 2, female,
Life Orientation teacher for 3 years)

An important point raised by Jonathan’s narrative earlier
reflected that the role of the teacher has changed from that of
an educator to that of a creator of context within which
discussions are facilitated. He later draws on the transformed
role of the traditional Life Orientation teacher to the modern
facilitation role:

The theme of the active versus the reactive role of the teacher
emerged strongly in all four participants’ narratives. They
are all of the opinion that the role of the modern Life
Orientation teacher is facilitator-based, and that the learners
should form an active part in the construction of knowledge.
However, while Sandra and Jonathan’s narratives remained
constant throughout all four themes, Jenna and Samantha’s
narratives as a whole reflected discomfort about raising the
topic of alternative sexualities in the classroom. While Jenna
stipulated that it will not be consistent with her Christian
beliefs, Samantha was of the opinion that it will be difficult,
as her classroom consists of mostly Black students, while, as
a female teacher, she will be disrespected for raising a topic
that is against the learners’ background influences. It is
interesting to note that Jonathan, highlights this during his
interview in the following extract from his narrative:

There was a difference between guidance in the old days where
you had to sit and do and accept the educator’s view of topics,
repeat what was written in the books. LO was introduced, the
focus changed from the orientation of the educator to the view of

In terms of gender, sexuality specifically, some teachers don’t
want to talk about it, especially young teachers. They tend to
stay away from topics like sex because the teachers now are 21,
and some of the learners in grade 9 are 18, so the age difference

Such questions enable learners to incorporate nonjudgemental attitudes and construct knowledge and skills in
such a way as to facilitate a behavioural outcome that is
consistent with their own background as well as that of the
topic or person in question.

Theme 3: The active versus reactive role of the teacher

http://www.td-sa.net

Open Access

Page 9 of 12

plays a big role. It all depends on the emotional intelligence
and emotional development they received during the years.
(Participant 1, male, Life Orientation teacher in a rural context
school)

Original Research

TABLE 1: Frustration calculated by means of descriptive statistics.
Section

Mean

Minimum

Median

Maximum

1

60.05

12.31

67.92

92.06

2

70.11

38.75

74.22

93.25

3

68.43

44.22

66.49

96.54

4

55.74

46.70

53.98

68.32

5

67.52

50.69

70.37

78.65

6

57.91

50.46

57.99

65.21

7

68.94

46.54

70.23

88.74

8

70.04

35.45

77.97

88.74

All

64.84

12.31

65.02

96.54

1

43.12

15.85

42.63

71.35

2

54.37

37.01

47.70

85.07

3

43.29

27.56

43.67

58.23

4

45.61

35.45

41.64

63.74

5

45.80

23.65

46.43

66.70

All

46.44

15.85

43.04

85.07

1

58.58

9.27

65.74

93.56

2

56.10

46.17

54.84

68.56

3

54.89

45.43

50.58

72.97

4

61.96

49.31

52.03

94.48

All

57.88

9.27

53.28

94.48

1

67.47

30.44

69.73

100.00

2

57.70

6.16

62.32

100.00

3

57.61

28.77

55.77

90.13

4

57.61

12.48

67.81

82.32

5

42.89

6.85

43.83

77.05

6

44.03

7.58

45.80

77.00

7

50.83

19.29

53.52

76.99

All

54.02

6.16

55.45

100.00

1

79.21

60.35

81.02

94.46

2

47.31

36.11

44.59

63.93

3

49.81

37.05

49.89

62.41

4

51.10

46.63

51.42

54.94

Results and discussion of the
Emotiv electroencephalogram data: Frustration

5

46.12

36.87

47.03

53.54

6

48.56

26.10

39.72

88.68

7

36.67

26.56

36.27

47.59

Descriptive statistics calculated the mean, minimum, median
and maximum readings for each section in the video and for
all sections in total. To represent the descriptive results
comprehensively, box-plot figures are used to inform the
discussion of the results that show significant fluctuations in
the readings. The main fluctuations were found in Videos 1
and 5. While fluctuations in sections and videos, in general,
could be because of various external variables, the consistent
attention level across all participants strengthens the
reliability of the results (Table 1).

8

50.32

38.78

47.30

67.90

9

52.03

37.54

48.16

74.26

10

40.60

24.28

43.60

50.91

11

43.90

35.09

45.75

49.02

12

56.76

31.56

56.95

81.57

13

53.78

28.54

50.28

76.04

14

56.43

46.84

54.73

69.44

15

53.67

28.4

57.39

71.50

All

51.08

24.28

47.55

94.46

These findings are consistent with Swanepoel and Beyers’s
(2015) findings. They propose that the role of the teacher can
either be reactive or proactive, and accordingly the latter will
yield a more empathetic and judgement-free classroom context.
This is further aligned with the mindfulness component of
cultural intelligence in how behaviour is strongly mediated
through emotional influences. The figure is based on the manner
in which an educator perspective will inform the traditional
classroom context, whereas the culturally intelligent and
proactive classroom context will be based on a reciprocated way
of constructing knowledge. Jonathan’s narrative highlights the
important aspect of challenging teacher perceptions during
teacher induction to reflect a greater emotional awareness on
the basis of the self and the learners in the teaching of sexuality
education (Beyers 2013).
The importance of sensitising teachers to topics of sexuality,
especially regarding the emotional dissonance found with
frustration, becomes clear from the EEG data reported below,
namely that emotional reactions related to sexuality topics
influence bias and preconceived ideas about sexuality. The
data below will be discussed accordingly, with careful
consideration as to the role of sensitisation regarding the
topics on which the teachers reflect. Specific focus will be on
Videos 1 and 5 as a means to understand how viewing these
videos influences internal reactions.

Pooling the averages of all sections per video provides an
overview of all four participants’ frustration levels. Video
1 reflects the highest mean, with an average of 65% across
all sections, followed by Video 3 (58%), Video 4 (54%),
Video 5 (51%) and Video 2 (46%). It is interesting to note
the different results between Videos 1 and 5, with a
difference of 11%. Video 1 reflects the least amount of
content pertaining to alternative sexualities, with the only
reflection thereof being at sections 7 and 8, with the reveal
of the cameraman being male and the subsequent marriage
proposal. Video 5, however, contains frequent content
related to homosexuality, yet reveals the lowest range for
percentages across sections compared to Video 1. While
the build-up to the end reveal of Video 1 shows an increase
http://www.td-sa.net

Video
1

2

3

4

5

Source: Department of statistical analysis at the University of the Free State

in frustration (section 1, 60%; section 8, 80%), Video 5
shows a strong decline (section 1, 79%; section 15, 51%). A
possible explanation for this is the participants’
preconceived expectations, as reflected in the following
narratives when participants were asked about their
experiences with the videos. Because of the content of the
research study, preconceived judgement was already
formed regarding expectations. The narratives are
followed by the percentages of individual frustration in
sections 6, 7 and 8 (the final sections of Video 1).
Video 1:
When the ring opened I knew there will be more. (Jonathan’s
frustration level increased greatly from the previous section,
59%, to sections 7 and 8, 89%) (Jonathan).

Open Access

Page 10 of 12

I expected the ending, because I am here for what I am here for.
(Sandra’s frustration level decreased greatly from the previous
section, 57%, to sections 7, 47% and 8, 35%) (Sandra).
When I saw it was a male, I thought okay ... I would have
wanted it to be a girl. (Jenna’s frustration levels increased
greatly from the previous section, 50%, to sections 7, 76% and 8,
80%) (Jenna).

From the above narratives from Video 1, it becomes apparent
that when expectations are met with preconceived
judgements, there is a significant decrease in frustration (as
with Sandra). However, when expectations are challenged,
frustration levels increase, as with Jonathan’s and Jenna’s
individual results. Video 1 enables the participants to form
judgements and further expectations as the video progresses.
For this reason, Video 5 starts with content that challenges
expectations immediately in section 1 that follows through to
the end of the video. The following are extracts from
participants’ narratives when asked about their experiences
with Video 5.
Video 5:
That was amazing. It is the ultimate search for identity … and
finding yourself. (Significant decline in frustration from section
1, 60%, to section 15, 28%) (Samantha).
Joh, very graphic. It is the first time I see a video of two men
being in love. In some scenes I felt awkward seeing two men
being together, but as they expressed love, it felt normal again.
(Significant decline in frustration from section 1, 94%, to section
15, 49%) (Jonathan).
It feels odd, that interaction [between the two men]. I felt at one
point to stop, but wanted to see how the video plays out. (Decline
in frustration from section 1, 87%, to section 15, 72%) (Jenna).

Results for each participant reflect the highest percentage of
frustration at the start of the video (Jenna, 83%; Samantha,
60%; Jonathan, 94%; Sandra, 75%) and show a significant
decline in frustration, regardless of the explicit content in the
subsequent sections. It ends with frustration levels of lower
percentages (Jenna, 72%; Samantha, 28%; Jonathan, 49%;
Sandra, 65%). It is interesting to note how frustration levels
dropped significantly, on average, after section 1 and
remained consistently low throughout the remainder of the
video. It appears that sensitisation to the content of the videos
significantly decreases frustration levels, while results further
suggest that frustration levels decrease consistently after a
preconceived judgement or expectation is challenged. With
reference to Videos 1 and 5, it can be deduced that expectations
of the participants led to increased frustration until these
expectations were either met or broken, whereas frustration
as a whole decreased when there was no time to strengthen
expectations or judgements during the showing of the video.
In challenging the preconceived expectations of the
participants, the results are indicative of Beyers’s (2013)
notion that the predetermined ideas about teachers’ sexuality
must be challenged to form a more truthful basis for
the teaching thereof, thus decreasing the preconceived
judgements during initial teacher induction. This further
http://www.td-sa.net

Original Research

reflects on cultural intelligence in how mindfulness mediates
knowledge and how emotions underpin the type of
knowledge that manifests during behavioural (and thus
teaching) output. The results across the videos suggest that it
is viable to introduce such material in stages in order to
challenge internal bias and personal background knowledge
of alternative sexualities.
At classroom level, however, the teachers acknowledged that
Video 5 could not be used due to its explicit content, whereas
Videos 1 to 4 would add significant value to challenging the
learners towards more truthful knowledge about alternative
sexualities and the implications of homophobia and sexism.
Jenna, however, remained consistent in her narrative that the
videos will not be informative to her learners, as they will
reject the messages that will cause significant problems with
parents if shown. Jenna’s post-narratives touched mainly on
the general aspects of the videos, where high frustration level
sections were skipped during her narrative of the videos. A
decrease in frustration ultimately led to a more open narrative
among the other participants to speak about the contents of
the videos.
In general, participants’ narratives reflected consistency with
their EEG readings. The results of the participants’ decreased
frustration across videos also show consistency with their
understanding of how sexuality teaching (and personal
teacher dispositions) should be approached during classroom
practice and teacher induction in order for messages to be
received systematically and to ensure that messages are not
rejected outright. After viewing Video 4, Jonathan responded
that this would be a good video to show after a lesson, as it
would allow the learners to be further challenged by their
preconceived ideas about gender stereotypes. He further
elaborated that lessons will differ, in the manner in which
they are taught, from grade 10 to grade 12, as grade 12 will be
a better level to focus on emotions, whereas a knowledge
base of alternative sexualities can be systematically built up
from earlier grades (specifically grade 8). Samantha’s
narrative also reflects this (as the extract below shows), while
elaborating on the influence of preconceived knowledge
about alternative sexualities within the classroom among
learners:
Being a new teacher I went too fast. This year I am slowing it
(teaching) down to ease them into it. But they do reject the idea,
it is in total conflict, you can see them denying it, rejecting it. You
have to take it slowly to get them to think outside their traditional
box. (Participant 4, female, Life Orientation teacher in a rural
context school)

The conflicting messages shown in the videos and the
teachers’ beliefs are highly indicative of how exposure to
content sensitises the perceptions thereof. Internal beliefs
about alternative sexualities were met with frustration when
inconsistent with the expectations of the participants, while
subsequent exposure decreased these emotional levels, as was
the case with Jonathan, Samantha and Sandra. Jenna rejected
the messages on the basis of her beliefs shared during the preinterview (as discussed in the section on qualitative results).
Open Access

Page 11 of 12

Original Research

The manner in which discomfort and frustration manifest
within teacher pedagogies are further reflected upon by
Reygan and Francis (2015) and Francis (2016) in how teachers’
emotional underpinnings often dictate teachings, and how
negative emotions lead to socially unjust messages or
complete silence during sexuality education. The remaining
participants accommodated messages and, while experiencing
initial dissonance, allowed the messages to be evaluated with
better awareness. These findings are in line with research on
cognitive dissonance in challenging previously held beliefs
with incoming information (Baumeister & Bushman 2011;
Taylor, Peplau & Sears 2006). Accordingly, the results indicate
an understanding among participants that learners must be
sensitised by incoming messages in order to accommodate
new information against their background influences that
cause interference with contradictory knowledge about
alternative sexualities.

and behaviour, the active teaching of sexuality in Life
Orientation classes can provide a platform where preconceived
ideas are challenged, judgement is suspended, emotions are
explored and ultimately behavioural change can be facilitated.

Recommendations

Authors’ contributions

As part of an ongoing need to establish research within
the emotional underpinning of sexuality education, we
recommend that critical consciousness and self-reflective
practices of teachers become central during teacher induction
and life skills didactics. This is especially important in
sensitising future teachers to sensitive content such as sex and
sexuality as a means to promote comfort during the teaching
of sexuality education. It is further important to establish more
spaces, such as workshops, where teachers can communicate
openly and acquire knowledge about cultural diversity and
sexual inclusivity, specifically related to the experiences of
colleagues at different schools and with different challenges.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the National Research Foundation
(NRF) for the support in conjunction with this study
(Competitive Programme for Rated Researchers, grant
number CPRR13082330440).

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no financial or personal
relationships which may have inappropriately influenced
them in writing this article.

A study completed by E.S. for his master’s degree with his
supervisor, C.B. and co-supervisor L.d.W. The area of
expertise included by C.B. is sexuality education and Life
Orientation, and L.d.W. is the expert on the use of the EEG for
the empirical part of the study.

References
Allen, K., 2013, Emotions and cognitive dissonance: Your supreme divine guidance,
viewed 2015, from http://www.collective-evolution.com/2013/02/05/emotionsand-cognitive-dissonance-theory-your-supreme-divine-guidance/
Applebaum, B., 2013, ‘Ignorance as a resource for social justice education?’,
Philosophy of Education Archive 391–399, viewed 17 May 2017, from https://
www.bing.com/search?q=ignorance+as+a+resource+for+social+justice+educat
ion%3F&form=EDGEAR&qs=PF&cvid=77f999165eb645a191cd3056d471afd1&
cc=ZA&setlang=en-US
Baxen, J., 2006, ‘An analysis of the factors shaping teachers’ understanding of HIV and
AIDS’, doctoral thesis, University of Cape Town, Cape Town.

Conclusion
The teaching of sexuality within a multicultural environment
is met with various challenges. While teachers are limited in
their knowledge about the background influences that shape
incoming messages for learners, their personal beliefs shape
these messages. This paper focused on how teachers mediate
personal bias in teaching about alternative sexualities, with
specific emphasis on teacher bias manifesting during
teachings. By examining how knowledge is constructed in
the teaching thereof, further examination of internal bias was
informed by measuring frustration and by post-interviews in
order to understand how teachers accommodate the
experienced dissonance. Frustration, as a measured item in
the composition of teacher emotions, was used to show the
extent of teacher responses to dissonant experiences.
The results thus suggest that cultural intelligence is a
valuable framework to use for the teaching of sexuality in the
South African context. While considering the reactive nature
of sensitive topics such as alternative sexualities, the paper
details that the active role of teachers with an awareness of
their emotional bias and preconceived ideas will align more
valid teaching methods in order to give learners the space
within which to form their sexual identities. By taking into
account the three components of knowledge, mindfulness
http://www.td-sa.net

Baumeister, R.F. & Bushman, B.J., 2011, Social psychology and the human nature,
Wadsworth, Belmont, CA.
Beyers, C., 2013, ‘In search of healthy sexuality: The gap between what youth want
and what teachers think they need’, The Journal for Transdisciplinary Research in
Southern Africa: Special Edition: Sustainable Learning Environments and Social
Justice 9(3), 550–560. https://doi.org/10.4102/td.v9i3.197
Blanche, M.J.T., Blanche, M.T., Durrheim, K. & Painter, D. (eds.), 2011, Research in
practice: Applied methods for the social sciences, Juta, Cape Town.
Brislin, R., Worthley, R. & MacNab, B., 2006, ‘Cultural intelligence: Understanding
behaviours that serve people’s goals’, Group and Organization Management
31(1), 40–55. https://doi.org/10.1177/1059601105275262
Brown, K.W. & Ryan, R.M., 2003, ‘The benefits of being present: Mindfulness and its
role in psychological well-being’, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
84(4), 822–848. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.84.4.822
Butler, A.H. & Astbury, G., 2008, ‘The use of defence mechanisms as precursors to
coming out in post-apartheid South Africa: A gay and lesbian youth perspective’,
Journal of Homosexuality 55(2), 223–244.
Coetzee, M. & Esterhuizen, K., 2010, ‘Psychological career resources and coping
resources of the young unemployed African graduate: An exploratory study’,
South African Journal of Industrial Psychology 36(1), 1–9. https://doi.org/10.4102/
sajip.v36i1.868
Collier, K.L., Bos, H.M., Merry, M.S. & Sandfort, T.G., 2013, ‘Gender, ethnicity,
religiosity, and same-sex sexual attraction and the acceptance of same-sex
sexuality and gender non-conformity’, Sex Roles 68(11–12), 724–737. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11199-012-0135-5
Crespi, I., 2004, ‘Socialization and gender roles within the family: A study on
adolescents and their parents in Great Britain’, MCFA Annals 3, 1–8.
Davids, M., 2014, ‘Using Foucauldian “discursive practices” as conceptual framework
for the study of teachers’ discourses of HIV and sexuality’, Perspectives in
Education 32(3), 35–48.
DePalma, R. & Francis, D.A., 2014a, ‘Silence, nostalgia, violence, and poverty …: What
does “culture” mean for South African sexuality educators?’, Culture, Health and
Sexuality: An International Journal for Research, Intervention and Care 16(5),
547–561. https://doi.org/10.1080/13691058.2014.891050

Open Access

Page 12 of 12

Original Research

DePalma, R. & Francis, D.A., 2014b, ‘The gendered nature of South African teachers’
discourse on sex education’, Health Education Research 129(4), 624–632. https://
doi.org/10.1093/her/cyt117

Perkins, R.M., 2012, ‘The multicultural awareness, knowledge, skills and attitudes of
prospective teachers: A quantitative and heuristic phenomenological study’,
doctoral dissertation, University of Missouri, Kansas City.

Department of Basic Education, 2013, Curriculum and assessment policy statement
grades 7–9: Life orientation, Government Printers, Pretoria.
Dynes, W., 2014, The homophobic mind, Lulu.com Publishers, Fairford, United Kingdom.

Potgieter, C. & Reygan, F.C., 2012, ‘Lesbian, gay and bisexual citizenship: A case study
as represented in a sample of South African Life Orientation textbooks’,
Perspectives in Education: Rethinking Citizenship and Social Justice in Education:
Special Issue 30(4), 39–51.

Emotiv, n.d., EMOTIV Epoc - 14 channel wireless EEG headset, viewed 17 May 2017,
from https://www.emotiv.com/epoc/

Reddy, V., 2010, ‘Identity, law, justice. Thinking about sexual rights and citizenship in
post-apartheid South Africa’, Perspectives 4(10), 18–23.

Formby, E., 2011, ‘Sex and relationships education, sexual health, and lesbian, gay and
bisexual cultures: Views from young people’, Sex Education 11(3), 255–266.
https://doi.org/10.1080/14681811.2011.590078

Reygan, F. & Francis, D., 2015, ‘Emotions and pedagogies of discomfort: Teachers’
responses to sexual and gender diversity in the Free State, South Africa’, Education
as Change 19(1), 101–119. https://doi.org/10.1080/16823206.2014.943259

Francis, D., 2016. ‘I felt confused; I felt uncomfortable… my hair stood on ends’:
Understanding how teachers negotiate comfort zones, learning edges and
triggers in the teaching of sexuality education in South Africa’, in V. Sundaram &
H. Sauntson (eds.), Global perspectives and key debates in sex and relationships
education: Addressing issues of gender, sexuality, plurality and power, pp. 130–
145, Palgrave Macmillan, Johannesburg, South Africa.

Richardson, E., 2009, ‘Considering the lives of lesbian, gay and bisexual youth in HIV
and AIDS education efforts’, in C. Mitchell & K. Pithouse (eds.), Teaching and HIV
and AIDS in the South African education classroom, pp. 15–176, Macmillan,
Johannesburg.

Francis, D., 2017. Troubling the teaching and learning of gender and sexuality in South
African education, Palgraph Macmillon, New York.

Shefer, T. & Ngabaza, S., 2015, ‘And I have been told that there is nothing fun about
having sex while you are still in high school: Dominant discourses on women’s
sexual practices and desires in Life Orientation programmes at school’,
Perspectives in Education 33(2), 63–76.

Francis, D.A., 2011, ‘Wedged within a triad of contradictory values: Sexuality education
in South Africa’, African Journal of Psychology 21(2), 319–328.
Habarth, J.M., 2008, ‘Thinking “Straight”: Heternormativity and associated outcomes
across sexual orientation’, doctoral thesis, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.
Hammett, D. & Staeheli, L., 2011, ‘Respect and responsibility: Teaching citizenship in
South African high schools’, International Journal of Education Development 32,
269–276. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijedudev.2010.06.011

Shefer, T. & Macleod, C., 2015, ‘Life Orientation sexuality education in South Africa:
Gendered norms, justice and transformation’, Perspectives in Education 33(2), 1–10.

Sigamoney, V. & Epprecht, M., 2013, ‘Meanings of homosexuality, same-sex sexuality,
and Africanness in two South African townships: An evidence-based approach for
rethinking same-sex prejudice’, African Studies Review 56(2), 83–107. https://doi.
org/10.1017/asr.2013.43
Stangor, C., 2011, Research methods for the behavioral sciences, Cengage Learning,
Belmont, CA.

Harrison, T., 2013, ‘The Emotiv mind: Investigating the accuracy of the EmotivEpoc in
identifying emotions and its use in an Intelligent Tutoring System’, Honours
report, University of Canterbury.

Swanepoel, E. & Beyers, C., 2015, ‘From personal sexuality bias to the life orientation
classroom: Bridging the gap with cultural intelligence’, Journal of Psychology in
Africa 25(2), 164–169.

Hülsheger, U.R., Alberts, H.J., Feinholdt, A. & Lang, J.W., 2013, ‘Benefits of mindfulness
at work: The role of mindfulness in emotion regulation, emotional exhaustion,
and job satisfaction’, Journal of Applied Psychology 98(2), 310–325. https://doi.
org/10.1037/a0031313

Taylor, S.E., Peplau, L.A. & Sears, D.O., 2006, Social psychology, Pearson Publisher,
Upper Saddle River, NJ.

Iverson, S.V., 2012, ‘Multicultural competence for doing social justice: Expanding our
awareness, knowledge, and skills’, Journal of Critical Thought and Praxis 1(1),
62–87.

Thomas, D.C., 2006, ‘Domain and development of cultural intelligence: The
importance of mindfulness’, Group and Organization Management 31(1), 78–99.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1059601105275266

Magano, M.D., 2011, ‘The new kind of a teacher, to handle the new subject Life
Orientation, in a township high school in South Africa’, Journal of Social Sciences
28(2), 119–127.

Tesch, R., 1992, Qualitative research: Analysis types and software tools, Falmer Press,
Hampshire.

Van den Berg, R., 2008, ‘Cultural intelligence: A comparison between managers in South
Africa and the Netherlands’, master’s dissertation, University of Pretoria, Pretoria.

Meier, C. & Hartell, C., 2009, ‘Handling cultural diversity in education in South Africa’,
South Africa Educational Journal 6(2), 180–192.

Vassallo, B., 2012, ‘Am I culturally competent? A study on multicultural teaching
competencies among school teachers in Malta’, The Journal of Multiculturalism in
Education 8, 1–31.

Morrell, R., Bhana, D. & Shefer, T. (eds.), 2012, Books and/or babies: Pregnancy and
young parents in school, HSRC Press, Cape Town.

Zier, B.J., 2012, ‘SSVEP-based brain computer interface using the Emotiv EPOC’,
master’s dissertation, Eastern Washington University.

http://www.td-sa.net

Open Access

