Review

Vital Sign Monitoring in Car Seats Based
on Electrocardiography, Ballistocardiography
and Seismocardiography: A Review
Michaela Sidikova 1,*, Radek Martinek 1,*, Aleksandra Kawala-Sterniuk 2, Martina Ladrova 1,
Rene Jaros 1, Lukas Danys 1 and Petr Simonik 1
Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, VSB-Technical University of Ostrava,
17 Listopadu 15, 70800 Ostrava, Czech Republic; martina.ladrova@vsb.cz (M.L.); rene.jaros@vsb.cz (R.J.);
lukas.danys@vsb.cz (L.D.); petr.simonik@vsb.cz (P.S.)
2 Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Automatic Control and Informatics, Opole University of Technology,
Proszkowska 76, 45-758 Opole, Poland; a.kawala-sterniuk@po.edu.pl
* Correspondence: michaela.sidikova@vsb.cz (M.S.); radek.martinek@vsb.cz (R.M.)
1

Received: 21 August 2020; Accepted: 30 September 2020; Published: 6 October 2020

Abstract: This paper focuses on a thorough summary of vital function measuring methods in
vehicles. The focus of this paper is to summarize and compare already existing methods integrated
into car seats with the implementation of inter alia capacitive electrocardiogram (cECG), mechanical
motion analysis Ballistocardiography (BCG) and Seismocardiography (SCG). In addition, a
comprehensive overview of other methods of vital sign monitoring, such as camera-based systems
or steering wheel sensors, is also presented in this article. Furthermore, this work contains a very
thorough background study on advanced signal processing methods and their potential application
for the purpose of vital sign monitoring in cars, which is prone to various disturbances and artifacts
occurrence that have to be eliminated.
Keywords: vital sign monitoring; sensors; car seats; electrocardiography; ballistocardiography;
seismocardiography; electroencephalography; signal processing

1. Introduction
In the future, the majority of vehicles will probably be fully autonomous, so the driver will play
a less significant role than today. The transition to autonomous vehicles is an ongoing process, and
the era of fully autonomous vehicles is slowly approaching. Until then, it will be necessary to
continuously monitor and warn drivers, who have to stay alert, no matter the situation on the road
[1–5]. Even a short diversion caused by a reflection in the rear-view mirror can affect the whole
journey and lead to major accidents [5,6]. Long journeys also lead to fatigue; therefore, it can be very
challenging to keep constant attention on the road [7,8]. As living standards increase, so does the
number of vehicles and thus the density of traffic and the number of traffic accidents [9,10].
Numerous researchers are currently working on various driver response systems, which can measure
various life functions of the driver in order to monitor his/her alertness [2,6–8,11–16]. These systems
mainly detect fatigue, stress and the driver’s health condition. Figures 1 and 2 represent the statistics
from Czech roads. In Figure 1, you can see the increasing number of drivers who died due to healthrelated conditions in comparison to the total number of people that died on roads (according to the
statistics of the Police of the Czech Republic). In addition, Figure 2 shows the most common diseases
that have a major impact on mortality on Czech roads.

Sensors 2020, 20, 5699; doi:10.3390/s20195699

www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors

Sensors 2020, 20, 5699

2 of 29

Figure 1. Number of drivers who died while driving due to health reasons, according to statistics
from the Police of the Czech Republic.

Figure 2. The incidence of diseases having a major impact.

To design a proper countermeasure, it is necessary to monitor and recognize the approaching
critical moment when the driver loses the attention or even total control of the vehicle. These critical
situations can be predicted by various bodily responses such as faster eye movement and blinking,
electrocardiogram changes, specific facial expressions and muscles movements, certain muscle
activities, hand vibrations, fluctuations of blood pressure, increase in heart rate, changes in skin
conductivity resistance, respiratory rate or brain activity, alcohol levels in blood, changes in sugar
level and oxygen in blood or also by sudden changes in skin temperature. Existing systems cannot
predict these states, as they are only capable of detecting the current state. A partially or fully
automated system that can respond to the previously mentioned conditions offers a significantly
faster response time and can save human lives, especially when connected to the various autonomous
vehicular systems.

Sensors 2020, 20, 5699

3 of 29

One way to divide sensors used to monitor the driver’s condition is to specify their deployed
location. To ensure ongoing operation, the driver has to be connected and monitored either directly
(through contact) or by cameras and other wireless sensors (contactless). Each approach has different
advantages and disadvantages. Contact sensors tend to cause slight or major discomfort to the driver,
as they require their direct placement on body/skin. Based on their construction, these sensors can
also interfere with the driver’s actions. From the practical perspective, contact monitoring systems,
such as cables or probes, are not appropriate, mainly due to the driver’s discomfort. However, in
certain critical situations, they can offer more reliable data than contactless variants. On the other side
stands various contactless technologies. These technologies do not interfere with the driver, can
operate completely independently and are not limited by bodily proportions. Table 1 presents a
summary of sensors with their division into the sensors that has to be attached to the driver’s body
and others mounted as a part of the vehicle.
Table 1. Sensor’s distribution.

Non-Attached Sensor
eye movement monitoring sensors
head movement monitoring sensors
mouth movement monitoring sensors
vigilance monitoring system based on the
driver’s behavior
accelerometer
capacitive electrodes
infrared sensors
ultrasonic sensors
Harken sensor
optical sensors

Attached Sensor
helmet
electrocardiographic (ECG) electrodes
galvanic skin response sensing monitor
(Electrodermal Activity)
respiration belt
pulse sensors

The implementation of car-mounted sensor is nowadays still a very challenging task due to the
occurrence of numerous interfering artifacts, which are mainly caused by the driving itself. This
artifact has to be eliminated or at least partially compensated.
This paper will mainly focus on detailed analysis of various sensors mounted into car seats,
which despite significance of this topic, have not been discussed in depth. In addition, it also includes
a detailed overview of the most recent and the most popular methods for vital sign monitoring in
vehicles (e.g., camera systems, sensors in the steering wheel). Furthermore, a summary of various
disturbances occurring during monitoring via a car seat and an overview of methods for disturbance
elimination are presented and thoroughly described.
Background Study on Vital Sign Monitoring Systems
The ongoing demographic change and slowly increasing life expectancy will lead to an
increasing number of older car drivers [1,5,17,18]. That is a reason for the necessity of medical support
in the automotive industry, which is expected to attract further attention from insurance companies,
healthcare providers or emergency services. Advanced health monitoring systems in vehicles are,
therefore, basically a necessary addition and are expected to attract further attention from insurance
companies, healthcare providers or emergency services. These systems can basically react in two
ways. The first one is a system which would estimate the driver’s capabilities and detect acute health
problems. A set of complex medical sensors could detect a critical condition and initiate appropriate
countermeasures, ranging from adjustments to driving (e.g., secure autopilot) to emergency services
(e.g., a direct call to the hospital). The second application is based around sensory systems which
monitor and regularly acquire the driver´s vital signs to initiate split-second automatized decisions.
In addition, such system could be used in a broader context as part of a home health monitoring
system, further expanding coverage and connectivity.

Sensors 2020, 20, 5699

4 of 29

Four primary vital signs are nowadays used for bedside monitoring and assessment of patient´s
status: heart rate (HR), respiratory rate (RR), blood pressure (BP) and body temperature (BP) [19–24].
These methods usually require close physical interaction with the examined patient (cables,
electrodes, cuffs, etc.), which makes them suitable for clinical environments but limits their
deployment to non-hospital applications [19,22]. In addition, in automotive applications, there are
significant motion artifacts caused by sudden acceleration/deceleration as they cause sudden changes
in the distance change between one (or both) electrode surface and the body. This problem still
remains and is difficult to solve [1,25,26].
The development of technology for unobtrusive and non-contact vital sign monitoring has
brought a large amount of attention in recent years [22–24,27]. Active driver status monitoring has
been a major research topic for a long time, as it has a significant impact on road safety and accident
statistics. Various physiological sensors based on electrocardiogram (ECG) and
electroencephalogram (EEG) are nowadays frequently used in numerous studies [28,29].
For example, M. Walter et al. [11] used an alternative approach, placed the ECG electrodes on
the human back and tried to systematically optimize the electrolytic effect of said electrodes on the
human back. In addition, various electrode deployment positions and combinations were studied as
well. The amplitude of the QRS complex was measured, since it is used as a sensitivity indicator. The
measured results clearly confirmed that the angled electrode arrangement reached a significantly
higher sensitivity in comparison to the horizontal positioning. In fact, this outcome is not very
surprising since the typical electrical heart axis for the QRS complex can range from −30 ° to +90 °
(with respect to the horizontal axis when measured frontally on the chest). Typical values are between
30 ° and 60 °, corresponding to the obtained measurements.
For many years, scientists have focused on detection of stress, drowsiness, etc. [30–32]. These
methods mainly employ video cameras and conventional imaging technologies, relying often on eye
blinking frequency or the percentage of closed eyelids. [31,33,34].
The level of drowsiness can be also monitored by the heart rate variability (HRV) parameter,
reflecting the everchanging balance between sympathetic and parasympathetic activity [35]. Slower
HRV rhythms (LF) are a sign of increased sympathetic or lower vagal activity, thus pointing to the
driver´s alertness, while faster HRV rhythms (HF) are a sign of lower sympathetic or increased
parasympathetic and vagal activity indicating weariness and sleep [36]. It is important to mention
the work of E. Michail et al. [37], which demonstrated that power spectral analysis of the driver’s
heart rate can report and thus also predict driving errors caused by sleepiness. Both ECG and EEG
data were obtained from subjects deprived of sleep who were exposed to off-road driving conditions.
Lower ratio of low-frequency and high-frequency components (LF/HF) and lower LF values were
reported when driving errors occurred.
Currently, there are multiple sensors located on various locations (e.g., in the steering
wheel [1,38–40] or sensors which focus on the eyes in order to monitor drivers’ activity [3,4,17,41].
One such system which was integrated into a car seat was developed by researchers from the
Nottingham Trent University in UK. It provides driver drowsiness detection with immediate sound
alert response [12,13]. Sensors used to monitor vital signs in a car are used for both safety and
efficiency purposes, albeit their location may differ depending on the specific project [1,11,13].
A fabric-based sensor system integrated inside the car seat could detect fluctuations in measured
data (the driver´s focus and alertness) and advise the driver to immediately stop driving. If the driver
ignores the signals, the system will activate cruise control or lane departure technology in order to
prevent road accidents. The system can even send information to the remote-control center via a
wireless network to take further actions.
For this study purpose, three measurement methods of vital signs contactless monitoring were
investigated. In particular, the authors focused on capacitive ECG (cECG) monitoring, mechanical
motion analysis (BCG—ballistocardiography) with the application of piezo-foils and inductive
impedance monitoring. Further investigation was carried out for the purpose of their future
integration into car seats. It is important to mention that all the three sensor techniques are not

Sensors 2020, 20, 5699

5 of 29

dependent on electrically conductive contact with the human body (driver) but require defined
mechanical boundary conditions (stable distances, or in the case of BCG, a friction connection).
Unfortunately, deployment of car seats as a source for vital sign monitoring is not a widespread
topic. Therefore, any additional research of this interesting topic may play a very important role for
both professional and ordinary drivers, as the security on roads is becoming an increasingly relevant
topic [1–4]. Therefore, modified car seats, capable of measuring and monitoring the vital signs of the
driver, could be an integral part of every car and would definitely improve safety and reaction time
during critical scenarios [4,41,42].
Because built-in wireless sensors are a very important part of computer networks, the
technologies inside the car can help improve safety monitoring as well as health [42]. Leonhardt et
al. [1] reported in detail in his study physical principles and specific boundary conditions related to
the automotive vehicle integration.
A very widespread topic is the integration of wireless signal transmission modules into vehicles
and peripherals. Modern wireless modules integrated in car seats can offer a great advantage over
conventional cable connections, as many modern vehicle seats face problems due to limited cable
routing space. When the previously discussed non-contact monitoring of cardiac function is used, the
passenger’s cECG and BCG signal can be measured simultaneously. Due to various artifacts caused
by a moving vehicle, the BCG signal can be only identified and used when the vehicle is stationary
and idling. Therefore, its necessary to employ advanced signal processing methods to filter the
effective signal. The ECG signal, which is measured by insulated electrodes on the backrest of the car
seat, remains stable for about 250 s and could be detected in a stationary position with varying speed.
The baseline shift that was recorded during the first 250 s could be the result of a change in contact
impedance due to a change in moisture in the garment. Another reason may lie in the varying
distance between the body and the electrode surface, which decreases due to the time-dependent
compression of the fabric layer. In non-contact biopotential scanning, signal quality depends on
clothing thickness and pressure, and can affect the data in a negative way [25,43].
2. Overview of Already Existing Methods
Technology related to medicine has improved significantly over the past few generations,
particularly in recent years. The development of various modern systems and methods became more
advanced and less invasive at the same time. For example, the most advanced methods of vital sign
monitoring include contactless respiration and heartbeat monitoring, which is a very interesting
alternative to chest-strap monitors [44]. Another modern method is Doppler radar, which is also noninvasive [44,45].
This section presents the thorough overview of the most popular current vital sign monitoring
methods, summarized in Table 2.
Table 2. Overview of the most recent sensor-based methods.
Location/Type of
Sensor
car seats
steering wheel
front camera

Principle






back camera

helmet






monitoring of vital signs, such as cECG, BCG, seismocardiography (SCG) or all
at once;
cECG or pulse wave monitoring via conductive systems;
monitoring of the driver’s face and evaluation of signs of fatigue, such as
frequent blinking, eyes closing or head dropping;
monitoring of horizontal and vertical traffic signs, detection of lane deviations
and traffic restrictions;
in cooperation with the front camera, tracing the driver’s view and determines
whether he has registered the vertical traffic sign with the view;
detection of time of collision with an obstacle in front of the vehicle;
included in a test phase;
monitoring of the driver’s condition through the EEG.

Sensors 2020, 20, 5699

6 of 29

2.1. Car Seat Systems
Vital sign monitoring systems implemented into car seats are usually based on monitoring of
cECG, BCG and SCG signals. The steering wheel (conductive part), backrest (capacitive part) and seat
(capacitive part) are used as contact points of the electrodes in vehicles (see Figure 3). The grounding
electrode is used to reduce common leads.

Figure 3. Location of sensors in the car seat and their signals.

2.1.1. cECG Electrodes
Since ECG measurement is nowadays used in clinical practice as a “gold standard” for
measuring heart activity, many studies dealt with its implementation into vehicles. The ECG signal
represents an electrical activity of heart cells during the heart cycle. It means that the ECG waveform
is characterized by several significant points (see Figure 3): P wave representing the depolarization
of the atria; the QRS complex as the result of depolarization of the ventricles; and the T wave,
resulting from the repolarization of the ventricles. For ECG measurement purposes, different types
of electrodes can be used, connected to the certain place of scanning. The capture points for
monitoring ECG in cars together with the type of used electrodes are summarized in Table 3. As this
section focuses on the sensors integrated into car seats, cECG monitoring methods are described
further below. Table 3 summarizes the capture points for monitoring ECG from the designated sites.
Table 3. Summary of the sensing points and the electrodes type used.

Place of Scanning
driving-wheel
conductive driving-wheel
armchair and bed
office chair
car seat
breast belt
car seats via bluetooth

Electrode Type
dry and conductive fabric electrode
capacitive electrode
capacitive electrode
grounding and reference electrode
capacitive electrode
conductive electrode
circular capacitive electrode

The first implementations of cECG into others objects was presented by Park et al. [46]. They
presented the successful integration of cECG electrodes into a chair. Authors compared the results of
cECG with standard ECG measured by Ag-AgCl electrodes fixed directly to the subject body. Later
Lim et al. [47] and Wu and Zhang [48] reported the integration of dry and cECG electrodes into beds.
The experiments showed the dependence of the measurement accuracy on the position of the
measured subject and the type of his clothing. Furthermore, the measurement appears to be
significantly affected by motion artifacts. In 2006, the real application of cECG electrodes was
introduced for the first time [49,50]; in their studies, researchers described the so-called Aachen Smart

Sensors 2020, 20, 5699

7 of 29

Chair. This chair is a modified office chair in which two solid copper plate electrodes are built. These
electrodes are integrated into the backrest.
The integrated backrest electrodes were coated in a protective black acrylic paint for pure
capacitive bonding. A similar design was proposed in [47].
Chamadiya et al. [26] introduced a concept of textile capacitive electrodes integrated into the
conventional Mercedes seat. The electrodes were placed horizontally and laterally due to the limiting
space. Unfortunately, lateral electrode placement was inadequate and resulted in reduced contact
with the body and consequently also lower coverage.
Eilebrecht et al. [51] integrated a structure in which the multi-electrode design is located in the
rear of the seat. The presented specific arrangement had a significant advantage—from among the
different electrode pairs, the strongest signal could be freely selected. The system was, therefore, able
to adapt to different heart axes as well as to the variable torso proportions.
In 2012, Schneider et al. [49] developed a custom framework capable of vital signs measuring
inside vehicles. The system consists of two textile electrodes positioned horizontally in the lumbar
region of the back and an electrode powered by a seat right above the two active sensing electrodes.
The design was thoroughly tested and implemented in the Audi testing vehicle.
Jung et al. [52] introduced another monitoring system, which also deals with cECG. This system
has two horizontal electrodes that are integrated into the car. The researchers placed the active
measuring electrodes horizontally in the back of the seat. The electrode of the right leg was made of
conductive fabrics and placed on the seat. Authors examined the complete HRV analysis without any
heart disease.
A custom three-electrode system fully integrated into the car seat was announced in media in
2014. Leicht et al. [50] states that the localized water vapor can dramatically influence the measured
SNR (Signal-Noise-Ratio) levels of cECG electrodes. They state that increasing local air humidity can
lead to improved ohmic coupling (i.e., the coupling will no longer be exclusively capacitive), while it
also allows the static charge difference induced with the tribo-electric effects to flow to the ground.
This reduce the impact of tribo-electric power on capacity monitoring. They also proposed
conductive textile electrodes which are vapor permeable and have placed silica gel chambers as a
source or compensation of moisture behind the textile electrodes.
The team from the RWTH Aachen introduced a multi-electrode design integrated into Ford SMax commercial test vehicle [51]. While solid metal electrodes remained in this design, their shape
was changed to round, and the contract surface was reduced compared to the previous explored
designs. In that study, patients were asked to exercise on a simulator with a capacitive seat ECG while
also maintaining classic ECG monitoring for reference purposes [25].
Weder et al. [53] provided a textile breast belt which included a water reservoir used to
periodically soak the electrodes. These solutions were fully integrated, but they did not provide any
additional information concerning their effect on local moisture. Therefore, Leicht et al. [54]
published a closed-loop concept for controlling local humidity feedback. Since the storage and release
of water vapor on silica gel depend on the local water vapor pressure and temperature, a closed-loop
temperature control was introduced as a method for releasing water vapor from the gel, leading to
increased SNR efficiency.
A new system called the WARDENTM system [13] was introduced in 2016. It is a seat cover that
includes regulated ground electrodes. These electrodes are built into the main electronic unit, which
is located opposite the backrest.
In 2017, the Belgian research organization IMEC (Interuniversity Microelectronics Centre)
introduced a novel design composed of six electrodes with circular capacitive electrodes in the
backrest [55]. The overall design had a similar appearance to the one presented in [50]. The main
difference lies in the additional integration of the radar sensors, which lead to sensor fusion.
2.1.2. BCG and SCG Sensors
The BCG signal reflects the blood moving with each pulse around the vascular tree causing
changes in the center of the body. Body micromovements are then generated by the back forces to

Sensors 2020, 20, 5699

8 of 29

maintain overall dynamics. The BCG is a record of mentioned movements. It is measured as a signal
of displacement, speed or acceleration (in all three axes). The BCG longitudinal signal is a
measurement of head-to-foot variations in the body. The BCG transverse signal represents front-rear
(or dorso-ventral) vibration. The original BCG systems based on beds and tables focused on
longitudinal BCG measurements [56,57].
The BCG makes it easier to monitor cardiac (as well as respiratory) activity. Usually focusing on
external pressure or strain gauges, the BCG records vibrations, caused by the mechanical activity of the
heart and lungs. The obtained diagnostic information is, therefore, significantly different from the
conventional electrocardiogram used to record the direct electrical activity of the heart muscle [57].
The SCG signal reflects the mechanical vibrations of thorax caused by heart contraction and blood
ejection from the ventricles into the vascular tree. The SCG signal is usually measured by a three-axis
accelerometer when each of its components shows a specific pattern. In contemporary research, most
studies focus on dorso-ventral components. However, one cannot omit the occurrence of biological
information in longitudinal and lateral ones, including the acceleration vector trajectory [58–64].
Each heart contraction is depicted in BCG and SCG waveforms (see Figure 3). Each waveform is
characterized by several peaks and valleys reflecting specific events of the heart activity. In BCG
signal, three phases can be distinguished: pre-ejection (FGH complex), ejection (IJK complex) and
diastolic (LMN complex) part of the heart cycle. J-wave, as a reflection of rapid ejection of both
ventricles and blood acceleration in the descending and abdominal aorta, is the most prominent peak
of the signal. SCG signal is characterized by these events: AS—atrial systole; MC—mitral valve
closure; IM—isovolumetric contraction; AO—aortic valve opening; RE—rapid ejection; AC—aortic
valve closure; MO—mitral valve opening; and RF—rapid filling.
Bruser et al. [23] explained in their work the application of nine different non-contact sensing
modalities, which measured cardiorespiratory activity by sensing mechanical, bioelectric and
thermal effects caused by various body disorders—specifically cECG, SCG, BCG, pulse oximetry,
thermography, laser, radar methods, video motion analysis, as well as methods using high-frequency
electromagnetic fields. When pressure or acceleration sensors are attached to the chest for the
purpose of heart movements’ recording, it results, in particular, in BCG signal measurement [58–60].
For medical or diagnostics purposes, the sensors may be integrated into a bed, and they could be
positioned either above or between mattresses (e.g., quasi-piezoelectric ferroelectric films), inside the
mattress (optical sensors), on a slatted frame (using e.g., strain gauge sensors) or on beds (e.g., using
a pressure sensor) [61,62].
In the 1950s, Scarborough et al. [58] presented a list of BCG measurement and defined the three
measurement axes for the BCG translation records as longitudinal (head-to-foot, also called craniocaudal), transversal (side-to-side) and dorsoventral (back to chest). It is noted that craniocaudal
momentum is usually significantly greater than the transversal and dorsoventral component. A direct
contact (mechanical connection) is required to reliably measure the BCG signal [1].
The early BCG recording systems were usually designed as longitudinal [63], which for a
standing person corresponds with the z-axis [64]. Weights were also measured on this axis [65]. The
early BCG recording systems were usually designed as longitudinal [63]. In this case, a standing
person corresponds with the z-axis [64] on which weights are also measured [65]. A different
approach is set by using bed-based BCG systems, when the signal is measured in combination of
transversal and dorsoventral axes. Then, the z-axis is given by the dorsoventral one [66–68].
The BCG is nowadays becoming interesting again, mainly due to the development of simple and
inexpensive instrumentation and the adaptivity of the whole technique, since it can be easily used
outside conventional medical scenarios (e.g., sleep analysis) [37,69]. However, BCG signal shows
much higher variability than the standard ECG signal, which is related to the body position of the
patient. Thus, the BCG heart rete detection can be more challenging [69]. Despite these issues, Brüser
et al. [70] developed a unique for detection of individual heart rates.
The driver monitoring based on BCG sensing has a large amount in common with the BCG
monitoring implemented into chair [71]. In this position, the sensor is usually located on chest. Thus,
the cranio-caudal BCG component is generally measured because of the possibility of insufficient

Sensors 2020, 20, 5699

9 of 29

connection between the torso and backrest, which can make the measurement of dorsoventral
component problematic.
Early attempts to integrate the BCG sensors into car seats began about 11 years ago, when a
successful placement of the BCG sensors in the passenger seat of the SMART car (Daimler A.G.) took
place [71]. In this system, a qui-piezoelectric ferroelectret EMFiTM was used as a BCG sensor [72].
However, the presented data show that engine vibration might still prevent the reliable BCG
monitoring in a running vehicle [11].
In order to fight with the driver’s fatigue (which allegedly causes 20%–35% of serious accidents,
see in Figures 1 and 2), the HARKEN project was introduced. It deals with monitoring of the driver’s
cardiorespiratory activity, but without using the sensors directly attached to the patient’s body. The
measuring method is based on smart materials embedded in the car seat and safety belt [12,73].
However, no other results of this BCG policy have been published so far.
In 2018, Wusk and Gabler [74] introduced an estimate of the cardiorespiratory function obtained
using the BCG sensor in the passenger seat of the Ford Mustang, where the authors suggested using
a “fluid-filled bladder attached to a solid-phase pressure transducer” as a sensor. The study contained
the data collected from eleven volunteers, and the whole study was carried out in controlled
laboratory conditions. As a result, the authors were able to extract both vital signs with fair accuracy.
Monitoring of vital functions in a car faces many problems with signal distortion due to
interference caused by the vehicle and driver himself—for example, movement artifacts [75]. These
artifacts are non-stationary and more prevalent in discrete sensory techniques [76]. Thus, the current
research deals with their elimination using sensor fusion, which means combining multiple sensors
at different locations, even different types of sensors [77]. This approach would be able:




To compensate artifacts—by using advanced adaptive filtering techniques with a single sensor
used to monitor the noise itself;
To separate unique sources—by using algorithms based on statistical dependencies between
each individual signal (such as independent component analysis);
To increase the coverage rate—by using a set of sensors to measure the same vital sign, thus
increasing the likelihood that this vital sign can be obtained reliably.

The improved coverage and robustness of vital signs estimation by fusing unobtrusive
measurements was proved in 2015 [78]. In the experimental setup, the authors actually combined
camera-based information (a webcam for BCG and pulse wave) and information about a
one-dimensional signal (BCG in the seat).
Modern research in BCG and SCG measuring techniques also deals with wearable monitoring
systems, allowing continuous vital sign recording during everyday life [56], in any environment or
under stress [1]. In this case, a three-axis accelerometer is generally used, which can be mechanically
attached to the body either by adhesive, plastic fastening or textile [79]. The SCG assessment using an
external three-axis MEMS accelerometer mounted on the left clavicle attached to an intelligent garment
with textile ECG electrodes to obtain simultaneous three-axis SCG and single-lead ECG records was
thoroughly tested [80]. This concept was subsequently improved by Di Rienzo et al. [81], who designed
an integrated vest equipped with a MagIC-SCG accelerometry device. Omer T. Inan [56] summarized
in his study the key achievements and limitations of modern BCG systems, which are presented in
Table 4.

Sensors 2020, 20, 5699

10 of 29

Table 4. Classification of modern BCG systems.
Modern BCG
System

Measuring Axis

Key Benefits/Successes

Challenges/Constraints

3-axis

- Characterized 3D BCG
vector
- Measured 3D BCG in
microgravity

- the need for weight reduction either in space or with dry
immersion

Bed and chair
[70,83,84]

Longitudinal or
out of the plane

- Minimal movement
artifacts (usually)
- Easy to integrate into
home and everyday life

- Changes in sleep position may
affect signal quality and
morphology
- It is difficult to pair BCG with
other physiological measurements
(e.g., ECG)

Monitor vital signs
on the ears [85]

Primarily
longitudinal

- ECG can be measured
simultaneously
- Miniature, potentially
cheap system

- Head position may affect signal
integrity
- Repeatability to be assessed

Longitudinal

- Correlation with
CO/contractility changes
- obtaining multiple
physiological signals in
addition to BCG

Primarily
longitudinal

- Correlation with CO
changes
- Obtain multiple
physiological signals in
addition to BCG

Accelerometer in
center of weight
[82]

Weight [35,36]

Vest MagIC [37,86]

- Postural differences between
measurements may affect signal
integrity
- Motion artifacts must be
automatically detected and
mitigated
- Signal variation based on sensor
position
- Motion artifacts must be
automatically detected and
mitigated

2.1.3. Optical Sensors
Heartbeat was examined for a long time mainly based on the sound of the heart. This basic
diagnosis, often carried out with a stethoscope, is nowadays expanded, and other additional
components, such as force, frequency and sound pressure, are often extracted as well. Optic sensors
are often used as an alternative approach. A device based on Fiber Bragg Grating (FBG) monitor heart
rhythm by measuring the acoustic pressure of the muscle itself. D. Gurkan et al. even introduced a
modified version that leverages BCG as well—the captured sound signal is converted into an
electrical by a reflex-sensitive FBG sensor [87]. This design was verified in a specific scenario. The
FBG sensor was glued onto a subwoofer. During a recording of various heartbeat sounds, specific
spectral changes were recorded at sampling frequency of 250 Hz. The system showed an increased
sensitivity to various heartbeat strength, frequency and time content of the oscillation. The designed
non-invasive FBG sensor proved to be a reliable alternative approach for the extraction of various
information from the heart sounds, and even managed to measure heart strength. Non-invasive
methods are currently explored by various researchers, as they have a number of benefits—mainly
for patients [88,89].
A description of the design and manufacture of smart fabric based on the FBG field was at first
described by D.L. Presti et al. [90]. Their study showed the assessment of the feasibility for monitoring
respiratory parameters (i.e., respiratory rate, respiratory period and inspiratory and expiratory
period) and heart rate in healthy volunteers in two positions (standing and lying down). The
increased number of FBGs was incorporated into this system with respect to previously developed
prototypes. The main goal was to improve its accuracy in estimation of these parameters. The testing
was carried out in order to determine whether the proposed solution made it possible to improve the
measurement of respiratory volume exchanges in new scenarios, such as sports medicine, or activities
such as walking, running and cycling.

Sensors 2020, 20, 5699

11 of 29

The Complete Ensemble Empirical Mode Decomposition with Adaptive Noise (CEEMDAN)
and sensor fusion for automatic heart rate detection from a mat with built-in FBG sensor arrays was
investigated by Sadek et al. [91,92]. The fusion process was performed in the time domain by
averaging the sensor readings for each sensor field. Afterwards, the CEEMDAN was applied in order
to gather internal beat intervals. The experiments were performed on 10 human volunteers lying in
two specified positions on the bed for 20 min. The overall system performance was evaluated based
on the reference ECG signals. The fusion of the sensor and CEEMDAN proved to be resistant against
movement artifacts caused by random body movements [91].
2.2. Steering Wheel Systems
The implementation of sensors integrated in a steering wheel allows non-invasive heartbeat and
pulse wave measurement. Modern systems, where a steering wheel is applied, do not require neither
particular preparation nor conductive gel or paste [30,93].
One of the first research goals was to place the electrodes on the steering wheel in order to
quantify driver stress levels, when investigating the load on the driver and the load response based
on HRV obtained with a pair of dry steering-wheel ECG electrodes [94]. Similarly, in the same year,
Lee et al. [95] reported their studies similarly using steering wheel with integrated dry electrodes
made of copper tape. For the study purposes, three students were admitted as test drivers and asked
for directions for 16 km for 40 to 50 min.
Shin et al. [96] and later Jung et al. [52] introduced electrodes placed on the steering wheel made
of conductive fabric. Choi et al. [97] introduced a steering wheel, which is covered with a conductive
dry material of the fabric-based electrode, was manufactured by galvanic plating.
In parallel, a multi-sensor system consisting of infrared thermometer and reflective optical
sensor for measuring pulse oximetry and skin temperature implemented in the
S-Class Mercedes was published by Heuer et al. [98]. In parallel, D’Angelo et al. [8,9] demonstrated
a multi-sensor system integrated into the steering wheel of the BMW 730d test vehicle, which enabled
pulse oximetry and conductive ECG scanning. They applied a similar design to the one proposed by
Jeong et al. [94], which integrated the electrodes into the steering wheel, the gear shift and the left
armrest. However, the exact location of the electrodes was clearly stated [98].
Gomez-Clapers and Casanella [99] presented a steering wheel equipped with the ECG
demonstration meter based on dry ECG electrodes and wireless communication. Similarly,
Silva et al. [100] demonstrated that steering wheel equipped with dry Ag/AgCl electrodes managed to
obtain the ECG measurements of a similar quality to traditional electrodes.
Another study [100] presented a custom design of a steering wheel, which contained a set of two
conductive fabric electrodes, similar to those used by Jung et al. [52], where the electronic circuit
design was based on the MSP 430 microcontroller and the Chipcon CC2420 RF transceiver. Apart
from measurements, the system offered a way to wirelessly transfer data in a 2.4 GHz band.
ECG monitoring based on a steering-wheel with integrated electrodes can be a good candidate
for heart rate monitoring but requires that both the driver’s hands interface with conductive parts of
the steering wheel. Significant steering movements along with grip position changes, and the
relatively common one-handed steering habit causes a significant problem for this technology and
negatively affects the data quality [101].
A different design way was proposed by Matsuda and Makikawa [102] who suggested using a
conductive steering wheel in combination with a capacitive electrode placed in the driver’s seat. This
system managed to overcome the common one-handed steering custom and its consecutive
problems. This proposed system also combined conductive measurement concepts with capacitive
sensing, which was later called hybrid sensing. This hybrid method was also suggested by
Baek et al. [103] as a useful addition to redundant scanning and sensor fusions. The idea of steering
wheel electrodes measuring against a capacitive electrode in the seating area was once again
introduced and researched by Xu and Ta [104].

Sensors 2020, 20, 5699

12 of 29

2.3. Helmet Systems
Analysis of EEG signals is a very complex task which is even more difficult when the main system
has to communicate with other various subsystems to source data or maintain proper [76,105–107]. That
is due to the non-stationary character of these signals, their susceptibility to various artifacts (external
and internal) and other disturbances [76,106,107]. The EEG signal is usually analyzed and evaluated
in various frequency spectra: Delta rhythm (0.5 ≤ f < 4 Hz) is a symptom of deeper stages of sleep; Theta
rhythm (4 Hz ≤ f < 8) is typically present in the initial stages of sleep; Alpha rhythm (8 Hz ≤ f ≤ 13) is the
main manifestation of the resting brain activity, while Beta rhythm (13 < f < 30 Hz) is present in
nervous or anxious subjects.
As mentioned in the previous part of this work, the number of annual traffic deaths is constantly
growing and is the leading cause of death of people in the 5–29 years bracket. As driving is a very
complex task (from the biomedical point of view), it requires a large amount of concentration. Any
distractions or health problems can affect driving in a negative way resulting in an accident. That is
why advanced driver assistance systems—e.g., based on EEG—were introduced [105].
Application of the EEG data as a vital sign tracking while driving can be a very useful tool.
Sudden changes in sensory, motor and cognitive functions are strongly related to the driver’s age,
and there is even some evidence stating that lower Alpha and Beta frequency ranges correlate with
slower reaction time while driving [108]. Cognitive state of drivers can be analyzed with the
implementation of inter alia channel-wise convolutional neural networks (CCNN) [109].
Various inexpensive devices were tested to measure and analyze EEG recordings [110–113]. One
of the first commercial, inexpensive devices applied for EEG was a headset from NeuroSky
Mind-Wave, which was supposed to capture different levels of EEG [114,115]. In addition, a limit switch
electrical circuit, which controls car engine start, was designed and connected between the seat belt and
the ignition system. In this early solution, the Arduino microcontroller was used along with its software
as a signal processing unit to control various safety systems of the vehicle. The experimental results
have shown that the system was able to reliably increase the safety of drivers [116,117].
Consumer-grade level EEG devices are becoming more and more popular. Among such systems
are the above mentioned Neurosky headsets (Mind-Wave and MindWave Mobile), EPOC and FLEX
from Emotiv, Ultracortex (Open BCI), ENOBIO (Neuroelectrics), DSI (QUASAR), interaXon,
Smarting (mBrainTrain) or Quick (Cognionics) [110,112,113,118]. Especially Emotiv EPOC is a very
popular and inexpensive solution which, despite the appearance of newer versions (Flex and Insight),
is still being applied in numerous BCI-related projects [107,110,112,119]. MindWave Mobile and
Yband also stand over other numerous inexpensive headsets, mainly due to their price and reliability.
However, their implementation is very limited as they are capable of measuring from only one or
two electrodes placed on the frontal lobe [111].
Besides age and cognition level of the driver, another major reason causing car accidents is driver
drowsiness, which became a major focus of safety research in 2005, when EEG was applied in order
to detect the immediate state of the driver [120].
2.4. Camera Systems
While the seat-integrated techniques (ECG, cECG and BCG) have been used extensively in the
automotive environment [121]; camera-based techniques, although not studied at a high level of
readiness to the same extent as seat-integrated techniques, also remained popular [122,123]. The main
problem probably lies in their relatively high costs and a potential conflict with drivers—the camera
can be taken as a violation of their privacy [123,124].
The advantage of the camera-based vital sign measuring system is the imperceptible contactless
transmission of information from the driver or passenger. Optical modalities potentially offer
unobtrusive remote sensing, which is attractive for automotive applications, especially in modern
automobiles, where cameras are used to detect external obstacles and so on. In the recent years, there
was a boom in camera technologies and their application in vital sign monitoring. Figure 4 shows
frequency spectra suitable for cameras [1].

Sensors 2020, 20, 5699

13 of 29

Figure 4. Frequency ranges—visible, near-infrared, far-infrared—usable for optical monitoring
techniques.

Three frequency bands are suitable for monitoring the driver’s vitals: visible light (350–740 nm),
near infrared light (750–1000 nm) and far infrared light (1 μm–1 mm). Within the visible and near
infrared range, light can freely interact with living tissues. The light can move through the tissue in
a direct path (as in transmissive pulse oximetry), or it can also scatter. In fact, in the case of the skin
tissue, the scattering tends to be the dominant effect of the tissue-to-photon interaction. As with any
optical method, the driver or passenger tracking via an integrated camera requires constant
supervision. As the current cockpit design requires a clear view for the driver, the following possible
camera locations have been explored (see Figure 5) [1].

Figure 5. The locations for the cameras. Locations can be distinguished by the angle of attack ρ.

2.5. Radar Systems
Radar devices can be used in non-intrusive situations to monitor vital signs. Accurate
simultaneous estimates of heart rate and respiratory rate are possible by detecting and extracting
body movement associated with physiological activity. Most research focuses on anterior monitoring
of superficial chest motion. Schires et al. [125] demonstrated the feasibility of back-monitoring vital
signs using pulse radar. They demonstrated the physiological movements in the body by
demonstrating the attachment of the radar to a car seat.
For proper monitoring of post-contact applications, it is crucial to eliminate accidental body
movement. When using Doppler radars, the suppression of random body movement is usually
performed by phase measurements, which are obtained from two opposite sides of the human body. In

Sensors 2020, 20, 5699

14 of 29

their article, Munoz-Ferreras et al. [126] proposed the method which leverages two frequency-modulated
continuous waves of radars to solve the phenomenon of random body movement.
Lohman et al. [127] proposed a new signal processing method for continuous heart rate
monitoring using ultra-wideband pulsed radar. The processor can even reliably calculate both subject
speeds at distances of up to 2 m. Speed determination was based on autocorrelation in addition to
several enhancement techniques.
Leem et al. [128] proposed a new algorithm, which estimates vital signs even when random
movement occurs. The entire fast detection area of vital signs was analyzed and signals, obtained
while driving, provided useful information regarding drivers’ condition. These signals were then
divided into sub-signals, and then, the desired vital signal was generated with the implementation
of the correlation method. In this way, the driver’s vital signals could be monitored non-invasively,
which could be potentially used for detection of driver drowsiness. The authors also discussed robust
monitoring of vital signs using pulsed radio ultra-wideband (IR-UWB) radar.
Zito et al. [129] developed the custom sensor based on 90 nm CMOS technology. They
experimentally characterized a UWB radar sensor for the respiration rate monitoring. The radar test
chip was used for non-contact detection of respiratory activity in adults and children. Field tests have
shown that the UWB radar sensor detected the person’s respiratory rate associated with the chest
movements up to units of centimeters, allowing continuous non-invasive follow-up monitoring of
the hospital patients and other persons at risk of apnoea obstruction.
2.6. Other Sensors
Besides the sensor types described above, other possibilities are often discussed in the literature.
Among them is a preventive system mounted on the steering wheel which uses a magnetic
sensor built into the seats of cars and trucks developed by the Tsuchida et al. [130]. The measuring
system is based on the implementation of build-in torsion bars in the driver’s seat. The authors tried
to monitor drivers by measuring the differences in the magnetic properties of these torsion bars—the
torsion voltage of the magnetic sensor depends on the stress caused by the sitting driver. The
measuring unit registers changes between voltage induced by the excitation coil and registered by
pickup coils.
Real-time eye movement classification offers a very effective way of human–machine interaction
[131,132]. However, these systems require the sensors to be placed around the eyes, which might be
distracting and cause significant discomfort [131]. In one among numerous studies, Zhao et al. [133]
used two EEG sensors located above the temporal areas to classify real-time eye blinks and five distinct
classes of eye movement direction. The gathered data were then processed, and a set of discernible time
series functions was extracted. The presented solution reached up to 85.2% in case of accuracy and
77.6% in case of sensitivity. The used algorithm with its high accuracy and low latency clearly shows
that it is an effective solution for reliable detection and classification of eye movement. Desk-mounted
eye tracking sensors which use human–machine Interfaces and Interaction to extract features already
exist [131].
Electrical sensors are also widely used. They allow the monitoring of respiration and heartbeat
rate and can be also used for non-invasive, contactless radar sensors. The early concepts of these
systems are very promising, but their real-world implementation is significantly more difficult as the
simultaneous respiration and heartbeat detection is currently impossible [134].
3. Interference and Signal Pre-Processing
Vital sign monitoring plays a crucial role in both prevention and diagnosis of various health
problems [135,136]. As more and more people pay attention to their health condition, various
measurement systems are developed, in particular, following the so-called “wearable” concept. The
problem with these devices is that they can be somewhat uncomfortable for patients as they require
direct physical contact with the body. Contactless solutions are, on the other hand, prone to various
interferences and artifacts, and therefore, are less efficient [134].

Sensors 2020, 20, 5699

15 of 29

3.1. Noise and Interference
In the literature, there are many well-known algorithms for the measuring of human vital signs
[137–139]. The vital signs, as with other biomedical data, are prone to the occurrence of various
internal and external artifacts, which could be related to some specific interferences [76,107].
Moreover, measurement of vital signs while driving is a different challenge, since there are various
body movements [140,141]. The occurrence of the interference in examined or recorded data affects
their quality in a negative way (see Figure 6 [128]) and makes the whole analysis process much more
difficult [49].

Figure 6. Noisy vital signal obtained by conventional algorithm—during motion period.

Among the most important interferences is the one associated with the powerline, which is 50 Hz
for Europe and 60 Hz for the US. It can be easily compensated by the basic Notch filter [88,142]. In the
case of the cECG recordings, there is an occurrence of both inter-modal and intra-modal interferences,
which do not affect the quality of the recording and does not interfere with the vital sign
monitoring [88].
Other interferences are often connected to the driver’s movements or antenna designs (for
wireless data transfer) [143]. In addition, other signals, such as those caused by the background
(generated by other passengers or the vehicle—e.g., engine noise), can lead to major unnecessary
interferences [144]. Table 5 summarizes an occurrence of different types of interference in the
measured signals using methods discussed in this paper.
Table 5. Interference occurring in the measured vital signs data.

Powerline
Motion
Background noise
Vibrations

ECG/cECG
High
Medium
Low
Medium

BCG/SCG
Low
Medium
Low
High

Ultra-Wideband Radar
Low
High
Low
Medium

Fiber Bragg Grating
Low
Medium
Low
High

The researchers in [139] discussed the problem of vital functions of a non-stationary character, but
their approach was very simple—they were able to detect body movement and block the measurement
of vital signs until body movement stopped. Such approach might be advantageous for certain
situations but might lead to other significantly dangerous scenarios. In [128], the team managed to not
only detect body movement, but also to measure vital signs during the period of movement.
Motion artifacts can also significantly impair the signal quality due to the varying connection
between sensors and the subject. One way to address this challenge is to combine multi-channel
evaluation using sensor fusions. For a robust and accurate sensor interconnection, it is essential to
analyze the effects of motion in various ways. Antik et al. [78,128] introduced a custom experimental
setup, combining cECG, reflex pulse oximetry, impedance sensors and BCG sensors. A series of early
experiments was carried out to quantify movement artifacts. In addition, a set of predetermined

Sensors 2020, 20, 5699

16 of 29

exercises was carried out by testing subjects to perform a cardiorespiratory monitoring. A shape-based
SNR was used to quantify and analyze the effect of human body movement on performance of different
sensors. The work also shows the optimal combination of sensors and a concept of future fusion
methodology [145].
3.2. Advanced Signal Processing Methods
The signals measured using the BCG and SCG sensors are influenced by different types of
interference mentioned before—mainly by vibrations and movements of driver. To extract the desired
information of the driver’s physiological functions, it is necessary to use the advanced methods of signal
processing. Generally, these methods can be divided into adaptive and non-adaptive. Although nonadaptive methods require only specific sensors for measuring the BCG signal with noise (or SCG signal
with noise), adaptive methods need at least another one sensor set for measuring the interferences
(reference signal), as shown in Figure 7.
The most commonly used adaptive methods include techniques based on neuro-fuzzy inference
systems (ANFIS), Least Mean Squares (LMS) and Recursive Least Squares (RLS) algorithms. Nonadaptive methods can be divided into single-channel and multi-channel methods, based on the
number of input signals required. The well-known single-channel methods are, for example, filtration
based on Fast Fourier Transform (FFT), Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT) and Empirical Mode
Decomposition (EMD). Multi-channel methods comprise the set of methods called Blind Source
Separation (BSS), including Independent Component Analysis (ICA) or Principle Component
Analysis (PCA) [107,144].
Hybrid methods present another possibility to properly eliminate the artifacts and interferences,
as they combine the aforementioned methods. Many researchers often use the ICA method as a preprocessing for some adaptive algorithm, and the single-channel non-adaptive method for smoothing
of the desired signal. The overview of the discussed signal processing methods is shown in Table 6.
The most frequently used adaptive methods are based on LMS-based noise cancellers. Although
they tend to suffer from a higher delay in comparison to other adaptive methods. However, this delay
can be reduced using pipelined filtering [146]. Manjula et al. [147] achieved up to 80% of noise
reduction (mainly vibrations) from the simulated BCG signal. The adaptive noise cancellation using
the LMS algorithm for elimination of floor vibrations was proposed in [148]. The authors monitored
BCG signal measured by bathroom scale and filtered the vibrations using a reference seismic sensor
(geophone) placed on the floor next to the scale. This approach can increase BCG measurements
robustness in home monitoring applications as well as in ambulances or other vehicles. Using the
similar methodology, the electromyogram signal taken from the feet of the subject can be used as a
noise reference for motion artifacts reduction using adaptive filtering [149]. Yang et al. [150] extracted
SCG data using LMS adaptive algorithm from moving subjects with a significant improvement of
signal quality.
Non-adaptive methods have a great potential for BCG signal processing. Etemadi et al. [151] used
EMD for denoising of SCG signal obtained using wearable measuring system, which has been
successfully used in the past to remove baseline wander and other noise from the ECG waveform. The
SCG signal components that were related to movement were shifted from the components related to
heartbeats, so the SCG waveform morphology was improved. Postolache et al. in 2010 [152] introduced
a multi-sensing system with BCG sensors embedded on a smart wheelchair. They used a combination
of ICA and WT for signal processing and estimation of heart rate and respiratory rate. They achieved a
good accuracy during filtration by mentioned methods. Manjula and Sharma in 2017 [153] also used
the ICA method for BCG denoising. This method was used for preprocessing and for dividing source
signals. In next step, k-means was used for the determination of which components corresponded to
noise, and suppressed them. The proposed method provided a good accuracy and outperformed other
conventional BCG processing methods. Javed et al. in 2014 [154] and 2017 [155] used combination of
PCA and EMD methods for BCG processing. This method was named PCA-EMD. These studies
showed that noise in BCG signals could be effectively eliminated by the proposed approach. However,
higher computational cost is a main limitation of this approach. The main advantage of mentioned

Sensors 2020, 20, 5699

17 of 29

methods is that they do not require any reference signal and no prior information, or any assumption,
is needed to perform quality filtration.
Table 6. Overview of signal processing methods.

Method
Adaptive
Methods

ANFIS
LMS
RLS
FFT
DWT

NonAdaptive
Methods
(SingleEMD
Channel)
NonICA
Adaptive
Methods
PCA
(MultiChannel)
Hybrid Methods

Overall
Performance
High
Medium
Medium
Medium
Medium

SNR
Improvement
Medium
Medium
Medium
Medium
Medium

Computational
Cost
High
Medium
Medium
Low
Low

RealTime
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes

Implementation
Complexity
Complex
Simple
Simple
Medium
Medium

High

Medium

High

No

Medium

Medium

Medium

Medium

No

Medium

Low

Medium

Low

Yes

Simple

High

High

Medium/High

Yes/No

Medium/Complex

Table 6 represents the comparison of various signal processing methods, covering individual
important parameters and their optimal settings. As these methods offer distinctive advantages and
also disadvantages, their fusion could offer other significant gains. Hybrid systems combine multiple
algorithms to gain significant strengths in different fields of signal processing. These systems are
currently explored and will definitely surface more often in the future.
Computational costs is another significant factor for future implementation of BCG and SCG
signal processing methods. Modern vehicles operate with limited CPU/GPU performance and RAM
space. Any computationally intensive operations could influence the successful operation of other,
often much more important, systems. Therefore, the system has to take the limited resources of
vehicles into account and work around the deployed hardware. Modern carmakers are already
replacing typical electronic control units (ECUs) with centralized computing platforms, which tend
to offer a much higher performance. However, these systems must be robust to operate in large
temperatures and altitude ranges. A subsystem, specially designed for processing and evaluation of
BCG and SCG signals could offer a better way to continuously gather drivers’ vital signs, while not
stressing the vehicular central unit. Table 7 and Figure 7 represents overview of individual
parameters and most often used optimal values for various signal processing methods.

Sensors 2020, 20, 5699

18 of 29

Table 7. Overview of individual parameters and most often used optimal values for various signal
processing methods.
Method
ANFIS

Parameters
Epochs
Mf
Shape

DWT
EMD
LMS
RLS
ICA, PCA

/
µ
/
Input
Output
Iterations

Description
Number of epochs
Number of membership functions
Type of the membership function
Decomposition level
Maternal wavelet
Number of intrinsic mode functions
Size of the standard deviation (stopping criterion)
Filter length/Filer order ( = − 1)
Step size (convergence constant)
Filter length/Filer order ( = − 1)
Forgetting factor
Number of input channels
Number of outputs components
Norm of the iterative step

Optimal Values
[10, 20]
6
Gaussian/bell-shaped
[3, 7]
Daubechies/Symlet
15
[0.2, 0.3]
[1, 100]
[0.00001, 0.1]
[1, 100]
[0.9, 1]
Minimally 3
Minimally 3
1000

Sensors 2020, 20, 5699

19 of 29

Figure 7. Overview of signal processing methods and car seat. (a) BCG signal processing and (b) SCG
signal processing.

4. Examples of Patents
One of the most interesting patents was the one made by Elrod et al. [156], who patented a
function monitoring system with sensors mounted into the child seat, which manage to monitor one
or more occupants’ health conditions. The applied processor generates the status signals, and the
implemented transmitter wirelessly transfers the status signals to a remote receiver. The signaling
device connected to the receiver produces at least one sensory (e.g., visual, audible, tactile) output
based on status of the received signals.
Another patent where a sensor was integrated into the child seat was presented by Bellamy [157].
A sensor unit was mounted on the housing. The sensor managed to detect vital signs in addition to
another parameter—weight. The vital signs include body temperature and heart rate. The sensor also
detects ambient air temperature adjacent to the child seat. The display is mounted on the child safety

Sensors 2020, 20, 5699

20 of 29

seat and is electrically connected to the detection unit, showing all measured parameters. The power
supply is mounted in a housing and is electrically connected to the sensing unit and the display.
Another invention, which can be used to conduct analysis of the driver (land, water and air
vehicles) before commencing driving, provides information regarding stress level and health status
throughout the driving, even working over extended periods of time. Such system was developed
and patented by Tausch et al. [158]. The device analyzes and evaluates HRV in the time domain and
frequency domain using Fourier transform. It is based on a signaling system similar to the one
applied in traffic lights. The red colors indicate the expected state of stress and health, while the
greens mean best health.
5. Discussion
With the ongoing era of Internet of Things (IoT), various smart technologies are combined or
connected to each other, enabling their integration and interaction. These data are nowadays very
easily shared and exchanged. New methods for road-safety improvements have been introduced
with the implementation of IoT applications and they often enable the monitoring of the driver’s
state, counting of the number of passengers or even detecting an unattended child’s presence in a car
on a hot day [159].
The future of vital signs measurement in car seats lays in contactless sensors. Based on modern
signal and image processing methods, many of the technologies described in this paper will be
implemented in smart cars [160]. It might work in a way that when critical health condition is
detected—e.g., asthma or heart attack—the car will stop itself and call the emergency service.
Furthermore, when the system recognizes that the driver has consumed alcohol, drugs or other
addictive substances, the system will not allow him to drive. As the modern cars will be equipped
with location information and, of course, a communication interface, it will be easier for medical
services to track the driver of individual vehicles. Modern systems will also be able to sense emotions,
so the system will alert the driver that he is not in a suitable condition to drive. Vehicles will also
have sophisticated anti-microsleeve systems, while also having sophisticated fatigue detection
systems. In the future, sensors in the car might also become a part of a larger telemedicine system—
remotely monitoring patient health [136].
However, the moving vehicles generate a large amount of interference which influence multiple
systems such as those based on BCG, ECG, etc. The signal can be negatively affected by noise and
interference coming from several sources including sensor itself. Motion artifacts, generated by either
body motion or vibrations coming from the road [11], are still a major limiting factor and can be
definitely reduced by the implementation of various sophisticated filtering methods. Another issue,
which has to be faced by future manufacturers is the ethical aspects of selected monitoring
methods [161].
6. Conclusions
This work mainly focuses on a thorough review of inconspicuous and contactless sensors used
to monitor vital functions. These systems will definitely be introduced into practice in the future (in
the car seat, seat belt, steering wheel, etc.), but their advanced implementation is a subject of further
research. Many technologies have been proposed based on various physical principles. The results
presented in this work are mainly focused on their potential car implementation, but they can be
easily transferred to other areas, including military applications, aircraft or even to personal
healthcare (telemedicine) applications [11,161].
Techniques for the integration of ECG, cECG, BCG and SCG into seats have been applied
extensively in the automotive environment; meanwhile, camera-based techniques, although already
at a high level of readiness, have not yet been explored to the same extent. This may be due to their
relatively high cost and possible conflict with the driver’s privacy.
Contactless sensors available today are still limited by motion sartifacts. Some specific
technologies have even bigger challenges (such as tribo-electrics for cECG and changing light
conditions in the visible and NIR frequency ranges). Sensor–signal fusion can be a way to overcome

Sensors 2020, 20, 5699

21 of 29

many of these limiting factors, as it can be also used to motion artifact elimination. These technologies
require multiple sensors and simultaneous multi-channel measurements with redundant sensor
deployments.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, M.S., A.K.-S., M.L., R.J. and L.D., Methodology, M.S., A.K.-S. and
M.L., Software, M.S., Formal Analysis, R.J. and L.D., Investigation, M.S., A.K.-S. and M.L., Resources, R.M. and
P.S., Data Curation, M.S., Writing—Original Draft Preparation, M.S., A.K.-S. and M.L., Writing—Review &
Editing, M.S., R.J., L.D. and M.L., Visualization, R.M., A.K.-S. and P.S., Project Administration, R.M. and P.S.,
Funding Acquisition, R.M. and P.S. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This work was supported by the European Regional Development Fund in Research Platform focused
on Industry 4.0 and Robotics in the Ostrava project, CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/17_049/0008425 within Operational
Programme Research, Development and Education. This article was supported by the Ministry of Education of
the Czech Republic, Project No. SP2020/151. We thank the company Brose, Kopřivnice CZ (Petr Zmij).
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.

5.

6.
7.
8.

9.
10.

11.
12.

13.

14.

Leonhardt, S.; Leicht, L.; Teichmann, D. Unobtrusive vital sign monitoring in automotive environments—
A review. Sensors 2018, 18, 3080.
Zhou, X.; Wingert, T.; Sauer, M.; Kundu, S. Development of a camera-based driver state monitoring system
for cost-effective embedded solution. SAE Int. 2020, 1, 1–8.
Jesudoss, A.; Muthuram, B.; Lourdson Emmanuel, A. Safe driving using iot sensor. Int. J. Pure Appl. Math.
2018, 118, 3745–3751.
Boyraz, P.; Acar, M.; Kerr, D. Multi-sensor driver monitoring and assistance system using state-of-the-art
signal modelling. In Proceedings of the 20th International Technical Conference on the Enhanced Safety of
Vehicles (ESV) National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, Detroit, MI, USA, 5-8 June 2017.
Henni, K.; Mezghani, N.; Gouin-Vallerand, C.; Ruer, P.; Ouakrim, Y.; Vallières, É. Feature selection for
driving fatigue characterization and detection using visual- and signal-based sensors. Appl. Inform. 2018, 5,
7, doi:10.1186/s40535-018-0054-9.
Bi, C.; Huang, J.; Xing, G.; Jiang, L.; Liu, X.; Chen, M. Safe Watch: A wearable hand motion tracking system
for improving driving safety. ACM Trans. Cyber Phys. Syst. 2020, 4, 1–21.
Hubbard, J.; Kantarjiev, C.U.S. Driver Alertness Warning System and Method. Patent Application No.
16/177,338, 2 May 2019.
Wang, Y.; Ma, J.; Wei, L. Investigating the effect of long trip on driving performance, eye blinks, and
awareness of sleepiness among commercial drivers: A naturalistic driving test study. Sci. Iran. 2018, 26,
95–102.
Ashraf, I.; Hur, S.; Shafiq, M.; Park, Y.; Guo, Y. Catastrophic factors involved in road accidents: Underlying
causes and descriptive analysis. PLoS ONE 2019, 14, e0223473.
Lupinska-Dubicka, A.; Tabedzki, M.; Adamski, M.; Rybnik, M.; Omieljanowicz, M.; Omieljanowicz, A.;
Szymkowski, M.; Gruszewski, M.; Klimowicz, A.; Rubin, G. et al. The concept of in-vehicle system for
human presence and their vital signs detection. In Proceedings of the 5th International Doctoral
Symposium on Applied Computation and Security Systems: ACSS2018, Kolkata, India, 9–11 February
2018.
Walter, M.; Eilebrecht, B.; Wartzek, T.; Leonhardt, S. The smart car seat: Personalized monitoring of vital
signs in automotive applications. Pers. Ubiquitous Comput. 2011, 15, 707–715.
Teyeb, I.; Jemai, O.; Zaied, M.; Amar, C. Towards a smart car seat design for drowsiness detection based
on pressure distribution of the driver’s body. In Proceedings of the the Eleventh International Conference
on Software Engineering Advances (ICSEA 2016), Rome, Italy, 21–25 August 2016.
Park, J.; Subramaniyam, M.; Kim, S.; Lee, J.; Jo, C.; Seo, Y. Development of the elderly healthcare monitoring
system with iot. In Advances in Human Factors and Ergonomics in Healthcare; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg,
Germany, 2017; pp. 309–315.
Alasry, B.; Vang, D.U.S. System for Monitoring Driver Alertness and Adapting Vehicle Settings Thereto.
Patent No. 9,925, 27 March 2018.

Sensors 2020, 20, 5699

15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.

21.
22.
23.
24.

25.

26.

27.

28.
29.
30.
31.

32.

33.

34.

22 of 29

Nanu, F.; Peterscu, S.; Oprea, F.; Haller, E.U.S. Human Monitoring System Incorporating Calibration
Methodology. Patent Application No. 16/150,225, 11 August 2020.
Hanna, K.U.S. Combining Driver Alertness with Advanced Driver Assistance Systems (ADAS). Patent
Application No. 16/192,529, 11 April 2019.
Sakurai, K.; Tamura, H. A study on the gaze range calculation method during an actual car driving using
eyeball angle and head angle information. Sensors 2019, 19, 4774.
Tiffen, R.; Gauja, A.; O’Connor, B.; Gittins, R.; Smith, D. People and Life Expectancy. In How America
Compares; How the World Compares; Springer: Singapore, 2020; pp. 1–7, ISBN 978–981-13–9581-9.
Nakajima, Y. Controversies in the temperature management of critically ill patients. J. Anesth. 2016, 30,
873–883.
Sun, G.; Matsui, T.; Watai, Y.; Kim, S.; Kirimoto, T.; Suzuki, S.; Hakozaki, Y. Vital-SCOPE: Design and
evaluation of a smart vital sign monitor for simultaneous measurement of pulse rate, respiratory rate, and
body temperature for patient monitoring. J. Sens. 2018, 2018, 1–7.
Alhassan, B.; Tela, N. Modeling vital signs components and it consequence in human health. J. Phys. Sci.
Innov. 2019, 11, 1–14.
Wartzek, T.; Czaplik, M.; Antink, C.; Eilebrecht, B.; Walocha, R.; Leonhardt, S. UnoViS: The MedIT public
unobtrusive vital signs database. Health Inf. Sci. Syst. 2015, 3, 2.
Bruser, C.; Antink, C.; Wartzek, T.; Walter, M.; Leonhardt, S. Ambient and unobtrusive cardiorespiratory
monitoring techniques. IEEE Rev. Biomed. Eng. 2015, 8, 30–43.
Ekerete, I.; Nugent, C.; Giggins, O.; McLaughlin, J. Unobtrusive Sensing solution for post-stroke
rehabilitation. In Smart Assisted Living; Chen, F., García-Betances, R., Chen, L., Cabrera-Umpiérrez, M.,
Nugent, C., Eds.; Computer Communications and Networks; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2020;
pp. 43–62, ISBN 978–3-030–25589-3.
Leicht, L.; Skobel, E.; Mathissen, M.; Leonhardt, S.; Weyer, S.; Wartzek, T.; Reith, S.; Mohler, W.; Teichmann,
D. Capacitive ECG recording and beat-to-beat interval estimation after major cardiac event. –In
Proceedings of the 2015 37th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and
Biology Society (EMBC), Milan, Italy, 25–29 August 2015; pp. 7614–7617.
Chamadiya, B.; Heuer, S.; Hofmann, U.; Wagner, M. Towards a capacitively coupled electrocardiography
system for car seat integration. In 4th European Conference of the International Federation for Medical and
Biological Engineering; Vander Sloten, J., Verdonck, P., Nyssen, M., Haueisen, J., Eds.; IFMBE Proceedings;
Springer: Berlin Heidelberg, 2009; pp. 1217–1221, ISBN 978–3-540–89207-6.
Barakat, R.; Deserno, T.; Deserno, T.; Chen, P. Automatic alerting of accidents and emergencies: The
international standard accident number and vital sign data embedded in future PACS. In Proceedings of
the Medical Imaging 2020: Imaging Informatics for Healthcare, Research, and Applications, San Diego, CA,
USA, 16–17 February 2020; p. 49.
Heath, B.; Malkin, W.U.S. Contextual driver behavior monitoring. Patent No. 10,543, 26 December 2017.
Huang, J.; Luo, X.; Peng, X. A novel classification method for a driver’s cognitive stress level by transferring
interbeat intervals of the ecg signal to pictures. Sensors 2020, 20, 1340.
Hamza Cherif, F.; Hamza Cherif, L.; Benabdellah, M.; Nassar, G. Monitoring driver health status in real
time. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 2020, 91, 035110.
Raju, J.; Rakesh, P.; Neelima, N. Driver drowsiness monitoring system. In Intelligent Manufacturing and
Energy Sustainability; Reddy, A., Marla, D., Simic, M., Favorskaya, M., Satapathy, S., Eds.; Smart Innovation,
Systems and Technologies; Springer: Singapore, 2020; pp. 675–683, ISBN 978–981-15–1615-3.
Miah, A.; Ahmad, M.; Mim, K. Drowsiness detection using eye-blink pattern and mean eye
landmarks’ distance. In Proceedings of International Joint Conference on Computational Intelligence;
Uddin, M., Bansal, J., Eds.; Algorithms for Intelligent Systems; Springer: Singapore, 2020; pp. 111–121, ISBN
978-981-13-7563-7.
Ashfakur Rahman Arju, M.; Khan, N.; Hoque, K.; Jisan, A.; Tareque, S.; Hasan, M. A framework for
detecting driver drowsiness based on eye blinking rate and hand gripping pressure. In Proceedings of
International Joint Conference on Computational Intelligence; Uddin, M., Bansal, J., Eds.; Algorithms for
Intelligent Systems; Springer: Singapore, 2020; pp. 289–304, ISBN 978-981-13-7563-7.
Anitha, J.; Mani, G.; Venkata Rao, K. Driver Drowsiness Detection Using Viola Jones Algorithm. In Smart
Intelligent Computing and Applications; Satapathy, S., Bhateja, V., Mohanty, J., Udgata, S., Eds.; Smart
Innovation, Systems and Technologies; Springer: Singapore, 2020; pp. 583–592, ISBN 978–981-13–9281-8.

Sensors 2020, 20, 5699

35.
36.

37.

38.
39.

40.
41.
42.

43.

44.
45.
46.
47.
48.

49.

50.
51.

52.
53.

54.
55.

23 of 29

Shin, J.; Hwang, S.; Chang, M.; Park, K. Heart rate variability analysis using a ballistocardiogram during
Valsalva manoeuvre and post exercise. Physiol. Meas. 2011, 32, 1239–1264.
Koivistoinen, T.; Junnila, S.; Varri, A.; Koobi, T. A new method for measuring the ballistocardiogram using
EMFi sensors in a normal chair. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual International Conference of the IEEE
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, San Francisco, CA, USA, 1–5 September 2004; pp. 2026–2029.
Giovangrandi, L.; Inan, O.; Wiard, R.; Etemadi, M.; Kovacs, G. A method worth revisiting. In Proceedings
of the 2011 Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society,
Boston, MA, USA, 30 August–3 September 2011; pp. 4279–4282.
Heinrich, A.; Aarts, R.U.S. Automatic Car Setting Adjustments by Identifying Driver with Health Watch
Wearable or In-car Sensors. Patent Application No. 15/893,085, 30 June 2020.
Abu-Faraj, Z.; Al Chamaa, W.; Al Hadchiti, A.; Sraj, Y.; Tannous, J. Design and development of a heartattack detection steering wheel. In Proceedings of the 2018 11th International Congress on Image and Signal
Processing, BioMedical Engineering and Informatics (CISP-BMEI), Beijing, China, 13–15 October 2018; pp.
1–6.
Essers, S.; Lisseman, J.; Ruck, H. Steering wheel for active driver state detection. Auto Tech Rev. 2016, 5,
36–41.
Sudhakar, J.; Srinivasan, S. To detect drowsy & eye state analysis of driver’s behaviour for the intelligent
transport system. Indian J. Public Health Res. Dev. 2018, 9, 902–905.
Schöneburg, R.; Fehring, M.; Richert, J.; Glashagel, M.; Ruf, J.; Walz, M.; Bogenrieder, R. Effectiveness
potential of PRE-SAFE® impulse using the scenario of a major accident at an intersection as an example. In
Proceedings of the 25th International Technical Conference on the Enhanced Safety of Vehicles (ESV),
Detroit, MI, USA, 5–8 June 2017.
Schmidt, E. Effects of Thermal Stimulation during Passive Driver Fatigue. In Gestaltung hybrider MenschMaschine-Systeme/Designing Hybrid Societies; Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden: Wiesbaden, Germany, 2020;
ISBN 978-3-658-28157-1.
Li, C.; Cummings, J.; Lam, J.; Graves, E.; Wu, W. Radar remote monitoring of vital signs. IEEE Microw. Mag.
2009, 10, 47–56.
de Haan, G.; Verkruysse, W. Editorial for special issue: Contactless vital signs monitoring. Appl. Sci. 2020,
10, 166.
Yong, G.L.; Ko, K.K.; Suk, P. ECG measurement on a chair without conductive contact. IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng. 2006, 53, 956–959.
Lim, Y.; Kim, K.; Park, K. ECG recording on a bed during sleep without direct skin-contact. IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng. 2007, 54, 718–725.
Wu, K.; Zhang, Y. Contactless and continuous monitoring of heart electric activities through clothes on a
sleeping bed. In Proceedings of the 2008 International Conference on Technology and Applications in
Biomedicine, Tucson, AZ, USA, 13–17 January 2008; pp. 282–285.
Schneider, J.; Koellner, C.; Heuer, S. An approach to automotive ECG measurement validation using a carintegrated test framework. In Proceedings of the 2012 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium, Alcala de
Henares, Spain, 3–7 June 2012; pp. 950–955.
Leicht, L.; Eilebrecht, B.; Weyer, S.; Wartzek, T.; Leonhardt, S. Active humidification for capacitive-resistive
ECG-systems. Biomed. Technol. 2014, 59, 818–821.
Leicht, L.; Skobel, E.; Knackstedt, C.; Mathissen, M.; Sitter, A.; Wartzek, T.; Mohler, W.; Reith, S.; Leonhardt,
S.; Teichmann, D. Capacitive ECG monitoring in cardiac patients during simulated driving. IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng. 2019, 66, 749–758.
Jung, S.-J.; Shin, H.-S.; Chung, W.-Y. Driver fatigue and drowsiness monitoring system with embedded
electrocardiogram sensor on steering wheel. IET Intell. Transport Syst. 2014, 8, 43–50.
Weder, M.; Hegemann, D.; Amberg, M.; Hess, M.; Boesel, L.; Abächerli, R.; Meyer, V.; Rossi, R.
Embroidered electrode with silver/titanium coating for long-term ECG monitoring. Sensors 2015, 15, 1750–
1759.
Leicht, L.; Eilebrecht, B.; Weyer, S.; Leonhardt, S.; Teichmann, D. Closed-loop control of humidification for
artifact reduction in capacitive ECG measurements. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst. 2017, 11, 300–313.
Van Hoof, C.; Torfs, T. How Your Car Can Check Your Daily Health. Available online:
https://www.mwee.com/design-center/how-your-car-can-check-your-daily-health-0/page/0/3 (accessed on
30 September 2020).

Sensors 2020, 20, 5699

56.

57.
58.

59.

60.
61.

62.

63.
64.

65.
66.
67.
68.

69.
70.
71.

72.
73.
74.
75.

76.

77.

24 of 29

Inan, O. Recent advances in cardiovascular monitoring using ballistocardiography. In Proceedings of the
2012 Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, San Diego,
CA, USA, 28 August–1 September 2012; pp. 5038–5041.
Cimr, D.; Studnička, F. Automatic detection of breathing disorder from ballistocardiography signals.
Knowl. Based Syst. 2020, 188, 104973.
Scarborough, W.; Talbot, S.; Braunstein, J.; Rappaport, M.; Dock, W.; Scarborough, W.; Hamilton, W.; Smith,
J.; Nickerson, J.; Talbot, S.; et al. Proposals for ballistocardiographic nomenclature and conventions: Revised
and extended. Circulation 1956, 14, 435–450.
Tao, N.; Shao, D.U.S. Systems and Methods for Non-contact Monitoring of Ballistocardiogram,
Photoplethysmogram, Blood Pressure and Abnormal Heart Rhythm. Patent Application No. 16/083,052, 3
March 2019.
Sadek, I.; Biswas, J.; Abdulrazak, B. Ballistocardiogram signal processing: A review. Health Inf. Sci. Syst.
2019, 7, 10.
Nagura, M.; Mitsukura, Y.; Kishimoto, T.; Mimura, M. A practical BCG measuring system with bed sensors
and algorithm for heartbeat detection. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE 15th International Workshop on
Advanced Motion Control (AMC), Tokyo, Japan, 9–11 March 2018; pp. 317–321.
Nagura, M.; Mitsukura, Y.; Kishimoto, T.; Mimura, M. An estimation of heart rate variability from
ballistocardiogram measured with bed leg sensors. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE International
Conference on Industrial Technology (ICIT), Lyon, France, 20–22 February 2018; pp. 2005–2009.
Gordon, J. Certain molar movements of the human body produced by the circulation of the blood. Anat.
Physiol. 1877, 11, 533–536.
Starr, I.; Rawson, A.; Schroeder, H.; Joseph, N. Studies on the estimation of cardiac ouptut in man, and of
abnormalities in cardiac function, from the heart’s recoil and the blood's impacts the ballistocardiogram.
Am. J. Physiol. Leg. Content 1939, 127, 1–28.
Inan, O.; Etemadi, M.; Wiard, R.; Giovangrandi, L.; Kovacs, G. Robust ballistocardiogram acquisition for
home monitoring. Physiol. Meas. 2009, 30, 169–185.
Choudhary, T.; Bhuyan, M.; Bora, K.; Sharma, L. Design of Breathing-states Detector for m-Health Platform
using Seismocardiographic Signal. arXiv 2020, arXiv:2002.10510.
Mora, N.; Cocconcelli, F.; Matrella, G.; Ciampolini, P. Detection and analysis of heartbeats in
seismocardiogram signals. Sensors 2020, 20, 1670.
Mack, D.; Mack, D.; Patrie, J.; Suratt, P.; Felder, R.; Alwan, M. Development and preliminary validation of
heart rate and breathing rate detection using a passive, ballistocardiography-based sleep monitoring
system. IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed. 2009, 13, 111–120.
Jansen, B.; Larson, B.; Shankar, K. Monitoring of the ballistocardiogram with the static charge sensitive bed.
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 1991, 38, 748–751.
Bruser, C.; Stadlthanner, K.; de Waele, S.; Leonhardt, S. Adaptive beat-to-beat heart rate estimation in
ballistocardiograms. IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed. 2011, 15, 778–786.
Leonhardt, S.; Aleksandrowicz, A. Non-contact ECG monitoring for automotive application. In
Proceedings of the 2008 5th International Summer School and Symposium on Medical Devices and
Biosensors, Hong Kong, China, 1–3 June 2008; pp. 183–185.
Hyun Jae, B.; Gih S.C.; Ko, K.K.; Kwang, S.P. A smart health monitoring chair for nonintrusive
measurement of biological signals. IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed. 2012, 16, 150–158.
Harken Heart and Respiration in-Car Embedded Non Intrusive Sensors. 2016. Available online:
https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/286265/reporting (accessed on 30 September 2020).
Wusk, G.; Gabler, H. Non-invasive detection of respiration and heart rate with a vehicle seat sensor. Sensors
2018, 18, 1463.
Scheunemann, J.; Unni, A.; Ihme, K.; Jipp, M.; Rieger, J. Demonstrating brain-level interactions between
visuospatial attentional demands and working memory load while driving using functional near-infrared
spectroscopy. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 2019, 12, 542.
Kawala-Sterniuk, A.; Podpora, M.; Pelc, M.; Blaszczyszyn, M.; Gorzelanczyk, E.; Martinek, R.; Ozana, S.
Comparison of smoothing filters in analysis of eeg data for the medical diagnostics purposes. Sensors 2020,
20, 807.
Qin, T.; Cao, S.; Pan, J.; Shen, S. A general optimization-based framework for global pose estimation with
multiple Sensors. arXiv 2019, arXiv:1901.03642.

Sensors 2020, 20, 5699

78.
79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.
85.

86.
87.

88.

89.

90.
91.

92.
93.
94.

95.

25 of 29

Antink, C.; Gao, H.; Brüser, C.; Leonhardt, S. Beat-to-beat heart rate estimation fusing multimodal video
and sensor data. Biomed. Opt. Express 2015, 6, 2895–2905.
Shandhi, M.; Semiz, B.; Hersek, S.; Goller, N.; Ayazi, F.; Inan, O. Performance analysis of gyroscope and
accelerometer sensors for seismocardiography-based wearable pre-ejection period estimation. IEEE J.
Biomed. Health Inform. 2019, 23, 2365–2374.
Castiglioni, P.; Faini, A.; Parati, G.; Di Rienzo, M. Wearable seismocardiography. In Proceedings of the 2007
29th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, Lyon,
France, 22–26 August 2007; pp. 3954–3957.
Di Rienzo, M.; Meriggi, P.; Rizzo, F.; Vaini, E.; Faini, A.; Merati, G.; Parati, G.; Castiglioni, P. A wearable
system for the seismocardiogram assessment in daily life conditions. In Proceedings of the 2011 Annual
International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, Boston, MA, USA, 30
August–3 September 2011; pp. 4263–4266.
Migeotte, P.; Tank, J.; Pattyn, N.; Funtova, I.; Baevsky, R.; Neyt, X.; Prisk, G. Three dimensional
ballistocardiography: Methodology and results from microgravity and dry immersion. In Proceedings of
the 2011 Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, Boston,
MA, USA, 30 August–3 September 2011; pp. 4271–4274.
Gih Sung, C.; Jeong, S.L.; Su Hwan, H.; Young, K.L.; Do-Un, J.; Kwang, S.P. Wakefulness estimation only
using ballistocardiogram: Nonintrusive method for sleep monitoring. In Proceedings of the 2010 Annual
International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 31
August–4 September 2010; pp. 2459–2462.
Paalasmaa, J. A respiratory latent variable model for mechanically measured heartbeats. Physiol. Meas. 2010,
31, 1331–1344.
He, D.; Winokur, E.; Sodini, C. A continuous, wearable, and wireless heart monitor using head
ballistocardiogram (BCG) and head electrocardiogram (ECG). In Proceedings of the 2011 Annual
International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, Boston, MA, USA, 30
August–3 September 2011; pp. 4729–4732.
Mandelbaum, H.; Mandelbaum, R. Studies utilizing the portable electromagnetic ballistocardiograph.
Circulation 1953, 7, 910–915.
Gurkan, D.; Starodubov, D. Xiaojing yuan monitoring of the heartbeat sounds using an optical fiber bragg
grating sensor. In Proceedings of the IEEE Sensors, Irvine, CA, USA, 30 October–3 November 2005; pp.
306–309.
Romaniuk, R.; Linczuk, M.; Fajkus, M.; Nedoma, J.; Martinek, R.; Walendziuk, W. Comparison of the FBG
sensor encapsulated into PDMS and FBG sensor glued on the plexiglass pad for respiratory and heart rate
monitoring. In Proceedings of the Photonics Applications in Astronomy, Communications, Industry, and
High-Energy Physics Experiments, Wilga, Poland, 28 May–6 June 2017.
Lo Presti, D.; Massaroni, C.; D'Abbraccio, J.; Massari, L.; Caponero, M.; Longo, U.; Formica, D.; Oddo, C.;
Schena, E. Wearable system based on flexible FBG for respiratory and cardiac monitoring. IEEE Sens. J.
2019, 19, 7391–7398.
Presti, D.; Massaroni, C.; Formica, D.; Saccomandi, P.; Giurazza, F.; Caponero, M.; Schena, E. Smart textile
based on 12 fiber bragg gratings array for vital signs monitoring. IEEE Sens. J. 2017, 17, 6037–6043.
Sadek, I.; Biswas, J.; Fook, V.; Mokhtari, M. Automatic heart rate detection from FBG sensors using sensor
fusion and enhanced empirical mode decomposition. In Proceedings of the 2015 IEEE International
Symposium on Signal Processing and Information Technology (ISSPIT), Abu Dhabi, UAE, 7–10 December
2015; pp. 349–353.
Xu, Y.; Luo, M.; Li, T.; Song, G. ECG signal de-noising and baseline wander correction based on ceemdan
and wavelet threshold. Sensors 2017, 17, 2754.
Futatsuyama, K.; Mitsumoto, N.; Kawachi, T.; Nakagawa, T. Noise Robust optical sensor for driver’s vital
signs. SAE Tech. Pap. 2011, doi:10.4271/2011-01-1024.
Jeong, I.; Lee, D.; Park, S.; Ko, J.; Yoon, H. Automobile driver’s stress index provision system that utilizes
electrocardiogram. In Proceedings of the 2007 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium, Istanbul, Turkey, 13–
15 June 2007; pp. 652–656.
Lee, H.; Choi, J.; Kim, J.; Kim, Y.; Baek, H.; Ryu, M.; Sohn, R.; Park, K. Nonintrusive biosignal measurement
system in a vehicle. In Proceedings of the 2007 29th Annual International Conference of the IEEE
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, Lyon, France, 22–26 August 2007; pp. 2303–2306.

Sensors 2020, 20, 5699

96.
97.
98.

99.
100.

101.

102.

103.
104.
105.

106.

107.
108.
109.
110.
111.
112.
113.
114.
115.

26 of 29

Heung-Sub, S.; Sang-Joong, J.; Jong-Jin, K. Wan-Young Chung Real time car driver’s condition monitoring
system. In Proceedings of the 2010 IEEE Sensors, Kona, HI, USA, 1–4 November 2010; pp. 951–954.
Choi, Y.J.; Lee, J.Y.; Kong, S.H. Driver ECG Measuring System With a Conductive Fabric-Based Dry
Electrode. IEEE Access 2018, 6, 415–427.
Heuer, S.; Chamadiya, B.; Gharbi, A.; Kunze, C.; Wagner, M. Unobtrusive in-vehicle biosignal
instrumentation for advanced driver assistance and active safety. In Proceedings of the 2010 IEEE EMBS
Conference on Biomedical Engineering and Sciences (IECBES), Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, 30 November–2
December 2010; pp. 252–256.
Gomez-Clapers, J.; Casanella, R. A Fast and easy-to-use ECG acquisition and heart rate monitoring system
using a wireless steering wheel. IEEE Sens. J. 2012, 12, 610–616.
Silva, H.; Lourenço, A.; Fred, A. In-vehicle driver recognition based on hand ECG signals. In Proceedings
of the 2012 ACM International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces—IUI’12, Lisbon, Portugal, 14–17
February 2012; ACM Press: New York, NY, USA, 2012.
Osaka, M. Customized heart check system by using integrated information of electrocardiogram and
plethysmogram outside the driver’s awareness from an automobile steering wheel. In Advances in
Electrocardiograms—Methods and Analysis; Millis, R., Ed.; INTECH Open Access: London, UK, 2012; ISBN
978–953-307–923-3.
Matsuda, T.; Makikawa, M. ECG monitoring of a car driver using capacitively-coupled electrodes. In
Proceedings of the 2008 30th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and
Biology Society, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 20–25 August 2008; pp. 1315–1318.
Baek, H.; Lee, H.; Kim, J.; Choi, J.; Kim, K.; Park, K. Nonintrusive biological signal monitoring in a car to
evaluate a driver’s stress and health state. Telemed. eHealth 2009, 15, 182–189.
Xu, X.; Ta, L. A novel driver-friendly ecg monitoring system based on capacitive-coupled electrode. Inf.
Technol. J. 2013, 12, 4730–4734.
Acerra, E.; Pazzini, M.; Ghasemi, N.; Vignali, V.; Lantieri, C.; Simone, A.; Di Flumeri, G.; Aricò, P.; Borghini,
G.; Sciaraffa, N.; et al. EEG-based mental workload and perception-reaction time of the drivers while using
adaptive cruise control. In Human Mental Workload: Models and Applications; Longo, L., Leva, M., Eds.;
Communications in Computer and Information Science; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2019; pp.
226–239, ISBN 978–3-030–32422-3.
Kawala-Janik, A.; Bauer, W.; Al-Bakri, A.; Haddix, C.; Yuvaraj, R.; Cichon, K.; Podraza, W. Implementation
of low-pass fractional filtering for the purpose of analysis of electroencephalographic signals. In Non-Integer
Order Calculus and its Applications; Ostalczyk, P., Sankowski, D., Nowakowski, J., Eds.; Lecture Notes in
Electrical Engineering; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2019; pp. 63–73, ISBN 978-3-319-78457-1.
Kawala-Janik, A.; Pelc, M.; Podpora, M. Method for EEG Signals pattern recognition in embedded systems.
Elektron. Elektrotechnika 2015, 21, 3–9.
Karthaus, M.; Wascher, E.; Getzmann, S.; Yao, D. Proactive vs. reactive car driving: EEG evidence for
different driving strategies of older drivers. PLoS ONE 2018, 13, e0191500.
Hajinoroozi, M.; Mao, Z.; Jung, T.; Lin, C.; Huang, Y. EEG-based prediction of driver's cognitive
performance by deep convolutional neural network. Signal. Process. Image Commun. 2016, 47, 549–555.
Osama, M.; Aslam, M. Emotive EPOC+ fed electrical muscle stimulation system; an inexpensive braincomputer interface for rehabilitation of neuro-muscular disorders. J. Pak. Med Assoc. 2020, 3, 525–530.
Kim, J.; Lee, J.; Han, C.; Park, K. An instant donning multi-channel eeg headset (with comb-shaped dry
electrodes) and bci applications. Sensors 2019, 19, 1537.
Sawangjai, P.; Hompoonsup, S.; Leelaarporn, P.; Kongwudhikunakorn, S.; Wilaiprasitporn, T. Consumer
Grade EEG measuring sensors as research tools: A review. IEEE Sens. J. 2020, 20, 3996–4024.
Chuang, K.; Lin, Y. Cost-efficient, portable, and custom multi-subject electroencephalogram recording
system. IEEE Access 2019, 7, 56760–56769.
Awangga, R.; Pane, S.; Simamora, D.; Asyhari, M. MILA: Low-cost BCI framework for acquiring EEG data
with IoT. Telkomnika 2020, 18, 846–852.
Raja, P.; Akash, D.; Kumar, S.; Harsha, D.; Arunachalaperumal, C. Feature extraction and classification of
EEG signal based anomaly detection and home automation for physically challenged/impaired people
using neurosky mindwave headset. AIP Conf. Proc. 2020, 2207, 040006.

Sensors 2020, 20, 5699

27 of 29

116. Hammadi, K.; Ismaeel, M.; Faisal, T. Intelligent car safety system. In Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE Industrial
Electronics and Applications Conference (IEACon), Kota Kinabalu, Malaysia, 20–22 November 2016; pp.
319–322.
117. Nissimagoudar, P.; Nandi, A. Precision enhancement of driver assistant system using eeg based driver
consciousness analysis & classification. In Computational Network Application Tools for Performance
Management; Pant, M., Sharma, T., Basterrech, S., Banerjee, C., Eds.; Asset Analytics; Springer: Singapore,
2020; pp. 247–257, ISBN 978-981-32-9584-1.
118. Lin, Y.; Chen, T.; Chen, W. Cost-efficient and custom electrode-holder assembly infrastructure for EEG
recordings. Sensors 2019, 19, 4273.
119. Stach, T.; Browarska, N.; Kawala-Janik, A. Initial Study on Using Emotiv EPOC+ Neuroheadset as a Control
Device for Picture Script-Based Communicators. IFAC Pap. 2018, 51, 180–184.
120. Chin-Teng, L.; Ruei-Cheng, W.; Sheng-Fu, L.; Wen-Hung, C.; Yu-Jie, C.; Tzyy-Ping, J. EEG-based
drowsiness estimation for safety driving using independent component analysis. IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst.
I Regul. Pap. 2005, 52, 2726–2738.
121. Liu, M.; Chen, H. Pre-research for long-term driving monitoring system based on physiological signals. In
Proceedings of the 2016 6th International Conference on Advanced Design and Manufacturing Engineering
(ICADME 2016), Zhuhai, China, 23–24 July 2016; Atlantis Press: Paris, France, 2016.
122. Bauer, P.; Hiba, A.; Zarandy, A. Comparison of mono camera-based static obstacle position estimation
methods for automotive application. In Proceedings of the 2019 27th Mediterranean Conference on Control
and Automation (MED), Akko, Israel, 1–4 July 2019; pp. 386–391.
123. Joy, J.; Gerla, M. Internet of vehicles and autonomous connected car—Privacy and security issues. In
Proceedings of the 2017 26th International Conference on Computer Communication and Networks
(ICCCN), Vancouver, BC, Canada, 31 July–3 August 2017; pp. 1–9.
124. Nowara, E.; Marks, T.; Mansour, H.; Veeraraghavan, A. SparsePPG: Towards driver monitoring using
camera-based vital signs estimation in near-infrared. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops (CVPRW), Salt Lake City, USA, 18–22 June 2018; pp.
1353–135309.
125. Schires, E.; Georgiou, P.; Lande, T. Vital sign monitoring through the back using an uwb impulse radar
with body coupled antennas. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst. 2018, 12, 292–302.
126. Munoz-Ferreras, J.; Peng, Z.; Gomez-Garcia, R.; Li, C. Random body movement mitigation for FMCWradar-based vital-sign monitoring. In Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE Topical Conference on Biomedical
Wireless Technologies, Networks, and Sensing Systems (BioWireleSS), Austin, TX, USA, 24–27 January
2016; pp. 22–24.
127. Lohman, B.; Boric-Lubecke, O.; Lubecke, V.; Ong, P.; Sondhi, M. A digital signal processor for Doppler
radar sensing of vital signs. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Mag. 2002, 21, 161–164.
128. Leem, S.; Khan, F.; Cho, S. Vital Sign monitoring and mobile phone usage detection using ir-uwb radar for
intended use in car crash prevention. Sensors 2017, 17, 1240.
129. Zito, D.; Pepe, D.; Mincica, M.; Zito, F.; Tognetti, A.; Lanata, A.; De Rossi, D. SoC CMOS UWB Pulse Radar
Sensor for Contactless Respiratory Rate Monitoring. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst. 2011, 5, 503–510.
130. Tsuchida, Y.; Shimoji, H.; Todaka, T.; Enokizono, M.; Yamane, H.; Enoki, Y.; Fujita, E. Development of a
magnetic seat sensor for monitoring condition of a car driver. In Proceedings of the INTERMAG Asia
Digests of the IEEE International Magnetics Conference, Nagoya, Japan, 4–8 April 2005; pp. 439–440.
131. Lim, Y.; Gardi, A.; Pongsakornsathien, N.; Sabatini, R.; Ezer, N.; Kistan, T. Experimental characterisation
of eye-tracking sensors for adaptive human-machine systems. Measurement 2019, 140, 151–160.
132. Ahmed, H.; Salma, A. A survey on human eye-gaze tracking (EGT) system “a comparative study”. Iraqi J.
Inf. Technol. 2019, 9, 3.
133. Zhao, Q.; Zhang, L.; Cichocki, A. EEG-based asynchronous BCI control of a car in 3D virtual reality
environments. Chin. Sci. Bull. 2009, 54, 78–87.
134. Tan, F.; Liu, Z.; Chen, S.; Yu, C. Vital signs monitoring using twin core fiber-based sensor. In Proceedings
of the 2019 24th OptoElectronics and Communications Conference (OECC) and 2019 International
Conference on Photonics in Switching and Computing (PSC), Fukuoka, Japan, 7–11 July 2019; pp. 1–3.
135. Xu, W.; Shen, Y.; Yu, C.; Dong, B.; Zhao, W.; Wang, Y. Long modal interference in multimode fiber and its
application in vital signs monitoring. Opt. Commun. 2020, 474, 1–7.

Sensors 2020, 20, 5699

28 of 29

136. Niederhauser, J. An engineer’s approach: How can 10–100 μT, 10–100 Hz magnetic field influence human
cardiovascular regulation? Int. J. Bioelectromagn. 2018, 20, 90–95.
137. Lazaro, A.; Girbau, D.; Villarino, R. Techniques for Clutter Suppression in the Presence of Body Movements
during the Detection of Respiratory Activity through UWB Radars. Sensors 2014, 14, 2595–2618.
138. Engelberg, J.; Hill, L.; Rybar, J.; Styer, T. Distracted driving behaviors related to cell phone use among
middle-aged adults. J. Transp. Health 2015, 2, 434–440.
139. Khan, F.; Cho, S. A detailed algorithm for vital sign monitoring of a stationary/non-stationary human
through ir-uwb radar. Sensors 2017, 17, 290.
140. Chen, M.; Castro, I.; Lin, Q.; Torfs, T.; Tavernier, F.; Van Hoof, C.; Van Helleputte, N. A 400GΩ InputImpedance, 220MVinfpp/inf Linear-Input-Range, 2.8Vinfpp/inf CM-Interference-Tolerant Active Electrode
for Non-Contact Capacitively Coupled ECG Acquisition. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE Symposium on
VLSI Circuits, Hilton Hawaiian Village, HI, USA, 18–22 June 2018; pp. 129–130.
141. Fang, B.; Lane, N.; Zhang, M.; Boran, A.; Kawsar, F. BodyScan. In Proceedings of the Proceedings of the 14th
Annual International Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications, and Services—MobiSys ’16; ACM Press: New
York, NY, USA, 2016; pp. 97–110.
142. Briko, A.; Chvanova, J.; Kobelev, A.; Shchukin, S. Evaluation of the electrode system pressure force
influence on neuro muscular activity signals. Int. J. Bioelectromagn. 2018, 20, 28–31.
143. Alizadeh, M.; Shaker, G.; Safavi-Naeini, S. Experimental study on the phase analysis of FMCW radar for
vital signs detection. In Proceedings of the 2019 13th European Conference on Antennas and Propagation
(EuCAP), Krakow, Poland, 31 March–5 April 2019.
144. Lupinska-Dubicka, A.; Tabędzki, M.; Adamski, M.; Rybnik, M.; Szymkowski, M.; Omieljanowicz, M.;
Gruszewski, M.; Klimowicz, A.; Rubin, G.; Zienkiewicz, L. Vehicle Passengers Detection for Onboard eCallCompliant Devices. In Advances in Soft and Hard Computing; Pejaś, J., El Fray, I., Hyla, T., Kacprzyk, J., Eds.;
Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2019; pp. 408–419,
ISBN 978–3-030–03313-2.
145. Hoog Antink, C.; Schulz, F.; Leonhardt, S.; Walter, M. Motion artifact quantification and sensor fusion for
unobtrusive health monitoring. Sensors 2018, 18, 38.
146. Manjula, B.M.; Prasantha, H.S.; Goutham, M.A. Delayed LMS Algorithm for Ballistocardiogram Biomedical
Signal. Int. J. Eng. Adv. Technol. 2020, 9, 77–81.
147. Manjula, B.; Sharma, C. Ballistocardiography signal filtering using adaptive least mean square algorithm.
In Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE International Conference on Recent Trends in Electronics, Information &
Communication Technology (RTEICT), Bangalore, India, 20–21 May 2016; pp. 127–131.
148. Inan, O.; Etemadi, M.; Widrow, B.; Kovacs, G. Adaptive cancellation of floor vibrations in standing
ballistocardiogram measurements using a seismic sensor as a noise reference. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 2010,
57, 722–727.
149. Inan, O.; Etemadi, M.; Wiard, R.; Giovangrandi, L.; Kovacs, G. Evaluating the foot electromyogram signal
as a noise reference for a bathroom scale ballistocardiogram recorder. In Proceedings of the 2008 21st IEEE
International Symposium on Computer-Based Medical Systems, Jyvaskyla, Finland, 17–19 June 2008; pp.
70–74.
150. Yang, C.; Tavassolian, N. Motion noise cancellation in seismocardiographic monitoring of moving subjects.
In Proceedings of the 2015 IEEE Biomedical Circuits and Systems Conference (BioCAS), Atlanta, GA, USA,
22–24 October 2015; pp. 1–4.
151. Etemadi, M.; Inan, O. Wearable ballistocardiogram and seismocardiogram systems for health and
performance. J. Appl. Physiol. 2018, 124, 452–461.
152. Postolache, O.; Girao, P.; Mendes, J.; Pinheiro, E.; Postolache, G. Physiological Parameters Measurement
Based on Wheelchair Embedded Sensors and Advanced Signal Processing. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 2010,
59, 2564–2574.
153. Manjula, B.M.; Sharma, C. BCG Artifact Removal Using Improved Independent Component Analysis
Approach. Indones. J. Electr. Eng. Comput. Sci. 2017, 5, 130–138.
154. Javed, E.; Faye, I.; Malik, A.; Abdullah, J. Reference-free reduction of ballistocardiogram artifact from EEG
data using EMD-PCA. In Proceedings of the 2014 5th International Conference on Intelligent and Advanced
Systems (ICIAS), Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, 3–5 June 2014; pp. 1–6.
155. Javed, E.; Faye, I.; Malik, A.; Abdullah, J. Removal of BCG artefact from concurrent fMRI-EEG recordings
based on EMD and PCA. J. Neurosci. Methods 2017, 291, 150–165.

Sensors 2020, 20, 5699

29 of 29

156. Elrod, S.; Dabney, R.U.S. Health Monitoring System for Car Seat. Patent Application No. 10/392, 26 October
2004.
157. Bellamy, K.U.S. Health monitoring car seat assembly. Patent Application No. 15/878, 25 July 2019.
158. Tausch, G.; Lüthke, T. Device for analyzing state e.g. health of driver, has processing module to analyze
time-and-frequency-domain HRV parameters in digital signal to display stress state and activity of nervous
system of driver on traffic light system. Patent No. DE102012002037B4, 5 March 2015.
159. Xu, Q.; Wang, B.; Zhang, F.; Regani, D.; Wang, F.; Liu, K. Wireless AI in Smart Car: How Smart a Car Can
Be? IEEE Access 2020, 8, 55091–55112.
160. Mahajan, A.; Bhat, K. A smart car: Synergetic combination of low cost multiple sensors for safety and
accident prevention. J. Diabetes Sci. Technol. 2019, 6, 1–3.
161. Jacobsen, M.; Dembek, T.; Kobbe, G.; Gaidzik, P.; Heinemann, L. Noninvasive continuous monitoring of
vital signs with wearables: Fit for medical use? J. Diabetes Sci. Technol. 2020, doi:10.1177/1932296820904947.
© 2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

