www.ijecs.in
International Journal Of Engineering And Computer Science ISSN: 2319-7242
Volume 5 Issues 7 July 2016, Page No. 17260-17267

Brain Computer Interface applications and classification techniques
T. Shashibala, Bharti W. Gawali
Department of CS and IT, Dr. B.A.M.University,
Aurangabad, Maharashtra, India.
shashibala.rao@gmail.com
bharti_rokade@yahoo.com

Abstract: Brain Computer Interface(BCI) has provided a direct medium of communication between human beings and external
devices. It is a boon for people with severe motor disorders as it provides means of control and communication for them. Recently more
efforts on out of the lab BCI based research with the help of Electroencephalogram (EEG) signals from brain has provided many
applications. In this technology, specific features of brain activity are considered and transformed into device control actions. This kind
of interface would help disabled individuals to become independent thus improving their quality of life.

Keywords: Brain Computer, Electroencephalogram, brain activity, device control.
usability and functionality, while the focus of entertainment
applications should be on pleasure and entertainment [3].
1. Introduction
Brain computer interface (BCI), a hardware and software
system, provides interaction to a computer directly from the
user's brain has received considerable attention in the past
years. BCI has the ability to transfer and use information from
distinct brain states for communicating with a machine. It can
offer people with severe disabilities an additional means of
communication, and restore the damaged motor control
function. The communication systems based on brain activity
play an important role and provide a new form of
communication and control, either to increase the integration
into the society or to provide to these people tools for
interaction with their environment without constant support.
Now it is possible to distribute tasks of a complex system over
different computers communicating with each other and to
process acquired data in a parallel manner and in real-time.
New developments in computer hardware and software has
boosted the growth of BCI based research in the past decade.
There have been speculations that it could be used to translate
thoughts or intents, such that a person will be able to control
devices directly from the brain, with the help of electrical
devices, bypassing the normal channels of peripheral nerves
and muscles [1]. BCI technology has also found its use for nonmedical purposes. Here, not only communication is central, but
BCI technology has gained popularity in the form of
measurement devices for brain states such as attention,
performance capability, emotion etc., in real-time. The signals
extracted by BCI techniques are then employed to optimize and
to enhance human performance and to achieve potentially
novel types of skills. A wider use of BCI technology has
become possible only through the use of modern machine
learning and signal processing methods, that allowed to
relocate the burden of training from a learning subject toward
statistical learning machines and thereby achieve BCI
communication for a naive user [2]. The focus of evaluation for
communication and functional applications should be on

2. Types of BCI
Signal recordings of brain activity used by BCI can be either:
1 Invasive - Invasive BCI require surgery to implant electrodes
directly on or inside the cortex, the advantage are the
electrodes lie in the gray matter of the brain and invasive BCI
produces the highest-quality signals. The disadvantage being
the surgery is dangerous and risky and it is very expensive.
2 Partially invasive Partially invasive BCI devices are
implanted inside the skull, but rest outside the brain rather than
within the gray matter. The advantage are better quality signals
than non invasive BCI and less risky than invasive BCI. The
disadvantage being this approach typically results in a
permanent hole in the skull.
3 Noninvasive - Whereas in noninvasive BCI, there are no
implants. The advantages are it is applicable even in low
quality signal and It is safest, as no surgery is required. The
disadvantage being Muscle movement in noninvasive BCI can
create artifacts and noninvasive implants produce poor signal
resolution[4]. Noninvasive BCI can use various brain signals as
inputs,
such
as
electroencephalograms
(EEG),
magnetoencephalograms
(MEG),
blood-oxygen-leveldependent (BOLD) signals, and (de) oxyhemoglobin
concentrations [5].
2.1 Electroencephalogram (EEG)
Since the first mention of alpha rhythm by Hans Berger [1929],
EEG signals have been mostly used for diagnosis of
neurological problems and the functioning of the brain.
However, due to the large amount of data to be analyzed, it
could attract serious scientific attention only in the last decade.
Working with EEG is the most convenient method and
therefore the BCI is based on detecting the EEG signals
associated with certain mental states [6].

T. Shashibala, IJECS Volume 5 Issue 7 July 2016 Page No.17260-17267

Page 17260

DOI: 10.18535/ijecs/v5i7.14
EEG signals are created by the firing of neurons in the brain.
They are measured using electrodes attached to the scalp,
which are sensitive to changes in postsynaptic potentials of
neurons in the cerebral cortex. It is usually initiated in the cell
body and normally travels in one direction. The membrane
potential depolarizes (becomes more positive), producing a
spike. After the peak of the spike the membrane depolarizes
(becomes more negative). The potential becomes more
negative than the resting potential and then returns to normal.
The action potentials of most nerves last between 5 and 10
milliseconds. Postsynaptic potentials are created by the
combination of inhibitory and excitatory potentials located in
the dendrites.The average of the potentials are amplified and
combined to show rhythmic activity that is classified by
frequency. Electrodes are usually placed along the scalp based
on 10-20 system as shown in figure 1 [7] to measure
brainwaves of different frequencies. There are five major brain
waves distinguished by their different frequency ranges. These
frequency bands from low to high frequencies respectively are
called delta (δ) having range of 0.5 - 4 Hz, theta (θ) with range
of 4 - 7Hz , alpha (α) in the range of 8 - 13Hz, beta (β) having
range of 13 - 30Hz and gamma (γ ) the range is higher than 30
Hz [8].

Figure 2: Wired EEG devices

Wireless mostly used for gaming, entertainment and research.
Advantages are easy to use, convenient for user and very less
preparation time. Disadvantage is noisy signals may be
captured. Some of the companies manufacturing wireless eeg
are emotiv, neurosky, mattel as in figure 3.

Figure 3: Wireless EEG devices
2.3 BCI based tasks
2.3.1. Visual-evoked potentials
Visual-evoked potentials (VEPs) define a dependent BCI, i.e.,
they depend on oculomotor control of gaze direction, such that
activity in the normal information pathways, e.g., peripheral
nerves and muscles is needed to generate the brain activity. A
dependent BCI is essentially an alternative method for
detecting messages carried out in the brain’s normal output
pathways, but does not give the user a new communication
channel that is independent of conventional channels.
Figure 1: International 10-20 system of electrodes placement
2.2 EEG Devices for BCI
Depending on the type of connection between the electrodes,
analog circuit, digital system and computing devices, we can
divide BCI systems into two kinds, wired and wireless BCI
systems [9].
Wired EEG devices mostly used in research,the advantage is
low noise, more accuracy, disadvantage being more preparation
time, inconvenient for user and immobility. Some of
commercially available devices are Advanced brain mapping,
Nihon kohden, neurosoft, RMS India as seen in figure 2.

2.3.2. P300-based BCI
BCI systems are defined to be independent, if they do not rely
on any muscular activity, if the message is not carried by
peripheral nerves and muscles, and, furthermore, if activity in
these pathways is not needed to generate the brain activity
(e.g., EEG) that does carry the message. For example, a subject
waiting for the occurrence of a rare stimulus on the background
of a series of standard stimuli evokes a Positive peak over
parietal cortex about 300 ms (P300) after appearance.
However, those techniques remain limited to letter selection
paradigms, similar to that one described in the previous
subsection. Approaches for independent BCIs are of greater
theoretical interest than for dependent BCIs, because they offer
the brain a completely new output pathway and are likely to be
more useful for people with most severe neuromuscular
disabilities.
2.3.3. BCI based on motor imagery
In Albany, New York, Jonathan Wolpaw directs the
development of a BCI system that lets the user steer a cursor by
oscillatory brain activity into one of two or four possible

T. Shashibala, IJECS Volume 5 Issue 7 July 2016 Page No.17260-17267

Page 17261

DOI: 10.18535/ijecs/v5i7.14
targets [10]. In the first training sessions most of the subjects
use some kind of motor imagery, which is then, during further
feedback sessions, replaced by adapted strategies. Well-trained
users achieve hit rates of over 90% in the two-target set-up;
however, each selection typically takes 4–5 s. The lab in Graz
of Gert Pfurtscheller develops a BCI system that is based on
event-related modulations of the mu and/or the central betarhythm of sensorimotor cortices. For control paradigm the
focus is on motor preparation and imagination. Feature vectors
calculated from spontaneous EEG signals by adaptive autoregressive modelling are used to train a classifier.
2.3.4. ERD and ERS
The ERD and ERS are event-related components that occur in
relation to a response rather than a stimulus. The ERD and ERS
are desynchronization and synchronization events, respectively
(Schomer and Lopes da Silva 2011), around a motor response.
The ERD occurs in the 1 s that precedes a response in both the
mu (8–14 Hz) and beta bands (14–25 Hz). In contrast, the ERS
is only shown in the beta band and is strongest in the 1–2 s
period after a response [11].
2.3.5. Slow cortical potentials
Slow cortical potentials (SCP) are voltage shifts generated in
cortex lasting over 0.5–10 s. Slow negative shifts are usually
associated with cortical activation, e.g., evoked by the
implementation of a movement or by the accomplishment of a
mental task, whereas positive shifts indicate cortical relaxation.
After repeated training sessions over months, through which
patients achieve accuracy over 75%, they are switched to a
letter support program, which allows selection of up to 3
letters/min. A new letter selection protocol, involving a
predictive algorithm that uses a set of first letters of a word to
select the whole word from a lexicon which adapts to the user’s
vocabulary simultaneously, increases the communication rate
and provides Internet access to a disabled user [12].

3

General Structure of BCI

Figure 4: General BCI structure
Figure 4 shows the functional model of a BCI system. The
figure depicts a generic BCI system in which a person controls
a device in an operating environment (e.g., a powered
wheelchair in a house) through a series of functional
components. In this context, the user’s brain activity is used to
generate the control signals that operate the BCI system. The
user monitors the state of the device to determine the result of
his/her control efforts. In some systems, the user may also be
presented with a control display, which displays the control
signals generated by the BCI system from his/her brain activity.
The electrodes placed on the head of the user record the brain

signal from the scalp, or the surface of the brain, or from the
neural activity within the brain, and convert this brain activity
to electrical signals. The feature extraction block shown in
figure 4 removes the artifacts from the electrical signal after it
has been amplified. Note that many transducer designs do not
include artifact processing. The classification block transforms
the resultant signals into feature values that correspond to the
underlying neurological mechanism employed by the user for
control. For example, if the user is to control the power of
his/her mu (8–12 Hz) and beta (13–30 Hz) rhythms, the feature
generator would continually generate features relating to the
power spectral estimates of the user’s mu and beta rhythms.
The control interface translates the logical control signals into
semantic control signals that are appropriate for the particular
type of device used.

4

Classification Techniques

Widely used classification techniques in BCI research are
support vector machines (SVM), linear discriminant analysis
(LDA), Artificial Neural Network (ANN), Hidden Markov
Model(HMM) and statistical classifiers.
4.1
Support Vector Machine(SVM)
SVM is a useful technique for data classification. Even though
it’s considered that Neural Networks are easier to use than this,
however, sometimes unsatisfactory results are obtained. A
classification task usually involves with training and testing
data which consist of some data instances. Each instance in the
training set contains one target values and several attributes.
The goal of SVM is to produce a model which predicts target
value of data instances in the testing set which are given only
the attributes.
Classification in SVM is an example of Supervised Learning.
Known labels help indicate whether the system is performing in
a right way or not. This information points to a desired
response, validating the accuracy of the system, or be used to
help the system learn to act correctly. A step in SVM
classification involves identification as which are intimately
connected to the known classes. This is called feature selection
or feature extraction. Feature selection and SVM classification
together have a use even when prediction of unknown samples
is not necessary. They can be used to identify key sets which
are involved in whatever processes distinguish the classes.
There are many linear classifiers (hyper planes) that separate
the data. However only one of these achieves maximum
separation. The reason we need it is because if we use a hyper
plane to classify, it might end up closer to one set of data sets
compared to others and we do not want this to happen and thus
we see that the concept of maximum margin classifier or hyper
plane as an apparent solution. The next illustration gives the
maximum margin classifier example which provides a solution
to the above mentioned problem Expression for Maximum
margin is given as
m a rg in 

a rg m in d ( x )  a rg m in
x D

x D

xw  b
d

 i 1 w i

2

For calculating the SVM we see that the goal is to correctly
classify all the data. For mathematical calculations we have,

T. Shashibala, IJECS Volume 5 Issue 7 July 2016 Page No.17260-17267

wx i  b  1

Page 17262

DOI: 10.18535/ijecs/v5i7.14
In this equation x is a vector point and w is weight and is also a
vector. So to separate the data should always be greater than
zero. Among all possible hyper planes, SVM selects the one
where the distance of hyper plane, as in figure 5 is as large as
possible. If the training data is good and every test vector is
located in radius r from training vector. Now if the chosen
hyper plane is located at the farthest possible from the data.
This desired hyper plane which maximizes the margin also
bisects the lines between closest points on convex hull of the
two datasets [13][14].

within the classes, while trace (Sb) measures the separation
between classes[15].
Where mi = ¹/ni ∑ x ɛ ᴨi , x is the global mean. It is easy to
verify that trace (Sw) measures the closeness of the vectors
within the classes, while trace (Sb) measures the separation
between classes[15].
4.3
Artificial Neural Network (ANN)
Computational models of neurons McCulloch and Pitts
proposed a binary threshold unit as a computational model for
an artificial neuron (see Figure 2). This mathematical neuron
computes a weighted sum of its n input signals,x, j = 1,2, . . . ,
n, and generates an output of 1 if this sum is above a certain
threshold μ. Otherwise, an output of 0 results. Mathematically,
 n
y   
 j 1

Figure 5: Representation of Hyper planes.
4.2

Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA)

LDA is a transform-based method which attempts to minimize
the ratio of within-class scatter to the between class scatter. The
mathematical formulation involved in the theory of LDA is
explained in the following sections. A within-class scatter
matrix defines the scatter of samples around their respective
class centers (means).
Given a matrix A ɛ RNxn , LDA aims to find a transformation
G ɛ RN1that maps each column ai of Ai for 1≤ i ≤ n , in the Ndimensional space to a vector bi in the 1-dimensional space.
That is G : ai ɛ RN ˃ bi = GT ai ɛ Rl (l < N). LDA aims to
find a vector space G spanned by gi where G = {g1, g2,…gl}
such that each ai is projected onto G by (g1T.ai ,……..,g1T.ai)
ɛ Rl.
Assume that the original data in A partitioned into k classes as
A = { ᴨ1, ᴨ2, …., ᴨk} where ᴨ, contains ni points from the ith
class, and ∑ki=1 ni =n. LDA aims to find the optimal
transformation G such that the class structure of the original
high dimensional space is preserved in the low dimensional
space.

w x
j

j


 u


where θ( .) is a unit step function at 0, and w, is the synapse
weight associated with the jth input. For simplicity of notation,
we often consider the threshold μ as another weight w0 = - μ
attached to the neuron with a constant input x0= 1. Positive
weights correspond to excitatory synapses, while negative
weights model inhibitory ones. McCulloch and Pitts proved
that, in principle, suitably chosen weights let a synchronous
arrangement of such neurons perform universal computations.
There is a crude analogy here to a biological neuron: wires and
interconnections model axons and dendrites, connection
weights represent synapses, and the threshold function
approximates the activity in a soma. The McCulloch and Pitts
model, however, contains a number of simplifylng assumptions
that do not reflect the true behavior of biological neurons. The
McCulloch-Pitts neuron has been generalized in many ways.
An obvious one is to use activation functions other than the
threshold function, such as piecewise linear, sigmoid, or
Gaussian, as shown in Figure 3. The sigmoid function i s by far
the most frequently used in A"s. It is a strictly increasing
function that exhibits smoothness and has the desired
asymptotic properties. The standard sigmoid function is the
logistic function, defined by
g ( x )  1 /( 1  exp{

-βx})
where β is the slope parameter.

In general if each class is tightly grouped, but well separated
from the other classes, the quality of considered to be high. In
discriminant analysis, two scatter matrices, called as within
class (Sw) and between class (Sb) matrices are defined to
quantify the quality of cluster as follows:
Sw = ∑ i = 1k ∑ x ɛ ᴨi (x – mi) (x – mi)T
Sb = ∑ i = 1k ni ( mi - m) (mi - m)T
Where mi = ¹/ni ∑ x ɛ ᴨi , x is the global mean. It is easy to
verify that trace (Sw) measures the closeness of the vectors

Figure 6: McCulloch and Pitts model
Network architectures
ANNs can be viewed as weighted directed graphs in which
artificial neurons are nodes and directed edges (with weights)

T. Shashibala, IJECS Volume 5 Issue 7 July 2016 Page No.17260-17267

Page 17263

DOI: 10.18535/ijecs/v5i7.14
are connections between neuron outputs and neuron inputs.
Based on the connection pattern (architecture), ANNs can be
grouped into two categories (see Figure 7) :

only on the previous state, this represents the memory of the
model:
P(qt|q1t−1 ) = P(qt|qt−1) (9)
The independence assumption states that the output observation
at time t is dependent
only on the current state, it is independent of previous
observations and states:
P(ot|o1t−1 , q1t) = P(ot|qt) (10) [17].

Figure 7: Recurrent and FeedForward model

* feed-forward networks, in which graphs have no loops
* recurrent (or feedback) networks, in which loops loops,
and occur because of feedback connections [16].
4.4

Hidden Markov Model(HMM)

The Hidden Markov Model(HMM) is a powerful statistical
tool for modeling generative sequences that can be
characterized by an underlying process generating an
observable sequence. HMMs have found application in many
areas interested in signal processing, and in particular speech
processing, but have also been applied with success to low
level NLP tasks such as part-of-speech tagging, phrase
chunking, and extracting target information from documents.

The formal definition of a HMM is as follows:
λ=(A,B,π)

(1)

S is our state alphabet set, and V is the observation alphabet
set:
S = (s1, s2, · · · , sN)
V = (v1, v2, · · · , vM)

(2)
(3)

We define Q to be a fixed state sequence of length T, and
corresponding observations O:
Q = q1, q2, · · · , qT
(4)
O = o1, o2, · · · , oT
(5)
A is a transition array, storing the probability of state j
following state i . Note the state transition probabilities are
independent of time:
A = [aij ] , aij = P(qt = sj |qt−1 = si) . (6)
B is the observation array, storing the probability of
observation k being produced from the state j, independent of t:
B = [bi(k)] , bi(k) = P(xt = vk|qt = si) . (7)
π is the initial probability array:
π = [πi] , πi = P(q1 = si) .

(8)

Two assumptions are made by the model. The first, called the
Markov assumption, states that the current state is dependent

A variety of classifiers have been used to translate these
extracted features from EEG signals into an output command,
from simple classifiers such as nearest neighbor, linear
discriminant analysis (LDA), to nonlinear neural networks
(NN), support vector machines (SVM), Hidden Markov Model
(HMM) and statistical classifiers.
LDA is a widely used linear classifier. Compared with the other
methods, the main advantages of LDA include the following: 1)
It is simple to use and 2) it has low computational complexity.
Thus, numerous brain-controlled mobile robots used LDA to
develop the classifiers of BCI systems. Artificial neural
network (ANN) is a widely used nonlinear modeling method
for regression analysis and classification, which is based on
biological neural networks. The main advantage of ANN as a
classification method is its ability to approximate arbitrary
nonlinear decision functions by minimizing the error in
classifying training data. Unlike ANN, SVM does not need to
set up many configurations and parameters. Another advantage
of SVM is that it has good generalization characteristics and is
especially suitable for the cases, where a small amount of
training data is gained. In addition, the two kinds of classifiers
were widely applied into brain-controlled mobile robots.
Statistical classifiers classify one new instance into a particular
class by selecting the highest one from the estimated posterior
probabilities of all classes based on observed features of the
new instance and prior knowledge. The main advantage of
statistical classifiers is that it can represent the uncertainty of
EEG signals and has been applied into brain-controlled mobile
robots. However, the robustness of all existing BCI systems is
not satisfactory due to the nonstationary nature of noninvasive
EEG signals. Considering that the natural change of brain
signals over time and the change of brain activity patterns since
the users develop new capabilities as subjects gain experience,
Mill´an et al. proposed that a possible research direction to
improve the robustness is the online adaptation of the classifier
during its use to drifts in the brain signals, and preliminary
results have shown the feasibility and advantage of this method
. In addition, there are a few software tools that are widely used
to process the EEG data such as EEGLAB and BCI 2000,
which can help researchers develop brain-controlled mobile
robots[18].
For BCIs that use the mu and beta rhythms, the common
average referencing (CAR) and Laplacian methods are superior
to the ear reference method. This may be because these
methods use high-pass spatial filters and enhance the focal
activity from the local sources (e.g. the mu and the beta
rhythms) and reduce the widely distributed activity, including
that resulting from distant sources (e.g. EMG, eye movements
and blinks, visual alpha rhythm). Comparing the two variations
of the Laplacian filtering methods (the large Laplacian and the
small Laplacian), it is shown that the large Laplacian method is

T. Shashibala, IJECS Volume 5 Issue 7 July 2016 Page No.17260-17267

Page 17264

DOI: 10.18535/ijecs/v5i7.14
superior to the small Laplacian method in BCI systems that use
the mu rhythm [19]

acknowledgment of threat, and their lessened capacities to take
care of their vehicles [4].

5. BCI Applications

5.3
The P300 Speller18
A positive deflection in an EEG over the parietal cortex of
about 300 ms is generated after infrequent stimuli. This
response is termed the ―P300‖ or ―oddball‖ potential. Cz is the
electrode around which the spatial amplitude distribution of
P300 is centered. It is largest as the parietal electrode gets
attenuated as the recording sites move to central and frontal
locations. Temporally, a typical P300 response has a width of
150e200 ms and a triangular shape. The peak potential of a
P300 is typically 2e5 mV. Thus a single P300’s signal-to-noise
ratio is low, and is typically enhanced by averaging over
multiple responses. The P300 potential has been used as the
basis for a BCI system in many studies. The user selects a
character by focusing attention on it and counting how many
times it flashes. The row or column that contains this character
evokes a P300 response, whereas all others do not. After
averaging several responses, the computer can determine the
desired row and column (ie, the row/column with the highest
P300 amplitude), and thus the desired character.

BCI applications have been seen in several ways; driving a
robot or wheelchair, operating prosthetic devices, selecting
letters from a virtual keyboard, internet browsing, navigating in
virtual realities, and controlling computer games. Users of BCI
train to modulate their brainwaves so as to generate distinct
brain patterns. In some cases, user training is complemented
with machine learning techniques to discover the individual
brain patterns characterizing the mental tasks executed by the
user.
Computer applications for BCI might be divided into 3 broad
categories programs for communication, tools for functional
control, and entertainment applications. Entertainment
programs can further be subdivided into games, tools for
creativity and interactive media. Description of BCI based
applications is given below and Figure 8.
5.1

Prosthetic Control

It is a well-known fact that the brain controls our actions and is
the origin of all decisions, normally performed by modulating
specific brain waves in the areas specialized for those tasks. In
recent years BCI using EEG is emerging as a means to give
communication and control. EEG provides a medium for
recording and accessing neural activity, thus facilitating
computer retrieval and analysis of information from the brain
signals produced by a thought. BCI research often focuses on
finding a substitute for the broken mind body chain that can
help paralyzed patients move and communicate. The main
purpose of BCI is converting a person’s intent into action.
Thought-controlled arms, as shown in Figure are far from new,
but an international team of researchers has apparently created
an apparatus that aims to make the lives of paralyzed
individuals easier. Though BCI application-oriented research
has had beneficial results, including controlling wheelchairs, it
uses expensive and bulky EEG equipment and highly skilled
manpower. Technology is continuously getting smaller and
cheaper, however, and recently several inexpensive consumergrade devices have become available.
5.2

5.4

Entertainment

The area of entertainment has typically had a lower priority in
BCI work, compared to more ―functional‖ activities such as
basic communication or control tasks. For the purposes of this
survey, entertainment encompasses everything from video
games, to interaction with collections of media to control of
ambient features, such as wall displays, lighting, and music. In
tasks such as music or images, the feedback from even a
―wrong‖ selection is usually pleasant (assuming the user likes
the music or images in their collection), and interaction
techniques can be focused on more exploratory approaches to
browsing collections. Such systems might also provide
opportunities for users to express their emotional state, or
desires to a caregiver more rapidly and expressively than using
written language. As an example of this BCI approach to
entertainment, very recent work has begun to gather experience
with synchronous and asynchronous BCI ―painting‖
applications which allow the user creative expression.
Preliminary results indicate that the application provides
pleasure to patients, healthy volunteers, and artists.

Detecting Fatigue and Driver Alertness

Driver drowsiness is one of the major causes of serious traffic
accidents. According to the National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration (NHTSA), there are about 56,000 crashes
caused by drowsy drivers every year in India, The National
Sleep Foundation also reported that 60% of adult drivers have
driven while feeling drowsy in the past year, and 37% have
actually fallen asleep at the wheel. For this reason, a technique
that can detect real-time driver drowsiness is of utmost
importance to prevent drowsiness-caused accidents. If
drowsiness status can be accurately detected, incidents can be
prevented by countermeasures, such as arousing of the driver
and deactivation of cruise control. The sleep cycle is divided
into no-rapid-eye-movement (NREM) sleep and rapideyemovement sleep. Sleepiness in drivers has been identified as
a causal component in numerous accidents, because of the
marked decrease in drivers’ view of danger and

Figure 8: Applications of BCI.

6

Discussion

The research and development of brain-controlled mobile
robots have received a great deal of attention because they can
help bring mobility back to people with neuromuscular
disorders and thus improve their quality of life. The paper
discusses a review of the applications, complete systems, key
techniques, and evaluation issues of brain-controlled interfaces.
Researchers have developed various brain interfaces using
different BCI techniques as well as other techniques such as

T. Shashibala, IJECS Volume 5 Issue 7 July 2016 Page No.17260-17267

Page 17265

DOI: 10.18535/ijecs/v5i7.14
intelligence techniques (in sensing situations, localization, and
path planning) and shared control techniques. Still more work
has to be done before to make more robust brain-controlled
interfaces. The overall driving performance of the BCI system
and standard evaluation method to facilitate the research and
development of brain-controlled devices. First, improving the
BCI system performance (especially robustness) is critical to
make the interfaces usable in real-world situations. One
possible research direction is the online adaptation of the BCI
classifier to drifts in the brain signals, considering the natural
change of brain signals over time and the change of brain
activity patterns as the users develop new capabilities with
experience; preliminary results have shown the feasibility and
advantage of this method. The BCI systems that are used in all
existing brain-controlled systems rely on only one type of
suitable brain signals (such as P300, ERD, or SSVEP) to
translate user intentions into commands. However the BCI
systems that are based on a single signal do not work for all
users. Some users cannot produce the necessary brain activity
patterns for a particular kind of BCI systems. Recent studies
have shown that some subjects could not yield corresponding
brain activity patterns for an ERD BCI, but they could produce
the needed activity patterns for an SSVEP BCI and vice versa.
Moreover, all the subjects who could not generate the ERD or
SSVEP patterns could likely use a mixed BCI that combines
the two approaches to improve accuracy. Furthermore,
discovering some new modes of brain signals that are more
stationary and distinguishable, and developing corresponding
BCI systems represents another open and challenging research
direction to improve the BCI system performance [18].

3 J. d. R. Millan et al,―Combining brain–computer interfaces
and
assistive
technologies
state-of-the-art
and
challenges,‖Frontiers Neurosci., vol. 4, pp. 1–15, 2010

7

10 Wolpaw JR, McFarland DJ, Neat GW, Forneris CA
(1991) An EEG-based brain-computer interface for cursor
control. Electroencephalography Clinical Neurophysiology
78:252–259

Conclusion

Research on brain-controlled systems has gained wide
momentum with notable significant milestones. Future research
would lead to the development of robotic systems that can be
used by disabled users, and thus improve their mobility,
independence, and quality of life. If online database are made
available by major BCI research groups, many upcoming
research groups will be able to benefit, providing new
expansions to ongoing work.

Acknowledgement
We would like to thank the department of computer science,
Dr. B.A.M. University for providing the infrastructure for
research.

References
1 Wolpaw, J. R. et Al., 2000. Brain–computer interface
technology: a review of the first international meeting, IEEE
Transactions on Rehabilitation. Engineering, vol. 8(2), pp.
164–173
2 Benjamin Blankertz et al. The Berlin brain–computer
interface: non-medical uses of BCI technology Frontiers in
Neuroscience | Neuroprosthetics December 2010 | Volume 4 |
Article 198 pg 1-14

4 Priyanka A. Abhang, Bharti W. Gawali, Suresh C. Mehrotra,
2016. Introduction to Emotion, Electroencephalography, and
Speech Processing, Academic Press Publication, Elsevier.
5 A. Nijholt, D. Tan et al. ―Brain–computer interfacing for
intelligent systems,‖ IEEE Intell. Syst.,vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 72–
79, May/Jun. 2008
6 K. S. Ahmed Wheelchair Movement Control VIA Human
Eye Blinks American Journal of Biomedical Engineering:
2011; 1(1): 55-58 DOI: 10.5923
7 Niedermeyer, Ernst and da Silva, Fernando Lopes.
Electroencephalography:
Basic
Principles,
Clinical
Applications, and Related Fields, Fifth Edition. Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins, 2005. pp 140
8 S. Sanei, J. Chambers. EEG signal processing, Chapter 1.
2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
9 Lee et al. Review of Wireless Brain-Computer Interface
Systems http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/56436

11 T S Grummett et al. Measurement of neural signals from
inexpensive, wireless and dry EEG systems Physiological
Measurement 36 (2015) 1469–1484 doi:10.1088/09673334/36/7/1469
12 R. Krepki et al. Berlin Brain–Computer Interface—The
HCI communication channel for discovery Int. J. HumanComputer Studies 65 (2007) 460–477
13 Nello Cristianini and John Shawe-Taylor, ―An Introduction
to Support Vector Machines and Other Kernel-based Learning
Methods‖, Cambridge University Press, 2000
14 J.P.Lewis,Tutorial on SVM, CGIT Lab, USC, 2004.
15 S.Balakrishnama, A. Ganapathiraju. ―Linear Discriminant
Analysis – A brief Tutorial‖. Institute for Signal & Information
Processing. Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering,
Mississipi State University‖.
16 Anil K Jain, Jianchang Mao and K.M Mohiuddin,
―Artificial Neural Networks: A Tutorial‖, Michigan State
university, 1996.

T. Shashibala, IJECS Volume 5 Issue 7 July 2016 Page No.17260-17267

Page 17266

DOI: 10.18535/ijecs/v5i7.14
17 Phil Blunsom pcbl@cs.mu.oz.au.
Model‖,August 19, 2004.

―Hidden

Markov

18 EEG-Based Brain-Controlled Mobile Robots: A Survey
Luzheng Bi, Member, IEEE, Xin-An Fan, and Yili Liu,
Member, IEEE, IEEE transactions on human-machine systems,
vol. 43, no. 2, march 2013 doi 10.1109/tsmcc.2012.2219046
19 Ali Bashashati, Mehrdad Fatourechi, Rabab K Ward and
Gary E Birch A survey of signal processing algorithms in
brain–computer interfaces based on electrical brain signals J.
Neural Eng. 4 (2007) R32–R57 doi:10.1088/17412560/4/2/R03

Author Profile
T. Shashibala

is currently pursuing Ph.D in the domain of BCI.

Bharti W. Gawali is Professor and Research guide, she specializes in
the domain of BCI, speech recognition, Remote sensing and many
more. She has successfully guided many Ph.D. And M.Phil students.

T. Shashibala, IJECS Volume 5 Issue 7 July 2016 Page No.17260-17267

Page 17267

