TOBE: Tangible Out-of-Body Experience
Renaud Gervais, Jérémy Frey, Alexis Gay, Fabien Lotte, Martin Hachet

To cite this version:
Renaud Gervais, Jérémy Frey, Alexis Gay, Fabien Lotte, Martin Hachet. TOBE: Tangible Out-ofBody Experience. TEI ’16 - Tangible, Embedded and Embodied Interaction., Feb 2016, Eindhoven,
Netherlands. ACM, 2016, <http://www.tei-conf.org/16/>. <10.1145/2839462.2839486>. <hal01215499>

HAL Id: hal-01215499
https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01215499
Submitted on 19 Nov 2015

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of scientific research documents, whether they are published or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

TOBE: Tangible Out-of-Body Experience
Renaud Gervais∗
Inria, France
renaud.gervais@inria.fr

Jérémy Frey∗
Univ. Bordeaux,
France

Alexis Gay
Univ. Bordeaux
Montaigne, France

jeremy.frey@inria.fr

alexis.gay@inria.fr

Fabien Lotte
Inria, France

Martin Hachet
Inria, France

fabien.lotte@inria.fr

martin.hachet@inria.fr

ABSTRACT

We propose a toolkit for creating Tangible Out-of-Body Experiences: exposing the inner states of users using physiological
signals such as heart rate or brain activity. Tobe can take the
form of a tangible avatar displaying live physiological readings to reflect on ourselves and others. Such a toolkit could
be used by researchers and designers to create a multitude
of potential tangible applications, including (but not limited
to) educational tools about Science Technologies Engineering
and Mathematics (STEM) and cognitive science, medical applications or entertainment and social experiences with one
or several users or Tobes involved. Through a co-design approach, we investigated how everyday people picture their
physiology and we validated the acceptability of Tobe in a
scientific museum. We also give a practical example where
two users relax together, with insights on how Tobe helped
them to synchronize their signals and share a moment.
Author Keywords

Physiological Computing; Tangible Interaction; Spatial
Augmented Reality; EEG; ECG; EDA
ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.1 Multimedia Information Systems: Artificial, augmented,
and virtual realities; H.5.2 User Interfaces: Prototyping
INTRODUCTION

Wearable computational devices are more accessible and more
popular than ever. These devices are personal and are embedded with physiological sensors, i.e. sensors that can monitor
signals such as heart beats. Nowadays even brain activity
is within reach of consumers thanks to cheap alternatives to
medical equipment, such as the Emotiv Epoc1 or, closer to
the Do-It-Yourself community, the OpenBCI board2 . Physiological computing is becoming mainstream. However, for the
general public, the use of such sensors seems mostly centered
around performance. Despite an era of personal development,
* Co-first

authorship, both authors contributed equally to this work.

1

https://emotiv.com/
2
http://www.openbci.com/

© 2016 Association for Computing Machinery. ACM acknowledges that this contribution was authored or co-authored by an employee, contractor or affiliate of a national
government. As such, the Government retains a nonexclusive, royalty-free right to
publish or reproduce this article, or to allow others to do so, for Government purposes
only.
TEI ’16, February 14-17, 2016, Eindhoven, Netherlands
Copyright © 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3582-9/16/02 ...$15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2839462.2839486

Figure 1: Tobe, the tangible avatar displaying real-time physiological
readings along with the interface to control the different visualizations.

well-being and communication, how many smart watches and
heart rate belts advertise themselves as sportspersons’ best
buddies, while they can account for so much more than physical health? Indeed, physiological computing is mature enough
to asses mental states [4, 20, 30, 6]. Therefore, it could be
used as a mean to better know our own self and others.
On the one hand, physiological technologies are not exploited
to their full potential, on the other hand, we have end users
that ignore what technology has to offer for their well-being.
Some companies are pioneers, as for example Empatica and its
Embrace smart watch3 , but they focus on health applications
and, consequently, the targeted consumers are still a niche.
Both a process that will raise public awareness and a collection
of meaningful use cases are missing. Finally, when bodily
activity and mental states are at stake – which are difficult to
conceptualize and often difficult to perceive – the feedback
given to users matters for them to comprehend at first sight
what is being measured. How to represent the arousal state of
someone? How would you represent cognitive workload? We
found little examples besides pies and charts, which are not
always obvious informants in data visualizations – e.g. [13].
To address these issues, we first conducted surveys and interviews to gain insight about physiological feedback. We then
created Tobe, a Tangible Out-of-Body Experience shaped as a
tangible avatar (Figure 1). This avatar lets users freely explore
and represent their physiological signals, displayed on the
avatar itself using spatial augmented reality. The overarching
goal is to help one reflect on her physiological and mental
states in her own way. The main activity would be for users to
3

https://www.empatica.com/

actively build from the ground up their own self-representation
and then visualize physiological signals through it. As such,
we designed a modular toolkit around Tobe that can be used
to customize any part of the system. Tobe has been tested on
two different occasions in a scientific museum to collect user
feedback. A specialized version of the system was also built to
give biofeedback to multiple users in a relaxation task. Beside
these two implementations, we identified potential future uses
of the system, such as a biofeedback device for stroke rehabilitation or replaying inner states synchronized along with
videos of cherished memories. The latter example could help
create more cherishable versions of personal digital data [7].
Previous works do not embrace such system as a whole and are
limited either to low-level signals or to emotions. Wearables
were used in [29] to mediate affect using multimodal stimuli
(sounds, heat, vibration, . . . ). However, as with the “Social
Skin” project [27] – that also embodies emotions into actuated
wearables –, the information given to those around was rather
implicit. When a more comprehensible feedback was studied,
as in [18], it was limited to anatomical models, for instance
to teach children how the body works. Tobe, on the other
hand, gives both access to meaningful visualizations and to
additional cognitive states. Tangible proxies and material
representations were already studied in [10], although the
feedback was not dynamic and, once again, constrained to
bodily activity. While we previously used a tangible puppet as
a proxy for brain activity [5], the settings concerned scientific
outreach and the feedback focused only on preprocessed brain
signals, not on higher level mental states. Our toolkit pushes
further the boundaries of the applications by giving access
to physiological signals, high-level mental states as well as
dynamic and customizable feedback.
Our contribution for this paper consists of a toolkit enabling
users to create an animated tangible representation of their
inner states. The toolkit encompasses the whole workflow,
including the physical avatar creation, sensors, signal processing, feedback and augmentation. It was tested through two use
cases, in public settings and with a multiple users scenario.

(SD=1.3). The latter score indicates that the participants were
confident about their inner states, even though a whole literature demonstrates how difficult this is [17]. Interestingly,
we also observed that most of the participants reduced mental states and physiology to emotions only. Mentions of any
cognitive processes such as vigilance and workload were very
rare (7 out of 36). This lack of knowledge about the inner self
and the different cognitive processes is an opportunity to raise
awareness of the general public about the complexity of the
mind. When inquired about possible uses of a Tobe system,
few respondents (6 out of 36) gave examples other than sports
or health. This emphasizes the fact that the general public is
unaware of possibilities of technology for well-being.
The second survey specifically investigated how users would
shape the feedback. We focused on visual cues because it was
easier to express on paper, but note that other modalities could
be explored, such as sound [15]. We asked 15 participants to
express with drawings and text how they would represent various metrics (Figure 2). There was little resemblance between
subjects for a given high-level metric and even low-level ones
– breathing and heart activity – sprang different views. For
example, some people drew a physiologically accurate heart
instead of a simple sketch. Overall, there was a wide variety
of sketches and people were very creative. This highlighted
the absence of consensus on how we conceive and view our
inner states. Therefore, people could benefit from being able
to tailor a meaningful and personal feedback.

Figure 2: Sample of the drawings made by participants to represent
various high-level metrics.

REPRESENTING PHYSIOLOGICAL SIGNALS

Exposing physiological signals in a way that makes sense
for the user is not trivial. Some types of signals might be
more obvious to represent than others. For example, heart
activity could be understood using a symbolic heart shape
due to largely accepted cultural references. This question
is, however, harder when talking about more abstract mental
states such as workload. Nevertheless, even the dynamic
representation of low-level physiological signals is still an
open question at the moment [3]. We conducted two surveys
to gain more insight about the knowledge and representations
people had of different types of signals and high-level mental
states.
In the first survey, conducted online, we asked 36 persons
about their knowledge of physiological signals in general. We
inquired about the self-awareness of inner states on a 7-points
Likert scale (1: no awareness, 7: perfectly aware). About
“internal physiological activities”, the average score was 3.5
(SD=1.4) and for “mental states”, the average score was 4.9

TOOLKIT

We created a tangible anthropomorphic avatar, named Tobe as
a host for displaying real-time feedback. We chose this form
factor because we found evidence in the literature that this
combination of anthropomorphism and tangibility can foster
social presence and likability [25, 9]. This also reminds users
and observers that the feedback is linked to an actual being;
it helps to recognize Tobe as a persona and to bond with it,
hence it facilitates engagement.
Our implementation uses open or low-cost hardware and we
are releasing as open-source software the entire pipeline4 , thus
facilitating reproduction and dissemination.
General Approach

We conceived a toolkit to assist the creation of representations
of inner activities – our body at large and the hidden processes
4

https://github.com/potioc/tobe

of our mind in particular, making it visible to oneself and to
others. The different components are highlighted in Figure 3.
The first step consists in choosing a metric, e.g. the arousal
level. For this given metric there are different ways to measure
it, that include a combination of one or multiple sensor(s)
and signal processing algorithm(s). One chooses a support
to express this metric (e.g. tangible avatar, screen, speaker
for sound) and creates a shape associated to it (e.g. a circle
with a changing color, a rhythmic tone). The conjunction
of both the shape and the support produces the feedback. It
is an iterative process because when one acknowledges the
feedback, it changes one’s self-representation. Moreover, it
creates a feedback loop which affects one’s biosignals.
In order to help users mold the system to their likening, we
identified three different degrees of freedom:
• The measured physiological signal or mental state (Metric)
• The form factor (Support)
• The display of the signals (Shape)

public [17] and would benefit the most of a system enabling
their visualization.
Sensors and Signal Processing

Metrics were acquired from five physiological signals. We
measured thoracic circumference for breathing, electrocardiography (ECG) for heart rate, electrodermal activity (EDA,
i.e. perspiration) for arousal, electrooculography (EOG, eyes
activity) for eye blinks, and electroencephalography (EEG,
brain activity) for most high-level mental states – i.e. vigilance, workload, meditation and valence.
We created the sensors with a wearable form factor in mind.
Since we used Tobe in public settings, it was important that the
sensors were non-invasive (no need to remove clothes or apply
gel to the skin) and be quick to install and remove, while being
able to acquire a reliable signal. With the setup described
in this section, we were able to equip the users and record
physiological signals in less than two minutes.
The different sensors were embedded inside a lab coat (Figure
6) which could be put on quickly over daily clothes. This form
factor provides enough room in the sleeves and the pockets
to take care of the wiring and electronic components storage.
The recording of the low-level physiological signals (i.e. everything except EEG) is done using the BITalino board, an
Arduino-based recording device. It contains modules that amplify various physiological signals and it embeds a Bluetooth
adapter as well as a battery to work in ambulatory settings.
Each physiological signal or mental state index was sent to
the other stage of the toolkit using LSL5 , a network protocol
dedicated to physiological recordings.
ECG

Figure 3: Simplified view of the toolkit that supports Tobe.

Metrics

There is a continuum in the visibility of the signals and mental
states measured from physiological sensors, i.e. metrics. We
categorized those metrics in three different levels, depending
on who can perceive them without technological help.
1. Perceived by self and others, e.g. eye blinks. Even if those
signals may sometimes appear redundant as one may directly look at the person in order to see them, they are
crucial in associating a feedback to a user.
2. Perceived only by self, e.g. heart rate or breathing. Mirroring these signals provides presence towards the feedback.
3. Hidden to both self and others, e.g. mental states such as
cognitive workload. This type of metrics holds the most
promising applications since they are mostly unexplored.
Lower levels (1 & 2) help to breath life into a proxy used to
mediate the inner state of the user. These metrics are accessible
to our conscious selves. On the other hand, level 3 metrics
are little known and are hard to conceptualize for the general

We chose to use ECG for heart rate activity as it is more accurate than light emission-based methods to detect individual
heartbeats [11]. Existing solutions for ECG require electrodes
to be put directly on the chest, e.g. heart rate monitor belts.
We instead opted for installing TDE-201 Ag-AgCl electrodes
from Florida Research Instruments on both wrists of the user
(ECG needs two electrodes diametrically opposed to sense
heart electrical activity). The electrodes were attached to an
elastic band sewn inside the end of the lab coat sleeves which
could be tightened with velcro straps (Figure 4a). ECG was
recorded with the dedicated ECG module of the BITalino.
EDA

We measured arousal – which relates to the intensity of an
emotion and varies from calm to excited (e.g. satisfied vs
happy) – using EDA. When measuring EDA, most accurate
readings can be obtained from the tip of the fingers. However, since it is difficult to manipulate a tangible interface and
controls while having hardware attached to one’s fingers, we
acquire the signal from the palm of a single hand instead. We
assess skin conductance from two small conductive thread
patches sewn inside a fingerless glove (Figure 4b). Because
the BITalino EDA amplifier was not sensitive enough for signals acquired from the palm we made our own, replicating the
schematics described in [21].
5

https://github.com/sccn/labstreaminglayer/

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 4: Wearables. a: coat embedding ECG sensors; b: fingerless glove measuring EDA; c: breathing belt; d: EEG headband.

Breathing

For breathing, we built a belt based on a stretch sensor (Figure 4c). A conductive rubber band was mounted as a voltage
divider and connected to an instrumentation amplifier (Texas
Instruments INA128). As opposed to piezoelectric components, that are sensitive to momentous speed instead of position, stretch sensors can directly map users’ chest inflation
onto their avatar.
EEG and Eye Blinks (EOG)

We built our own EEG helmet based on the open hardware
OpenBCI board (Figure 4d). To shorten setup time we used
dry electrodes – the same TDE-201 as for ECG for the forehead, and elsewhere TDE-200 electrodes, which possess small
protuberance that could go through the hair. Using a stretchable headband, we restrained electrodes’ locations to the rim
of the scalp to avoid difficulties with long-haired people. In
the 10-20 system, electrodes were positioned at O1, P7, F7,
FP1, F8, T8, P8 and O2 locations – reference at T7, ground
at FP2. We used OpenViBE to analyze physiological data in
real time6 . EEG signals were re-referenced using a common
average reference. Specific frequencies (see below) were extracted with a band-pass filter, taking the log of the power of
signals in order to normalize indices. Eye blinks were detected
when the signal, after DC drift removal, exceeded 4 times the
variance in the F8 electrode. We used the following metrics:
• Vigilance: appoints for the ability to maintain attention over
time. We use the ratio between beta frequency band (1520Hz) and theta + low alpha frequency band (4-10Hz) for
all electrodes [19].
• Workload: increases with the amount of mental effort required to complete a task. We use the ratio between delta +
theta band (1-8Hz) in near frontal cortex (F7, FP1, F8, T8)
and wide alpha band (8-14Hz) in parietal + occipital cortex
(P8, P7, O2, O1) [1, 26].
• Meditation: we used instantaneous phase locking value
between front (FP1, F7, F8) and rear (O1, P7, P8) parts of
the brain in alpha + beta bands (7-28Hz) [5] – mindfulness
and body focus practices decrease the synchronization while
transcendental practice increases it.
• Valence: designates the hedonic tone of an emotion and
varies from positive to negative (e.g. frustrated vs pleasant).
We use the ratio between the EEG signal power in the left
(F7, P7, O1) and right (F8, P8, O2) cortex in the alpha band
(8-12Hz) [16].
6

http://openvibe.inria.fr/

In earlier iterations of the system we tested the use of an
Emotive Epoc headset to account for brain activity. The Epoc
is a consumers-oriented EEG device, easier to install than
medical headsets that use gel. However, it still requires a
saline solution that tends to dry over time, causing additional
installation time between users. Moreover, good signal quality
was next to impossible to obtain with long haired persons.
Another downside of consumers-oriented EEG headsets is
that they usually conceal signal processing behind proprietary
algorithms, with little scientific evidence on what is truly
measured. While building a tailored EEG helmet, we took the
upper hand on the whole pipeline. With access to raw EEG
signals, we looked into the literature to match the inner state
we wanted to measure with actual neurological markers.
Feedback

The feedback consists in both a support and a shape.
Support

3D printing a tangible avatar is a powerful incentive for customization. While the version of the system that we deployed
in the scientific museum used an already modeled and 3D
printed incarnation of Tobe because of time constraints, a user
of the system could change the parametric model in order to
obtain an avatar that pleases her. The process would be similar to how the appearance of a Nintendo “Mii” can be tuned,
except for the tangibility. As a tradeoff between preparation
time and customization, we prototyped a “Mr. Potato Head”
version of Tobe, with parts ready to be assembled (Figure 5b).
Shape

The visualization of users’ signals are displayed onto Tobe
using Spatial Augmented Reality (SAR), as introduced by
Raskar et al. [23]. SAR adds dynamic graphics to real-world
surfaces using projected light. Despite external hardware –
i.e. a projector and eventually a tracking device (Figure 6)
– SAR is an easy solution to prototype a system, faster to
deploy than putting actual screens in users’ surroundings. The
augmentation occurred within vvvv7 , a software that uses realtime visual programming to render 3D scenes. We used a LG
PF80G projector of resolution 1920x1080 and the tracking of
Tobe was achieved with an OptiTrack V120:Trio, running a
120 FPS with an overall latency of 8.3ms and a precision of
0.8mm. The projector was calibrated with the OptiTrack using
OpenCV’s camera calibration function.
7

http://vvvv.org/

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 5: a: Simple multitouch animator allowing users to create and animate visual feedback. b: Customizing the tangible support of Tobe can be
achieved using modular body pieces; c: it is also possible to embedded electronics inside the support to have a standalone Tobe.

As an alternative to SAR, Tobe can be embedded with small
screens, LEDs, actuators and small electronics components so
that it represents a standalone unit. We already have a proof of
concept of such an implementation thanks to the easiness and
accessibility of the building blocks that go with the Arduino
platform and the Raspberry Pi (Figure 5c).
Customization

We conceived a GUI that let users draw a picture and animate
it according to their wishes. The animator is touch based;
users press a “record” button and animate the picture with
gestures (Figure 5a). Once done, the animation’s timeline is
automatically mapped to the chosen signal. This animator is
kept simple on purpose, it is designed for novice users and as
such must remain easy to understand and operate for someone
not familiar with animation. Only three basic operations are
currently supported – scaling, rotation and translation – and
yet it is sufficient to generate meaningful animations. For
example, scaling makes a heart beat, translation moves a cloud
along respiration and rotation spins cogs faster as workload
increases. An advanced tool such as Photoshop has already
been integrated as a proof of concept, but the simplicity of the
current GUI does not impede users’ creativity and is already
sufficient to enable a tailored feedback.

After we equipped participants, we gave them “activity cards”,
a collection of scenarios designed to modify their inner state
and to prompt self-investigation (Figure 6). In particular, these
card asked them to perform riddles and arithmetic problems
involving working memory to increase their workload [6]; to
look at cute and less cute images to change their valence and
arousal levels (a typical emotion elicitation approach [16]), to
perform a breathing exercise to help them meditate, and to
play a “Where’s Waldo?” game to increase their vigilance [6].
These sole cards sufficed to engage participants for a few tens
minutes without our intervention.
We created the activity cards after our first intervention in the
museum. There were some candies left at disposal next to Tobe
to lure museum’s visitors to our booth. At some point, one
user wanted to see how different tastes affected the emotional
valence that was displayed on Tobe. This proved to be a fun
activity for him – and for the people around. Having such goal
in mind was an effective way to drive participants.

TOBE IN THE WILD

We used and tested Tobe in two different applications: as
a demonstration in a scientific museum and as a multi-user
biofeedback device for relaxation and empathy.
Tobe in a public exhibition

Using a co-design approach, we intervened in a scientific museum over two half days, proposing to passersby to try out
Tobe. Around twelve persons tested the system. We built
the sensors and prepared the signal processing beforehand
because these steps require hardware and expertise. Five highlevel metrics were selected: workload, vigilance, meditation,
valence and arousal. These metrics were chosen because the
general public showed interest in them (meditation and emotions) or because they could benefit from being better known
(workload and vigilance). Due to the short duration of our exhibitions, we also set the corresponding feedback (both support
and shape), according to the outcome of the questionnaires
about people’s representations.

Figure 6: In a scientific museum, various activities were proposed to
visitors in order to prompt self-investigation. The setup consists of a
projector handling the augmentation and an OptiTrack for the tracking.

One degree of freedom was left to users by the mean of a
graphical interface (see Figure 1). They had to manipulate
the GUI on a nearby tablet to drag and drop visualizations
on predefined anchor points. Users could customize some
of Tobe’s aspects (eyes and heart rate feedback) and among
the 5 high-level metrics available, they selected which one
to study at a particular time. When at first we tested Tobe
with no degree of freedom – i.e. all metrics were displayed
altogether – we realized that users were too passive and quickly
overwhelmed. The GUI helped to focus and engage users.

To further engage users, Tobe was tracked and participants
were asked to put Tobe on a spotlight to “awake” it – i.e. to
start physiological signals’ streams. The action of bringing
life to an inanimate puppet goes well with making the world
“magical” again [24], that is to say to use the power of abstraction of modern computer science in order to bring back awe.
The aim is not to take benefit of ignorance but to strengthen
the amazement that technology can offer. We were ourselves
pleasantly disturbed and surprised when we happened to hold
in our hands a representation of our beating heart during some
routine test. Suddenly the relationship with the digital content
felt different, truly tangible.
Tobe for multi-users relaxation

We tested Tobe as a relaxation device for two users (Figure
7). The objective was to see if Tobe could be used both as a
biofeedback tool and for collaboration.

Protocol

We asked 14 participants, by pairs, to come and use Tobe to
reach cardiac coherence – 6 females, 8 males, mean age 25.3
(SD=2.8). Participants were coworkers from the same research
institute and already knew each other. Participants were seated
on each side of a screen and instructed not to talk to each
other. We presented them the cardiac coherence activity as a
relaxation exercise. Afterwards, we equipped them and turned
the system on.
The experiment comprised of three sessions of 5 minutes.
During the first session, participants had to individually learn
how to reach cardiac coherence. A smaller screen on the table
prevented them to see each other’s Tobe. They had to imitate
the breathing pattern given by a gauge going up and down
in 5s cycles onto Tobe’s body. The lights of the room were
dimmed to facilitate a relaxation state and each participant
was given headphones playing back rain sounds.
After the training session, the screen separating the two Tobes
was removed. Participants were then instructed to repeat the
same exercise as before, but without the help of the gauge.
They could see their colleague’s Tobe. However, there was no
interaction between them at this stage – it served as a transition
between a self-centered task and a collaboration task.
During the third session, participants were instructed to synchronize their hearts. In order to do so, they had to both reach
cardiac coherence while breathing on the same rhythm – with
no other way to communicate than using their Tobes.
After this final session, we gave questionnaires to participants
and conducted informal interviews with them to gather feedback about their experience.

Figure 7: Multi-users application: relaxation through cardiac coherence.

Results
Implementation

This version of Tobe relies only on respiration and heart rate
variability. It relates to cardiac coherence: when someone
takes deep breaths, slowly (≈ 10s periods) and regularly, her
or his heart rate (HR) varies accordingly and the resulting state
has positive impact on well-being [14]. During cardiac coherence, HR increases slightly when one inhales and decreases
as much when one exhales. We took the magnitude squared
coherence between HR and breathing signals over 10s time
windows as a “relaxation” index.
Sensors consisted in a breathing belt and in a pair of elastic
bands around the wrists to measure ECG. We used OpenBCI
instead of BITalino to measure ECG and breathing in order to
get more accurate readings. Indeed, the OpenBCI amplifier
has a resolution of 24 bits instead of 10 for the BITalino.
There were two Tobes on the table, one for each participant.
They were not tracked. Breathing activity was pictured with
inflating lungs onto the torso; cardiac coherence with a blooming flower onto the forehead. The synchronicity between
subjects – users’ heart rates varying at the same pace – was
represented with a similar but bigger flower projected between
both Tobes. Additionally, “ripples” on the table, around Tobes’
feet, matched heart beats.

From the questionnaires, that took the form of 5-points Likert
scales, participants reported that they were more relaxed after
the end of the session: 4.36 on a scale ranging from 1 “much
less relaxed” to 5 “much more relaxed” (SD=0.74). Beside
the fact that Tobe acted as an effective biofeedback device,
the experiment was also a chance to introduce participants to
activities centered around well-being, as few of them were
practicing relaxation or meditation in their daily life – 1.93
score (SD=1.44) with 1 “never” and 5 “regularly”.
During the interviews, the participants reported that they appreciated the feedback, saying that it formed a coherent experience – e.g. ripples on the table and sounds of rain. Among the
few that were practicing yoga regularly, one praised how Tobe
favors learning-by-doing over wordy and disrupting instructions but had troubles to follow the 10s breathing cycle since it
differed from his usual practice. We had mixed reviews about
the visualization associated to breathing, mostly due to the
mapping between Tobe’s lungs and the measured thoracic circumference being dynamically adapted over time rather than
calibrated per user with a min/max. Because of that, some
users had to draw their attention away from the breathing patterns in order to achieve cardiac coherence. These two last
issues could be resolved by giving users access to the signal
processing through our toolkit.

We received comments about how a qualitative and ambient
feedback (blooming flower) fostered a better focus on the
activity compared to the use of quantitative metrics which
are an incentive for competition. Indeed, apart from some
comparisons made during the second session, participants
did use their Tobes for collaboration. Users described how
they use the respiration of their partner to get in sync during
the third stage – usually by waiting before inhaling. One
participant described how she tried to “help” her companion
when he struggled to follow. Another retold how she quickly
resumed her regular breathing when she saw that a brief hold
troubled her colleague. More playful, a participant laughed
afterward at how he purposely “tricked” twice his partner.
Even with a communication channel as basic as the display
of thoracic circumference, rich interactions emerged between
participants over a short period – 5 minutes that felt like less
for many of them.
Overall these findings suggest that Tobe could be employed as
a proxy for interpersonal communications and that it has an
interesting potential for enhancing well-being.
DISCUSSION AND POTENTIAL APPLICATIONS

The toolkit that we propose uses physiological sensors to let
people grasp and share their inner states. Even if the modules
we chose promote the inclusion of novices – e.g. visual programming that could be easily extended in OpenViBE or vvvv,
they can be switched to other components that would suit more
experienced users – e.g. Matlab for signal processing. Moreover, we explored multiple ways to support the feedback via
SAR and embedded electronics. We think that SAR provides a
very flexible and high-resolution option for prototyping different feedbacks. However, for long term usages and deployment,
we would recommend the use of more embedded solutions
since SAR still suffers from a more complicated installation
and occlusion issues.
Beside the applications that we tested in the wild, we drew
usages for Tobe by exploring different design dimensions.
We considered on the one hand the number of users, Tobes
and external observers involved, and, on the other hand the
time and space separating the feedback and the recordings.
The following scenarios could be used by researchers and
enthusiasts to explore the possibilities offered by our toolkit.
One User

Tobe can be used as a biofeedback device with a specific goal
– e.g. reduce stress – or to gain knowledge about one self. A
feedback about workload and vigilance would prevent overwork. Insights gathered from an introspection session with
Tobe could also be employed to act better. For example, it
might be useful to realize that you are irritated before answering harshly to beloved ones.
One User and Observer(s)

Tobe could be used in a medical context. Indeed, in stroke
rehabilitation, patients with motor disabilities may regain mobility after long and difficult sessions of reeducation. However,
occasional drawbacks may create anxiety and a counterproductive attitude towards therapy, which leads to even more anxiety.
A Tobe could help patients and therapists acknowledge this

affective state and break this vicious circle. Autistic persons
could also benefit from using Tobe since it is difficult for them
and their relatives to gauge their inner state. Explicit arousal
could help their integration into society. An offline experiment
– i.e. after signals were recorded – pointed to this direction [8].
Multiple Users and Tobes

Using Tobe as an alternate communication channel during
casual interactions would help to explore connections with
relatives, discover and learn from strangers or improve collaboration and efficiency with coworkers. This has been partially
explored through the “Reflect Table”, which gives a feedback
about the affective state of meeting participants [2]; and a
bicycle helmet that displays the heart rate of the wearer to
the other cyclists nearby has been proposed to support social
interactions during physical efforts [28].
Archetype of a Group

Tobe could summarize the state of a group. A real-time feedback from the audience would be a valuable tool for every
speaker or performer. To pace a course, a teacher could use
one Tobe as an overall index that aggregates the attention
level of every student in the classroom. Through behavioral
measures and with a feedback given afterward, this was investigated in [22].
Time and Space

One could want to analyze or to recall inner states after an
event. Tobe could replay how one actually felt alongside a
video of a cherished moment. If it is not time but space that
separates a Tobe from its owner, imagine a distant relationship
where the Tobe on your desk slowly awakens as the sun rises
in the timezone of your beloved one – and you would wait
for Tobe’s vigilance to increase to a sufficient level before
you pick up your phone for a chat, knowing that your soul
mate is a bit grumpy at the beginning of the day. Besides
this theoretical view, it has been hinted that even low-level
physiological signals could enhance telepresence [12].
CONCLUSION

We have presented an open system aimed at externalizing
physiological signals and mental states in order to offer users
a shared “out-of-body experience”. This system covers the
entire pipeline, from signals’ acquisition to their visualization.
The open nature of the toolkit may be used to introduce STEM
disciplines (Science, Technologies, Engineering and Mathematics) to the general public through inquiry-based learning,
while end usages can steer them to cognitive science, psychology and humanities. Future work will include testing Tobe in
classrooms or public workshops where users will be invited
to build their own self-representation from the ground up, including the tangible support, sensors and the feedback design.
Longer usages of the toolkit, over multiple days or weeks,
will also be the opportunity to strengthen signal processing
in order to provide more reliable mental states that could be
displayed between users. Tobe could be used to ease social
interaction or to foster empathy towards others. Giving users
the tools to investigate their own bodies and mind is a good
way to empower them and prompt self-reflection.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Christelle Godin, Matthew S. Goodwin, Pierre-Alain
Joseph, Éric Sorita, Dominique Dionne, Oussama Azibou and
Cap Sciences for their ideas and support during this project.
REFERENCES

1. Pavlo Antonenko, Fred Paas, Roland Grabner, and
Tamara van Gog. 2010. Using Electroencephalography to
Measure Cognitive Load. Educational Psychology
Review 22, 4 (2010), 425–438.
2. Khaled Bachour. 2010. Augmenting Face-to-Face
Collaboration with Low-Resolution Semi-Ambient
Feedback. Ph.D. Dissertation. EPFL.
3. G. Chanel and C. Muhl. 2015. Connecting Brains and
Bodies: Applying Physiological Computing to Support
Social Interaction. Interacting with Computers (2015).
4. Stephen H. Fairclough. 2009. Fundamentals of
physiological computing. Interacting with Computers 21,
1-2 (Jan. 2009), 133–145.
5. Jérémy Frey, Renaud Gervais, Stéphanie Fleck, Fabien
Lotte, and Martin Hachet. 2014a. Teegi: Tangible EEG
Interface. In UIST ’14.
6. Jérémy Frey, Christian Mühl, Fabien Lotte, and Martin
Hachet. 2014b. Review of the use of
electroencephalography as an evaluation method for
human-computer interaction. In PhyCS ’14.
7. Connie Golsteijn, Elise van den Hoven, David Frohlich,
and Abigail Sellen. 2012. Towards a more cherishable
digital object. In DIS ’12.
8. Elliott Hedman, Lucy Miller, Sarah Schoen, and Darci
Nielsen. 2012. Measuring Autonomic Arousal During
Therapy. In D&E ’12. 11–14.
9. Eva Hornecker. 2011. The role of physicality in tangible
and embodied interactions. Interactions 18, 2 (2011), 19.
10. Rohit Ashok Khot, Larissa Hjorth, and Florian ’Floyd’
Mueller. 2014. Understanding physical activity through
3D printed material artifacts. CHI ’14 (2014), 3835–3844.
11. J. Kranjec, S. Beguš, G. Geršak, and J. Drnovšek. 2014.
Non-contact heart rate and heart rate variability
measurements: A review. Biomedical Signal Processing
and Control 13 (Sept. 2014), 102–112.
12. Myungho Lee, Kangsoo Kim, Hyunghwan Rho, and
Si Jung Kim. 2014. Empa Talk: A Physiological Data
Incorporated Human-Computer Interactions. In CHI EA
’14.
13. David McCandless. 2010. Information is Beautiful.
HarperCollins.
14. Rollin McCraty, Mike Atkinson, Dana Tomasino, and
Raymond Trevor Bradley. 2009. The coherent heart:
Heart-brain interactions, psychophysiological coherence,
and the emergence of system-wide order. Integral Review
5, 2 (2009), 10–115.

15. Sebastián Mealla. 2011. Listening to Your Brain :
Implicit Interaction in Collaborative Music Performances.
In NIME ’11. 149–154.
16. Gary Garcia Molina, Tsvetomira Tsoneva, and Anton
Nijholt. 2009. Emotional brain-computer interfaces. Int J
Auton Adapt Commun Syst 6, 1 (2009), 9.
17. Richard E. Nisbett and Timothy DeCamp Wilson. 1977.
Telling more than we can know: Verbal reports on mental
processes. Psychological Review 84, 3 (1977), 231–260.
18. Leyla Norooz, Matthew L Mauriello, Anita Jorgensen,
Brenna Mcnally, and Jon E Froehlich. 2015. BodyVis: A
New Approach to Body Learning Through Wearable
Sensing and Visualization. In CHI ’15.
19. B S Oken, M C Salinsky, and S M Elsas. 2006. Vigilance,
alertness, or sustained attention: physiological basis and
measurement. Clin Neurophysiol 117, 9 (Sept. 2006).
20. Rosalind W. Picard. 1995. Affective computing. Technical
Report 321. MIT Media Laboratory.
21. Ming-Zher Poh, Nicholas Swenson, and Rosalind W.
Picard. 2010. A wearable sensor for unobtrusive,
long-term assesment of electrodermal activity. IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng 57, 5 (2010), 1243–1252.
22. Mirko Raca and Pierre Dillenbourg. 2013. System for
Assessing Classroom Attention. In LAK ’13. 1–5.
23. Ramesh Raskar and G Welch. 2001. Shader lamps:
Animating real objects with image-based illumination. In
Eurographics.
24. David Rose. 2014. Enchanted Objects: Design, Human
Desire, and the Internet of Things. Simon and Schuster.
25. Michael Schmitz. 2010. Tangible Interaction with
Anthropomorphic Smart Objects in Instrumented
Environments. Ph.D. Dissertation.
26. F Schober, R Schellenberg, and W Dimpfel. 1995.
Reflection of mental exercise in the dynamic quantitative
topographical EEG. Neuropsychobiology 31, 2 (1995).
27. Seçil Uğur. 2013. Wearing Embodied Emotions: A
Practice Based Design Research on Wearable Technology.
Springer Milan.
28. Wouter Walmink, Danielle Wilde, and Florian ’Floyd’
Mueller. 2014. Displaying Heart Rate Data on a Bicycle
Helmet to Support Social Exertion Experiences. In TEI
’14.
29. Michele A Williams, Asta Roseway, Chris O’Dowd,
Mary Czerwinski, and Meredith Ringel Morris. 2015.
SWARM: An Actuated Wearable for Mediating Affect. In
TEI ’15. 293–300.
30. Thorsten O Zander and Christian Kothe. 2011. Towards
passive brain-computer interfaces: applying
brain-computer interface technology to human-machine
systems in general. J. Neural. Eng 8, 2 (April 2011).

