Article

A review of the use of psychophysiological methods in game research

KIVIKANGAS, J. Matias, et al.

Abstract
This article reviews the psychophysiological method in game research. Psychophysiological
measurements provide an objective, continuous, real-time, noninvasive, precise and sensitive
way to assess the game experience. However, the best results require controlled experiments
with careful monitoring of variables, large enough sample sizes and expertise in electrical
signal processing. We briefly explain the theory behind the method and present the most
useful
measures:
electromyography
(EMG),
electrodermal
activity
(EDA),
electroencephalography (EEG) and cardiac measures. We review previous studies that have
used psychophysiological measures in game research and illustrate some future directions.
Our article covers several research lines using the psychophysiological method in game
studies, and offers a comprehensive list of references for those interested in the field.

Reference
KIVIKANGAS, J. Matias, et al. A review of the use of psychophysiological methods in game
research. Journal of Gaming & Virtual Worlds, 2011, vol. 3, no. 3, p. 181-199

DOI : 10.1386/jgvw.3.3.181_1

Available at:
http://archive-ouverte.unige.ch/unige:80604
Disclaimer: layout of this document may differ from the published version.

Review on psychophysiological methods in game
research
J. Matias Kivikangas, Inger Ekman, Guillaume Chanel, Simo Järvelä, Ben Cowley, Mikko
Salminen, Pentti Henttonen, Niklas Ravaja
Center for Knowledge and Innovation Research, Aalto University
PO BOX 21255
00076 Aalto, Finland
+358 50 3120 922
matias.kivikangas@aalto.fi, first.last@aalto.fi, sjarvela@aalto.fi
ABSTRACT

This paper reviews the psychophysiological method in
game research. The use of psychophysiological
measurements provides an objective, continuous, real-time,
non-invasive, precise, and sensitive way to assess the game
experience, but for best results it requires carefully
controlled experiments, large participant samples and
specialized equipment. We briefly explain the theory
behind the method and present the most useful measures.
We review previous studies that have used
psychophysiological measures in game research, and
provide future directions.
Keywords

Psychophysiology, review, game experience, facial EMG,
EDA, EEG, ECG, HR, digital games
INTRODUCTION

Lately, psychophysiological measures (e.g., ECG, EMG,
skin conductance) have gained some attention in (digital)
game research and interest is rapidly growing. However, the
various studies using psychophysiological measures do not
yet form a common field: instead they have been from
different scientific backgrounds and with different
motivations. Studies have attempted to capture the game
experience or demonstrate the psychological effects of
gaming with physiological evidence, they have used realtime measures for adapting game features to the players’
physiology as well as utilized various sorts of physiological
indicators to support the evaluation of design choices. Thus,
we have a number of separate results for many separate
research questions, but very little accumulated knowledge
that could be used for answering more precise research
questions or for creating theoretical syntheses. This critical
review aims to contribute to creating such a body of
knowledge.
In the next two sections, we very briefly introduce the
Nordic DiGRA 2010. DiGRA © 2010 Authors &
Digital Games Research Association (DiGRA).
Personal and educational classroom use of this paper is
allowed, commercial use requires specific permission
from the author.

theory behind the psychophysiological method and the
practical use of it. After that, the previous research section
details the most pertinent and recent work, conveniently
subdivided into areas of special research interest. Finally, a
section on future directions discusses the authors’ views on
the most promising lines of inquiry.
PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGICAL RESEARCH

Psychophysiological research is defined as using
physiological signals to study psychological phenomena
[7]. However, physiological processes are typically not
related to psychological phenomena with a one-to-one
relationship, which sometimes makes interpreting the
signals challenging. Digital games are a difficult stimuli in
this sense - they typically provide sensory output in at least
two modalities and sometimes employ physically
complicated input devices; they also typically require
complicated cognitive processing on different interpretative
levels and operate on time scales from fractions of a second
to several hours [34]. The motivations for playing also vary
from person to person and from time to time [30]. As most
of the psychophysiological reasoning employed originates
from much simpler experimental situations, it is not selfevident that the same associations hold for experiences with
digital games. For instance, a consistent association
(between physiology and psychology) found when the
participants look at pictures standardized for emotional
stimulation, might not occur equally when the participants
experience the same emotions spontaneously during a
game. Another complication is the lack of a commonly
accepted theory on how digital game experience arises, that
could be used in psychophysiological game research.
The practical challenge is to identify research questions that
can be answered even when the game is complex and the
psychological processes numerous, and then to create an
experimental design with the proper and necessary controls
so that no confounding variables will affect the results (cf.
e.g. [43]). This is no minor task, as demonstrated by the
large number of methodological problems in the current
literature (including our own research; see section on
previous research, below). If the game used in an
experiment is not extremely simple and as such easily

controllable, the phenomenon of interest must be very
strong or the sample size large enough that the reactions of
interest are not confounded among noise. Statisticians
advise [19] that a sample size of at least 28 is needed to
reliably detect a large effect size, even when the
assumptions of the population are met—and they rarely are.
Thus, although measurements from a few participants can
be informative in the sense that they may demonstrate a
point or provide directions for further inspection, it is
statistically implausible that such an experiment would
reliably confirm anything beyond the sample.
Practical pros and cons

Physical reactions are part of the processes that underlie the
(player´s) game experience. Hence, it is tempting to claim
that the psychophysiological method provides a tool for
measuring the game experience itself. In truth, it is only
possible to tap into those parts of the experience that have
recognized
measurable
physical
concomitants.
Nevertheless, in those areas, physiological measures can
provide more objective and precise information of the
player´s emotional and cognitive processes than is available
by subjective methods.
The physiological processes measured are mostly
involuntary. Therefore measurements are not contaminated
by participant answering style, social desirability,
interpretations of questionnaire item wording or limits of
participant memory, nor by observer bias. Moreover, for
studying game experiences the main benefit is that
measurements can be recorded automatically and
continuously (in real-time), without disturbing the
participant's natural behavior. Another benefit is the
sensitivity of the psychophysiological method: measures are
sensitive enough to pick up responses smaller than what the
human eye can detect. Combined with other methods (e.g.,
self-report and observational data), psychophysiological
methods add significant precision to studying the gaming
experience.
As practical limitations, the data acquisition devices are
typically expensive, and sufficient attention and time should
be given to personnel training and device maintenance.
Also, experimental preparations and procedures during
testing (setting up the equipment, placing electrodes, testing
the signals) take considerably more of the participants’ time
than when using, for instance, questionnaires.
THEORY AND MEASURES

As there are more comprehensive looks at the theory and
practice of psychophysiological methods elsewhere, in this
paper we repeat only the very basics. Handbook of
Psychophysiology [7] is strongly recommended for the
definitive review of the methodology. There are also other
papers that present introductions to the methods specifically
in gaming context [40, 15]. Unfortunately there is no single,
commonly accepted theory for game experience, so most of
the theoretical framework used in game research is

borrowed from other fields of study (for
psychological theories in media research, see [53]).

useful

Valence and arousal

A significant part of the game experience arises from
emotional reactions [29]. According to the dimensional
model of emotions (see [61, 37, 72] for different views), all
emotions can be located within a few basic dimensions,
typically valence (hedonic tone) and arousal (bodily
activation). For example, joy and anger are not
fundamentally different in quality (cf. basic emotions theory
[17]): on the visceral level of automatic physical reactions
they are created by the same two systems [50, 76].
Facial electromyography (EMG), which measures the
electrical activity of facial muscles (see [71] for details),
can be used for assessing positive and negative emotional
valence (on the importance of facial expressions in
emotional processing, see [6, 36]). The benefits of EMG
compared to coding from a video are the automation,
objectivity (no observer biases), temporal precision
(milliseconds), and detection of even minuscule responses
[5]. On the other hand, facial EMG measurements are
sensitive to noise, both of technical origin (e.g., bad contact
between electrode and skin) and from confounding sources
of muscle activity, such as speaking and other social
communication (see behavioral ecology view [17]).
Electrodermal activity (EDA) or skin conductance (often
misleadingly called galvanic skin response, GSR, see
below) is associated with emotional arousal [12, 36]. EDA
data can be analyzed as skin conductance level (SCL), an
aggregate over a certain period of time, or number or
amplitude of discrete skin conductance responses (SCR,
also electrodermal response, or GSR) to a specific phase or
event. Electrodermal responses are slow (delay of one to
four seconds), but in general, EDA is less sensitive to noise
and less ambiguous than facial muscle and heart activity.
Cardiac activity (e.g., heart rate, HR; measured with
electrocardiograph, ECG, or peripheral pulse oximeter) is
among the most widely used physiological research
methods, but because the heart and circulatory system is
regulated by many different bodily processes, interpreting
the signal’s relevance to the game context can be
challenging. In different studies cardiac activity has been
interpreted as an index of both valence and arousal, but also
of attention, cognitive effort, stress, and orientation reflex
during media viewing [53]. Still, cardiac measures have
been used successfully in some game studies (see section on
previous research, below).
Attention

Attention, or allocation of mental resources to a specific
stimulus, causes physiological changes such as the orienting
reflex, or parasympathetic activation (in certain
circumstances detectable by EMG, EDA, or HR [53, 35,
75]). However, a game stimulus typically requires active
coping, resulting in increased arousal that may mask such

subtle changes. This often makes it difficult to study
attention (in the psychological sense) in games.
Electroencephalography (EEG) provides data about
the brain’s electrical activity with millisecond accuracy.
The signal is examined for event-related potentials (ERP)
evoked by specific events, or for changes in the power of
different frequency bands. Certain features of the signals
have been shown to be associated with drowsiness and
vigilant attention [11] or to reflect inactivity in the brain
regions (smaller use of mental resources [67]). EEG has
also been used to study the processing of visual emotional
stimuli [1]. However, to this date, the use of EEG in game
research has been sparse, perhaps due to the complicated
nature of the signal, which combined with a complex
stimulus produces a range of methodological challenges.
Other methods

More marginal methods, but still with some potential,
include measurements of cortisol levels from participant
saliva to investigate participant stress; measuring
respiration for studying emotions or attention, or for
providing control data when measuring cardiac activity;
using eye gaze tracking and pupil size measurements for
investigating arousal, cognitive effort, or attention level and
its direction; and examining brain activity with
magnetoencephalography (MEG) or functional magnetic
resonance (fMRI) (see [7] for details of each method). To
extend from psychophysiological measurements, there is
some evidence that body movement and position (measured
by acceleration sensors or position cameras) might be
associated with attention, interest, and emotions [21, 27].
PREVIOUS RESEARCH

As mentioned, previous research has rarely been systematic
on a specific issue or question, but mostly separate studies
on separate issues. The following sections outline the most
prominent lines of interest within this area of study.
Studies validating the method in gaming context

Although the corpus of physiological game studies is
growing, there have been few attempts at validating proven
psychophysiological results in the context of digital games;
that is, finding out if the evidence from studies using
pictures, short auditory or video clips and others (e.g. [36])
apply when studying a multimodal game experience.
Earliest are from Hazlett [24] and Mandryk et al [40], who
have presented studies, although with small sample sizes,
supporting the use of psychophysiological measures in
game research. More recently, Nacke [45] and others
published studies as an attempt at a common methodology
for a design-oriented approach. Their papers have a look at
EEG [48], EDA and HR [47, 14], and facial EMG [47] and
conclude with a recommendation for the methodology in a
game context.

The FUGA project1 examined the construct validity,
reliability, and predictive validity of facial EMG, EDA and
EEG, but also fMRI, eye tracking, and physical activity and
behavioral indicators in this regard [21, 65, 33, 27]. In
general the conclusions supported the use of these methods
in game context, but clearly showed the necessity of proper
experimental design and that care must be taken in
interpretation of the signals: otherwise, for instance, selfreported and physiologically indexed emotions may turn out
to be significantly different things.
A strong sign of validity is good agreement between
prediction and observation. Findings from the FUGA
project show that EDA and facial EMG activity measured
during an experiment predicted actual play in the threeweek following period [manuscript under preparation].
Mandryk and others [41], modeled five emotions using an
input of EDA, facial EMG, and cardiac measurements, to
predict self-reports with tentative success. Yannakakis and
Hallam [80] successfully used a similar approach to create a
model of children’s entertainment preferences, measuring
cardiac indices and EDA.
Social game experience

Studying the experience of social interaction has provided
some particularly consistent results, albeit concentrating on
very precise questions. Several studies have reported that
both arousal and positive valence are higher when playing
against a friend, compared to playing against a stranger
(EDA and facial EMG [59], and self-reports [22]),
regardless whether they are in the same room or not [54]. A
similar effect has been observed when playing against a
human, compared to playing against computer ([59], and
[42] with regrettably small sample), although it is not clear
whether this is because human-vs-computer play lacks the
social aspect or because the human-vs-computer game
might simply involve easier challenges and/or be otherwise
functionally different to a human-vs-human game.
Previous studies were often conducted with competitive
games, but the difference between competitive and
cooperative modes has also been investigated. One study
[38] examined a simple singular cooperative or competitive
event with other character presented as either player
controlled, or computer controlled, but the results (higher
arousal in EDA and HR for competitive and humancontrolled conditions) may be explained by the two
different game-play operations, trading (cooperative) vs.
dueling (competitive), inducing different activity levels.
In one of our own experiments [32] participants played a
simple action game, either cooperatively in teams of two
against a team of computer-controlled characters, or
competitively against each other with teams of one human
and one computer-controlled character. Positive valence
(facial EMG) tended to be higher in competitive mode for
1

FUGA - Fun of Gaming, see: http://project.hkkk.fi/fuga/

males, and in cooperative mode for females. Unfortunately,
this experiment did not adequately control the opponent
type, potentially a strong confound, as described above.
Studying game features

The research of virtual environments has also produced
some studies which may be relevant to game experience.
For example, it has been reported that people respond to
virtual characters the same way they do to other people
(facial EMG [78], pupil size, eye tracking [44]) and that
this is (at least to some extent) dependent on how humanlike the virtual character looks [10]. One interesting study
[74] demonstrated that as the sole stimulus, darkness on a
desktop virtual environment does not induce anxiety or
stress (measured by HR and cortisol level), contrary to
darkness in the real world and in immersive virtual
environments. However, it is unclear to which extent games
can be likened to virtual environments, which lack the
intrinsic motivation provided by game mechanics (cf. magic
circle [62]).
A few studies have focused on audio features. Findings
include higher physiological arousal and better performance
in an FPS with background music, as opposed to no music
(using tonic cardiovascular measures [70]) and increased
stress (cortisol level) in presence of music [25]. Similar
effects (increased tonic HR as index of arousal) were found
[79] only with interaction of game sounds and background
color, but with a very simple game. A recent study did not
find a difference in analysis of tonic physiological measures
(facial EMGs, EDA) when testing effects of sounds and
music in an FPS game [46]. However, the researchers
question whether tonic measurements are in fact suitable for
this kind of comparison. Due to large differences in games,
experimental designs and analyses, the only conclusive
outcome from these studies is an expected tendency of
heightened arousal in response to game audio.
Studying game events

Although a major benefit of psychophysiological methods
is the temporal precision and continuous measurement (see
[41] for a good example), it has been exploited regrettably
rarely. A powerful analysis technique is to extract only
those parts of the data that correspond to a defined
repetitive event, and statistically testing the trend of all
reactions to it. In a pioneering work, Mandryk and Inkpen
[42] presented responses to events, but almost in an
anecdotal manner: five participants showed an expected rise
of arousal (EDA) to scoring a goal and three to fighting in a
hockey game. Our own results demonstrate that collection
of points in a platform racing game was associated with
increased arousal (HR, SCL, EEG) and positive affect
(facial EMG), whereas reaching the goal was associated
with decreased arousal and increased positive affect [56,
63]. Reasonably enough, getting points and winning seems
to be experienced positively, and success and fighting is
arousing.

More interestingly, and contrary to what could be expected,
we found both in the racing game and in an FPS game that
the death of the player’s own character seemed to cause a
positive affect, whereas killing an opposing character in an
FPS seemed to elicit a negative reaction [56, 57, 63, 58].
We have subsequently re-confirmed this effect in a separate
study [31], using a different game, and comparing the
events based on the opponent (friend, stranger, computer).
We found that the death of the player’s character elicits a
positive reaction regardless of the opponent, whereas the
response to a kill is positive only when the opponent is
human.
Studying game effects

A notable portion of gaming-related psychophysiological
research has focused on the effects that games have on the
players, and the medical or societal implications of such
effects (see [3] and [18] for two reviews on effects of game
violence using some physiological evidence, with opposite
conclusions). Unfortunately the results of the game effect
studies tend to be of limited use for game researchers. For
example, it is unclear if the association with higher arousal
and violent games (as compared to non-violent) tell much
about the actual experience of game violence, as most
studies compare reactions to different games or even
different types of games, which makes it questionable
whether other differences are adequately controlled (see
e.g. [2, 20]; but cf. [68, 4]). This limitation is not unique to
game effect studies, however: some otherwise plausible
findings suffer from the same uncertainty (e.g., [64, 28]),
showing that the presence of a story or screen size increases
physiological arousal (tonic SCL) (but see [55]).
Perhaps the best attempt at understanding game effects has
also provided an exceptionally interesting take at game
experience and its research methodology: Weber and others
[77] deconstructed the whole 50-min play session of
thirteen participants, and analyzed player behavior in
different phases (danger, safe, combat, etc.) and over time,
as well as the most common event combinations and
average heart rate during different events. More studies
with this kind of systematic approach would significantly
contribute to the basic understanding of the link between
game structure and experience.
Psychophysiology in game design

Another important part of the psychophysiological game
research literature is concerned with formative evaluation,
for example using physiological methods to support design
decisions [66]. A further application is the use of
physiological signals for creating adaptive systems, such as
dynamic difficulty adjustment (DDA), that provide a
(supposedly) optimized game experience. For instance
research [8, 51, 73] has demonstrated that it is possible to
automatically assess emotional states in games from many
physiological signals, and it was reported that affect-based
DDA enhances gaming experience compared to traditional
DDA (without physiology) [39]. Researchers have also

adaptively added effects and game content, with mixed
results [14].
As adaptive technology advances, applications which are
potentially viable for digital games in the near future have
begun to emerge, for example, using EDA to sense player
affect through the gamepad [69]. Some emotional reactions
such as frustration can also be detected using no more than
the pressure exerted by the player on the analog buttons of
the gamepad ([23, 27], see also [60]). As the capacity for
natural expression with game controllers increases, so do
the possibilities for player modeling using only the
controller as input. For instance, new controllers for all the
major game consoles offer the potential for new
methodologies utilizing their sophisticated motion-sensing
technologies. Within the context of Uncommon User
Interfaces, some researchers [49, 16, 26, 52] have utilized
psychophysiological indicators as direct input, providing
completely new interfaces. Recently, commercial
applications have also started capitalizing on the potential
of using signals such as EEG as novel input for games and
toys (for example, Emotiv: http://www.emotiv.com/, Star
wars
science:
Force
trainer:
http://unclemilton.com/starwarsscience/)

in a wider set of contexts: how do they hold for different
types of games, game environments, modalities, social
environments, etc.? As soon as there is a more substantial
corpus of basic knowledge, the development of
methodology guidelines for studying game experiences
should be undertaken, including determining statistical
requirements for experiment design, establishing intrasignal patterns of significance and better definition of the
typical modes of interaction found in games. This would
allow for tighter control of experiments and eventually
more reliable and generalizable, ultimately more useful,
results.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by the Finnish graduate school on
User Centered Information Technology (UCIT).
REFERENCES

1.

Aftanas, L.I., et al. (2004). Analysis of evoked EEG
synchronization and desynchronization in conditions of
emotional activation in humans: temporal and
topographic
characteristics.
Neuroscience
and
Behavioral Physiology, 34, 859–867.

2.

Ballard, M.E. & Wiest, J.R. (1996). Mortal Kombat
(tm): The effects of violent videogame play on males’
hostility and cardiovascular responding. Journal of
Applied Social Psychology, 26, 8, 717-730.

3.

Barlett, C.P., Anderson, C.A. & Swing, E.L. (2009).
Video game effects – confirmed, suspected, and
speculative. A review of the evidence. Simulation &
Gaming, 40, 3, 377-403.

4.

Barlett, C.P., Harris, R.J. & Bruey, C. (2008) The
effect of the amount of blood in a violent video game
on aggression, hostility, and arousal. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 44, 539-546.

5.

Bolls, P.D., Lang, A., & Potter, R.F. (2001). The
effects of message valence and listener arousal on
attention, memory, and facial muscular responses to
radio advertisements. Communication Research, 28,
627-651.

6.

Bradley, M.M. (2000). Emotion and motivation. In J.
T. Cacioppo, L. G. Tassinary & G. G. Berntson (Eds.),
Handbook of psychophysiology (2nd ed.). New York:
Cambridge University Press.

7.

Cacioppo, J.T., Tassinary, L.G., & Berntson, G.G.
(2007). Handbook of psychophysiology (3rd ed.). New
York: Cambridge University Press.

8.

Chanel, G., Rebetez, C., Betrancourt, M., Pun, T.
(2008). Boredom, engagement and anxiety as
indicators for adaptation to difficulty in games.
MindTrek 2008: Entertainment and Media in the
Ubiquitous Era, Tampere, Finland, October 7-9.

9.

Cowley, B., Charles, D., Black, M., Hickey, R. (2009).
Analyzing player behavior in Pacman using featuredriven decision theoretic predictive modeling. IEEE

FUTURE DIRECTIONS

By continuously and synchronously measuring the
physiological activity of many players it is possible to
analyze concurrent physiological activations, referred to as
physiological linkage [15]. In the case of game studies, such
measures could allow better insights in the social
experience of play.
Another potential future direction would be to analyze the
reaction patterns of multiple psychophysiological signals
together, and classifying typical reactions by interdependent
reaction patterns between signals [41]. Individual intrasignal patterns could then further be linked to different
game types and personality profiles, which would give us
an explanation of how subjective gaming experiences are
formed. In two similar approaches using nonpsychophysiological source data [13, 9], the researchers
presented separate methods for interpreting continuous data
from the game engine. Such approaches offer another
perspective on the rich source of data from
psychophysiological recordings, with the possibility of
integrating sources through a common framework.
Conclusion

A large number of studies have shown that
psychophysiological measures can be used to index
emotional, motivational, and cognitive responses to media
messages (e.g. video, television, radio and textual
messages), and similar evidence in the context of digital
games is slowly growing. However, the emerging field is
lacking useful and widely accepted game-specific
theoretical background, systematic research, and
accumulated results between studies. A first step towards
developing the method is by validation of existing findings

Symposium on Computational Intelligence and Games
2009, Milan, Italy, September 7-10.
10. Cummings, J.J., Potter, R.F. & Chung, H. (2009).
Smile and the virtual world smiles with you:
Electromyographic response to avatar facial
expressions. Paper presented at the annual meeting of
the International Communication Association, Marriott,
Chicago.
11. Davidson, R.J., Jackson, D.C., & Larson, C.L. (2000)
Human electroencephalography. In J. T. Cacioppo, L.
G. Tassinary & G. G. Berntson (Eds.), Handbook of
psychophysiology (2nd ed.). New York: Cambridge
University Press, 27–52.
12. Dawson, M. E., Schell, A. M., & Filion, D. L. (2000).
The electrodermal system. In J. T. Cacioppo, L. G.
Tassinary & G. G. Berntson (Eds.), Handbook of
psychophysiology (2nd ed.). New York: Cambridge
University Press, 200-223.

21. FUGA (2009). Deliverable D8.2: Final scientific
report. EU report in New and Emerging Science and
Technologies programme, FP6. To be published.
22. Gajadhar, B.J., de Kort, Y.A.W. & IJsselsteijn, W.A.
(2008). Shared fun is doubled fun: Player enjoyment as
a function of social setting. In P. Markopoulos, B. de
Ruyter, W. IJsselsteijn and D. Rowland (Eds.), Fun
and Games 2008 (pp. 106-117). Berlin, Germany:
Springer-Verlag.
23. Gilleade, K.M. & Dix, A. (2004). Using frustration in
the design of adaptive videogames. In Proceedings of
the 2004 ACM SIGCHI International Conference on
Advances in computer entertainment technology, ACM
Press, pp. 228-232.
24. Hazlett, R.L. (2006). Measuring emotional valence
during interactive experiences: boys at video game
play. Proceedings of CHI 06 (Montreal, Canada,
2006), 1023-1026.

13. Dekker, A. & Champion, E. (2007). Please biofeed the
zombies: Enhancing the gameplay and display of a
horror game using biofeedback. Proceedings of DiGRA
2007 Conference.

25. Hébert, S., Béland, R., Dionne-Fournelle, O., Crête, M.
& Lupien, S.J. (2005). Physiological stress response to
video-game playing: the contribution of built-in music.
Life Sciences, 76, 2371-2380.

14. Drachen, A., Canossa, A., Yannakakis, G.N. (2009),
Player modeling using self-organization in Tomb
Raider:
Underworld,
IEEE
Symposium
on
Computational Intelligence and Games 2009, Milan,
Italy, September 7-10.

26. Hjelm, S.I. (2002). Research + Design: The Making of
Brainball. Interactions, 10, 1, 26—34.

15. Ekman, I., Chanel, G., Kivikangas, J.M., Salminen, M.,
Järvelä, S., & Ravaja, N. (2010). Psychophysiological
methods for game experience research - Directions for
assessing social experience. Manuscript submitted for
publication.
16. Ekman, I.M., Poikola, A.W., & Mäkäräinen, M.K.
(2008). Invisible eni: using gaze and pupil size to
control a game. In CHI '08 Extended Abstracts on
Human Factors in Computing Systems. CHI '08.
ACM, New York, NY, 3135-3140.
17. Ekman, P. (1994). Strong evidence for universals in
facial expressions: A reply to russell's mistaken
critique. Psychological Bulletin, 115, 2, 268-287.
18. Ferguson, C.J. (2007). The good, the bad and the ugly:
A meta-analytic review of positive and negative effects
of violent video games. Psychiatric Quarterly, 78, 4,
309-316.

27. van der Hoogen, IJsselsteijn, W.A. & de Kort, A.W.Y.
(2009). Effects of sensory immersion on behavioural
indicators of player experience: movement synchrony
and controller pressure. In Proceedings of DiGRA
2009.
28. Ivory, J.D. & Magee, R.G. (2009). You can’t take it
with you? Effects of handheld portable media consoles
on physiological and psychological responses to video
game and movie content. CyberPsychology &
Behavior, 12, 3, 291-297.
29. Järvinen, A. (2008). Understanding Video Games as
Emotional Experiences. In B. Perron & M.J.P. Wol
(Eds.), The Video Game Theory Reader 2. Routledge.
85-108.
30. Kallio, K.P., Mäyrä, F. & Kaipainen, K. (in press) At
least nine ways to play: approaching gaming
mentalities. Games & Culture.

19. Field, A. (2009). Discovering statistics using SPSS
(3rd edition). SAGE Publications, 58.

31. Kivikangas, J. M. & Ravaja, N. (2010).
Psychophysiological responses to victory and defeat in
a digital game: The moderating influence of the
relationship between players. Manuscript submitted for
publication.

20. Fleming, M. J., & Rickwood, D. J. (2001). Effects of
violent versus nonviolent video games on children's
arousal, aggressive mood, and positive mood. Journal
of Applied Social Psychology, 31, 10, 2047-2071.

32. Kivikangas, J. M. & Ravaja, N. (2010).
Psychophysiology of digital game playing: Effects of
competition versus collaboration in the laboratory and
in real life. Manuscript in preparation.
33. Klasen M, Zvyagintsev M, Weber R, Mathiak KA, &
Mathiak K (2008). Think Aloud during fMRI:

Neuronal Correlates of Subjective Experience in Video
Games. Fun and Games 2008, LNCS 5294, 132–138.
34. Klimmt, C. (2003). Dimensions and determinants of
the enjoyment of playing digital games: A three-level
model. Level Up: Digital Games Research Conference,
Utrecht, the Netherlands. 246-257.
35. Lang, P. J. (1995). The emotion probe: Studies of
motivation and attention. American Psychologist, 50,
5, 372-385.
36. Lang, P. J., Greenwald, M. K., Bradley, M. M., &
Hamm, A. O. (1993). Looking at pictures: Affective,
facial,
visceral,
and
behavioral
reactions.
Psychophysiology, 30, 261-273.
37. Larsen, R. J., & Diener, E. (1992). Promises and
problems with the circumplex model of emotion. In M.
Clark (Ed.), Review of personality and social
psychology (vol 13.). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
38. Lim, S. & Reeves, B. (2010). Computer agents versus
avatars: Responses to interactive game characters
controlled by a computer or other player. International
Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 68, 57-68.
39. Liu, C., Agrawal, P., Sarkar, N., & Chen, S (2009).
Dynamic Difficulty Adjustment in Computer Games
Through
Real-Time
Anxiety-Based
Affective
Feedback, International Journal of Human-Computer
Interaction, 25, 6, 506-529.
40. Mandryk, R. (2008). Physiological measures for game
evaluation. In: K. Isbister and N. Schaffer (Eds.),
Game Usability: Advancing the player experience.
Burlington, MA: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers.
41. Mandryk, R. & Atkins, M. (2007). A fuzzy
physiological approach for continuously modeling
emotion during interaction with play environments.
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies. 65,
4, 329-347.
42. Mandryk, R. & Inkpen, K.M. (2004). Physiological
indicators for the evaluation of co-located
collaborative play. Presented at CSCW’04, Nov 6-10,
2004, Chicago, IL.
43. Maxwell, S.E. & Delaney, H.D. (2004). Designing
experiments and analyzing data. A mode comparison
perspective. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, Publishers.
44. Mojzisch, A., et al. (2006). The effects of selfinvolvement on attention, arousal, and facial
expression during social interaction with virtual others:
a psychophysiological study. Social Neuroscience, 1,
3-4, 184-195.
45. Nacke, L. (2009). Affective ludology: scientific
measurement of user experience in interactive
entertainment. Blekinge Institute of Technology
Doctoral Dissertation Series No. 2009:04.

46. Nacke, L. E., Grimshaw, M. N., Lindley, C. A. (in
press). More Than a Feeling: Measurement of Sonic
User Experience and Psychophysiology in a FirstPerson Shooter Game. Interacting with Computers, 22.
47. Nacke, L., & Lindley, C. (2009). Affective Ludology,
Flow and Immersion in a First- Person Shooter:
Measurement of Player Experience. Loading… 3, 5.
48. Nacke, L. E., Stellmach, S. & Lindley, C. A. (in press).
Boredom,
Immersion,
Flow
—
Electroencephalographic Assessment of Affective
Level Designs in a First-Person Shooter Game. In
special conference issue (Design for Engaging
Experience and Social Interaction) of Simulation &
Gaming.
49. Nenonen, V., Lindblad, A., Häkkinen, V., Laitinen, T.,
Jouhtio, M., and Hämäläinen, P. (2007). Using heart
rate to control an interactive game. In Proceedings of
the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (San Jose, California, USA, April
28 - May 03, 2007). CHI '07. ACM, New York, NY,
853-856.
50. Posner, J., Russell, J. A., & Peterson, B. S. (2005). The
circumplex model of affect: An integrative approach to
affective neuroscience, cognitive development, and
psychopathology. Development and Psychopathology,
17, 715-734.
51. Rani, P.; Liu, C.; & Sarkar, N. (2006), An Empirical
study of machine learning techniques for affect
recognition in human-robot interaction, Pattern
Analysis & Applications, 9, 58-69.
52. Rapino, M. (2009). Creating immersive worlds using
the Blender Game Engine (BGE). Presented in Blender
Conference 2009, Amsterdam, the Netherlands,
October 23-25.
53. Ravaja, N. (2004). Contributions of psychophysiology
to media research: Review and recommendations.
Media Psychology, 6, 2, 193-235.
54. Ravaja, N. (2009). The psychophysiology of digital
gaming: the effect of a non co-located opponent. Media
Psychology, 12, 268-294.
55. Ravaja, N., Saari, T., Kallinen, K., & Laarni, J. (2006).
The role of mood in the processing of media messages
from a small screen: Effects on subjective and
physiological responses. Media Psychology, 8, 3, 239265.
56. Ravaja, N., Saari, T., Salminen, M., Laarni, J., &
Kallinen, K. (2006). Phasic emotional reactions to
video
game
events:
A
psychophysiological
investigation. Media Psychology, 8, 4, 343—367.
57. Ravaja, N., Turpeinen, M., Saari, T., Puttonen, S., &
Keltikangas-Järvinen,
L.
(2008).
The
psychophysiology of James Bond: Phasic emotional

responses to violent video game events. Emotion, 8, 1,
114—120.

Systems (Ft. Lauderdale, Florida, USA, April 05 - 10,
2003). CHI '03. ACM, New York, NY, 732-733.

58. Ravaja, N., et al. (2005). The psychophysiology of
video gaming: Phasic emotional responses to game
events. Proceedings of DiGRA 2005 Conference.
Burnaby, BC, Canada: Simon Fraser University.

70. Tafalla, R. J. (2007). Gender differences in
cardiovascular reactivity and game performance related
to sensory modality in violent video game play.
Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 37, 9, 20082023.

59. Ravaja, N., et al. (2006). Spatial presence and
emotions during video game playing: Does it matter
with whom you play? Presence: Teleoperators &
Virtual Environments, 15, 4, 381-392.
60. Reynolds, C.J. (2001). The sensing and measurement
of frustration with computers. Bachelor’s thesis,
published by MIT, MA.
61. Russell, J. A. (1980). A circumplex model of affect.
Journal of Personality & Social Psychology, 39, 11611178.
62. Salen, K. & Zimmerman, E. (2004). Rules of play.
Game design fundamentals. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
63. Salminen, M., & Ravaja, N. (2007). Oscillatory brain
responses evoked by video game events: The case of
Super Monkey Ball 2. Cyberpsychology & Behavior,
10, 3, 330—338.

71. Tassinary, L. G., & Cacioppo, J. T. (2000). The
skeletomotor system: Surface electromyography. In J.
T. Cacioppo, L. G. Tassinary & G. G. Berntson (Eds.),
Handbook of psychophysiology (2nd ed.). New York:
Cambridge University Press.
72. Tellegen, A., Watson, D., & Clark, L.A. (1999). On the
dimensional and hierarchical structure of affect.
Psychological Science, 10, 4, 297-303.
73. Tijs, T.J.W., Brokken, D., IJsselsteijn, W.A. (2008).
Dynamic game balancing by recognizing affect. In P.
Markopoulos, B. de Ruyter, W. IJsselsteijn and D.
Rowland (Eds.), Fun and Games 2008. Berlin,
Germany: Springer-Verlag, 106-117.
74. Toet, A., van Welie, M., Houtkamp, J. (2009). Is a
dark virtual environment scary? CyberPsychology &
Behavior, 12, 4, 363-371.

64. Schneider, E. F., Lang, A., Shin, M., & Bradley, S. D.
(2004). Death with a story: How story impacts
emotional, motivational, and physiological responses to
first-person
shooter
video
games.
Human
Communication Research, 30, 3, 361-375.

75. Waterink, W. & van Boxtel, A. (1994). Facial and jawelevator EMG activity in relation to changes in
performance level during a sustained information
processing task. Biological Psychology, 37, 3, 183198.

65. Sennersten, C. (2009). Gameplay (3D Game engine +
Ray tracing = Visual attention through eye tracking).
Unpublished licentiate thesis, Blekinge Institute of
Technology,
Karlshamn,
Sweden.
http://gamescience.bth.se/research/publications/

76. Watson, D., Wiese, D., Vaidya, J., & Tellegen, A.
(1999). The two general activation systems of affect:
Structural findings, evolutionary considerations, and
psychobiological evidence. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 76, 5, 820-838.

66. Shilling, R., Zyda, M., & Wardynski, E. C., (2002).
Introducing emotion into military simulation and
videogame design: America’s Army: Operations and
VIRTE. Presented in GameOn Conference, London.

77. Weber, R., Behr, K.-M., Tamborini, R., Ritterfeld, U.
& Mathiak, K. (2009). What do we really know about
first-person-shooter games? An event-related, highresolution content analysis. Journal of ComputerMediated Communication, 14, 1016-1037.

67. Smith, M.E., McEvoy, L.K., & Gevins, A. (1999).
Neurophysiological indices of strategy development
and skill acquisition. Cognitive Brain Research 7, 389–
404.
68. Staude-Müller,Bliesener & Luthman, 2008;
Staude-Müller, F., Bliesener, T., & Luthman, S.
(2008). Hostile and hardened? an experimental study
on (de-)sensitization to violence and suffering through
playing
video
games.
Swiss
Journal
of
Psychology/Schweizerische
Zeitschrift
Für
Psychologie/Revue Suisse De Psychologie, 67, 1, 4150.
69. Sykes, J. and Brown, S. 2003. Affective gaming:
measuring emotion through the gamepad. In CHI '03
Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing

78. Weyers, P., Mühlberger, A., Hefele, C., & Pauli, P.
(2006). Electromyographic responses to static and
dynamic avatar emotional facial expressions.
Psychophysiology, 43, 450-453.
79. Wolfson, S., & Case, G. (2000). The effects of sound
and colour on responses to a computer game.
Interacting with Computers, 13, 183-192.
80. Yannakakis, G.N. & Hallam, J. (2008). Entertainment
modeling through physiology in physical play.
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 66,
741-755.

