USING STUDENT MENTAL STATE AND LEARNING SENSORY
MODALITIES TO IMPROVE ADAPTIVITY IN E-LEARNING
USO DE ESTADOS MENTALES DE ESTUDIANTES Y MODALIDADES DE APRENDIZAJE
SENSORIAL PARA MEJORAR ADAPTABILIDAD EN E-LEARNING
Rodriguez-C Paola-J1, Paternò Fabio2 and Jimenez Jovani3
Recibido para publicación: 18 de mayo de 2014 - Aceptado para publicación: 15 junio de 2014

ABSTRACT
In this paper, we present an innovative solution to improve adaptivity in an e-learning system using Brain
Computer Interface (BCI) measures (Attention/Meditation) in order to detect changes in students’ preferred
perceptual modes for learning information (VARK model). Our solution is also able to report course units and
learning resources that could be difficult for the students.
Keywords: Adaptivity, Attention, BCI, e-learning, Meditation, Neurosky, VARK.

RESUMEN
En este artículo se presenta una solución innovadora para mejorar la adaptabilidad de un sistema de e-learning
utilizando medidas Brain Computer Interface (BCI) (Atención / Meditación) con el fin de detectar los cambios
en los modos de percepción preferidas de los estudiantes para el aprendizaje de la información (modelo
VARK). Nuestra solución también es capaz de reportar unidades del curso y los recursos de aprendizaje que
podría ser difícil para los estudiantes.
Palabras clave: Adaptabilidad, Atención, BCI, e-learning, Meditación, Neurosky

Camaleon reasearh group of Universidad del Valle at Cali, Colombia; (e-mail: paola.rodriguez@correounivalle.edu.co).
Paternò Fabio, is with CNR-ISTI, HIIS Lab at Pisa, Italy, (e-mail: fabio.paterno@isti.cnr.it).
3
Jimenez Jovani, is with Universidad Nacional de Colombia at Medellin (e-mail: jajimed1@unal.edu.co
1
2

66

Rodriguez-C Paola-J, USING STUDENT MENTAL STATE AND LEARNING SENSORY MODALITIES

1. INTRODUCTION

Based on the foregoing, we propose a technique
that takes advantage of users’ brain-activity
data (attention/meditation) while they interact
with e-learning systems. In this manner, we can
predict the grade of user engagement (focus/
relaxation) with the interface and detect and
monitor the student preferred perceptual mode
for learning information.

Adaptativelearning systems which focus on
users’ Learning Styles (LS) have shown to be able
to improve the students learning achievements
and even their satisfaction during the learning
process [1][2][3][4][5].
Consequently, many proposals about LS
identification have been developed in recent
years, which arebased on a) questionnaires
answered by the students before whatever
interaction, b) the server log file in order to
monitor resources that have been accessed by
the students, their frequency of use and time
spent on them. The last ones are classified in
the state of art as automatic ways to identify LS
applying, inter alia, Bayesian Networks, Fuzzy
Logic, Genetic Algorithms, Neural Networks,
Hidden Markov Chains, Decision Trees and
statistical tendency measurements to adapt the
learning system [6][7][8][4][9][10].

The article is organized as follows: section
2 presents an introduction to BCI; section 3,
describes VARK perception model and the
relationship between student engagement and its
perceptual mode tendency; section 4 explains the
proposed technique to improve adaptivity in an
e-learning system and finally, some conclusions
and future work are presented.

2. BRAIN COMPUTER INTERFACES BCI
BCIs are computational systems that permit
interaction between users and the environment
by means of their brain activity. This is a new way
of communication in which users intentions are
sending to external devices such as computers,
mobiles, prostheses and wheelchairs, etc. [13]
[14][15][16].

Nevertheless, disadvantages still exist : Many
of the preceding works depend of large
questionnaires (40 items at least) as a prior step
in order to establish the student LS and as is
mentioned in [11][12]; They use very technical
language that can cause misinterpretation or
misunderstanding because of their size and in
some cases students answer them lightly. On
the other hand, automatic detection techniques,
reported on the literature, are founded on biased
data sincethey correspond to activities planned
by the teacher for the course; This means that
students access an activity or resource just
because the teacher planned the use of that
resource, so variables as frequency of use and
time spenton activities present some uncertainty
for identifying student styles. In addition, only afew
contributionshave taken into account potential
LS changes over the time. It is worth noticethat
it has not been proposed any technique that use
student internal state (what a student feels at the
moment of the interaction).

BCI is an AI system that can acquire brain
signals, pre-processes them in order to extract
information, identify and gather discriminative
information, classify and organize those data and
translate them into commands understandable by
the connected device [17][18][16].
Most frequently used BCI systems are based on
Electroencephalography (EEG) signals that via
sensors on the scalp can capture brain signals
(non-invasive way). In general the quality of the
signals are considering acceptable, BCI devices
are relatively inexpensive and do not generate
any risks for users[16][19][17][20].
EEG technique classifies captured signals
in four frequency ranges in accordance with
67

Ingeniería e Innovación - Vol. 2:(1) Enero - Junio 2014 (66 - 75)

sensor location and biological meaning. Thus,
this information can be used in order to infer
user metal state (level of focus, relaxation, etc.).
Table 1 summarizes frequency ranges and their
meaning [16][15][21][22][14][18].

contexts. Although many companies building BCI
devices exist, Neurosky and Emotive are the most
widely recognized and used in both commercial
and academic sphere Table 2 presents a
comparative summary of this both technologies
[23][24][25][26][27][28][29].

In addition, hardware and software advances
have made possible to develop portable and
reliable BCI devices incorporating the above
aspects and promote their application in several

In the HCI context, BCI technology has
predominantly assumed as a assistance tool,
focused on restoring communication skills,

Tabla 1. EEG FREQUENCY RANGES AND MENTAL STATES
Brainwaves

Frequency Ranges

Mental State
Unconsciousness, deep sleep

Delta (δ)

< 4 Hz

Theta (θ)

4Hz to 7Hz

Relaxation, intuition, creativity, remembrance, Imagination

Alpha (α)

8Hz to 12Hz

Mental effort, relaxed but not sleepy, quiet, conscious.

Low Beta (β)

12Hz to 15Hz

relaxed and focus

Mid Beta (β)

16Hz to 20Hz

Thinking, self-conscious

High Beta (β)

21Hz to 30Hz

Alert, agitation, disturbance

Gamma (γ)

30Hz to 100Hz

Motor functions and high mental activity

Tabla 2. EMOTIV AND NEUROSKY COMPARATIVE
Characteristic

Emotiv

Neurosky

Sensor Type

Wet

Dry

N° sensors

14 around the scalp

1 in the front and an ear contact point.

Data reported

Brainwaves.
Brainwaves.
User mental State: instant emotion, long User Mental State: Attention, Meditation,
term emotion, focus, frustration, meditation, (Anxiety, Lethargy), and Blink
boredom.
Facial expressions as left-right look, blink, wink,
brow lift, grip teeth, smile.
Basic head movements (left, right, up, down)

Software

Expressiv™ Suite for Monitoring facial MindWave Mobile - Brainwave Starter
Kit for processs EEG signals and return
expressions and head movements.
Brainwaves data and user mental state.
Affectiv™ Suite to infering mental states.
Cognitiv™ Suite for deduce users conscious
intentions in order to interact with objects.

System
Requirements

Windows, MAC.
USB Access

Windows, MAC,
Bluetooth access

68

iOS/Android.

USB/

Rodriguez-C Paola-J, USING STUDENT MENTAL STATE AND LEARNING SENSORY MODALITIES

3. MODAL PREFERENCES IN
LEARNING STYLES

monitoring the environment and providing mobility
for people with severe physical disabilities, so
that much of the results of research is framed
in the field of accessibility [30][23][31][16].
Nonetheless, some works report aspects relative
to BCI usability with the intention to test their power
and viability of use in software development. As a
result of this review we could find out that: users
feel secure wearing those devices; some people
find difficulties with Emotiv Cognitive (movement
prediction tool); for common mental state
variables there are not any noticeable difference
between Emotiv and Neurosky[32][33][34][18].

A LS is the pattern of behaviour exhibited by the
learner in his learning process, which means LS
shows the preferred way apprentices used to
approach and appropriate knowledge. LS are
important because could improve the teaching
process doing learning easier for each student.
Accordingly, it is extremely important to identify
apprentice LS and monitor its changes over the
time [11][5].
Considering the state of art in LS, we find the VARK
model very interesting in order to use it in e-learning
environments, because of common computerlearning resources can be easily transform to
Learning Objects compliant with VARK and the
patterns of behaviour can be without difficulty
translate into guidelines for potential interactions.
Thus, we can take advantage of that for improving
presentation adaptivity in e-learning environments.

As a complement, at the Camaleon Research
group of Universidad del Valle, we have
conducted a small test with 50 users randomly
selected in order to observe the performance and
user comfort level. For this, we used Neurosky
Attention and Meditation games and Emotiv suites,
and observed and interviewed the users during
the interaction. The group was composedof40
university students(10 of arts, 10 of computer
science, 10 of sciences and 10 of humanities)
and 10 professors (2 of arts, 3 of sciences, 3 of
computer science and 2 of humanities); They
interacted for 3 minutes with each application and
took 4 minutes of break between each one. As
a result, we could confirm the findings concluded
in the above works and other additional and
important aspects as:
• All users prefer wearing Neurosky device
because its facility of location on the head and
its dry sensor does not cause any discomfort.
• 90% of users expressed displeasure with
Emotiv because of its wet sensors.
• Long or abundant hair causes interference
with Emotiv device, which became evident
since in those cases many sensors worked
intermittently or did not work.

3.1 VARK LS Model
The VARK model suggests that learners have a
preferred perceptual mode for information inputs
and outputs. Accordingly, Visual, Aural, Read/
Write and Kinaesthetic are the possible modal
preferences. Table 3 summarizes the features for
each type of modal [35].
This model has been widely used because of
many learning resources are available in formats
that easily could be trace to each type of modality,
as well as, the test used to identify the learning
profile is very simple, understandable and ease
of use [36], [37].
3.2 User Engagement and Learning Tendency
There are few studies that have shown the
relationship between students’ engagement or
affective response and their LS tendency owing

Finally and in accordance with the foregoing, we
decide to use Neurosky, due to our work is based
on Attention and Meditation measures that have
similar reliable level in both devices, but users
feels more comfortable wearing it and it is less
expensive.

According to IEEE, Learning Objects are any entity, digital
or non-digital, that may be used for learning, education or
training. In this context we are interesting in digital resources.
1

69

Ingeniería e Innovación - Vol. 2:(1) Enero - Junio 2014 (66 - 75)

Tabla 3. VARK LEARNING STYLES SUMMARY
Modal Preferences
Visual (V)
Aural (A)
Read/Write (R)
Kinaesthetic (K)

Main Features
People that easily understand and assimilate information presented in charts,
graphs, and other symbolic modes instead of words.
People who prefer to use spoken material and talking.
Individuals who easy understand and appropriate information from different kinds
of texts.
People who need to go into direct practice, doing muscular movements or having
movement sensations in order to understand.

to the difficulty to estimate that in an e-learning
environment. Notwithstanding, technological
advances have allowed some interesting
studies. The most interesting are: a) [38]it was
conducted an experiment in order to investigate
the relationship between LS, engagement and
Visual Programming Languages. Their conclusion
was that Visual style learners exhibited higher
engagement labels. For the experiment VARK
model LS, Venkatesh’s questionnaire for measure
the engagement and Scrath1 programming
Languagewere used. b) [39]found out that
students’ emotion (frustration, anxiety, focus,
etc.) is affected by the type of materials they use
during the learning process, and suggest that
students should receive materials compliant with
their cognitive learning style in order to stimulate
learning interest and performance. This work
was tested for Visualizer and Verbalizer styles
and used heart rate variability as a measure of
emotional state by means of emWave device. c)
[40] studied the relationship between students’
LS and EEG data when students perform
mental rotation tasks. They could determine by
means of different statistical measurements that
different brain zones were activated according
to the student’s LS and its gender. They used
EGI 64-channel HydroCel Geodesic Sensor
and Fielder-Solomon Inventory for LS. d) [41]
worked with log-file server data in order to predict
disengagement in an e-learning system using
data mining techniques. They found that there is

a relation between the potential disengagement
situation and student’s learning performance
(evaluation activities). The disengagement
prediction took into account data from learners’
interaction such number of accessed pages, time
spend per activity, etc.

It is a visual programming language designed by the Lifelong
Kindergarten team from MIT Media Lab

Figura 1. Adaptivity Module - Component View

Considering as well foregoing studies that show
the existence of a relation between LS and level
engagement, the strength of this proposal is to
use Attention/Meditation measurement in order to
predict and monitoring learning modal tendency
and thus improve adaptivity in an e-learning system.

4. ADAPTIVITY PROCESS
The adaptivity process comprises three
components, one runs on the client side and
others on the side server. These components are
connected as shown in figure 1.
EEG-Capturer: It is an autonomous component
that getsBCI data (Attention/Meditation) form
TGC (Neurosky controller), via socket connection.
When interaction ends the EEG-Captured create
and stores a XML file on the server.It isnoteworthy

1

70

Rodriguez-C Paola-J, USING STUDENT MENTAL STATE AND LEARNING SENSORY MODALITIES

that Neurosky device reports BCI data every
second, so EEG-Capturer could get hundreds of
values for each variable by a single interaction.

The Inference-Maker uses an algorithm in order
to establish SM. First, the Inference-Algorithm
calculates the statistical distribution of the data
captured by EEG-Capturer. Then, it could estimate
the level of difficulty (Dl). For this, the algorithm
consider the above intervals defined for Attention
and Meditation values.

Inference Maker: It updates Student’s Model
(SM) according to BCI data.The SM is defined as
5-tuple as follow:

The student VARK modal preference is
determined in two steps: First, when students use
the adaptation model for the first time they are
asked to answer VARK test (16 questions)[35].
At this moment, the algorithm is able to identify a
VARK tendency and applies the first adaptation
rules by the course. Second, the Inference-Maker
monitors Att and Med variables in order to identify
loss of focus and calm in the interaction, which
means high degree of disengage and thus a
potential change in VARK preference.To calculate
the change, the algorithm determine a value
(median)for probability distribution of the Att and
Med data associated to learning resources used
by the student.

Where
• Id corresponds to student identifier at the
system.
• Cu is the Course-Unit of study. The course
content is represented as a hierarchical
structure of Cu.
• Att and Med2 are the statistical tendency of
attention and meditation levels for the related
Cu.

If
it means student lost focus or is
disengage of the activity.
If
it means student present high
interest in the activity.
If
relaxation.

Adaptive Maker: It applies the adaptation rules
according with the Student Model. Adaption
Rules are a set of rules expressed in the format
Event/Condition/Action, which represent the
way to adapt user interfaces [42]. For this case,
we have a main Event and 8 conditions that
determinates the possible actions. Table 4, shows
main adaptation rule.

it means student lost calm and

If
relaxed.
Values between

it means student is calm and

are considered neutral.

Adaptive Maker is able to build the concrete
user interface by means of RIA technologies
(CCS, JavaScript, and HTML5) and Web Speech
API. For best understanding of user interface
changes, figure 2 and 3 shows a prototype of a
learning resource for Multimodal Read/Write-Aural
tendencie and the recommendation for access
another resources according with the model.

• Dl represents the estimate level of difficulty
for the current Cu. It could be Low, Neutral
or High. We are interesting in High values in
order to report the associated Cu.
• VARK represents the student modal preference
that was detected.

71

Ingeniería e Innovación - Vol. 2:(1) Enero - Junio 2014 (66 - 75)

Tabla 4. ADAPTATION RULES
EVENT
CONDITION
If there is a V tendency
If there is an A tendency
If there is a R tendency
If there is a K tendency
If there is a Multimodal
tendency

If VARK tendency is
determined
If Attention and
Meditation are in a low
interval.
If student is disengage
on a lesson

Change in Student Model
ACTION
The user interface turns into an iconic map, chart or graphs, using symbols.
The user interface turns into a vocal modal.
The user interface turns into a mental map, list or table, with strong highlight in text.
The user interface needs to have animation and movement, with balance between
symbols, text.
Multimodal is a combination of VARK, it could be bimodal, or more. In those cases,
UI turns into the strongest modal preference for the index page and the others
pages levels could take the other modalities. For balance users, it means with
low difference between their modalities, the tendency will be selected randomly
because that situation point out that user could take advantage of whatever modal
option.
Link to Cu structure learning resources related to student tendency (as a first
priority).
Link Cu structure learning resources changes to the next in priority
Refresh statistical information on “Difficulty topics” professor panel.

Figure 2. Multimodality Read/Write - Aural and Recommendation for change the resource.

Figure 3. Access of the recommended reosurce.

CONCLUSION

was appropriate because it allows to identify to
what extent the data is grouped or spread around
the intervals defined for the target variables.
Additionally, BCI data could be used as a metric
for the design of learning resources because they
allow to establish the extent to which students are
engage in learning activities.

This work describes the use of student’s mental
data (Attention/Meditation) as way to monitor VARK
modal preferences and thus improve adaptivity.
For this type of data, the use of measures of
central tendency in the Inference-Maker algorithm
72

Rodriguez-C Paola-J, USING STUDENT MENTAL STATE AND LEARNING SENSORY MODALITIES

Future work will be dedicated to further applying
the adaptivity process in a complete courses
supported by Moodle platform to identify the
relation between high engagement learning
resources and effectiveness of students learning
process.

[7]

Zataraín C R, Barrón E M, and Reyes G A,
“A Fuzzy-Neural Network for Classifying
Learning Styles in a Web 2.0 and Mobile
Learning Environment,” 2009.

[8]

Sabine G and Kinshuk, “Advanced
Adaptivity in Learning Management
Systems by Considering Learning Styles,”
2009.

[9]

Pham Q D and Adina M F, “A literaturebased method to automatically detect
learning styles in learning management
systems,” 2012.

[10]

Dorça F A, Lima L V, Fernades M A, and
Lopes C R, “Consistent Evolution of Student
Models by Automatic Detection of Learning
Styles,” 2012, vol. 10, pp. 2150–2161.

[11]

Coffield F, Moseley, D, Hall E, and Ecclestone
K, “Learning styles and pedagogy in post16 learning: a systematic and critical
review, LSRC reference,” Learning & Skills
Research Centre, London, 2004.

[12]

Felder R and Spurlin J, “Applications,
Reliability and Validity of the Index of
Learning Styles,” 2005, vol. 21, pp. 103–112.

[13]

et al. “ Wolpaw, J.R, Birbaumer, N., “Brain–
computer interfaces for communication
and control,” Clin. Neurophysiol. Off. J. Int.
Fed. Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 133, no. 6,
pp. 767– 791, 2002.

[14]

R. Fazel-rezai, RECENT ADVANCES IN
BRAIN COMPUTER INTERFACE SYSTEMS.
Rijeka, Croatia: InTech Open Access
Publischer, 2011, p. 234.

[15]

M. Marchesi and B. Riccò, “BRAVO : A
BRAin Virtual Operator For Education
Exploiting Brain-Computer Interfaces,” CHI
2013, pp. 3091–3094, 2013.

REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

E. Popescu, P. Trigano, and C. Badica,
“Relations between Learning Style and
Learner Behavior in an Educational
Hypermedia System: An Exploratory Study,”
in Eight IEEE International Conference on
Advanced Learning Technologies, 2008,
pp. 725–726.
Popescu E, “Adaptation provisioning with
respect to learning styles in a web-based
educational system: an experimental
study,” J. Comput. Assist. Learn., vol. 26,
no. 4, pp. 243–257, 2010.
[Sabine G, Tzu-Chien L, and Kinshuk,
“Analysis of learners’ navigational behaviour
and their learning styles in an online course,”
2010, vol. 26(2), pp. 116–131.
Eltigani Y, Mustafa A, and Sharif S M,
“An approach to Adaptive E-Learning
Hypermedia System based on Learning
Styles (AEHS-LS): Implementation and
evaluation,” Int. J. Libr. Inf. Sci., vol. 3, no.
1, pp. 15–28, Jan. 2011.

[5]

[Drissi S and Amirat A, “An adaptive
educational hypermedia system integrating
learning styles: model and experiment,”
2012, pp. 1–7.

[6]

Sabine G, Kinshuk, and Tzu.Chien L,
“Identifying Learning Styles in Learning
Management Systems by Using Indications
from Students’ Behaviour,” 2008, pp. 482–
486.

73

Ingeniería e Innovación - Vol. 2:(1) Enero - Junio 2014 (66 - 75)

[16]

L. F. Nicolas-Alonso and J. Gomez-Gil,
“Brain computer interfaces, a review.,”
Sensors (Basel)., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 1211–
79, Jan. 2012.

[17]

A. Wilson and G. Schalk, “Brain-Computer
Interfaces,” in Brain-Computer Interfaces,
Human.Computer Interaction Series, D. S.
Tan and A. Nijholt, Eds. London: Springer
London, 2010, pp. 261–274.

[18]		 B. Van De Laar, G. Hayrettin, D. P. Bos, F.
Nijboer, and A. Nijholt, “Towards Practical
Brain-Computer Interfaces,” 2013.
[19]

G. Dornhege, T. Hinterberger, and D.
J. Mcfarland, Toward Brain-Computer
Interfacing. Cambridge, Massachsetts:
MIT Press, 2007, p. 520.

[21]

H. de Garis, C. Shuo, B. Goertzel, and
L. Ruiting, “A world survey of artificial
brain projects, Part I: Large-scale brain
simulations,” Neurocomputing, vol. 74, no.
1–3, pp. 3–29, Dec. 2010.

[22]

I. NeuroSky, “Brain Wave Signal ( EEG )
of NeuroSky.” NeuroSky Brain-Computer
Interface Technologies, p. 22, 2009.

[23]

C. Hondrou and G. Caridakis, “Affective ,
Natural Interaction Using EEG : Sensors
, Application and Future Directions,” pp.
331–338, 2012.

[24]

M. Perakakis and A. Potamianos, “Affective
Evaluation of a Multimodal Dialogue System
Using Brain Signals,” in Spoken Language
Technology Workshop (SLT), IEEE, 2012,
pp. 43–48.

[26]

A. Vourvopoulos, “Brain-controlled NXT
Robot : Tele-operating a robot through brain
electrical activity,” in Third International
Conference on Games and Virtual Worlds
for Serious Applications, 2011.

[27]		 H. K. . Goldberg, B.S., Sottilare, R.A.,
Brawner, K.W., Holden, “Predicting Learner
Engagement during Well-Defined and IllDefined Computer-Based Intercultural
Interactions.,” D’Mello, S., Graesser, A.,
Schuller, B., Martin, J.-C. ACII 2011, Part I.
LNCS, vol. 6974, pp. 538–547, 2011.

T. W. Berger, G. A. G. John K Chapin, D. J.
McFarland, J. C. Principe, W. Soussou, D.
M. Taylor, and P. A. Tresco, Brain-Computer
Interfaces. An International Assessment
of Research and Develoment Trends.
Springer, 2008, p. 310.

[20]

[25]

A. Vourvopoulos and F. Liarokapis,
“Robot Navigation Using Brain-Computer
Interfaces,” 2012 IEEE 11th Int. Conf. Trust.
Secur. Priv. Comput. Commun., pp. 1785–
1792, Jun. 2012.
74

[28]

M. . Inventado, P.S., Legaspi, R., Bui, T.D.,
Suarez, “Predicting student’s appraisal of
feedback in an its using previous affective
states and continuous affect labels from
EEG data.,” in Proceedings of the 18th
International Conference on Computers in
Education, 2010.

[29]

W. . A. Gonzalez-Sanchez, J., ChavezEcheagaray, M.E., Atkinson, R., Burleson,
“An agent-based software architecture for
a multimodal emotion recognition framework.,” in Proc. of 9th Working IEEE/IFIP
Conference on Software Architecture,
WICSA, 2011.

[30]

M. M. Jackson and R. Mappus, “Applications
for Brain-Computer Interfaces.”

[31]

K. Krishnaswamy and R. Kuber, “Toward
the development of a BCI and gestural
interface to support individuals with
physical disabilities,” Proc. 14th Int. ACM
SIGACCESS Conf. Comput. Access. ASSETS ’12, p. 229, 2012.

Rodriguez-C Paola-J, USING STUDENT MENTAL STATE AND LEARNING SENSORY MODALITIES

[32]

[33]

[34]

G. S. Taylor and C. Schmidt, “Empirical
Evaluation of the Emotiv EPOC BCI Headset
for the Detection of Mental Actions,” Proc.
Hum. Factors Ergon. Soc. Annu. Meet., vol.
56, no. 1, pp. 193–197, Oct. 2012.
G. N. Ranky and S. Adamovich, “Analysis
of a commercial EEG device for the control
of a robot arm,” Proc. 2010 IEEE 36th Annu.
Northeast Bioeng. Conf., pp. 1–2, Mar.
2010.
H. Park, B. Myung, and K. Y. Sun, “Power
consumption of wireless EEG device for
Bel application,” no. 1, pp. 100–102, 2013.

75

[35]

N. Fleming, Teaching and Learning Styles.
VARK Strategies. 2012, p. 90.

[36]

W. Leite, S. Marilla, and S. Yuying,
“Attempted Validation of the Scores of
the VARK: Learning Styles Inventory With
Multitrait–Multimethod Confirmatory Factor
Analysis Models,” in Educational and
Psychological Measurement, 2009, pp.
323–339.

[37]

R. Morgan and F. Baker, “VARK Analysis
and Recommendations for Educators.
In R. McBride & M. Searson (Eds.),” in
Proceedings of Society for Information
Technology
&
Teacher
Education
International Conference, 2013, pp. 1381–
1385.

