USING BRAIN - COMPUTER INTERFACE FOR CONTROL ROBOT
MOVEMENT
Jaromir Svejda, Roman Zak, Roman Senkerik and Roman Jasek
Department of Informatics and Artificial Intelligence
Tomas Bata University in Zlin
Nam T.G. Masaryka 5555, 760 01 Zlin, Czech Republic.
E-mail: {svejda, rzak, senkerik, jasek}@fai.utb.cz

KEYWORDS
Electroencephalography, Brain - Computer Interface,
Robotics, Neuro-headset
ABSTRACT
The basic idea of Brain - Computer Interface (BCI) is
the connection of brain waves with an output device
through some interface. Aim of this article is to clarify
the potential utilization of complex EEG signal in BCI
system. For this purpose, real application of BCI
technology was designed and tested. This paper
describes this real application in detail and discussed its
qualities with respect to its further practical utilization.
INTRODUCTION
The human brain is a complex system, which is an
object of our research. It is regarded as the most
complex system in the universe. The modern science is
currently attempting to understand the complex
interconnection among individual parts of the brain
(Sporns et.al. 2005). There are many publications,
which deal with a description of the brain. (Adeli 2010,
Damasio 1995, Sporns et al. 2005)
The brain itself is composed of several parts, without
which his activity could not be possible. One of its basic
structural parts is a neuron. The neuronal cells are
characterized by the fact that electrical activity is
carried out in them. These cells communicate with each
other by electrical signals. According to the last

estimate, there are approximately 1011 neurons in the
brain. Every one of them is connected with thousands of
other
neurons.
The
main
source
of
Electroencephalography (EEG) signal is an electric
activity of synapse - dendrites membrane located in the
surface layer of the cortex. Each active synapse
dispatches electromagnetic pulse to the environment
during excitation. (Kandel et al. 2000) Due to the high
number of these pulses, it is difficult to locate their
source by means of multichannel sensor on the skin.
This article deals with the Brain - Computer Interface
(BCI) technology, which represents the connection of
brain waves with the output device through some
interface. Figure 1. illustrates the basic principle of a
system based on BCI.
Firstly, the brain activity is obtained from the subject’s
brain by appropriate device based on some of the
technologies, which are currently available for sensing
the brain activity; for example fMRI (functional
magnetic
resonance
imaging),
EEG
(Electroencephalography) etc. For the purposes of the
study described below, EEG technology was chosen to
record brain activity.
Further, received signal has to be processed and
prepared for translation algorithm. This phase involves
a feature extraction during which the most expressive
characteristics of obtained signal are discovered. In the
case of EEG signal, these characteristics usually relate
to some physiological activity such as eye blink, eye
movement, raise brow etc.

Figure 1: Basic principle of BCI system

Proceedings 29th European Conference on Modelling and
Simulation ©ECMS Valeri M. Mladenov, Petia Georgieva,
Grisha Spasov, Galidiya Petrova (Editors)
ISBN: 978-0-9932440-0-1 / ISBN: 978-0-9932440-1-8 (CD)

Finally, the translation algorithm transfers selected
features to commands of external device or software.
Currently, there are many known applications of BCI
technology, but not enough to each particular field of
study. Signal that is sensed from the brain is the key
element in the BCI model; therefore the design of an
appropriate algorithm for processing of the signal is the
most discussed part of BCI model structure. (Schalk et
al. 2004)
The aim of this paper is to introduce a real application
of BCI technology which uses Emotiv EPOC neuroheadset (EEG device) for sensing brain activity and
robotic device Mindstorms EV3 as an external device.

headset do not need any additional tools. It has 14 high
resolution sensors, which are placed on optimal
positions on the human head (Figure 3).

SPECIFICATION OF TECHNICAL EQUIPMENT
BCI system consists of three main parts: signal sensing,
signal processing and external system control. The
technical equipment of each part is described separately
in the following chapters.

Figure 2: Emotiv EPOC neuro-headset (Emotiv 2012)

Signal Sensing
There are several approaches for sensing brain activity.
The most widely used is EEG technology, which
belongs among the non-invasive methods. Devices
based on EEG technology provide signal with very low
voltage amplitude because the signal has to pass
through the relatively low conductive skull. The
amplitude ranges from tens to hundreds microvolts.
Recently, we use Emotiv EPOC neuro-headset to obtain
EEG signal from the human brain. Sensing of EEG by
Emotiv EPOC neuro-headset has a number of
advantages because it already involves solved
elementary issues in the processing of the measured
signal. Due to this fact, it is not necessary to operate
with raw data. It depends on the further usage of the
data. Although the spectrum of this data could be used
in many applications, it is not simple to understand the
entire significance of the whole signal even if the
proportion of the noise is minimal. This technology has
the greatest expansion and certainly also the priority
significance in diagnosis of various diseases in
medicine. (Adeli 2010)
Emotiv Corporation developed personal brain computer interface for human - computer interaction
using neuro-technology, which is based on processing
of electromagnetic waves occurring in the human brain.
The interface has a wide range of possible applications;
for example in interactive games, intelligent adaptive
environment, audio-visual art and design, medicine,
robotics and automotive industry. Moreover, it can be
deployed in a large amount of scientific research.
Emotiv EPOC neuro-headset (Figure 2) measures a
signal wirelessly transferred to common personal
computer. It is a device, which has a set of sensors
intended for sensing the activity produced by human
brain. Traditional EEG devices requires the use of
conductive pasta to improve the conductivity between
electrodes and hairs. On the other hand, the neuro-

Figure 3: Placement of electrodes of Emotiv EPOC
neuro-headset
Moreover, it also includes gyroscope for determinate
the position in the area. Each channel has its own label
based on its position on the head: AF3, F7, F3, FC5, T7,
P7, O1, O2, P8, T8, FC6, F4, F8, and AF4. Internal
sampling frequency of the neuro-headset is 2048 Hz.
On the other hand, the neuro-headset provides signal
with sampling frequency of 128Hz. More information
about neuro-headset can be found in (Emotiv 2012).
Emotiv provide basic software set containing many
tools, which can be used for recording various signals
such as electric potential from all 14 sensors, power
spectrum of individual EEG channels in real time and
rotational acceleration of the head in horizontal and
vertical axis using data from gyroscope. All of these
outputs are shown in graphs. Data are also available in
raw form, which can be used for further analysis. If it is
required special functionality, which is not provided by
native software, it is desirable to develop own
application using Emotiv SDK (Software Development
Kit).
Signal Processing
Signal processing is important part of BCI system;
therefore, this area has to be deeply examined. This part
is responsible to either physiological or mental activity

recognition. Current recognition methods are based on
artificial neural networks and they are able to detect
following states of mind:
Instantaneous excitement - introduced as a
consciousness or feeling of physiological excitement
with positive value. Excitement is characterized by
activation of sympathetic nervous system, which is
responsible for physiological responses such as dilated
pupils, stimulation of the sweat glands, pulse frequency
etc.
Long-term excitement - similar to instantaneous
excitement. Detection of this state is designed and set to
obtain more precise measurement of excitement
changes in longer time periods (minutes).
Engagement - known as both alertness and directing
attention to suggestions to the tasks. It is characterized
as a growth of physiological excitement. It can be
observed in beta-waves and alpha waves of EEG record.
Contrary of this state is called boredom. The more
attention or concentration is performed, the higher value
is recorded during detection phase. The writing of text
to the paper or writing on computer rises a value of
engagement state, while closing eyes almost always
rapidly decreases that value.
The most pronounced physiological activity is facial
expression; thus, movement of brow, mouth or eyes can
be detected. The brain signals of these activities is
similar among all people; therefore, universal signatures
can be used to detect facial expressions of almost each
person.
External System Control
External system can be either software or hardware
model. For the purposes of our research, robotics device
Mindstorms EV3 was chosen as an external system
(Figure 4.), because it supports most of communication
interfaces such as Bluetooth, Wi-Fi, USB connection
etc. It consist of many static parts from which it is
possible to construct various robotic solutions. Further,
robot can be equipped with colour sensor, ultrasonic
sensor, gyroscope sensor or touch sensor. Robot’s
motion is assured by interactive servomotors.
Communication and logic of robot’s behaviour is
controlled by programmable intelligent EV3 Brick.
Figure 4. shows an example of one specific robotic
device, which is possible to construct from parts
described above.
Intelligent EV3 Brick can be programmed in native
graphics program language in LabView software.
Moreover, there is also an option to develop own
software application in some other supported languages
such as Java, C# etc.

Figure 4: Robotic device Mindstroms EV3
RESULTS
The structure of proposed BCI application can be
divided into three parts as was described in previous
section: signal sensing, signal processing and external
system control.
Signal sensing part ensures measurement of brain
signals using Emotiv EPOC neuro-headset. Moreover,
data from embedded gyrocope are also recorded. Both
brain signal and gyroscope data are sent to the computer
through the wireless connection. Further, obtained data
are processed in software application interface.
The whole application interface was realized on the
higher abstraction level. Its architecture was designed
with emphasis on mutual compatibility among available
technical resources.
Parallelization was chosen in order to achieve real time
response; thus, proposed application contains special
program threads, where individual consuming
operations are carried out. Thread B (labelled as Brain
part) performs communication with the neuro-headset
and listens to events related to physiological activity
such as blink of an eye; it also receives gyroscope data.
Thread C (labelled as computer/device part) was
implemented analogously to previous thread, but it is
connected to the external system; in our case, it is a
robotic device Mindstorms EV3. The main task of
thread C is to switch servomotors of a robot according
to states, which are transmitted between threads B and
C.
Time delay for both loops were selected in hundreds of
milliseconds to ensure fluent communication between
neuro-headset and robot. Moreover, when one of the
servomotors is started by communication interface, it
requires at least 100ms to perform required operation.
Gyroscope has to be calibrated before its usage. That
operation takes 550ms. The data from gyroscope is
then used to control direction of robot rotation. Even if
the data contains values of angular velocity in
horizontal (x) and vertical (y) axis, robot is controlled
with using only horizontal movement of neuro-headset,
where the gyroscope is located. Robot control is
performed as follows. Whenever neuro-headset rotates

left, robot also rotates to left. The same applies for right
rotation. Moreover, software interface is set to react on
angular velocity higher then 20 deg/s in both directions.
The reason for this adjustment was too high sensitivity
of control due to which the robot was difficult to
control.
Finally, Interface part is main thread in which
translation algorithm takes care of interconnection
between B and C thread. Proposed architecture of
communication interface is depicted on Figure 6. Then,
whole design and realization with the real devices is a
prototype, which has to be subjected to thorough testing
on several levels of development. Interface part is main
thread of application.
The part of Emotiv research SDK edition software
package is also a simulator of brain activity called
EmoComposer, which is able to simulate occurrence of
brain activities mentioned in previous section of this
article. Firstly, the testing of reliability of proposed
communication interface were tested using that
simulator, which communicates through the same
network protocol. At this case, reliability was 100%;
thus, each initiation of specific brain activity using the
simulator caused a motion of the robotic device.
Activity of open eye was chosen as test brain activity.

Gyroscope could not be simulated, so it was tested with
real devices.
Experiment with real neuro-headset showed following
results. EEG record of closed eyes is depicted in Figure
5, where its activity is bounded by red rectangle. The
rest of the signal responds to the state of open eyes.
Neuro-headset was set on the head of test subject.
Further, the scanned brain activity of the subject was
sent to the computer through the wireless connection.
Obtained signal was processed using proposed
communication interface mentioned above. Finally, an
appropriate command was sent to the robotic device.
The aim of this experiment was to find out the real
efficiency of brain - computer interface when universal
signature of open eyes state is used to detect a brain
activity from the subject.
Current study builds on our previous research, which
dealt with the EEG signal analyses with respect to its
usage for biometrical purposes. (Zak et al. 2014, Svejda
et al. 2014) Our previous research brought results of
response reliability on universal signature of eye
blinking activity. The model reacts with approximately
from 60 to 70% success rate. However, current research
showed that universal signature of open or close eyes is
more suitable; the succes rate was around 98%.

Figure 5: Example of close eyes record (bordered by the red line) and open eyes record
(not bordered)

Figure 6: Architecture of described software interface
DISCUSSIONS
Human brain is the most complex known system in the
universe. Study of its activity is extremely important
mainly due to the most precise diagnosis of brain
diseases and their treatment. Furthermore, acquired
knowledge could be used in modern technologies with
BCI systems, where an interaction between brain and
computers appears.
Our research deals with BCI system, which was used to
control robotic device. We designed the architecture of
software communication interface between neuroheadset and robotic equipment. The abilities of
proposed software were confirmed on real BCI system.
The system consisted of EEG device, computer and a
robotic device. Tests proved that proposed architecture
of
software
communication
interface
meets
requirements for real-time control of an external device
using brain waves.
Further, our research examined practical issues
associated with currently one of the most advanced
EEG equipment intended for technical utilization. The
time, which one spends with its installation on the
subject head, is approximately from 5 to 10 minutes. It
depends on whether it is the very first installation of the
equipment or whether it is reused in the same day. Even
if the device does not need any special gel, which will
be applied on subject’s head, it still requires application
of saline solution on sensor pads. Further, the important
part of the installation is also to find the right position
for the neuro-headset on the head. This process is
usually controlled by software, which provides
information about contact quality of each sensor. This
issue is not problem in laboratory conditions, but it
could bring complications in practical applications;
thus, it could be the one of the main reasons of making
the whole system unusable because of the time needed
to set the system up. On the other hand, current EEG

devices provide EEG signal in the highest possible
quality depended on the current technical progress.
The aim of our experiment was to demonstrate the real
efficiency of communication between EEG and the
robotic device using universal signatures of selected
brain activities. The average reliability of robotic device
response on signal of eye blinking was 65.45%. On the
other hand, the response on state of open eyes was
around 98%. Therefore, we decided to use universal
signature of open eyes in our further research.
These results were obtained during initial test
experiment, whose aim was to find out whether it is
possible to use brain activity signal to control external
device; therefore, only one volunteer was participated in
this initial experiment. There were performed 300
attempts of eye blinking activity detection with this
participant. Our future research will deal with proving
of mentioned results on greater group of volunteers.
The low reliability could be caused by prolonged use of
neuro-headset which may leads to headache caused by
slight pressure of soft pads on the skull; thus, subject’s
focus on repeating the same activity may be partly
affected by this unwanted headache. Finally, it was also
the reason for making breaks after each three set of
attempts.
Further, difference between response reliabilities on two
selected brain activities could be caused by the different
difficulty level of tested tasks. Repeating the eye
blinking activity with respect to obtain similar signal
waveform at each attempt seems to be more
complicated then repeating state of open/close eyes.
Moreover, the first activity has usually short duration,
while the second may be quite longer; thus, it brings
more comfort ways to control external device.
In addition, inexperienced subject need time to become
familiar with how to properly perform an activity,
which should be recognized using universal signature.
Other investigations shows that even subjects who have
no BCI control in the first few sessions can learn the

operation by neuro-biofeedback training. (Birbaumer et
al. 1999, Guger et al. 2003, Neuper et al. 1999,
Pfurtscheller et al. 2000)
Our research proved that robot can react on brain
activity. The set of universal signatures contains other
activities (brow movement, smile etc.). Each of them
could be mapped into different robot action.
Unfortunately, there are many activities, which are not
included in the set of universal signatures e.g.
movement imagination, limb movement etc. These
activities can currently be recognized only after
additional learning of neural network. This kind of
activities could be another appropriate subject of further
research.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by Internal Grant Agency of
Tomas Bata University under the project No.
IGA/FAI/2015/063, further by Grant Agency of the
Czech Republic - GACR P103/15/06700S, further
by financial support of research project NPU I No.
MSMT-7778/2014 by the Ministry of Education of the
Czech Republic and also by the European Regional
Development Fund under the Project CEBIA-Tech No.
CZ.1.05/2.1.00/03.0089.
REFERENCES
Adeli, H. 2010. Wavelet-Chaos-Neural Network Models for
EEG-Based Diagnosis of Neurological Disorders. In: Kim
T-h, Lee Y-h, Kang B-H, Ślęzak D (eds) Future
Generation Information Technology, vol 6485. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science. Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
pp 1-11. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-17569-5_1.
Birbaumer, N., N. Ghanayim, T. Hinterberger, I. Iversen, B.
Kotchoubey, A. Kübler, J. Perelmouter, E. Tuab and H.
Flor. 1999. A spelling device for the paralysed. Nature
[online]. vol. 398, issue 6725, s. 297-298. DOI:
10.1038/18581.
Damasio, Hanna. 1995. Human brain anatomy in
computerized images. New York: Oxford University
Press, 303 p. ISBN 0195082044.
Emotiv | EEG System | Electroencephalography. 2012.
(online).
Available
from:
http://www.emotiv.com/index.php.
Guger, C., G. Edlinger, W. Harkam, I. Niedermayer and G.
Pfurtscheller. 2003. How many people are able to operate
an eeg-based brain-computer interface (bci)?. IEEE
Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation
Engineering [online]. vol. 11, issue 2, pp. 145-147. DOI:
10.1109/tnsre.2003.814481.
Kandel, Eric R., James H. Schwartz and Thomas M. Jessell.
2000. Principles of neural science. 4th ed. New York:
McGraw-Hill, Health Professions Division, xli, 1414 p.
ISBN 978-0-8385-7701-1.
Neuper, C., A., Schlögl and G., Pfurtscheller. 1999.
Enhancement of Left-Right Sensorimotor EEG
Differences During Feedback-Regulated Motor Imagery.
Journal of Clinical Neurophysiology [online]. vol. 16,
issue 4, pp. 251-261. DOI: 10.1007/978-4-431-309628_23.

Pfurtscheller, G., C. Guger, G. Müller, G. Krausz and C.
Neuper. 2000. Brain oscillations control hand orthosis in a
tetraplegic. Neuroscience Letters[online]. vol. 292, issue
3, pp. 211-214. DOI: 10.1016/s0304-3940(00)01471-3.
Schalk, G., D.J. McFarland, T. Hinterberger, N. Birbaumer
and J.R. Wolpaw. 2004. BCI2000: A General-Purpose
Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) System. IEEE
Transactions on Biomedical Engineering [online]. vol. 51,
issue 6, pp. 1034-1043 DOI: 10.1109/tbme.2004.827072.
Sporns, O., G. Tononi and R. Kötter. 2005. The Human
Connectome: A Structural Description of the Human
Brain. PLoS Computational Biology[online]. vol. 1, issue
4. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.0010042.
Svejda, J., R. Zak, R. Senkerik and R. Jasek. 2014. Complex
Analysis of EEG Signal for Biometrical Classification
Purposes. Proceedings of Nostradamus 2014 – Prediction,
modeling and analysis of complex systems, pp. 449 - 459.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-07401-6_45.
Zak, R., J. Svejda, R. Senkerik and R. Jasek. 2014. Analysis
of EEG signal for using in biometrical classification
(2014) Proceedings - 28th European Conference on
Modelling and Simulation, ECMS 2014, pp. 377 - 381.

AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES
JAROMIR SVEJDA was born in the Czech Republic, and
went to the Tomas Bata University in Zlin,
where he studied Information Technologies
and obtained his MSc degree in 2011. He is
now a Ph.D. student at the same university.
His email address is: svejda@fai.utb.cz.
ROMAN ZAK was born in the Czech Republic, and went to
the Tomas Bata University in Zlin, where he
studied Information Technologies and
obtained his MSc degree in 2011. He is now
a Ph.D. student at the same university. His
email address is: rzak@fai.utb.cz.
ROMAN SENKERIK was born in the Czech Republic, and
went to the Tomas Bata University in Zlin,
where he studied Technical Cybernetics and
obtained his MSc degree in 2004, Ph.D. degree
in Technical Cybernetics in 2008 and Assoc.
prof. in 2013 (Informatics). He is now an Assoc.
prof. at the same university (Research and
courses in: Applied Informatics, Cryptology, Artificial
Intelligence, Mathematical Informatics). His email address
is: senkerik@fai.utb.cz.
ROMAN JASEK is working as a Associate Professor, head
of Department of Informatics and Artificial
Intelligence in Faculty Applied Informatics
in Tomas Bata University in Zlin. He
graduated from computer science in Palacky
University in Olomouc, his Ph.D. received
in Charles University in Prague. His
research interests are: Artificial Intelligence, Computer
Science and Data Security. His email address is:
jasek@fai.utb.cz.

