International Journal on Perceptive and Cognitive Computing (IJPCC)

Vol 6, Issue 2 (2020)

Identifying Stress Level Among Gamers Using
Electroencephalogram Signals
Norzaliza MNor1, Sheik Dawood Mohamed Rafi2, Muhammad Arif Othman3
1,2,3Department

of Computer Science, Kulliyyah of Information & Communication Technology (KICT), International Islamic
University Malaysia, Jalan Gombak, 51300 Kuala Lumpur
norzaliza@iium.edu.my, sheikdawood1103@gmail.com, muhammadarifothman97@gmail.com

Abstract—This research is conducted to identify stress level among gamer using Electroencephalogram
Machine (EEG). Electroencephalogram machine or better known as EEG machine is a machine used by
neuroscientists to read brain signals activity through various number of channels. The brain signals collected
from subjects using 19 channels EEG machine which is DABO Machine. The problem in this research study is to
find out if game can induce stress. The expected outcome of this research is that brain signal collected from
subjects could give enough evidence about the relationship between playing game and stress level in their
daily activities. Objective of the research is to design experimental procedure suitable for understanding the
bio-signal of subjects inducing stress and to understand the relationship between four basic emotions (Happy,
Calm, Fear, Sad) and the emotion while playing the games. In our research methodology, we focus on five
difference stages to complete the research. The stages start with the data collection, pre-processing, features
extraction classification and lastly analysis. Later, we able to come out with the result of our research about
the stress level for the subject. The experiment was conducted by following a standard protocol experiment
for EEG machine. This data will be analysed using Mel Frequency Cepstral Coefficients (MFCC) as feature
extraction, and multilayer perceptron (MLP) as classifier. The result show that the subject has positive
emotion which is calm and happy at the beginning and ending of playing the game. At the beginning, subject
only start with demo, so the subject did not feel pressured and at the end we assumed that the subject feel
relieved because of ending the game. After certain time playing the game, the subject starting to have
negative emotion until the end of the game. This happen because of subject started to feel stress after plays
the higher level of the game. Based on the result, we can conclude that game can induce stress among
gamers.

Keywords—EEG, stress, gamers, MFCC, MLP.

I. INTRODUCTION
Stress is a feeling of emotional or physical tension. It can
come from any event or thought that makes you feel
frustrated, angry, or nervous. Stress is our body's reaction
to a challenge or demand. In short bursts, stress can be
positive, such as when it helps you avoid danger or meet a
deadline [1-2]. But when stress lasts for a long time, it may
harm our health.
The problem in this research study is why stress is
important to be measured and what is the relationship
between four basic emotions (Happy, Calm, Fear, Sad) and
the emotion while playing the games. The experiment was
conducted to identify stress level among gamers using
electroencephalogram (EEG) machine. The brain signals
collected from subjects using 19 channels EEG
(electroencephalogram) machine. The experiment was
conducted by following a standard protocol experiment for
EEG machine usage and DASS-21 (depression anxiety and
stress scales) questionnaires [1] with extension of SAM
(self-assessment manikin) towards subjects.

42

To complete the analysing process, we used MFCC (Mel
Frequency Cepstral Coefficients) as a feature extraction,
then MLP (multilayer perceptron) as classifier, to get the
expected result. We used these methods to analyse the
result and compare the accuracy level between these
methods. In the last part of our research, we expect the
results to show an accuracy of data emotions. The
trajectories of the valence(V) and arousal(A) are when V=+1
and A=+1 the subject’s emotion is happy, when V=+1 and
A=-1 the subject’s emotion is calm, when V=-1 and A=+1 the
subject’s emotion is fear whereas when V=-1 and A=-1 the
subject’s emotion is sad. As the subject’s emotion is happy
or calm, he is being motivated whereby if the subject’s
emotion is fear or sad, he is not motivated while
performing the tasks given. The outcome expected from
this experiment is that brain signals collected could give
enough evidence that the kinds of games given could
contribute to intrinsic motivation among our subjects.
This research is conducted to identify stress level
among gamer using Electroencephalogram Machine (EEG).
Electroencephalogram machine or better known as EEG

International Journal on Perceptive and Cognitive Computing (IJPCC)
machine is a machine used by neuroscientists to read brain
signals activity through various numbers of channels [3].
The brain signals collected from subjects using 19 channels
EEG (electroencephalogram) machine which is DABO
Machine. The experiment was conducted by following a
standard protocol experiment for EEG machine. This data
will be analysed using MFCC (Mel Frequency Cepstral
Coefficients) as feature extraction, and MLP (multilayer
perceptron) as classifier. The problem in this research study
is to find out whether game can induce stress or not. The
expected outcome of this research is that brain signal
collected from subjects could give enough evidence about
the relationship between playing game and stress level in
their daily activities. Hence the paper set out the following
objectives: to design experimental procedure suitable for
understanding the bio-signal of subjects inducing stress;
and to understand the relationship between four basic
emotions (Happy, Calm, Fear, Sad) and the emotion while
playing the games.
This is crucial because the research will help Computer
Scientist to analyse the stress data for gamers based on
physiological signals (EEG) using neural network, since the
psychological data itself can be biased. But with help from
our psychological signal data, we can help them to analyse
the data and get a better result. Other than that, to identify
either game can induce stress or otherwise, hence, to find
the relationship between game and stress level. Besides,
this project is to help researches to analyse the stress data
for playing game based on physiological signals (EEG) using
neural network, since the psychological data (dass21) itself
can be biased.

Vol 6, Issue 2 (2020)

more positive as compared to C programming. These
variations eventually prove that if the EEG data analysis
conducted in controlled environment can reveal
exceptional
conclusion
about psycho-physiological
activities. However, in this experiment they do not aim to
generalize the results and the evaluation are performed
based on the pilot nature of the experiment. This particular
thesis helped to formulate the steps that need to be
followed in order to analyze the EEG data using the noncommercial tools like EEGLAB and MATLAB.
B. MLP–Performance Evaluation for Pattern Recognition in
Myoelectric Signal
This experiment is about the evaluation of MLP’s
performance on myoelectric signal usage for artificial limbs
movements. The signals were gathered from BioPatRec
signal repository. MLP was used to train original signals and
only collect the re-sampled signal by using NetLab. This
experiment also conducted an evaluation of results of
different situation to gain the best configuration for
artificial limbs to move [5]. This paper stated that
comparison process also being made between MLP and
other algorithms however, MLP works the best with
accuracy of 98.3% by train the original data. The new resampled data also scores 96.7% of accuracy with 200 of
iteration was used. It can be concluded that MLP may be
the best algorithms to process myoelectric signals.

II. RELATED WORK

C. Using the Depression Anxiety Stress Scale 21 (DASS 21)
across cultures
Experiment in this paper focus on validation of DASS-21
usage in across South East Asian countries. There are 2,630
employees were recruited by 4 different researchers from
several companies from six countries to cross validate the
result in each country. Paper-based questionnaire and data
entry have been conducted. The scores of questionnaires
were calculated, and cross validation process was being
made to obtain the significant pattern of questions
residuals. This paper also mentioned about the
psychometrics aspect of DASS-21 with respect to Asian
demographics background [6]. The result of this
experiment also proposed that some of questions in DASS21 are causing residuals and cross loading. The researchers
also stated in this paper that DASS-18 may work better in
term linguistic choices of words because of differences in
term of perception.

A. EEG-Based Evaluation of Cognitive and Emotional Arousal
An experiment to understand how emotions and/or
cognitive load vary while coding in C and Python, to gain
better understanding on the EEG method, principles and
complexities involved with the collection of data and to
understand the steps to perform such an experimental
study and to assimilate the emotional and cognitive load
that affects the brain when performing programming. In
the research, a novel method was adopted to measure and
quantitatively analyze EEG data in order to evaluate the
emotions and cognitive levels of programmers while
coding, using the Emotiv headset device and self-reports in
an experimental setup. This Pilot research indicated that
the Emotiv Epoc device is feasible to conduct a controlled
experiment. Following the results of the experiment above,
three distinct differences were observed in the cognitive
and emotional measures of the programmers [4]. Python
programming languages was more preferred than C
programming based on the syntax, difficulty level and time
taken was also less in Python. The emotions in Python were

43

D. Emotion and Eelectroencephalogram (EEG)
Electroencephalogram (EEG) device is a diagnostic tool
used by the neurologist to record the electrical activity of
the brain using numerous electrodes placed on the scalp
[3]. The electrical activity produced by the brain cells
(neurons activation) and neural circuits can then be
captured. These EEG signals can then be used to analyze
the student’s dynamic emotions and the respective

International Journal on Perceptive and Cognitive Computing (IJPCC)
precursor emotion. EEG device has been adopted by many
researchers in capturing neural activity in milliseconds from
the cortical surface [7].

Vol 6, Issue 2 (2020)

III RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
In our research methodology, we focus on five different
stages to complete the research. The stages start with the
data collection, pre-processing, features extraction

classification and analysis. In the end, we would be able to
come out with the result of our research about the stress
level for the subject. Figure 1 shows the overall
methodology of our research by using the block diagram.

Fig 1. Proposed research methodology block diagram for intrinsic motivation towards games
A. Data Collection
Data collection is the most important part in our research
to ensure that the conclusion that we made from the
analysis is correct and useful, it will be the first phase that
needs to be completed to obtain the EEG raw signals. There
are four stages used in data collection which are eyes
closed and eyes open data collection, basic emotion stimuli
(IAPS) data collection, games data collection and also
DASS-21 data collection. The eyes closed and eyes open
data collection is important for the first step in our data
collection as it will give the actual data for the subject
during the resting state or initial state data before the
other task is given, it also will be used to analyze the
precursor emotion. The eyes open will be used to represent
the emotion calm. Based on our findings, the results from
eyes open and close shows the subject’s state for that
moment and also state a week before.
Next step in the data collection is to collect the EEG raw
data in analyzing basic emotion responses of the subject
based on four basic emotion stimuli of happy, fear, calm

44

and sad to be used in analyzing the discrete class emotion
and also deriving the VA axes for the ASM. Although the
ASM requires four quadrants, happy, fear, sad and calm,
emotion calm was deriving from the eyes open while
emotion happy, fear and sad using IAP’s pictures stimuli.
Thus, the four chosen basic emotion will be functioned as
the basis in our research. Next step will be game data
collection. The subject will play 2 games while the brain
signal being recorded. This is one of the important parts in
the data collection.
Finally, we can check the state of the subject during this
part and this plays an important role in the result and
progress. For the last data collection task, we will ask the
DASS 21 question that consist of 21 question on stress,
anxiety and depression to the subject and record their
brain signal for all 21 question. Each will be displayed on the
screen to the subject, and they are required to answer
verbally on the scale of zero to three. The answer of each
question is recorded on a paper and to calculate the score
of the DASS 21 for each of the subject.

International Journal on Perceptive and Cognitive Computing (IJPCC)
B. Pre processing
The EEG raw data need to be pre-processed to ensure all
noise and artefact will be reduced. One of the techniques
used to reduce noise is elliptic filter.

Vol 6, Issue 2 (2020)

seconds each and record the brain signal along the video
were showed. Then, we will ask the subject to play 2 games
where each game 5 minutes each. The first game is
Chameleon Run game. This game is made up of abstract.
The second game is Vector game and this game is
somehow related to the reality.
The brain signal will be recorded during the subject play
both games. Next, we asked the DASS 21 question that
consist of 21 questions on stress, anxiety and depression to
the subject and record their brain signal for all 21 questions.
Each question will be displayed on the screen to the
subject, and they are required to answer verbally on the
scale of zero to three. The answer of each question is
recorded on a paper to calculate the score of the DASS 21
for each of the subject. Last part of our experimental
design will be recording the brain signal of the subject
during eyes closed and eyes open within 1 minute each.

i. Noise Filter Method (Elliptic Filter)
The human brain generates electrical signals called EEG
signals which are related to body functions. Sources of
noise are static electricity or electromagnetic field
produced by surrounding devices. In addition to this
external noise, the EEG signal can be affected by noise
artefact due to body movement example such as facial
movement, hand movement and another surrounding
artefact.
C. Feature Extraction (MFCC)
Initially, features extraction is done to determine the
important features of brain signals from all 19 channels of
electroencephalogram (EEG) machine. Before second part
of the process takes place, which involves classification, we
used Mel-Frequency Cepstral Coefficients to extract the
features.
D. Classification (MLP)
For the classification, we used Multilayer Perceptron (MLP)
classifier to classify the brain signals in order to check the
intrinsic motivation of the students either being motivated
or not. The result is gained by using MLP function readily
can be found in MatLab under the type of feedforward
artificial neural network.
E. Analysis
For the analysis part, we will use all the collected data from
previous step by using MATLAB to get the result of the
stress level of the subject during the experiment. The
overall scores for each subject can be considered as
preliminary result. This result as well can be used as a
comparison to result gained from classification of the
patterns.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
The experimental design used in this experiment is where
we place the electrode of the EEG Machine on the head of
the subjects based on the 19-channel guide. The placement
of the electrode is done manually by attaching the
electrode directly to the subject’s head without using the
special cap. Then we proceed to the next steps of the
experiment which is recording the brain signal of the
subject during their eyes opened and eyes closed within 1
minute each. Eyes closed data were used to identify the
precursor emotion as it represents the initial emotional
state [8]. Next, we will do the reaction stimuli where it will
be proceeded by viewing the IAPS Emotion Sequence
video, consisting of happy, calm, sad, and fear videos for 30

Fig 2. Proposed experimental design

45

V. ANALYSIS AND PRESENTATION OF RESULT
During the progress, we use the data that had been
collected about the stress level among gamers using EEG
signal as the preliminary result and the methodology that
was used to analyse the data is like our proposed
methodology in this research. Therefore, by analysing the
collected data, we can test the methodology and learn how
to analyse the data correctly for our future data. The

International Journal on Perceptive and Cognitive Computing (IJPCC)
collected data involves one subject aged 23 years old.
Below is the result after we analyse the data:

Vol 6, Issue 2 (2020)

physiological signals (EEG) of the subject when the subject
is answering the DASS 21 questions. The result in figure 4
show that subject only have negative emotion which is fear
and sad during the session. Next when we compare the
psychological data and the physiological signals, we find
that the result is tally in terms of stress level of the subject.
We can conclude that the subject was totally honest when
answering the DASS21 question. As we can see in figure 5,
the result shows that the subject has only positive emotion
which is calm and happy at the beginning and ending of
playing the game. Initially when the subject only starts with
demo, so that they did not feel pressured whereas at the
end we assumed that the subject feels relieved because the
game ends. After a period playing the game, the subject
starts to have negative emotion until the end of the game.
This happens because the subject starts to feel stress after
playing the higher level of the game. Based on the result, it
is concluded that game can induce stress among gamers.

Fig 3. Results of the Subject on Dass21 (Psychological data)

VI.

Future Work
On future works, we are going to analyse the data using
others classifier method instead of multilayer perceptron
(MLP) and using others feature extraction method instead
of Mel Frequency Cepstral Coefficients (MFCC), then
compare the results of the method used to get better
evaluation results. Next, we will continue analysing more
subjects to compare the results between subjects. Finally,
we would like to provide an early detection for the subjects
to know if they have depression using EEG machine.

Fig 4. Results of the Subject on Dass21 (Physiological
signals)

REFERENCES
[1] K. Kramlinger, Mayo Clinic (2001). Mayo Clinic on depression.
Rochester, Minn.: Mayo Clinic.

[2] G. Andersson (2006). Internet-based cognitive-behavioural self-help
for depression. Expert Rev Neurother; 6: 1637-1642

[3] S. Ali AlMejrad. (2010). Human Emotions Detection using Brain Wave

Fig 5. Results of the Subject on Game

[4]

Based on the experiment that has been conducted, we
manage to calculate the score of the psychological data
(DASS 21) for the subject. The DASS 21 questions contain
seven questions on depression, stress and anxiety
respectively and the score of each question is multiplied by
two to get the total score of each category of question.
After the total score of each question category is obtained,
then we can classify the level of stress, anxiety and
depression into five classes which are normal, mild,
moderate, severe, and extremely severe.
As we can see in figure 4, the score of depression,
anxiety, and stress of the subject is 16, 20, and 30
respectively where we can classify the scores as moderate,
extremely severe, and severe. We also record the

[5]
[6]

[7]

46

[8]

Signals: A Challenging, European Journal of Scientific Research, 44
(4), 640-659
A.R. Desai, (2017). EEG-based evaluation of cognitive and emotional
arousal when coding in different programming languages.
University of Oulu
C. Gabriel and Luiz Moreno, Robson, (2018) Netlab MLP Performance Evaluation for Pattern Recognition in Myoletric Signal.
Procedia Computer Science.
Oei, Tian Po and Sawang, Sukanlaya and Goh, Yong Wah and
Mukhtar, Firdaus, (2013) Using the Depression Anxiety Stress Scale
21 (DASS-21) across cultures. International journal of psychology:
Journal international de psychologies: 48.
R. Khosrowabadi, R.; Quek, C.; Ang, K.K.; Wahab, A., (2014). “ERNN:
A Biologically Inspired Feedforward Neural Network to Discriminate
Emotion from EEG Signal”, IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks
and Learning Systems, (25), 609 – 620, March 2014.
Wahab, A., Kamaruddin, N., M. Nor, N., Abut, H., “Pre- and
Postaccident Emotion Analysis on Driving Behavior”, Smart Mobile
In-Vehicle Systems, 225-239, 2014

