Rehabilitation System for Stroke Patients using
Mixed-Reality and Immersive User Interfaces
Emmanouela Vogiatzaki and Yannis Gravezas

Artur Krukowski

Research for Science, Art and Technology (RFSAT)
{emmanouela, wizgrav}@rfsat.com

Intracom S. A. Telecom Solutions
krukowa@intracom-telecom.com

Abstract — The work presented in this paper addresses
stroke, a disease costing the healthcare in Europe and USA over
3% of their entire healthcare expenditure, including inpatient
treatments, outpatient hospital visits and long-term rehabilitation
and care. The StrokeBack project is a response to those needs
offering an effective long-term care and rehabilitation strategy
for stroke patients, which would actively involve patients in the
rehabilitation process while minimizing costly human support.
The game-based training system has been proposed allowing
physicians to supervise the rehabilitation of patents at home. The
proposed approach empowers patients and their caretakers to
execute effectively rehabilitation protocols in their home settings,
while leading physicians are able to monitor the rehabilitation
progress remotely via Personal Health Record (PHR) system.
The increased rehabilitation speed and ability to perform
training at home directly improves quality of life of patients.
Keywords — e-Health; rehabilitation training; stroke; mixed
reality; immersive user interfaces; Unity3D; Kinect; PHR

I.

INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION

Stroke affects about 2 Million [1] people every year in
Europe. For these people the effect of stroke is that they lose
certain physical and cognitive abilities at least for a certain
time period. More than one third of these patients i.e. more
than 670,000 people return to their home with some level of
permanent disability leading to a significant reduction of
quality of life which affects not only the patients themselves
but also their relatives. This also increasing costs of the health
care services associated with hospitalisation, home services and
rehabilitation. Therefore, there is a strong need to improve
ambulant care model, in particular, at the home settings,
involving the patients into the care pathway, for achieving
maximal outcome in terms of clinical as well as quality of life.
II.

THE CONCEPT OF THE “STROKEBACK” PROJECT

The StrokeBack project addresses both of the indicated
problem areas. The goal of the project is the development of a
telemedicine system which supports ambulant rehabilitation at
home settings for the stroke patients with minimal human
intervention. With StrokeBack the patients would be able to
perform rehabilitation in their own home where they feel
psychologically better than in care centres. In addition, the
contact hours with a physiotherapist could be reduced thus
leading to a direct reduction of healthcare cost. By ensuring
proper execution of physiotherapy trainings in an automated
guided way modulated by appropriate clinical knowledge and
The research leading to these results has received funding from the European
Union Seventh Framework Program (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement
n° 288692-StrokeBack.

in supervised way only when necessary, StrokeBack aims to
empower and stimulates patients to exercise more while
achieving better quality and effectiveness than it would be
possible today. This way StrokeBack system is expected to
improve rehabilitation speed, while ensuring high quality of
life for patients by enabling them to continue rehabilitation in
their familiar home environments instead of subjecting them to
alien and stressful hospital settings. This offers also means of
reducing indirect healthcare cost as well.
The concept of StrokeBack is complemented by a Patient
Health Record (PHR) system in which training measurements
and vital physiological and personal patient data are stored.
Thus, PHR provides all the necessary medical and personal
information for the patient that rehabilitation experts might
need in order to evaluate the effectiveness and success of the
rehabilitation, e.g. to deduce relations between selected
exercises and rehabilitation speed of different patients as well
as to assess the overall healthiness of the patient. In addition
the PHR can be used to provide the patient with mid-term
feedback e.g. her/his rehabilitation speed compared to average
as well as improvements over last day/weeks, in order to keep
the motivation of patients high.
The StrokeBack project aims at increasing the rehabilitation
speed of stroke patients while patients are in their own home.
The benefit we expect from our approach is twofold. Most
patients feel psychologically better in their own environment
than in hospital and also rehabilitation speed is improved.
Furthermore we focus on increasing patients’ motivation when
exercising with tools similar to a gaming console. The idea is
for patient into the centre of the rehabilitation process. It aims
at exploiting the fact the patients feel better at home, that it has
been shown that patients exercise more if the training is
combined with attractive training environments. First the
patients learn physical rehabilitation exercises from a therapist
at the care centre or in a therapists’ practice. Then the patients
can exercise at home with the StrokeBack system monitoring
their execution and providing a real-time feedback on whether
the execution was correct or not. In addition it records the
training results and vital parameters of the patient. This data
can be subsequently analysed by the medical experts for
assessment of the patient recovery. Furthermore the patient
may also receive midterm feedback on her/his personal
recovery process. In order to ensure proper guidance of the
patient, the therapist also gets information from the PHR to
assess the recovery process enabling him to decide whether
other training sequences should be used, which are then
introduced to the patient in the practice again.

III. THE CONCEPT OF GAME-STIMULATED REHABILITATION
Use of virtual, augmented and/or immersive environments
for training and rehabilitation of post-stroke patients opens an
attractive avenue in improving various negative effects
occurring as a result of brain traumas. Those include helping in
the recovery of the motor skills, limb-eye coordination,
orientation in space, everyday tasks etc. Training may range
from simple goal-directed limb movements aimed at achieving
a given goal (e.g. putting a coffee cup on a table), improving
lost motor skills (e.g. virtual driving), and others. In order to
increase the efficiency of the exercises advanced haptic
interfaces are developed, allowing direct body stimulation and
use of physical objects within virtual settings, supplementing
the visual stimulation. Immersive environments have quickly
been found attractive for remote home-based rehabilitation
giving raise to both individual and monitored by therapists
remotely. Depending on the type of a physical interface
different types of exercises are possible [7]. Virtual
environments are often used for functional training and
simulation of natural environments, e.g. home, work, outdoor.
Exercises range from simple goal-directed movements [8] to
learn execution of everyday tasks.
Current generation of post-stroke rehabilitation systems,
although exploiting latest immersive technologies tend to
proprietary approaches concentrating on a closed range of
exercise types, lacking thoroughly addressing the complete set
of disabilities and offering a comprehensive set of
rehabilitation scenarios. The use of technologies is also very
selective and varies from one system to another. Although
there are cases of using avatars for more intuitive feedback to
the patient, the use of complicated wearable devices makes it
tiresome and decreases the effectiveness of the exercise. In our
approach we have been exploring novel technologies for body
tracing that exploit the rich information gathered by combining
wearable sensors with visual feedback systems that are already
commercially available such as Microsoft Kinect1 or Leap
Motion2 user interfaces and 3D virtual/augmented vision.
Immersive environment we develop aims to support full 3D
physical and visual feedback through Mixed-Reality interaction
and visualisation technologies placing the user inside of the
training environment. Considering that detecting muscle
activity cannot be done without wearable device support, our
partner in the project, IHP GmbH3, has been developing a
customizable lightweight embedded sensor device allowing
short-range wireless transmission of most common parameters
including apart from EMG, also other critical medical signs
like ECG, Blood Pressure, heart rate etc. This way the training
exercises become much more intuitive in their approach by
using exercise templates with feedback showing correctness of
performed exercises. Therapists are then able to prescribe a set
of the rehabilitation exercises as treatment through the
EHR/PHR platform(s) thus offering means of correlating them
with changes of patient’s condition, thus showing their
effectiveness in patients’ recovery process.
1
2
3

Microsoft Kinect SDK: http://kinectforwindows.org
Leap Motion: http://www.wii.com
IHP GmbH: http://www.ihp-microelectronics.com

IV.

STROKEBACK ARCHITECTURE

A conceptual system architecture of the StrokeBack system
is presented in Fig 1. It contain a Patient System deployed at
home supporting physiological remote monitoring of patient
wellbeing, runs the rehabilitation games and offers full
integration with online Personal health Record (PHR) used as a
data repository for sharing information between the patient and
his/her physician(s).

Fig. 1. The conceptual architecture of the StrokeBack system.

It offers full support to immersive user interfaces like
Kinect, Leap Motion, Emotiv EEG and other ones, combined
with a range of virtual and augmentation systems in order to
enable fully immersive gaming experience.

Fig. 2. The physical architecture of the gaming part of a StrokeBack system.

Fig. 3. The concept design of the “Virtual Table”

As shown in Fig 2 we support 3D Smart TVs, AR/VR
visors and 3D projectors. The system is geared to offer also
fully support usage also on mobile devices like smartphones,
tablets etc. We also develop an affordable integrated gaming
solution for both near-field and full-body exercises, which we
call the “Smart Table”. The clinician part of the system
provides access to back-office PHR data repository for constant
monitoring of patients’ condition, the progress of their
rehabilitation and other relevant physiological data including

audio-visual connection if needed. The back-office services are
based on the intLIFE core PHR service platform provided by
Intracom S. A. Telecom Solutions4 from Greece. The overall
gaming system has been designed using client-server approach
allowing us to store the game repository and game provision of
the PHR server, thus maximally lowering the load on the client
devices. This allowed us from one side to run games on such
devices as Smart TVs or Smartphones, while offering us
flexibility of maintaining the latest versions of the games
without the need of updating the clients. However, since any
networked based system needs to anticipate that connectivity
may not be always maintained, we have built into our system
two scenarios: when network is constantly available and for the
case it is not. In the first case the game server is executed
remotely, while in the second case it can be executed locally
and use games downloaded earlier. Similarly physiological
data and game progress can be either uploaded to the server on
the fly or stored and uploaded when link is re-established.
V. BODY SENSING AND USER INTERFACES
In order to enable the tracking the correctness of performed
exercises automatically without the constant assistance of the
physicians, an automated means of tracking and comparing
patient’s body movement against correct ones (templates) has
to be developed. This is an ongoing part of the work due to the
changing requirements from our physicians. Although many
methods are in existence, most of them employ elaborate sets
of wearable sensors and/or costly visual observations. In our
approach we initially intended to employ a proprietary
approach using visual-light scanning, but the recent availability
of new Kinect, Prime Sense and Leap Motion sensors made us
change our approach and use existing infrared-LED solutions.
When better accuracy is required that offered by 3D
scanners then additional micro embedded sensor nodes are
employed, e.g. gyros (tilt and position calibration) and
inertial/accelerometers (speed changes). Such are readily
available for us in both EPOC EEG U/I from Emotiv (used
currently as a U/I, though intended to be used in the future for
seizure risk alerting) and on Shimmer EMG sensor platform
that we use for detecting muscle activity during the exercises.
Considering extremely small sizes of such sensors (less than
5x5mm each) a development of lightweight wireless energyautonomous (employing energy harvesting technologies) may
be possible, which is investigated in the project by IHP GmbH.
Muscle activity poses problems for measurement since it
has been well known for many years [2] that the EMG reflects
effort rather than output and so becomes an unreliable indicator
of muscle force as the muscle becomes fatigued. Consequently
measurement of force, in addition to the EMG activity, would
be a considerable step forward in assessing the effectiveness of
rehabilitation strategies and could not only indicate that fatigue
is occurring, but also whether the mechanism is central or
peripheral in origin [3]. Similarly, conventional surface EMG
measurement requires accurate placement of the sensor over
the target muscle, which would be inappropriate for a sensor
system integrated within a garment for home use. Electrode
4

Intracom S. A. Telecom Solutions: http://www.intracom-telecom.com

arrays are, however, now being developed for EMG
measurement and signal processing is used to optimise the
signal obtained. A dedicated solution by IHP GmbH has been
developed to offer reliable and economic muscle activity
monitoring. However EMG is not the only sensor that is
needed for home hospitalisation of patients suffering from
chronic diseases like stroke. This requires novel approaches to
combining building blocks in a body sensor network. Existing
commercial systems provide basic information about activity
such as speed and direction of movement and postures.
Providing precise information about performance, for example
relating movement to muscle activity in a given task and
detecting deviations from normal, expected patterns or subtle
changes associated with recovery, requires a much higher level
of sophistication of data acquisition and processing and
interpretation. The challenge is therefore to design and develop
an integrated multimodal system along with high-level signal
processing techniques and optimisation of the data extracted.
The Kinect system has potential for use in haptic interfacing
[4] and has already been used in some software projects [5].
The existing techniques for taking measurements on the
human body are generally considered to be adequate for the
purpose but are often bulky in nature and cumbersome to
mount, e.g., electro-goniometers, and they can also be
expensive to implement, e.g., VIACON camera system. Their
ability to be used in a home environment is therefore very
limited. In this context we have decided to address those
deficiencies by extending the state-of-the-art in the areas of:
• Extending the application of existing sensor technologies:
For example, we tend to use commercially available
MEMS accelerometers with integrated wireless modules to
measure joint angles on the upper and lower limbs in order
to allow wire-free, low-cost sensor nodes that are optimized
in terms of their context and spatial location.
• Novel sensing methodologies to reduce the number of
sensors worn on the human body, while maintaining good
information quality. For example, many homes now have at
least one games console (e.g. Xbox, Nintendo Wii etc.) as
part of a typical family home entertainment system. With
the advent of the Xbox Kinect system, the position and
movement of a human will be possible to be monitored
using a low-cost camera mounted on TV sets.
• Easy system installation and calibration by non-experts for
use in a non-clinical environment, thus making this solution
suitable for use at home for the first timer and with support
or non-trained care-takers and family members.
• Transparent verification of correct execution of exercises
by patients may be based on data recorded by Body Area
Networks (BAN), correlation of prescribed therapies with
medical condition allowing to determine its effectiveness
on patient’s condition, positive and negative.
VI. SYSTEM PROTOTYPING
The project has reached two years of its life time already
and the prototyping as well as integration of various
technologies have already started. This refers to the
physiological monitoring with Shimmer sensors, gaming user

interfaces as well as the games themselves, for which we
decides to focus on the Unity3D engine.

Fig. 4. Integration diagram of the overall home system of StrokeBack

In Fig. 4 the subunit assembly diagram of the “Patients
home training place” is depicted. The blue and grey rectangles
designate respective elements, while green ones are the user
interfaces. The PTZ-camera features pan-tilt-zoom. Arrows
show the data flow. The description of the user interfaces
shown in this diagram follows below. The principal user
interface used to control our games has been Microsoft Kinect,
the Xbox version at first and then the Windows version when it
has been first released in early 2012. Its combination of
distance sensing with the RGB camera proved perfectly
suitable for both full body exercises (exploring its embedded
skeleton recognition) as well as for near-field exercises of
upper limbs. However since Kinect has not been designed for
short range scanning of partial bodies, the skeleton tracking
could not be used and hence we had to develop our own
algorithms that would be able to recognise arms, palms and
fingers and distinguish them from the background objects.

progress info can be either uploaded to the server on the fly or
pre-stored and uploaded when network link is re-established.
The main features of our implementation offers the capabilities
of restricting the visibility window, filtering the background
beyond prescribed distance, distinguishing between separate
objects etc. This way we were able to implement the Kinect
based interface where following the requirements of our
physiotherapists we replaced the standard keyboard arrows
with gestures of the palm (up, down, left, right and open/close
to make a click). Such an interface allowed for the first gamebased rehabilitation of stroke patients suffering from limited
hand control. The tests were first made with Mario Bros game
where all controls were achieved purely with movements of a
single palm. An alternative gaming approach to mixing virtual
and real objects was a game where patients were requested to
through a paper ball at the virtual circles displayed on the
screen (Fig 10).

Fig. 6. Game concept #1: real paper ball & virtual targets

Such a game allowed patients to exercise the whole arm,
not just the wrist. Hitting the circle that represented a virtual
balloon was rewarded with an animated explosion of the
balloon and a respective sound. Such a game proved to be very
enjoyable for the patients letting them concentrate on
perfecting their movements while forgetting about their motor
disabilities, hence increasing the effectiveness of their training.

Fig. 5. Online & offline “games” interaction with remote PHR portal

This has led to the development of the “Kinect server”
based on open source algorithms56 adapted by RFSAT to run
with MS Kinect SDK. This allows the game server is executed
either remotely or locally on the same computer and run games
downloaded from PHR. Similarly physiological data and game
5
6

Open Kinect on Git Hub: https://github.com/OpenKinect/libfreenect
Intrael server: https://code.google.com/p/intrael

Fig. 7. Game scenario: real patient controlling patient avatar using Kinect in
a home environment replicated in virtual world

Subsequently we have investigated more advanced class of
games for stroke patients for full-body exercises. In such a case
we have chosen to build such games using 3D engine and
employ avateering approach, that is patient’s body motion

capture and its projection onto a virtual avatar. The prototype
system is being currently developed featuring different
environments, e.g. familiar home spaces in photorealistic
quality7 (Fig 12). Scenes with one and two avatars were
implemented. The first one was intended as a base for selftraining exercises where instruction would be overlaid over the
avatar to indicate the movements that the patient would need to
perform in order to pass the exercise.

Fig. 8. Game concept #3 (version 1) played online in WEB browser by real
patient. Avatar motion controlled in Unity3D using a ZigFu plug-in

An important advantage of Unity3D is the possibility to run
games either as stand-alone or under from inside a WEB page.
The latter approach makes it easier for integrating games as
therapies within the PHR system accessible and controllable
via WEB browser. A use of this feature for exercises with a
real patient is shown in Fig 6.
VII. VALIDATION AND PRELIMINARY EVALUATIONS
Both technical system validation tests and preliminary
evaluations by other project partners have been performed.
Regarding the evaluations of the home rehabilitation system we
have used the following regime:
 Patient switches on the rehabilitation gaming device
(Kinect-based “touch table”) shown in Error! Reference
source not found.
 Patient starts the „Tele-rehabilitation“ session on the table
 The patient selects an exercise and runs it. She/he may
consider former trainings scores. All actions follow a set of
permissions that have been configured by the therapist and
adapted to patient’s abilities/progress.
 The patient executes the exercise in the autonomous modus.
The PHR analyses the result of tasks and exercises and
generates respective feedback. Finally, training results and
acquired scores are uploaded to PHR.
 The patient executes the exercise once a week with livesupervision of the therapist. She/he is observed by the
therapist in real-time, may see the therapist on the screen
via bidirectional video link (implemented by Meytec).
 The patient can see the final evaluation and score of an
exercise after finishing it.
Initial tests have proven initial technical assumptions and
compliance with pre-defined user requirements. As expected
Kinect has proven unreliable for near field upper limb tracking

7

Virtual Room: https://www.assetstore.unity3d.com/#/content/6468

requiring frequent re-calibration, while Leap Motion offered
sufficient precision for fingers and palm tracking.
VIII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
The initial technical validation tests have proven the
viability of the design approach adopted. The suitability of
Leap Motion for “Touch-Screen”-like applications and game
development under Unity3D has been confirmed. Following
the success of the technical system tests the clinical trials with
real patients will be conducted between March and September
of 2014. The results of early trials will be presented at the
SEGAH’14 conference. Primarily the focus will be made on
the motion capture and recording of the real person (therapist)
for subsequent use for demonstration of correct exercises by
animating his/her avatar (Fig 13). The hand model will need to
be developed, rigged and animated in order to allow its use in
Unity3D games. Subsequently the overall integration of the
gaming system will be performed whereby selection of games
and the necessary data exchange mechanism with the PHR
system will be developed. The most difficult work will be
related to the real-time comparison of avatar movements for
providing an accurate scoring of the correctness of exercises, to
be achieved in liaison with the physiotherapists.
REFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]

[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]

[16]

[17]

P. Kirchhof, et al, “How Can We Avoid a Stroke Crisis?”. ISBN 978-1903539-09-5, 2009.
R. Edwards and O. Lippold, “The relation between force and integrated
electrical activity in fatigued muscle”, Journal of Physiology, Vol. 28,
pp. 677-681, 1956.
R. Enkona and D. Stuart, “The contribution of neuroscience to exercise
studies”, Federation Proceedings, Vol. 44, pp. 2279-2285, 1985.
J. Giles, “Inside the race to hack the Kinect”, The New Scientist,
Volume 208, Issue 2789, pp. 22-23, ISSN 0262-4079, 2010.
MIT Media Lab Hacks, “Kinect for Browser Navigation with Gestures”:
http://www.readwriteweb.com/archives/kinect_browser_navigation.php#
“Next-generation remote healthcare: A practical system design
perspective”, edited by Koushik Maharatna et al, Chapter 6 by Artur
Krukowski, Emmanouela Vogiatzaki et al, “Patient Health Record
(PHR) system”, Springer Science and Business Media New York, 2013
Virtual Technologies Inc. (WEB site):
http://www.cyberglovesystems.com/all-products
M. McNeill, et al “Immersive virtual reality for upper limb rehabilitation
following stroke”, Systems, IEEE International Conference on Man and
Cybernetics, ISBN: 0-7803-8566-7, 2004
Seikowave (WEB site): http://seikowave.com
Lloyd Hooson, “Unity 3D Stereoscopic Development”:
http://lloydhooson.co.uk/2010/01/12/unity-3d-stereoscopic-development
Human Interface Technology Laboratory Australia (HIT Lab),
“Stereoscopic 3D”, http://www.hitlab.utas.edu.au/wiki/Stereoscopic_3D
Panda Board (WEB site): http://www.pandaboard.org
Raspberry PI (WEB site): http://www.raspberrypi.org
Unity3D game engine: http://unity3d.com
Emmanouela Vogiatzaki and Artur Krukowski, “Serious Games for
Stroke Rehabilitation Employing Immersive User Interfaces in 3D
Virtual Environment”, 3rd International Conference on Serious Games
and Applications for Health (SeGAH’2014), Rio de Janeiro, May 2014
C. Sik Lányi, V. Szűcs, T. Dömők, E. László: Developing serious game
for victims of stroke, Proc. 9th Intl Conf. on Disability, Virtual Reality
and Assoc. Technologies, P M Sharkey, E Klinger (Eds), pp. 503-506,
Laval, France 10-12 Sept. 2012
V. Szücs, C. Sik Lanyi: Abilities and limitations of assistive
technologies in post-stroke therapy based on virtual/augmented reality,
Assistive Technology: From Research to practice, P. Encarnaҫão et al.
(Eds), 12th Europen AAATE conference, IOS Press, pp. 1087-1091.
Vilmoura, Algevre, Portugal, 19-22 September 2013.

