15th International Conference on Electrical Engineering/Electronics, Computer, Telecommunications and Information Technology (ECTI-NCON2018)

The Difference of Brain Activities of
Musical Listeners
Indra K. Wardani
Music Department of Indonesia Institute of the Arts
Indonesia Institute of the Arts
Yogyakarta, Indonesia
Email: indrakwardani@gmail.com

Djohan

Phakkharawat Sittiprapaporn

Graduate School of Indonesia Institute of the Arts
Indonesia Institute of the Arts
Yogyakarta, Indonesia
Email: djohan.djohan@yahoo.com

Brain Science and Engineering Innovation Research Unit
School of Anti-Aging and Regenerative Medicine
Mae Fah Luang University, Bangkok, Thailand
Email: wichian.sit@mfu.ac.th
Schlaug [2] explain how the structure of brain are different
between those subjects. Through a morphometric study, they
displayed and explained the difference of gray matter in
mentioned subjects. Regarding to this result they assumed a
relative contribution of long-term musical practice be done by
both amateur and professional musicians as the main cause.

Abstract—Rapid development of music research lead into
many interdisciplinary topics. These studies evoke music’s
integration to many subjects, such as neuroscience. In
neuroscience, music is being studied related to either its effect on
cognitive process or cognitive process behind it. Previous
researches suggested the difference between musicians and nonmusicians in terms of brain structure and brain activity. Instead
of differentiate brain activity between musician and nonmusician, this present study aims to explain the different brain
activity between two musical listeners regarding to their musical
experience. Using EEG technique in experimental approach
toward Piano students and Karawitan students (N=40), this study
shows higher brain activity in listening to familiar music for both
piano and Karawitan students. Moreover, the dominant brain
activity happened in temporal lobe when subject listened to
familiar music and frontal lobe when subject listened to
unfamiliar music.

Another study by Patston [3] shows the different cognitive
performance between expert musicians and non-musicians in
terms of language and visuospatial processing. An experiment
required the subjects to do language and visuospatial task with
an inference of background music showed how expert
musicians tent to have a decreased language task performance
when a background music was played during task. Meanwhile,
non-musicians tent to have a stabile task result with or without
background music inference. It shows that in certain cases,
music and language function are somehow independent in
expert musicians, functionally.

Keywords—Music; EEG; Brain Activity; Piano; Karawitan

I.

Studies mentioned above were comparison of musicians
and non-musicians where the musical experience became an
important aspect as a prior conditioning to differentiate subject.
Main argumentation of this assumption is based on notion that
involvement of a long-time musical training and certain skill
acquirement experienced by subjects enable them to have
different cognitive process. Musicians go through complex
rehearsal processes including physical and mental operation to
construe musical notation as a visual information and alter it as
motoric responses, to remember musical phrase, to do musical
improvisation, and to identify a note without any referential
note [5]. All of those complexities in music rehearsal were
considered as brain stimuli to train its function and enhance its
performance as well as develop its perception.

INTRODUCTION

Research of music and cognition has developed rapidly
since the first it was done. Neuroscience as one of discipline
focusing in cognition had examined music and its cognition
process for years. Not only has it tried to explain the
mechanism lies behind perception and reception of music, this
discipline also tries to understand the effect of particular music
(or musical activity) towards brain structurally and
functionally. Many researches had been done in order to
understand the effect generated by particular music activity
toward brain functioning. In their research, Slumming et al. [1]
explained how musical training is beneficial to enhance
cognitive performance through altering brain function. Using
visuospatial task applied to orchestral musicians and nonmusicians subject, Slumming tried to provide evidence on how
complexity in musical training done by orchestral musicians
are able to affect the activation of Broca’s area during test that
enhanced their performance. By comparing professional
musicians, amateur musicians, and non-musicians, Gaser and

In terms of musical experience and perception, Ian Cross
[4] explained it through a cultural difference approach. Cross
gave an example of Andean music from North Potosi, Bolivia.
This is a music accompanying dance where the dancer’s foot
falls in a certain beat of the music constantly. When he asked
western listeners to listen to this music and clapped, their claps
was quite different from dancer’s footfalls. Cross argued this

* Corresponding

author: Prof. Djohan, Graduate School of Indonesia Institute
of the Arts, Jogjakarta, Indonesia; Email: djohan.djohan@yahoo.com

978-1-5386-3552-0/18/$31.00 ©2018 IEEE

181

15th International Conference on Electrical Engineering/Electronics, Computer, Telecommunications and Information Technology (ECTI-NCON2018)

was caused because the western listeners ‘learned’ to clap in a
certain way therefore they would think the dancer’s foot falls in
the ‘offbeat’. Cross’ explanation gave us insight on how the
musical learning as musical experience of western listeners
differentiate their way perceive a certain musical stimuli from
the dancers. This insight is in line with the study by Morrison
[6] and Stevens [7] that showed how different musical
practices lead into different music perception and cognition in
terms of musical structures. Further, Tierney et al. [8] explain
the role of early musical experience in supporting auditory
sequence memory among musicians. In a study employed
musicians, gymnasts, video game players, and psychology
students, they applied memory task on audio, visual, and audiovisual stimuli. The results showed insignificant difference on
visual or audio-visual task but significant difference on audio
task where musicians scored higher.

C. Data Collection
Research on brain activity mostly uses brain imaging
technique with EEG [6-7], MEG, or fMRI [3,8-9]. To collect
the data of brainwave activity, this experiment used a
neuroheadset named Emotiv Epoc. This is a brain-computer
interface hardware with EEG concept that is design to record a
real time brainwave. It is connected to a computer through a
Bluetooth connection. Emotiv Epoc has 14 channels (and two
referential channels) that is based on 10-20 montage system
positioning. The electrode are flexible to be used in many sizes
of subject’s head without alter the ratio of its position. This
hardware is equipped with TestBench, a software to obtain the
raw data file from brainwave activity collected by Emotiv
Epoc.
D. Procedure
Preparation of data collector is one of the most important
thing in data collecting. In order to minimalize deviation
caused by the equipment, Bluetooth connection between
Emotiv Epoc and the computer should be in a good status as
well as the battery status of the device since low battery power
could lead into bad data recording. After all electrodes are
well-connected with subject’s scalp (by checking the status in
the computer) the subjects will be informed the do’s and don’ts
during experiment. Beside suggesting the subjects to stay
relaxed and calmed during the listening activity, important
points were instructed as follows: (1) try not to move your
body or body part (it is an artifact prevention of the data), (2)
try not to blink or move your eyes (eye blink and movement
will cause noise in the data), and (3) try to keep your eyes open
during listening activity (closed eye will lead to high alpha
activity in the EEG). The ready subjects subsequently listened
to Mozart’s Piano Sonata for 1 minute and rested for few
minutes before listened to Gendhing Lancaran for another 1
minute. This study only took the brainwave activity of first
minute listening to avoid an unwanted familiarity toward
mentioned excerpt and to avoid subject concentration loss.

All research mentioned employed musicians and nonmusicians as the primary subject to distinguish musical
experience in terms of ‘had received’ and ‘had not received’
musical teaching. It is quite clear to create such distinction
between subject and to hypotheses the possible difference
occurred. After all, Instead of examined brain activity
difference between musicians and non-musicians, the present
research aimed to describe brain activity between two
musicians. The thing that differentiate our subjects is that one
of them were studying western music and the other one were
studying Karawitan, traditional Javanese music. Through this
research we’d like to understand the possibilities of brain
activity difference between those two.
II.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

A. Participants
Twenty piano students and twenty Karawitan students were
employed to be involved in this research. All participants had
been explained and had approved about the applied procedure.
Both piano and Karawitan students employed here should
actively receive music (piano or Karawitan) practical lesson
for consecutive three years. It was to make sure that each
student in both groups have more or less same musical
experience in terms of duration. Furthermore, we made sure
that every piano students were able to play Mozart Piano
Sonata in C Major and every Karawitan students were able to
play Gendhing Lancaran since those two works were our main
audio stimuli.

E. Data Analysis
The data collected from previous activity explained was a
raw data that need to be converted and reduced. TestBench
generate .edf file from brainwave recording that is need to be
converted into .csv. This file is compatible for Microsoft Excel
where we reduced unnecessary table and make sure that the
data will be compatible to be processed further in sLORETA, a
freeware developed by Pascual-Marqui to compute images of
electrical neuronal activity from EEG and MEG [10]. The
version we used was 20081104 that is only for EEG. This
software provide an image and numerical value of seven
brainwaves; delta, theta, alpha, beta-1, beta-2, beta-3, and
gamma. The brainwave activity was defined in a numerical
value that enable us to compare the most dominant brainwave
between those all. In terms of visual result, this software able to
provide a two-dimension, five views three-dimension, and six
views three-dimension images. The sLORETA also provided a
detailed label containing location of brainwave occurred in
brain region. Since this experiment focused in comparing the
most dominant brainwave occurred during listening activity

B. Auditori Stimuli
The stimuli of this experiments were two musical excerpts
from Mozart’s Piano Sonata in C major and Gendhing
Lancaran. These two works were chosen under the
consideration of the most popular and familiar works for
mentioned piano students and Karawitan students. This audio
stimuli was played from a MP3 player and the subject listened
to this stimuli through an earphone. These two excerpts were
divided into two different mp3 files in which they would not
played subsequently without our permission.

182

15th International Conference on Electrical Engineering/Electronics, Computer, Telecommunications and Information Technology (ECTI-NCON2018)

and its particular location in brain region, this software is
enough to accommodate data analyses.
III.

RESULTS

TABLE I. PIANO STUDENTS’ BANDWIDTH VALUE ON PIANO SONATA
Subject

ɗ

Ɵ

α

β1

β2

β3

ɤ

Group A

2.714

3.355

1.454

1.270

2.986

4.118

3.895

TABLE II. KARAWITAN STUDENTS’ BANDWIDTH VALUE ON GENDHING
LANCARAN
Subject
ɗ
Ɵ
α
β1
β2
β3
ɤ
Group B

2.529

2.580

9.705

5.100

1.381

1.381

3.093

The above tables reveal bandwidth value of Piano Students
and Karawitan Students when listening to Piano Sonata. The
bold number indicates the most dominant brainwave occurred
during listening activity: beta-3 for Piano Students and alpha
for Karawitan Students. Following, the 3D views and detailed
location of those two dominant brainwave will be displayed.

Fig. 2. Dominant brainwave of Karawitan students while listening to Piano
Sonata. The source generator of Alpha brainwaves at Superior Frontal Gyrus –
Frontal Lobe (Brodmann area 10; X= -10, Y= 60, Z= 30; MNI coords; Best
Match at 0 mm; 9.71 μV)

According to table 3 and 4, they reveal bandwidth value of
Piano Students and Karawitan Students when listening to
Gendhing Lancaran. The bold number indicates the most
dominant brainwave occurred during listening activity: delta
for Piano Students and theta for Karawitan Students.
Following, the 3D views and detailed location of those two
dominant brainwave will be displayed.

According to Fig. 1 and Fig.2, they reveal the dominant
brainwave of Piano Students when listening to Piano Sonata is
beta-3 and located in Temporal Lobe while the dominant
brainwave of Karawitan Student when listening to Gendhing
Lancaran is alpha and located in Frontal Lobe. Following is
the bandwidth value of subject when listening to Gendhing
Lancaran.

Fig. 3. Dominant brainwave of Piano students while listening to Gendhing
Lancaran. The source generator of Delta brainwaves at Middle Frontal Gyrus
– Frontal Lobe (Brodmann area 10; X= 30, Y= 60, Z=15; MNI coords; Best
Match at 5 mm; 7.06 μV)

Fig. 1. Dominant brainwave of Karawitan students while listening to
Gendhing Lancaran. The source generator of Beta brainwaves at Middle
Temporal Gyrus – Temporal Lobe (Brodmann area 21; X= 65, Y= -55, Z= 0;
MNI coords; Best Match at 5 mm; 4.12 μV)

According to figure 3 and 4, they reveal the dominant
brainwave of Piano Students when listening to Piano Sonata is
delta and located in Frontal Lobe while the dominant
brainwave of Karawitan Student when listening to Gendhing
Lancaran is theta and located in Temporal Lobe.

TABLE III. PIANO STUDENTS’ BANDWIDTH VALUE ON GENDHING LANCARAN
Subject

ɗ

Ɵ

α

β1

β2

β3

ɤ

Grup A

7.061

5.328

1.895

1.183

5.761

6.159

1.031

TABLE IV. KARAWITAN STUDENTS’ BANDWIDTH VALUE ON
GENDHING LANCARAN
Subject
Grup B

ɗ
5.289

Ɵ
7.624

α
2.969

β1
1.624

β2
5.518

β3
1.369

ɤ
7.259

183

15th International Conference on Electrical Engineering/Electronics, Computer, Telecommunications and Information Technology (ECTI-NCON2018)

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was partially supported by Indonesia Institute
of the Arts Yogyakarta, Indonesia, and was partially supported
by grant no. 611U109005 (2017) from Brain Science and
Engineering Innovation Research Unit, Mae Fah Luang
University and grant no. 02201A601814 (2017) from Mae Fah
Luang University, Thailand. We thank all of the subjects
involved in this research as main data provider of this studies.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]
Fig. 4. Dominant brainwave of Karawitan students while listening to
Gendhing Lancaran. The source generator of Theta brainwaves at Middle
Temporal Gyrus – Temporal Lobe (Brodmann area 21; X= 65, Y= -55, Z= 0;
MNI coords; Best Match at 5 mm; 7.62 μV)

IV.

[3]
[4]

[5]

DISCUSSION

In both piano and Karawitan student, temporal lobe was
the location where dominant brainwave occur when subjects
listened to music familiar to them. Temporal lobe is the region
of brain responsible for memory processing task. It could
indicate that memory processing occurred when subjects were
listening to familiar music. Similar things happened when
subjects listened to particular music that is less familiar for
them, in this case piano students listened to Gendhing
Lancaran and Karawitan students listened to Piano Sonata,
the dominant brainwave occurred in Frontal Lobe. In terms of
brain activity, piano students achieved higher brain activity
when listening to Piano Sonata compared to Karawitan
students meanwhile Karawitan students achieved higher brain
activity when listening to Gendhing Lancaran compared to
piano students. This indicates a higher brain activity occurred
when subject are more familiar with the particular music they
listen to. When comparing brain activity of a subject listening
to two particular music, piano student had higher brain activity
when listening to piano sonata than Gendhing Lancaran as
well as Karawitan student. Even though piano sonata is less
familiar music for Karawitan student, their brain activity was
higher when listening to this excerpts than Gendhing
Lancaran as their more familiar music. An assumptions of this
condition undergo to the characteristic of those two particular
music. Musically, those two excerpts are different especially
in tempo and melody succession. The allegro piano sonata
presents a fast music with rapid melody succession. It is quite
dissimilar with Gendhing Lancaran’s tempo that is relative
slow and calm while the melody of Gendhing Lancaran is a
cyclical theme that is not as rapid as piano sonata. For
researchers interested in this topic we suggest a future research
by focusing in audio characteristic of the stimuli to provide a
deeper elaboration of this result.

[6]
[7]
[8]

[9]
[10]

[11]
[12]

[13]

184

V. Slumming, “Broca's Area Supports Enhanced Visuospatial Cognition
in Ochestral Musicians”. The Journal of Neuroscience, vol. 27(14),
2007.
C. Gaser, and G. Schlaug, “Brain Structures Differ between Musicians
and Non-Musicians”. The Journal of Neuroscience, vol. 23(27), 2003.
L. Patston, “The Effects of Background Music on Cognitive
Performance in Musicians and Nonmusicians”. Music Perception, 2011
G. Schlaug, “The Brain of Musicians”. In I. Peretz, & R. J. Zatorre, The
Cognitive Neuroscience of Music. New York: Oxford University Press,
2003.
I. Cross, “Music, Cognition, Culture, and Evolution”. In I. Peretz, & R.
J. Zatorre, The Cognitive Neuroscience of Music. New York: Oxford
University Press, 2003.
S. Morrison and S. Demorest, “Cultural Constraints on Music Perception
and Cognition”. Progress in Brain Research, Vol. 178, 2009.
C. Stevens, “Music Perception and Cognition: A Review of Recent
Cross-Cultural Research”. Topics in Cognitive Science, 2012.
A.T. Tierney, T.R. Bergeson, and D.B. Pisoni, “Effects of Early Musical
Experience on Auditory Sequence Memory”. Empirical Musicology
Review, vol. 3(4), 2008.
D.O. Bos, “EEG-based Emotion Recognition: The Influence of Visual
and Auditory Stimuli”, 2006.
K. Tanji, “High-Frequency Gamma Band Activity in the Basal Temporal
Cortex during Picture-Naming and Lexical-Decision Tasks”. The
Journal or Neuroscience, vol. 25(13), 2005.
J.A. Grahn, and M. Brett, “Rhytm and Beat Perception in Motor Areas
of the Brain”. Jounal of Cognitive Neuroscience, vol. 19, 2007.
R.C. Gur, “Sex Differences in Brain Gray and White Matter in Healthy
Young Adults: Correlations with Cognitive Performance”. The Journal
of Neuroscience, vol. 19(10), 1999.
R.D.
Pascual-Marqui,
“Standardized
low-resolution
brain
electromagnetic tomograpgy (sLORETA): Technical Details, Methods
Finding”. Exp. Clin. Pharmacol., vol. 24, pp. 5-12 (Suppl D), 2002.

