Unsupervised Approach for Measurement of Cognitive Load using
EEG Signals
1

Diptesh Das, Member, IEEE, Debatri Chatterjee and Aniruddha Sinha, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— Individuals exhibit different levels of cognitive
load for a given mental task. Measurement of cognitive load
can enable real-time personalized content generation for
distant learning, usability testing of applications on mobile
devices and other areas related to human interactions.
Electroencephalogram (EEG) signals can be used to analyze the
brain-signals and measure the cognitive load. We have used a
low cost and commercially available neuro-headset as the EEG
device. A universal model, generated by supervised learning
algorithms, for different levels of cognitive load cannot work
for all individuals due to the issue of normalization. In this
paper, we propose an unsupervised approach for measuring the
level of cognitive load on an individual for a given stimulus.
Results indicate that the unsupervised approach is comparable
and sometimes better than supervised (e.g. support vector
machine) method. Further, in the unsupervised domain, the
Component based Fuzzy c-Means (CFCM) outperforms the
traditional Fuzzy c-Means (FCM) in terms of the measurement
accuracy of the cognitive load.

I. INTRODUCTION

T

HE definition of cognitive load, according to Wikipedia
is the “load related to the executive control of working
memory” [1]. In simpler words, it is the amount of load
experienced, by the working memory, to perform a task. The
cognitive load mostly depends on working memory capacity
[2]. An optimum level [3] of cognitive load for an individual
is desirable, in order to perform a task in a satisfactory
manner. Various application use cases ranging from
monitoring pilots [4] to normal truck drivers [5], adaptive
learning systems [6] and practical training sessions [7]
demand for real-time monitoring of individuals’ cognitive
loads, user-interface (UI) evaluation and testing [8] [9].
Apart from the mission critical activities, the need for
constant monitoring of cognitive load can be realistic only if
the EEG measuring device is of low cost and easy to wear.
Recently, a couple of such devices are available (neuroheadset from Emotive [10] and Neurosky [11]) which have
reinforced the research in such application areas.
The EEG signals have been successfully used in various
motor control applications [12] [13] [14]. Most of the
cognitive load related works use functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) [15], functional near infrared
spectroscope (fNIRs) [16], positron emission tomography
(PET) [17] etc. Alternately pupil dilation [18] and galvanic
1
Diptesh Das, Debatri Chatterjee and Aniruddha Sinha are with
Innovation Labs, Tata Consultancy Services Ltd., India. {e-mail:
diptesh.das, debatri.chatterjee, aniruddha.s}@tcs.com

978-1-4799-3163-7/13/$31.00 ©2013 IEEE

skin responses [19] have been used to detect the stress,
anxiety and cognitive load. Statistical approaches are used to
measure the cognitive load for students [20] without using
any EEG device. There have been limited amount of work
done in measurement of cognitive loads with low cost EEG
devices.
In the present work, we have used the 14 leads Emotive
EEG device which is wearable on the head. Though it is low
cost and easily available, a practical problem lies in the
repeatability of the EEG signals. In this regard there are two
issues – intensity and signal range variation among different
individuals and the variation for same individual for
different trials. The reason for the first one is mainly due to
the difference in the shape of the head or scalp for different
individuals. The second variation is due to spatial shift in the
positioning of the leads from one trial to another for the
same individual. This is usually termed as normalization
issue. Models generated using supervised learning cannot
address this unless the EEG signals are normalized before
training. Hence in this paper, we have proposed an
unsupervised approach for measurement of cognitive load.
The objective is to identify the stimulus that imparts
higher cognitive load to an individual than another stimulus
using the EEG signals. In order to achieve the same, initially
the EEG signals are split into sliding windows of few
seconds (~10 sec.). These raw EEG signal are fed into the
input of CSP (Common Spatial Pattern) [21] to filter out the
two most widely separated signals based on their variance.
These CSP filtered signals are then used to extract the
meaningful features to be used for determining the level of
cognitive load imparted by a stimulus (dataset). In the
present paper we focus on two levels of the cognitive load –
low and high. Standard Fuzzy c-Means (FCM) and its
extension Component-wise Fuzzy c-Means (CFCM)
algorithms have been used as the unsupervised approach. A
comparison is performed with the supervised approach using
a standard SVM (Support Vector Machine) classifier to
generate the training model and classify the test dataset
using the feature set. One example of classifying EEG
signals using SVM classifier is explained in [22]. The use of
unsupervised approach to measure different levels of
cognitive loads overcomes the issues related to
normalization and relaxes the need for initial training of
individual users before the measurements. Therefore the
unsupervised approach enhances its wide spread
applicability for any real-time measurement of cognitive

load in any educational institute as well as professional
pedagogical (or training) institute.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II provides the
details of Test Stimuli used for the experiment. In section III
we have described the data acquisition tool and the details of
proposed methodology. Section IV gives the details of the
experiments conducted, followed by the results and
performance analysis in section V. Finally the paper is
concluded in section VI.
II. DESIGN OF TEST STIMULI
The cognitive load can be broadly classified into three
types – Intrinsic, Extraneous and Germane [23]. Each of
these types effect the learning and decision making process
of an individual. Intrinsic load refers to the complexity of the
task. The additional load due to the method of presentation
of the task refers to Extraneous load. The load due to
learning a new technology or schema refers to the Germane
load. In the current work, we have used three different types
of stimulus namely – (i) Stroop Test [24] – this is mostly
Extraneous load (ii) Generic UI usability Test – Extraneous
load and (iii) Logical reasoning – mostly Germane load. For
generic GUI usability test, we have used two different
onscreen keyboard layouts (Fig. 5 and Fig. 6) which can be
operated by a remote control. These two layouts were
compared on the basis of user-friendliness. All of the above
stimuli are having varying Intrinsic load.
Each of these stimuli is constituted for two levels of
complexity – low and high as detailed below.
A. Stimuli for Stroop test
In typical Stroop test the users are asked to read out the
colours of each text in each slide while wearing the EEG
headset. Typical example of Stroop slides used for two
levels of cognitive loads are shown in Fig. 1 and Fig. 2.
In Fig. 1 (for low cognitive load) the name of the colour
was printed in a colour denoted by the name while in Fig. 2
(for high cognitive load) the name was printed in a colour
not denoted by the name. In both the cases the users were
asked to read the colour inferred by the text instead of name
of the colour.

B. Logical reasoning test
In this test a set of logical reasoning questions having
different levels of cognitive loads were designed. The
questions are prepared based on the laws of propositional
logic as described in [25]. Questions containing single
logical error were designed to impart low cognitive load
whereas questions containing multiple logical error imparted
high cognitive load. The experimental test set consisted of
three slides for low load and three slides for high load.
Typical examples of such slides are shown in Fig. 3 and Fig.
4 for low and high cognitive load respectively.

Fig. 3. Question for low load.

Fig. 4. Question for high load.

C. Typing using onscreen-keyboards
In this experiment, the users are asked to type some
phrases using two different onscreen layouts shown in Fig. 5
and Fig. 6. Theoretical model (KLM-GOMS) as well as
extensive user study establishes the fact that the Hierarchical
layout imparts lower cognitive load compared to QWERTY
layout [26] [27]. The test phrases are taken from
Mackenzie’s standard phrase sets [28]. The average length
of the phrases selected is 20 characters.

Fig. 5. Hierarchical keyboard layout.

Fig. 1. Stroop slide for low cognitive load.

Fig. 6. QWERTY keyboard layout.

III. PROPOSED METHODOLOGY
Fig. 2. Stroop slide for high cognitive load.

The objective of this research is to compare the

performance of supervised and unsupervised classification
methodologies while classifying the cognitive load. While
performing the tasks, the EEG signals are acquired from the
users. As the time intervals for executing tasks for different
stimuli are different, we apply dynamic time wrapping
algorithm [29] to align them in the same time-scale.
A. EEG data acquisition and analysis tool
For recording the EEG signals, we have used 14–channel
Emotiv neuro-headset. The device uses a standard 10-20
electrode configuration for channel fixing. The sampling
frequency of the device was set to 128Hz. The raw EEG data
acquired was pre-filtered using a notch filter at power line
frequency. The device also provides two reference channels
(DRL, CMS) at P3/P4 locations offering good spatial
resolution. The headset is shown in Fig. 7.
The acquired EEG data are processed in a window by
window basis. Window size is defined based on the
maximum discrimination of Cognitive Score (CS) between
high and low cognitive loads. A typical window size of 10
sec has been experimentally chosen based on the Stroop test
dataset [25].

Fig. 7. Emotive neuro-headset.

The raw EEG signal (in a particular window) suffers from
poor spatial resolution. Hence we used CSP filters to
maximize the variance of band-pass filtered EEG signals
from one class while minimizing that from other class [21].
From these filtered signals, EEG features are extracted. The
features used in the present work are log variance [30],
Hjorth parameters [31] [32] and different band power
estimates [33] [34].
The feature vectors thus obtained are then fed to both
supervised and unsupervised learning algorithms to finally
measure the level of the cognitive load on the users.
B. Classification of cognitive load using supervised
learning
A standard Support Vector Machine (SVM) classifier is
used to classify the cognitive load of users. For the purpose
of training, EEG data from standard Stroop test undertaken
by a group of users have been used. This trained model is
further used to classify the EEG data obtained from the same
set of users exposed to two different sets of stimuli. Here in
our experiments, different on-screen keyboard layouts and
logical reasoning problems are used as two different testing
stimuli as explained in [22], [25].

C. Classification of cognitive load using unsupervised
learning
EEG signals generated from the same individual at
different instances for the same stimulus do not remain the
same because of the normalization issues as discussed
before. Thus it becomes absolutely necessary to train the
classifier for individual users every time we need to measure
the cognitive load of that user to achieve best performance
of the classifier. This may not be feasible under all
circumstances. To overcome this difficulty we have opted
for unsupervised learning algorithms for differentiating the
levels of cognitive loads. In an unsupervised learning
algorithm, data points are grouped into two or more clusters
based on the data similarity. In the present work we have
used traditional FCM algorithm and an extension of the
traditional Fuzzy c-Means algorithm called Component-wise
Fuzzy c-Means (CFCM) algorithm [35] and have compared
their performances while measuring the cognitive load for
two levels.
Traditional FCM is an unsupervised algorithm, where
each data points are induced by a membership value which
is a function of the distance measure of the data point from
the cluster centers. It is an iterative process of finding the
cluster centers based on these membership values. At the
end of each iteration, the membership values are used for
hard assignment of the data points to one of the clusters.
But in CFCM, instead of giving an overall membership
for a data point, each individual dimensions of the data-point
are assigned a membership of belongingness to a cluster.
This enhances the performance of clustering where odd
parametric values of one or fewer dimensions lead to a bad
clustering of data points. However instead of giving a
complete freedom, these individual memberships of
belongingness at component level is further aggregated
while calculating the cluster centroid. Another important
aspect of CFCM is that it automatically updates the value of
fuzziness control parameter m based on the stability
criterion of cluster centers. Therefore whatever be the initial
value of m , the algorithm automatically tunes m in the
stability region of cluster centers.
The present approach has been evaluated on two levels of
clustering, but it can further be employed to multi-level
cognitive load measurement in a seamless manner. The
overall methodology using both supervised and
unsupervised learning algorithms has been depicted in a
flowchart given in Fig. 8.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
Three sets of experiment are conducted to generate the
training and testing database for the proposed approach.
A. Experiment 1
A group of 15 users (male) were selected in the age group
of 25-30 years. Female users were avoided because of the
problems in placement of EEG headset due to their long
hair. They were asked to read both the Stroop slides as

shown in Fig. 1 and Fig. 2. EEG signals were recorded while
reading the slides.
Data for low load

P=

Data for high load

Divide high load
EEG data in 10s
windows

Stroop
Test data

R=

Extract EEG
feature vector
for each
window

Extract EEG
feature vector
for each
window

TP
TP + FP

(2)

Recall (3) is the ratio of true positive (TP) and the total
number of data points that actually belong to that cluster
(TP+FN). Where FN, the false negative is the total number
of data points which are wrongly identified as not belonging
to the same cluster.

Dynamic time wrapping for signal matching
Divide low load
EEG data in 10s
windows

(TP+FP). Where FP represents the false positive, i.e. the
total number of data points which are falsely identified to
belong to the said cluster.

TP
TP + FN

(3)

SVM
FCM / CFCM
Low load or
high load
Cluster center for
low load and high
load

Fig. 8. Flowchart for overall process.

B. Experiment 2
In this experiment the subjects who have already been
participated in experiment 1 were asked to take part in
Logical reasoning test as described in section IIB. Each
participant completed both the sessions of low and high
cognitive tasks with a short break of 30 seconds between
each session.
C. Experiment 3
All the participants were next asked to type 5 different
phrases [28] using the on-screen keyboard layouts shown in
Fig. 5 and Fig. 6. After typing a phrase using a particular
layout, the participants were asked to take a short brake of 2
mins. EEG signals were recorded while typing the phrases.
V. RESULTS AND PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
In this section we have described the metric used for the
performance analysis of the algorithms, the selection of
Fuzziness Control parameter m and it’s convergence over
iterations using CFCM and the performance comparison of
Supervised (SVM) and Unsupervised (FCM and CFCM)
algorithms while classifying the EEG signals into two levels
of cognition load.
A. Performance metric
The performance metric used for analyzing the output of
both supervised and unsupervised learning algorithm is
the Fmeasure (1) which is defined as the harmonic mean of
precision (P) and recall (R).
Fmeasure =

2⋅ P⋅ R
P+R

(1)

Precision (2) is defined as the ratio of number of data
points truly belonging to a cluster (TP) and the total number
of data points identified to belong to the same cluster

Fig. 9. Automatic tuning of Fuzziness Control Parameter ( m ) using
CFCM with different initial value of m for Onscreen Keyboard dataset.

B. Choice of

m for EEG data set

An analysis on the automatic update of fuzziness control
parameter ( m ) is done over iterations with different initial
values of m ranging from 2, 4 to 5 using CFCM algorithm. It
has been observed from Fig. 9 that the value of m for EEG
dataset converges within a small range from 2.8 to 3.2.
Therefore a suitable choice for fuzziness control parameter
( m ) for EEG data set can be 3. So the traditional FCM
algorithm is evaluated with a m value set at 3.
C. Analysis of the result of Supervised and Unsupervised
learning algorithm
The performances of traditional FCM, CFCM and
standard SVM classifier on Onscreen Keyboard and Logical
reasoning dataset are shown in Fig. 10 and Fig. 11
respectively. From the figures it is evident that the
performance obtained in unsupervised approach (FCM and
CFCM) is comparable with that obtained by supervised
learning algorithm (SVM).

more real time monitoring of cognitive loads.
TABLE I.

PERFORMANCE COMPARISION BETWEEN SVM, FCM AND
CFCM

Stimulus

Fmeasure
SVM

On Screen
Keyboard
Logical
Reasoning

Fig. 10. Performance comparison between CFCM, FCM and SVM for OnScreen keyboard dataset.

Fig. 11. Performance comparison between CFCM, FCM and SVM for
Logical Reasoning dataset.

Table I give the average and standard deviation of

FCM

CFCM

Avg.

Std.

Avg.

Std.

Avg.

Std.

0.743

0.082

0.688

0.155

0.779

0.129

0.764

0.149

0.657

0.162

0.767

0.111

VI. CONCLUSION
This paper discusses the problems associated with the
generation of a Universal model to analyze the cognitive
loads of different individuals due to normalization issues of
the EEG signal. Therefore it proposes an unsupervised
approach for measuring the cognitive load which is a better
alternative than the supervised one as it requires no training
and hence is independent of the normalization problems. It is
further experimentally proved that the unsupervised
algorithm is a more feasible solution in practice where there
is need for continuous measurement of cognitive load.
However it is clear from the experimental results that CFCM
will be a better choice, if unsupervised approach for twolevel classification of cognitive loads is adopted. The
complexity of the CFCM is higher compared to FCM, hence
as part of future work, there is a need to reduce the
complexity for real-time embedded implementation in
portable solutions. Though the present approach has been
justified with only two class clustering problem, it can
further be employed for a multi-level cognitive load analysis
problem in a seamless manner.

Fmeasure for all the subjects. It can be seen that the overall

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

performance in terms of average Fmeasure for CFCM and
SVM are comparable. Moreover, the standard deviation for
CFCM and FCM for both the datasets remains almost same
whereas it varies drastically for SVM. It indicates that the
issue of normalization across datasets does not affect the
unsupervised (CFCM) learning.
If normalization issues arising due to non-homogeneity of
human scalp and spatial drift in successive trials are to be
handled properly using a supervised learning model, then it
imposes an extra overhead of data normalization and
preprocessing of training data. This also requires the
construction of a training model every time there is a need
for measuring the cognitive loads of individuals. This may
not be feasible in real life applications as cited before, where
continuous monitoring of cognitive loads of different users
is essential to judge their cognitive ability. Therefore
unsupervised approach which does not require any training
phase and hence does not suffer from normalization issues
can be a better alternative where there is a practical need for

We would like to thank all the subjects participated in the
experiments conducted and Mr. Debanjan Majumdar for his
valuable contribution in recording the EEG signals.
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]

[5]

REFERENCES
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cognitive_load, last accessed on 29-July2013.
J. Sweller,.: The Cambridge handbook of multimedia learning.
Cambridge University Press, 2005, ch. “Implications of cognitive load
theory for multimedia learning,” pp. 19–30.
John Sweller, "Cognitive load during problem solving: Effects on
learning." Cognitive science 12, no. 2 (1988): 257-285.
Lini, Sami, Christophe Bey, Sylvain Hourlier, Bruno Vallespir, Axel
Johnston, and Pierre-Alexandre Favier. "Evaluating ASAP
(Anticipation Support for Aeronautical Planning): a user-centered case
study." In Proceedings of the 17th International Symposium on
Aviation Psychology. 2013.
T. Taylor, A. K. Pradhan, G. Divekar, M. Romoser, J. Muttart, R.
Gomez, A. Pollatsek, and D. L. Fisher. "The view from the road: The
contribution of on-road glance-monitoring technologies to
understanding driver behavior." Accident Analysis & Prevention
(2013).

[6]
[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]

[14]

[15]
[16]

[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]

Moos, Daniel. "Examining hypermedia learning: The role of cognitive
load and self-regulated learning." Journal of Educational Multimedia
and Hypermedia 22, no. 1 (2013): 39-61.
Creemers, Bert, Leonidas Kyriakides, and Panayiotis Antoniou.
"Improvement of Teaching by Mastering Specific Competences: The
Competency-Based Approach." In Teacher Professional Development
for Improving Quality of Teaching, pp. 13-28. Springer Netherlands,
2013.
M. H Leanne, and et all in "Brain measurement for usability testing
and adaptive interfaces: an example of uncovering syntactic workload
with functional near infrared spectroscopy", Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference 2009 on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
pp2185-2194,ISBN:978-1-60558-246-7,
doi:10.1145/1518701.1519035.
S. Feinberg, M. Murphy, "Applying cognitive load theory to the
design of web-based instruction", Proceedings of IEEE professional
communication society international professional communication
conference and Proceedings of the 18th annual ACM international
conference on Computer documentation: technology & teamwork, pp
353 - 360, ISBN:0-7803-6431-7.
http://www.emotiv.com/epoc/features.php - last accessed on 29-July
2013.
http://www.neurosky.com/Products/MindWave.aspx - last accessed on
29-July 2013.
Y. Wang, S.Makeig, ‘‘Predicting Intended Movement Direction
Using EEG from Human Posterior Parietal Cortex” in HCI
international, San Diego CA, July 2009.
D. Huang, P. Lin, Fei Ding-Yu., X. Chen, O. bai, “Decoding human
motor activity from EEG single trials for a discrete two-dimensional
cursor control” in Journal of Neural Engineering, vol. 6 046005,
doi:10.1088/1741-2560/6/4/046005.
C. Nuper, R. Gernot, R. Scherer, G. Pfurtscheller, “Motor imagery and
EEG-based control of spelling devices and neuroprostheses”, Progress
in Brain research, Elsevier,vol. 159, 2006, pages393-409, DOI:
10.1016/S0079-6123(06)59025-9.
F. Lotte, J. Van Dille Dirk, L. Koole, “Tuning down the emotional
brain: An fMRI study of the effects of cognitive load on the
processing of affective images”, NeuroImage 2009.
E. T. Solovey, P. Schermerhorn, M. Scheutz, A. Sassaroli, S.
Fantini,R.J.K. Jacob, “Brainput: Enhancing Interactive Systems with
Streaming fNIRS Brain Input”, in CHI12, May 5-10, 2012, Austin,
Texas, USA.
E. E. Smith, J. Jonides, R.A. Koeppe, “Dissociating verbal and spatial
working memory using PET”, in Cerebral Cortex, 1996.
J. Klingner, B. Tversky, P. Hanrahan: “Effects of visual and verbal
presentation on cognitive load in vigilance, memory and arithmetic
tasks”. J. of Psyhophysiology 48, 3 (2011), 323–332.
Y. Shi, N. Ruiz, R. Taib, E. Choi, F. Chen: “Galvanic skin response
(gsr) as an index of cognitive load”. In CHI ’07 extended abstracts
(2007), ACM, pp. 2651–2656.
C. E. Parker, J. Gorin, and S. Bechard. "Adapting Reading Test Items:
Decreasing Cognitive Load to Increase Access for Students with
Disabilities." Lessons Learned in Federally Funded Projects that Can

[21]
[22]
[23]
[24]

[25]

[26]
[27]

[28]
[29]
[30]
[31]
[32]
[33]
[34]

[35]

Improve the Instruction and Assessment of Low Performing Students
with Disabilities (2013): 17.
F. Lotte, C. Guan, “Regularizing common spatial patterns to improve
BCI designs: Unified Theory and new Algorithms”, in IEEE
transaction on bio-medical Engineering vol. x, pages 355-362, 2011.
A. Sinharay, D. Chatterjee, A. Sinha, “Evaluation of different
onscreen keyboard layouts using EEG signals”, to be published in
SMC 2013, October 13-16, 2013.
P. Chandler, J. Sweller: “Cognitive load theory and the format of
instruction”. Cognition and Instruction 8 (1991), 293–332.
P. Hjemdahl, U. Freyschuss, A. Juhlin-Dannfelt, B. Linde,
"Differentiated sympathetic activation during mental stress evoked by
the Stroop test" in Acta Physiol Scand Suppl [1984, 527:25-29],
(PMID:6589948).
D. Chatterjee, A. Sinharay, A. Konar, “EEG-Based Fuzzy Cognitive
Load Classification during Logical Analysis of Program Segments”,
to be published in IEEE International Conference on Fuzzy Systems
(FUZZ-IEEE), July 7-10, 2013.
A. Pal, D. Chatterjee, D. Kar, “Evaluation and Improvements of onscreen keyboard for TV and set -top box”, 15th IEEE International
symposium on Consumer Electronics, June 2011, Singapore.
D. Chatterjee, A. Sinha, A. Pal, A. Basu, “An Iterative Methodology
to Improve TV Onscreen Keyboard Layout Design through Evaluation
of User Studies”, Scientific and academic publishing journal,
Advances in computing, DOI:10.5923/j.ac.20120205.03, pages 8191.
I. S. MacKenzie, and R. W. Soukoreff, "Phrase sets for evaluating text
entry techniques," in CHI'03 extended abstracts on Human factors in
computing systems, Lauderdale, USA, 754-755, 2003.
H. C. Huang, and B. H. Jansen. "EEG waveform analysis by means of
dynamic time-warping." International journal of bio-medical
computing 17, no. 2 (1985): 135-144.
B. Blankertz, R. Tomioka, S. Lemm, M. Kawanabe, Klaus. Mller
‘‘Optimizing Spatial Filters for Robust EEG Single-Trial Analysis’’,
in IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 25, 2008.
S. Gudmundsson, P. Runarsson, T. Sigurdsson, S. Eiriksdottir, K.
Johnsen, ‘‘Reliability of quantitative EEG features’’, in Clinical
Neurophysiology 118 (2007) 21622171, August 2007.
V. Carmen, K. Nicole, B. Blankertz, A. Schlgl, ‘‘Time Domain
Parameters as a feature for EEG-based Brain-Computer Interfaces’’ in
Neural Networks 22 (2009) 1313-1319.
W. Klimesch, ‘‘EEG alpha and Theta oscillations reflect cognitive and
memory performance: a review and analysis’’ in Brain Research
Reviews 29, 1999.
H. Sijuan, ‘‘Feature extraction and classification of EEG for imagery
movement based on mu/beta rhythms’’, in Biomedical Engineering
and Informatics (BMEI), 2010 3rd International Conference on 16-18
Oct, 2010.
D. Das, A. Sinha, K. Chakravarty, A. Konar, “Stabilization of Cluster
Centers over Fuzziness Control Parameter in Component-wise Fuzzy
c-Means Clustering”, to be published in IEEE International
Conference on Fuzzy Systems (FUZZ-IEEE), July 7-10, 2013.

