Directed Graph-based Wireless EEG Sensor Channel Selection Approach for Cognitive
Task Classification
Abduljalil Mohamed*, Khaled Bashir Shaban**, and Amr Mohamed**
*Information

Systems Department, Ahmed Bin Mohamed Military College
P.O. Box: 22988, Doha, Qatar
**Computer Science and Engineering Department, College of Engineering, Qatar University
P.O. Box: 2713, Doha, Qatar
ajamoham@abmmc.edu.qa, khaled.shaban@qu.edu.qa, amrm@qu.edu.qa
Abstract—Wireless electroencephalogram (EEG) sensors have
been successfully applied in many medical and computer brain
interface classifications. A common characteristic of wireless
EEG sensors is that they are low powered devices, and hence
an efficient usage of sensor energy resources is critical for any
practical application. One way of minimizing energy
consumption by the EEG sensors is by reducing the number of
EEG channels participating in the classification process. For
the purpose of classifying EEG signals, we propose a directed
acyclic graph (DAG)-based channel selection algorithm. To
achieve this objective, the EEG sensor channels are first
realized in a complete undirected graph, where each channel is
represented by a node. An edge between any two nodes
indicates the collaboration between these nodes in identifying
the system state; and the significance of this collaboration is
quantified by a weight assigned to the edge. The complete
graph is then reduced into a directed acyclic graph that
encodes the knowledge of the non-increasing order of the
channel ranking for each cognitive task. The channel selection
algorithm utilizes this directed graph to find a maximum path
such that the total weight of this path satisfies a predefined
threshold. It has been demonstrated experimentally that
channel utilization has been reduced by 50% in the worst case
scenario for a three-state system and an EEG sensor with 14
channels; and the best classification accuracy obtained is 81%.
Keywords- Brain computer interface; channel selection;
graph theory; wireless EEG signal classification.
I.

INTRODUCTION

Recent advances in wireless communication and intelligent
wireless electroencephalogram (EEG) sensors have allowed
the realization of different EEG-based applications, such as
healthcare [1] and brain computer interface applications [2].
In general, an EEG sensor network topology comprises of
simple sensors that collect information about the subject and
send it through wireless paths to the sink. A common
characteristic of the wireless EEG sensors is that they are
low powered devices, and hence an efficient usage of sensor
energy resources is critical for any practical application. As
shown in [3, 4], the sensing and processing energy are
negligible with respect to communication energy. Thus,
most of the energy-aware algorithms reported in the
literature address this issue at the communication level [57]. It is also shown in [8] that the reduction of the number of
sensors can also reduce the power consumption for wireless
EEG caps. Moreover, it yields more comfort for the user,

decreases installation time duration and may substantially
reduce the financial cost of the Brain Computer Interface
(BCI) setup since the cost of an EEG cap and an amplifier
vary in relation to the number of channels [9].
In this paper we address the problem of channel reduction
for multi-channel sensor acquiring EEG data for a BCI
classifier identifying cognitive tasks. The channel selection
problem can be well represented as a complete undirected
graph, where each channel is represented as a graph node.
An edge between any two nodes indicates the collaboration
between the corresponding channels in identifying the
current system state; and the significance of this
collaboration is quantified by a weight assigned to the edge.
Various approaches that tackle the issue of utilizing only
an informative subset of channels rather than the complete
set of the available sensor channels have been presented
recently in the literature. In [9], a sensor channel selection
method based on the backward elimination is proposed. The
method uses a cost function that is based on the signal to
signal-plus-noise ratio with spatial filtering. The evaluation
of the selected subset of channels is assessed on three
different levels: 1) at a global level, the measure of the
signal EEG to noise, 2) at a recognition level, the overall
accuracy of the P300 event detection, 3) the accuracy of the
speller application. The conducted experiments have shown
that selection methods do not consider the spatial filters
provide the worst results. In [10], the authors use phase
locking values to measure the variability of phase difference
between two EEG signals. It basically characterizes the
behavioral similarity between two channels. The
performance of the selected subset of channels is evaluated
by measuring the character recognition accuracy. Thomas
N. L. et al [11], propose a Support Vector Machine-based
channel selection method. Without using prior knowledge
about the spatial distribution of brain activity of a mental
task, the method utilizes the recursive feature elimination
(RFE) and zero-norm optimization (10-Opt) based on
support vector machine. All features of one channel are
either removed completely (the channel is removed) or all
features remain. The proposed methods are applied to motor
imagery and have shown that, while REF is capable of
reducing the channels needed for a robust classification
without an increase of error, the performance of the 10-Opt
algorithm is less than satisfactory. In [12], the authors

propose a multichannel classification method that uses a
committee of artificial neural networks (ANNs). The
coefficients of the power spectrum estimator autoregressive
(AR) model are used as feature vectors representing the data
in one channel. For each individual channel in the EEG, an
ANN is trained to classify three classes (left and right index
fingers, and right foot). The classification accuracy depends
on the number of the committee members (channels),
however, the average classification success does not vary
significantly with committee members with sizes bigger
than 20 channels. In [13], a synchronization likelihoodbased approach is proposed. It basically measures both the
linear and nonlinear interdependency between signals. The
synchronization likelihood (SL), along with Hjorth
parameters, are used as input features to the Linear
Discriminant Analysis classifier. The SL was computed in a
sliding window of size 512 sample points. Taking into
account both anatomical knowledge and SL values, five
channels from different brain regions have been selected
among the EEG channels which exceed the global mean of
SL value. Utilizing these five channels, using different
features, the LDA classifier yields a better classification
accuracy than it does utilizing all the EEG channels. In [14],
the EEG channels are ranked such that the mutual
information (MI) between selected sensors and class labels
are maximized. An efficient computational approach to
estimate the MI is presented. In [15], the principal
component analysis is used as a feature selection method.
The selected channels are to preserve as much information
as compared to the complete set of channels as possible. A
multilayer perceptron (MLP) neural network is used to
classify the EEG data into two categories: alcoholics and
non-alcoholics. Experiments show that, on average,
classification performance using the full set (64 channels) is
not significantly different from using 16 channels. However,
as the number of channels is reduced to 8 and 4, they
produce a drastic drop in the classification accuracy.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II
introduces the channel selection representation model. The
basic notions of the evidence theory are introduced in
section III. The proposed approach is detailed in section IV.
Section V reports the results obtained by the new approach
and final remarks are summarized in section VI.
II.

CHANNEL SLECTION REPRESNTATION MODEL

The sensor channel selection representation model plays
an essential role in the new proposed algorithm. Basic graph
concepts and notations are first introduced in this section to
facilitate the construction of the graph-based proposed
algorithm.
A. Basic Notations
We consider an EEG sensor consisting of N channels.
We represent the sensor channels with an undirected
weighed graph G  (V , E ) , where V  {v1 , v2 ,..., vn }
is

the

set

of

nodes

(channels),

and

E  {(vi , v j ) | f ( xvi , xvj )  0} is the set of edges, and f(.)
is the task weight function (or weight function for
simplicity) and defined as follows:

f : ( xvi , xvj )  (0,1]
where xvi and

xvj are the current readings of the channels

vi and v j , respectively. We assume the existence of this
weight function. The edge between any two graph nodes
sensor channels does not mean a communication link, but
rather it indicates the collaboration between these two
channels in identifying the current system state. Using
certain measures, the weight function assigns to this edge a
positive value that reflects the confidence of the
collaborating channels in their decision. Moreover, it
assigns a confidence value for each individual channel node.
Hence, the weighting function plays a crucial role and
should be contrived carefully.
B. General Graph-based Channel Selection
Given a representation graph model, the problem now is
to find a path that starts from a certain channel node and
monotonically increases, in terms of confidence value, as an
additional node is added to the path. Fig.1 demonstrates the
channel search process for an EEG sensor with six channels.
It starts with the channel node (node 3) that has the
maximum confidence value. It then searches for the next
node such that its collaboration with previous node yields
the highest confidence value among all other nodes. The
directed edge in the figure refers to the next selected
channel node. With the exception of the edge connecting the
selected node with its previous one, all the edges of the
selected node are removed from the graph. The search
process continues in this manner until either the
accumulated path confidence value exceeds the defined
threshold or all the available channels are visited.
III.

DIRECTED ACYCLIC GRAPH-BASED CHANNEL
SELECTION ALGORITHM

The computational complexity associated with the
general graph-based channel selection is due to the
exhaustive search resulted from the undirected complete
graph model. Without loss of generality, we will assume a
directed acyclic graph model in which the new search
method is performed in a systematic and more efficient way.
The new channel selection algorithm always starts from a
special node (or nodes) which will be denoted as the leading
node. The structure of the directed edges in the new graph
model guides the selection process to the next most
appropriate node based on the path confidence value
assigned to the edges. The search process stops when it
reaches the destination node (a dummy node that is
designated as the final node). Clearly, the graph topology

(a)

channel to a given task is a more appropriate ranking
measure. For this purpose, the precision measure is used.
Using an appropriate classifier model, the overall
classification accuracy of each sensor channel and its
sensitivity to each task hypothesis can be computed. The
precision measure can be given a probabilistic interpretation
as the probability that a random channel reading is relevant
to the given cognitive task. Based on the above discussion,
the following definitions will be used in the graph
construction process.
vi

Definition 1 (channel ranking set). Let Pwk
class precision of the channel node
channel ranking set,

C

wk

refer to the

vi for the task wk . The

, for the task

wk is defined as

follow:

C wk  {v1, v2 ,..., vN } ,

C wk is an ordered permutation of the set V such that the
(b)

following condition holds:

Pwvk1  Pwvk2  ...  PwvkN ,
Definition 2 (leading channel). Given the channel
ranking set,

C wk as defined in Definition 1, the channel

wk
node v1  C is called the first leading channel for the

task

wk , v2  C wk the second leading channel for the task

wk , and so on.
(c)
Figure 1. General graph-based channel selection algorithm (a) node 3 is
selected as a starting channel (b) node 5 is selected next and added to the
search path (c) node node is added as a final node, assuming the total
confidence value exceeds a predefined threshold

plays a critical role in the search process. Domain
knowledge can be used to construct such topology. In this
work, the EEG sensors are used for the purpose of cognitive
task classification. Thus, as a first step in the graph
construction process, the sensor channels are ranked based
on classification measures.
A. Sensor Channel Ranking
The most-widely sensor channel ranking method reported
in the literature is based on the overall performance of the
channel selection criterion. It basically utilizes the global
knowledge as it effectively identifies the most relevant
sensors. An irrelevant sensor is a sensor whose removal
barely impairs the performance of the selection criterion.
However, this method ignores the local knowledge that the
sensors may have. Experimental work has shown that
different sensors, though they may exhibit similar overall
performance, may actually have different responses to
different cognitive tasks. Hence, the relativity of a certain

B. Constructing Directed graph
Given channel ranking sets, as defined in Definition 1, a
directed graph can be constructed as follows: the first
leading channels of each ranking set constitute the first layer
of the directed graph, the second leading channels constitute
the second layer, and so on. Identical leading channels are
replaced with their successive channels in their respective
ranking sets. Directed edges are added from every node in a
each layer to every node in the subsequent layer. The nodes
of the last layer are all connected to a final destination node
(dummy node), and the nodes of the first layer are merged
to constitute the root node of the directed graph. The graph
construction process can be better explained by the
following example attained from previous work [16]. The
14-channel Emotiv EPOC EEG sensor was used for the
purpose of classification of three-mental tasks (T1, T2, T3).
Using the RapidMiner software tool [17], the quality of
the discriminant power of each channel is examined. The kNN classifier model is utilized, where the k parameter is set
to 4. The channel classification results are shown in Table I.
In the table, the first fourteen columns refer to the fourteen
Emotiv EEG channels numbered from 4 till 17, respectively.
The tasks T1, T2, and T3 correspond to the three mental
tasks; sending an email, dialing a phone number, and
initiating a Skype session, respectively, and indicate the
class precision obtained by the classifier. The

TABLE 1 K-NN BASED CHANNEL RANKING
Algorithm. (DAG-based channel selection (DBCS))
Let v x be an auxiliary node,
Let eij be a directed edge from the node vi to the node

vj ,
Let ceij be the confidence value of the edge eij ,
last column is the overall classification accuracy for each
channel. The symbol √ means the respective channel is used
for the EEG signal classification, while the symbol X
denotes its absence. Notably, no single channel yields a
satisfactory performance level in terms of the overall
classification accuracy (less than 37% accuracy). However,
it can be noted from the table that EEG channels respond
differently to different mental tasks. For T1, channel 15
performs best at 34.56% class precision rate. For T2,
channel 13 outperforms other channels at 74.42% rate. For
T3, channel 11 yields the best class precision rate at
83.53%. The channels 11, 13, and 15 constitute the initial
observed channels. Hence, the root node, v * , is:
v*  {11,13,15} ,
Based on the classification results shown in Table I, the
channel ranking sets are determined as follows:

Let Evi be the set of all the outgoing edges of the channel

vi , Evi  E ,
Initializations:

PN  {} ,
CR  {} ,
PCV  0
1. For all eij  E ,
calculate ceij

constructed as shown in the previous section, such that V
is the set of nodes, E is the set of edges, v * is the root
node, and vd is the destination node. The DBCS algorithm is
formally presented by the following pseudo-code.
IV.

PERFORMANCE EVALUATION

In this section, the performance of the proposed channel
selection DBCSA approach is examined.

vx  v * ,

3.

Add the nodes of the set v x and their current

CR ,

CR  {CR  {xvx }}
4. Calculate the PCV  f (CR ) ,
5. If PCV  Threshold , Go To 10,
6. Select an edge exj  Evx such that cexj is a


The obtained directed acyclic graph is shown in Fig. 2.
In the graph, the R node represents the root node which
refers to the leading nodes for each mental task and consists
of the nodes 11, 13, and 15. The last node in the graph, D ,
is the destination node, which serves as a flag indicating the
end of the channel search process.

G  (V , E , v*, vd ) be a directed acyclic graph of size N ,

2.

readings to the sets PN and
respectively:
 PN  {PN  {v x }}

C T 1  {16,7,4,17,12,8,14,6,10,9,5} ,
C T 2  {16,10,12,4,7,9,6,17,14,5,8} ,
C T 3  {6,8,10,7,12,9,14,17,16,4,5} ,

C. Directed Acyclic Graph based Cahnnel Selection
Algorithm
A new directed acyclic graph-based channel selection
(DBCS) algorithm can now be developed. Let

 f ( xvi , xvj ) ,

7.

maximum,
Set the head node of the edge exj to the node

v x , v x  neighbor (exj ) ,
8.

If ( v x

 vd ), Go To 10

9. Go To 3,
10. Report PN ,
END
A. Data Collection
Using a 14-channel EEG sensor, signals were collected from
five male subjects, referred to as S1, S2, S3, S4, and S5. The
data collection procedure outlined in [16] was used. Each
subject was asked to perform three mental tasks namely,
sending an email, dialing a phone number, and initiating
Skype session. Interested readers should refer to [16] for
more details.
B. AAN and DBCS Cognitive Classification Accuracy
Since cognitive task identification is considered a
classification problem, ANN with scaled conjugate gradient

(a)

classification accuracy is shown in Table III. It can be seen
from the table that the best performance is obtained for
subject S2 with 81% classification accuracy, whereas the
worst performance is obtained for subject S3 with 72%
classification accuracy. As expected, the classification
accuracy of the proposed algorithm would be lower, but
acceptable, than that of the ANN classifier shown in Table
II, as the latter uses all the sensor channels during the
classification process.
However, the proposed algorithm is superior in terms of
channel utilization. On average, the DBCS uses only 20% of
sensor channels during the classification process. The
distribution of channel utilization for all subjects is shown
in Figs. 3. It can be summarized as follows: the root node
(lower bound), is used 17% for S2, 15% for S2, and 16% for
the subjects S3, S4, and S5. The root node is the lower
bound on the channels used. The maximum number of
channels (upper bound) used is seven channels and utilized
as follows: 23% for S1, 25% for S2, 24% for S3, 25% for
S4, and 26% for S5. Due to its adaptive property, the
number of channels selected by the DBCS algorithm varies
from one subject to another.
I.

(b)
Figure 2. Directed graph-based representation model of the Emotive EEG
sensor with 14 channels (a) channels are connected by directed edges based
on their task sensitivies (b) nodes of the first layer are merged into one
node (R), and nodes of the last layer are connected to a final dummy node
(D)

back-propagation learning algorithm is used as a classifier.
For each subject, 13438 samples were collected. The data
were divided into three parts as follows: 70% used for
training, 15% used for validation, 15% used for testing. The
purpose is to examine the contribution of the complete set of
the sensor channels to the classification task. Employing the
14 channels, the MLP network classification accuracies of
the five subjects are shown in Table II. As shown in the
table, certain subjects are more susceptible to particular
tasks than others. For example, S2 yields the best
performance at 95.4% overall accuracy, and S5 yields
comparatively lower performance at 91.4% overall
accuracy. However, while S2 shows better accuracy than S2
for tasks 2 (98.6%) and S3 (95.7%), S5 performs better in
identification task 1 (93.7%) than S2. Similar observations
can be made for other subjects.
Moreover, ANNs are also used to learn and estimate the
weight values for all the edges and paths of the constructed
directed graphs. For the DBCS algorithm, empirically, a
threshold value of 0.5 is found to be appropriate. A larger
threshold value would require a larger number of channels
than the upper bound, and thus a smaller and sufficient
number of channels may not be obtained. A smaller
threshold can lead to a better channel utilization, however,
the cognitive task classification accuracy may degrade to an
unacceptable level. The performance of DBCS in terms of

CONCLUSION

In this paper, a directed graph-based wireless EEG sensor
channel selection approach for cognitive task classification is
proposed. The channel selection problem is modeled within
the framework of graph theory, where graph nodes represent
sensor channels, and graph edges represent the collaboration
between the corresponding sensor channels in the
classification process. The sensor channels are first ordered
based on their task sensitivities. A directed graph is then
constructed that encodes the node ordering knowledge into
the graph topology. Using the constructed graph, the
proposed approach selects the most appropriate channels to
identify the current cognition task. For an EEG sensor with
14 channels, the proposed approach utilizes only 7 channels
TABLE 2 THE NEURAL NETWORK CLASSIFICATION
ACCURACY OF THE FIVE SUBJECTS

TABLE 3 OVERALL CLASSIFICATION ACCURACY OF THE
DBCS ALGORITHM

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

Figure 3. Channel utilization for all subjects

(i.e., 50% channel utilization), in the worst case scenario,
and it yields classification accuracy at 81%. In future
work,feature selection component can be incorporated
within the proposed approach to enhance the model
performance in terms of classification accuracy.

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

II.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This work was made possible by NPRP 7 - 684 - 1 - 127
from the Qatar National Research Fund (a member of Qatar
Foundation). The statements made herein are solely the
responsibility of the authors.

[13]

[14]

REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

Mohamed, A., Shaban, K. B., Mohamed, A.: Evidence Theory-based
Approach for Epileptic Seizure Detection using EEG Signals. In: 21th
IEEE International Conference on Data Mining Workshops, pp. 7985. IEEE (2012)
Bashashati, A., Fatourechi, M., Ward, R. K., Birch, G. E.: A Survey
of Signal Processing Algorithms in Brain-Computer Interfaces based
on Electrical Brain Signals. Neural Engineering 4, no. 2 (2007): R32.
E. Reuses, W. Joseph, B. Latre, B. Braem, G. Vermeeren, E. TAnghe,
L. Martens, I. Moerman, C. Blondia.: Characterization of On-body
Communication Channel and Energy Topology Design for Wireless
Body Area Networks, IEEE Transactions on Information Technology
in Biomedicine 13 (6) (2009) 933-945.
A. Ehyaie, M. Hashemi, P. Khadivi, Using Relay Network to Increase
Life Time in Wireless Body Area Sensor Networks, in: Proc. Of
WoWMM’09, Kos, Greece, 2009, pp. 1-6.

[15]

[16]

[17]

Marinkovic, S. J., Popovici, E. M., Spagnol, C., Faul, S., Marnane,
W. P.: Energy-Efficient Low Duty Cycle MAC Protocol for Wireless
Body Area Networks. IEEE Transactions on Information Technology
in Biomedicine. 13(6), 915-925 (2009)
Omeni, O., Wong, A., Burdett, A. J., Toumazou, C.: Energy Efficient
Medium Access Protocol for Wireless Medical Body Area Sensor
Networks. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Circuits and Systems.
2(4), 251-259 (2008)
Daly, D. C., Anantha P. C.: An Energy-Efficient OOK Transceiver
for Wireless Sensor Networks. IEEE Journal of Solid-state Circuits.
42.5, 1003-1011(2007)
E. I. Shih, A. H. Shoeb, and J. V. Guttag. Sensor selection for energyefficient ambulatory medical monitoring. In Proc. of the 7th
international Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications and
Services, pages 347–358, 2009.
Cecotti H, Rivet B, Congedo M, Jutten C, Bertrand O, et al.: A
Robust Sensor Selection Method for P300 Brain-Computer Interfaces.
J. Neural Eng. (2011) 8: 016001.
Minpeng Xu, et al.: Channel Selection Based on Phase Measurement
in P300-Based Brain-Computer Interface. PLoS ONE 8 (4): e60608.
Doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0060608.
Lal T., Schroder M., Hinterberger T., Weston J., Bogdan B.,
Scholkopf B.: Support Vector Channel Selection in BCI. IEEE
Transaction on Biomedical Engineering, Vol. 51, No. 6, 2004.
Peters B., Pfurtscheller G., Flyvbjerg H.: Automatic Differentiation of
Multichannel EEG Signals IEEE Transactions on Biomedical
Engineering, Vol. 48, No. 1, 2001.
Ansari-Asl K., Chanel G., Pun T.: A Channel Selection Method for
EEG Classification in Emotion Assessment Based on
Synchronization Likelihood. 15th European Signal Processing
Conference, 2007.
Lan T., Erdogmus D., Adami A., Pavel M., Mathan S.: Salient EEG
Channel Selection in Brain Computer Interfaces by Mutual
Information Maximization. Proceedings of the IEEE Engineering in
Medicine and Biology 27th Annual Conference, 2005.
Ong K., Thung K., Wee C., Paramesran R. Selection of a Subset of
EEG Channels using PCA to Classify Alcoholics and Non-alcoholics.
Proceedings of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology 27th
Annual Conference, 2005.
Mohamed, Abduljalil, Khaled Bashir Shaban, and Amr Mohamed.
"Bayesian Network Based Heuristic for Energy Aware EEG Signal
Classification." Brain and Health Informatics. Springer International
Publishing, 2013. 246-255.
Mierswa, I., Wurst, M., Klinkenberg, R., Scholz, M., Euler, T.: Yale:
Rapid Prototyping for Complex Data Mining Tasks. In: Proceedings
of the 12th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge
discovery and data mining, pp. 935-940. ACM (2006).

