1

Steady State Visually Evoked Potentials detection
using a single electrode consumer-grade EEG
device for BCI applications
Enrico Calore

arXiv:1611.04833v1 [cs.HC] 15 Nov 2016

(This work was conducted between 2013 and 2014)

Abstract—Brain-Computer Interfaces (BCIs) implement a direct communication pathway between the brain of an user and
an external device, as a computer or a machine in general. One
of the most used brain responses to implement non-invasive BCIs
is the so called steady-state visually evoked potential (SSVEP).
This periodic response is generated when an user gazes to a
light flickering at a constant frequency. The SSVEP response
can be detected in the user’s electroencephalogram (EEG) at
the corresponding frequency of the attended flickering stimulus.
In SSVEP based BCIs, multiple stimuli, flickering at different
frequencies, are commonly presented to the user, where to each
stimulus is associated a command for an actuator. One of the
limitations to a wider adoption of BCIs is given by the need of
EEG acquisition devices and software tools which are commonly
not meant for end-user usage. In this work, exploiting stateof-the-art software tools, the use of a low cost easy to wear
single electrode EEG device is demonstrated to be exploitable
to implement simple SSVEP based BCIs. The obtained results,
although less impressive than the ones obtainable with professional EEG equipment, are interesting in view of practical low
cost BCI applications meant for end-users.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Brain-Computer Interfaces (BCIs) implement a direct communication pathway between the brain of an user and an
external device, as a computer or a machine in general [1].
The purpose of a BCI is to translate a detectable brain state
of the user in a command for an actuator, providing the user
with a real-time feedback. BCIs may record the brain activity
of their users with different methods, but the most used is
electroencephalography (EEG). EEG recording of the neural
activity allow for non-invasive recordings with a relatively high
time resolution and the use of relatively inexpensive devices,
with respect to other methods.
Initial research regarding BCIs aimed to provide mobilityimpaired users with a tool capable of translating a thought or
a will into a command for an external device or a prosthetic
limb. Nevertheless, more recently, BCIs are gaining attention
also as new means to interact with computers and other devices
for healthy subjects too [2].
In literature, different BCI modalities have been successfully
adopted and differentiate between them accordingly to the
kind of underlying brain process that is investigated to detect
This work was conducted when E. Calore was a PhD student with the
Department of Computer Science, Università degli Studi di Milano, Via
Comelico 39/41, I-20135 Milan, Italy.
E. Calore is now a Research Assistant with Università degli Studi di Ferrara,
Via Saragat 1, I-44122 Ferrara, Italy. (e-mail: enrico.calore@unife.it)

features associated to brain states. The most popular are
the P300 or Event Related Potentials (ERP), Motor Imagery
(MI) or Event Related Synchronization/De-synchronization
(ERS/ERDS) and Steady-State Visually Evoked Potentials.
BCIs could be further divided into three main categories,
with smooth boundaries [3]; every modality may fit inside
one of these category, accordingly to how it is used, although
not every modality is suitable for every category:
•

•

•

Active BCIs derive their outputs from brain activity
which is directly consciously controlled by the user,
independently from external events, for controlling an
application.
Reactive BCIs derive their outputs from brain activity arising in reaction to external stimulation, which
is indirectly modulated by the user for controlling an
application.
Passive BCIs derive their outputs from arbitrary brain
activity without the purpose of voluntary control, for
enriching a human-computer interaction with implicit
information.

The performance of a consciously controlled BCI (Active
or Reactive) is commonly given in terms of its Information
Transfer Rate (ITR). The ITR value has been introduced
in order to take into account both the speed of a BCI in
detecting a user command and its accuracy in detecting the
correct command [4]. BCI research is consequently strongly
focused on the improvement of the detection accuracy and the
time needed to issue a command. Both of these factors are
strongly dependent on the acquired signals quality, as well as
the efficiency of the feature extraction algorithms, machine
learning methods and the potential training of the users.
Other performance metrics for a BCI could be its cost in
terms of hardware, or its ease of use, concerning the time to
wear the electrodes system and the training time needed for
calibrations or for the user to learn to modify her/his brain
activity to issue commands.
One of the limitations to a wider adoption of BCIs is given
by the need of data acquisition devices which are commonly
not meant for end-user usage, requiring trained technicians
to use them and moreover being orders of magnitude more
expensive than ordinary interaction devices. Furthermore, only
recently general purpose BCI software frameworks are being
developed in order to provide user friendly tools for nonprogrammers.

2

The aim of this work is indeed to exploit state-of-the-art
software tools and feature extraction algorithms in order to
investigate the feasibility of an easy to use BCI, minimizing
the hardware cost and the user time needed for the system set
up.
In particular a low cost easy to wear single electrode EEG
device is investigated in order to implement a Reactive BCI
based on the SSVEP response detection.
II. SSVEP BASED BCI S
In this research work the SSVEP modality, commonly used
to implement Reactive BCIs, has been chosen because of its
high reachable ITR, the short calibration time needed, the low
number of EEG electrodes required and also for the low BCI
illiteracy showed [5], granting high usability for most of the
users, also in out-of-laboratory environments. In fact, in the
last years the SSVEP response has been adopted widely for
the implementation of Reactive BCIs [6].
Steady-state VEP (SSVEP) are a particular case of Visually
Evoked Potentials (VEP), where the visual stimulus is presented several times at a frequency at least higher than 3.5Hz,
but more commonly higher than 6Hz. In this case, a quasisinusoidal periodic response called SSVEP can be observed in
the scalp recorded EEG signals, in particular over the occipital
brain region, where the visual cortex resides.
The stimulus presented to elicit a SSVEP response is
commonly a flickering light and accordingly to the flickering
frequency, in the EEG signals acquired from an user looking
at the stimulus an increase in the power at the corresponding
frequency (and harmonics) can be detected. Consequently in
the case of SSVEP, the presence of the response can be
detected analyzing the frequency spectrum of the recorded
signal.
In presence of multiple stimuli, flickering at different frequencies in the visual field of the user, the increase of the
signal power in the same frequencies of the stimuli is more
pronounced in the single frequency corresponding to the single
stimulus the user is gazing at.
Thanks to this observation, Reactive BCIs can be implemented using this modality, since the user, gazing at a
particular stimulus chosen from the presented ones, can issue
to the system a command previously associated to the stimulus.
For BCI applications, stimuli are commonly presented by
LED lights, or by shapes on a regular computer monitor,
flickering at frequencies ranging between 6Hz and 40Hz. The
provided visual stimuli characteristics are known to be highly
relevant concerning the SSVEP response amplitude, indeed
their frequency stability as well as their size (in terms of user
visual angle), color, duty cycle, modulation depth, etc. have to
be carefully controlled to obtain a stronger response and thus
an easier detection [7].
Data acquisition is commonly performed placing electrodes
over the visual cortex in the occipital region of the user’s brain
using multiple electrodes EEG devices.
The SSVEP signal processing could be very simple and lot
of SSVEP based BCIs implemented so far simply filter the
raw EEG signals with narrow band-pass filters, centered on

the stimuli frequencies, to later estimate the signal power in
the frequency regions corresponding to the different stimuli.
Features corresponding to the power in the different frequency
bands can then be used to detect the gazed target using a
previously trained classifier.
Anyhow, it has been demonstrated that better performances
can be obtained using more sophisticated methods as: evaluating the signal power also on higher harmonics for each
stimulation frequency [8]; merging the information coming
from different electrodes using spatial filters [9], [10]; or using
as features SNR indexes representing the ratio between the
SSVEP response power and the stimulus-uncorrelated brain
activity occurring in the same frequency band [10].
The adoption of sophisticated signal processing methods
do not commonly introduce complexity from the user point
of view, on the other side it commonly improve the BCI
performance, thus, as will be highlighted in this work, it
permits to obtain a fair performance also when using lower
quality EEG signals.
III. T OWARDS PRACTICAL BCI S
Conductive gel based EEG electrodes represent the stateof-the-art in terms of signals acquisition quality [11], despite
of this, the montage of EEG cups adopting them commonly
requires a trained technician and moreover users need to wash
their hair after usage. Just the fact that the user would need
another person to mount the EEG headset on her/him is
a strong limitation for end-user applications, as is also the
high cost of electroencephalographers with respect to other
interaction devices.
Custom hardware is being investigated [12] in order to
provide easier to use devices by means of dry electrodes or
salted-water based electrodes and also industrial companies are
working towards this direction (as Emotiv, Neurosky, Biosemi,
g.Tec, etc.). To exploit easy to wear EEG devices is indeed one
of the most challenging research directions towards practical
BCIs in the last years [13], [14].
Professional general purpose EEG headsets, implementing dry electrodes, are already available (e.g. the g.Tec
g.SAHARA system), but from their cost and their complexity
(e.g. the need to choose electrodes positions, connect the
electrodes to the amplifiers, etc.) is clear that they are still
meant to be used mainly by BCI and clinical researchers, but
not end-users.
New kind of EEG devices, meant to improve the usability
by non-trained end-users, recently appeared on the market;
they are commonly characterized by a rigid structure where
electrodes are fixed on a pre-determined position and could be
worn by the user himself without the need of external help.
These devices commonly adopt dry electrodes or water-based
electrode technologies in order to not slime the user’s hair,
renouncing to the higher signal quality given by the use of
conductive gel, but improving users’ comfort.
A famous commercial device of this kind is the Emotiv
EPOC 1 which is a salted-water based 14-electrodes system,
1 http://www.emotiv.com/epoc/

3

that for example has been recently successfully used to implement SSVEP based BCIs [14], [15].
One of the less expensive devices of this kind is the Mindset
single dry electrode system provided by Neurosky Inc. which
looks like regular headphones, a part from an additional
arm holding a dry EEG electrode to be positioned on the
forehead. It was designed to provide an additional interaction
mean for generic computer application, e.g. computer games,
implementing Active BCIs where the user can learn, using
a bio-feedback approach, how to control her/his own brain
activity and thus the features extracted from it. The features
extracted from the raw EEG data are computed by a proprietary algorithm, which is known to compute indexes based on
relative clinical band power ratios, but no more details were
disclosed about it by its manufacturer. Interestingly raw EEG
data can be read-out from this device as well.
The Mindset is clearly not designed to detect SSVEP
responses, but in view of more practical BCIs, it would be
very interesting if the Mindset could be used also for SSVEP
based BCIs, thanks to its extremely low cost and for its ease
to be wear. In particular, in contrast to the Active BCI its
manufacturer had in mind, it would be very interesting to be
able to use it for Reactive BCIs based on the SSVEP modality,
since it would avoid the need of subject training. Applications
where a generic naive user could just wear it in order to be
able to use the BCI, would be possible.
Anyhow, to use the Mindset for this purpose various challenges has to be faced: having a single electrode it will not
allow to exploit spatial filtering algorithms [9]; having a dry
electrode it will provide a noisier signal than gel or water
based ones [11] and moreover, as already mentioned, wearing
it as indicated by its manufacturer, the electrode would be
positioned on the forehead (roughly at Fp1 with respect to the
10-20 positioning system) and thus very far from the visual
cortex where SSVEP responses are more intense [6].
IV. M ATERIAL AND M ETHODS
A. Stimuli presentation
In the performed experiments, the flickering stimuli presentation was provided on a regular 60 Hz LCD computer monitor
(HP LP2065) thanks to a custom developed C++/OpenGL software [16]. The used flickering stimulus was a squared white
patch subtending 5◦ of the user visual angle. To achieve an
optimal stimuli presentation, the flickering frequency control
was synchronized to the vertical screen refresh as suggested
in [17].
The duty cycle of the stimulus was tuned for best performances according to the results discussed in [18] and was 50%
for the 15 Hz stimulation frequency and 40% for the 12 Hz one
(since in this case a 50% duty cycle is not possible due to the
integer odd number of frames given a 60 Hz screen refresh).
B. Data acquisition
The EEG signal acquisition was performed using the MindSet device already mentioned. Its single electrode is designed
to be positioned on the forehead, roughly at the Fp1 position.
It acquires the EEG signal band-pass filtered between 3 Hz and

Fig. 1. Figure depicting an user wearing the Neurosky MindSet device
“reversed”, with its electrode backward facing, positioned roughly at P2
location (according to the extended 10-20 system), over the parietal lobe of
the cerebral cortex.

100 Hz at a sampling rate of 512 Hz, digitizing it at 12 bit. It
can be connected to a computer for data acquisition using a
Bluetooth connection. It incorporates a notch filter to remove
power-line artifacts and implements proprietary algorithms for
further signal cleaning and feature extraction. In addition to the
single acquisition electrode, the MindSet has also three other
contacts positioned over the left ear of the subject, which are
used as ground and reference electrodes. In particular, a part
from the raw filtered EEG signal, it provides also proprietary
dimensionless features representing the power strength in the
clinical frequency bands and also two 1 Hz sampled signals
called e-Sense Attention and e-Sense Meditation values. The
Attention and Meditation values are computed thanks to a
proprietary algorithm and very few information are available
about their actual meaning. In the manufacturer intention,
the subject wearing this device should be able to learn to
control these two values in order to be able to use Active
BCI applications after several hours of training.
Data acquisition and software triggering handling, was
performed using the OpenVibe software framework [19]. Interestingly the MindSet has an automatic on-line check to detect
the contact quality between the skin and the electrodes, that,
instead of an impedance value as is commonly used, returns
a SNR between what a proprietary algorithm considers as the
EEG signal and what it identifies as artifacts. This value can
be acquired by OpenVibe too and displayed in real-time to the
user while wearing the device.
To overcome the wrong positioning of the MindSet’s electrode for SSVEP response detection, experiments was conducted using the MindSet on the subjects head, wearing
it “reversed”, letting the single electrode to be positioned
backward and the reference/ground electrodes over the right
ear. In this manner, as shown in Fig. 1, the electrode is roughly
positioned near P2 (according to the extended 10-20 system),
which is a much more suitable location to detect the SSVEP
response, although not the optimal one [6].
Being the MindSet electrode meant to be positioned on the
forehead, its shape is not appropriate to have a connection to
the scalp where hair is present. To overcome this problem a
droplet of conductive electrode gel was used to improve the
contact. Although consequences in terms of impedance could
not be assessed due to the proprietary hardware (electrodeskin impedance could not be measured and the amplifier input
impedance is unknown), experimental results, as exposed in

4

the next section, confirm that this procedure improve the
acquisition signal quality. In order to have a similar impedance
also on ground and reference electrodes, a very small amount
of gel was positioned also on them.
Despite of the use of a little amount of conductive gel, wearing the MindSet remains much easier than wearing ordinary
gel based EEG devices and it could be easily done by the
subject himself with no need of external help. Moreover, the
small amount of gel to be used, do not force the subject to
have a shower right after the use of the device.
The user, as already mentioned, could use the automatic
impedance checker, implemented in the device, in order to
assess the quality of the electrodes contact, which was reported
in real-time and displayed by the acquisition software.
Montage of the device was in the range of about 0.5 min to
3 min, according to the hair volume of the user.
The study was conducted in accordance with the recommendations of the Declaration of Helsinki and before the
experiment, all participants signed the informed consent.
C. Signal Processing
The features describing the SSVEP response intensity were
computed using the T test statistic described in [10], where
one of the best performing spatial filtering methods [9] known
as Minimum Energy Combination was proposed. Having the
MindSet a single electrode, spatial filtering is not possible, but
the same approach discussed in [10] was used to separate the
SSVEP response contribution from the stimulus-uncorrelated
brain activity.
The acquired EEG signal can be modeled as shown in Eq. 1,
adapted from the multi-channel signal model described in [10].

s(t) =

Nh
X

ak sin(2πkf t + φk ) +

X

bj zj (t) + e(t)

(1)

j

k=1

The first component of s(t) is the actual SSVEP response
of interest, which is characterized by a set of sinusoids with
frequency f and its k harmonics, each of which has a specific
amplitude ak and phase φk . The second component of the
model is a set of signals zj (t), scaled by the weighting factors
bj , which are unrelated to the SSVEP response and comprise
concurrent brain activity and internal as external artifacts.
These signals are present. Eventually, the last component e(t)
is a measurement noise component.
In vector form, the model can be expressed as s = xa +
zb+e and an estimate of the stimulus-uncorrelated component
can be obtained as shown in Eq. 2.
s̃ = s − x(x> x)−1 x> s ≈ zb + e

(2)

Given this model, the actual T statistic to be used as a feature,
can be computed as shown in Eq. 3:
T =

Nh
P̂k
1 X
Nh
σ̂k2

(3)

k=1

where P̂k is the estimated SSVEP power for the k-th harmonic
frequency in channel signal s and σ̂k2 is an estimate of the

Fig. 2. The PSD spectrum of the EEG signal acquired by the Mindset device
positioned on the scalp of a subject gazing at a 15 Hz flickering white patch
on a regular 60 Hz screen for 30 s.

noise and uncorrelated brain activity in the same frequency.
In other words, the T statistic estimates how many time larger
is the SSVEP response power compared to the case where no
visual stimulus is present, averaging the SNRs ratios across
Nh harmonics.
The power P̂k in the k-th harmonic is estimated as P̂k =
2
kx>
k sk , while, in order to avoid the need of calibration data
acquired with no stimuli presentation and also to take into
2
account the nonstationarity of the noise, the noise power σ̂k,l
is estimated on the same data segment, containing the SSVEP
response, used to compute P̂k .
The SSVEP contribution is therefore removed from the
signal as shown in Eq. 2 to later fit an auto-regressive model
AR(p) of order p and use the fitted models to interpolate the
noise power in the SSVEP frequencies. The AR(p) models are
fitted using the Wiener-Khinchin theorem for computing the
autocovariance of the signal and then solving the Yule-Walker
equations using a Levinson-Durbin recursion [10]. This yields
the AR(p) parameters α1 , α2 , . . . , αp as well as an estimate of
the variance σ̂ 2 of the white noise driving the AR(p) process.
Once fitted the model to the signal s, the noise level estimated
at the k-th harmonic is given by:
σ̂k2 =

πNt
σ̂ 2
Pp
4 |1 + j=1 αj exp (−2πijkf /Fs )|2

(4)

where Nt are the signal samples, k is the harmonic number,
f is the stimulation frequency
in Hz, Fs is the sampling
√
frequency in Hz and i = −1.
V. P ERFORMED EXPERIMENTS
As a preliminary test to assess the possibility to record a
SSVEP response using the MindSet unconventionally wore, as
shown in Fig. 1, one subject was visually stimulated with a
15 Hz flickering white patch displayed on a screen and the PSD
of its acquired EEG signal was computed off-line taking the
FFT of the 60 s signal auto-correlation. As shown in Fig. 2, the
proposed setup led to a clear detection of a SSVEP response
to the 15 Hz stimulation; peaks at the fundamental frequency
and first harmonics are visible.
Knowing that the SSVEP response could be recorded with
the MindSet, further experiments have been conducted to
identify the shortest signal length able to lead to a classification

5

Fig. 3. Test statistic T computed for the two frequencies for every two seconds
non-overlapping window of EEG signal. Blu points are epochs with a 15Hz
stimulation, while red points are epochs with a 12Hz stimulation. Plotted data
correspond to 10 trials acquired from one subject, for a total of 150 epochs
(75 for each frequency).

accuracy high enough for BCI applications. Having BCIs to
be quasi real-time by definition, a SSVEP response detection
has to be performed using at most few seconds long signal
windows. The ITR is indeed dependent on the accuracy, but
on the detection speed as well.
In a similar fashion as performed in [10], multiple subjects
were visually stimulated for 30 s for each trial for two different
stimulation frequencies, chosen as 12 Hz and 15 Hz, while
recording their EEG with the MindSet. Four trials have been
recorded for each subject in order to have a total of 30 s +
30 s recording for each stimulation frequency.
Off-line analysis was then performed, computing the T
test statistic reported in Eq. 3 setting Nh = 2, for both the
stimulation frequencies, for each signal window, irrespective
of the actual stimulation frequency. The same operation was
performed for 1 s non-overlapping signal windows and then
again, using 2 s non-overlapping signal windows.
Each signal window could be labeled with three values:
< f, T12 , T15 >, the actual stimulation frequency f and the
two T features representing the detected SSVEP response
respectively for the two stimulation frequencies.
Information coming from the first trial for each subject and
each stimulation frequency was used to train a simple linear
least squares binary classifier, while information coming from
the second trial was used to test it. The datasets were not
randomized between trials, since in an actual BCI application
the training data would be acquired before the BCI use, so the
same approach has been followed.
VI. R ESULTS
Data points computed using two second signal windows,
for one subject, are reported in Fig. 3, where the points
color represents the actual stimulation frequency f during the
epoch, while the points coordinates are the computed features
(T12 , T15 ).
As can be seen, a linear classification between the epochs
acquired under the two different stimulation frequencies seems
to be feasible, despite of the short signal window (considering
the used acquisition device).

Fig. 4. Test statistic T computed for the two frequencies for every one second
non-overlapping window of EEG signal. Blu points are epochs with a 15Hz
stimulation, while red points are epochs with a 12Hz stimulation. Plotted data
correspond to 10 trials acquired from one subject, for a total of 300 epochs
(150 for each frequency).
TABLE I
C LASSIFICATION ACCURACY. R ESULTS ARE REPORTED FOR
NON - OVERLAPPING ONE SECOND AND TWO SECONDS SIGNAL WINDOWS .

Subject
Subject
Subject
Subject
Subject
Subject

1
2
3
4
5
6

1 s windows

2 s windows

90%
83%
74%
70%
69%
50%

93%
90%
87%
80%
83%
48%

Using the same approach, the data points computed using
one second signal window, on the same dataset are reported
in Fig. 4.
As can be seen, as expected using a shorter signal window,
in this case, a linear classification would produce a lower
accuracy, but nevertheless it seems to be feasible.
The classifier training was performed using the first trial
acquired for each of the two frequencies, while the remaining
two trials where used as test sets; results for the different
subjects are reported in Tab. I.
According to the reported results, for 5 subjects out of 6 the
SSVEP response can be detected with a reasonable accuracy.
As expected, using 2 seconds epochs lead to better results
for all the subject a part for the 6th one. For the 6th subject,
a manual inspection of the data points revealed that the two
point clouds, relative to the two stimulation frequencies, are
not separable for all the acquired trials. The reason may be a
SSVEP based BCI illiteracy of the subject, a very low attention
payed to the flickering target or a particularly inefficient
electrode location for the particular subject.
Concerning the classification accuracy, it is worth to mention that it has been computed using non-overlapping windows,
but, when implementing SSVEP based BCIs, is a common
practice to compute the SSVEP response index (e.g. the
frequencies power or the T test statistic, as in this case) for
sliding windows and then to evaluate the computed value for
several subsequent windows. This leads to a smoother output,
lowering the effect of false-positive detections which may be
computed in a single signal window. In this work this approach

6

was not used to compute the values in Tab. I, since it would
have been not a fair way to evaluate the classification accuracy,
in the sense that multiple points would have been computed
from the same parts of acquired signal.
VII. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
With the previously described experiment has been demonstrated that using a popular single electrode consumer-grade
EEG acquisition device is possible to detect a SSVEP response. Moreover, despite of the not optimal electrode position
and its physical shape, has been demonstrated that, using a
state-of-the-art signal processing technique, the signal window
length needed to accurately detect the SSVEP response could
be short enough for BCI applications.
Moreover, in an actual SSVEP based BCI application
adopting the proposed method, the real-time feedback, which
was not presented in the performed experiments, as already
demonstrated in other contexts [20], should increase the users’
SSVEP response intensity and thus enhance the detection
accuracy and/or shorten the needed signal windows.
The reported results highlight the feasibility to implement
a simple SSVEP based BCI using the MindSet device and the
presented signal processing method. This is interesting due to
the wide diffusion and affordable cost of this device.
Even more interestingly, this work highlights the possibility
to design new simple single electrode devices with a more
suitable electrode position for the SSVEP detection and also
adopting a specific electrode shape to let it be positioned where
hair is present without the need of conductive gel.
R EFERENCES
[1] J. R. Wolpaw, N. Birbaumer, D. J. McFarland, G. Pfurtscheller, T. M.
Vaughan et al., “Brain-computer interfaces for communication and
control,” Clinical neurophysiology, vol. 113, no. 6, pp. 767–791, 2002.
[2] J. van Erp, F. Lotte, and M. Tangermann, “Brain-Computer Interfaces:
Beyond Medical Applications,” Computer, vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 26–34,
2012.
[3] T. O. Zander, C. Kothe, S. Jatzev, and M. Gaertner, Enhancing humancomputer interaction with input from active and passive brain-computer
interfaces, ser. Human-Computer Interaction Series. Springer, 2010,
pp. 181–199.
[4] D. J. McFarland, W. A. Sarnacki, J. R. Wolpaw et al., “Brain-computer
interface (BCI) operation: optimizing information transfer rates,” Biological psychology, vol. 63, no. 3, pp. 237–251, 2003.
[5] C. Guger, B. Z. Allison, B. Grosswindhager, R. Prückl, C. Hintermüller,
C. Kapeller, M. Bruckner, G. Krausz, and G. Edlinger, “How many
people could use an SSVEP BCI?” Frontiers in Neuroscience, vol. 6,
no. 169, 2012.
[6] F.-B. Vialatte, M. Maurice, J. Dauwels, and A. Cichocki, “Steady-state
visually evoked potentials: focus on essential paradigms and future
perspectives,” Progress in neurobiology, vol. 90, no. 4, pp. 418–438,
2010.
[7] J. Bieger, G. G. Molina, and D. Zhu, “Effects of Stimulation Properties in
Steady State Visual Evoked Potential Based Brain-Computer Interfaces,”
in 32nd Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in
Medicine and Biology Society, 2010.
[8] D. J. Krusienski and B. Z. Allison, “Harmonic coupling of steadystate visual evoked potentials,” in Engineering in Medicine and Biology
Society, 2008. EMBS 2008. 30th Annual International Conference of the
IEEE, 2008, pp. 5037–5040.
[9] G. Garcia-Molina and D. Zhu, “Optimal spatial filtering for the steady
state visual evoked potential: BCI application,” in Neural Engineering
(NER), 2011 5th International IEEE/EMBS Conference on, 2011, pp.
156–160.

[10] O. Friman, I. Volosyak, and A. Graser, “Multiple Channel Detection of
Steady-State Visual Evoked Potentials for Brain-Computer Interfaces,”
Biomedical Engineering, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 742–
750, 2007.
[11] V. Mihajlović, G. Molina, and J. Peuscher, “To what extent can dry and
water-based EEG electrodes replace conductive gel ones?: A Steady
State Visual Evoked Potential Brain-computer Interface Case Study,” in
BIODEVICES 2012 - Proceedings of the International Conference on
Biomedical Electronics and Devices, 2012, pp. 14–26.
[12] T. O. Zander, M. Lehne, K. Ihme, S. Jatzev, J. Correia, C. Kothe,
B. Picht, and F. Nijboer, “A dry EEG-system for scientific research
and brain–computer interfaces,” Frontiers in neuroscience, vol. 5, 2011.
[13] V. Mihajlović, G. Garcia-Molina, and J. Peuscher, “Dry and Water-Based
EEG Electrodes in SSVEP-Based BCI Applications,” in Biomedical
Engineering Systems and Technologies. Springer, 2013, pp. 23–40.
[14] N. Chumerin, N. Manyakov, M. van Vliet, A. Robben, A. Combaz, and
M. Van Hulle, “Steady-State Visual Evoked Potential-Based Computer
Gaming on a Consumer-Grade EEG Device,” Computational Intelligence and AI in Games, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 100–
110, 2013.
[15] Y. Liu, X. Jiang, T. Cao, F. Wan, P. U. Mak, P.-I. Mak, and M. I. Vai,
“Implementation of SSVEP based BCI with Emotiv EPOC,” in Virtual
Environments Human-Computer Interfaces and Measurement Systems
(VECIMS), 2012 IEEE International Conference on. IEEE, 2012, pp.
34–37.
[16] E. Calore, “Towards SSVEP based Brain-Computer Interfaces for Virtual
Reality environments explicit and implicit interaction,” Ph.D. dissertation, Università degli Studi di Milano, 2014.
[17] H. Cecotti, I. Volosyak, A. Graser et al., “Reliable visual stimuli on
LCD screens for SSVEP based BCI,” in In Proc. of the 18th European
Signal Processing Conference (EUSIPCO-2010), 2010.
[18] G. Huang, L. Yao, D. Zhang, and X. Zhu, “Effect of duty cycle
in different frequency domains on SSVEP based BCI: A preliminary
study,” in Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), 2012
Annual International Conference of the IEEE, 2012, pp. 5923–5926.
[19] Y. Renard, F. Lotte, G. Gibert, M. Congedo, E. Maby, V. Delannoy,
O. Bertrand, and A. Lécuyer, “Openvibe: An open-source software
platform to design, test, and use brain–computer interfaces in real and
virtual environments,” Presence: Teleoper. Virtual Environ., vol. 19,
no. 1, pp. 35–53, Feb. 2010.
[20] F. Lotte, J. Faller, C. Guger, Y. Renard, G. Pfurtscheller, A. Lécuyer, and
R. Leeb, “Combining BCI with virtual reality: Towards new applications
and improved BCI,” in Towards Practical Brain-Computer Interfaces.
Springer, 2013, ch. 10, pp. 197–220.

