Journal of Neurotherapy: Investigations in
Neuromodulation, Neurofeedback and Applied
Neuroscience
Neurofeedback 2.0?
Martijn Arns a & Dirk De Ridder b
a
Senior Editor
b
University Hospital Antwerp
Published online: 20 May 2011.
To cite this article: Martijn Arns & Dirk De Ridder (2011) Neurofeedback 2.0?, Journal of Neurotherapy: Investigations in
Neuromodulation, Neurofeedback and Applied Neuroscience, 15:2, 91-93, DOI: 10.1080/10874208.2011.570690
To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10874208.2011.570690

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE
© International Society for Neurofeedback and Research (ISNR), all rights reserved. This article (the “Article”) may be
accessed online from ISNR at no charge. The Article may be viewed online, stored in electronic or physical form, or
archived for research, teaching, and private study purposes. The Article may be archived in public libraries or university
libraries at the direction of said public library or university library. Any other reproduction of the Article for redistribution,
sale, resale, loan, sublicensing, systematic supply, or other distribution, including both physical and electronic
reproduction for such purposes, is expressly forbidden. Preparing or reproducing derivative works of this article is
expressly forbidden. ISNR makes no representation or warranty as to the accuracy or completeness of any content in the
Article. From 1995 to 2013 the Journal of Neurotherapy was the official publication of ISNR (www. Isnr.org); on April 27,
2016 ISNR acquired the journal from Taylor & Francis Group, LLC. In 2014, ISNR established its official open-access journal
NeuroRegulation (ISSN: 2373-0587; www.neuroregulation.org).
THIS OPEN-ACCESS CONTENT MADE POSSIBLE BY THESE GENEROUS SPONSORS

Journal of Neurotherapy, 15:91–93, 2011
Copyright # 2011 ISNR. All rights reserved.
ISSN: 1087-4208 print=1530-017X online
DOI: 10.1080/10874208.2011.570690

EDITORIAL
NEUROFEEDBACK 2.0?

The invention of the printing press in the
late 15th century gave rise to the possibility
of printing books. Later, however, this process was further automated and perfected
giving rise to many new—and more rapidly
changing—content by means of newspapers,
magazines, and so forth, which in turn made
the media more ‘‘personal’’ by having different
newspapers per political stream and possibilities of submitting letters to the editor, among
other things. Looking at the history and future
of neurofeedback in the broadest sense, it is
also important to be aware of our past, in order
to better judge what will be happening in the
future. In Volume 14, Issue 4, Martijn Arns
introduced the Historical Archives feature.
Some of the early works on classical conditioning from the 1940s were summarized (Arns,
2010), also called ‘‘associative learning’’ of
the alpha blocking response (Jasper & Shagass,
1941a). In 1949, Jasper and Shagass (1941b)
demonstrated for the first time ‘‘voluntary control’’ of the EEG, based on classical conditioning principles. Later, in 1962, Wyrwicka and
Sterman replicated this principle of classical
conditioning using electrical stimulation of the
basal forebrain. They paired the electrical brain
stimulation to an auditory stimulus, and
eventually the auditory stimulus alone triggered the sleep preparatory behavior initially
observed after the basal forebrain stimulation
(Wyrwicka, Sterman, & Clemente, 1962). In
that same year Joe Kamiya presented his first
results on ‘‘voluntary control’’ of the alpha
rhythm (Kamiya, 2011), which was followed
by Sterman’s first report of operant conditioning of the SMR rhythm (Wyrwicka &
Sterman, 1968), which was found to exert anticonvulsant effects (Sterman, LoPresti, &
Fairchild, 2010). Since these early days—also

Our field is developing rapidly without many of
us being fully aware of the fundamental progress taking place at the time of writing. In
1999 the web was developing at a fast pace
and becoming widely known by the general
public. However, most of the regular users in
those years were not fully aware of the fundamental change the Internet was going through,
from Web 1.0 to Web 2.0.
In the 1990s the Internet was a source of
information enabling people to exchange information via e-mail. This is currently referred to
as Web 1.0, first coined by DiNucci (1999).
At that time the Internet was rather passive.
Many companies had a website posting information. Nowadays, Web 2.0 is a completely
different Internet, more personally oriented,
more interactive, as people can place their
minute-to-minute experiences online (using
services like Facebook, Twitter, and LinkedIn),
where virtually everyone has a web presence
by means of a blog, personal website, or YouTube video. Furthermore, much of the data
and software used by our personal computers
are stored and retrieved from ‘‘the cloud,’’ that
is, word-processing tools in a web browser, and
data retrieval is done without need of locally
installed software. Also, the first Internet TVs
have been announced by Google, demonstrating how far the Internet is penetrating our lives.
Who would have envisioned in 1999 that right
now 6% to 8% of all sales would consist of
e-commerce sales (Forrester, 2009)? That our
children are broadcasting their everyday
experiences across the Internet using Twitter?
That a ‘‘Web 2.0 suicide machine’’ would exist
to delete all your social networking profiles
(http://www.suicidemachine.org)?
In view of the history of the media these
developments might come as less of a surprise.

91

92

by advances in computer technology—
neurofeedback has become widely used, both
clinically and as a research tool.
The recent National Institute of Mental
Health Multimodal Treatment Study of Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)
findings have been published at 8 years
follow-up, demonstrating that both medication
and behavior therapy do not result in clinical
benefits beyond 2 years (Molina et al., 2009),
which sparked the interest of many psychiatrists
investigating different treatment modalities
for the treatment of ADHD, neurofeedback
among them. Several known ADHD and autism
researchers such as the groups from Ohio State
University (Eugene Arnold and Nicholas
Lofthouse), Radboud University Nijmegen (Jan
Buitelaar), and University of California, Los
Angeles (Jaime Pineda) have all conducted
research into the utility of neurofeedback in
the treatment of ADHD and autism. In Internet
years, this marks the point of neurofeedback
1.0. The neurofeedback technology is known
everywhere, practiced widely, and more and
more accepted, although questions remain
and there is room for improvement.
At the beginning of this century we experienced the bursting of the Internet bubble; similarly, we may now expect a bursting of the
‘‘commercial neurofeedback 1.0 bubble’’
when many major electronics and toy companies such as Mattel, Neurosky, and Emotiv
(and other commercial providers selling ‘‘the
magic neurofeedback software that fixes all’’)
are hyping this technology, possibly leading to
yet another bubble bursting, explained by
either ‘‘underdelivery’’ or ‘‘unwanted side
effects’’ due to the large-scale and unsupervised use of neurofeedback technology.
So where would Neurofeedback 2.0 be
heading? Many of you are probably thinking . . . LORETA Neurofeedback? fMRI Neurofeedback? However, using the same analogy as
with Web 2.0, we should first look back rather
than forward! LORETA neurofeedback and
fMRI neurofeedback, although very promising,
are a modification and improvement on the
same theme, that is, more ‘‘processor intensive’’ but not a fundamental change. So where

M. ARNS AND D. DE RIDDER

did we start? Our field started with classical
conditioning, followed by pairing of stimuli to
specific brain stimulation: associative learning.
In the latest issue of Nature, Engineer et al.
(2011) pointed to a possible new direction of
where neurofeedback 2.0 might be going!
They employed simultaneous pairing of auditory stimuli with vagus nerve stimulation
(VNS). VNS was chosen as a ‘‘less invasive’’
method to directly trigger the release of neuromodulators known to promote plastic changes,
and VNS is also shown to result in desynchronized EEG (Engineer et al., 2011). In their first
experiment they demonstrated that the pairing
of VNS with a specific auditory stimulus
resulted in a drastic change in the plasticity of
the primary auditory cortex as shown on the
frequency map. In a second experiment they
used an animal model of noise-induced tinnitus and further tested if this technique could
renormalize the pathological plasticity and subsequently eliminate the tinnitus. In this part
they paired the VNS to multiple tones. So
essentially they are employing ‘‘associative
learning’’ principles, where an auditory stimulus is paired to specific brain stimulation
(VNS) capable of promoting cortical reorganization. This ‘‘associative learning’’ represents
a very basic neural principle, which has been
demonstrated in Aplysia Californica (a marine
invertebrate consisting of only 20,000 neurons;
Hawkins, Kandel, & Bailey, 2006) and could
also be explained by Hebbian plasticity (cells
that wire together, fire together). Hence in
neurofeedback there may have been an overfocus on ‘‘operant conditioning,’’ and we
should maybe investigate and explore more
the implications of associative learning.
The first two patients with tinnitus in Dirk
de Ridder’s Belgian clinic have been treated
in the way just described. A first clinical observation was that ‘‘the patient reported an
improvement, but was not Tinnitus-free,’’
demonstrating a proof-of-concept in humans.
So can we still call this neurofeedback? We
cannot call this ‘‘feedback,’’ but this form of
associative conditioning could lead the way for
further developments in neurofeedback. Pairing sounds with tinnitus-matched frequency to

EDITORIAL

93

negative feedback and sounds different from
the tinnitus pitch to positive feedback might
be worthwhile investigation—especially if combined with LORETA, which, for example, targeted dorsal cingulate activity. However, if we
consider neurofeedback to be a neuromodulation technique in which learning principles are
involved, this associative conditioning technique could be considered a form of neurofeedback. In analogy, in 1990, would we have
considered broadcasting ‘‘I just ate a sandwich’’
via Twitter to be Internet? Or rather a form of
radio broadcasting? Therefore, this might be a
first demonstration of ‘‘Neurofeedback 2.0,’’
which will be characterized by neuromodulation techniques combined with learning theory
principles, with a focus on ‘‘associative learning.’’ So let’s broaden our horizon and spot
the new developments!
Martijn Arns
Senior Editor
Dirk De Ridder
University Hospital Antwerp
REFERENCES
Arns, M. (2010). Historical archives: The
beginning. Journal of Neurotherapy, 14,
291–292.
DiNucci, D. (1999). Fragmented future. Print,
53(4), 32.
Engineer, N. D., Riley, J. R., Seale, J. D., Vrana,
W. A., Shetake, J. A., Sudanagunta, S. P., . . .
Kilgard, M. P. (2011). Reversing pathological
neural activity using targeted plasticity.
Nature, 470(7332), 101–104.

Forrester (2009). US eCommerce Forecast,
2008 to 2013.
Hawkins, R. D., Kandel, E. R., & Bailey, C. H.
(2006). Molecular mechanisms of memory
storage in aplysia. The Biological Bulletin,
210(3), 174–191.
Jasper, H., & Shagass, C. (1941a). Conditioning the occipital alpha rhythm in man.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 28,
373–387.
Jasper, H., & Shagass, C. (1941b). Conscious
time judgments related to conditioned time
intervals and voluntary control of the alpha
rhythm. Journal of Experimental Psychology,
28, 503–508.
Kamiya, J. (2011). The first communications
about operant conditioning of the EEG. Journal of Neurotherapy, 15(1), 65–73.
Molina, B. S., Hinshaw, S. P., Swanson, J. M.,
Arnold, L. E., Vitiello, B., Jensen, P. S., . . .
Houck, P. R. (2009). The MTA at 8 years:
Prospective follow-up of children treated for
combined-type ADHD in a multisite study.
Journal of the American Academy of Child
and Adolescent Psychiatry, 48, 484–500.
Sterman, M. B., LoPresti, R. W., & Fairchild, M.
D. (2010). Electroencephalographic and
behavioral studies of monomethylhydrazine
toxicity in the cat. Journal of Neurotherapy,
14, 293–300.
Wyrwicka, W., & Sterman, M. B. (1968).
Instrumental conditioning of sensorimotor
cortex EEG spindles in the waking cat. Physiology & Behavior, 3, 703–707.
Wyrwicka, W., Sterman, M. B., & Clemente, C.
D. (1962). Conditioning of induced electroencephalographic sleep patterns in the cat.
Science, 137, 616–618.

