Indonesian Journal of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Vol. 13, No. 2, February 2019, pp. 794~800
ISSN: 2502-4752, DOI: 10.11591/ijeecs.v13.i2.pp794-800



794

Detection of attention and meditation state-based brainwave
system to control prosthetic arm
Ahmad Danial, Abdul Rahman2, Hanim Hussin3
1,2,3Faculty

of Electrical Engineering, Universiti Teknologi Mara (UiTM), Selangor, Malaysia
3Integrated Microelectronics System and Application Research Group, Universiti Teknologi Mara (UiTM), Selangor,
Malaysia

Article Info

ABSTRACT

Article history:

Neurotechnology has led to the development of Brain-Computer Interfaces
(BCIs) or Brain-Machine Interfaces (BMIs) which are devices that use brain
transmission signal to operate. Electroencephalography (EEG) is one of the
recent methods that could retrieve transmission signal of the brain from scalp
safely. This paper will discuss the development of Neuroprosthetics limb by
using patients’ attention and meditation level to produce movement. The
main objective of this project is to restore mobility of patients that have
suffered from motor disabilities. This project is carried out by interfacing the
data acquisition device which is NeuroSky Mindwaves Headset with the
microcontroller to move the prosthetic arm as the output. Arduino Nano
microcontroller acts as data processing and a controller to the arm as the
output. The prosthetic arm is designed by using SOLIDWORKS software
and fabricated by 3D printed. From this project, the user will be able to
control the prosthetic arm ranging from rotating the hand to bending the
fingers creating a grasp and release gesture.

Received Oct 13, 2018
Revised Dec 14, 2018
Accepted Dec 28, 2018
Keywords:
Brain-computer interface (BCI)
Brain-machine interface (BMI)
Electroencephalography (EEG)
Neuroprosthetic
NeuroSky

Copyright © 2019 Institute of Advanced Engineering and Science.
All rights reserved.

Corresponding Author:
Hanim Hussin,
Faculty of Electrical Engineering,
Universiti Teknologi Mara (UiTM),
40450 Shah Alam, Selangor, Malaisia.
Email: hanimh@salam.uitm.edu.my

1.

INTRODUCTION
The brain is the fastest supercomputer on earth, which also the command center of the human
nervous system that controls everything in the human body including movement of a body. The building
blocks of the brain produce brainwaves signals when neurons communicating with each other. Brainwaves
are in the form of electrical pulses which measured in hertz (Hz). Types of brainwaves are classified based on
their frequencies which are Alpha, Beta, Theta, Delta, and Gamma. Each type of brainwave has its own
functions and different signal wave [1]. Alpha waves are generated when human are in the state of relaxation
or calmness and its frequency between 8 to 12Hz and 7 to 13 pulses per second. Beta waves have the fastest
waves between 12 to 38 Hz frequency and 13 to 60 pulses per second. It is usually generated during the
human’s normal state when they gain consciousness. For theta waves, they usually occur when human are in
the deep meditation to act as a getaway in the learning process. The frequency range of theta waves is
between 3Hz to 5Hz. The brain can communicate and pass information both in conscious or unconscious
mind. Delta is the slowest but has the loudest brainwaves between 0.5 to 3 Hz. It is generated when a human
takes a deep sleep and it emits between four cycles per second. Gamma waves have the largest frequency
among all which is from 30 to 100 Hz. Gamma waves are generated during active learning or in hyperactivity
state. This state is the best time to retain information [2]. All of these waves can be obtained through four
primary recording modalities which are Electroencephalography (EEG), Electrocorticography (ECoG), Local

Journal homepage: http://iaescore.com/journals/index.php/ijeecs

Indonesian J Elec Eng & Comp Sci

ISSN: 2502-4752



795

Field Potentials (LFPs), and Single-neuron action potential recordings (single units). The difference between
all of these methods is where the electrode is placed whether on the scalp or in the head.
Electroencephalography (EEG) is the safest method among all which electrodes are placed on the scalp to
monitor electrical activity of the brain [3].
For a normal person, brainwaves are transmitted through the neuromuscular pathway to
communicate with the external environment. In simple words, the electrical signal from the nervous system is
transmitted to the muscle to produce movement. But for a person who suffers from motor disabilities, the
signal from the brain cannot reach that far and may only settle for less. According to the statistic updated on
June 2011 by Jabatan Kebajikan Masyarakat Malaysia, 115,000 Malaysian were registered with physical
disabilities [4]. Physically disability usually refers to the loss of limb, deformed limbs at birth or paralysis of
the limb. These people usually have limited movements. They will need help from others or from assistive
technologies to survive their daily life. There are thousands of assistive products available for these people.
Prosthetic arm is one of the assistive products available in the market nowadays. These artificial devices can
be worn or surgically implanted to replace the diseased or missing limb. Several types of the prosthetic arm
are the cosmetic arm, functional arm or both. Cosmetic prosthetic arm usually looks like a real human arm,
but just a replica that cannot be moved. On the other hand, the functional prosthetic arm can flexibly work,
but looks abnormal or robot like. Brain-Computer Interfaces (BCIs) or also known as Brain-Machine
Interfaces (BMIs) are not new things to this world. For the past 40 years, researchers have seen the potential
of these technologies and they have been trying to convert thought into action [5].
This project is developed to build a portable and lightweight, functional cosmetic prosthetic arm that
can be controlled wirelessly through a wearable EEG Headset by using attention and meditation state of the
users. The main objective of this project is to develop a Brain-Machine Interface device that could restore
motor disabilities. The most significant impact of this project is to those disabled people who suffered from
injured or loss of arm, deformed arm since birth or paralysed person who can use their brain to get help from
a prosthetic arm. This prosthetic arm will ease paralysed people and amputees' daily life as a portable
assistive device.
Recent studies have proven that neural interface systems have a big potential in restoring mobility of
patients who suffered from motor disabilities as assistive devices [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 13]. This neural interface
system used data from cortical activity recorded by several types of data acquisition devices. A previous
study by Schwartz et al. [3] discovered several methods in retrieving data from the brain. They are classified
based on the distance between the electrode and the cortex of brain as shown in Figure 1.

Figure 1. Comparisons of the four primary data acquisition of brain activities [3]

EEG electrodes located approximately 3 centimeters from the surface of the cortex. It is the safest
way, but the large distances between the electrode and cortical surface makes it difficult to obtain the signal.
Compared to EEG, ECoG obtains a finer signal because it lies approximately on the cortical surface. For
local field potentials and single-unit action potentials, both are recorded in the brain parenchyma. All of these
methods need surgery except EEG and every method has their pros and cons. Researchers have proven that
every patient can use one of those methods as long as their brain are functioning. Even a paralyzed person’s
cerebral cortical motor areas become active when trying to move his/her body part [6, 8, 9, 11, and 12].

Detection of attention and meditation state-based brainwave system to control prosthetic… (Ahmad Dania)

796



ISSN: 2502-4752

2.

RESEARCH METHOD
This project is divided into several parts which are the design and development of the hardware and
system This project is divided into several parts which are the design and development of the hardware and
system and another is on the software. The design of the prosthetic arm and fabrication of the prototype are
the main components in the design and development of the hardware. The system is designed to receive
signals from the brain to move the arm. In the software part, a microcontroller is programmed to read the
attention and meditation level from the sensors as the input and then rotate the servo motors as the output.
The overview of the project implementation is shown in Figure 2.

Figure 2. Overview of project implementation

2.1. Hardware design
The first phase in hardware design and development is designing the prosthetic arm using
SOLIDWORKS software. The hand is designed based on a few pieces of research made to mimic a real
human hand. The final design of the hand is shown in Figure 3. The design made is simulated using the same
software to make sure the prosthetic arm is fully functional, and the hand can hold various types of shapes
such as cylindrical shape, baseball's ball, and tiny things. Some aspects are considered in designing this
prosthetic arm such as weight, size, and functionality. The last phase of hardware development is a
fabrication of the arm using the 3D printer. The material used to fabricate the prosthetic arm is a biodegradable polymer, PLA that stands for Polylactic acid which is harder than ABS, Acrylonitrile Butadiene
Styrene.

Figure 3. Final design of hand using SOLIDWORKS software

2.2. System Architecture
In developing and designing the system for this project, wearable wireless EEG headset, Mindwave
from NeuroSky is used as the brain sensors to detect the brain’s electrical activity. The electrical pulses are
then converted into a signal and after that transferred to the microcontroller wirelessly through Bluetooth.
Bluetooth module, HC-05 is connected to the microcontroller, Arduino to receive the signal transmitted from
Mindwave Headset. Arduino microcontroller then interprets and process the signal received and transferred it
Indonesian J Elec Eng & Comp Sci, Vol. 13, No. 2, February 2019 : 794 – 800

Indonesian J Elec Eng & Comp Sci

ISSN: 2502-4752



797

to servo motors that are connected to strings in the prosthetic arm to create movement. The block diagram of
the system is shown in Figure 4.

Figure 4. Block diagram of the system

2.3. System Verification
Figure 5 shows the setup for the Bluetooth module HC-05 to connect to EEG sensor and
microcontroller board. LEDs are used as the substitution of the servo motor for verification purpose.

Figure 5. Testing setup to check the functionality of the system

2.4. Software Implementation
HyperTerminal is used to execute AT mode of the HC-05 in order to change the properties of the
HC-05 Bluetooth module. This step is important to ensure the HC-05 will only pair with the headset. Deeper
into the software part, the coding was made to detect the signal from the headset as the input to the
microcontroller. The variables that were being focused are the strength in connection, attention level,
meditation level and duration of the last data executed.
Attention levels are programmed to rotate the servo motors to pull the string in the prototype, so the
hand will grasp while meditation levels are used to rotate the servo motors to rotate the hand. The software
flowchart is shown in Figure 6. For this work, the result discussed is based on preliminary data upon signal
detection and based on the wrist movement. Further work will be conducted to check the functionality for
human application.

Detection of attention and meditation state-based brainwave system to control prosthetic… (Ahmad Dania)

798



ISSN: 2502-4752

Figure 6. Software Flowchart of the system

3.

RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
Figure 7(a) shows the graph of attention and meditation versus time in second when the user tries to
get focused. At high levels of attention (70% and above), the grasping gesture would be produced as shown
in Figure 7(b). If the attention level is below 70%, it will release the grasp. The reason for setting the
movement at the level of 70% is because it is quite difficult to achieve a definite 100% or 90% even. Besides,
even if the user manages to reach 100% of attention level, it is near to impossible to maintain it. 70% is the
average value of attention that indicates the user is about to get focused.
For meditation level, the same concept as the attention is used, but the difference lies only in the
movement produced. Figure 8(a) shows the graph when the user tries to meditate. In this case, the high level
of meditation (70% and above), would rotate the wrist. Figure 8(b) show the initial condition of the hand and
after rotating the wrist.

Percentage (%)

Figure 7(a). Graph of Attention and Meditation level (%) versus Time(s)
Indonesian J Elec Eng & Comp Sci, Vol. 13, No. 2, February 2019 : 794 – 800

Indonesian J Elec Eng & Comp Sci

ISSN: 2502-4752



799

Figure 7(b). Grasping and release gesture of the hand

Figure 8(a). Graph of Attention and Meditation level (%) versus Time(s)

Figure 8(b). Initial condition of hand and after rotating wrist

4.

CONCLUSION
The common problem that researcher faced in BCIs project is cost. By using a low-cost single
electrode EEG headset like NeuroSky Mindwave for data acquisition is the limitation of BCIs projects. In a
nutshell, this project is successful to control prosthetic arm based on attention and meditation state-based
brainwave system. This project has the potential to give people who suffered from motor disabilities feel
closer to normal functionality back. It is believed to give those disable hopes and sense of touch again ease
their daily activities. For future improvements, it is better to use a multiple electrode EEG Headset such as
Detection of attention and meditation state-based brainwave system to control prosthetic… (Ahmad Dania)

800



ISSN: 2502-4752

Emotiv EPOC although it will cost some money. By using multiple electrode EEG headsets, the movement
and gesture of the hand could be more complex and variety. Other than that, pressure sensors could be added
at the fingertips to extend the force of grasping. Furthermore, the mechanism of hand can be added to bend
the hand.

REFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]

Brain Works (2015) What are Brain Waves. Retrieved from http://www.brainworksneurotherapy.com/what-arebrainwaves.
Dr Hugo H. (2015) Brainwaves. Retrieved from http://www.doctorhugo.org/brainwaves/brainwaves.html.
Andrew B. Schwartz,X. Tracy Cui,Douglas J. Weber,Daniel W. Moran, “Brain-Controlled Interfaces: Movement
Restoration with Neural Prosthetics”, Neuron: Elsevier, Volume 52, Issue 1, 5 October 2006, Pages 205–220.
Utusan
Malaysia
(2011)
JKM
kemas
kini
pendaftaran
OKU.
Retrieved
from
http://ww1.utusan.com.my/utusan/info.asp?y=2011&dt=1103&sec=Timur&pg=wt_02.htm.
Gerhard M. Friehs, MD; Vasilios A. Zerris, MD; Catherine L. Ojakangas, PhD;Mathew R. Fellows, BA; John P.
Donoghue, PhD “Brain–Machine and Brain–Computer Interfaces” in press.
Donoghue, J. P. “Bridging the brain to the world: a perspective on neural interface systems”. (2008) Neuron 60,
511–521.
Gilja, V. et al. “Challenges and opportunities for next-generation intra-cortically based neural prostheses”. (2011)
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 58, 1891–1899.
Schwartz, A. B., Cui, X. T., Weber, D. J. & Moran, D. W. “Brain-controlled interfaces: movement restoration with
neural prosthetics”. Neuron 52, 205–220 (2006).
Nicolelis, M. A. L. & Lebedev, M. A. “Principles of neural ensemble physiology underlying the operation of brainmachine interfaces”. Nature Rev. Neurosci. 10, 530–540 (2009).
Green, A. M. & Kalaska, J. F. “Learning to move machines with the mind”. Trends Neurosci.34, 61–75 (2011).
J.R. Wolpaw, “Brain–computer interfaces as new brain output pathways”, J. Physiol., 579 (2007), pp. 613–619.
N.G. Hatsopoulos, J.P. Donoghue, ”The science of neural interface systems”,Annu. Rev. Neurosci., 32 (2009), pp.
249–266.
Leigh R. Hochberg, Daniel Bacher, Beata Jarosiewicz, Nicolas Y. Masse, John D. Simeral, Joern Vogel, Sami
Haddadin, Jie Liu, Sydney S. Cash, Patrick van der Smagt & John P. Donoghue “Reach and grasp by people with
tetraplegia using a neurally controlled robotic arm” in press.

Indonesian J Elec Eng & Comp Sci, Vol. 13, No. 2, February 2019 : 794 – 800

