Looned et al. Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation 2014, 11:51
http://www.jneuroengrehab.com/content/11/1/51

JNER

JOURNAL OF NEUROENGINEERING
AND REHABILITATION

RESEARCH

Open Access

Assisting drinking with an affordable
BCI-controlled wearable robot and electrical
stimulation: a preliminary investigation
Ritik Looned, Jacob Webb, Zheng Gang Xiao and Carlo Menon*

Abstract
Background: The aim of the present study is to demonstrate, through tests with healthy volunteers, the feasibility
of potentially assisting individuals with neurological disorders via a portable assistive technology for the upper
extremities (UE). For this purpose the task of independently drinking a glass of water was selected, as it is one of
the most basic and vital activities of the daily living that is unfortunately not achievable by individuals severely
affected by stroke.
Methods: To accomplish the aim of this study we introduce a wearable and portable system consisting of a novel
lightweight Robotic Arm Orthosis (RAO), a Functional Electrical Stimulation (FES) system, and a simple wireless
Brain-Computer Interface (BCI). This system is able to process electroencephalographic (EEG) signals and translate
them into motions of the impaired arm. Five healthy volunteers participated in this study and were asked to
simulate stroke patient symptoms with no voluntary control of their hand and arm. The setup was designed such
as the volitional movements of the healthy volunteers’ UE did not interfere with the evaluation of the proposed
assistive system. The drinking task was split into eleven phases of which seven were executed by detecting
EEG-based signals through the BCI. The user was asked to imagine UE motion related to the specific phase of the
task to be assisted. Once detected by the BCI the phase was initiated. Each phase was then terminated when the
BCI detected the volunteers clenching their teeth.
Results: The drinking task was completed by all five participants with an average time of 127 seconds with a
standard deviation of 23 seconds. The incremental motions of elbow extension and elbow flexion were the primary
limiting factors for completing this task faster. The BCI control along with the volitional motions also depended
upon the users pace, hence the noticeable deviation from the average time.
Conclusion: Through tests conducted with healthy volunteers, this study showed that our proposed system has
the potential for successfully assisting individuals with neurological disorders and hemiparetic stroke to
independently drink from a glass.
Keywords: BCI, EEG, Drinking task, FES, Stroke, Assistive, Exoskeleton, Hemiparetic, Upper extremity

* Correspondence: cmenon@sfu.ca
MENRVA Group, School of Engineering Science, Faculty of Applied Science,
Simon Fraser University, 8888 University Drive, Burnaby, BC V5A 1S6, Canada
© 2014 Looned et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited.

Looned et al. Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation 2014, 11:51
http://www.jneuroengrehab.com/content/11/1/51

Background
Much time and effort in recent years has been devoted to
restoring function to paralyzed limbs resulting from hemiparetic stroke [1-3]. Traditional rehabilitative techniques
require numerous sessions with a physiotherapist. These
sessions are limited by the time and capabilities of the therapist; this in turn possibly limits the recovery of the patient [2]. Robotic aided rehabilitation [3-7] removes many
of these limitations by performing the same rehabilitative
and assistive motions accurately and without fatigue of the
therapist. This potentially allows greater access to rehabilitative care for post stroke. An example is the ArmeoPower
[8] a commercially available rehabilitative exercise device
which provides intelligent arm support in a 3D workspace
for individuals with neurological disorders.
Another popular method utilizing a different form of
technology involves electrical stimulation of the user. Electrical stimulation of muscle groups has been used as both a
purely rehabilitative technique to restore strength to atrophied muscles, and to manipulate the paralyzed limbs of
both stroke patients and tetraplegics [9,10]. A voltage difference between the pairs of electrodes is generated which
results in safe levels of current to flow through the region
causing the activation of the respective muscle groups. A
recent study [11] proposed using electrical therapy for conduction of tasks of daily living.
In addition to robot-aided rehabilitation and electrical
stimulation therapy, brain computer interfaces have shown
promising results in aiding stroke recovery [12-14]. Since
the damage resulting from hemiparetic stroke is specifically
limited to the brain itself, it is an intriguing solution to use
a brain computer interface to help induce neuroplasticity
[15]. Research has shown that simply imagining movement
of a limb activates the same regions of the motor cortex as
actually performing the movement [16]. Moreover, mental
practice alone post stroke can help produce functional improvement [17].
Unfortunately each method alone has associated disadvantages, which prevent assisting activity of daily living and
performing rehabilitation exercise at a comfortable setting
such as the patient's home. Both rehabilitative and assistive
robots are traditionally large and cumbersome which make
them impractical to use outside of the laboratory environment [18]. The ArmeoPower being a prime example is not
portable and is also currently not generally affordable by
most of the patients [19]. In regards to FES, there are also
different concerns, the primary one being fatigue in the respective muscle groups which may occur very quickly [20].
Similar setbacks with standard brain computer interfaces
are they cannot be used outside of the laboratory environment due to their high cost and lengthy setup and training
times.
Despite their disadvantages, each of the three technologies however shows peculiar promising aspects.

Page 2 of 13

Previous studies have in fact explored this concept and
introduced combinational systems [21-28]. The work
performed by Pfurtscheller et al. [29] is particularly relevant, as it investigated a BCI-controlled FES system use
to restore hand grasp function in a tetraplegic volunteer.
Another relevant study incorporating both BCI and FES
focused on elbow extension and flexion [30]. A more
thorough rehabilitative research comprised of a BCI system controlling a neuroprosthesis [31].
In this article, we propose a unique wearable and portable system that combines all three technologies for assisting functional movement of the upper limb that can
potentially be used outside of the laboratory environment.
Our proposed system consists of a wearable robotic arm
orthosis (RAO) with functional electrical stimulation
(FES), which is controlled through a BCI system. The
RAO is an exoskeleton capable of providing active force
assistance for elbow flexion/extension and forearm pronation/supination. The RAO is made of lightweight plastic
with a compact design, and yet powerful enough to effectively assist the arm motion. The RAO does not assist
shoulder motion due to the fact that 88% of stroke patients often have voluntary control over this region [32].
The FES is incorporated with the RAO to assist the hand
in grasping/releasing an object. The use of FES is limited
on the hand motion only, which allows reduction of fatigue and maintains the compactness of the system. Lastly,
we seek to control the entire system using an affordable
and portable BCI, which comprises of an inexpensive
electroencephalography headset (Emotiv EEG headset) to
acquire the brain signals and open-source software processing system, BCI2000. In order to evaluate the proposed system, a functional task of daily living - drinking a
cup of water [33], is investigated. The drinking task consists of reaching for and grasping a cup from a table,
taking a drink, and returning the cup to the table.

Methods
Robotic Arm Orthosis (RAO)

The goal was to design a system that was wearable and
portable for enabling its future use in most activities of
daily living (ADL). The robotic arm orthosis was developed to actuate the user’s elbow in flexion/extension as
well as forearm pronation/supination. All structural components were fabricated out of an ABS derivative using
rapid prototyping techniques.
The elbow joint, as seen in Figure 1, was designed to
generate 10 Nm of output torque by a brushless DC
motor with customized gearbox, which is sufficient to lift
the forearm if the user doesn't apply strong resistance
force. Due to safety considerations the range of motion
of the elbow assembly was mechanically limited to 110
degrees.

Looned et al. Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation 2014, 11:51
http://www.jneuroengrehab.com/content/11/1/51

Page 3 of 13

Figure 1 Robotic arm exoskeleton. Wearable, inexpensive device designed for assistive and rehabilitative purposes for stroke and spinal cord
injury patients.

The pronation/supination joint of the ROA as seen in
Figure 1, consists of two semi-cylindrical interlocking
components. The upper component is fixed to the elbow
joint while the lower component rotates freely within it
and affixes to the user’s wrist. The lower component has
a flexible chain wrapped around the outer surface that
meshes with a pair of aluminum sprockets affixed to a
motor and shaft assembly contained within the upper
component. The system is capable of producing 75 degrees of rotation in both pronation and supination for a
total of 150 degrees of movement. A brushed DC motor
is coupled to a semi-cylindrical component to generate
torque on the wrist.
As shown in Figure 1, the device is dawned on the user’s
right arm as opposed to the left arm as most functional
tasks are conducted with the right arm. Further, the feasibility scope of the study also granted us to assume that
the right extremity was affected due to the stroke. The
orthosis is affixed using two straps across the upper arm,
one strap across proximal end of the forearm, one strap
across the distal and of the forearm, and a final strap
(yellow color in Figure 1) going over the user’s right shoulder and underneath the left arm. Donning the device takes
less than 30 seconds when aided by another party and less
than 60 seconds for an unaided healthy individual. Most
of the weight is supported by the shoulder strap when the
arm is relaxed at the user’s side. Both joints are positioned
as such to not interfere with the user’s natural arm position whether relaxed or while performing tasks. The portability of the battery operated system allows the device to
be used either as a rehabilitative aid in the laboratory, in
the comfort of the patient’s home, or potentially as a functional device wherever the user may desire.

Functional electrical stimulation

Stroke patients often have spasticity in their hands,
which is an involuntary constant contraction of the muscles [34]. They are unable to voluntarily open their
hands but are instead able to contract, as they desire.
Therefore, hand opening was achieved by placing two
electrodes on the distal and proximal ends of the extensor digitorum muscles of the forearm [35]. This provided
the necessary contraction of the muscles to ensure the
hand opened to a minimum degree required to grasp
the cup.
For the purposes of this study an EMPI300 functional
electrical stimulator from DJO Global was chosen in
order to facilitate hand opening in patients who are
otherwise incapable. The device itself is portable, battery
operated, and capable of producing up to 50 volts at
100 mA. In addition, it is one of the few devices in
which an external hand or foot switch may be attached
to trigger stimulation. Extra circuitry was developed to
interface the FES unit with the computer for control.
When stimulation is externally triggered, the device can
be set to ramp up to a predefined intensity within a preset period of time.
Brain computer interface

In order to maintain the portability of the entire system,
a wearable wireless EEG headset from EMOTIV was
chosen to acquire data for the brain computer interface.
The EMOTIV headset has 14 active electrodes operating
at 2048 Hz before filtering. Amplification, buffering, and
filtering are performed in the headset itself before being
transmitted over a Bluetooth connection at 128 samples
per second to a HP ENVY m6 laptop computer running

Looned et al. Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation 2014, 11:51
http://www.jneuroengrehab.com/content/11/1/51

an AMD A10 processer at 2.3 GHz with 8.0 GB of
random-access memory (RAM). Hardware digital notch
filters at 50 Hz and 60 Hz were utilized to filter out
power line interference. Additional processing comprised of software filters, which include a spatial filter
and a linear classifier. The objective of the spatial filter
was to focus on the activity of the electrodes located
over the sensorimotor cortex while the linear classifier
was used to output actions corresponding to inputs.
For the purpose of this study we used the BCI2000
software, an open source system capable of data acquisition, stimulus presentation, and brain monitoring [36].
The four prominent modules accessible in this software
include the source module (for data acquisition and storage), the signal processing unit, a user application, and
the operator interface. BCI2000 is capable of utilizing
the sensorimotor rhythms pattern to classify between
motor movement and relaxation states. The sensorimotor rhythms were of significance in this project as alteration in the frequency and amplitude of these waves
dictated actuation of the orthosis and FES. Sensorimotor
rhythms consist of waves in the frequency range of 7 –
13 Hz (i.e. μ) and 13 – 30 Hz (i.e. β) and are evident in
most adults typically around the primary sensorimotor
cortices [37]. A decrease in the amplitude of the μ and/
or β rhythm wave, known as Event Related Desyncronization [38], occurs upon both motor movement and
imagined motor movement. Identifying this change then
allowed us to classify the action as an imagined motor
movement and activate the corresponding actuator.
One of the most prominent disadvantages of all BCI systems is the difficulty in differentiating between more than
three classes in real-time sessions [39]. Classification accuracy in BCI systems decreases with the addition of classes. High-end BCI systems use complex algorithms and

Page 4 of 13

EEG caps with over 100 sensors in order to increase data
resolution and therefore classification accuracy. This of
course comes at the obvious expense of cost, setup time,
and portability [40]. Therefore the highlight of our BCI is
the ability to dynamically activate and deactivate pretrained classes in real-time. This allows us to configure
the system as to minimize the necessary classes. Thus, the
system was designed to distinguish between only two cognitive classes (rest and motor imagery) and one artifact
class (jaw clench).
Since the jaw clench may interfere with other motions
of the jaw during activities of the daily living, a preliminary test to assess the robustness of classifying this
artifact was performed. Specifically, a test was designed
to determine the accuracy of the clench artifact in which
a volunteer was asked to alternate between talking, resting, eating, swallowing, and jaw clenching. The goal was
to determine the accuracy of classifying clenching versus
the other four jaw movements. A two-class problem was
therefore formulated, in which one class was clenching
and the other included talking, resting, eating and swallowing. Talking consisted of repeating an arbitrarily
chosen phrase (i.e. "The quick brown fox jumped over
the lazy dog", which includes a large number of letters of
the alphabet); clenching of the jaw was performed by
grinding firmly the rear molar teeth; resting was simply
no talking and no jaw motions; eating consisted of chewing some food (a banana was arbitrarily selected); and
swallowing entailed other gulping saliva or swallowing
the chewed food. Figure 2 shows the EEG voltage-time
signal visible during the five different motions considered in this test, namely resting, talking, eating, swallowing and clenching. In the performed test, a volunteer
was asked to perform each of the five tasks for 10 seconds. The order of each task was randomized. Each

Figure 2 Resting, Talking, Eating, and Swallowing vs. Clench. Volunteers were asked to grind their rear molar teeth to switch between task
phases. This produced a high frequency interference in the EEG signal making it a favourable distinguishable feature.

Looned et al. Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation 2014, 11:51
http://www.jneuroengrehab.com/content/11/1/51

10 seconds phase was repeated 10 times for a total of 50
times. The entire procedure was performed five times.
The average real-time classification accuracy performed
with the inexpensive headset was of 98%. Results therefore suggest that jaw clenching can be robustly distinguished against other motions of the jaw typically
performed in activities of daily living.
Drinking task experiment
Experimental setup

As illustrated in Figure 3, the system setup required the
user to wear the EEG headset on their head, the ROA
on their arm, and the FES electrodes on their lower arm.
An embedded potentiometer in the wrist pronation/
supination joint provided measurable data on the wrist
rotation angle while the encoder in the elbow motor was
used to determine elbow angle. A custom designed glove
with a fitted bend sensor along the middle finger was
also worn by the individuals to track their hand configuration. A curled fist was calibrated to be 90° while a

Page 5 of 13

fully open hand was 0°. Data for measuring shoulder
movement was recorded via a Microstrain Gyroscope
affixed to the upper arm of the ROA. Vertical acceleration indicated motion of the arm as it was lifted up or
brought back down to rest on the table.
Bci familiarization and demonstration

Prior to experimentation all users were first introduced to
the drinking task protocol which consists of the steps
entailed in Figures 4A-4H. The trial consisted of an appearance of the Figures 4A through 4H in addition to a
blank white screen in between transitions. Each image and
blank screen was displayed for 5 seconds in which the volunteers were asked to imagine the corresponding motion
for each displayed action and a neutral thought for the
blank screen. This procedure was completed 2 times after
which a feature plot (Figure 5) was generated. Based on
the brain signal features, which differed the most between
the two thoughts, parameters for the real-time task were
configured. As expected, the most distinguishable features

Figure 3 Experimental Setup. The complete system comprises of an EEG, FES, and a ROA. Additional measurement instruments include a
custom glove worn on the right hand and a gyroscope attached to the upper arm.

Looned et al. Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation 2014, 11:51
http://www.jneuroengrehab.com/content/11/1/51

Page 6 of 13

Figure 4 Drinking Task Protocol. Subjects were provided visual cues during the training phase to assist them in their formulation of their
cognitive thoughts for each task. (A) Elbow extension. (B) Hand open. (C) Hand close. (D) Elbow flexion. (E) Supination. (F) Pronation (G) Elbow
Extension. (H) Hand open.

were in the mu and beta band over the left sensorimotor
cortex. Following this initial phase, the volunteers were
asked demonstrate their BCI control skill. The objective
during the demonstration phase was to navigate the virtual cursor towards a virtual target as shown on the screen
(see Figure 6). The target would either be visible at the top
of the screen or to the right of the screen. Control of the
cursor in the vertical direction towards the top target was
induced by imagining an active thought, while facial
clench controlled horizontal movement of the cursor

towards the target on the right side of the screen. A neutral thought resulted in the virtual cursor to remain
stationary.
A maximum duration of 5 seconds was provided to
navigate the virtual cursor towards the target. The user
was asked to demonstrate proficient BCI control (at least
80% accuracy) for each cognitive phase (elbow extension,
hand open, elbow flexion, wrist pronation, wrist supination), before the subject was permitted to proceed onto
the next segment of the experiment. In the case of

Figure 5 BCI Feature Plot for rest vs. imagined motion. The largest variation in the brain signal between rest and imagined motion occurs
over the sensorimotor cortex. The electrodes corresponding to Channel 1–14 are AF3 F7 F3 FC5 T7 P7 O1 O2 P8 T8 FC6 F4 F8 AF4 respectively.

Looned et al. Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation 2014, 11:51
http://www.jneuroengrehab.com/content/11/1/51

Page 7 of 13

Figure 6 User interface for the BCI system. (A) Motor imagery thoughts translate the cursor in the vertical direction while (B) clenching of the
teeth signals cursor translation in the horizontal direction.

extremely poor performance (accuracy less than 80%),
another session at a later date would be conducted before the subject would be withdrawn from the study.
This would be a rare possibility given that a similar field
study conducted at an exposition in Austria with ninetynine subjects indicated positive results [41].
FES intensity tuning

Following the BCI operation, the intensity of the FES
system had to be tuned for each volunteer. Symmetrical
biphasic pulses at a fixed frequency of 25 Hz were applied to all participants. This provided sufficient contraction of the digitorum muscles responsible for opening
the hand. Studies have shown that higher frequencies
(50 Hz) result in rapid fatigue [42] while low frequencies
(15 Hz) are not adequate enough to recruit motor nerve
units and only affect the sensory nerves [43]. The pulse
width was also fixed at 200 μs for all subjects leaving the
intensity parameter to be the only variable. The intensity
of the stimulation was catered to each individual and
was determined prior to initiating tests. The chosen
values, as shown in Table 1, were programmed into the
system and consequently applied during the experiment.
A ramp up time of 1.0 second followed by continuous
stimulation was initiated until the individual clenched
their jaw to indicate termination of the task. No complaints of fatigue were expressed by the volunteers during any time of the experiment.

Table 1 Device intensity level and measured current
across 1KΩ load at 25 V
EMPI intensity level

Current (mA)

Subject 1

11

1.28

Subject 2

13

1.55

Subject 3

10

1.18

Subject 4

13

1.55

Subject 5

15

1.76

Drinking task protocol

The protocol for the drinking task was split up into
eleven sections (Figure 7), of which seven required the
BCI and the rest consisted of voluntary movements. The
voluntary movements were clenching of the jaw, hand
contraction, and shoulder movement all of which can be
performed by the majority of the stroke patients as discussed earlier. The transition from each section to the
next required the subject to perform a clenching of the
jaw. This artifact was used as it could be detected with
high accuracy through the Emotiv EEG headset. Clenching of the jaw signified the end of the present phase
and initiation of the next one.
Upon initialization of the drinking task, the elbow joint
of the RAO automatically rotated to a “rest” position in
which the user’s forearm was approximately horizontally
parallel with the ground while resting on the table. The
first motion of elbow extension (Figure 4A) was initiated
by an imagined movement of the user extending their arm
toward the cup. Once the thought was detected by the
BCI, the elbow joint incrementally increased by a fixed
angle, which was empirically selected to be 18° in this application. Repetition of the thought caused another incremental increase in the elbow joint. Once the volunteers
were satisfied with their degree of elbow extension, they
then clenched their jaw to move to the second phase. The
second phase (Figure 4B) entailed the users’ opening of
the hand by electrical stimulation. The electrical stimulation was initiated via an imagined hand open thought. A
jaw clench turned off the FES which initiated the third
phase of the task (Figure 4C). The user grasped the cup
volitionally and the phase was completed once a finger
flexion angle of 15° was detected. The angle of 15° was
empirically selected. The fourth phase (Figure 4D)
prompted the user to flex their elbow as to bring their
arm towards their body. Increments of 18° were also used
in this phase, which was terminated via a clenching of the
jaw. The fifth phase was to bring the hand up towards the
mouth. This required the user to utilize their shoulder

Looned et al. Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation 2014, 11:51
http://www.jneuroengrehab.com/content/11/1/51

Page 8 of 13

Figure 7 Flowchart of Experiment. The entire protocol consist of 11 phases, each operated sequentially. The phases are transitioned through
by clenching of the jaw.

voluntarily. Clenching of the jaw was used to indicate the
end of the current phase. The sixth phase (Figure 4E) was
wrist pronation, once again triggered by an imagined
movement and terminated via a jaw clench. During this
interval the user was expected to drink from the cup but
this segment was neglected as to minimize the risk of any
fluid spillage. Instead the users simply touched the cup to
their lips. The seventh phase (Figure 4F) was wrist supination actuated in a similar manner but by imaging a supination motion. Each wrist rotation was empirically
selected to be 60°. The eighth phase required the user to
return their arm back on the table using their shoulder
and clenching their jaw when done so. The ninth phase
(Figure 4G) was once again elbow extension but this time
with the cup in the hand. The corresponding imagined
thought was the trigger mechanism. Incremental extension was terminated by a jaw clench. The tenth phase
(Figure 4H) required the user to place the cup on the table
by activating the FES unit. Once the users hand was

opened, a clench terminated this phase and turned off the
FES. The eleventh phase being the final phase simply required the user to voluntarily clench their hand. This motion indicated successful completion of the drinking task.
Participants

The goal of this study was to determine the capabilities
of the complete RAO/FES/BCI system by performing a
functional drinking task with healthy individuals simulating stroke patients. The users were asked to simulate
the common spastic condition and allowed shoulder
movements which parallel the abilities of stroke patients.
The volunteers were also encouraged to not provide any
volitional movement necessary for the task.
It should however be noted that possible undesired
volitional movements of the participants could not compromise the validity of the performed tests. In fact, the
RAO was not back drivable, and therefore did not allow
movements of the elbow and pronation/supination

Figure 8 Real-time screenshot of Event-Related-Desynchronization. Power spectrum at rest (A) compared to the power spectrum just prior
to imagined motion (B) of the upper extremity during the drinking task. Suppression of the mu and beta frequency bands is the trigger signal
for each actuator.

Looned et al. Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation 2014, 11:51
http://www.jneuroengrehab.com/content/11/1/51

Figure 9 (See legend on next page.)

Page 9 of 13

Looned et al. Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation 2014, 11:51
http://www.jneuroengrehab.com/content/11/1/51

Page 10 of 13

(See figure on previous page.)
Figure 9 Presentation of extremity throughout the drinking task. Elbow movements are incremental. Finger flexion and wrist rotation are
continuous. Shoulder acceleration is only during motion. Class 1 – Elbow Extension. Class 2 – Elbow Flexion. Class 3 – Hand Open. Class
4 – Pronation. Class 5 – Supination. Unshaded – Volitional. (A) Subject 1. (B) Subject 2. (C) Subject 3. (D) Subject 4. (E) Subject 5. Each phase of
the task is labeled in the respective regions.

without a correct use of the BCI interface. In addition,
electromyographic (EMG) signals were also used to
monitor activities of the different muscles of the participates’ hand to make sure they did not interfere during
the phase in which FES was used to clench their hand.
Five healthy individuals (mean age equal to 21 ± 1 yr)
with no prior experience with EEG-based BCI systems
volunteered to participate in the research (project approved by the Office of Research Ethics, Simon Fraser
University).

Results and discussion
Drinking task results

Once the volunteers demonstrated competency in controlling their μ rhythm brain activity, they were then
asked to perform a complete drinking task motion. A
snapshot of the real-time data captured over the sensorimotor cortex during the elbow extension phase of the
drinking task illustrates the ERD effect (Figure 8). A
decrease in the amplitude of the mu band and the beta
band was visible prior to each motion for all subjects.
Rather than specifying a constant numerical threshold
for the amplitude, the system computed the average
EEG power decrease relative to a reference value over
fixed time intervals. This approach compensated for
each individual and eliminated the need for any manual adjustments. Data from the elbow joint, middle finger joint, wrist, and shoulder were all recorded during
their respective active phases and are illustrated in
Figures 9A – 9E. Each BCI phase of the task is indicated
with a different shade of green while the un-shaded parts
are the volitional movements. Additional numbers are labeled to indicate the exact phase sequences which were
defined earlier.
As indicated in Figures 9A – 9E, elbow extension and
flexion for all users occurs in increments. The incremental method was chosen to provide users with a controllable range of motion as opposed to a full continuous

extension or flexion. This was necessary as seen by the
results of the user in Figure 9D. This user did not fully
extend the arm as opposed to other individuals yet was
still able to grasp the cup and fully complete the task.
Full flexion of the elbow (71°) on the contrary was necessary for all individuals as to ensure that the cup
would be able to make contact with the lips.
Wrist pronation and supination on the other hand
occurred in a single smooth motion with a rotation of
approximately 70°. This provided the necessary tilt to
allow drinking from the cup. Although users were not
drinking in these trials due to safety concerns mentioned
earlier, the simulation imitated the action reasonably.
Analysis of the results provided in Figures 9A – 9E
further indicate that each user performed the task at
their own pace. For example, comparison of the elbow
extension phase for Figure 9A and Figure 9B illustrates
the variance in BCI control. Although both users fully
extended their elbow during this phase, one user took
40 seconds while the other user took 28 seconds (see
Table 2). Additional differences in the time taken to
complete each phase vary throughout the entire protocol
for each volunteer. This applies to both the BCI controlled motions and the volitional motions. As a consequence, the total time for completion varied with the
individual.
As stated earlier, the time required to complete the
whole drinking motion depended upon how well the subject was able to control their cognitive thoughts and at
what pace they conducted their voluntary movements.
Overall, the duration ranged from 100 seconds to 160 seconds for the individuals to complete the task. The average
time to complete the motion was 127 seconds with a
standard deviation of 23 seconds.
The results attained further indicate the practicality of
the system in terms of the duration it takes to complete
a drinking task. The values are fair and can be analyzed
over a period of trials to visualize improvements in the

Table 2 Duration to complete each phase of the task and to complete the entire protocol
Arm extension

Hand open

Arm flexion

Pronation

Supination

Arm extension (2)

Hand open (2)

Total

Subject 1

39.9 s

15.6 s

17.8 s

12.7 s

0.55 s

20.5 s

11.3 s

136.4 s

Subject 2

27.9 s

7.6 s

29.4 s

0.58 s

0.52 s

25.1 s

8.75 s

112.8 s

Subject 3

28.9 s

18.8 s

45.6 s

7.2 s

0.56 s

34.5 s

11.4 s

159.9 s

Subject 4

17.5 s

5.3 s

27.8 s

0.6 s

1.0 s

18.9 s

6.4 s

127.5 s

Subject 5

22.0 s

4.5 s

25.9 s

2.3 s

0.62 s

21.3 s

3.5 s

99.6 s

Looned et al. Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation 2014, 11:51
http://www.jneuroengrehab.com/content/11/1/51

patients’ abilities when testing with stroke or spinal cord
injury patients.
Limitations of study

Although optimistic results were presented in this study,
some assumptions were made during the project design.
Firstly, determining the true intention of the users when
operating the BCI was based on the users’ word. In fact,
to the best of the authors’ knowledge, there is no verification method to establish that the user was indeed imagining ‘reach’ during the elbow extension phase and
not imagining a different motion. It is understandable to
assume, as we did, that the users will follow the guidelines when using the system for both an intuitive experience and maximal benefit for themselves.
Secondly, while the study is in fact designed for stroke
and spinal cord injury patients, it currently lacks that portion. The next step would be to test the system with individuals who would actually benefit from the operation.
Lastly, the current study was limited to the sole functional task of drinking a glass of water, as the main focus
was to highlight the feasibility of such a combinational
system of an ROA, FES, and BCI for a single functional
task of the arm. Future versions, while maintaining the
inexpensive and portable nature of the setup, may include other functional tasks. It should be noted that the
ROA and FES could already potentially assist a large variety of tasks in their current configurations. In fact, they
could assist a number of functional tasks including
reaching for an object, turning the handle of a door, supinating the arm to see the time on a wrist watch, pulling a drawer, and grasping an object to move it from
one location to another. The main challenge to obtain a
multi-task system is therefore the identification of the
user’s intention using the BCI. A potential approach is
the use of a cascaded classification strategy [44]. In fact,
similarly to a decision tree [45], a binary classifier could
be used in each internal node of the tree. This approach

Page 11 of 13

would enable selecting a number of tasks, corresponding
to the number of the leaves of the tree. An example of
feasible binary classification consists of determining if
the volunteer intends to move her/his right or left extremities – such a classification was proven to yield high
accuracy [46-49]. This node would be of interest in case
the volunteer wears assistive devices on both arms. Another set of tasks for a potential node would be the
“drinking task”, as analyzed in this manuscript, and
another functional task, such as a “time check task”,
consisting of supinating the forearm to check the time
on a wristwatch. The functional mental task used to
identify the intention of the user to drink from a glass of
water would be to imagine being thirsty and wanting to
reach out for a glass placed in front of the volunteer. Initiation of the time check task would instead be triggered
by imagining a ticking clock where the user is asked to
continuously add the numbers on the dials. This twotask problem has strong potential for being classified
with high accuracy as research showed that motor and
arithmetic tasks could clearly be distinguished [50-52].
An example of the suggested cascaded classification to
be investigated in future research is presented in
Figure 10. In addition to the above-mentioned cascaded
approach, the advancement of BCI systems could also
enable the future extension of the proposed two-class
problem to multi-class problems. Research has shown
strong potential in this regard. For instance, Schlögl
et al. demonstrated the feasibility of classifying four
motor imaginary tasks [53]. Future research aimed at
on-line classification of motor tasks using inexpensive
headsets could therefore further facilitate the use of the
proposed technology for assisting multiple tasks.

Conclusion
The goal of this study was to explore an inexpensive and
fully portable assistive technology for individuals with
neurological disorders in their pursuit of independently

Figure 10 Cascaded classification scheme. Example strategy to potentially achieve assistance in multiple functional tasks of the upper extremities.

Looned et al. Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation 2014, 11:51
http://www.jneuroengrehab.com/content/11/1/51

drinking from a glass. A combination of a robotic arm
orthotic, an electrical stimulation system, and a Brain
Computer system were utilized for this task. The task
consisted of a drinking maneuver broken down into
eleven phases where each phase was triggered by the respective imagined movement and terminated by a soft
clench of the jaw. The ambitions of the study were met
with five healthy volunteers who simulated stroke patients with spasticity. The volunteers completed the
drinking maneuver with an average time of 127 seconds
and a standard deviation of 23 seconds. The next step
would be expand the capabilities of the system by including additional functional tasks and then conducting
tests with stroke and spinal cord injury patients to assess
the benefit of the system.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions
CM conceived the work, proposed the overall protocol, and directed the
development of the robotic system. ZGX assisted on selecting the
components of the system, programming the robot and interpreting the
recorded data. JB designed the robot, interfaced the Emotiv EEG headset to
the robot, and contributed to the design of the protocol. RL interfaced the
Emotiv EEG headset to the BCI2000 software and to the FES, conducted the
tests with the volunteers, and finalized the protocol. All authors were
involved on drafting the paper and read and approved the final manuscript.

Page 12 of 13

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.
17.

18.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Michael Smith Foundation for Health
Research, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research, and the Natural
Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada. The authors would
like to thank Gil Herrnstadt for his assistance in setting up of the devices,
and Axis Prototypes for the support and assistance in the fabrication of the
robotic arm orthosis.
Received: 12 February 2013 Accepted: 1 April 2014
Published: 7 April 2014
References
1. Kwakkel G, Wagenaar RC, Koelman TW, Lankhorst GJ, Koetsie JC: Effects of
intensity of rehabilitation after stroke a research synthesis. Stroke 1997,
28:1550–1556.
2. Duncan PW, Zorowitz R, Bates B, Choi JY, Glasberg JJ, Graham GD, Katz RC,
Lamberty K, Reker D: Management of adult stroke rehabilitation care a
clinical practice guideline. Stroke 2005, 36:e100–e143.
3. Loureiro Rui CV, Harwin WS, Nagai K, Johnson M: Advances in upper limb
stroke rehabilitation: a technology push. Med Biol Eng Comput 2011,
49:1103–1118.
4. Colombo R, Pisano F, Micera S, Mazzone A, Delconte C, Carrozza MC,
Dario P, Minuco G: Robotic techniques for upper limb evaluation and
rehabilitation of stroke patients. Neural Syst Rehabil Eng 2005, 13:311–324.
5. Adamovich SV, Merians AS, Boian R, Lewis JA, Tremaine M, Burdea GS,
Recce M, Poizner H: A virtual reality-based exercise system for hand
rehabilitation post-stroke. Presence: Teleop Virt Environments 2005,
14:161–174.
6. Fazekas G, Horvath M, Toth A: A novel robot training system designed to
supplement upper limb physiotherapy of patients with spastic
hemiparesis. Int J Rehabil Res 2006, 29:251–254.
7. Lo AC, Guarino PD, Richards LG, Haselkorn JK, Wittenberg GF, Federman DG,
Ringer RJ, Wagner TH, Krebs HI, Volpe BT, Bever CT, Bravata DM, Duncan
PW, Corn BH, Maffucci AD, Nadeau SE, Conroy SS, Powell JM, Huang GD,
Peduzzi P: Robot-assisted therapy for long-term upper-limb impairment
after stroke. N Engl J Med 2010, 362:1772–1783.

19.
20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.
26.

27.

28.

29.

Guidali M, Guidali M, Duschau-Wicke A, Broggi S, Klamroth-Marganska V,
Nef T, Riener R: A robotic system to train activities of daily living in a
virtual environment. Med Biol Eng Comput 2011, 49:1213–1223.
Pfurtscheller G, Müller GR, Pfurtscheller J, Gerner HJ, Rupp R:
‘Thought’–control of functional electrical stimulation to restore hand
grasp in a patient with tetraplegia. Neurosci Lett 2003, 351:33–36.
Kimberley TJ, Kimberley TJ, Lewis SM, Auerbach EJ, Dorsey LL, Lojovich JM,
Carey JR: Electrical stimulation driving functional improvements and
cortical changes in subjects with stroke. Exp Brain Res 2004,
154:450–460.
Popovic MB, Popovic DB, Sinkjær T, Stefanovic A, Schwirtlich L: Restitution
of reaching and grasping promoted by functional electrical therapy.
Artif Organs 2002, 26:271–275.
Ang KK, Guan C, Chua KSG, Ang BT, Kuah C, Wang C, Phua KS, Chin ZY,
Zhang H: Clinical Study of Neurorehabilitation in Stroke using EEG-Based Motor
Imagery Brain-Computer Interface with Robotic Feedback. Buenos Aires, Brazil:
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), 2010 Annual
International Conference of the IEEE. IEEE; 2010.
Prange GB, Jannink MJ, Groothuis-Oudshoorn CG, Hermens HJ, IJzerman MJ:
Systematic review of the effect of robot-aided therapy on recovery of
the hemiparetic arm after stroke. J Rehabil Res Dev 2006, 43:171.
Prasad G, Herman P, Coyle D, McDonough S, Crosbie J: Applying a
brain-computer interface to support motor imagery practice in people
with stroke for upper limb recovery: a feasibility study. J Neuroeng
Rehabil 2010, 7:60.
Grosse-Wentrup M, Mattia D, Oweiss K: Using brain–computer interfaces
to induce neural plasticity and restore function. J Neural Eng 2011,
8:025004.
Schaechter JD: Motor rehabilitation and brain plasticity after hemiparetic
stroke. Prog Neurobiol 2004, 73:61.
Prasad G, Herman P, Coyle D, McDonough S, Crosbie J: Using motor imagery
based brain-computer interface for post-stroke rehabilitation. Antalya, Turkey:
Neural Engineering; 2009. NER'09. 4th International IEEE/EMBS Conference on.
IEEE, 2009.
Lum PS, Burgar CG, Shor PC, Majmundar M, Van der Loos M: Robot-assisted
movement training compared with conventional therapy techniques for
the rehabilitation of upper-limb motor function after stroke. Arch Phys
Med Rehabil 2002, 83:952–959.
NeuroSolutions. [http://www.neuro-solutions.ca/hocoma/hocoma-armeo/]
Mizrahi J: Fatigue in muscles activated by functional electrical
stimulation. Critical Reviews™ in Physical and Rehabilitation Medicine 1997,
9:93.
Meng F, Tong K, Chan S, Wong W, Lui K, Tang K, Gao X, Gao S: BCI-FES
training system design and implementation for rehabilitation of stroke
patients. In, IEEE Int Jt Conf Neural Networks (IEEE World Congr Comput Intell
IEEE 2008, 2008:4103–4106.
Gollee H, Volosyak I, McLachlan AJ, Hunt KJ, Gräser A: An SSVEP-based
brain-computer interface for the control of functional electrical
stimulation. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng 2010, 57:1847–55.
Do AH, Wang PT, King CE, Abiri A, Nenadic Z: Brain-computer interface
controlled functional electrical stimulation system for ankle movement.
J Neuroeng Rehabil 2011, 8:49.
Belda-Lois J-M, Mena-del Horno S, Bermejo-Bosch I, Moreno JC, Pons JL,
Farina D, Iosa M, Molinari M, Tamburella F, Ramos A, Caria A, Solis-Escalante
T, Brunner C, Rea M: Rehabilitation of gait after stroke: a review towards a
top-down approach. J Neuroeng Rehabil 2011, 8:66.
Rahman K, Ibrahim B: Fundamental study on brain signal for BCI-FES
system development. Sci (IECBES) 2012, 2012:195–198.
Takahashi M, Takeda K, Otaka Y, Osu R, Hanakawa T, Gouko M, Ito K: Event
related desynchronization-modulated functional electrical stimulation
system for stroke rehabilitation: a feasibility study. J Neuroeng Rehabil
2012, 9:56.
Liu Y, Li M, Zhang H, Li J, Jia J, Wu Y, Cao J, Zhang L: Single-trial
discrimination of EEG signals for stroke patients: a general multi-way
analysis. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc 2013, 2013:2204–7.
Zhang H, Liu Y, Liang J, Cao J, Zhang L: Gaussian mixture modeling in
stroke patients’ rehabilitation EEG data analysis. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med
Biol Soc 2013, 2013:2208–11.
Pfurtscheller G, Müller-Putz GR, Pfurtscheller J, Rupp R: EEG-based
asynchronous BCI controls functional electrical stimulation in a
tetraplegic patient. EURASIP J Adv Sig Pr 2005, 2005:3152–3155.

Looned et al. Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation 2014, 11:51
http://www.jneuroengrehab.com/content/11/1/51

30. Rüdiger R, Gernot R, Müller- P: BCI-Controlled Grasp Neuroprosthesis in High
Spinal Cord Injury. Converging Clinical and Engineering Research on
Neurorehabilitation 2013, 2013:1253–1258.
31. Rohm M, Schneiders M, Müller C, Kreilinger A, Kaiser V, Müller-Putz GR, Rupp R:
Hybrid brain–computer interfaces and hybrid neuroprostheses for restoration
of upper limb functions in individuals with high-level spinal cord injury. Artif
Intell Med 2013, 59:133–142.
32. Lindgren I, Jönsson AC, Norrving B, Lindgren A: Shoulder pain after stroke
A prospective population-based study. Stroke 2007, 38:343–348.
33. Alt Murphy M, Willén C, Sunnerhagen KS: Kinematic variables quantifying
upper-extremity performance after stroke during reaching and drinking
from a glass. Neurorehabil Neural Repair 2011, 25:71–80.
34. Sommerfeld DK, Eek EUB, Svensson AK, Holmqvist LW, Von Arbin MH:
Spasticity After Stroke Its Occurrence and Association With Motor
Impairments and Activity Limitations. Stroke 2004, 35:134–139.
35. Ijzerman MJ, Stoffers TS, Klatte MAP, Snoek GJ, Vorsteveld JHC, Nathan RH,
Hermens HJ: The NESS Handmasterothosis. J Rehabil Sci 1996, 9:86–89.
36. Schalk Lab. [http://www.schalklab.org/research/bci2000]
37. McFarland DJ, Miner LA, Vaughan TM, Wolpaw JR: Mu and beta rhythm
topographies during motor imagery and actual movements. Brain Topogr
2000, 12:177–186.
38. Pfurtscheller G, da Silva FHL: Event-related EEG/MEG synchronization and
desynchronization: basic principles. Clinical neurophysiology 1999,
110.11:1842–1857.
39. Shenoy P, Krauledat M, Blankertz B, Rao RP, Müller KR: Towards adaptive
classification for BCI. J Neural Eng 2006, 3:R13.
40. Popescu F, Blankertz B, Müller K-R: Computational challenges for noninvasive
brain computer interfaces. IEEE Intell Syst 2008, 23:78–79.
41. Guger C, Edlinger G, Harkam W, Niedermayer I, Pfurtscheller G: How many
people are able to operate an EEG-based brain-computer interface (BCI)?
IEEE Trans Neural Syst Rehabil Eng 2003, 11:145–147.
42. Bigland-Ritchie B, Jones DA, Woods JJ: Excitation frequency and muscle
fatigue: electrical responses during human voluntary and stimulated
contractions. Exp Neurol 1979, 64(2):414–427.
43. Kebaetse MB, Turner AE, Binder-Macleod SA: Effects of stimulation
frequencies and patterns on performance of repetitive, nonisometric
tasks. J Appl Physiol 2002, 92(1):109–116.
44. Lee P-L, Chen LF, Wu YT, Chiu HF, Shyu KK, Yeh TC, Hsieh JC: Classifying
MEG 20Hz rhythmic signals of left, right index finger movement and
resting state using cascaded radial basis function networks. J Med Biol
Eng 2002, 22(3):147–152.
45. Yuan Y, Shaw MJ: Induction of fuzzy decision trees. Fuzzy Sets Syst 1995,
69(2):125–139.
46. Pfurtscheller G, Neuper C, Flotzinger D, Pregenzer M: EEG-based
discrimination between imagination of right and left hand movement.
Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 1997, 103:642–51.
47. Ozmen NG, Gumusel L: Classification of Real and Imaginary Hand Movements
for a BCI Design. Rome, Italy: 2013 36th Int Conf Telecommun Signal
Process; 2013:607–611.
48. Kayagil TA, Bai O, Henriquez CS, Lin P, Furlani SJ, Vorbach S, Hallett M: A
binary method for simple and accurate two-dimensional cursor control
from EEG with minimal subject training. J Neuroeng Rehabil 2009, 6:14.
49. Medina-Salgado B, Duque-Munoz L, Fandino-Toro H: Characterization of
EEG signals using wavelet transform for motor imagination tasks in BCI
systems. In Image, Signal Processing, and Artificial Vision (STSIVA) 2013 XVIII
Symposium of IEEE: 11-13 September; Bogota, Colombial 2013:1–4.
50. Volavka J, Matoušek M, Roubíček J: Mental arithmetic and eye opening.
An EEG frequency analysis and GSR study. Electroencephalogr Clin
Neurophysiol 1967, 22.2:174–176.

Page 13 of 13

51. Hamada T, Murata T, Takahashi T, Ohtake Y, Saitoh M, Kimura H, Wada Y,
Yoshida H: Changes in autonomic function and EEG power during
mental arithmetic task and their mutual relationship. Rinsho byori Jap J
Clin Path 2006, 54(4):329.
52. Wang Q, Sourina O: Real-time mental arithmetic task recognition from
EEG signals. IEEE Trans Neural Syst Rehabil Eng 2013, 21:225–32.
53. Schlögl A, Lee F, Bischof H, Pfurtscheller G: Characterization of four-class
motor imagery EEG data for the BCI-competition 2005. J Neural Eng 2005,
2.4:L14.
doi:10.1186/1743-0003-11-51
Cite this article as: Looned et al.: Assisting drinking with an affordable
BCI-controlled wearable robot and electrical stimulation: a preliminary
investigation. Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation 2014 11:51.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

