“Brainprint” Biometric
ID Hits 100% Accuracy
Could an EEG-based system be the perfect
biometric key for really high security situations?
Psychologists and engineers at
Binghamton University in New York
say they’ve hit a milestone in the quest
to use the unassailable inner workings
of the mind as a form of biometric identification. They came up with an electro­
encephalograph system that proved
100 percent accurate at identifying individuals by the way their brains responded
to a series of images. But EEG as a practical means of authentication is still far off.
Many earlier attempts had come close
to 100 percent accuracy but couldn’t
completely close the gap. “It’s a big deal
going from 97 to 100 percent because we
imagine the applications for this technology being for high-security situations,”
says Sarah Laszlo, the assistant professor of psychology at Binghamton who led
the research with electrical engineering
professor Zhanpeng Jin.
Perhaps as important as perfect accuracy is that this new form of ID can do something fingerprints and retinal scans have a
hard time achieving: It can be “canceled.”
Fingerprint authentication can be reset
if the associated data is stolen, because
that data can be stored as a mathematically transformed version of itself, points
out Clarkson University biometrics expert
Stephanie Schuckers. However, that trick
doesn’t work if it’s the fingerprint (or the
finger) itself that’s stolen. And the theft
part, at least, is easier than ever. In 2014
hackers claimed to have cloned German
defense minister Ursula von der Leyen’s
fingerprints just by taking a high-­definition
photo of her hands at a public event.
Several early attempts at EEG-based
identification sought the equivalent of a fingerprint in the electrical activity of a brain
at rest. But this new brain biometric, which
its inventors call CEREBRE­, dodges the can14

|

Jun 2016

06.News.NA.indd 14

|

North American |

celability problem because it’s based on the
brain’s responses to a sequence of particular types of images. To keep that ID from
being permanently hijacked, those images
can be changed or re-sorted to essentially
make a new biometric passkey, should the
original one somehow be hacked.
CEREBRE, which Laszlo, Jin, and colleagues described in IEEE Transactions in

open your mind: Binghamton University
professor Sarah Laszlo prepares to peer into
the peculiarities of a person’s brainwaves.

than any other system—would create
enough different ERPs to accurately distinguish one person from another.
The EEG responses were fed to software called a classifier. After testing
several schemes, including a variety of
neural networks and other machinelearning tricks, the engineers found that
what actually worked best was a system
based on simple cross correlation.
In the experiments, each of the 50 test
subjects saw a sequence of 500 images,
each flashed for 1 second. “We collected
500, knowing it was overkill,” Laszlo says.
Once the researchers crunched the data
they found that just 27 images would have
been enough to hit the 100 percent mark.
The experiments were done with a
high-quality research-grade EEG, which
used 30 electrodes attached to the skull
with conductive goop. However, the data
showed that the system needs only three
electrodes for 100 percent identification,
and Laszlo says her group is working on
simplifying the setup. They’re testing
consumer EEG gear from Emotiv and
NeuroSky­, and they’ve even tried to replicate the work with electrodes embedded in a Google Glass, though the results
weren’t spectacular, she says.
For EEG to really be taken seriously as a
biometric ID, brain interfaces will need to
be pretty commonplace, says Schuckers.
That might yet happen. “As we go more
and more into wearables as a standard
part of our lives, [EEGs] might be more
suitable,” she says.
But like any security system, even an
EEG biometric will attract hackers. How
can you hack something that depends
on your thought patterns? One way, explains Laszlo, is to train a hacker’s brain
to mimic the right responses. That would
involve flashing light into a hacker’s eye at
precise times while the person is observing the images. These flashes are known
to alter the shape of the ERP.
“The awesome part of this—the crazy
science-fiction part—is to see if the attitude of the hacker changes to be more
like” the target of the hack, she says.

Information Forensics and Security, involves
presenting a person wearing an EEG system with images that fall into several cate­
gories: foods people feel strongly about,
celebrities who also evoke emotions, simple sine waves of different frequencies, and
uncommon words. The words and images
are usually black and white, but occasionally one is presented in color because that
produces its own kind of response.
Each image causes a recognizable
change in voltage at the scalp called an
event-related potential, or ERP. The different categories of images involve somewhat
different combinations of parts of your
brain, and they were already known to
produce slight differences in the shapes of
ERPs in different people. Laszlo’s hypothesis was that using all of them—­several more —Sa muel K. Moor e

Jonathan Cohen/Binghamton University

news

SPECTRUM.IEEE.ORG

5/13/16 1:26 PM

