arXiv:1808.06055v1 [cs.HC] 18 Aug 2018

EEG-based Evaluation of Cognitive Workload Induced by
Acoustic Parameters for Data Sonification
Maneesh Bilalpur

Mohan Kankanhalli

CVIT, IIIT Hyderabad
India
maneesh.bilalpur@research.iiit.ac.in

School of Computing, National University of Singapore
Singapore
mohan@comp.nus.edu.sg

Stefan Winkler

Ramanathan Subramanian

Advanced Digital Sciences Center, University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Singapore, Singapore
stefan.winkler@adsc-create.edu.sg

Advanced Digital Sciences Center, University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Singapore, Singapore
ramanathan.subramanian@ieee.org

ABSTRACT
Data Visualization has been receiving growing attention recently, with ubiquitous smart devices designed to render
information in a variety of ways. However, while evaluations
of visual tools for their interpretability and intuitiveness have
been commonplace, not much research has been devoted to
other forms of data rendering, e.g., sonification. This work is
the first to automatically estimate the cognitive load induced
by different acoustic parameters considered for sonification
in prior studies [9, 10]. We examine cognitive load via (a)
perceptual data-sound mapping accuracies of users for the
different acoustic parameters, (b) cognitive workload impressions explicitly reported by users, and (c) their implicit
EEG responses compiled during the mapping task. Our main
findings are that (i) low cognitive load-inducing (i.e., more
intuitive) acoustic parameters correspond to higher mapping
accuracies, (ii) EEG spectral power analysis reveals higher
𝛼 band power for low cognitive load parameters, implying
a congruent relationship between explicit and implicit user
responses, and (iii) Cognitive load classification with EEG
features achieves a peak F1-score of 0.64, confirming that
reliable workload estimation is achievable with user EEG
data compiled using wearable sensors.

KEYWORDS
Data Sonification, EEG, Cognitive Workload, Acoustic parameters.

1

INTRODUCTION

Understanding and sensemaking from multi-dimensional data
is a challenge, since the traditional medium for visual data
representation and communication is typically restricted to
two or three dimensions. This calls for visualization and content delivery tools utilizing alternative sensing mechanisms
such as auditory [14], tactile [16], gustatory and olfactory [22].
Also, given the significant proportion of visually challenged
Accepted for publication in the proceedings of the 20th ACM International Conference on Multimodal Interaction, Colorado, USA.
DOI:10.1145/3242969.3243016

persons the world over (around 253 million people are visually impaired1 ), employing purely visual communication
techniques makes information inaccessible to a large section
of the society.
Nevertheless, attempts to use non-visual modalities for
encoding data attributes are few. Among these, data sonification, where data attributes are conveyed via psychoacoustic
signals, is a relatively mature technique with applications
in multiple fields such as astrophysics and neurology [10].
Two recent works that investigate the suitability/ease-ofunderstanding of data-to-sound mappings are [9] and [10].
In [9], a study evaluating auditory parameters (such as pitch,
roughness, noise and sharpness) that best convey the focus
level of an astronomical image is presented. This study is
further extended in [10], where the perceptual congruence
between three data attributes, namely, stress, error and danger and the aforementioned acoustic parameters is evaluated.
Both evaluations are based on explicit user assessments acquired via the mouse and keyboard.
A limiting factor in real-life situations where visualizations are put to use is that explicit user feedback may not
be available for improving or adapting the data rendering
methodology. Acquiring user feedback via implicit means
would therefore be critical for optimal information communication. Neuroergonomics, which examines human factors by
employing neuroscientific methods, presents a viable alternative in this regard. This approach is also attractive with
the advent of light-weight, wearable sensors. A number of
works have explored cognitive sensing of users presented with
visual information– the user’s level of (dis)comfort with the
presented information is gauged via eye movements [12, 23]
or neural activity in the form of EEG [1, 27] and fNIRS [19].
Such studies have however not been performed, to our knowledge, for auditory perception tasks.
This paper builds on prior works [9, 10], and seeks to estimate the cognitive load of users mapping acoustic parameters
to data attributes via implicit means. Cognitive load induced
by different auditory parameters is examined via explicit as
well as implicit user responses– participants completed (a
1

http://www.who.int/en/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/blindnessand-visual-impairment

subset of questions from) the NASA-TLX questionnaire [11]
to convey their impressions regarding how easy (low cognitive
load condition) or difficult (high cognitive load condition) it is
to map the focus level of an astronomical image to an acoustic parameter; their EEG responses while performing the
mapping task were also recorded via the commercial Emotiv
device. The main findings of this work are the following: (1)
Perceptual (focus level to acoustic data) mapping accuracies
are higher for parameters inducing low cognitive load as per
explicit user impressions; (2) On performing power spectral
analysis for the different EEG spectral bands, higher 𝛼 band
power is noted for low cognitive load inducing parameters,
implying a congruence between explicit and implicit user
responses; (3) On segregating acoustic parameters as low
or high cognitive load inducing based on user impressions,
we attempted cognitive load classification for each auditory
presentation trial by examining the EEG data. Experiments
confirm that a maximum F1-score of 0.64 is achievable with
a CNN based classifier. This implies that user perception of
acoustic data can be gauged via implicit means. Overall, this
work makes the following contributions.
i. To our knowledge, this is the first work to expressly investigate the cognitive load induced by multiple acoustic parameters via explicit and implicit means. Our
analysis combines examination of the (a) perceptual
mapping accuracies for data sonification, (b) user cognitive load impressions, and (c) user EEG responses.
ii. We demonstrate congruence between explicit user impressions and implicit neural activity, Acoustic parameters inducing low cognitive load are found to be associated with higher EEG 𝛼 power, in line with previous
findings [27].
iii. We show that better-than-chance cognitive load classification is possible by examining the user EEG signals. A
maximum F1-score of 0.64 is obtained for low-vs-high
cognitive load classification using a deep convolutional
neural network (CNN) classifier.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2
motivates our work in the context of available literature,
and highlights its novelty. Section 3 details the experimental
design and protocol. Section 4 examines explicit user data in
terms of perceptual mapping accuracies and cognitive load
impressions, while Section 5 presents an analysis of the EEG
data. In Section 6 we introduce the cognitive load classification experiments and discuss the results, while Section 7
concludes the paper.

2

RELATED WORK

This section reviews literature on data sonification and cognitive load estimation to motivate the need for our study.

2.1

Visualization and Data Sonification

Information Visualization (InfoViz) concerns the design and
development of interactive and graphical representations of
information. Interactive visualizations typically convey visual and data patterns utilizing rendering techniques that

best cater to human perception and cognition [5, 20]. Among
the various visualization techniques, sonification involves the
use of non-speech based audio signals to convey information.
A sonification system conveys data values by manipulating acoustic parameters such as sound frequency (pitch) or
tempo. Two recent works that attempt to identify the optimal
acoustic parameters for conveying different (types of) data
attributes are [9] and [10].
A study presented in [9] explores the utility of sharpness,
roughness, noise, pitch and a combination of roughness and
noise for conveying the focus level of an astronomical image.
The sound parameters are carefully chosen, upon reviewing
sonification literature in great detail. Sound parameters in
[9] are evaluated by: (1) computing the mean perceptual
data:sound mapping accuracy for focus level determination,
and (2) comparing the performance of the sound parameters against the visual stimuli to evaluate if the acoustic
parameters can indeed serve as effective proxies for conveying the visual information. The study concludes with two
main findings: (a) Acoustic parameters that converge on a
clear/pure sound are optimal for focus determination, and (b)
The investigated auditory parameters can provide effective
substitution for visual information.
An extension of the above study is presented in [10]. Here,
the ability of parameters such as roughness, noise and pitch
for conveying negative data attributes such as error, danger
and stress is explored. This study concludes that the effectiveness of sound parameters is governed by the ease with
which users can perceive the data:sound mapping. An earlier
study detailed in [26] suggests that intuitive data:sound mappings may not result in the best user performance in terms
of accuracy or response times.

2.2

Cognitive Workload Estimation

Cognitive workload (or mental workload) has been traditionally employed as a standard for measuring task difficulty
by many previous works [1, 2, 27]. In particular, there is a
large body of work correlating how neural activity captured
via EEG [2, 27] and fNIRS signals [19] can enable cognitive
workload assessment. The advantage of employing neural
signals such as EEG and fNIRS is that they can be captured via light-weight and wearable commercial devices, as
against other physiological modalities that require data to
be recorded with bulky and specialized lab equipment.
The utility of EEG for measuring cognitive workload has
been demonstrated by many previous works [2, 27]. The
observation that changes in the EEG 𝜃 and 𝛼 band power
are indicative of memory load is made in [27]. Specifically,
low cognitive load is found to be associated with higher 𝛼
band power. The cognitive load induced by visualizations
such as bar and quartile plots is studied via EEG analysis
in [1]. NASA-TLX parameters are employed to explicitly
obtain cognitive load ratings from users, and the authors
demonstrate prefrontal cortex activity captured during task
performance is relevant to the working memory consumption.

Deep learning for cognitive load estimation is proposed
in [2]. The ability of convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
to preserve spatial, spectral and temporal structure of EEG
is exploited in this work. Spectral band maps are first synthesized from EEG data corresponding to low and high mental
workload tasks, and automated classification of low/high
cognitive load from EEG data is then attempted.

2.3

Analysis of Related Work

Upon reviewing related literature, one can note that (1) The
evaluation of auditory parameters for data rendering is still an
active area of research. While the authors of [9] and [10] base
their findings on perceptual mapping accuracies obtained
from user responses, a direct estimation of user cognitive
load is not attempted in either of these works; (2) While
mental workload estimation has been explored via cognitive
sensing as users perform visual processing, to the best of our
knowledge we have not encountered equivalent studies for
sonification.
In this regard, we present the first work towards estimating
cognitive load of users by analyzing their EEG signals. A
salient aspect of our work is that these EEG signals are
captured via a light-weight and wearable Emotiv device. It
is reasonable to expect that users will be willing to use such
sensors to feedback their cognitive state as they perform
real-life perception tasks. The next section details the stimuli
and protocol employed for estimation of sonification-induced
cognitive workload.

3

STIMULI AND EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN

For the purpose of this study, we used the acoustic parameters
employed in [9], namely, noise, pitch (pure sinusoidal tones
in a C-major scale as in Experiment 2 of [9]), roughness and
combination of roughness and noise. Furthermore, we used
the original astronomical images with varying focus levels for
comparison. In this section, we describe the stimuli used and
the adopted experimental protocol.

3.1

Stimuli

3.1.1 Visual. For benchmarking purposes, we used the astronomical images representing varying levels of focus in our
study. These images are presented in Figure 1. A color image
showing a telescopic view of the M110 galaxy was used for
the highest focus level (level 10). Blurred versions of this
image were generated using OpenCV via smoothing with
different kernel sizes. The visual images are found to convey
the focus level most precisely to users in [9].
3.1.2 Noise. Similar to [9], we used a 1000 Hz pure tone and
broadband white noise to convey 10-levels of varying focus.
As suggested in [9], we exploit the possible association of
noise with a negative attribute such as blur to denote the
image focus level. A perfectly focused image (focus level of 10)
corresponds to a 100% pure tone while a 1-focus level (i.e.,
completely de-focused) image corresponds to 100% noise.

3.1.3 Pitch. The sensation of acoustic frequency is referred
to as Pitch. This parameter is usually found in music. Pure
sinusoidal tones in a C-major scale (plus 2 extra notes to
make the range 10 notes long) beginning at the middle C (C4,
freq = 261.63 Hz) and ending on E6 (freq = 1318.51 Hz) were
used. Loudness variations for the various frequencies were
compensated for. Higher frequencies denoted higher focus
levels.
3.1.4 Roughness. Having demonstrated in [9] the drawback
of using a noisy carrier signal for roughness representation,
we used a 100% pure-tone that was amplitude modulated
with 0, 2, 4, 7, 11, 16, 23, 34, 49 and 70 Hz. We believe that
the dissonance in the acoustics best represents image blur.
Hence we used a pure tone to represent the image of focus
level-10.
3.1.5 Combined Roughness and Noise. This is the second
best performing acoustic parameter in [9] after the visual
images. Thus, we used this direct pairing of roughness and
its corresponding noise. Analogous to the above described
individual parameters, a pure-tone was used to represent the
highest focus level of the image and the combination of 100%
noise modulated by 70Hz corresponds to focus level-1.
3.1.6 Combined Image plus Acoustics. In addition to the
above mentioned parameters, we also used a mix of visual
images combined with roughness and noise to explore if a
combination of the visual and acoustic modalities enabled
better identification of the image focus level. This parameter
is referred to as Visual-plus-Combined in the remainder of
the paper.

3.2

Cognitive Workload parameters

Cognitive Workload is a complex construct of intrinsic, extrinsic and germane load [8]. Hence, we utilized the multidimensional rating design of NASA-TLX [11] to acquire explicit
cognitive load impressions from users. We employed a subset
of the parameters to rate the task difficulty, in particular the
three factors of effort (Rate the level of effort you needed to
put in to complete the task on a scale of 0 (lowest)–4 (highest)), mental demand (Rate the level of stress you endured
while performing the task on a 0–4 scale) and frustration
(Rate the level of frustration you experienced while performing the task on a 0–4 scale). We hypothesized that these
three parameters had complementary contributions to the
user workload, given the nature of the task.

3.3

Participants

20 participants (16 male) with an average age of 28.9 ± 4.9
years took part in our study. None of them had any formal
training in music. Users had to perform the experiment for
about one hour, and were financially compensated for their
participation. The experimental design was approved by the
local ethics committee.

Figure 1: Astronomical images shown with various focus levels. The image focus level progressively increases from 1–10 from
left to right.

3.4

Protocol

The experiment was conducted in two sessions, where each
session was divided into six blocks. Each of the six blocks
corresponded to one of the visualization parameters (4 acoustic, 1 visual and 1 visual-plus-acoustic). Within each block,
the 10 stimuli were played for 2 sec each in random order
and repeated thrice, leading to a total of 30 trials (stimulus
presentations) in a block.
Session 1 involved playing of a stimulus following which,
the user had to immediately rate the corresponding focus
level on a scale of 1–10. Session 1 therefore involved Immediate Recall (IR) from the user. In Session 2, the 10 stimuli
corresponding to a particular visualization parameter were
again repeated thrice in random order, but at the beginning
of each of the three repetitions, users were instructed to click
a ‘Yes’ radio button if they inferred that the played stimulus
corresponds to a particular focus level. The focus level of
interest was pre-specified prior to each of the three repetitions, and the objective here was to facilitate perceptual
comparisons between the stimuli presented over successive
trials to arrive at a decision. Session 2 is similar to the rapid
serial visual presentation (RSVP) protocol adopted in psychophysical studies, and is termed the Compared Recall (CR)
session. To enable at least one comparison by the user, we
ensured that the target focus level stimulus was not rendered
in the first trial following the target focus level specification.
In the IR session, each stimulus was presented for 2s,
preceded by a a fixation cross which was displayed for 500ms.
The stimulus was followed by a question to let users ascertain
the corresponding focus level on a 1–10 scale. A 10s timer
was displayed on the screen during the judgement task, and
the next stimulus was automatically presented if the user
failed to respond within the 10s time-frame. All parameters
remained identical in the IR and the CR sessions with the
exception of each stimulus being followed by a 3s response
time in CR (as against a 10s time-frame in IR).
Upon completion of each block, users were required to rate
their experience on the subset of NASA-TLX parameters
(mentioned above) to evaluate the cognitive workload. No
technical terms were used to represent the various stimuli,
and participants were instructed regarding the stimulus type
through a coded representation (Type 1–6). Users were also
made to perform a practice session before each session, where
they were familiarized with all the stimuli employed in the
experiments.

3.5

Data Acquisition

As users performed the focus level detection task, we acquired
their neural responses (which we hypothesized to capture the
cognitive workload experienced) via the 14-channel consumergrade Emotiv Epoc EEG device. Both the IR and CR sessions
were split into two halves to calibrate the device regularly, and
to prevent participants from experiencing fatigue. The Epoc
device used has a 128 Hz sampling rate. Our experimental
protocol was designed using Matlab PsychToolbox [6].

4

EXPLICIT RESPONSE ANALYSIS

To begin with, we attempt to model cognitive workload in
terms of data:parameter mapping (or recognition) accuracies,
and cognitive workload impressions provided by users in
terms of the NASA-TLX ratings.
We analyzed the accuracy of user responses for the various
stimuli presented and their combinations. We summarize
and compare the results with prior work described in [9]. As
with [9], we considered a 10% error margin while computing
accuracies.

4.1

Recognition Rate

For Immediate Recall, the highest mapping accuracy was
observed for visual-plus-combined (0.83 ± 0.11) while the
least accuracy was observed for roughness (0.48 ± 0.19) (see
Figure 2(left)). This implies that the combination of visual
plus acoustic cues facilitated better inference of the image
focus level by users. The acoustic stimuli followed a similar
trend as in [9] with the combined rendering of roughness and
noise (accuracy of 0.71 ± 0.18) being the easiest to map.
The only exception in our study is that pitch outperforms
roughness. The visual stimuli (accuracy = 0.78 ± 0.18) were
easier to perceive than all acoustic parameters, in line with
one’s expectations.
For Compared Recall, very similar mapping accuracies
were noted for visual-plus-combined (0.82 ± 0.33) and visual
(0.84 ± 0.22) (see Figure 2(left)). Among acoustic parameters,
Noise (0.67 ± 0.26) and Combined (0.64 ± 0.32) were most
suitable for detecting the target focus level, while pitch was
the most difficult (0.54 ± 0.3). Overall, a similar trend as
in [9] was observed. Higher standard deviations in the CR
session suggest that focus level identification based on stimulus comparison was more difficult than individually mapping
each presented stimulus as in the IR protocol.

Figure 2: (left) Mapping accuracy with the different parameters. Error-bars denote unit standard deviation. (right) Proportion
of low cognitive load trials for each parameter.

4.2

Cognitive Workload Ratings

We considered the mean of the three NASA-TLX parameters
(effort, mental demand and frustration) to evaluate the overall mental workload. The average score was thresholded at
the mean value of 2 (since the used scale was 0–4) to quantize or characterize a parameter block as inducing low/high
workload. To examine the correlation between recognition
rates and the cognitive workload impressions for a given visualization parameter, we computed the proportion of low
cognitive workload trials for each of the six parameters. We
hypothesized that a visualization parameter that induces
low cognitive workload should correspond to higher mapping
accuracy, i.e., parameters that correspond to higher accuracies in Figure 2(left) will also have many low cognitive load
blocks as shown on Figure 2(right). To this end, we computed
Pearson correlation coeffcients between the mapping accuracies and the proportion of low cognitive load blocks. For
IR, we observed a correlation 𝜌 = 0.8339, 𝑝<0.05, while a 𝜌
= 0.8631, 𝑝<0.05 was noted for CR. The above correlations
confirm that there exists a congruent relationship between
the recognition rates and cognitive workload.
Given that the ultimate objective of this study is to assess
mental workload via the implicitly acquired EEG data, we
need to label trials (denoting the presentation of an individual stimulus) as high or low cognitive load inducing. To this
end, labels were generated for the IR and CR sessions based
on user workload impressions. As seen from Figure 2(right),
we categorized pitch, roughness and combined as high load
parameters for IR, while noise, visual, and visual plus combined as low load parameters. This categorization was based
on the maximum inter-parameter difference of 0.12 noted between the combined and noise parameters in Figure 2(right).
Similarly for CR, the high load parameters included pitch,
combined, noise and roughness while the low load parameters

were visual, and visual plus combined. We observed that the
acoustic parameters were rated to induce relatively higher
load than the visual or visual plus combined parameters as
anticipated.

5

EEG ANALYSIS

In this section, we describe the data preprocessing techniques
and our inferences from the EEG data acquired during the
memory workload evaluation task.

5.1

Data Preprocessing

The EEG data acquired using the consumer-grade Epoc device
is highly susceptible to external electrical noise, motor activity
(apart from the task-related activity) such as eye-blinks, head
and muscle movements. Thus, the EEG data is subjected to
a preprocessing pipeline to eliminate artifacts.
We extracted epochs of 2.5s duration for each trial (comprising 0.5s of fixation presentation and 2s of stimulus presentation). We performed removal of the baseline neural
activity DC-offset using the EEG response for the 0.5s fixation duration. Further, the EEG signals were subjected to
(a) band-limiting between 0.1–45 Hz, (b) visual rejection of
noisy epochs and (c) Independent Component Analysis-based
rejection of artifacts corresponding to eye-blinks and movements. Muscle movement artifacts are removed upon band
limiting EEG as they are chiefly concentrated in the 40–100
Hz band, and via manual removal of noisy ICA components.

5.2

ERP analysis

Several previous works have investigated Event Related Potentials (ERPs) for human-centric decision tasks like emotion
recognition [4], image annotation [17] and error identification
[25]. These markers act as a bridge between neuroscience and
behavioral studies, facilitating better understanding of the

Figure 3: ERP plots for F4 channel corresponding to immediate recall (left) and compared recall (right) sessions, with different
ERP components labeled.

Figure 4: Power spectra plots for the different visualization parameters in the IR (left) and CR (right) tasks.
structural and functional relevance of neural activity to the
task on hand, and validation of the EEG data.
Figure 3 shows the ERP components observed upon analyzing EEG data from all IR and CR trials. In particular,
we emphasize the existence of N100 and P200 components in
both the IR and CR sessions. The N100 component is known
to reflect processing of acoustic cues, and is typically followed
by the P200 component which is fronto-centrally distributed
[18]. Also, amplitude of the N100 component is known to
be sensitive to the level of attention [3]. We attribute higher
N100 amplitude for CR to the experimental design, as the CR
protocol forces users to compare the current stimulus against
prior ones for target detection, thereby demanding greater
attention than the IR protocol (as also reflected via higher
variance in mapping accuracies for CR). In addition to the
N100 and P200 components, we also encountered the N400
and P600 components in the F4 channel. Several works [7, 15]
confirm the presence of N400, P600 components in language
comprehension and semantic memory understanding tasks.
However, their presence while processing visualizations has
not been explored as yet.
5.2.1 Spectral Analysis. Prior studies on memory workload
for the 𝑛-back task [27] have demonstrated the existence of

differences in 𝛼 (8-13 Hz), 𝜃 (4-7 Hz), lower 𝛽 (13-16 Hz)
and higher 𝛾 (40-45 Hz) EEG band powers with varying task
difficulty. We investigated the power spectrum averaged over
all the EEG channels for any existence of such cues. The
power spectrum analysis (Figure 4) suggests an increased
activity in the 𝛼 band (as well as other frequency bands such
as 𝛿 (1-4 Hz) and 𝛾) for low workload parameters identified
from Section 4.2. These patterns are better observable for
the CR task as compared to IR. Differences noted in [27]
for the 𝜃 band are not observed in our study. It is also
interesting to note that the power spectral trends for both
the IR and CR tasks are similar indicating that memory
workload is reliably captured by our study. Some similarities
can be noted between Figure 2(right) and Figure 4. Those
parameters associated with low cognitive workload (such as
Visual and Visual plus Combined) are associated with higher
spectral power (in particular the 𝛼 band) than high workload
parameters (such as pitch and noise).

6

COGNITIVE LOAD CLASSIFICATION

This section describes how we train classifiers from the compiled EEG data and cognitive workload labels to implicitly assess memory workload from EEG. To this end, we

Table 1: Convolutional neural network parameters.
Parameter
Learning rate
Kernel size
Stride size
Pool size
Batch size
# Kernels(layer wise)
Momentum
Weight decay
Dropout

Value
0.01
3
2
2
32
16,32,32
0.9
0.0001
0.1

labeled all trials corresponding to parameters associated with
low/high workload (from Section 4.2) for the IR and CR tasks
accordingly, i.e., Visual-plus-Combined, Visual and Noise parameters were considered to be low workload inducing for IR,
while only Visual and Visual-plus-Combined were deemed as
low workload inducing for CR.

6.1

Classification methods

6.1.1 Traditional methods. We employed traditional machine
learning methods– Naive Bayes (NB), Linear Discriminant
Analysis (LDA), SVM with linear kernel (LSVM), and SVM
with RBF kernel (RSVM) for EEG-based low/high workload
categorization. Prior to classification, the 14 channel, 2s
long stimulus-duration data was vectorized and subjected to
dimensionality rejection via principal component analysis to
retain 90% variance. We performed 10 repetitions of 5 fold
cross validation on the data. Given the class imbalance for
the IR and CR tasks, we chose F1-score as the metric to
evaluate classifier performance.
6.1.2 Convolutional Neural Network. The CNN feature learning can achieve better dimensionality reduction by projecting
the EEG data onto a robust feature space for preserving task
relevance and invariance to noise.
We adopted a 3-layer CNN model proposed in [21] to learn
a robust representation from EEG data for classification of
cognitive workload. Three convolution together with rectified
linear unit (ReLU) activation function and average pooling
layers are stacked to extract task specific features (Figure 5).
The convolutions employed are 1-dimensional along time.
Batch normalization [13] is used after the third CNN layer to
reduce the internal covariate shift and accelerate the training. To prevent over-fitting, we used dropout after the fully
connected layer with 128 neurons. We finally classify with
softmax over 2 output neurons. The number of kernels increase with the depth of the convolution network as analogous
to the VGG architecture [24]. We have optimized the network for categorical cross entropy using vanilla stochastic
gradient descent with Nestrov momentum and weight decay.
CNN hyper-parameters are specified in Table 1. The values
for these hyper-parameters are mainly adopted from [21]
or otherwise decided by cross-validation (10 repetitions of
5-fold).

6.2

Results

Table 2 summarizes the performance of various classifiers in
terms of F1-scores (𝜇 ± 𝜎) obtained over 50 runs. Precision
and recall values are also tabulated for better insights. The

obtained results clearly show that the LDA, LSVM and CNN
classifiers outperform Naive Bayes and RSVM, and achieve
better-than-chance cognitive load classification. The fact that
LSVM outperforms RSVM for both IR and CR tasks implies
that non-linear kernels do not result in better classification
performance for our data. Traditional classifiers result in
low precision for the IR task, and low recall for the CR
task. Overall, the CNN classifier achieves the most balanced
performance in terms of precision and recall, and produces the
best workload classification performance for the IR task (F1 =
0.64). Nevertheless, its performance decreases for the IR task
presumably because of the class imbalance and the fact that
training data was far fewer for this condition (4 low cognitive
load vs 2 high cognitive load parameters, and only those
trials eliciting a user response were employed for training).
Correspondingly, higher variance in the performance of all
classifiers is noted in the CR condition. The LSVM classifier
performs best for the CR task. Overall, our classification
results emphasize the need for efficient and robust feature
learning for workload estimation from noisy EEG signals.

7

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

This work examines the efficacy of the pitch, roughness, noise,
and combined acoustic (in combination with visual) parameters for conveying image focus level in terms of explicit
data:parameter mapping accuracies and user cognitive load
impressions conveyed via NASA-TLX attributes. Specifically,
parameters associated with low cognitive load result in higher
mapping accuracies in line with one’s expectations. Furthermore, we perform automated classification of cognitive load
from EEG signals acquired via a commercial wireless device,
and labels based on explicit responses to achieve a maximum
(and significantly above-chance) F1-score of 0.64. In terms of
novelty, our work improves over evaluation studies conducted
in [9, 10] which exclusively rely on explicit user responses for
workload understanding.
On the whole, our findings mirror those in [9] and [10]. The
best performing acoustic parameter in terms of data:sound
mapping accuracies is the combined rendering of roughness
and noise (Section 4.1), which owing to its negative attributes
best conveys image blur (inverse of focus level). We observe
that focus recognition accuracy is higher for visual stimuli
than acoustic stimuli; nevertheless, the recognition accuracy
is highest for visual-plus-combined implying that acoustic information augments visual information towards determining
the focus level. Congruence between recognition accuracies
and cognition load is also highly noticeable. Specifically, the
visual and visual-plus-combined conditions are reported to
induce low memory workload over a majority of the trials,
while noise is observed to be the most intuitive in terms of
acoustic parameters based on NASA-TLX responses.
We designed two different tasks for determining the image focus level in our experimental design– immediate recall, where users had to immediately detect focus level from
the presented stimulus, and compared recall where the user
needed to detect a pre-specified target level from among

Figure 5: CNN architecture showing various layers in the model and parameters.
Table 2: Classification results summary (* denotes F1-score distribution significantly above chance level with 𝑝<0.05).

Classifier
NB
LDA
LSVM
RSVM
CNN

Precision
0.48 ± 0.01
0.50 ± 0.01
0.48 ± 0.01
0.37 ± 0.04
0.64 ± 0.02

IR
Recall
0.48 ± 0.03
0.61 ± 0.02
0.54 ± 0.02
0.46 ± 0.15
0.64 ± 0.02

F1-score
0.48 ± 0.02
0.55 ± 0.02*
0.51 ± 0.02*
0.41 ± 0.03
0.64 ± 0.02*

serially presented stimuli. We hypothesized that CR would
be more facile for visualization understanding since comparisons would enable a better assessment of the rendered
visualizations. However, different from our expectation, a
greater variance in IR recognition accuracies suggests that
focus level identification was perhaps more difficult for the
IR task. It is also pertinent to note that the N100 ERP component was stronger for the IR task, and indicative of the
greater cognitive attention required in this setting. A more
thorough analysis of the focus levels that were easy/difficult
to detect in the IR and CR settings is required as part of
future work.
Power spectral analysis also confirmed that low workload
parameters are characterized by higher 𝛼, 𝛿 and 𝛾 band
powers as compared to high workload parameters, and that
the power spectral densities for the CR task are significantly
lower than those for the CR condition. In terms of binary
cognitive workload classification, the CNN model produces
the most balanced performance in terms of precision and
recall, and results in the peak F1 score of 0.64 for the IR
condition. Relatively lower F1 scores achieved for CR can be
attributed to fewer training data available in this condition
𝑡ℎ

(about 17 of the training data available for IR owing to the
experimental design). While this work compiles data from
the general population, data sonification could specifically
benefit the visually impaired community, and future work
would evaluate sonification techniques on such participants.

Precision
0.49 ± 0.06
0.56 ± 0.05
0.58 ± 0.04
0.34 ± 0.01
0.54 ± 0.10

CR
Recall
0.37 ± 0.06
0.50 ± 0.07
0.52 ± 0.07
0.55 ± 0.00
0.52 ± 0.06

F1-score
0.42 ± 0.04
0.53 ± 0.07*
0.55 ± 0.06*
0.42 ± 0.00
0.52 ± 0.07*

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Steve Brewster and Jamie Ferguson for kindly
providing us with the visual and auditory data used in their
experiments. This research is supported by the National Research Foundation, Prime Ministers Office, Singapore under
its International Research Centre in Singapore Funding Initiative. Maneesh Bilalpur completed this work as a visiting
student at the SeSaMe Centre in the National University of
Singapore.

REFERENCES
[1] Erik W Anderson, Kristin C Potter, Laura E Matzen, Jason F
Shepherd, Gilbert A Preston, and Cláudio T Silva. 2011. A User
Study of Visualization Effectiveness Using EEG and Cognitive
Load. In Computer Graphics Forum, Vol. 30. Wiley Online Library, 791–800.
[2] Pouya Bashivan, Irina Rish, Mohammed Yeasin, and Noel
Codella. 2015.
Learning Representations from EEG with
Deep recurrent-Convolutional Neural Networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1511.06448 (2015).
[3] Alan S Bellack and Michel Hersen. 1998. Introduction to Comprehensive Clinical Psychology.
[4] Maneesh Bilalpur, Seyed Mostafa Kia, Manisha Chawla, Tat-Seng
Chua, and Ramanathan Subramanian. 2017. Gender and Emotion
Recognition with Implicit User Signals. In Proceedings of the
19th ACM International Conference on Multimodal Interaction.
ACM, 379–387.
[5] Michael Bostock and Jeffrey Heer. 2009. Protovis: A Graphical
Toolkit for Visualization. IEEE Trans. Visualization & Comp.
Graphics (Proc. InfoVis) (2009).
[6] David H Brainard and Spatial Vision. 1997. The Psychophysics
Toolbox. Spatial Vision 10 (1997), 433–436.
[7] Harm Brouwer and Matthew W Crocker. 2017. On the Proper
Treatment of the N400 and P600 in Language Comprehension.

Frontiers in Psychology 8 (2017), 1327.
[8] Fang Chen, Jianlong Zhou, Yang Wang, Kun Yu, Syed Z Arshad,
Ahmad Khawaji, and Dan Conway. 2016. Robust Multimodal
Cognitive Load Measurement. Springer.
[9] Jamie Ferguson and Stephen A Brewster. 2017. Evaluation of
Psychoacoustic Sound Parameters for Sonification. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM International Conference on Multimodal
Interaction. ACM, 120–127.
[10] Jamie Ferguson and Stephen A Brewster. 2018. Investigating
Perceptual Congruence Between Data and Display Dimensions
in Sonification. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, 611.
[11] Sandra G Hart and Lowell E Staveland. 1988. Development of
NASA-TLX (Task Load Index): Results of Empirical and Theoretical Research. In Advances in Psychology. Vol. 52. Elsevier,
139–183.
[12] Weidong Huang. 2007. Using Eye Tracking to Investigate Graph
Layout Effects. In Visualization, 2007. APVIS’07. 2007 6th
International Asia-Pacific Symposium on. IEEE, 97–100.
[13] Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. 2015. Batch Normalization:
Accelerating Deep Network Training by Reducing Internal Covariate Shift. arXiv preprint arXiv:1502.03167 (2015).
[14] Gary S Kendall. 1991. Visualization by Ear: Auditory Imagery
for Scientific Visualization and Virtual Reality. Computer Music
Journal 15, 4 (1991), 70–73.
[15] Marta Kutas and Kara D Federmeier. 2011. Thirty Years and
Counting: Finding Meaning in the N400 Component of the EventRelated Brain Potential (ERP). Annual Review of Psychology
62 (2011), 621–647.
[16] Beom-Chan Lee, Hyeshin Park, Junhun Lee, and Jeha Ryu. 2007.
Tactile Visualization with Mobile AR on a Handheld Device.
In International Workshop on Haptic and Audio Interaction
Design. 11–21.
[17] Viral Parekh, Ramanathan Subramanian, Dipanjan Roy, and CV
Jawahar. 2018. An EEG-based Image Annotation System. In
Computer Vision, Pattern Recognition, Image Processing, and
Graphics. Springer, 303–313.
[18] Silke Paulmann. 2015. The Neurocognition of Prosody. In Neurobiology of Language. Elsevier, 1109–1120.

[19] Evan M M Peck, Beste F Yuksel, Alvitta Ottley, Robert JK
Jacob, and Remco Chang. 2013. Using fNIRS Brain Sensing to
Evaluate Information Visualization Interfaces. In Human Factors
in Computing Systems. ACM, 473–482.
[20] Kranthi Kumar Rachavarapu, Moneish Kumar, Vineet Gandhi,
and Ramanathan Subramanian. 2018. Watch to Edit: Video
Retargeting using Gaze. Computer Graphics Forum 37, 2 (2018),
205–215.
[21] Nastaran Mohammadian Rad, Seyed Mostafa Kia, Calogero Zarbo,
Twan van Laarhoven, Giuseppe Jurman, Paola Venuti, Elena Marchiori, and Cesare Furlanello. 2018. Deep Learning for Automatic
Stereotypical Motor Movement Detection Using Wearable Sensors
in Autism Spectrum Disorders. Signal Processing 144 (2018),
180–191.
[22] Nimesha Ranasinghe, Kasun Karunanayaka, Adrian David Cheok,
Owen Noel Newton Fernando, Hideaki Nii, and Ponnampalam
Gopalakrishnakone. 2011. Digital Taste and Smell Communication. In Conference on Body Area Networks. ICST (Institute for
Computer Sciences, Social-Informatics and Telecommunications
Engineering), 78–84.
[23] Michael Raschke, Tanja Blascheck, Marianne Richter, Tanja Agapkin, and Thomas Ertl. 2014. Visual Analysis of Perceptual and
Cognitive Processes. In Information Visualization Theory and
Applications. IEEE, 284–291.
[24] Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. 2014. Very Deep Convolutional Networks for Large-Scale Image Recognition. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1409.1556 (2014).
[25] Chi Thanh Vi, Izdihar Jamil, David Coyle, and Sriram Subramanian. 2014. Error Related Negativity in Observing Interactive
Tasks. In Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, 3787–
3796.
[26] Bruce N Walker and Gregory Kramer. 2005. Mappings and
Metaphors in Auditory Displays: An Experimental Assessment.
ACM Transactions on Applied Perception 2, 4 (2005), 407–412.
[27] Shouyi Wang, Jacek Gwizdka, and W Art Chaovalitwongse. 2016.
Using Wireless EEG Signals to Assess Memory Workload in the
𝑛-Back Task. IEEE Transactions on Human-Machine Systems
46, 3 (2016), 424–435.

