Kent Academic Repository
Full text document (pdf)
Citation for published version
Yang, Su and Deravi, Farzin (2017) On the Usability of Electroencephalographic Signals for
Biometric Recognition: A Survey. IEEE Transactions on Human-Machine Systems . ISSN
2168-2291.

DOI
https://doi.org/10.1109/THMS.2017.2682115

Link to record in KAR
http://kar.kent.ac.uk/61551/

Document Version
Publisher pdf

Copyright & reuse
Content in the Kent Academic Repository is made available for research purposes. Unless otherwise stated all
content is protected by copyright and in the absence of an open licence (eg Creative Commons), permissions
for further reuse of content should be sought from the publisher, author or other copyright holder.

Versions of research
The version in the Kent Academic Repository may differ from the final published version.
Users are advised to check http://kar.kent.ac.uk for the status of the paper. Users should always cite the
published version of record.

Enquiries
For any further enquiries regarding the licence status of this document, please contact:
researchsupport@kent.ac.uk
If you believe this document infringes copyright then please contact the KAR admin team with the take-down
information provided at http://kar.kent.ac.uk/contact.html

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON HUMAN-MACHINE SYSTEMS

1

On the Usability of Electroencephalographic Signals
for Biometric Recognition: A Survey
Su Yang and Farzin Deravi, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Research on using electroencephalographic signals
for biometric recognition has made considerable progress and is
attracting growing attention in recent years. However, the usability aspects of the proposed biometric systems in the literatures
have not received significant attention. In this paper, we present a
comprehensive survey to examine the development and current status of various aspects of electroencephalography (EEG)-based biometric recognition. We first compare the characteristics of different stimuli that have been used for evoking biometric information
bearing EEG signals. This is followed by a survey of the reported
features and classifiers employed for EEG biometric recognition.
To highlight the usability challenges of using EEG for biometric recognition in real-life scenarios, we propose a novel usability
assessment framework which combines a number of user-related
factors to evaluate the reported systems. The evaluation scores
indicate a pattern of increasing usability, particularly in recent
years, of EEG-based biometric systems as efforts have been made
to improve the performance of such systems in realistic application
scenarios. We also propose how this framework may be extended to
take into account Aging effects as more performance data becomes
available.
Index Terms—Biometrics, electroencephalography (EEG), feature classification, feature extraction, usability.

I. INTRODUCTION
LECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHY (EEG) is the (generally noninvasive) recording of the electrical activities of
the brain along the scalp, measuring the small voltage fluctuations resulting from ionic currents within the brain [1]. One
of the earliest investigations of brain-related functions was the
monitoring the electroencephalographic signals of animals (rabbits’ and monkeys’ brains, in 1890) [2], [3]. The first human
EEG was recorded in 1924 [4], later the EEG gradually became
a useful tool in diagnosing brain disease (epileptic seizures [5],
for instance). Considering the physiological differences between
the brains of different people, EEG signals may be expected to
possess the potential to not only indicate the brain’s functions,
but also dissimilarities between individuals as manifested by the
electrical activity of their brains. Such an assumption has led to

E

Manuscript received September 30, 2015; revised September 27, 2016; accepted February 20, 2017. This work was supported in part by the University
of Kent academic on-line database service. This paper was recommended by
Associate Editor J. del R. Millan. (Corresponding author: Su Yang.)
The authors are with the School of Engineering and Digital Arts, University of Kent, Canterbury, CT2 7NZ, U.K. (e-mail: sy91@kentforlife.net;
F.Deravi@kent.ac.uk).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/THMS.2017.2682115

attempts at developing EEG-based person recognition systems,
where EEG signals are used as a biometric modality.
The EEG signal has been employed for biometric purposes
by a number of researchers in laboratory environments (for
example in [6]); however, many problems still remain and need
to be addressed before considering its application in real-life
scenarios.
Previous surveys in [7] and [8] have addressed the theoretical
aspects of EEG-biometric systems, reviewing the state-of-theart methods and their future perspectives. The goal of this investigation is to review the recent work on EEG-based biometric
recognition systems while focusing on issues of practicality and
usability which are key to achieving the wider deployment of
such systems. This study is organized into four major sections:
A review of the sensors and stimuli used to trigger and acquire
EEG signals for person recognition is presented in Section II.
In Section III, a survey of the techniques used for generating
features from EEG signals provided. Section IV describes the
relevant techniques for feature classification. Section V first
explores a series of factors that affect the usability of an EEG
biometric system, followed by introducing a novel metric which
combines these factors to provide a better measurement of the
usability and practicality of such systems. This section also contains suggestions for how this usability assessment framework
may be extended to take into account Aging effects as more
performance data becomes available. Section VI presents the
overall conclusions and suggestions for further work.
II. SIGNAL ACQUISITION
Two types of sensor system have been used for biometric
purposes: 1) medical-grade sensor systems and 2) low-cost sensor systems. The medical-grade systems conventionally contain a large number of electrodes for data capture; the sensors
usually need to be moistening by electrolytes (e.g., saline solution). Such a sensor system generally produces high quality
signals, but the deployment of the wet sensors could be impractical in EEG biometric applications. The distribution of
the electrodes over the scalp conventionally follows the 10-20
system [9] or 10-10 system [10] (see Fig. 1). The 10-20 system and 10-10 system are internationally recognized methods
to describe and apply the location of scalp electrodes in the
context of an EEG test or experiment [11]. On the other hand,
low-cost sensor systems typically contain a small number of
electrodes (down to a single electrode), using dry sensor(s) to
reduce the cost and improve the usability of the system. Usually only the frequency components below 50 Hz are taken into

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License. For more information, see http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
2

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON HUMAN-MACHINE SYSTEMS

to be a predefined stimulus to evoke the desired brain activity
for producing consistent results. The choice of stimulus that
would result in optimal production of identity-bearing signals
for biometric person recognition purposes is currently a subject
of research. In the following sections, some relevant published
approaches are surveyed covering three types of brain stimulation: Resting state, sensory (audio/visual) stimuli, and cognitive
tasks—(verbal instructions).
A. Resting State

Fig. 1. (a) 64 electrodes positioning based on 10-10 system [10] and (b) single
Fp1 electrode low-cost headset [13].
TABLE I
LIST OF MARKET AVAILABLE LOW-COST EEG HEADSETS
Device
NeuroSky MindSet [17]
Neural Impulse Actuator [18]
Emotiv EPOC [16]
Mindflex (Uses NeuroSky chips)
MindWave [17]
XWave headset (NeuroSky chips)
Melon Headband [19]
HiBrain [20]
iFocusBand [21]
Muse [22]
OpenBCI [23]
Aurora Dream Headband [24]
Emotiv Insight [16]

Electrode

Sensor

Released

1
3
14
1
1
1
4
1
1
4
8 or 16
1
5

dry
dry
wet
dry
dry
dry
dry
dry
dry
dry
dry/wet
dry
dry

2007
2008
2009
2009
2011
2011
2014
2014
2014
2014
2014
2015
2015

consideration in EEG biometric recognition. The typical EEG
frequency bands considered for analysis are named: Delta (<4
Hz), theta (4–7 Hz), alpha (8–15 Hz), beta (16–31 Hz), and
gamma (>32 Hz) [12].
EEG is a relatively new biometric modality, many sensor
systems used in the research for EEG person recognition are
directly those used in the medical field. Therefore, the number
of electrodes usually is large and the sensors are scattered all
over the scalp [9]. Typically, an EEG data acquisition software
system, such as the BCI2000, is used to facilitate data collection
[14], [15]. On the other hand, to be considered as a successful
biometric modality, good recognition performance is necessary
but may not be enough: The ease of deployment and low cost
of a sensor system may also be similarly important in practical
applications. Researchers have, therefore, been testing the performance of low-cost sensor headsets for biometric recognition.
Popular headsets such as Emotiv [16] and Neurosky products
[13] have been tested in biometric scenarios. Emotiv EPOC is
the first low-cost sensor system using wet electrodes for signal
acquisition [16].
Table I presents some commercial low-cost EEG sensor systems, which have or potentially could be used for biometric
person recognition.
An essential consideration in EEG data acquisition for biometric person recognition is the state of the brain and the nature
of its activity. The identity-information bearing signals that are
produced by the brain may crucially depend on the type of mental task in which the user is engaged. Often there may need

For the data acquisition process during the resting state, usually the subject is asked to sit on a chair in a quiet environment,
either with eyes open or closed. The resting state scheme is the
least demanding in terms of the need for additional equipment
to generate an external stimulus; the users passively produce
EEG signals without needing to follow additional instructions
during the data collection.
La Rocca et al. [25] reported person identification performance using two resting state subsets of a relatively large (108
subjects) publicly available EEG database [10]: One with eyes
open and the other with eyes closed. Of the one minute’s EEG
recording per subject, data of 10 s were used for testing and
the rest for training. Using conventional power spectral features
and a functional connectivity feature that they proposed, performance of 100% CRR was achieved by the fusion between
sensors at the match score level, for each feature type separately.
Fraschini et al. [26] employed the same dataset for a verification
scenario, an equal error rate (EER) of 4.4% was obtained using the “eigenvector centrality” features extracted from gamma
band (30–50 Hz).
A potential obstacle to using the resting state EEG data for
biometrics recognition may be the ambiguity of the instruction
“to rest” for users, which may be interpreted and acted on by
even the same subject at different times in different ways, resulting in incommensurable data. By ensuring that the instruction is
as clear as possible and that the subject undertakes a consistent
mental activity at each session, it is likely that more distinctive
biometric information would be produced.
B. Sensory Stimuli
An event-related potential (ERP) is the measured brain response that is the direct result of a specific sensory, cognitive,
or motor event [27]. The P300 (P3) wave is an ERP component [28] which can be detected as a waveform between
250 and 500 ms after a visual stimulus is presented to the
user. Researchers have used this particular waveform for person
recognition.
Palaniappan et al. [29] employed the P300 components for
feature extraction using an EEG cap with 61 electrodes while
10 subjects viewed a set of standardized pictures originally proposed in [30]. The maximum identification rate achieved was
95% using the data recorded in a single session (part of the
session used for training and the rest for testing). Similar but
improved approaches have been tested using databases with
larger population leading to maximum peak recognition rate of
98.12% with a database of 102 subjects [31]–[35].
One possible drawback of using visual stimuli for biometric
applications is the need for external devices to produce the

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
YANG AND DERAVI: ON THE USABILITY OF ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHIC SIGNALS FOR BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION: A SURVEY

stimulus and generate the required EEG signals. This may result
in biometric systems that are complex and costly compared with
alternatives based on using the resting state or directed cognitive
activity.
C. Intentional Cognitive Activities
Given the above-mentioned limitations of the resting state and
sensory stimulus approaches for EEG biometric applications,
researchers have explored other approaches which may result
in brain signals that are more repeatable, and potentially more
individually distinctive. A cognitive stimulus involves directing
the subject(s) to perform various intentional tasks during the
data collection: This could be either actual physical movement
tasks or imagery tasks, where a particular physical movement is
only imagined. The use of cognitive stimuli was first reported
in 2005 when EEG data recorded during the performance of
a variety of mental tasks (including: Mathematical calculation,
geometric figure rotation, and mental letter composition) were
first used in an identification scenario to distinguish between
four subjects [36].
Marcel et al. [37] used the data captured while subjects imagining hand movements for a biometric authentication scenario.
Power Spectral Density (PSD) features of EEG signals from
different subjects were compared using Gaussian mixture models and, a half total error rate of 7.1% was reported for nine
subjects using eight electrodes (using 16 min of the recorded
data for training and 4 min for testing).
Chuang et al. [38] reported a system which employed only a
single Fp1 electrode (NeuroSky MindSet); Two data acquisition
sessions were conducted on separate days, each session lasted
for 40–50 min. Different activities were performed, including:
Object Counting, etc. The half total error rate of 1.1% for a
database of 15 subjects was reported. However, an identification
rate of only 22% was achieved using the same database.
Similar to the EEG signals captured during the resting state,
the mental/cognitive task-stimuli also suffer from the ambiguity
problem. However, usually the challenge of employing such
tasks not only stems from the ambiguity of the task instruction
and its interpretation, but also in the identification of the taskrelated segments of the overall signal that needs to be used for
data analysis. Although there are established signal processing
techniques and statistical techniques to extract these correlates
of different mental tasks in the recorded brain activity when
sensory stimuli are used, this is more difficult in the case of
intentional cognitive tasks.
D. Template Aging
Most of the research papers included in this survey use data
acquired in a single recording session, or in multiple sessions
that are not separated significantly in time. To truly evaluate
the potential of EEG based biometric systems, data acquisition
should take place over time. Some papers using data across time
to evaluate temporal effects are reviewed in Section V as part of
the proposed novel framework for usability analysis.
III. FEATURE EXTRACTION
The choice of features is a crucial factor in determining the
performance of an EEG-based biometric system. The search for

3

suitable features for biometric recognition is governed by the nature of EEG signals: Features based on Fourier Transform (FT),
are designed to capture the energy/spectra of the signals; other
features are designed to capture the time-dependent information
of the EEG signals; and wavelet-based features are developed to
capture both the time and the frequency characteristics of EEG
signals.
A review of recently published research focusing on using
different feature extraction techniques for EEG biometrics is
provided in this section. Each section begins with a brief description of the technique’s rationale, followed by the related
literature reports.
A. Fourier Methods (PSD)
One of the frequently employed features in EEG biometrics
is the PSD. Conventionally, the PSD feature is computed from
the FT of the time-domain signal, which indicates the spectral
density distribution of the signal in the frequency domain. While
the FT is well-defined when the signal is stationary [39], many
bio-signals such as EEG signals are nonstationary. Therefore,
usually the truncated FT x̂T (ω) over a finite interval [0, T] is
computed instead. Within that interval the signal is assumed to
be stationary and the PSD, Sx (ω) , of the signal x(t) may be
computed using (1), where x̂T (ω): is the FT of x(t) [39]


(1)
Sx (ω) = lim E |x̂T (ω)|2 .
T →∞

As one of the most popular features in EEG biometrics,
PSD was first employed in an identification scenario in 1999.
Poulos et al. [6] used the spectral information of EEG signals the
identities of four subjects, each having 45 three-minute recordings. Another group of 75 subjects was used as imposters in a
simulated verification scenario. The voltage between O2 and Oz
positions was used in their investigation. The power spectral values of three overlapping frequency bands were used as features:
7–10 Hz, 8–11 Hz, and 9–12 Hz. The features were fed into a
learning vector quantization network for classification. A series
of binary classifications were conducted: For each classification
the data from one of the four subjects was compared with the
75 subjects-group in the dataset. The correct recognition rates
(CRRs) ranged from 80% to 100%.
PSD features have been used for identification within a larger
population of 102 users in [35]. A series of power spectral
features were developed using the multiple signal classification
algorithm. Visual stimuli were employed to trigger informative
EEG events for biometric recognition. A Manhattan distancebased k-NN classifier was used, reporting a maximum CRR
of 98.12%. However, the sensor system contained all the 61
electrodes in order to reach this performance level.
Safont et al. investigated the performance of EEG signals in
an authentication scenario for a large database [40]. Data from
two forehead electrodes (Fp1 and Fp2) were used; subjects were
sitting in a dark room in a resting state during the data capture.
A series of different features including maximum power of each
channel were used for feature extraction. A population of 70
subjects was used for the verification evaluation, 20 of them
acted as intruders and the rest were considered genuine. Genuine
subjects had data recording durations ranging from 3 to 5 min

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
4

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON HUMAN-MACHINE SYSTEMS

and each intruder provided 2 minutes’ data. A relatively good
performance of 2.4% EER was reported.
Using low-cost sensors systems for EEG biometrics in conjunction with PSD features has also been explored [38]. The
NeuroSky MindSet [13] single-sensor system has been used for
data collection: different mental tasks were performed by each
subject and repeated five times per session. Two sessions of data
on separate days (40–50 min with multiple tasks per session)
were captured; PSD coefficients of alpha band (8–12 Hz) and
the beta band (12–30 Hz) were extracted; the cosine similarity
was measured for classification in the verification scenario. The
reported HTER was 1.1% by applying a “customized threshold”
for 15 subjects.
The EEG Motor Movement/Imagery Dataset (containing
data of four mental/cognitive tasks and two resting state tasks
recorded using 64 electrodes) has been used for evaluating EEGbased biometric systems [25]. La Rocca et al. used only its
baseline data (resting state of 1 min, single session) for identification. A CRR of 100% was reported for a population of 109
subjects using the PSD-based feature ranged from 1–40 Hz.
B. Autoregressive Model (AR)
AR models have been another very popular feature since the
early development of EEG biometrics [41]. An AR model is a
time domain representation of a random process. The classic
AR model for a random process Xt is defined as follows [42]:
Xt = c +

p


ϕi Xt−i + εt

(2)

i= 1

where ϕ1,..., ϕp are the coefficients of the model, c is a constant
and εt is the white noise. Equation (2) can be equivalently
rewritten as (3) using the lag operator B
Xt = c +

p


ϕi B i X t + ε t

(3)

recorded at four sessions in different days whereas the impostors
were recoded only once. Only two frontal electrodes (Fp1 and
Fp2) were used and the frequencies above 50 Hz were removed.
Fisher’s discriminant analysis was used for classification and an
EER of 3.4% was reported. This result was obtained by using
a number of different features (including PSD) and the outputs
from separated classifiers were combined by fusing the scores
provided by 28 Fisher’s discriminant analysis classifiers with
different features.
Campisi et al. investigated the recognition performance under
an “Eyes Closed Resting Conditions” protocol [45]. The data
was captured from 48 subjects. The sixth-order AR coefficients
were used as features with a polynomial regression-based classifier. A genuine acceptance rate of 96.08% was reported by
using a data capture device that comprised of 56 electrodes with
a sampling frequency of 200 Hz.
To further improve the performance of EEG biometric recognition, noise removal has also been taken into consideration in
the preprocessing stage. Maiorana et al. [46] proposed a preprocessing method which combined independent component
analysis and sample entropy to isolate and remove the artifacts. AR coefficients and PSD were employed as features for
distance-based classification. For a population of 50 subjects
the reported recognition rate using AR feature was about 95%,
using 19 electrodes.
AR-based features have also been tested using low-cost sensor
system. Dan et al. [47] collected data from 13 healthy subjects
using the NeuroSky MindSet single-sensor headset. Data from
three sessions were captured on different days; subjects were
in a resting state with eyes closed during the data collection.
A recognition rate of 87% was achieved using an LDA classifier. Comparing the results of [38] which used the same sensor
device, it seems the AR features may be better suited in an
identification scenario, while the PSD-based features may be a
better choice for verification.

i= 1

as such, the signal Xt can be represented by a series of AR coefficients ϕi and white noise εt . The AR coefficients may reveal
certain intrinsic characteristics of EEG signals, and therefore,
suitable candidates as biometric features.
One of the early works using AR coefficients for EEG biometrics is reported by Paranjape et al. [43]. In their experiment,
data from 40 subjects was obtained from one electrode (at the
P4 position). The data recorded for each subject contained eight
epochs (8.533 s per epoch) while subjects were in a resting
state. A correct classification rate of 80% was achieved using a
linear discriminate analysis (LDA) classifier. As an early EEG
biometrics paper, the highlight of the experiment was the use of
only one electrode for identification; however, the manual contamination removal that was used for data preparation maybe
considered as a restriction on its applicability.
Using AR coefficients as features in a verification scenario
was investigated by Riera et al. [44]. They reported a True
Acceptance Rate of 96.6% in a database containing 87 subjects;
36 of which acted as impostors. Data capture was conducted
while subjects were in a resting state. The recording length for
each subject was between 2 to 4 min; the genuine subjects were

C. Wavelet Transform (WT)
Another relatively new and increasingly popular feature extraction method used for EEG biometrics is the WT. Waveletbased features usually are derived from the wavelet coefficients
W Tψ {x}(a, b), which can be computed using the following
formula [48]:

x (t) · ψa,b (t) dt (4)
W Tψ {x} (a, b) = < x, ψa,b > =
R

where x(t) is the time domain signal and ψa,b (t) is the wavelet
function. One advantage of wavelet-based methods is the flexibility of choosing the wavelet function ψa,b (t): Different
wavelet functions with different scale, a, and shift, b, could
be selected to suit specific application. Moreover, the WT can
be designed to preserve signal content within specific ranges of
both time and frequency in the wavelet domain which could
potentially provide more relevant information in the feature
space [48].
Gupta et al. [49] used wavelet packet decomposition (WPD)
to extract three typical EEG bands (delta, theta, and gamma
bands) with Daubechies (db4) and Coiflet (coif3) wavelets for

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
YANG AND DERAVI: ON THE USABILITY OF ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHIC SIGNALS FOR BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION: A SURVEY

biometric identification. The EEG signals were triggered by
visual stimuli and the P300 ERP data from four subjects was
captured using eight electrodes (around 200 s of recording per
subject) and used for feature extraction. An identification performance of 85% was reported using a radial-based function
Neural Network (NN) classifier.
Yang et al. [50], [51] did a series of investigations using
WT for EEG biometrics. Wavelet-based algorithms were employed for both noise removal and feature extraction. A correct
recognition accuracy of more than 90% was achieved for 109
subjects using wavelet domain features, when combined with
an entropy-based data-filtering algorithm [51].
D. Hilbert–Huang Transform (HHT)
The HTT is a relatively new algorithm initially reported in
1998 [52]. Though it was designed for dealing with nonstationary signals, its use for EEG biometrics is still relatively rare. The
HHT is comprised of two main steps: 1) generating the intrinsic
mode functions (IMF); in a process called empirical mode decomposition (EMD) and 2) performing the Hilbert Transform
on each IMFs.
Given a signal x(t), the effective algorithm of EMD can be
summarized as follows [52], [53]:
1) Identify all extrema of x(t).
2) Interpolate between minima and maxima, ending up with
some “envelope” em in (t) (and em ax (t)).
3) Compute
the
average
residual
m(t) =
( em in (t) + em ax (t))/2.
4) Extract the detail signal d(t) = x(t) − m(t).
5) Iterate on the residual m(t).
In practice, “the above procedure has to be refined by a ‘sifting
process’ which amounts to first iterating steps 1)–4) upon the
detail signal, until this latter approach a zero-mean according to
some stopping criterion” [53]. Once this is achieved, the “detail”
is considered as the effective IMF, the corresponding residual is
computed and step 5) is applied [53].
The next step of the HHT algorithm is computing the Hilbert
Transform. Denoting the resulting IMF(s) after EMD by x(t),
the HT of x(t) , y(t), can be computed using (5)
 ∞
x (τ )
1
dτ
(5)
y (t) = p
π τ t−τ
where
P = lim

ε→0 +



τ

t−ε

x (τ )
dτ +
t−τ



∞

t−ε


x (τ )
dτ .
t−τ

(6)

P is the Cauchy Principal Value defined by (6), due to the otherwise ill-defined function (5) while τ → t.
Kumari et al. [54] recently suggested using an EMD-based
coefficient of variation (a parameter that relates to the standard
deviation and mean of IMFs) as a feature for EEG biometric recognition. In a preliminary investigation, using data from
only three subjects, they claimed that person identification performance is sensitive to the scalp regions from which the EEG
signals are extracted.
Yang et al. [55] proposed the use of an improved EMD algorithm (Ensemble EMD [56]) for EEG feature extraction. Two

5

novel features based on IMFs were developed. Using data from
only one electrode (Cz), recognition rates of 99% and 96%
were reported for two publicly available databases both containing more than 100 subjects. These results, though could not
yet establish the stability of EEG signals for person recognition
over a long period of time, still proved the informative characteristics of EEG signals and the distinguishing power of the
HHT in extracting those characteristics.
E. Other Methods
Besides the previously mentioned feature extraction approaches which are based on the three major signal transforms,
other interesting features have been used for EEG biometrics.
Singhal et al. [57] proposed a novel time domain peak matching
algorithm using Visual Evoked Potentials (VEP) for identification. They reported a recognition rate of 78% for a ten subjects’
database. From each subject 20 recordings (6 s each) were obtained. Half the data was used to train the system and the rest
was used for testing.
Huang et al. [58] reported a simple but effective feature,
tested using a relatively large VEP database (122 subjects). The
proposed feature was the “equivalent root mean square (rms)
values for each electrode signal over a 1 s period.” This seems
to capture the transient energy after each visual stimulus (1 s
after the stimulus). As a time domain feature, its advantage was
the simplicity of computation combined with a relatively high
performance. The CRR reached 95.1% using the data from 64
electrodes for 116 subjects.
ERP was used for biometric recognition by Yearn et al. [59].
They claimed that showing the subject with self-face and nonself-face images would trigger different VEP signals, which
may be used for person recognition. The “point-wise biserial
correlation coefficients [60]” were employed as features; a CRR
of 85.5% was reported using a self-collected database which
contained 10 subjects. Only 18 electrodes were used for data
analysis.
Phung et al. [61] used the Shannon Entropy (SE) of alpha,
beta, and gamma bands’ PSD as features. The performance was
compared with conventional AR-based features and achieved
similar CRRs (97.1% versus 97.2%, for SE and AR). The advantage of the SE feature was claimed to be a much faster
identification speed (2.3–2.6 times faster than using the AR
features).
Considering these reported research trends, most of the feature extraction methods were based on visual stimuli. The experimental results using several newer features, despite their novel
designs, were either comparable with the conventional features
such as AR coefficients and PSD ([58], [61]) or worse than them
([57], [59]).There is, therefore, a need for continued efforts to
discover and develop new and more effective features for more
robust EEG-based biometric recognition.
Wavelet-based and HHT-based features have shown significant potential in EEG biometric recognition, and it is, thus,
interesting to develop further new features based on these transforms and evaluate them using larger databases (more than 100
subjects) extending over longer periods of time to also assess
their template Aging performance.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
6

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON HUMAN-MACHINE SYSTEMS

IV. FEATURE CLASSIFICATION
After the choice of features, the next most important component for an EEG biometric system is the choice of the classifier
and the strategy used to train it for a particular application. This
section reviews some of the recent works using different feature
classification techniques for EEG biometrics.
A. k-Nearest Neighbor (k-NN) Algorithms
One frequently used algorithm in EEG-based pattern classification is the k-NN algorithm. The basic principle of k-NN
algorithms for classification is to compare the similarity or distance between the template feature samples and the query (or
test) samples; the test set tends to find its k nearest labeled samples in the training feature space and the decision can be made
by a majority voting scheme: If the k is set to 1, the algorithm
becomes a simple nearest neighbor classifier and the decision
making is solely dictated by the label of that nearest neighbor’s
class [62].
The k-NN classifier directly uses the available training samples [63]. Therefore, the classification is sensitive to the local
(geometric) distribution of the training samples in the feature
space, such local sensitivity may potentially lead to the instability of performance [64]. Another shortcoming of the basic
k-NN algorithm is that the density of the data clusters affect its
performance and may lead to wrong decision making: depending on the parameter k, the decision may be biased toward the
class with a high cluster density, and makes the k-NN classifier
sensitive to noisy data [62]. To overcome this potential problem, some k-NN algorithms use the distance (d) as a weight
(conventionally 1/d) to improve the decision making [62].
Despite these shortcomings, k-NN does have one significant
advantage: It does not have an explicit and distinctive training
process. The available training samples (multidimensional feature vectors) only need to be stored together with their respective
class labels and compared with the query samples directly. Such
simplicity is a clear advantage over many other machine learning
algorithms.
Yazdani et al. also employed the k-NN classifier for person
identification using VEP data [65]. A 61-electrode sensor system captured the EEG data from 20 subjects. AR and PSD
coefficients were used as features. They claimed a 100% accuracy rate using a 5-NN classifier: the parameter k for k-NN
was extensively tested from 1 to 100. In these experiments the
optimal number of k for EEG biometric recognition tends to be
relatively small.
Fei et al. used data captured with a single electrode (Fp1)
from 40 subjects [66]. An identification accuracy of 97.5% was
obtained using a k-NN classifier; Fisher’s LDA was employed
for feature reduction. The recognition performance achieved
using a support vector machine (SVM) classifier was 81% in
their experiments.
B. Linear Discriminate Analysis
According to its frequent appearance in the relevant literature and its high recognition performance, LDA is by far one of

the most popular classifiers in EEG-based biometric classification. For a classification problem, LDA assumes that the conditional probability density functions of the classes are normally
distributed with equal class covariance [67]. In the Bayesian
framework, the optimal solution of a two-class problem can
then be approached by computing the ratio of the interclass
2
2
over the intra-class variance σinter
:
variance σinter
S=

2
σinter
.
2
σintra

(7)

The score S of (7) is the likelihood ratio, which is used for
optimizing the classification [68].
A closely related technique to LDA is the so-called Fisher’s
LDA, which also occasionally appears in EEG biometrics literatures. The only difference between Fisher’s LDA and the
conventional LDA is that the Fisher’s LDA does not make some
of the assumptions of LDA such as normally distributed classes
or equal class covariance [68].
The work in [69] is one of the early reports which employed
the LDA classifier to investigate the effectiveness of EEG signals for biometric person recognition. Publicly available data
for five subjects performing mental/cognitive tasks were used.
A series of different features were computed, including AR
coefficients, channel spectral powers, interhemispheric channel
spectral power differences, and interhemispheric channel linear complexity. A standard PCA algorithm was employed for
feature dimension reduction and the resulting features were fed
to a LDA classifier. The reported results indicated a minimum
average recognition error of 0%.
In [70], an LDA classifier was employed, and the spectral
power, the maximum power, and the frequency of maximum
power in the alpha band were used as features. Two sessions of
data from four subjects were collected using “one bipolar channel (O1A2),” and the time interval between the sessions ranged
from 10 days to 5 months. The “authentication performance”
was reported as 98.33% with test recordings of 20 s duration.
The results suggest robustness to template Aging (as opposed
to the report in [71], which showed a 10.9% degradation of the
identification rate in the repeatability investigation).
C. Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs)
ANN forms a family of statistical learning algorithms inspired
by biological neural networks (in particular the brain). These can
be used to estimate or approximate functions that may depend
on a large number of generally unknown inputs [62]. In general,
an ANN can be viewed as a network of simple classifiers; each
classifier in the network is an activation function which only
responds to the input from its previous neuron (function). The
results of these functions are weighted and fused before they
reach the final decision making phase.
ANNs have been popular classifiers for EEG biometrics since
this modality was first explored [6]. The work reported in [72]
is one of the early studies which employed this kind of classifier
for EEG-based person identification. In that study a “multilayer
perceptron NN with a single hidden layer” was used for classifying the data obtained from 20 subjects. A headset with 61

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
YANG AND DERAVI: ON THE USABILITY OF ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHIC SIGNALS FOR BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION: A SURVEY

electrodes was used to capture 40 s of VEP data (in a single
recording session). An identification accuracy of 99.06% was
reported by computing the conventional PSD-based features
from gamma band data (32–40Hz).
Using a single electrode (Cz) in an ANN-based identification
scenario was investigated in [73]. Data from only three subjects
was obtained and filtered to retain the frequency ranges from 1
to 12 Hz. The reconstructed time domain data was fed directly
to a single hidden layer ANN, trained by the data from five trials
(1 s of visual stimulus per trial), and an accuracy of 100% was
reported.
Using a low-cost sensor system for VEP data collection was
investigated by Gui et al. [74]. They reported using a six midline electrode system (“EASY CAP” [75]) in an identification
scenario for 32 subjects. Only the data obtained by the electrode
placed in the Oz location was employed for feature extraction.
The WPD was applied for noise-removal; the mean, SD and
entropy of the resulting wavelet coefficient were computed as
features. The VEP data was collected during the subjects were
reading an unconnected list of texts. Each recording lasted for
1.1 s, the overall recording length contained about 50 s per subject. 70% of the obtained data was used to train a “feed-forward,
back-propagation, multilayer perceptron” neural network and
the rest of the data was used for testing the recognition accuracy. A performance of around 90% in a one against the rest
identification scenario (binary classification) was reported. They
also reported that, in a conventional one-to-many identification
scenario (32 classes) the obtained accuracy was less than 11%,
which may indicate the low-cost single sensor system was still
not reliable enough for realistic biometric scenarios.
The quantity of data and time required for training ANNs
is a major concern for effective deployment. The reported researches on EEG biometrics usually employ ANNs with simple
structures (e.g., a single hidden layer). With the improvement
of computational power, i.e., faster central processing units, and
the employment of graphics processing units, the use of more
complex networks, such as recurrent and convolutional neural networks have shown great potential in pattern recognition
[76]. The concept of “deep learning” has been quite successfully implemented in many pattern recognition fields, including
handwriting recognition and fast image processing [77]. Such
classifiers hold great promise for application in EEG-based biometrics recognition.
D. Kernel Methods
Kernel-based classifiers were proposed as early as the 1960s,
with the invention of the kernel perceptron [77], [78]. These
algorithms became prominent with the popularity of the SVM
in the 1990 s, when the SVM was found to be competitive with
neural networks on tasks such as handwriting recognition [79].
The SVM classifier integrates the notion of supporting vectors and kernel tricks. Given a set of training samples, SVM is
designed to find the “maximum-margin hyper plane” in feature
space which indicates the maximum gap between two classes:
The feature vector(s) which form the hyper plane(s) are called
the “supporting vectors” [79]. However, it often happens that

7

the available data are not linearly separable in the original feature space. Therefore, it was proposed by Vapnik et al. [79]
that the original finite-dimensional space may be mapped into a
space with much higher-dimensionality to make the separation
easier in that space. The mapping of the original space onto
higher/infinite spaces is called the “kernel trick” [78]. Some
commonly used functions (kernels) for this mapping in SVM
are polynomial functions, the Gaussian radial basis function,
and the hyperbolic tangent function [79].
In the field of EEG biometrics, the use of SVM classifiers has
also received attention. Using conventional AR coefficients features for classification, results were presented using three classifiers, namely LDA, back-propagation Neural Network, and
SVM in [80]. The reported accuracies, using a small publicly
available database with three subjects and using five electrodes,
indicate that ANN and SVM provided comparable performance
(identification accuracy ranges from 80.8% to 84.0%) and LDA
outperformed both of them by more than 5% (89.5%).
In [81], the SVM classifier was used with the data obtained
using a low-cost sensor system (Emotiv [16] with 14 electrodes)
for five subjects. Each of them “performed four different mental tasks” with an overall recording length of 150 s. A series
of different features were extracted: sixth order autoregressive
(AR) coefficients, PSD, and total power in five frequency bands,
interhemispheric power differences and interhemispheric linear
complexity. These features were fed into a one-versus-all linear
SVM [82]: For every subject, the data from four tasks (10 s per
tasks) were combined and used for testing the performance, the
rest of the data was used for training the SVM. Classification
accuracy of 100% was reported through the combination of two
voting rules by computing the 1 minus the averaged HTER.
To summarize the characteristics of the classifiers reviewed in
this section, those based on the k-NN algorithm tend to require
the least computation time for model training, while maintaining
acceptable recognition performance [83]. However, the testing
for k-NN can be time-consuming as it compares the features exhaustively during the process. Compared to k-NN classifiers, the
SVM and ANN classifiers are more complex and they have the
potential to achieve much better performance in EEG biometric
recognition. Especially with the recent development of “deep
learning” algorithms, it is worth investigating the application of
improved ANN techniques to EEG biometric recognition. The
challenge here is the need for substantial training data that is
required to train such large networks. The LDA algorithm has
demonstrated very good performance amongst the results reviewed, and unlike the SVM and ANN classifiers, which can
be quite time-consuming in training, has a satisfactory tradeoff
between training/testing time and classification performance.
V. USABILITY INVESTIGATION OF THE REPORTED RESULTS
The use of EEG data for person recognition has been explored
since 1998 and more than 100 papers in this field are published.
Most of these papers were focused on reporting the performance
using conventional accuracy metrics (in both the identification
and verification scenarios). However, to objectively assess an
EEG biometric recognition system and establish its potential

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
8

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON HUMAN-MACHINE SYSTEMS

suitability for real-life applications, the performance of EEGbased biometrics system needs to be evaluated based on more
factors than the recognition accuracy only. In this section, five
factors affecting usability in practice are investigated and combined to provide one single metric to provide an indication of
the potential usability of the EEG-based biometric systems.
Besides the conventional measures of recognition accuracy,
there are at least another four factors which should be taken
into consideration for assessing the practical usability of any
reported EEG-based recognition systems:
1) number of the subjects for which the system was designed
or tested on (N);
2) number of the electrodes employed (K);
3) the recording duration of the training set (Tr); and
4) recording duration of the test set (Te).
The number of electrode(s) used for data collection has a considerable impact on the usability of the EEG-based biometric
system: A large number of electrodes may increase the difficulty
in deploying the system in real-life scenarios. The length of the
EEG recordings employed for system training, and particularly
the processing time required for person recognition are quite
influential factors as well. Number of the subjects employed
indicates the effectiveness of the biometric system in large scale
deployments. Training and test durations (in second) are proposed to be used here instead of the number of samples, as in
the actual application it is the time spent by user(s) and the
computational efficiency that matters.
Including the percentage CRR, five factors in total may be
considered together in evaluating a system. Of these five factors, K, Tr, and Te should ideally be as small as possible for
practical deployment; N and CRR should be as large as possible. Therefore, the following metric (8) is proposed to combine
these factors and produce an overall score, U, to evaluate the
system:
U=

N × CRR
.
Tr + K × Te

(8)

This score, which indicates the overall “effectiveness” or usability of an EEG biometric system, can therefore be used to
provide a meaningful comparison of the systems that have been
covered in this review: The higher the value of U, the better
the system’s overall usability. The time required for the user to
provide data in normal use is represented by the testing time,
Te, and is considered to have a greater weight in establishing the
usability of the system compared with the one-off time required
for training, Tr: Since the tests may be conducted multiple times,
the number of electrodes K is used as the weighting parameter
for Te in (8). This is because the greater the number of electrodes, the higher is the effort and cost needed to gather the
data, hence lower usability of the system.
In the following sections, the proposed metric, U, is used to
compare the systems covered in the review. These are grouped
by the different feature types that have been used for classification. As it was shown in Section III that the choice of feature is
crucial for EEG-based biometric systems, it is therefore, interesting to investigate the usability scores for the different feature

TABLE II
IDENTIFICATION COMPARISONS OF THE REPORTS USING PSD FOR FEATURE
EXTRACTION
Reports
Poulos et al. [41]
Palaniappan et al. [29]
Palaniappan [31]
Palaniappan [72]
Ravi et al. [32]
Palaniappan et al. [34]
Palaniappan et al. [35]
Sun Shiliang [84]
F.Su et al. [85]
Hema et al. [86]
Zhao et al. [87]
Quintela et al. [88]
La Rocca et al. [25]
Bai et al. [89]

N

K

Tr(s)

Te(s)

CRR(%)

U

4
10
20
20
40
40
102
9
40
15
10
70
108
20

1
61
61
61
61
35
61
15
1
2
1
8
56
32

3600
20
20
20
20
20
20
540
1800
160
100
45
50
10.8

4500
20
20
20
20
20
20
270
1800
40
50
45
10
1.2

95
95
94.18
99.06
96.63
98.56
98.12
95
97.5
89.95
96.77
99.1
100
97.25

0.05
0.76
1.52
1.59
3.13
5.56
8.33
0.10
1.09
5.56
6.25
8.33
77.14
39.53

TABLE III
IDENTIFICATION COMPARISONS OF THE REPORTS USING AR COEFFICIENTS FOR
FEATURE EXTRACTION
Reports

N

K

Tr(s)

Te(s)

CRR(%)

U

Poulos et al. [90]
Poulos et al. [41]
Paranjape et al. [43]
Poulos et al. [91]
Palaniappan et al. [36]
Palaniappan et al. [69]
Yazdani et al. [65]
F.Su et al. [85]
Zhao et al. [87]
Campisi et al. [45]
Kostilek [71]
La Rocca et al. [92]
Dan et al. [47]

4
4
40
4
4
5
20
40
10
48
9
45
13

1
1
1
1
6
6
61
1
1
3
53
3
1

3600
1800
34
3600
50
50
89
1800
100
43
45
43
9360

4500
6300
34
4500
50
50
1
1800
50
17
15
17
4680

72∼84
91∼97
80
99.5
99.04
99.88
100
97.5
96.77
96.08
98
98.73
87

0.04
0.05
47.06
0.05
1.14
1.43
0.36
1.09
6.25
49.06
1.05
47.26
0.08

types separately to explore the effectiveness before the feature
classification.
A. PSD-Based Systems
As it was stated in Section III.A, PSD features have been
amongst the most used for EEG biometric recognition. Table II
compares, with the help of the proposed metric, the effective
usability of some reported systems that employ these features.
The order of the listed papers follows the year of the publication
in ascending order. As it can be observed in Table II, the scores
generally tend to increase as the year of publication increase,
indicating a trend of improving usability of EEG biometric systems. The highest score listed in the table reached S = 77.14,
which indicates the best overall performance using PSD-based
features amongst the papers covered in this review.
B. AR-Based Systems
Feature extraction based on AR coefficients is another popular approach in EEG biometrics (Section III.B); some relevant
reports with experimental details are compared in Table III using the proposed usability metric. Based on this metric, the best

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
YANG AND DERAVI: ON THE USABILITY OF ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHIC SIGNALS FOR BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION: A SURVEY

TABLE IV
IDENTIFICATION COMPARISONS OF THE REPORTS USING OTHER ALGORITHMS
FOR FEATURE EXTRACTION
Reports
Gupta et al. [49]
Yang et al. [93]
Yeom et al. [59]
Yang et al. [51]
La Rocca et al. [94]
Yang et al. [50]
La Rocca et al. [25]
Phung et al. [61]
Yang et al. [55]

N

K

Tr(s)

Te(s)

CRR(%)

4
18
10
109
36
50
108
40
105

8
8
18
8
3
5
9
23
1

132
240
360
240
40
114
50
800
96

68
60
40
60
20
6
10
400
24

85
97.4
85.5
90
99.69
95.5
100%
97.1
99

U
0.51
2.43
0.79
14.29
35.89
33.16
77.14
0.39
89.93

9

these systems are developed and the real-world environments of
target applications for EEG biometric recognition (considering
the reported high accuracies and some systems with low usability scores). However, due to the limited number of the available
reports related to template Aging, it has not so far been possible to systematically consider the template Aging effect in
the relative evaluation of different EEG biometric recognition
systems.
Indeed, in biometric person recognition the template Aging
is an important consideration that may limit the usability of biometric systems in terms of the need for frequent acquisition of
new enrolment data. The comparisons reported in these tables
were either obtained using single session EEG data or trained
using concatenated data from multiple sessions. Therefore, the
factor of template Aging has been excluded from the proposed
metric. The following section is devoted to the issue of template Aging and suggests a way forward to extend the usability
evaluation framework to the analysis of template Aging effects
where test data is available.
D. Template Aging

Fig. 2.

Yearly plot of the usability scores.

performed system using the AR features performed better than
the best system using the PSD-based features amongst the papers reviewed in this survey.
C. Other Feature-Based Systems
In this section, papers reporting other features for use in EEG
biometrics are compared using the proposed metric in Table IV.
The usability score U = 89.93 was reported using a waveletbased feature, which is the best-reported performance amongst
the EEG biometrics papers covered in this survey.
The yearly cumulative usability scores of the reported EEG
biometric system are shown by Fig. 2. The usability scores of
the reported systems are summed per year. It is noticed the
score has a sharp increase in the year 2001. A possible reason
of this may have to do with the use of a manual data cleaning
process in that experiment: “the muscle (EMG), cardiac (ECG),
or other noise signals were removed” by “a trained neurologist”
[43]. The usability of EEG biometric appears to be consistently
increased in the past 5 years, a fact that is reflected by both the
growing r research effort in this area and the closer attention to
usability issues in system design.
In summary, the usability scores of the reported systems seem
to indicate that some of the early reported EEG biometric systems may have been focusing only on the recognition performance and ignored other important factors, such as the number
of electrodes and the recording length. The proposed usability
metric reveals the gap between the laboratory context where

Template Aging is an important phenomenon that impacts
the effectiveness and usability of biometric systems as the time
between enrolment and subsequent use of a biometric systems
is increased. Having a better understating of template Aging is
of particular importance for EEG biometrics as this is a relatively new modality and its performance characteristics with the
passage of time is yet to be firmly established.
In this section, we explore how the usability metric defined in
(8) may be extended to the case where data is available for more
than one set of tests separated in time. In this way, it is hoped that
the impact of template Aging may be incorporated in the relative
ranking of different EEG-based biometric systems as more data
becomes available. However, there are still only a very few
studies published where performance evaluations are reported
at different time intervals. We, therefore, start by mentioning
two of these studies that could be the basis for presenting the
extension to our usability analysis.
Template Aging effects when using mental-tasks with long
time interval between training and testing has been reported
in [71], where experiments were conducted using 53 electrodes
and 9 subjects (using actual and imagined motor tasks) from two
sessions, with a time interval of approximately 1 year. Using part
of the data from the first session for training and the rest of the
first session’s data as the test set, the CRR reached 98%; whereas
using the first session’s data for training and data of the second
session for testing, the CRR was reduced to 87.1%.
ERP data captured from a single sensor at the Oz position
was used for template Aging analysis for biometric recognition
by Blondet et al. [95]. They conducted the experiments with
15 subjects for multiple sessions with a time interval between
the first two sessions ranging from 5 to 40 days. Out of those
participants, nine returned for a third time, after 134–188 days
from the first session (mean: 156 days or 5 months). The time
domain cross-correlation was computed for feature extraction.
An “average accuracy of 0.99 was reported for the first session,
0.93 for the second session, and 0.84 for the third session.”

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
10

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON HUMAN-MACHINE SYSTEMS

TABLE V
MULTISESSION USABILITY ESTIMATION
Comparison U 0

UT

T (month)

System 1 [95] 1.375
System 2 [71] 0.27

1.29
0.24

0.5
12

Recently, Maiorana et al. [96] reported an EEG biometric
recognition system with promising results which addressed the
issue of single-session and multisession. Their experiments using the data acquired in a time span of approximately one month
and a half, both PSD and AR based features were investigated,
50 healthy subjects in resting state conditions were involved the
experiments.
Given that these reports provided at least two performance
measurements at a significant time separation, we propose the
following extension to our usability analysis in order to be able
to compare these systems, while taking into account the effect
of template Aging.
A new estimator Ut is proposed that will predict the usability
score for a system at any given time t given the usability scores
computed using (8) at two different points separated in time
separated by T. In the absence of substantial data to warrant a
more complex model, here we make a working assumption that
a linear model would be adequate for accounting for the change
in performance, and therefore usability, as a function of time
Ut = U0 − t

U0 − UT
.
UT

(9)

The new estimator is defined by (9), where U0 and UT represent the usability score for the first session and the second
session, respectively. Ut indicates the usability score at any particular time t for a given recognition system. Therefore, it is
possible to plot and compare the change in usability score for
two or more EEG biometric systems as long as at least two
recognition rates in different sessions are reported. For cases
where data for more than two sessions are available, it may
be possible to use a best fit line (or polynomial) to model the
change in performance as a function of time.
To illustrate the proposed usability analysis framework, we
use the data from two of the papers mentioned above ([81]
and [107]), where multisession recognition rates are reported
together with clear indications of time separation. The usability
scores at different time separations for these two systems are
computed using (8) and recorded in Table V.
In order to compare these two systems’ usability score at a
given time, these two systems ([95] and [71]) are represented by
“System 1” and “System 2,” respectively in Fig. 3 where their
Ut is plotted as a function of t.
Fig. 3 shows the trend in the degradation of the two systems’
usability scores during 12 months, assuming a linear model.
System 1 is seen to provide much better usability in the first few
months. However, after approximately 7 months the usability of
System 2 is seen to surpass that of System 1.
Clearly, this analysis framework can be significantly enhanced as more data at different time intervals becomes available

Fig. 3.

Illustration of the multisession usability analysis.

making it possible to produce better models of the template Aging effects. However, given the current quantity and quality of
the data available, it presents a first approximation at trying to
establish the relative merit of published systems.
The results reported so far suggest that while template Aging
may result in a decrease in accuracy and usability in EEGbased biometric systems, the impact of Aging may be limited.
However, these are for based on tests using few subjects and
relatively short temporal separations. More research is required
to quantify the nature and extent of template Aging effects in
EEG biometrics.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper provided a review of the recent literature on EEGbased biometric person recognition. As this is a relatively new
biometric modality, the literature has been focused on establishing the presence of biometric information in EEG signals. The
use of EEG biometrics in real-world application scenario would
need much more research to address the shortcomings of the
work done to date especially with regards to the quantity and
nature of data available for system evaluations.
The search for better acquisition systems, signal preprocessing, feature extraction, and classification should target the goal
of reducing the sensor costs (electrode numbers) and quantity
of data needed for training and testing while maintaining high
recognition rates. Quantifying and ameliorating the effects of
template Aging in EEG biometrics remains an important area
for further research.
REFERENCES
[1] E. Niedermeyer and F. H. L. da Silva, Electroencephalography: Basic
Principles, Clinical Applications, and Related Fields. Philadelphia, PA,
USA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2005.
[2] B. E. Swartz, “The advantages of digital over analog recording techniques,” Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 106, no. 2,
pp. 113–117, Feb. 1998.
[3] A. Coenen, E. Fine, and O. Zayachkivska, “Adolf Beck: A forgotten
pioneer in electroencephalography,” J. Hist. Neurosci., vol. 23, no. 3,
pp. 276–86, Jan. 2014.
[4] L. F. Haas, “Hans Berger (1873-1941), Richard Caton (1842-1926), and
electroencephalography,” J. Neurol. Neurosurgery Psychiatry, vol. 74,
no. 1, pp. 9–9, Jan. 2003.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
YANG AND DERAVI: ON THE USABILITY OF ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHIC SIGNALS FOR BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION: A SURVEY

[5] S. Aydin, H. M. Saraoğlu, and S. Kara, “Log energy entropy-based EEG
classification with multilayer neural networks in seizure,” Ann. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 37, no. 12, pp. 2626–30, Dec. 2009.
[6] M. Poulos, M. Rangoussi, and N. Alexandris, “Neural network based
person identification using EEG features,” in Proc. 1999 IEEE Int. Conf.
Acoust., Speech, Signal Process., 1999, vol. 2, pp. 1117–1120.
[7] P. Campisi and D. La Rocca, “Brain waves for automatic biometric based
user recognition,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 9, no. 5,
pp. 782–800, May 2014.
[8] S. N. Abbas, M. Abo-Zahhad, and S. M. Ahmed, “State-of-the-art
methods and future perspectives for personal recognition based on
electroencephalogram signals,” IET Biometrics, vol. 4, pp. 179–190,
Mar. 2015.
[9] R. W. Homan, J. Herman, and P. Purdy, “Cerebral location of international
10–20 system electrode placement,” Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 66, no. 4, pp. 376–382, Apr. 1987.
[10] “EEG Motor Movement/Imagery Dataset.” [Online]. Available:
http://www.physionet.org/pn4/eegmmidb/. Accessed on: Apr. 20,
2015.
[11] G. Chatrian, “Ten percent electrode system for topographic studies of
spontaneous and evoked EEG activity,” Amer. J. Electroencephalogr. Technol., vol. 25, pp. 83–92, 1985.
[12] W. O. Tatum, “Ellen R. Grass lecture: Extraordinary EEG,” Neurodiagn.
J., vol. 54, pp. 3–21, Jan. 2014.
[13] “Neurosky Products.” [Online]. Available: http://store.neurosky.
com/products. Accessed on Apr. 20, 2015.
[14] G. Schalk, D. J. McFarland, T. Hinterberger, N. Birbaumer, and J. R.
Wolpaw, “BCI2000: A general-purpose brain-computer interface (BCI)
system,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 1034–43,
Jun. 2004.
[15] schalklab, “BCI 2000.” [Online]. Available: http://www.schalklab.
org/research/bci2000. Accessed on May 21, 2015.
[16] “Emotiv.” [Online]. Available: http://emotiv.com/. Accessed on Apr 20,
2015.
[17] “MindWave.” [Online]. Available: http://store.neurosky.com/products/
mindwave-1. Accessed on Jul 10, 2015.
[18] “OCZ NIA Neural Impulse Actuator: Amazon.co.uk: Computers & Accessories.” [Online]. Available: http://www.amazon.co.uk/OCZ-NIA-NeuralImpulse-Actuator/dp/B00168VU4U. Accessed on Jul 10, 2015.
[19] “Melon Headband.” [Online]. Available: http://www.thinkmelon.com/.
Accessed on Jul 10, 2015.
[20] “HiBrain.” [Online]. Available: http://www.hyperneuro.cn/. Accessed on
Jul 10, 2015.
[21] “FocusBand - Mind Training Headset.” [Online]. Available: http://www.
ifocusband.com/. Accessed on Jul 10, 2015.
[22] “MUSE | Meditation Made Easy.” [Online]. Available: http://www.
choosemuse.com/. Accessed on Jul 10, 2015.
[23] “OpenBCI.” [Online]. Available: http://www.openbci.com/. Accessed on
Jul 10, 2015.
[24] “Aurora Dream Headband.” [Online]. Available: https://iwinks.org/. Accessed on Jul 10, 2015.
[25] D. LA Rocca et al., “Human brain distinctiveness based on EEG spectral coherence connectivity,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 61, no. 9,
pp. 2406–2412, Sep. 2014.
[26] M. Fraschini, A. Hillebrand, M. Demuru, L. Didaci, and G. L. Marcialis, “An EEG-based biometric system using eigenvector centrality in
resting state brain networks,” IEEE Signal Process. Lett., vol. 22, no. 6,
pp. 666–670, Jun. 2015.
[27] S. J. Luck, An Introduction to the Event-Related Potential Technique.
Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2014.
[28] E. Donchin, K. M. Spencer, and R. Wijesinghe, “The mental prosthesis:
assessing the speed of a P300-based brain-computer interface,” IEEE
Trans. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 174–179, Jun. 2000.
[29] R. Palaniappan and P. Raveendran, “Individual identification technique
using visual evoked potential signals,” Electron. Lett., vol. 38, no. 25,
Dec. 2002, Art. no. 1634.
[30] J. G. Snodgrass and M. Vanderwart, “A standardized set of 260 pictures:
Norms for name agreement, image agreement, familiarity, and visual complexity,” J. Exp. Psychol. Hum. Learn. Mem., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 174–215,
1980.
[31] R. Palaniappan, “A new method to identify individuals using signals from
the brain,” in Proc. Joint Conf. 4th Int. Conf. Inf., Commun. Signal Process., 4th Pacific Rim Conf. Multimedia, 2003, pp. 1442–1445.
[32] R. Palaniappan, “Recognising individuals using their brain patterns,” in
Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Inf. Technol. Appl., 2005, vol. 2, pp. 520–523.

11

[33] R. Palaniappan, “Vision related brain activity for biometric authentication,” in Proc. 32nd Annu. Conf. IEEE Ind. Electron., 2006,
pp. 3227–3231.
[34] R. Palaniappan and D. P. Mandic, “EEG based biometric framework for
automatic identity verification,” J. VLSI Signal Process. Syst. Signal Image. Video Technol., vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 243–250, Jun. 2007.
[35] R. Palaniappan and D. P. Mandic, “Biometrics from brain electrical activity: a machine learning approach,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
Intell., vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 738–42, Apr. 2007.
[36] R. Palaniappan, “Identifying individuality using mental task based brain
computer interface,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Intell. Sensing Inf. Process.,
2005, pp. 238–242.
[37] S. Marcel and J. D. R. Millán, “Person authentication using brainwaves
(EEG) and maximum a posteriori model adaptation.,” IEEE Trans. Pattern
Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 743–52, Apr. 2007.
[38] J. Chuang, H. Nguyen, C. Wang, and B. Johnson, “I think, therefore I
am: Usability and security of authentication using brainwaves,” in Proc.
Workshop Usable Security, 2013, vol. 424422, pp. 1–16.
[39] A. Oppenheim, Discrete-Time Signal Processing. Englewood Cliffs, NJ,
USA: Prentice-Hall, 1989.
[40] G. Safont, A. Salazar, A. Soriano, and L. Vergara, “Combination of multiple detectors for EEG based biometric identification/authentication,”
in Proc. 2012 IEEE Int. Carnahan Conf. Security Technol., 2012,
pp. 230–236.
[41] M. Poulos, M. Rangoussi, V. Chrissikopoulos, and A. Evangelou, “Parametric person identification from the EEG using computational geometry,”
in Proc. 6th IEEE Int. Conf. Electron., Circuits Syst., 1999, vol. 2, no. 2,
pp. 1005–1008.
[42] H. Akaike, “A new look at the statistical model identification,” IEEE
Trans. Automat. Control, vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 716–723, Dec. 1974.
[43] R. B. Paranjape, J. Mahovsky, L. Benedicenti, and Z. Koles’, “The electroencephalogram as a biometric,” in Proc. Canadian Conf. Elect. Comput.
Eng., 2001, vol. 2, pp. 1363–1366.
[44] A. Riera, A. Soria-Frisch, M. Caparrini, C. Grau, and G. Ruffini, “Unobtrusive biometric system based on electroencephalogram analysis,” EURASIP
J. Adv. Signal Process., vol. 2008, no. 1, 2008, Art. no. 143728.
[45] P. Campisi et al., “Brain waves based user recognition using the ‘ Eyes
Closed Resting Conditions ’ protocol,” in Proc. 2011 IEEE Int. Workshop
Inf. Forensics Security, 2011, pp. 16–19.
[46] E. Maiorana, J. Solé-Casals, and P. Campisi, “EEG signal preprocessing
for biometric recognition,” Mach. Vis. Appl., vol. 27, no. 8, pp. 1351–1360,
2016.
[47] Z. Dan, Z. Xifeng, and G. Qiangang, “An Identification System Based on
Portable EEG Acquisition Equipment,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Intell. Syst.
Design Eng. Appl., 2013, pp. 281–284.
[48] I. Daubechies, Ten Lectures on Wavelets, vol. 61. Philadelphia, PA, USA:
Society Ind. Appl. Math., 1992.
[49] C. N. Gupta, Y. U. Khan, R. Palaniappan, and F. Sepulveda, “Wavelet
framework for improved target detection in oddball paradigms using P300
and gamma band analysis,” Biosensors, Data Acquisition, Process. Control, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 61–67, 2009.
[50] S. Yang and F. Deravi, “Wavelet-based EEG preprocessing for biometric applications,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Emerg. Security Technol.,
Sep. 2013, pp. 43–46.
[51] S. Yang and F. Deravi, “Quality filtering of EEG signals for enhanced
biometric recognition,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Biometrics Special Interest
Group, 2013, pp. 1–4.
[52] N. E. Huang et al., “The empirical mode decomposition and the Hilbert
spectrum for nonlinear and non-stationary time series analysis,” Proc.
Roy. Soc. A, Math. Phys. Eng. Sci., vol. 454, no. 1971, pp. 903–995,
Mar. 1998.
[53] P. Flandrin, G. Rilling, and P. Gonçalvés, “Empirical mode decomposition
as a filter bank,” Signal Process. Lett., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 112–114, 2004.
[54] P. Kumarii, S. Kumar, and A. Vaishi, “Feature extraction using emprical mode decomposition for biometric system,” in Proc. Signal Propag.
Comput. Technol., 2014, pp. 283–287.
[55] S. Yang and F. Deravi, “Novel HHT-based features for biometric identification using EEG signals,” in Proc. 22nd Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit.,
Aug. 2014, pp. 1922–1927.
[56] N. E. Huang, Z. Wu, S. R. Long, K. C. Arnold, X. Chen, and K. Blank,
“On instantaneous frequency,” Adv. Adapt. Data Anal., vol. 1, no. 2,
pp. 177–229, 2009.
[57] G. K. Singhal and P. RamKumar, “Person identification using evoked
potentials and peak matching,” in Proc. Biometrics Symp., 2007,
pp. 1–6.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
12

[58] X. Huang, “Human identification with electroencephalogram ( EEG )
signal processing,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Commun. Inf. Technol., 2012,
pp. 1021–1026.
[59] S.-W. L. Seul-Ki Yearn and Heung-II Suk, “EEG-based Person authentication using face stimuli,” in Proc. Int. Winter Workshop Brain-Comput.
Interface, 2013, pp. 58–61.
[60] B. Blankertz, S. Lemm, M. Treder, S. Haufe, and K. Müller, “Single-trial
analysis and classification of ERP components—A tutorial,” Neuroimage,
vol. 56, no. 2, pp. 814–825, 2011.
[61] D. Phung, D. Tran, W. Ma, P. Nguyen, and T. Pham, “Using Shannon
entropy as EEG signal feature for fast person identification,” in Proc. Eur.
Symp. Artif. Neural Netw., 2014, pp. 23–25.
[62] S. B. Kotsiantis, I. D. Zaharakis, and P. E. Pintelas, “Machine learning:
A review of classification and combining techniques,” Artif. Intell. Rev.,
vol. 26, pp. 159–190, 2006.
[63] S. J. Russell, P. Norvig, J. F. Canny, J. M. Malik, D. D. Edwards, and
S. J. S. Jonathan, Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, vol. 13.
Egnlewood Cliffs, NJ. USA: Prentice-Hall, 1995.
[64] F. Nigsch, A. Bender, B. van Buuren, J. Tissen, E. Nigsch, and J. B. O.
Mitchell, “Melting point prediction employing k-nearest neighbor algorithms and genetic parameter optimization,” J. Chem. Inf. Model., vol. 46,
no. 6, pp. 2412–22, Jan. 2006.
[65] A. Yazdani, A. Roodaki, S. H. Rezatofighi, K. Misaghian, and S. K.
Setarehdan, “Fisher linear discriminant based person identification using
visual evoked potentials,” in Proc. 9th Int. Conf. Signal Process., 2008,
pp. 1677–1680.
[66] F. Su, L. Xia, A. Cai, and J. Ma, “Evaluation of recording factors in EEGbased personal identification: A vital step in real implementations,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Syst., Man Cybern., 2010, pp. 3861–3866.
[67] G. McLachlan, Discriminant Analysis and Statistical Pattern Recognition.
Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2004.
[68] R. A. Fisher, “The use of multiple measurements in taxonomic problems,”
Ann. Eugen., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 179–188, Sep. 1936.
[69] R. Palaniappan, “Electroencephalogram signals from imagined activities:
A novel biometric identifier for a small population,” in Proc. Intell. Data
Eng. Autom. Learn., 2006, pp. 604–611.
[70] H. J. Lee, H. S. Kim, and K. S. Park, “A study on the reproducibility of
biometric authentication based on electroencephalogram (EEG),” in Proc.
2013 6th Int. IEEE/EMBS Conf. Neural Eng., 2013, pp. 13–16.
[71] J. S. Kostilek, M., “EEG biometric identification: Repeatability and influence of movement-related EEG,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Appl. Electron., 2012,
pp. 147–150.
[72] R. Palaniappan, “Method of identifying individuals using VEP signals
and neural network,” IEE Proc.—Sci., Meas. Technol., vol. 151, no. 1,
pp. 16–20, 2004.
[73] R. Palaniappan, J. Gosalia, K. Revett, and A. Samraj, “PIN Generation
Using Single Channel EEG Biometric,” in Proc. Adv. Comput. Commun.,
2011, pp. 378–385.
[74] Q. Gui and Z. Jin, “Exploring EEG-based biometrics for user identification
and authentication,” in Proc. Signal Process. Med. Biol. Sympo., 2014,
pp. 1–6.
[75] F. Minow, “EASY CAP | EEG Recording Caps and Related Products |
FMS | Falk Minow Services,” FMS - Falk Minow Services, Germany,
accessed on Sep. 27, 2016, [Online]. Available: www.easycap.de
[76] A. Graves, M. Liwicki, S. Fernández, R. Bertolami, H. Bunke, and J.
Schmidhuber, “A novel connectionist system for unconstrained handwriting recognition,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 31, no. 5,
pp. 855–68, May 2009.
[77] D. Ciresan, U. Meier, and J. Schmidhuber, “Multi-column deep neural
networks for image classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit., 2012, pp. 3642–3649.
[78] A. Aizerman, E. Braverman, and L. Rozoner, “Theoretical foundations
of the potential function method in pattern recognition learning,” Autom.
Remote Control, vol. 25, pp. 821–837, 1964.
[79] C. Cortes and V. Vapnik, “Support-vector networks,” Mach. Learn.,
vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 273–297, Sep. 1995.
[80] H. U. Jian-feng, “Comparison of different classifiers for biometric system
based on EEG signals,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Technol. Comput. Sci.,
2010, pp. 288–291.
[81] C. Ashby, A. Bhatia, F. Tenore, and J. Vogelstein, “Low-cost electroencephalogram (EEG) based authentication,” in Proc. 5th Int. IEEE/EMBS
Conf. Neural Eng., 2011, pp. 442–445.
[82] C.-W. Hsu and C.-J. Lin, “A comparison of methods for multiclass support
vector machines,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw., vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 415–25,
Jan. 2002.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON HUMAN-MACHINE SYSTEMS

[83] R. Palaniappan and K. V. R. Ravi, “Improving visual evoked potential feature classification for person recognition using PCA and normalization,”
Pattern Recognit. Lett., vol. 27, no. 7, pp. 726–733, May 2006.
[84] S. Sun, “Multitask learning for EEG-based biometrics,” in Proc. 19th Int.
Conf. Pattern Recognit., 2008, pp. 1–4.
[85] F. Su, L. Xia, A. Cai, Y. Wu, and J. Ma, “EEG-based personal identification: From proof-of-concept to a practical system,” in Proc. 20th Int.
Conf. Pattern Recognit., 2010, pp. 3728–3731.
[86] C. R. Hema and A. A. Osman, “Single trial analysis on EEG signatures
to identify individuals,” in Proc. 6th Int. Colloq. Signal Process. Appl.,
2010, pp. 1–3.
[87] Q. Zhao, H. Peng, B. Hu, Q. Liu, and L. Liu, “Improving individual
identification in security check with an EEG based biometric solution,” in
Brain Informatics. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2010, pp. 145–155.
[88] B. Quintela and S. Cunha, “Biometric authentication using brain responses
to visual stimuli,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Bio-Inspired Syst. Signal Process.,
2010, pp. 103–112.
[89] Y. Bai, Z. Zhang, and D. Ming, “Feature selection and channel optimization for biometric identification based on visual evoked potentials,” in
Proc. 19th Int. Conf. Digit. Signal Process., 2014, pp. 772–776.
[90] M. Poulos, M. Rangoussi, V. Chrissikopoulos, and A. Evangelou, “Parametric person identification from the EEG using computational geometry,” in Proc. 6th IEEE Int. Conf. Electron., Circuits Syst., 1999, vol. 2,
pp. 1005–1008.
[91] M. Poulos, M. Rangoussi, N. Alexandris, and A. Evangelou, “Person identification from the EEG using nonlinear signal classification,” Methods Inf.
Med., vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 64–75, Jan. 2002.
[92] D. La Rocca, P. Campisi, and G. Scarano, “EEG biometrics for individual
recognition in resting state with closed eyes,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Biometrics
Special Interest Group, 2012, pp. 1–12.
[93] S. Yang and F. Deravi, “On the effectiveness of EEG signals as a source of
biometric information,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Emerg. Security Technol.,
2012, pp. 49–52.
[94] D. La Rocca, P. Campisi, and J. Sol, “EEG based user recognition using
BUMP modelling,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Biometrics Special Interest Group,
2013, pp. 1–12.
[95] M. V. R. Blondet and S. Laszlo, “Assessment of permanence of nonvolitional EEG brainwaves as a biometric,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Identity, Security Behavior Anal., 2015, pp. 1–6.
[96] E. Maiorana, D. La Rocca, and P. Campisi, “On the permanence of EEG
signals for biometric recognition,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security,
vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 163–175, Jan. 2016.

Su Yang received the B.A. degree in mechanical engineering from Changchun University of Technology,
Changchun, China, in 2008, the M.Sc. degree in information technology from the University of Abertay
Dundee, Dundee, U.K., in 2010, and the Ph.D. degree in electronic engineering from the University of
Kent, Canterbury, U.K., in 2015.
During his Ph.D. studies, he worked in the Intelligent Interactions Research Group at the School of
Engineering and Digital Arts, where his research was
focus on using EEG for biometric person recognition.
He is currently Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA, as a Post-Doctoral
Research Associate in the College of Engineering. His current research interests
include signal processing, pattern recognition, and EEG-event detection.

Farzin Deravi received the B.A. degree in engineering science and economics from the University of
Oxford, Oxford, U.K., in 1981, the M.Sc. degree in
communications engineering from Imperial College
London, London, U.K., in 1982, and the Ph.D. degree in electronic engineering from the University of
Wales, Cardiff, U.K., in 1988.
He is currently with the School of Engineering and
Digital Arts, University of Kent, Canterbury, U.K.,
where he is a Reader in Information Engineering.
His current research interests include the fields of
pattern recognition and signal processing and their application in security and
healthcare.

