ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 30 November 2018
doi: 10.3389/fphys.2018.01704

Multifractal Dynamic Functional
Connectivity in the Resting-State
Brain
Frigyes Samuel Racz, Orestis Stylianou, Peter Mukli and Andras Eke*
Department of Physiology, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary

Edited by:
Plamen Ch. Ivanov,
Boston University, United States
Reviewed by:
Chengyu Huo,
Changshu Institute of Technology,
China
Sebastiano Stramaglia,
Università degli Studi di Bari, Italy
*Correspondence:
Andras Eke
eke.andras@med.semmelweis-univ.hu
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Fractal Physiology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Physiology
Received: 19 July 2018
Accepted: 12 November 2018
Published: 30 November 2018
Citation:
Racz FS, Stylianou O, Mukli P and
Eke A (2018) Multifractal Dynamic
Functional Connectivity in the
Resting-State Brain.
Front. Physiol. 9:1704.
doi: 10.3389/fphys.2018.01704

Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org

Assessing the functional connectivity (FC) of the brain has proven valuable in enhancing
our understanding of brain function. Recent developments in the field demonstrated that
FC fluctuates even in the resting state, which has not been taken into account by the
widely applied static approaches introduced earlier. In a recent study using functional
near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) global dynamic functional connectivity (DFC) has
also been found to fluctuate according to scale-free i.e., fractal dynamics evidencing
the true multifractal (MF) nature of DFC in the human prefrontal cortex. Expanding
on these findings, we performed electroencephalography (EEG) measurements in 14
regions over the whole cortex of 24 healthy, young adult subjects in eyes open
(EO) and eyes closed (EC) states. We applied dynamic graph theoretical analysis to
capture DFC by computing the pairwise time-dependent synchronization between brain
regions and subsequently calculating the following dynamic graph topological measures:
Density, Clustering Coefficient, and Efficiency. We characterized the dynamic nature of
these global network metrics as well as local individual connections in the networks
using focus-based multifractal time series analysis in all traditional EEG frequency
bands. Global network topological measures were found fluctuating–albeit at different
extent–according to true multifractal nature in all frequency bands. Moreover, the
monofractal Hurst exponent was found higher during EC than EO in the alpha and
beta bands. Individual connections showed a characteristic topology in their fractal
properties, with higher autocorrelation owing to short-distance connections–especially
those in the frontal and pre-frontal cortex–while long-distance connections linking the
occipital to the frontal and pre-frontal areas expressed lower values. The same topology
was found with connection-wise multifractality in all but delta band connections, where
the very opposite pattern appeared. This resulted in a positive correlation between global
autocorrelation and connection-wise multifractality in the higher frequency bands, while a
strong anticorrelation in the delta band. The proposed analytical tools allow for capturing
the fine details of functional connectivity dynamics that are evidently present in DFC, with
the presented results implying that multifractality is indeed an inherent property of both
global and local DFC.
Keywords: functional connectivity, dynamic functional connectivity, multifractal analyses, brain, synchronization
likelihood (SL), self-organized criticality (SOC), electroencephalography (EEG)

1

November 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1704

Racz et al.

Multifractal Dynamic Functional Brain Connectivity

INTRODUCTION

Calhoun et al., 2014; Damaraju et al., 2014). As graph theory
provides a useful tool in characterizing complex networks of
the brain (Bullmore and Sporns, 2009) along several topological
aspects (Rubinov and Sporns, 2010), dynamic graph theoretical
analysis is also frequently applied (Tagliazucchi et al., 2012b; Yu
et al., 2015; Du et al., 2016; Racz et al., 2018). Finally, some DFC
studies focus–instead of on global network topology–only on one
or a few individual connections between specific regions (RackGomer and Liu, 2012) or intrinsic connectivity networks (Chang
and Glover, 2010; Allen et al., 2014). The fluctuating nature
of DFC is then usually captured in measures such as standard
deviation (Kucyi and Davis, 2014; Falahpour et al., 2016) or
coefficient of variation (Gonzalez-Castillo et al., 2014), however
these descriptive measures may be insensitive to finer temporal
structuring, which may well be present in DFC.
Although large-scale DFC attracted increasing attention
only recently, the dynamic nature of the functional coupling
between neuronal cell assemblies had been addressed earlier
(Friston, 2000). In fact, functional connectivity for modalities like
electroencephalography (EEG) and magnetoencephalography
(MEG) was reported having non-linear characteristics (Stam and
van Dijk, 2002; Stam et al., 2003). Also, it was shown that several
properties of DFC did not have a characteristic time-scale, instead
they showed scale-free (fractal) dynamics; Gong et al. (2003)
presented that fluctuations in phase synchronization between
brain regions were scale-free with the characterizing exponent
being stable across multiple subjects. Stam and de Bruin (2004)
investigated DFC in terms of global synchronization and found
that in the alpha and beta bands it scaled with a higher exponent
with eyes closed than open. EEG microstates—periods where
EEG topography remains constant for 80–120 ms (Lehmann
et al., 1987)—also exhibited fractal dynamics as reported by Van
de Ville et al. (2010). While these studies evidenced fine, complex
temporal structuring present in functional connectivity dynamics
both on global (state) and local (individual connection) levels, to
the best of our knowledge still only a few studies investigated the
scale-free nature of DFC.
Global scale-free (i.e., monofractal) behavior is most
commonly characterized by the Hurst exponent (H) in the
time-, and by the negative power spectral slope (i.e., scaling
exponent, β) in the frequency domain (Eke et al., 2000, 2002). H
and β are inherently interrelated (Eke et al., 2002) as they both
characterize the global long-range correlation (LRC) in a signal.
This is established by the Wiener-Khinchin theorem stating
that the power spectrum is equivalent to the Fourier-transform
of the linear autocorrelation function (Kantz and Schreiber,
2004). Describing dynamics through only H or β implicitly
assumes that frequency components of the power spectrum
are independent/random, and information encoded in the
phase angles is not considered. According to the definition by
Schreiber and Schmitz (2000) this property holds only for linear
dynamics. As mentioned above, functional connections in the
brain has been shown to be non-linear, which calls for more
in-depth analysis techniques capable of providing a detailedenough description of their dynamic characteristics. At this end,
multifractal analysis considers scaling as a local instead of a global
property of the signal (Mandelbrot, 1986; Tel, 1988; Theiler,

Functions
of
the
brain
emerge
from
dynamic
interactions between the elements of its complex neuronal
networks (Chialvo, 2010; Werner, 2010). This phenomenon
is present across a broad range of spatial scales from the
microanatomical level of individual neurons through neuronal
cell assemblies to macroanatomical brain regions (Sporns, 2011).
Pioneering works by Friston et al. (1993) and Biswal et al. (1995)
paved the way to the emergence of a new field of neuroscience
aiming at describing brain function through its anatomical
and functional connectivity (FC) (Sporns et al., 2005; van den
Heuvel and Hulshoff Pol, 2010; Friston, 2011). The key concept
underlying the latter is assessing the statistical interdependence
of neural activity registered at disparate regions of the brain, as it
is assumed to be proportional to the degree of their functional
cooperation (Friston et al., 1993). FC studies did not only reveal
the existence of several resting-state brain networks such as
the default mode network (Raichle et al., 2001; Greicius et al.,
2003) or the task-positive network (Fox et al., 2005), but also
showed that FC properties responded to changes in physiological
conditions e.g., sleep (Horovitz et al., 2009; Liu et al., 2015) or
cognitive stimulation (Esposito et al., 2006; Racz et al., 2017). In
addition, altered FC was also found in pathological conditions
like those in degenerative dementias (Pievani et al., 2011),
schizophrenia (Liu et al., 2008), or multiple sclerosis (Cader
et al., 2006).
Until recently, most studies typically considered connections
in functional networks and thus FC itself, too, as being stationary
despite the fact that a dynamic approach might provide a more
detailed and more realistic description of brain connectivity
(Hutchison et al., 2013a). Indeed it has been shown that FC
dynamically fluctuates even in the resting state (Chang and
Glover, 2010) and also during task modulation (Sakoglu et al.,
2010). Since then, investigating dynamic functional connectivity
(DFC) has become one of the most rapidly evolving fields
of neuroscience with a steadily expanding body of literature
(Hutchison et al., 2013a; Calhoun et al., 2014; Preti et al., 2017).
In FC studies most often functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) is used to monitor brain activity with high
spatial resolution and precise anatomical localization (Hutchison
et al., 2013a; Preti et al., 2017). Fluctuations in FC are usually
captured with a sliding-window (SW) approach, however other
approaches such as point process analysis (Tagliazucchi et al.,
2012a) or paradigm free mapping (Gaudes et al., 2013) have
also been presented. During SW analysis, FC is calculated from
a small data segment (i.e., within the actual window), then the
window is advanced by a predefined time step and the process
is repeated until the whole signal is covered. To assess FC
within the actual window, statistical interdependence is usually
estimated by bivariate statistical methods as Pearson-correlation
(Hutchison et al., 2013b), but multivariate methods such as
spatial independent component analysis (Allen et al., 2014) or
time-frequency methods (Chang and Glover, 2010) are also
often used. DFC is then described through–including but not
limited to–properties such as the number of stable global states,
their variability, and transition probabilities (Allen et al., 2014;

Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org

2

November 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1704

Racz et al.

Multifractal Dynamic Functional Brain Connectivity

MATERIALS AND METHODS

1990), yielding a set of exponents characterizing the scaling in
the signal (Kantelhardt et al., 2002; Barunik and Kristoufek,
2010). Moreover, using the method of decomposing a signal into
the sign and magnitude time series of its increments (Ashkenazy
et al., 2001), it has been shown that multifractal properties of a
signal correlated well with its degree of non-linearity (Ashkenazy
et al., 2003; Gomez-Extremera et al., 2016; Bernaola-Galvan
et al., 2017). Since the seminal work of Ivanov et al. (1999), a
diverse set of physiological processes were shown to exhibit
multifractal dynamics such as human heart rate variability
(Ivanov et al., 2001; Ashkenazy et al., 2003), motor coordination
(Ihlen and Vereijken, 2013) or gait dynamics (Ashkenazy et al.,
2002). Multifractal analysis of human heartbeat dynamics was
also able to capture the separate effects of sympathetic and
parasympathetic blockade (Nunes Amaral et al., 2001) as well
as reveal the impact of congestive heart failure as the loss of
multifractality, substantiating future clinical and diagnostic
applications (Ivanov et al., 1999, 2001, 2004). The multifractal
nature of neural dynamics was also reported using several
different modalities (Shimizu et al., 2004; Wink et al., 2008; Ihlen
and Vereijken, 2010), therefore a multifractal approach appears
a proper choice when investigating the supposedly rich dynamic
properties of functional connectivity.
A recent study using dynamic graph theoretical analysis of
multichannel functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) data
demonstrated that DFC in the human pre-frontal cortex (PFC)
expressed multifractal properties (Racz et al., 2018). In this paper
we make an attempt on expanding some of the limitations
of this previous study: firstly by investigating DFC based on
whole-head measurements instead of relying on those only in
the PFC, and secondly by considering not only the temporal
evolution of global network properties but describing the
dynamic fluctuations of individual connections in the network
as well. We estimate dynamic functional connectivity based
on whole-head EEG measurements using the synchronization
likelihood method (Stam and van Dijk, 2002) and apply
dynamic graph theoretical analysis. By doing so, we calculate
the temporal evolution of three network measures—Density,
Clustering Coefficient, and Efficiency—, in order to characterize
separate topological aspects of the dynamic networks. Then, both
global DFC (as captured in the fluctuations of these network
measures) and individual dynamic connections (captured as the
fluctuating synchronization levels between regions) are made
subject to multifractal time series analysis to reveal their dynamic
properties. We performed EEG measurements in eyes open
(EO) and eyes closed (EC) states in male and female subjects,
which allowed for exploring differences related to state, gender,
and network measure. Furthermore, analysis of individual
connections between different brain regions allowed us to show
if they express not only mono- but indeed multifractal character
and also if they show any particular topological pattern regarding
their dynamic properties. Our findings imply that multifractal
analysis of the dynamics of global functional connectivity as
well as that of individual functional connections may provide
a valuable tool when extracting information on the temporal
structuring of DFC and carry potentials for experimental and/or
clinical applications as well.

Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org

Participants, Experimental Protocol and
Data Acquisition
A total of 24 young, healthy volunteers (age: 24.25 ± 2.4 ranging
from 20 to 29 years, 12 female) participated in this study. This
number of subjects was determined by statistical power analysis
of preliminary measurements. The study was approved by the
Semmelweis University Regional and Institutional Committee
of Science and Research Ethics (ethical approval number:
2017/94) and all subjects provided written informed consent.
No participants had reported history of any neurological or
psychiatric disorders. Test subjects were instructed not to
consume any stimulant (e.g., caffeine) at least 4 h prior to
participating and to have at least 6 h of sleep the night before.
During the measurement, subjects were seated comfortably in
an armchair in a light- and sound-attenuated, electrically sealed
room, instructed to remain still, retrain from structured thinking
while remaining awake. Resting-state EEG measurements were
performed with eyes open (EO) while visually fixating on a dot on
a computer screen, followed by another recording session with
eyes closed (EC), resulting in four analysis groups: female eyes
open, female eyes closed, male eyes open and male eyes closed
(FEO , FEC , MEO and MEC , respectively). The recorded signals
were visually inspected online, and a session was completed once
an artifact-free 305 s record in both EO and EC state have been
obtained, which was achieved within 20 min with all subjects.
Measurements were carried out using an Emotiv Epoc+
wireless EEG system (Emotiv Systems Inc., San Francisco, CA,
USA), acquiring signals from 14 brain regions according to the
10–20 international system, including AF3, F3, F7 FC5, T7, P7,
O1, O2, P8, T8, FC6, F8, F4, and AF4 with additional CMS/DRL
reference electrodes at P3 and P4 positions. Data was sampled
at 2,048 Hz and internally band-pass filtered between 0.2 and
45 Hz with additional notch filters at 50 and 60 Hz, then downsampled to an effective temporal resolution of 128 Hz. Electrode
impedances were kept under 20 k during signal acquisition.
All measurements were performed with maximal contact quality
confirmed by the provided Emotiv Xavier TestBenchTM software
(version 3.1.18).

EEG Data Pre-processing
EEG data was pre-processed off-line in Matlab 2012a (The
Mathworks, Natick, MA, USA) using the freely available
EEGLAB toolbox (Delorme and Makeig, 2004) along with
custom scripts and functions. Independent Component Analysis
(ICA) was performed (Hyvarinen and Oja, 2000) to remove
signal components related to eye movement, blinking, muscle
contraction and general noise. These components were identified
by their power spectra, visual appearance, and spatial power
distribution over the cortex and rejected from the data before
performing inverse ICA. Subsequently, the ICA-pruned datasets
were band-pass filtered in the traditional frequency bands used in
EEG-analysis: δ, 0.5–4 Hz; θ, 4–8 Hz; α, 8–13 Hz; α, 13–30 Hz, and
γ, 30–45 Hz according to Stam and de Bruin (2004). All further
analyses were also performed on broadband (unfiltered), ICApruned signals as well. The first and last 2 s of each measurement

3

November 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1704

Racz et al.

Multifractal Dynamic Functional Brain Connectivity

SL(t) is then computed for every time point t. Note, that the
concept of synchronization likelihood is strongly related to the
correlation integral (Grassberger and Procaccia, 1983) and can
be considered as a so called “fixed-mass” or “k-nearest-neighbor”
approach (Theiler, 1990).
In this study, initial parameters of SL (d, m, w1 , w2 ) were set
to fit the filter parameters for each frequency band, according to
Montez et al. (2006). Parameter settings for each frequency band
and those for broadband EEG data are shown in Table 1.

segment were rejected, resulting in datasets with length of 38528
data points for both states of every subject.

Synchronization Likelihood
The synchronization likelihood (SL) method (Stam and van
Dijk, 2002) was used for pairwise estimation of dynamic
functional connectivity. SL identifies non-linear statistical
interdependencies between a pair (or in case of global SL, a
larger set) of signals. It is by its nature dynamic (i.e., estimates
synchronization as a function of time), normalized and seems
unaffected by non-stationarities (Stam and van Dijk, 2002). These
properties make SL a suitable tool in FC studies using EEG
measurements, as EEG signals (and brain activity in general) are
often considered non-stationary (Kaplan et al., 2005; Freeman
and Quian Quiroga, 2013) and the functional coupling between
different neuronal ensembles was confirmed to be non-linear by
several studies (Friston, 2000; Stam et al., 2003).
SL measures the general synchronization between discretely
sampled processes x(t) and y(t), t = 1, 2,... T. First, the temporal
evolution of x(t) and y(t) is reconstructed in the state space
by temporal embedding (Takens, 1981), where x(t) and y(t) is
converted into a set of state space vectors X(t) and Y(t) as

 
X (t) = x t, t − m, t − 2m, . . . , t − d − 1 m ,
 
Y (t) = y t, t − m, t − 2m, . . . , t − d − 1 m ,

Dynamic Graph Theoretical Analysis
Synchronization likelihood was computed on the pruned EEG
datasets for all pair-wise combination of the channels, yielding a
14 × 14 weighted synchronization matrix for every time point, in
which the connection strength is assumed to be proportional to
the level of synchronization between brain regions. Each of these
matrices capture the actual topology of the underlying network,
and calculating different network measures over them yield
Network Metrics Time Series (NMTS) that describe the temporal
evolution of network topology. Complex networks have several
aspects to their topologies such as modularity or small-worldness
(Rubinov and Sporns, 2010). The network is required to contain
a sufficiently large number of nodes for network descriptors to
make sense, i.e., there is no point in calculating for example
the node degree distribution on a network with 14 nodes. It
has been demonstrated however, that global network measures
Density (D), Clustering Coefficient (C) and Efficiency (E) can be
used effectively to describe and capture significant topological
differences in smaller networks (Racz et al., 2017). We used
the weighted formulas to calculate the aforementioned network
measures. Weighted Density (often termed also Connectivity
Strength) is the fraction of overall connectivity strength present
to the maximal possible connection strength in a network
(Rubinov and Sporns, 2010) and calculates as

(1)

where d is the embedding dimension and m is the time lag.
Further, let’s define the probability for every state space vector
X (t) [and for Y(t), similarly] that the distance of a randomly
selected vector X (t+u) is closer than distance rx (t) as

C (rx (t) , X) =

1
2 (w2 − w1 )

X

θ {rx (t) −

w1 <|u|<w2

|X (t) − X (t + u)|} ,

(2)
DW =

where u is the temporal distance, |·| is the Euclidean norm, θ
is the Heaviside step function, w1 is the Theiler correction for
autocorrelation (Theiler, 1986) and w2 is a window parameter
such as w1 ≪ w2 ≪ T. It should be noted, that w2 serves as
the time window in a SW analysis, and as u can be negative
as well, the ‘window length’ appears as 2w2 , with the middle
2w1 segment discarded to avoid effects of autocorrelation. The
distance parameters rx (t) and ry(t) are set for every time point t
that C (rx (t) , X) = C ry (t) , Y = pref , with pref usually fixed
at a value close to 0. Thus, pref basically serves as an internal
thresholding variable. Finally, the synchronization likelihood at
time point t is defined as the conditional probability that Y(t)
and Y(t+u) are closer than ry (t) given that X(t) and X(t+u) are
closer than rx (t) and calculates as

SL (t) =

1
2pref (w2 − w1 )

X

θ {rx (t) − |X (t)

(4)

i=1 j=i+1

where n is the total number of nodes, and cij is the connection
strength–in this case, SL(t) for every t–between nodes i and j.
Density is a general measure of “wiring cost” of a network, and
is also equal to the average normalized node degree (Rubinov
and Sporns, 2010). The Clustering Coefficient of an individual

TABLE 1 | Synchronization likelihood parameters for each frequency band.

(3)

w1 <|u|<w2


−X (t + u) |} θ ry (t) − |Y (t) − Y (t + u)| .
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org

n
n−1 X
X
1
cij ,
n (n − 1)

4

Band

Range

d

m

w1

w2

Delta

0.5–4 Hz

25

11

264

1264

Theta

4–8 Hz

7

5

30

1030

Alpha

8–13 Hz

6

3

15

1015

Beta

13–30 Hz

8

1

7

1007

Gamma

30–45 Hz

6

1

5

1005

Broadband

0.5–45 Hz

289

1

288

1288

November 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1704

Racz et al.

Multifractal Dynamic Functional Brain Connectivity

moments q, where small fluctuations are amplified by the
negative, while large fluctuations by the positive moments
(Barunik and Kristoufek, 2010; Ihlen, 2013). We used the
multifractal generalization of the Signal Summation Conversion
(SSC) method (Eke et al., 2000; Mukli et al., 2015) to extensively
characterize the power-law scaling of the NMTSs and the SL(t)s
of individual connections. In SSC, the signal is cumulatively
summed and standard deviation σ is calculated at different
window sizes ranging from a minimal to a maximal scale (smin
and smax , respectively). Within each window the local linear
trend is removed before calculation to diminish effects of nonstationarity. The power-law dependence of σ on s is captured in
the Hurst exponent H according to σ (s) ∝ sH (Eke et al., 2000).
The multifractal generalization of SSC (MF-SSC) consists of
repeating the steps of the analysis at different statistical moments
q, yielding the unified scaling function S(q,s) (Figure 1) (Mukli
et al., 2015)

node denotes the fraction of the existing triangles to the maximal
possible number of triangles around a node (Rubinov and
Sporns, 2010) and was generalized to weighted networks by
Onnela et al. (2005). Clustering Coefficient of node i calculates
as
n

CiW =

X
2

w̃ij w̃ih w̃jh ,
k k−1

(5)

j,h

where k is the number of edges connected to node i and w̃ih
is the weight of the edge between nodes i and j. Edge weights
are normalized by the largest weight present in the network,
therefore on binary networks the formula returns with the
original definition, that is also equivalent to the fraction of a
node’s neighbors that are also neighbors of each other (Watts and
Strogatz, 1998). The global Clustering Coefficient is the average
taken over individual nodes. C is the most general measure of
network segregation and related to “local” information flow in
the network (Rubinov and Sporns, 2010). Finally, Efficiency is
a global parameter capturing network integration, and is often
associated with the speed of information processing in a complex
system (Rubinov and Sporns, 2010). It is the average inverse
shortest path length between all nodes of a network and computes
according to

EW

n
n
1X X
=
n

i=1 j=1,i6=j



dijW

−1

n−1

,


S q, s =

(

Ns
1 X
σ (υ, s)q
Ns
υ=1

) q1

,

(7)

where Ns is the number of non-overlapping time windows at
scale s, and υ is the index of the actual window of calculation.
As σ is now dependent on s and q as well, their relationship is
established via the generalized Hurst exponent H(q) according

to σ q, s ∝ sH (q) and can be acquired by linear regression on
the values of S(q,s) (Barunik and Kristoufek, 2010). On empirical

(6)

where dijW is the length of the shortest weighted path between
nodes i and j (Latora and Marchiori, 2001). It is strongly related
to the average shortest path length, however often considered
as being a superior measure to the latter in describing network
integration (Achard and Bullmore, 2007). Efficiency is related
to the “global” information flow in the network (Rubinov and
Sporns, 2010). For the sake of simplicity, in the following we will
drop the superscripts “w” and will refer by D, C, and E to their
weighted forms, respectively.
Since SL has an internal step of thresholding, to avoid
acquiring an overwhelming amount of results we decided not to
use any additional threshold values, as in a previous study (Racz
et al., 2018) the dynamic properties of DFC did not show any
specific relation to the value of threshold. We calculated the time
evolution of Density, Clustering Coefficient, and Efficiency [D(t),
C(t), and E(t), respectively] for every subject both in EO and EC
states. For the calculations of D, C, and E we used functions of the
Brain Connectivity Toolbox by Rubinov and Sporns (2010).

Focus-Based Multifractal Signal
Summation Conversion (FMF-SSC)

FIGURE 1 | The scaling function. H(2) characterizes the global i.e.,
monofractal scaling, while the difference between H(−15) and H(15) termed
1H15 captures the degree of multifractality. The focus is used as a reference
point for linear regression. Scaling function of D(t) of subject male 4 during
eyes closed is used for illustration.

Multifractal analysis, instead of a single scaling exponent yields a
set of scaling exponents, each describing scaling in fluctuations
of different sizes in the signal (Kantelhardt et al., 2002). This
can be achieved by characterizing scaling at several statistical

Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org

5

November 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1704

Racz et al.

Multifractal Dynamic Functional Brain Connectivity

with equal β were generated with the spectral synthesis method
(Saupe, 1988), and the Kolmogorov-Smirnov distances were
calculated to estimate the goodness-of-fit (GoF) of the power-law
function. A time series was considered scale-free, if its GoF to a
power-law function was within the mean ± 2 σ range of those
calculated from surrogate data with known (identical) power-law
spectra (Clauset et al., 2009; He, 2011).
Second, we tested the presence of distribution-related
multifractality by randomly shuffling the values of the time series
(Ivanov et al., 1999; Kantelhardt et al., 2002). Shuffling destroys
all correlations and reduces the signal to pure random noise
but has no effect on the distribution of values. Consequently, if
shuffling renders H(q) ≈ 0.5 (i.e., white noise) for all q the case
of distribution-related multifractality can be excluded, otherwise
presence of scaling (at least partly) could be attributed to a
power-law type distribution of signal values.
Finally, we tested if the observed multifractality resulted from
the presence of different long-range correlations. For this purpose,
surrogate datasets were generated by Fourier transforming the
signal with Fast Fourier Transformation, randomizing its phases
and then performing inverse Fourier transformation (Theiler
et al., 1992). Phase randomization leaves the amplitudes and
therefore the power spectrum (hence, linear autocorrelation)
unaffected (Kantz and Schreiber, 2004), while destroying all
non-linear correlations in the signal (Schreiber and Schmitz,
2000). Hence it yields surrogate datasets with equal H(2)
i.e., monofractal characteristic preserved (Eke et al., 2000).
As the resulting time series are monofractal signals, this step
simultaneously tests for multifractal background noise/true
multifractality (Grech and Pamula, 2012) and the presence of
non-linearity (Ivanov et al., 1999). Multifractality was considered
true and as a sign of non-linear dynamics, if the 1H15 value of
a signal was significantly larger than those of surrogate datasets.
In the following, we will refer those processes passing all tests as
true multifractals.

signals with finite length the regressed functions converge in one
specific point termed focus (Mukli et al., 2015). This can be simply
shown by replacing s in S(q,s) with the total length of the signal
as it results in the disappearance of the sum and therefore q
from equation (7). The focus therefore is used as a reference
point during regression, which renders the multifractal analysis
of empirical time series very robust and prevents it from ending
up with “inverted” or corrupted multifractal spectra (Mukli et al.,
2015). Note that this way of handling of empirical signals is not
unique to SSC, but can be applied also to other MF methods such
as Detrended Fluctuation Analysis or Wavelet Leader methods
yielding their focus-based variants (Mukli et al., 2015).
The NMTSs and SL(t)s were analyzed by FMF-SSC with
the following input parameters as suggested in Mukli et al.
(2015): smin = 8 with s increasing dyadically until smax =
8192 and q ranging from −15 to +15 with unit increments.
The scaling range was defined between scales 23 and N/4, as
scaling function values below and over these scales become
statistically unreliable (Cannon et al., 1997; Gulich and Zunino,
2014). Scaling windows based on a dyadic scale provide efficient
computation. The range of q was selected based on Grech and
Pamula (2012), Mukli et al. (2015), and Nagy et al. (2017).
Global (i.e., monofractal) scaling associated with the long-term
memory of the signal was captured in H(2), and the degree
of multifractality was described by 1H15 = H(−15)–H(15),
as a measure of how much the scaling is different for small
and large fluctuations (Figure 1). Note, that 1H15 captures the
distribution of local scaling in a signal equivalently with the
often used multifractal/singularity spectrum that can be acquired
from S(q,s) by Legendre-transformation (Frisch and Parisi, 1985;
Chhabra et al., 1989).

Surrogate Data Testing
Multifractal scaling in a time series can appear as a consequence
of different long-range correlations present in the signal, however
multifractality can also originate in the heavy-tailed probability
distribution of signal values without any correlations whatsoever
(Ivanov et al., 1999; Kantelhardt et al., 2002). Also, the finite
size and/or simple constant linear autocorrelation of the signal
can also produce a so-called “multifractal background noise”
(Grech and Pamula, 2012), that has to be distinguished from
true multifractality. Thus, a proper surrogate data testing is
indispensable when analyzing empirical signals. Therefore, all
time series (NMTSs and SL(t)s) underwent steps of thorough
tests to verify if they indeed showed true multifractality. In all
of these steps, n = 39 surrogate datasets of equal length were
generated with the null hypothesis that the investigated time
series cannot be distinguished from its surrogates based on the
discriminating statistical measure (Theiler et al., 1992). The null
hypothesis was rejected if the discriminating statistic was found
outside the mean ± 2σ range calculated from the surrogate
datasets, that with n = 39 surrogate datasets corresponds to a 95%
confidence level (Theiler et al., 1992; Kaplan and Glass, 1995).
First, we tested the presence of global power-law scaling. This
can best be done in the frequency domain, as a signal with global
power-law scaling also has a corresponding f1β -like spectrum
(Eke et al., 2000). Hence, for every time series surrogate datasets

Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org

Analysis Strategy
The flowchart of the analysis steps is shown as a summary of
the methods on Figure 2. The first aim of this study was to
show if global DFC when investigated by EEG show multifractal
properties. For this purpose, the acquired D(t), C(t), and E(t)
time series were made subject to surrogate data tests for powerlaw scaling, long-range autocorrelation and true multifractality
as described above, and the fraction of subjects passing each
test were computed for all measures. To explore the effect of
gender (F and M), network measure (D, C, and E), and state (EO
and EC) on the MF properties of global DFC, two-way repeated
measures ANOVA tests were performed for each frequency
band separately, with gender as grouping variable, while state
and network measure as repeated measure factors. Bonferroni
post-hoc tests were performed to identify significant differences
between interactions (in the following marked by ×). Results
will be presented in the following manner: for each frequency
band, we present the significant differences considering the effect
of gender, measure and state separately, along with interaction
effects of gender × measure, gender × state and measure × state.

6

November 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1704

Racz et al.

Multifractal Dynamic Functional Brain Connectivity

respectively]. Also, to investigate the possible correlation between
the long-term memory and the degree of multifractality of
connections, the Pearson coefficient (r) was calculated between
the group averaged z(H(2)) and z(1H15) values. In order
to distinguish between a true correlation effect and pure
coincidence, r was calculated on the shuffled data as well when
n = 39 spatial surrogates (Aaria et al., 2013) were generated
by randomly shuffling the z(H(2)) and z(1H15) values [thus
destroying possible correlation between H(2) and 1H15]. Again,
if the r of original values was outside the mean ± 2 σ range
acquired from surrogate data, we regarded the correlation
between H(2) and 1H15 as significant.
It should be noted, that multifractality of individual
connections were investigated in each group (FEO , FEC , MEO , and
MEC ) individually as well, however as results were comparable
between analysis groups, for the sake of simplicity we decided to
present the results of all groups combined. All statistical analyses
were carried out in StatSoft Statistica 13.2.

RESULTS
Testing for True Multifractality
Results for surrogate data testing of NMTSs (including all groups
and states) are shown in Table 2. In the vast majority of the cases,
D(t), C(t), and E(t) were proven to have broadband power-law
spectra, qualifying them as scale-free (fractal) processes. Shuffling
reduced H(q) approximately to 0.5 in all cases, proving again
the presence of long-range correlations in the signals, while also
excluding the contribution of distribution-related multifractality.
True multifractality was also present in network dynamics in
most of the cases for all frequency bands as well for broadband
EEG data (Table 2).
Similar results were obtained when investigating the
power-law scaling and autocorrelation properties of individual
connections in the dynamic functional networks on the subject
level (Table 3). In that most connections in the networks yielded
power-law spectra, and all connections contained LRCs while
distribution-related multifractality could be excluded. Although
the fraction of true multifractal connections were generally high
in the delta, theta and alpha bands, slightly lower values were
found in functional networks of the higher (beta and gamma)
frequency bands with a slightly lower amount of connections
passing the true multifractality test in broadband EEG networks.
Nevertheless, these results compare well with those obtained
from global network dynamics (Table 2) implying that the
multifractal nature of global network dynamics emerges from
multifractally fluctuating individual connection strengths in
the network. Note that values in Table 3 refer to the fraction of
connections in the functional networks of each subject, thus they
are presented as mean ± σ across subjects (combining all four
groups).

FIGURE 2 | Steps of the analysis procedure.

When they bear significance, results from the post-hoc tests are
also discussed in detail.
Our second aim was to show if dynamic functional
connections themselves—captured in SL(t) between different
locations—exhibited multifractal scaling. Therefore, all SL(t)s
were also processed by the same testing framework as the
NMTSs. Fractions of edges in the network passing each test were
calculated on the subject level and were averaged combining all
four groups (FEO , FEC , MEO , and MEC ) to obtain a general picture
on the presence of true multifractality in functional connections.
Subsequently, to reveal if functional connections express any
particular topology in regards of their mono- and multifractal
properties, H(2) and 1H15 values of the connections were
standardized (z-scored) on the subject level and averaged across
subjects within all analysis groups collectively. This resulted
in group-averaged networks where edge weights represent
their corresponding z-scored values [z(H(2)) and z(1H15),

Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org

Multifractal Nature of Global DFC
In the following, for the H(2) of D(t), C(t), and E(t) we will
use the abbreviations H D (2), H C (2), and H E (2), respectively.
Similarly, 1H15 of D(t), C(t), and E(t) will be referred to as
1H D 15, 1H C 15, and 1H E 15. Summary of the results regarding

7

November 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1704

Racz et al.

Multifractal Dynamic Functional Brain Connectivity

Regarding 1H15, only measure-related differences were
found (main effect of measure, p = 0.026). Bonferroni post hoc
test indicated that 1H D 15 was higher than 1H C 15, however
the interaction measure × gender showed that this was not
significant in neither the male or female groups individually
(Figure 4B).

TABLE 2 | Fraction of NMTSs passing each surrogate data test.
Power-law
Band

Shuffling

Phase randomization

D (%) C (%) E (%) D (%) C (%) E (%) D (%) C (%)

E (%)

Delta

97.9

97.9

100

100

100

100

100

100

Theta

97.9

100

95.8

100

100

100

87.5

93.8

91.7
85.4

Alpha

97.9

95.8

100

100

100

100

97.9

93.8

95.8

Alpha Band

Beta

100

100

97.9

100

100

100

89.6

89.6

89.6

Gamma

100

100

100

100

100

100

91.7

93.8

95.8

Broadband 97.9

100

100

100

100

100

91.7

100

91.7

The previously observed difference in measure regarding H(2)
was also found in the alpha band [H D (2) > H C (2) < H E (2),
p < 0.001 in all cases], however additionally in males H E (2)
was slightly higher than H D (2) and H C (2) (p = 0.043). Also, a
significant difference related to state was revealed with H(2) being
higher in EC than in EO state (p = 0.035). Interaction of measure
× state verified that this difference was present in all network
measures (Figure 3C).
Larger 1H15 values were found in the male groups (main
effect of gender, p = 0.014). Interestingly, the interaction gender
× state revealed a trend in which state had the opposite effect in
the two genders, as 1H15 increased in males while decreased it
in females during EC condition (p = 0.066) (Figure 4C).

TABLE 3 | Fraction of functional connections in the network passing each test.
Band

Power-law (%)

Shuffling (%)

Phase randomization (%)

Delta

99.13 ± 9.29

100

99.47 ± 7.24

Theta

98.92 ± 10.32

100

93.77 ± 24.17

Alpha

98.86 ± 10.64

100

97.09 ± 16.80

Beta

98.99 ± 9.99

100

76.53 ± 42.38

Gamma

98.72 ± 11.25

100

81.87 ± 38.53

Broadband

98.28 ± 12.99

100

89.33 ± 30.87

Beta Band
The main effect of measure was found significant (p < 0.0001)
with Bonferroni post hoc test revealing H C (2) being smaller than
H D (2) and H E (2) (p < 0.001 in all cases). Moreover, similarly to
the alpha band, state had a significant effect in increasing H(2)
when transitioning from EO to EC (p < 0.001) (Figure 3D).
1H D 15, 1H C 15, and1H E 15 were found increased in EC
state, although the main effect of state was not significant (p
= 0.136). The interaction of gender × state revealed that this
increase was only present in the male group, while 1H15 values
remained unchanged in females, although yet again only in
tendency (p = 0.093) (Figure 4D).

H(2) of global DFC is shown in Figure 3, while those of 1H15
are presented on Figure 4.
A prominent measure-related effect appeared in H(2) which
was present in all frequency bands, as H C (2) values were found
significantly lower than those of H D (2) and H E (2). The same
difference was found regarding 1H15 (1H D 15 > 1H C 15 <
1H E 15), however in the delta band, only. Moreover, state had
a significant effect in the alpha and beta bands as H(2) values
increased during EC compared to EO condition. Gender related
effects were found sparsely with a tendency of higher H(2) and
1H15 values in males. In the following, we elaborate on these
results for every frequency band separately.

Gamma Band
In H(2), only measure-related differences appeared significant,
with a similar tendency as in the alpha band, with H C (2) being
lower than H D (2) and H E (2), and in males H E (2) also being
higher than H D (2) too (p < 0.001 in all cases) (Figure 3E). No
differences were found regarding 1H15 (Figure 4E).

Delta Band
H(2) values were found significantly higher in the male groups
(main effect of gender, p = 0.023). The three network measures
also showed significant difference with H C (2) being lower than
those of H D (2) and H E (2) (main effect of measure, p < 0.0001).
Interaction of measure × gender and Bonferroni post hoc
tests showed that these differences occurred in both genders
(Figure 3A).
Measure had a significant main effect on 1H15 as well (p
< 0.0001). The measure × gender interaction revealed, that in
females 1H D 15 was significantly larger than 1H C 15 and1H E 15
with no difference between the latter two, while in males 1H E 15
was also larger than 1H C 15 (p < 0.01 in all cases). Neither
gender nor state had significant effect on 1H15 in the delta band
(Figure 4A).

Broadband EEG
Measure related differences were found (main effect of measure,
p < 0.0001) with Bonferroni post hoc test confirming the same
tendency as in most previous cases [H D (2) > H C (2) < H E (2), p
< 0.01]. Also, higher H(2) values were found in EC (main effect
of state, p = 0.014) (Figure 3F).
The main effect of gender on 1H15 appeared significant (p =
0.012) with higher values in the male groups. Measure also had
a significant effect on 1H15 (p = 0.0006) however the measure
× gender interaction and Bonferroni post hoc test revealed that
significant differences only occurred in the male group, with
1H D 15 being significantly higher than 1H C 15 and 1H E 15 (p
< 0.001 in both cases) (Figure 4F).
In order to keep the statistical analysis simple, frequency band
was not included as a factor in the statistical analysis, however
it can be clearly seen on Figure 3 that H(2) values in the delta

Theta Band
Measure had a similar main effect on H(2) as in the delta band
[H D (2) > H C (2) < H E (2), p < 0.001 in all cases], however neither
gender- nor state-related differences were found (Figure 3B).

Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org

8

November 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1704

Racz et al.

Multifractal Dynamic Functional Brain Connectivity

FIGURE 3 | Summary of results regarding H(2) of global network metrics for the delta (A), theta (B), alpha (C), beta (D), and gamma (E) bands, as well as for
broadband EEG (F). Dotted lines connect the means of the corresponding analysis groups. Significant differences are marked by * for effects of gender, measure and
state (displayed on the left, in front and right of each subplot, respectively). Note, that significant differences of interaction effects are not marked.

FIGURE 4 | Summary of results regarding 1H15 of global network metrics in for the delta (A), theta (B), alpha (C), beta (D), and gamma (E) bands, as well as for
broadband EEG (F). Dotted lines connect the means of the corresponding analysis groups. Significant differences are marked by * for effects of gender and measure
(displayed on the left and in front of each subgraph, respectively). Again, significant differences of interaction effects are not marked.

Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org

9

November 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1704

Racz et al.

Multifractal Dynamic Functional Brain Connectivity

measurements and captured with dynamic graph theoretical
analysis—fluctuates according to multifractal dynamics.
Surrogate data tests proved that in majority, this temporal
structuring was of true multifractal nature in all frequency
bands as well as in broadband EEG. We also identified several
significant differences in the MF characteristics of global DFC
related to network measure, gender, and state.
We found that the degree of long-range temporal correlation
could be attributed to specific topological aspects of the dynamic
functional networks in that HC (2) was found significantly
lower than HD (2) and HE (2). This pattern was present almost
universally in all frequency bands as well as in broadband EEG
data. A very similar pattern regarding the H(2) of the same
dynamic graph theoretical measures (D, C, and E) was reported
previously in Racz et al. (2018), where multifractal nature of
DFC in the pre-frontal cortex was investigated using fNIRS
imaging. Findings of the present study and those of Racz et al.
(2018) suggest therefore that this pattern is a genuine feature
of FC dynamics as it can be captured in different imaging
modalities across a broad range of spatio-temporal scales.
In 1H15, significant differences related to network measure
appeared prominently only in the delta band, where 1HC 15 was
significantly lower than 1HD 15 and 1HE 15. These findings are
also consistent with the similar results of Racz et al. (2018), where
1H15 showed comparable differences regarding the applied
network measures (1HD 15 > 1HC 15 < 1HE 15). As in this
study, this measure-related pattern was found only in the delta
band with basically no significant measure-related differences
in higher frequency bands. As Racz et al. (2018) investigated
spontaneous brain activity in the 0.01–0.1 Hz range, these results
may apply for lower-frequency brain activity, only.
Multifractal time series analysis characterizes the timedependent scaling in a temporal process, that can emerge from
intermittent periods with high variance (Ihlen and Vereijken,
2010). In this study, employing three graph theoretical measures–
each capturing different aspects of network structure and
topology–all were shown fluctuating in a multifractal manner,
although to a different extent. The true multifractal scaling
of all three network topological measures indicates that their
scaling is in fact a local, time-dependent property. This implies
that the temporal evolution of dynamic resting-state connection
networks was interspersed with short periods of high variance
in their segregation and integration, suggesting that these
reorganization events leave their impact on localized and global
information transfer alike (as captured in C and E, respectively).
Moreover, the differences observed in the H(2) and 1H15 values
of these measures—at least in the delta band—imply that local
and global information processing is affected differently: the
lower 1H C 15 suggesting a more “balanced” temporal structuring
of localized activity, while global network integration (related
to fast information transfer between distant network sites) and
overall “wiring cost” is associated with larger variability in scaling.
The scale-free nature of global DFC has been demonstrated
earlier by Stam and de Bruin (2004). In that study, DFC was
captured in global synchronization of EEG signals (as acquired by
averaging SL time series) and fractal dynamics were characterized
by the monofractal Hurst exponent estimated with Detrended

and alpha band are considerably higher than those of the theta,
beta, and gamma bands, with H(2) of unfiltered signals being
approximately in between. Figure 4 shows that 1H15 values
were the highest in the delta-, alpha-, and broad-band EEG, with
slightly lower values in the theta, beta, and gamma bands.

Individual Connection Dynamics
Long-Range Correlation–H(2)
H(2) of individual connections showed a characteristic
topological distribution in all frequency bands as well as
broadband EEG data (Figure 5). In that spatially proximal
functional connections between ROIs expressed higher, while
those between distant regions showed lower H(2) values. This
pattern could be observed most prominently in connections
between regions of the frontal and pre-frontal cortex that had
the highest z(H(2)) values, while in general connections linking
regions of the occipital and parietal cortex to those of the frontaland pre-frontal cortex had the lowest z(H(2)) values. Also,
nearby connections linking contralateral regions in the frontal
and pre-frontal areas expressed higher long-range correlation,
however this did not hold for connections linking areas of
the occipital and parietal cortex to those of the contralateral
hemisphere (Figure 5).

Degree of Multifractality–1H15
Topology of 1H15 of individual connections in the delta band
were markedly different from those of other frequency bands
(Figure 6). While dynamic connections in the theta, alpha, beta
and gamma bands resembled a topology similar to that observed
for H(2) (with higher values for short- and lower-values for longdistance connections), a markedly opposite distribution appeared
in the delta band. Within this range, stronger multifractality was
found in connections linking the occipital and parietal regions
to pre-frontal and frontal regions while lower 1H15 values
appeared in connections between nearby regions. Connections
estimated on broadband EEG appeared to exhibit a homogenous
distribution of 1H15 without any particular topology (Figure 6).

Relationship Between z(H(2)) and z(1H15)
The relationship between the multifractal properties of dynamic
functional connections was captured in the Pearson correlation
coefficient between z(H(2)) and z(1H15) values with their scatter
plots shown in Figure 7. In the theta, alpha, beta, and gamma
bands, significant positive correlations were found indicating
that connections with higher long-term autocorrelation was
associated with higher degree of multifractality. The opposite
topology of z(H(2)) and z(1H15) in the delta band however
resulted in a strong negative correlation as connections with high
H(2) were associated with lower 1H15 values. In broadband
EEG no correlation was found concomitant with the absence of
topology in 1H15 of individual connections (Figure 5).

DISCUSSION
Multifractal Nature of Global DFC
In this study, we reported that dynamic functional connectivity
of the brain—as reconstructed from 14 channel whole-head EEG

Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org

10

November 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1704

Racz et al.

Multifractal Dynamic Functional Brain Connectivity

FIGURE 5 | Topology of global long-range correlations in dynamic functional connections across the brain cortex. In all frequency bands as well as in broadband EEG,
connections between frontal and prefrontal regions exhibit higher, while occipito-frontal connections lower H(2) values.

Fluctuation Analysis. The authors found an increased Hurst
exponent in eyes closed condition in the alpha and beta bands
(Stam and de Bruin, 2004). As weighted Density is in fact the
averaged connectivity strength (captured in SL), our current
observations regarding the same difference–i.e., increased H(2)
in the alpha and beta bands–are in agreement with those of Stam
and de Bruin (2004) thereby extending their validity to Clustering
Coefficient and Efficiency. The transition from eyes closed to eyes
open state is often associated with desynchronization in cortical
activity [Berger (1929), for a review see Barry et al. (2007)],
with lower H(2) values reflecting on the dominance of rapid
fluctuations (Stam and de Bruin, 2004). The lower H(2) values
found in EO condition for all three network measures may indeed
reflect the large-scale network reorganization affecting both local
and global information flow (Rubinov and Sporns, 2010; Preti
et al., 2017).
In a more recent study, Van de Ville et al. (2010) reported that
EEG microstates also exhibit scale-free dynamics. Nevertheless,
the authors did not find any difference in the scaling between
various statistical moments as EEG microstates were found
fluctuating in a strictly monofractal manner. However, this
absence of MF dynamics could be the consequence of the applied
analysis method. Specifically, it has been shown previously, that
brain electrical activity fluctuates between only four different
microstates in resting state (Lehmann et al., 1998). Van de Ville

Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org

et al. (2010) used bipartitioning between these four microstates to
capture microstate transitions, and confirmed fractal dynamics
in all possible bipartitioning scenarios independently from
the applied partition itself (Van de Ville et al., 2010). The
random walk time series analyzed by Van de Ville et al.
(2010) were acquired by cumulatively summing the bipartition
label sequences (consisting of −1 and +1 values) of the EEG
microstates. These are reminiscent of the sign time series
obtained from an increment series (Ashkenazy et al., 2001, 2003),
that can be obtained as the sign sequence of the local derivatives
of a fluctuating signal. Sign time series were indeed shown to be
related to the monofractal character (Gomez-Extremera et al.,
2016), while scaling in the magnitude time series acquired as
the absolute value sequence of local derivatives was reported
to be related to multifractality of a dynamic process (GomezExtremera et al., 2016; Bernaola-Galvan et al., 2017). Our results
show that dynamic graph theoretical analysis can capture the
dynamics of FC in a more detailed fashion than EEG microstates,
allowing for the unfolding of finer temporal structuring such as
multifractal scaling.
Gender-related differences in DFC has also been reported
previously (Yaesoubi et al., 2015a,b). Yaesoubi et al. (2015b)
investigated the simultaneous occupation of different FC states
(i.e., state combinations termed as “combo states”) and showed
that males occupy a larger fraction of all possible combo states

11

November 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1704

Racz et al.

Multifractal Dynamic Functional Brain Connectivity

FIGURE 6 | Topology of the degree of multifractality in dynamic functional connections across the brain cortex. Connections of the delta band showed a markedly
different topology from the rest of the frequency bands. Also, no particular topological pattern was apparent in connections estimated on broadband EEG.

than females. Since spatio-temporally overlapping events were
suggested as a possible origin of multifractal dynamics in a
complex system (Lima et al., 2017), this may indeed be the
underlying reason of the higher degree of multifractality of
DFC observed in males in the alpha band. We also found
higher autocorrelation i.e., higher H(2) values in male subjects
in the delta band. It is well-known, that functional connectivity
correlates well with structural (anatomical) connectivity (SC)
(Greicius et al., 2009; Honey et al., 2009) even when investigated
on multiple time scales (Honey et al., 2007). Our present findings
showed that in some cases gender can have an influence on FC
dynamics, which could well be–at least in part–to gender-related
differences in brain anatomical connectivity (Ingalhalikar et al.,
2014).
Finally, 1/f β i.e., scale-free neurodynamics were suggested
in numerous studies as an indication of an underlying selforganized critical state of the brain (Linkenkaer-Hansen et al.,
2001; Stam and de Bruin, 2004; Stam, 2005; Kitzbichler et al.,
2009; Chialvo, 2010; Van de Ville et al., 2010; Tagliazucchi
et al., 2012a; Racz et al., 2018). Moreover, it has been reported
that not only mono- but indeed multifractal scaling could also
occur in a three dimensional system at a critical state (Lima
et al., 2017). The concept of self-organized criticality (SOC) as
introduced by Bak et al. (1987) refers to the intrinsic property of
a dynamic system constantly approaching a critical state without
the fine tuning of an external “control parameter.” A critical

Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org

state—where local perturbations are allowed to dissipate across
all spatial and temporal scales in the system—usually appears
near (first- or secondorder) phase transitions. Therefore, SOC
is often considered as an ideal state of the brain in which fast
adaptation to changes in the external or internal environment can
be effectively achieved by rapid large-scale reorganization (Van
de Ville et al., 2010). The scale-free–and indeed, multifractal–
nature of the DFC measures reported in this study may therefore
be considered evidencing yet another implication of the selforganized critical nature of resting-state brain activity.

Multifractal Dynamics of Individual
Functional Connections
We showed that DFC networks exhibited multifractal dynamics
not only in their global graph theoretical parameters, but in their
dynamic functional connections, too, as captured in the varying
connectivity strengths between the nodes. This property was
most prevalent in the delta, theta and alpha band connections,
while slightly lower fraction of beta and gamma band as well as
broadband EEG connections was proven as true multifractals.
Given the moderate spatial resolution in this study, instead
of focusing on individual differences between inter-regional
connections, we rather investigated if dynamic functional
connections showed any global topology in their H(2) and 1H15
values and if there was a relationship between them. In all
frequency bands as well as in broadband EEG data we found a

12

November 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1704

Racz et al.

Multifractal Dynamic Functional Brain Connectivity

FIGURE 7 | Cross-correlation between z(H(2)) and z(1H15) of individual connections. Panels are scatter plots of all connections (14*13/2) of all subjects (48). The
Pearson correlation coefficient (r) is displayed in the lower right corner of each panel. Significant correlation is indicated by red regression line, while the black
regression line for broadband EEG indicates that the correlation was indistinguishable from spatial surrogates.

It has been shown in dynamic processes, that monofractal
scaling [captured in H(2) of the scaling function or the center
of the multifractal spectrum] is attributed to linear properties,
while the degree of multifractality [as assessed equivalently
either by 1H15 or the multifractal spectrum width] correlates
well with the degree of non-linearity (Gomez-Extremera et al.,
2016; Bernaola-Galvan et al., 2017). In addition non-linearity
in a power-law correlated signal can also be well estimated
by the long-term autocorrelation of its magnitude time series
(Ashkenazy et al., 2003; Schmitt et al., 2009). Multifractality
often emerges from the presence of intermittent periods of
higher variance (Ihlen and Vereijken, 2010). Accordingly, from
the topological pattern observed in broadband EEG and in the
lower frequency range (i.e., delta band), it is apparent that
connections between nearby regions express a lower degree of
non-linearity and they are more linearly autocorrelated (however
in most cases still non-linear as well), while on the contrary,
the opposite is true for long-distance connections where linear
autocorrelation is weaker and the dynamics appear more nonlinear. Therefore our results are in good agreement with—
and presumably reflect the same phenomenon as—previous
findings demonstrating the non-linear nature of neuronal
synchronization (Stam et al., 2003) and intermittent periods of

characteristic topology in the long-term autocorrelation of FC
strength, as short-range connections between the frontal and
pre-frontal areas tend to have higher H(2) values than longrange connections linking the same regions to the occipital
and parietal cortex. A very similar topology regarding the
degree of multifractality captured in 1H15 was found in the
theta, alpha, beta, and gamma bands. On the contrary, the
topological pattern was the opposite in the delta band: longrange connections linking occipital regions with mostly the
frontal and pre-frontal regions showed higher 1H15 values than
those linking nearby regions prominently again the frontal and
pre-frontal areas. This inverse relationship in the delta band
could be captured in a strong negative correlation between H(2)
and 1H15 values. However, in the higher frequency bands
the topology of 1H15 values were similar to those of H(2)
thus resulting in strong positive correlation between the two.
No correlation was found between the two MF measures in
broadband EEG connections. It should be emphasized that a
relationship between H(2) and 1H15 is indeed non-trivial, as
these measures capture two separate properties of the multifractal
spectrum (i.e., spectral center and spectral width) (Theiler,
1990; Kantelhardt et al., 2002; Kantelhardt, 2009; Mukli et al.,
2015).

Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org

13

November 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1704

Racz et al.

Multifractal Dynamic Functional Brain Connectivity

Limitations, Future Perspectives

high synchronization between neuronal cell assemblies (Friston,
2000). Also, this is in line with the fact that brain activity is
generally scale-free on the large-scale level while becoming more
synchronized when observed smaller spatial scales (Buzsaki,
2006).
Dynamic synchronization levels mainly capture the joint
activity of neuron populations of the regions of interest.
The fractal and multifractal nature of individual connections
therefore may also indicate that a possible critical state of brain
activity may not only be present on a global level, but also
on smaller spatial scales, too. In a SOC simulation using a
modified version of the classic sand pile model, Mukli et al.
(2018) investigated the effect of the size and connection density
of the cellular automata on the multifractal properties of their
dynamics, which was captured in the total number of sand
grains resident in the system at a given moment. Their results
demonstrated, that with (independently) increasing system size
or connection density, both H(2) and 1H15 of the system
dynamics increased (Mukli et al., 2018). This phenomenon
is very reminiscent of the positive correlation found in this
study between H(2) and 1H15 of individual connections in
the higher frequency bands. Therefore, higher H(2) and 1H15
values of a dynamic connection may well reflect that the
joint activity between the two regions involved larger and/or
more densely interconnected neuronal populations. Also, the
frequency range of network oscillations is constrained by the
networks size because most neuronal connections are local and
thus yield high-frequency oscillations (Braitenberg and Schüz,
2013). Accordingly, slower oscillations can only be produced
when larger neuronal cell assemblies are involved (Buzsaki and
Draguhn, 2004). Higher H(2) values indicate the dominance
of slow fluctuations thus suggesting the involvement of large
neural populations. These considerations are well in line with the
results of this study regarding that the highest H(2) and 1H15
values were found in connections of the frontal and prefrontal
cortex; regions that are both anatomically and functionally well
connected and form a high-level association cortex with diverse
functionality (Kandel, 2013). On the contrary, lower values
were found between both anatomically and functionally distant
regions.
Nevertheless the inverse relationship between H(2) and 1H15
found in the delta band raises some questions. Delta band activity
is not prominent in awake state during physiological conditions,
however several studies demonstrated the critical nature of brain
dynamics during sleep stages (Lo et al., 2002, 2004, 2013). It
also has been shown recently (using an alternate DFC approach
termed time delay stability, TDS), that different sleep stages–that
are known to be dominated by specific EEG frequency bands, as α
oscillations are most prominent during quiet wake and rapid eye
movement, while θ and δ fluctuations usually characterize lightand deep sleep, respectively–exhibit FC topologies characteristic
to sleep stage and frequency band as well (Bartsch et al., 2015; Liu
et al., 2015). Therefore, sleep would probably be a better setting
for further investigating the multifractal and critical nature of
delta band connections—and their relation to other frequency
bands—that is evidently beyond the scope of this present study.

Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org

Multifractal analysis could reveal relevant information at the
global (network) and the local (connection) levels, that otherwise
may remain hidden in static and also in most dynamic functional
connectivity approaches. MF analysis of DFC carries potential
for future applications both in basic science and clinical fields,
however one has to consider some methodological difficulties
with this approach. For a reliable numerical estimation of fractal
and/or multifractal parameters, a signal length of at least a
few thousand data points is desired, as well as long-enough
measurement time and high temporal resolution so that the
signal could represent a sufficiently broad range of temporal
scales (Eke et al., 2002; Ihlen, 2013). While these prerequisites can
be readily met with imaging modalities such as EEG, fNIRS, or
MEG, still major drawbacks remain owing to their lower spatial
resolution, their lack of exact source localization and the fact
that these techniques cannot access subcortical regions. These
limitations can be partly overcome by using fMRI—with spatial
normalization even allowing for exact comparison between
separate studies—however at the expense of lower temporal
resolution and limited signal length, both considerably affecting
the applicability of multifractal analysis (Eke et al., 2012). As
these methods–e.g., EEG and fMRI–can provide complementary
information, the importance of simultaneous EEG-fMRI (and/or
fNIRS-fMRI) measurements is indeed crucial in revealing the
relationship between EEG-DFC and fMRI-DFC so that DFC
could be investigated with high temporal resolution and exact
spatial localization, alike.
Although in this study the whole brain cortex is sampled,
the spatial resolution is still fairly limited. Using a higher
spatial resolution method would not only benefit from a more
detailed sampling of brain activity, but would also allow for
calculating more complex network measures—i.e., those related
with modularity, centrality or network motifs being more
complex than triangles—that could reveal even more details on
functional brain organization. Also, from Table 1 it is apparent,
that gamma band activity may not be well represented in the state
space during SL calculation. This is a limitation brought about by
the sampling frequency that calls for greater caution when results
regarding the gamma band are evaluated.
DFC analyses carry great potentials not only in basic research
leading to a better understanding of brain functions, but also in
the clinical field, as several studies already demonstrated their
applicability in neuropsychiatric diseases such as schizophrenia
(SZ) (Sakoglu et al., 2010; Calhoun et al., 2014; Damaraju
et al., 2014) or autism (Price et al., 2014). Thus dynamic
graph theoretical analyses similar to the one presented in this
study could prove a useful and potentially powerful tool when
investigating DFC in clinical settings. When analyzing the DFC of
the default mode network with fMRI imaging in SZ patients, the
same dynamic graph theoretical measures as used in this study
were found to be fluctuating around a lower average value than in
healthy controls (Du et al., 2016). Moreover in a whole brain DFC
study on SZ patients, in addition to the same results it was also
demonstrated that D(t), C(t), and E(t) showed less variance than
in healthy controls (Yu et al., 2015). Results of the present study

14

November 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1704

Racz et al.

Multifractal Dynamic Functional Brain Connectivity

according to a multifractal temporal pattern. Our results
revealed that several network topological aspects exhibit
different characteristics. Moreover, the dynamic functional
connections assembling these networks showed multifractal
dynamics themselves. We found a characteristic topology
in both mono- and multi-fractal measures with a positive
correlation between them in the higher frequency bands, while
anticorrelation in the delta band. Our results suggest that
multifractality is indeed a fundamental property of both global
and local (i.e., individual) DFC with specific global and local
attributes to network topology and anatomical localization,
respectively. Our findings are in support of a possible selforganized critical nature of resting-state brain activity. We
propose that multifractal analysis can provide a more detailed
description of global and local connectivity dynamics than most
methods applied in the field, and it could serve as a valuable tool
for a better characterization of healthy and pathological brain
functions.

clearly show, that the standard deviation (i.e., the square root of
variance) of graph theory metrics depends on the observation
scale and that second order statistics alone are insufficient to fully
characterize the network dynamics. Multifractal analysis however
is suitable to capture such features, therefore may serve as a
more sensitive tool in distinguishing physiological states from
pathological conditions based on their dynamic graph theoretical
measures.
Finally, in a recently established field of biological systems
science termed network physiology (Bashan et al., 2012; Ivanov
and Bartsch, 2014), the dynamic interactions of local neural
activity with several other physiological subsystems (e.g., the
cardiac and respiratory system) were analyzed (Bartsch and
Ivanov, 2014; Bartsch et al., 2015; Lin et al., 2016). These studies
showed that during different physiological states such as sleep
stages, the interactions between the elements of this physiological
network change significantly. As functional connectivity was
also shown to alter during different physiological conditions
(Horovitz et al., 2009; Liu et al., 2015; Racz et al., 2017), a dynamic
graph theoretical approach may contribute to this emerging field
by providing a way for capturing coordinated states of neural
activity so that its interactions with other functions of the human
body could be further analyzed.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
FR carried out the EEG measurements, developed the
analysis framework, performed the analysis on measured
data, and wrote the manuscript. OS helped carrying
out the measurements and did the data pre-processing.
PM helped conducting the measurements and writing
the manuscript. AE helped developing and writing the
manuscript and provided conceptual guidance in the
study.

CONCLUSIONS
In this study, we showed that dynamic global functional
connectivity of the brain—when investigated by EEG mapping
and captured in dynamic graph theoretical measures—fluctuates

REFERENCES

Bartsch, R. P., Liu, K. K. L., Bashan, A., and Ivanov, P. C. (2015). Network
physiology: how organ systems dynamically interact. PLoS ONE 10:e0142143.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0142143
Barunik, J., and Kristoufek, L. (2010). On hurst exponent estimation under heavytailed distributions. Physica A 389, 3844–3855. doi: 10.1016/j.physa.2010.05.025
Bashan, A., Bartsch, R. P., Kantelhardt, J. W., and Havlin, S. (2012). Network
physiology reveals relations between network topology and physiological
function. Nat. Commun. 3:702. doi: 10.1038/ncomms1705
Berger, H. (1929). Über das elektrenkephalogramm des menschen. Archiv für
Psychiatrie Nervenkrankheiten 87, 527–570.
Bernaola-Galvan, P. A., Gomez-Extremera, M., Romance, A. R., and Carpena, P.
(2017). Correlations in magnitude series to assess nonlinearities: application
to multifractal models and heartbeat fluctuations. Phys. Rev. E 96:032218.
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.96.032218
Biswal, B. Yetkin, F. Z., Haughton, V. M., and Hyde, J. (1995). Functional
connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar
MRI. Magn. Reson. Med. 34, 537–541. doi: 10.1002/mrm.1910340409
Braitenberg, V., and Schüz, A. (2013). Cortex: Statistics and Geometry of
Neuronal Connectivity. Berlin: Springer Science & Business Media.
Bullmore, E., and Sporns, O. (2009). Complex brain networks: graph theoretical
analysis of structural and functional systems. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 10, 186–198.
doi: 10.1038/nrn2575
Buzsaki, G. (2006). Rhythms of the Brain. Oxford, NY: Oxford University Press.
Buzsaki, G., and Draguhn, A. (2004). Neuronal oscillations in cortical networks.
Science 304, 1926–1929. doi: 10.1126/science.1099745
Cader, S., Cifelli, A., Abu-Omar, Y., Palace, J., and Matthews, P. M. (2006). Reduced
brain functional reserve and altered functional connectivity in patients with
multiple sclerosis. Brain 129, 527–537. doi: 10.1093/brain/awh670
Calhoun, V. D., Miller, R., Pearlson, G., and Adali, T., (2014). The
chronnectome: time-varying connectivity networks as the next frontier

Aaria, A. T., Mansour, A., Huang, L., Baliki, M. N., Cecchi, G. A., Mesulam,
M. M., et al. (2013). Linking human brain local activity fluctuations to
structural and functional network architectures. Neuroimage 73, 144–155.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.01.072
Achard, S., and Bullmore, E. (2007). Efficiency and cost of
economical brain functional networks. PLoS Comput. Biol. 3:e17.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.0030017
Allen, E. A., Damaraju, E., Plis, S. M., Erhardt, E. B., Eichele, T., and Calhoun,
V. D. (2014). Tracking whole-brain connectivity dynamics in the resting state.
Cerebral Cortex 24, 663–676. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhs352
Ashkenazy, Y., Hausdorff, J. M., Ivanov, P. C., and Stanley, H. (2002).
A stochastic model of human gait dynamics. Physica A 316, 662–670.
doi: 10.1016/S0378-4371(02)01453-X
Ashkenazy, Y., Havlin, S., Ivanov, P. C., Peng, C. K., Schulte-Frohlinde, V., and
Stanley, H. E. (2003). Magnitude and sign scaling in power-law correlated time
series. Physica A 323, 19–41. doi: 10.1016/S0378-4371(03)00008-6
Ashkenazy, Y., Ivanov, P. C., Havlin, S., Peng, C. K., Goldberger, A. L., and Stanley,
H. E. (2001). Magnitude and sign correlations in heartbeat fluctuations. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 86, 1900–1903. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.86.1900
Bak, P., Tang, C., and Wiesenfeld, K. (1987). Self-organized criticality:
an explanation of the 1/f noise. Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 381–384.
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.59.381
Barry, R. J., Clarke, A. R., Johnstone, S. J., and Magee, C. (2007). EEG differences
between eyes-closed and eyes-open resting conditions. Clin. Neurophysiol. 118,
2765–2773. doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2007.07.028
Bartsch, R. P., and Ivanov, P. C. (2014). Coexisting forms of coupling and phasetransitions in physiological networks. Nonlin. Dynam. Electron. Syst. 438,
270–287. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-08672-9_33

Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org

15

November 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1704

Racz et al.

Multifractal Dynamic Functional Brain Connectivity

Gomez-Extremera, M., Carpena, P., Ivanov, P., and Bernaola-Galvan, P.
A. (2016). Magnitude and sign of long-range correlated time series:
decomposition and surrogate signal generation. Phys. Rev. E 93:042201.
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.93.042201
Gong, P., Nikolaev, A. R., and van Leeuwen, C. (2003). Scale-invariant fluctuations
of the dynamical synchronization in human brain electrical activity. Neurosci.
Lett. 336, 33–36. doi: 10.1016/S0304-3940(02)01247-8
Gonzalez-Castillo, J., Handwerker, D. A., Robinson, M. E., Hoy, C. W.,
Buchanan, L. C., Saad, Z. S., et al. (2014). The spatial structure of resting
state connectivity stability on the scale of minutes. Front Neurosci 8:138.
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2014.00138
Grassberger, P., and Procaccia, I. (1983). Characterization of strange attractors.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 50, 346–349. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.50.346
Grech, D., and Pamula, G. (2012). Multifractal Background Noise of Monofractal
Signals. Acta Phys Pol A 121, B34–B39.
Greicius, M. D., Krasnow, B., Reiss, A. L., and Menon, V. (2003).
Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the
default mode hypothesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 100, 253–258.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0135058100
Greicius, M. D., Supekar, K., Menon, V., and Dougherty, R. F. (2009). Restingstate functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode
network. Cereb. Cortex 19, 72–78. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhn059
Gulich, D., and Zunino, L. (2014). A criterion for the determination of optimal
scaling ranges in DFA and MF-DFA. Phys. Stat. Mech. Appl. 397, 17–30.
doi: 10.1016/j.physa.2013.11.029
He, B. J. (2011). Scale-free properties of the functional magnetic resonance
imaging signal during rest and task. J. Neurosci. 31, 13786–13795.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2111-11.2011
Honey, C. J., Kotter, R., Breakspear, M., and Sporns, O. (2007). Network structure
of cerebral cortex shapes functional connectivity on multiple time scales. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 104, 10240–10245. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0701519104
Honey, C. J., Sporns, O., Cammoun, L., Gigandet, X., Thiran, J. P., Meuli,
R., et al. (2009). Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity
from structural connectivity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 106, 2035–2040.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0811168106
Horovitz, S. G., Braun, A. R., Carr, W. S., Picchioni, D., Balkin, T. J., Fukunaga, M.,
et al. (2009). Decoupling of the brain’s default mode network during deep sleep.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 106, 11376–11381. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0901435106
Hutchison, R. M., Womelsdorf, T., Allen, E. A., Bandettini, P. A.,
Calhoun, V. D., Corbetta, M., et al. (2013a). Dynamic functional
connectivity: promise, issues, and interpretations. Neuroimage 80, 360–378.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.05.079
Hutchison, R. M., Womelsdorf, T., Gati, J., S., Everling, S., Menon, R., et al.
(2013b). Resting-state networks show dynamic functional connectivity in
awake humans and anesthetized macaques. Hum. Brain Mapp. 34, 2154–2177.
doi: 10.1002/hbm.22058
Hyvarinen,
A.,
and
Oja,
E.
(2000).
Independent
component
analysis: algorithms and applications. Neural Netw. 13, 411–430.
doi: 10.1016/S0893-6080(00)00026-5
Ihlen, E. A., and Vereijken, B. (2010). Interaction-dominant dynamics in human
cognition: beyond 1/f(alpha) fluctuation. J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. 139, 436–463.
doi: 10.1037/a0019098
Ihlen, E. A., and Vereijken, B. (2013). Identifying multiplicative interactions
between temporal scales of human movement variability. Ann. Biomed. Eng.
41, 1635–1645. doi: 10.1007/s10439-012-0724-z
Ihlen, E. A. F. (2013). Multifractal analyses of response time series: a comparative
study. Behav. Res. Methods 45, 928–945. doi: 10.3758/s13428-013-0317-2
Ingalhalikar, M., Smith, A., Parker, D., Satterthwaite, T. D., Elliott, M. A., Ruparel,
K., et al. (2014). Sex differences in the structural connectome of the human
brain. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 111, 823–828. doi: 10.1073/pnas.13169
09110
Ivanov, P. C., Amaral, L. A., Goldberger, A. L., Havlin, S., Rosenblum, M. G.,
Struzik, Z. R., et al. (1999). Multifractality in human heartbeat dynamics. Nature
399, 461–465. doi: 10.1038/20924
Ivanov, P. C., and Bartsch, R. P. (2014). Network Physiology: Mapping
Interactions Between Networks of Physiologic Networks. Networks of Networks:
the Last Frontier of Complexity. Berlin: Springer, 203–222.

in fMRI data discovery. Neuron 84, 262–274. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.
10.015
Cannon, M. J., Percival, D. B., Caccia, D. C., and Raymond, G. (1997). Evaluating
scaled windowed variance methods for estimating the Hurst coefficient of time
series. Physica A 241, 606–626. doi: 10.1016/S0378-4371(97)00252-5
Chang, C., and Glover, G. H. (2010). Time-frequency dynamics of restingstate brain connectivity measured with fMRI. Neuroimage 50, 81–98.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.12.011
Chhabra, A. B., Meneveau, C., Jensen, R. V., and Sreenivasan, K. R. (1989).
Direct determination of the f( alpha ) singularity spectrum and its application
to fully developed turbulence. Phys. Rev. A Gen. Phys. 40, 5284–5294.
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevA.40.5284
Chialvo, D. R. (2010). Emergent complex neural dynamics. Nat. Phys. 6, 744–750.
doi: 10.1038/Nphys1803
Clauset, A., Shalizi, C. R., and Newman, M. E. J. (2009). Power-law distributions in
empirical data. Siam Rev. 51, 661–703. doi: 10.1137/070710111
Damaraju, E., Allen, E. A., Belger, A., Ford, J. M., McEwen, S., Mathalon, D.
H., et al. (2014). Dynamic functional connectivity analysis reveals transient
states of dysconnectivity in schizophrenia. Neuroimage Clin. 5, 298–308.
doi: 10.1016/j.nicl.2014.07.003
Delorme, A., and Makeig, S. (2004). EEGLAB: an open source toolbox for analysis
of single-trial EEG dynamics including independent component analysis. J.
Neurosci. Methods 134, 9–21. doi: 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2003.10.009
Du, Y., Pearlson, G. D., Yu, Q., He, H., Lin, D., Sui, J., et al. (2016).
Interaction among subsystems within default mode network diminished in
schizophrenia patients: a dynamic connectivity approach. Schizophr. Res. 170,
55–65. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2015.11.021
Eke, A., Hermán, P., Bassingthwaighte, J. B., Raymond, G. M., Percival, D. B.,
Cannon, M., et al. (2000). Physiological time series: distinguishing fractal noises
from motions. Pflugers Arch. 439, 403–415. doi: 10.1007/s004249900135
Eke, A., Herman, P., Kocsis, L., and Kozak, L. R. (2002). Fractal characterization
of complexity in temporal physiological signals. Physiol. Meas. 23, R1–R38.
doi: 10.1088/0967-3334/23/1/201
Eke, A., Herman, P., Sanganahalli, B. G., Hyder, F., Mukli, P., and Nagy, Z. (2012).
Pitfalls in fractal time series analysis: fmri bold as an exemplary case. Front.
Physiol. 3:417. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2012.00417
Esposito, F., Bertolino, A., Scarabino, T., Latorre, V., Blasi, G., Popolizio, T.,
et al. (2006). Independent component model of the default-mode brain
function: Assessing the impact of active thinking. Brain Res. Bull. 70, 263–269.
doi: 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2006.06.012
Falahpour, M., Thompson, W. K., Abbott, A. E., Jahedi, A., Mulvey, M.
E., Datko, M., et al. (2016). Underconnected, but not broken? dynamic
functional connectivity mri shows underconnectivity in autism is linked to
increased intra-individual variability across time. Brain Connect 6, 403–414.
doi: 10.1089/brain.2015.0389
Fox, M. D., Snyder, A. Z., Vincent, J. L., Corbetta, M., Van Essen, D. C.,
and Raichle, M. E. (2005). The human brain is intrinsically organized into
dynamic, anticorrelated functional networks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 102,
9673–9678. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0504136102
Freeman, W. J., and Quian Quiroga, R. (2013). Imaging Brain Function With
EEG : Advanced Temporal and Spatial Analysis of Electroencephalographic
Signals. New York, NY: Springer.
Frisch, U., and Parisi, G. (1985). On the Singularity Structure of Fully
Developed Turbulence. Amsterdam: Turbulence and Predictability in
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics and Climate Dynamics, Elsevier.
Friston, K. J. (2000). The labile brain. I. Neuronal transients and nonlinear
coupling. Philos. Trans. R Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 355, 215–236.
doi: 10.1098/rstb.2000.0560
Friston, K. J. (2011). Functional and effective connectivity: a review. Brain Connect.
1, 13–36. doi: 10.1089/brain.2011.0008
Friston, K. J., Frith, C. D., Liddle, P. F., and Frackowiak, R. (1993). Functional
connectivity: the principal-component analysis of large (PET) data sets. J.
Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 13, 5–14. doi: 10.1038/jcbfm.1993.4
Gaudes, C. C., Petridou, N., Francis, S. T., and Dryden, I. L. (2013). Paradigm free
mapping with sparse regression automatically detects single-trial functional
magnetic resonance imaging blood oxygenation level dependent responses.
Hum. Brain Mapp. 34, 501–518. doi: 10.1002/hbm.21452

Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org

16

November 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1704

Racz et al.

Multifractal Dynamic Functional Brain Connectivity

Mukli, P., Nagy, Z., and Eke, A. (2015). Multifractal formalism by enforcing
the universal behavior of scaling functions. Phys. A 417, 150–167.
doi: 10.1016/j.physa.2014.09.002
Mukli, P., Nagy, Z., Racz, F. S., Herman, P., and Eke, A. (2018). Impact of healthy
aging on multifractal hemodynamic fluctuations in the human prefrontal
cortex. Front Physiol. 9:1072. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2018.01072
Nagy, Z., Mukli, P., Herman, P., and Eke, A. (2017). Decomposing multifractal
crossovers. Front. Physiol. 8:533. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2017.00533
Nunes Amaral, L. A., Ivanov, P. C., Aoyagi, N., Hidaka, I., Tomono, S.,
Goldberger, A. L., et al. (2001). Behavioral-independent features of complex
heartbeat dynamics. Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 6026–6029. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.
86.6026
Onnela, J. P., Saramaki, J., Kertesz, J., and Kaski, K. (2005). Intensity and coherence
of motifs in weighted complex networks. Phys. Rev. E Stat. Nonlin. Soft Matter
Phys. 71:065103. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.71.065103
Pievani, M., de Haan, W., Wu, T., Seeley, W. W., and Frisoni, G. (2011). Functional
network disruption in the degenerative dementias. Lancet Neurol. 10, 829–843.
doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(11)70158-2
Preti, M. G., Bolton, T. A., and Van De Ville, D. (2017). The dynamic
functional connectome: state-of-the-art and perspectives. Neuroimage 160,
41–54. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.12.061
Price, T., Wee, C. Y., Gao, W., and Shen, D. G. (2014). Multiple-network
classification of childhood autism using functional connectivity dynamics. Lect.
Notes Comput. Sci. 8675, 177–184. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-10443-0_23
Rack-Gomer, A. L., and Liu, T. T. (2012). Caffeine increases the temporal
variability of resting-state BOLD connectivity in the motor cortex. Neuroimage
59, 2994–3002. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.10.001
Racz, F. S., Mukli, P., Nagy, Z., and Eke, A. (2017). Increased prefrontal cortex
connectivity during cognitive challenge assessed by fNIRS imaging. Biomed.
Opt. Express 8, 3842–3855. doi: 10.1364/BOE.8.003842
Racz, F. S., Mukli, P., Nagy, Z., and Eke, A. (2018). Multifractal dynamics of restingstate functional connectivity in the prefrontal cortex. Physiol. Meas. 39:024003.
doi: 10.1088/1361-6579/aaa916
Raichle, M. E., MacLeod, A. M., Snyde, A. Z., Powers, W. J., Gusnard, D. A.,
Shulman, G. L., et al. (2001). A default mode of brain function. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 98, 676–682. doi: 10.1073/pnas.98.2.676
Rubinov, M., and Sporns, O. (2010). Complex network measures of brain
connectivity: uses and interpretations. Neuroimage 52, 1059–1069.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.10.003
Sakoglu, U., Pearlson, G. D., Kiehl, K. A., Wang, Y. M., Michael, A. M., and
Calhoun, V. D. (2010). A method for evaluating dynamic functional network
connectivity and task-modulation: application to schizophrenia. Magn. Reson.
Mater. Phy. 23, 351–366. doi: 10.1007/s10334-010-0197-8
Saupe, D. (1988). “Algorithms for random fractals,” in The Science of Fractal
Images, eds H. O. Peitgen and D. Saupe (Springer), 71–136.
Schmitt, D. T., Stein, P. K., and Ivanov, P. C. (2009). Stratification pattern of
static and scale-invariant dynamic measures of heartbeat fluctuations across
sleep stages in young and elderly. Ieee Trans. Biomed. Eng. 56, 1564–1573.
doi: 10.1109/Tbme.2009.2014819
Schreiber, T., and Schmitz, A. (2000). Surrogate time series. Phys. D 142, 346–382.
doi: 10.1016/S0167-2789(00)00043-9
Shimizu, Y., Barth, M., Windischberger, C., Moser, E., and Thurner, S. (2004).
Wavelet-based multifractal analysis of fMRI time series. Neuroimage 22,
1195–1202. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.03.007
Sporns, O. (2011). The human connectome: a complex network. Ann. N. Y. Acad.
Sci. 1224, 109–125. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2010.05888.x
Sporns, O., Tononi, G., and Kotter, R. (2005). The human connectome:
a structural description of the human brain. PLoS Comput. Biol. 1:e42.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.0010042
Stam, C. J. (2005). Nonlinear dynamical analysis of EEG and MEG:
review of an emerging field. Clin. Neurophysiol. 116, 2266–2301.
doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2005.06.011
Stam, C. J., Breakspear, M. A. M., van Cappellen, W., and van Dijk, B. W. (2003).
Nonlinear synchronization in EEG and whole-head MEG recordings of healthy
subjects. Hum. Brain Mapp. 19, 63–78. doi: 10.1002/hbm.10106
Stam, C. J., and de Bruin, E. A. (2004). Scale-free dynamics of global
functional connectivity in the human brain. Hum. Brain Mapp. 22, 97–109.
doi: 10.1002/hbm.20016

Ivanov, P. C., Chen, Z., Hu, K., and Stanley, H. E. (2004). Multiscale
aspects of cardiac control. Phys. Stat. Mech. Appl. 344, 685–704.
doi: 10.1016/j.physa.2004.08.016
Ivanov, P. C., Nunes Amaral, L. A., Goldberger, A. L., Rosenblum, M. G., Stanley,
H. G., and Struzik, Z. R. (2001). From 1/f noise to multifractal cascades in
heartbeat dynamics. Chaos 11, 641–652. doi: 10.1063/1.1395631
Kandel, E. R. (2013). Principles of Neural Science. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Kantelhardt, J. W. (2009). Fractal and Multifractal Time Series. Encyclopedia of
Complexity and Systems Science. Berlin: Springer, 3754–3779.
Kantelhardt, J. W., Zschiegner, S. A., Koscielny-Bunde, E., Bunde,
A., Havlin, H., Stanley, H. E., et al. (2002). Multifractal detrended
fluctuation analysis of nonstationary time series. Phys. A 316, 87–114.
doi: 10.1016/S0378-4371(02)01383-3
Kantz, H., and Schreiber, T. (2004). Nonlinear Time Series Analysis. Cambridge,
NY: Cambridge University Press.
Kaplan, A. Y., Fingelkurts, A. A., Fingelkurts, A. A., and Borisov, S. (2005).
Nonstationary nature of the brain activity as revealed by EEG/MEG:
Methodological, practical and conceptual challenges. Signal Process 85,
2190–2212. doi: 10.1016/j.sigpro.2005.07.010
Kaplan, D., and Glass, L., (1995). Understanding Nonlinear Dynamics. New York,
NY: Springer-Verlag.
Kitzbichler, M. G., Smith, M. L., Christensen, S. R., and Bullmore, E. (2009).
Broadband criticality of human brain network synchronization. Plos Comput.
Biol. 5:e1000314. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000314
Kucyi, A., and Davis, K. D. (2014). Dynamic functional connectivity of
the default mode network tracks daydreaming. Neuroimage 100, 471–480.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.06.044
Latora, V., and Marchiori, M. (2001). Efficient behavior of small-world networks.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 87:198701. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.87.198701
Lehmann, D., Ozaki, H., and Pal, I. (1987). Eeg alpha-map series - brain microstates by space-oriented adaptive segmentation. Electroen. Clin. Neuro 67,
271–288. doi: 10.1016/0013-4694(87)90025-3
Lehmann, D., Strik, W., K., Henggeler, B., Koenig, T., and Koukkou, M. (1998).
Brain electric microstates and momentary conscious mind states as building
blocks of spontaneous thinking: i. Visual imagery and abstract thoughts. Int. J.
Psychophysiol. 29, 1–11.
Lima, G. Z. D. S., Corso, G., Correa, M. A., Sommer, R. L., Ivanov, P.
C., and Bohn, F. (2017). Universal temporal characteristics and vanishing
of multifractality in Barkhausen avalanches. Phys. Rev. E 96:022159.
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.96.022159
Lin, A. J., Liu, K. K. L., Bartsch, R. P., and Ivanov, P (2016). Delay-correlation
landscape reveals characteristic time delays of brain rhythms and heart
interactions. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Math. Phys. Eng. Sci. 374:20150182.
doi: 10.1098/rsta.2015.0182
Linkenkaer-Hansen, K., Nikouline, V. V., Palva, J. M., and
Ilmoniemi, R. (2001). Long-range temporal correlations and scaling
behavior in human brain oscillations. J. Neurosci. 21, 1370–1377.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.21-04-01370.2001
Liu, K. K., Bartsch, R. P., Lin, A., and Mantegna, R. N (2015). Plasticity of
brain wave network interactions and evolution across physiologic states. Front.
Neural Circuits 9:62. doi: 10.3389/fncir.2015.00062
Liu, Y., Liang, M., Zhou, Y., He, Y., Hao, Y., Song, M., et al. (2008).
Disrupted small-world networks in schizophrenia. Brain 131, 945–961.
doi: 10.1093/brain/awn018
Lo, C.-C., Bartsch, R. P., and Ivanov, P. C. (2013). Asymmetry and basic pathways
in sleep-stage transitions. EPL 102:10008. doi: 10.1209/0295-5075/102/10008
Lo, C.-C., Nunes Amaral, L. A.,Havlin, S., Ivanov, P. C., Penzel, T., and Peter, J.H., et al. (2002). Dynamics of sleep-wake transitions during sleep. EPL 57:625.
doi: 10.1209/epl/i2002-00508-7
Lo, C. C., Chou, T., Penzel, T., Scammell, T. E., Strecker, R. E., Stanley, H.
E., et al. (2004). Common scale-invariant patterns of sleep–wake transitions
across mammalian species. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 101, 17545–17548.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0408242101
Mandelbrot, B. B. (1986). Multifractals and fractals. Phys Today 39, 11–18.
doi: 10.1063/1.2815135
Montez, T., Linkenkaer-Hansen, K., van Dijk, B. W., and Stam, C. J. (2006).
Synchronization likelihood with explicit time-frequency priors. Neuroimage 33,
1117–1125. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2006.06.066

Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org

17

November 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1704

Racz et al.

Multifractal Dynamic Functional Brain Connectivity

Werner, G. (2010). Fractals in the nervous system: conceptual implications for
theoretical neuroscience. Front. Physiol. 1:15. doi: 10.3389/Fphys.2010.00015
Wink, A. M., Bullmore, E., Barnes, A., Bernard, F., and Suckling, J. (2008).
Monofractal and multifractal dynamics of low frequency endogenous
brain oscillations in functional MRI. Hum. Brain Mapp. 29, 791–801.
doi: 10.1002/hbm.20593
Yaesoubi, M., Allen, E. A., Miller, R. L., and Calhoun, V. (2015a). Dynamic
coherence analysis of resting fMRI data to jointly capture state-based
phase, frequency, and time-domain information. Neuroimage 120, 133–142.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.07.002
Yaesoubi, M., Miller, R. L., and Calhoun, V. D. (2015b). Mutually temporally
independent connectivity patterns: A new framework to study the dynamics
of brain connectivity at rest with application to explain group difference based
on gender. Neuroimage 107, 85–94. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.11.054
Yu, Q., Erhardt, E. B., Sui, J., Du, Y., He, H., Hjelm, D., et al. (2015). Assessing
dynamic brain graphs of time-varying connectivity in fMRI data, Application
to healthy controls and patients with schizophrenia. Neuroimage 107, 345–355.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.12.020

Stam, C. J., and van Dijk, B. W. (2002). Synchronization likelihood: an unbiased
measure of generalized synchronization in multivariate data sets. Phys. D 163,
236–251. doi: 10.1016/S0167-2789(01)00386-4
Tagliazucchi, E., Balenzuela, P., Fraiman, D., and Chialvo, D. R. (2012a). Criticality
in large-scale brain FMRI dynamics unveiled by a novel point process analysis.
Front. Physiol. 3:15. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2012.00015
Tagliazucchi, E., von Wegner, F., Morzelewski, A., Brodbeck, V., and
Laufs, H. (2012b). Dynamic BOLD functional connectivity in humans
and its electrophysiological correlates. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 6:339.
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2012.00339
Takens, F. (1981). “Detecting strange attractors in turbulence,” in Dynamical
Systems and Turbulence, Warwick 1980, eds D. Rand and L.S. Young (Berlin:
Springer), 366–381.
Tel, T. (1988). Fractals, multifractals, and thermodynamics - an introductory
review. Z Naturforsch A 43, 1154–1174. doi: 10.1515/zna-1988-1221
Theiler, J. (1986). spurious dimension from correlation algorithms
applied to limited time-series data. Phys. Rev. A 34, 2427–2432.
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevA.34.2427
Theiler, J. (1990). Estimating fractal dimension. J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 7, 1055–1073.
doi: 10.1364/Josaa.7.001055
Theiler, J., Eubank, S., Longtin, A., Galdrikian, B., and Farmer, J. D. (1992). Testing
for nonlinearity in time-series - the method of surrogate data. Phys. D 58,
77–94. doi: 10.1016/0167-2789(92)90102-S
Van de Ville, D., Britz, J., and Michel, C. M. (2010). EEG microstate sequences in
healthy humans at rest reveal scale-free dynamics. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
107, 18179–18184. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1007841107
van den Heuvel, M. P., and Hulshoff Pol, H. E. (2010). Exploring the
brain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity.
Eur. Neuropsychopharmacol. 20, 519–534. doi: 10.1016/j.euroneuro.2010.
03.008
Watts, D. J., and Strogatz, S. H. (1998). Collective dynamics of
‘small-world’
networks.
Nature
393,
440–442.
doi:
10.1038/
30918

Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org

Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
The handling editor is currently co-organizing a Research Topic with one of
the authors, AE and confirms the absence of any other collaboration.
Copyright © 2018 Racz, Stylianou, Mukli and Eke. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY).
The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original
publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice.
No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these
terms.

18

November 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1704

