Decision-Making in a Social Multi-Armed Bandit Task: Behavior,
Electrophysiology and Pupillometry
Julia Anna Adrian1, Siddharth Siddharth2, Syed Zain Ali Baquar1, Tzyy-Ping Jung3, & Gedeon Deák1
Department of Cognitive Science1, Electrical Engineering2, Bioengineering3, UC San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093
Abstract
Understanding, predicting, and learning from other people’s
actions are fundamental human social-cognitive skills. Little
is known about how and when we consider other’s actions
and outcomes when making our own decisions. We developed
a novel task to study social influence in decision-making: the
social multi-armed bandit task. This task assesses how people
learn policies for optimal choices based on their own
outcomes and another player's (observed) outcomes. The
majority of participants integrated information gained through
observation of their partner similarly as information gained
through their own actions. This lead to a suboptimal decisionmaking strategy. Interestingly, event-related potentials timelocked to stimulus onset qualitatively similar but the
amplitudes are attenuated in the solo compared to the dyadic
version. This might indicate that arousal and attention after
receiving a reward are sustained when a second agent is
present but not when playing alone.
Keywords: Decision-Making; Uncertainty; Multi-Armed
Bandit; Social Interaction; Dyadic EEG

Introduction
For successful social interaction it is useful to represent and
predict other people’s actions and the consequences of those
actions. Joint action is defined as the ability to coordinate
one’s actions with others to achieve a goal (Vesper et al.,
2016). Although it occurs in many sorts of human activities,
it can be conveniently studied using the social or two-player
versions of standardized cognitive tasks. Such tasks
modified for social interactions can reveal complex dynamic
in people's use of social information for judgments and
action-planning.
For example, the joint Simon task (Sebanz, Knoblich, &
Prinz, 2003) is a modified, two-player version of the
standard Simon task that measures stimulus-response
compatibility. Participants learn to respond with left or right
button press for visual or auditory cues and show a longer
reaction times are shorter when the cue location is
compatible with the response hand, than when the cue
occurs contralaterally. This Simon effect (Simon, 1990),
interestingly, remains in the two-player version in which
each participant is only responsible for one stimulusresponse pair (Sebanz et al., 2003). This can be interpreted
as evidence that human action planning is automatic and is
elicited by processing another person's actions as well as
planning and executing our own actions. The propensity to
develop this ability might have evolved to enable efficient

social learning (Kilner, Friston, & Frith, 2007; Liao, Acar,
Makeig, & Deák, 2015). Particularly under conditions of
uncertainty, the capacity to observe, encode, and imitate
others' actions can be beneficial (Laland, 2004), permitting a
sort of vicarious embodied modeling.
However, it is not always adaptive to generalize from
other’s actions and outcomes to one’s own. The findings
from joint Simon and other tasks have shown that
representation of other’s internal states occurs even when it
is unnecessary, or disadvantageous, for optimal task
completion. To study the extent to which people use
observation of other’s actions and outcomes to influence
their own choices, even when it is unfavorable, we
developed a novel task: the social multi-armed bandit task.
The standard multi-armed bandit is a single-player paradigm
to study decision-making under uncertainty. Named after
the ‘one-armed bandit’ slot machines of casinos that have a
fixed reward probability, multi-armed bandit tasks present
several different options (‘arms’) of different, unknown
reward probabilities. They manifest a classic exploitation/
exploration problem (Cohen, McClure, & Yu; Gittins,
Glazebrook, & Weber, 2011). Commonly, after an initial
phase of exploration players employ one of two strategies:
maximizing or matching. Maximizing, or consistently
choosing the most-rewarding arm (based on prior
observations), is the optimal strategy for problems with
static reward probabilities. By contrast, matching, or
choosing each arm in proportion to its relative reward
probability, is suboptimal but nevertheless seen in humans
and other animals (Sugrue, Corrado, & Newsome, 2004).
Notably, although a great deal of problem solving and
prediction updating occurs in social or joint tasks, only a
few studies have included multiple decision-makers in
social versions of prediction tasks such as multi-armed
bandit, and even these have not investigated effects of social
interaction or observation on decisions (Liu & Zhao, 2010).
In addition to studying behavior, we recorded participants'
electroencephalogram (EEG) and pupil size as physiological
metrics of cortical and neuromodulatory concomitants of
social decision-making. These bio-sensing methods may
provide insights into the underlying neural dynamics of
decision-making with high temporal resolution. Both of
these physiological measures are common in affective
computing (Partala, 2003) to measure valence and arousal,
and cortical changes (Fink, 2009).

The present study
The present study aims to address a “key question of today's
cognitive science: how and to what extent do individuals
mentally represent their own and others' actions, and how
do these representations influence, shape, and constrain an
individual's own behavior when interacting with others?”
(Dolk et al., 2014).
To do so, we converted a classic three-armed bandit
paradigm into a turn taking game. Reward probabilities for
the three arms were different for each of two participants,
allowing us to estimate the distinct effects of their own and
their partner's action and outcome history on their ongoing
decision-making. We studied three outcome measures:
(1) decision-making behavior, (2) event-related EEG
potentials, and (3) pupil dilation. Details are described
below.
In the multi-player version, the probabilities remain
constant for each player, however, they differ between the
two players (see Table 1). This allows us to examine to what
extent each participant takes into account their own and
their partner's choices and outcomes. We expected to
observe two different core strategies:
Egocentric strategy: Participants might make their
decisions only based on their own outcome history and
ignore information from their partner's outcomes. Players
using this strategy should converge on choosing their own
highest gaining arm (90% reward probability) most of the
time.
Joint strategy: Participants might take into account
information from their partner's outcomes to the same extent
as information from their own outcomes. Players using this
strategy should not converge on choosing one arm, because
all arms average the same reward probability if both
participants' outcomes are encoded equally. Alternately, in
an intermediate strategy, participants might take into
account their partner's outcomes but weigh them less than
their own outcomes, and then more slowly converge on their
own optimal choice.
Table 1: Reward probabilities for the different arms of the
social multi-armed bandit
Player 1
Player 2

Arm 1
30%
90%

Arm 2
60%
60%

One pair was excluded from EEG and eye-tracking
analysis due to recording failure; another pair was excluded
because one player chose the same arm on every trial. This
left behavioral data from 26 participants, EEG data from 12
participants, and pupillometry data from 12 participants.

Experimental Design
The (social) multi-armed bandit was described to
participants as ‘the ice-fishing game’ and presented on a
touchscreen. They were shown three ‘ice holes’ (arms)
distinguished by shape, at approximately equal distances
from each other (see Figure 2). The arms were associated
with discrete and constant reward probabilities (30%, 60%,
and 90%) unknown to the players. Upon choosing and
touching a hole, participants heard and saw differential
reward feedback. Participants had 100 trials each (200 total)
to catch as many fish as possible, choosing one ice hole per
trial. Each participant played the game once on their own
(solo version) and once as a turn-taking game (dyadic
version). For each dyad of participants, EEG and
pupillometry data were collected from one player, and
behavioral data were recorded from both.

Figure 1: The game screen when a player has won a reward
(green fish). The display shows the two players'
accumulated rewards as well as which player's turn it is.

Arm 3
90%
30%

Experiment 1
Participants
Participants were 28 female undergraduate students (14
dyads) recruited through the university’s SONA system.
They received course credit for participation in addition to a
small monetary reward based on performance in the social
multi-armed bandit (0.05 USD per reward).

Figure 2: Two participants playing the social multi-armed
bandit. The player on the left is wearing an Emotiv EEG
headset and PupilLabs eye-tracker.

Data Acquisition
The game was presented on a table-mounted capacitive
touch screen monitor (diagonal: 66cm). During the dyadic
turn-taking game the participants sat facing each other
(figure 2). An Emotiv headset (www.emotiv.com) recorded
14-channel EEG data, and a PupilLabs headset (pupillabs.com/pupil/) captured pupillometry data. These sensors
were chosen for participants' comfort and natural movement
during a social interaction. EEG was sampled at 128 Hz,
and the eye-facing camera sampled at 120 Hz. PupilLabs
Software was used to detect the pupil in each frame and
calculate its diameter. Lab Streaming Layer (LSL) (Kothe,
2015) was used to synchronize all of the data streams (i.e.
EEG, eye-gaze video, and game events) by time stamping
each event and each sample.
Synchronized EEG and pupillometry data were locked to
participants' game choices in LSL-created XDF files so that
behavioral and physiological data were epoched to trials. On
each turn the 2 sec of data following the outcome stimulus
presentation (win/loss) was used for further analysis.

Data Analysis
The first 20 trials of each game for each player were
considered training trials, to teach the participant the game.
These trials were not considered in the current analyses.
Decision-Making Behavior Participants' ice hole choice
patterns were analyzed via Kullback-Leibler divergence
(KLD), a measure of relative entropy.
!

𝐷!" (𝑝, 𝑞)    =   

𝑝(𝑥! ) ∗ 𝑙𝑜𝑔
!!!

𝑝(𝑥! )
𝑞(𝑥! )

This quantifies the divergence of one probability
distribution to another one. In our experiment we use the
KLD to measure the difference between a participant's
observed choices, and expected choices according to
potential strategies. We hypothesize the employment of four
different strategies with the expected choice probabilities as
summarized in Table 2. For the egocentric-maximizing
strategy, the player chooses the highest gaining arm (arm 3)
at every trial. In the egocentric-matching strategy, each arm
is chosen in proportion to their reward probability. The
joint-equal strategy assumes that the outcomes of both
players are weighted equally, resulting in an apparent
reward probability of 60% for each arm. In that case each
arm is chosen ⅓ of the trials. The joint-social strategy
assumes a social value of the arm that has an equal,
relatively high reward probability for both of the players
(arm 2) and is thus chosen most often.
KLD of observed vs. expected probability distribution for
each of the hypothesized strategies was calculated and
compared to classify each participant's preferred strategy.
As the joint strategy is not applicable in the single-player
version, only the two egocentric strategies were compared.

Table 2: Expected choice probabilities for player 1 for each
of the four hypothesized strategies. Reward probabilities for
Strategy of player 1

Egocentric

Arm 1

Arm 2

Arm 3

maximizing

0%

0%

100%

matching

16.7%

33.3%

50%

equal

33.3%

33.3%

33.3%

social

0%

100%

0%

Joint

Game Data The game data was an 8 x 200 matrix which
included the turn number, player number, reward state,
choice, time taken, player 1 reward and player 2 reward. In
the single player case the last value was set as -1 and
disregarded.
EEG Data The EEG data was cleaned using EEGLAB’s
Artifact Subspace Reconstruction (ASR) noise removal
pipeline (Delorme, 2004; Mullen, 2013). Region of interest
was the occipital cortex (channel O1).
Eye-Tracking Data The current analyses only consider a
single channel containing pupil diameter information.
Samples with abnormally high or zero pupil diameter values
(due to detection errors or eye blinks) were ignored and data
was interpolated by adjacent values.
After interpolating, the data was normalized to range
between 0 and 1 to account for discrepancies in pupil
diameter across subjects.
Further Analysis Epochs for each trial containing the
response and 2 seconds of subsequent data (including the
reward outcome). Our goal was to illustrate the pupil
dilation (indicating autonomic response) and cortical
dynamics (focusing on updating responses) upon perceiving
a reward stimulus after choosing a specific action.
Pupil and EEG data for each type of choice and reward
combination were then averaged across all subjects. For
EEG data, each channel was averaged independently, to
facilitate Event Related Potential (ERP) analyses. The 0.2
sec of data before the event were used as baseline for the
normed succeeding EEG data, to control variance in EEG
amplitude across subjects.

Results
Decision-Making Behavior Over the course of the game,
participants received information through trial and error and
could learn that different arms were associated with
different probabilities of receiving a reward. In the solo
version, participants chose the highest gaining arm more
often than the other two. Table 3 summarizes the decisionmaking behavior via mean total scores and mean number of
choices for each arm. Participants distributed their choices
more equally and scored lower during the dyadic game.
Table 3: Means (SD) of each decision type in the single- and
multi-player games. All measures differ significantly
between single and multi-player version (p<0.001).
Reward
probability
No. of
choices
by game
version

30%

60%

90%

single

7
(5.0)

17
(10.3)

56
(13.4)

multi

18
(9.1)

32
(15.1)

30
(19.5)

Mean total score in the single-player game was 76 (SD: 7.0)
compared to 63 (SD: 10.1) in the multi-player game
(p<0.001).
For each version, participants were categorized based on
the strategy employed. For each strategy, KLD was
calculated between the observed and the expected choices.
70% (18/26) of participants employed a maximizing
strategy in the solo version. In the dyadic version, strategies
were more varied (see Figure 3). Most common was the
joint-social strategy, used by 32% (9/28). There was no
correlation between individuals' strategies in the solo and
dyadic versions.
Strategy use affected overall scores in the dyadic version
(F=6.083, p=0.004) and had a marginally significant effect
in the solo version (p=0.073).
Brain Dynamics ERP locked to outcome stimuli for each of
the differentially rewarding arms were compared between
three conditions: (1) solo: a player’s responses in the solo
version of the game, (2) dyad (self): a player’s responses to
an outcome of their own action, and (3) dyad (other): a
player’s responses to an outcome of the partner’s action.
Figure 4 illustrates the findings. The ERP displayed a
prominent positive potential around 300ms (P3) after dyadic
self-reward events in the dyadic version, but not for
partner’s reward or for reward in the solo game. We also
note that the ERP response for partner’s rewards as well as
for own-reward in the solo game is attenuated but follows
the same profile as that of the self-reward condition.

Figure 3: Distribution of strategies being employed by the
participants in the single- and multi-player game, as
determined via KLD.

Figure 4: ERP after reward at arm 3 (90%/30%) averaged
across participants from channel. Dyad (Self): player
receives reward in dyadic version, Dyad (Other): player
observes partner receive a reward in dyadic version, Solo:
player receives a reward in solo version.

Figure 5: Pupillometry data after reward at arm 3
(90%/30%) averaged across participants from channel.
Dyad (Self): player receives reward in dyadic version, Dyad
(Other): player observes partner receive a reward in dyadic
version, Solo: player receives a reward in solo version.

Pupillometry Pupil dilation significantly increases initially
(Figure 5) when a reward is obtained for the player
themselves when playing the social multi-armed bandit, but
not in the single-player version and not when observing the
partner receive a reward. After this initial response, we see
that after 0.8 seconds of the reward onset, pupil diameter
increases for the Dyad (Other) condition whereas it
decreases for the self-reward one.

Discussion
The Social Multi-Armed Bandit revealed that adults take
into account information from others’ when making
decisions. In consistency with previous studies, the majority
of participants employed maximizing strategy in the solo
version of the task. With this novel paradigm we found that
this is not the case when there is a second player present,
and when the reward probabilities for the arms are not the
same for the two players. Instead, more than half of the
participants employed a ‘joint’-strategy, in which the
actions and outcomes from the other player are integrated
with their own when making decisions. One explanation for
this phenomenon is a high prior belief of the same
underlying probability structure for both players. This is
likely the case because the visual representation remains
constant throughout the game aside from updating the score
count and the display whose turn it currently is. This issue is
addressed in Experiment 2.
The ERP time-locked to stimulus onset showed a
qualitatively similar pattern after receiving a reward at arm
3 (90%/30% reward probability) for the three conditions
analyzed. However, the amplitude is highest when receiving
a reward in the dyadic version, and attenuated when
observing the partner receive a reward. When receiving a
reward in the solo version of the game, the amplitude is also
attenuated in comparison to receive a reward in the presence
of a second player. We believe that this is due to the higher
stakes and reward scenario attached with the dyadic version
of the game.
Interestingly, pupil dilation increases drastically at about
0.6 seconds after stimulus onset when receiving a reward in
the dyadic version of the game. In contrast, pupil dilation
after observing the partner receive a reward has a longer
latency of about 0.8 second. This likely reflects differential
activation of the parasympathetic nervous system (PNS) for
self/other reward scenarios.

Experiment 2
Participants
Participants were 32 undergraduate students (16 dyads, 10
female-female, 4female-male, 2 male-male) recruited
through the university’s SONA system. They received
course credit for participation in addition to a small
monetary reward based on performance in the social multiarmed bandit (0.05 USD per reward).

Experimental Design
The experimental design of Experiment 2, is very similar to
experiment 1. The modifications of the experiment are:
(1) Whereas in experiment 1, one person in each dyad
played the solo version of the game before the dyadic
version and the other person played in the reverse order, in
experiment 2 both played the solo version either before or
after the dyadic version. In other words, game order was
randomly assigned by dyad. This ensured that the game
process was not driven by prior knowledge of only one of
the players.
(2) To reduce the prior belief of a constant underlying
reward structure of the game, we changed the background
color of the game after each turn, such that there was a
distinct visual cue to signal each player's turns.
(3) EEG data was recorded from both participants in
Experiment 2 (vs. only one participant per dyad in Exp. 1).
Pupillometry data was not recorded.

Data Acquisition
See Experiment 1.

Data Analysis
As in Experiment 1, the first 20 trials were excluded from
analysis.
Decision-making behavior
The analysis performed in Experiment 1 is based upon the
assumption that participants make use of particular
strategies. In this experiment, a different type of analysis
was performed, considering choice behavior ‘bottom-up’
without assumptions of specific strategies.
Participants’ choices were analyzed via the Jensen-Shannon
Divergence (JSD). The JSD is a distance metric between
two probability distributions and based on the KLD:
!

!

𝐷!" 𝑝, 𝑞 =    !𝐷!" 𝑝, 𝑥 +    !𝐷!" 𝑞, 𝑥
with

𝑥 = (𝑝 + 𝑞)/2

The JSD between the relative choice distribution of the last
80 trials of the participants’ empirical behavior and the
relative choice distribution if all choices were made towards
the highest gaining arms (=(0,0,1), maximizing strategy)
was used to analyze the data. Hence, the decision-making
behavior for each participant could be characterized by their
JS divergence in the solo and the dyadic version. As
reference, the JS divergence of relative choice distribution
between matching behavior (0.17, 0.33, 0.5) and
maximizing (0,0,1) is 0.31. This value was used to further
cluster participants into ‘learners’ (JSD < 0.31) and ‘nonlearners’ (JSD ≥ 0.31).

Results
Decision-Making Behavior Participants could be
categorized into four groups, depending on if they learned
which option was the highest gaining in the solo and/or
dyadic version of the game. 50% (16/32) of participants
were grouped into ‘learners’ in the solo version, but into
‘non-learners’ in the dyadic version. As shown in Figure 6,
in the solo version, they choose the 90% reward arm
significantly more often than the other two arms (F = 179.1,
p < 0.0005) and significantly more often than in the dyadic
version (F = 59.7, p < 0.0005). 22% (7/32) of participants
were clustered into ‘learners’ in both versions of the game,
and 19% (6/32) were clustered into ‘non-learners’ in both
versions of the game. 9% (3/32) were clustered into
‘learners’ in the dyadic version of the game, but not in the
solo version.

Brain Dynamics ERPs were examined at channel O1 of
participants who chose the highest gaining arm most of the
time in the solo version, but not in the dyadic version
(Figure 7). We observed a high increase in amplitude for the
Dyad (Self) condition. In comparison, there was a negative
deflection in ERP for the Dyad (Other) and Solo condition.

Discussion
Even when the prior belief of a common underlying reward
structure was decreased, half of the participants integrated
information gained through observation of their partner
similarly as information gained through their own actions.
In Experiment 2, our goal was to combine the subjects’
decision-making behavior with their physiology. Similarly
as in Experiment 1, the ERP time locked to stimulus onset
when receiving a reward at arm 3 showed a high increase in
amplitude for the Dyad (Self) condition. In comparison,
there was a negative deflection in ERP for the Dyad (Other)
and Solo condition. We consider this a good starting point
to move towards extracting more high-level features such as
EEG power spectrum density, mutual information and pupil
diameter-based fixations and saccades in the future.

General Discussion

Figure 6: Choice behavior of 50% of participants who
learned which arm has the highest reward probability in the
solo but not the dyadic version of the multi-armed bandit.

Figure 7: ERP after reward at arm 3 (90%/30%) averaged
across participants from channel. Dyad (Self): player
receives reward in dyadic version, Dyad (Other): player
observes partner receive a reward in dyadic version, Solo:
player receives a reward in solo version.

We developed a Social Multi-Armed Bandit task to examine
the influence of social interaction on decision-making. We
found that while some individuals do figure out that the
other player’s information does not apply to them, the
majority of participants converged to a suboptimal decisionmaking strategy. We termed this strategy ‘joint’ as it most
likely emerges through averaging the reward probabilities
for both players. Measurement of electrophysiology showed
a distinct P3 when the player receives a reward in the dyadic
version of the multi-armed bandit but not the solo version.
P3 is thought to emerge through stimulus-driven ‘top-down’
processes when the participant pays focused attention to a
task. The distinct presence of the P3 in the dyadic task
might thus hint towards heightened attention, particularly
towards own rewards, in the presence of another player.
Interestingly, the pupillometry data revealed a similar
pattern as the ERP.
This task has considerable possibilities for further studies
of social interaction. Next steps include a similar experiment
with participants are previously acquainted with each other,
e.g. friends, and children with their parents. It is likely that
having a prior relationship with the other partner will alter
the joint strategy for one or both partners. It would also be
interesting to test how an asymmetric relationship (e.g.,
parent-child) would influence decision-making strategies,
compared to a more symmetric relationship. It is possible
that less-experienced participants (e.g., children) are more
likely to follow, or match, the behavior of a ‘reliable’
person, as is the case in imitation (Poulin-Dubois, Brooker,
& Polonia, 2011). Lastly, this task might give interesting
insights into decision-making processes of neuro-divergent
people, particularly those with potential differences in social
behaviors (Montague, 2018).

Acknowledgements
This study was funded with an Innovative Research Grant
from the Kavli Institute for Brain and Mind.

References
Cohen, J. D., McClure, S. M., & Yu, A. Y. (2007). Should I
stay or should I go? How the human brain manages the
trade-off
between
exploitation
and
exploration.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London
B: Biological Sciences, 362(1481), 933-942.
Delorme, A., & Makeig, S. (2004). EEGLAB: an open source
toolbox for analysis of single-trial EEG dynamics including
independent component analysis. Journal of neuroscience
methods, 134(1), 9-21.
Dolk, T., Hommel, B., Colzato, L. S., Schütz-Bosbach, S.,
Prinz, W., & Liepelt, R. (2014). The joint Simon effect: a
review and theoretical integration. Frontiers in Psychology,
5, 974.
Fink, A., Grabner, R. H., Benedek, M., Reishofer, G.,
Hauswirth, V., Fally, M., ... & Neubauer, A. C. (2009). The
creative brain: Investigation of brain activity during creative
problem solving by means of EEG and fMRI. Human brain
mapping, 30(3), 734-748.
Gittins, J., Glazebrook, K., & Weber, R. (2011). Multi-armed
bandit allocation indices. John Wiley & Sons.
Kilner, J. M., Friston, K. J., & Frith, C. D. (2007). Predictive
coding: an account of the mirror neuron system. Cognitive
Processing, 8(3), 159-166.
Kothe, C. (2014). Lab streaming layer (LSL).
https://github.com/sccn/labstreaminglayer. Accessed on
February, 1, 2019.
Liao, Y., Acar, Z. A., Makeig, S., & Deak, G. (2015). EEG
imaging of toddlers during dyadic turn-taking: Mu-rhythm
modulation while producing or observing social actions.
NeuroImage, 112, 52-60.
Liu, K., & Zhao, Q. (2010). Distributed learning in multiarmed bandit with multiple players. IEEE Transactions on
Signal Processing, 58(11), 5667-5681.
Montague, P. R. (2018). Computational Phenotypes Revealed
by Interactive Economic Games. In Computational
Psychiatry.
Mullen, T., Kothe, C., Chi, Y. M., Ojeda, A., Kerth, T.,
Makeig, S., ... & Jung, T. P. (2013, July). Real-time
modeling and 3D visualization of source dynamics and
connectivity using wearable EEG. In 2013 35th annual
international conference of the IEEE engineering in
medicine and biology society (EMBC) (pp. 2184-2187).
Partala, T., & Surakka, V. (2003). Pupil size variation as an
indication of affective processing. International journal of
human-computer studies, 59(1-2), 185-198.
Polich, J. (2007). Updating P300: an integrative theory of P3a
and P3b. Clinical neurophysiology, 118(10), 2128-2148.
Poulin-Dubois, D., Brooker, I., & Polonia, A. (2011). Infants
prefer to imitate a reliable person. Infant Behavior and
Development, 34(2), 303-309.

Sebanz, N., Knoblich, G., & Prinz, W. (2003). Representing
others' actions: just like one's own?. Cognition, 88(3), B11B21.
Sugrue, L. P., Corrado, G. S., & Newsome, W. T. (2004).
Matching behavior and the representation of value in the
parietal cortex. science, 304(5678), 1782-1787.
Vesper, C., Abramova, E., Bütepage, J., Ciardo, F., Crossey,
B., Effenberg, A., ... & Schmitz, L. (2017). Joint action:
mental representations, shared information and general
mechanisms for coordinating with others. Frontiers in
psychology, 7, 2039.
Wellman, H. M., Cross, D., & Watson, J. (2001). Meta‐
analysis of theory‐of‐mind development: The truth about
false belief. Child development, 72(3), 655-684.

