Deep Learning Decoding of Mental State in Non-invasive Brain
Computer Interface
Dongdong Zhang
Institute of Brain Science
DeepBlue Academy of Sciences
DeepBlue Technology
(Shanghai)Co., Ltd.
zhangdongdong@deepblueai.co
m

Dong Cao

Haibo Chen

Institute of Cognitive Intelligence
DeepBlue Academy of Sciences
DeepBlue Technology
(Shanghai)Co., Ltd.
caodong@deepblueai.com

DeepBlue Academy of Sciences
DeepBlue Technology
(Shanghai)Co., Ltd
chenhaibo@deepblueai.com

ABSTRACT
Brain computer interface (BCI) has been popular as a key
approach to monitor our brains recent year. Mental states
monitoring is one of the most important BCI applications and
becomes increasingly accessible. However, the mental state
prediction accuracy and generality through encephalogram
(EEG) are not good enough for everyday use. Here in this
paper we present a deep learning-based EEG decoding
method to read mental states. We propose a novel 1D
convolutional neural network with different Nilter lengths to
capture different frequency bands information. To improve
the prediction accuracy, we also used a resnet-like structure
to train a relatively deep convolutional neural network to
promote feature extraction. Compared with traditional ways
of predictions such as KNN and SVM, we achieved a
signiNicantly better result with an accuracy of 96.40%. Also, in
contrast with some already published open source deep
neural network structures, our methods achieved the state of
art prediction accuracy on a mental state recognition dataset.
Our results demonstrate using only 1D convolution could
extract the features of EEG and the possibility of mental state
prediction using portable EEG devices.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Computing methodologies → ArtiNicial intelligence
• Human-centered computing → Human computer interaction
(HCI) • Applied computing → Life and medical sciences
KEYWORDS
convolutional neural network, electroencephalogram, mental
state prediction, brain computer interface

1

INTRODUCTION

Brain computer interface (BCI) is an electronic device that
establish a communication channel between our biological
brain and external equipment [1]. BCI is becoming a
technology that will change our lives dramatically and plays a
central role in reading our thoughts and transfers the

information to the outside world [2]. One of the most
important applications of non-invasive BCI is brain state
monitoring through electroencephalogram (EEG) or near
infrared spectrum (NIRS) [3]. EEG has a long history and has
been adopted for brain signal decoding or brain diseases
diagnosis for more than 100 years [4]. As the rise the BCI
technology, EEG quickly becomes one of the main brain signal
acquisition techniques because of its ease of use.
Previous studies have employed EEG to read people’s
attention [5]. Liu et al reported that they trained a support
vector machine (SVM) classiNier from EEG data to distinguish
students’ attentiveness and achieved an accuracy of 76.82%
[6]. Wang et al showed that they could read the engagement of
operators which indicated their attentions in dual (multi)tasking conditions through EEG recording [5].
Some studies also showed the possibility of using EEG to
detect fatigue in humans. The driving fatigue is disastrous and
can cause serious trafNic accidents. EEG activity changes is the
most direct manifestation of fatigue [7] and combining EEG
and EOG as a biomarker achieves high prediction accuracy of
fatigue [8]. The other study demonstrated mental fatigue was
associated with increased power in frontal theta (θ) and
parietal alpha (α) EEG rhythms [9].
There are also some studies showed probability of monitoring
mental state using EEG. Drowsiness detection proved to be
promising and 92% prediction accuracy was achieved in one
study [10]. Richer et al built a entropy-based measure to
recognize Focus and Relax states in real-time with over 80%
accuracies [11]. Acl et al demonstrated the power of EEGbased passive BCI and its ability to distinguish mental
attention states [12].
Deep learning has been around for almost 10 years and
revolutionized nearly all the Nields in artiNicial intelligence
[13]. Several studies have started to use deep learning
techniques to decode brain activities in BCI applications [14].
Roy et al showed the potential of using deep recurrent neural

network to diagnose brain-related disorders and proposed a
RNN architecture called ChronoNet [15]. Sakhavi et al
proposed a classiNication framework for motor imaginary (MI)
data by introducing a new temporal representation of the data
and also utilizing a convolutional neural network (CNN)
architecture for classiNication. The performance of this
framework outperformed the best method by 7% [16]. These
studies demonstrate the great potential of deep learning in the
future applications of BCI.
In this study, we proposed a structure using only 1D
convolution neural network to predict mental state collected
from a wearable EEG device. We designed Nilters to extract
different bands features and achieved state of art
performance.

2 METHODS
All the experiments in this paper was done with the data from
this study [12]. The dataset primarily comprised a total of 25
hours EEG recordings collected from 5 participants engaged in
a low-intensity control task. The task consisted of controlling
a computer-simulated train. Each experiment lasted for 35 to
55 min over a primarily featureless route.

2.1 Experiment procedure

minutes of each session, the participants were asked to
remain focused to control the train. During the second 10
minutes, the participants were in a relax state without
controlling the train anymore. Finally, during the last 10
minutes, the participants were allowed to close their eyes or
even doze off as desired.

2.2 Data preprocess
EEG data were collected using Emotiv Epoc+ headset. This
headset has 14 recording channels at a sampling rate of 128
Hz and a bandwidth between 0.2-43 Hz. First, the raw EEG
data was Niltered with a bandpass Nilter with cutoff frequencies
of 1 and 40 Hz. The epoch of each mental state was
approximately 10 minutes. There were 31 recording sessions
which were randomly divided into 5 groups and we adopted a
5-fold cross validation recipe. We split the data to get the
epochs for the three distinct mental states. Then, each mental
state was segmented into 15 s clips with 14 s overlap, which
was similar to the parameter settings described in Acı et al
feature extraction procedure. Additionally, we normalized the
data as follows:
𝑥",$ − 𝑥
𝑥",$ =
𝑠
𝑥",$ is data point 𝑥" in channel j, 𝑥 is the mean of all the channel
data, 𝑠 is the standard deviation of the data. We performed the
normalization using total average and deviation to preserve
the correlations between different channels.
We adopted two kinds of cross validation methods described
as follows. First, to compare our approach with traditional
methods used in Acı et al, we kept the same cross validation
procedure in which we segmented the data into small
overlapped clips and then randomly split into training and
validation sets. In this case, there is a high probability that the
validation folds could overlap with the training folds which
may cause high biases in our result (table 1). Therefore, we
modiNied this procedure in the deep net comparisons. To
ensure the exclusiveness of the validation set, we Nirst
randomly selected 6~7 independent recording sessions as our
validation set before segmentation. The rest 34~35 sessions
were marked as training set (table 2).

Figure 1: Framework of data processing workKlow
Detailed experiment procedure was described here [12]. The
dataset contains 31 recording sessions from 5 subjects.
Different mental states were induced in a driving simulation
environment. There are 3 mental states recorded in this
dataset including the focused, the normal (unfocused or
detached) state and the drowsy state. Participants were asked
to control a simulated passenger train for a duration of 35 to
55 minutes during each recording session. During the Nirst 10

2.3 Structure of deep convolutional neural
network
Deep neural network (DNN) has been successfully and widely
used in speech recognition, image recognition and
understanding, natural language processing. Until recently,
the area of BCI starts embracing this technique and a lot of
progress has been made. EEG signals are time series and tricks
used in audio processing can be applied to EEG analysis
immediately.

In this work, we constructed a deep neural network
comprising of the input layer, 6 convolution blocks, an output
layer as shown in Figure 2. In each convolution block, two
consecutive 1-D convolution with batch normalization and
nonlinear relu activation was followed by one shortcut
connection. A down sampling layer was added after the
shortcut connection to promote generalization. By employing
shortcut connections, we could train a comparably deep
neural network with better performance. The Nilter length is
constant in one block. At the end of convolution block, a
dropout layer with 0.5 keeping probability was added to
reduce overNitting. The Ninal softmax layer was used for the
Ninal mental state classiNication. We Nit the model using the
Adam optimizer with default parameters. Cross-entropy has
been used for the loss function.

Table 1 showed the prediction accuracies results based on our
trained neural network. It shows that our model can predict
much better than the traditional algorithms such as support
vector machine, adaptive neuro-fuzzy system, or k-nearest
neighbors. Our proposed method achieved an accuracy of
96.40%.

All models were trained on a 5 Nvidia 1080 Ti GPUs
workstation with CUDA 9.0 using the Keras API with
TensorNlow backend.

Table 1: Comparisons of the prediction accuracy with
traditional methods

We also tried to compare our method with some published
open source deep learning architectures as shown in table 2.
EEGNet is a compact convolutional neural network using
depthwise and separable convolutions to construct a model to
extract EEG features. FBCSPNet employed the idea of widely
used Nilter bank common spatial patterns (FBCSP) algorithm
to build a deep neural net. Results showed that our model is
better than those methods.

Methods

Prediction Accuracy

kNN (Acl et al [12])

77.76%

ANFIS (Acl et al [12])

81.55%

SVM (Acl et al [12])

91.72%

Our proposed

96.40%

Table 2: Comparisons of the prediction accuracy with
other deep learning models

Figure 2: Visualization of DNN structure

3

RESULTS

Experiments of mental state prediction was performed on the
preprocessed dataset. Previous EEG studies tended to train
one classiNier for each subject because of the poor
generalization of the algorithms, which is also called subjectspeciNic paradigm. A lot of such classiNiers achieve good
performances but it’s impossible to train a detector for each
individual in real life. Therefore, we adopted a more general
method and trained a universal classiNier for all the subjects,
which is also called common-subject paradigm. We directly
trained a 3-classes deep neural network and the 5-fold cross
validation technique was applied to evaluate the performance.

4

Methods

Prediction Accuracy

EEGNet ([17])

51.01%

FBCSPShallowNet ([18])

49.17%

DeepConvNet ([18])

52.91%

Our proposed

53.22%

DISCUSSION

In this work, we examined the problem of mental state
prediction from EEG data using deep learning algorithms. By
comparing different EEG bands power to recognize mental
state has been popular in many studies [19]. A lot of
preprocessing tricks and machine learning algorithms has
been proposed to overcome the susceptibility of EEG BCI to
motion artifacts or external electromagnetic interferences
[20]. Different from those studies, we adopted convolution
neural network which is an automatically powerful feature
extractor to distill useful features. The automatic feature
extraction procedure is superior to traditional method by
hand picking as it keeps all the useful information in the
original data [17].

Some studies suggested using recurrent neural network
(RNN) to extract temporal information of EEG data [15]. This
is true in some circumstances. However, due to the slow
computation of RNN, it could hinder its usage in small chips
with less computing power. Studies have demonstrated that 1D convolution could also extract temporal information [16].
We used 1-D convolution layers only in our deep neural
network architecture without any RNN to facilitate training
and inference. Compared with some published deep neural
nets [17], [18], our method get a higher prediction accuracy
proving only 1D convolution without CNN is good enough to
extract EEG features.
To compare our approach with traditional methods used in
Acı et al, we kept the same cross validation procedure in
which we segmented the data into small overlapped clips and
then randomly split into training and validation sets. This
validation approach allowed leakage of information between
the training and validation sets. Such cross-validation cannot
be used as a reliable performance metric. Therefore, we
abandoned such approach and randomly split training and
validation sets before segmentation to avoid information
overlap. The change of cross-validation strategy signiNicantly
decreased the model performance but yielded a more realistic
and objective evaluation.
The present work showed that deep learning could
signiNicantly improve the prediction accuracy and generality.
Although the method proposed achieved a better result, the
prediction accuracy 53.22% is still relatively low. As the data
was collected from other studies and the amount of the data is
small, we may try to collect more data to verify the power of
this architecture in the future. The normal state is hard to
predict because it is an intermediate condition that could be
easily misclassiNied (data not shown). Besides the mental state
data, we may try other dataset such as driving fatigue or
motor imaginary to explore potential usages. All the recording
channel were included in this study. A good channel selection
scheme is needed to reduce the information redundancy and
to achieve equal prediction accuracy with less computing
power.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are very grateful to DeepBlue Technology (Shanghai) Co.,
Ltd. and DeepBlue Academy of Sciences for their support.

[3]

[4]
[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]
[14]

[15]

REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

Shangkai Gao, Yijun Wang, Xiaorong Gao, and Bo Hong,
“Visual and Auditory Brain–Computer Interfaces,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 1436–1447, May
2014.
E. Musk and Neuralink, “An integrated brain-machine
interface platform with thousands of channels,” bioRxiv,
p. 703801, Jul. 2019.

[16]

[17]

X. Hu, C. Zhuang, F. Wang, Y.-J. Liu, C.-H. Im, and D.
Zhang, “fNIRS Evidence for Recognizably Different
Positive Emotions,” Front. Hum. Neurosci., vol. 13, p.
120, Apr. 2019.
R. A. Ramadan and A. V. Vasilakos, “Brain computer
interface: control signals review,” Neurocomputing, vol.
223, no. Supplement C, pp. 26–44, Feb. 2017.
Y.-K. Wang, T.-P. Jung, and C.-T. Lin, “EEG-Based
Attention Tracking During Distracted Driving,” IEEE
Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. Publ. IEEE Eng. Med.
Biol. Soc., vol. 23, no. 6, pp. 1085–1094, Nov. 2015.
Y. Liu, O. Sourina, and M. K. Nguyen, “Real-Time EEGBased Human Emotion Recognition and Visualization,”
in 2010 International Conference on Cyberworlds,
Singapore, Singapore, 2010, pp. 262–269.
G. N. Dimitrakopoulos, I. Kakkos, N. V. Thakor, A.
Bezerianos, and Y. Sun, “A mental fatigue index based
on regression using mulitband EEG features with
application in simulated driving,” in 2017 39th Annual
International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in
Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), Seogwipo, 2017,
pp. 3220–3223.
Xue-Qin Huo, W.-L. Zheng, and B.-L. Lu, “Driving fatigue
detection with fusion of EEG and forehead EOG,” in
2016 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks
(IJCNN), Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2016, pp. 897–904.
L. J. Trejo, K. Kubitz, R. Rosipal, R. L. Kochavi, and L. D.
Montgomery, “EEG-Based Estimation and Classification
of Mental Fatigue,” Psychology, vol. 06, p. 572, Apr.
2015.
A. Mehreen, S. M. Anwar, M. Haseeb, M. Majid, and M. O.
Ullah, “A Hybrid Scheme for Drowsiness Detection
Using Wearable Sensors,” IEEE Sens. J., vol. 19, no. 13,
pp. 5119–5126, Jul. 2019.
R. Richer, N. Zhao, J. Amores, B. M. Eskofier, and J. A.
Paradiso, “Real-time Mental State Recognition using a
Wearable EEG,” in 2018 40th Annual International
Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and
Biology Society (EMBC), Honolulu, HI, 2018, pp. 5495–
5498.
Ç. İ. Acı, M. Kaya, and Y. Mishchenko, “Distinguishing
mental attention states of humans via an EEG-based
passive BCI using machine learning methods,” Expert
Syst. Appl., vol. 134, pp. 153–166, Nov. 2019.
Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, “Deep learning,”
Nature, vol. 521, no. 7553, pp. 436–444, May 2015.
H. Chao, H. Zhi, L. Dong, and Y. Liu, “Recognition of
Emotions Using Multichannel EEG Data and DBN-GCBased Ensemble Deep Learning Framework,” Comput.
Intell. Neurosci., vol. 2018, pp. 1–11, Dec. 2018.
S. Roy, I. Kiral-Kornek, and S. Harrer, “ChronoNet: A
Deep Recurrent Neural Network for Abnormal EEG
Identification,” ArXiv180200308 Cs Eess, Jan. 2018.
S. Sakhavi, C. Guan, and S. Yan, “Learning Temporal
Information for Brain-Computer Interface Using
Convolutional Neural Networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural
Netw. Learn. Syst., pp. 1–11, 2018.
V. J. Lawhern, A. J. Solon, N. R. Waytowich, S. M. Gordon,
C. P. Hung, and B. J. Lance, “EEGNet: a compact
convolutional neural network for EEG-based brain–

computer interfaces,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 15, no. 5, p.
056013, 2018.
[18] R. T. Schirrmeister et al., “Deep learning with
convolutional neural networks for EEG decoding and
visualization,” Hum. Brain Mapp., vol. 38, no. 11, pp.
5391–5420, Nov. 2017.
[19] F. Lotte et al., “A review of classification algorithms for
EEG-based brain–computer interfaces: a 10 year
update,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 15, no. 3, p. 031005, Jun.
2018.
[20] C. M. Michel and D. Brunet, “EEG Source Imaging: A
Practical Review of the Analysis Steps,” Front. Neurol.,
vol. 10, 2019.

