Neural Correlates of Mobile EEG and the Built
Environment
Maryam Banaeia, Abbas Yazdanfara, Mostafa Nooreddina, Ali Yoonessib
a School of Architecture,
Iran University of Science & Technology (IUST), Tehran, Iran
b School of Advanced Technologies in Medicine,
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran

banaei@arch.iust.ac.ir

Abstract
Enhancing urban trails design quality can encourage people to use them. This study compared two
urban trails with different functions in Tehran. Trying to discover that while walking on the urban trails
which parts of the path has the most effects on the cognitive functions of users. The aim is to enhance
the urban trails quality by understanding human‘s reaction. We use electroencephalography device as
a cognitive science tool. Results illustrate that first three minutes of strolling has the most cognitive
effects on users. We suggest improving the space quality of urban trails after the first minutes of
entrancing.
Keywords: urban trails; EEG; park; commercial walkway
eISSN 2514-751X © 2017 The Authors. Published for AMER ABRA by e-International Publishing House, Ltd., UK..
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-ncnd/4.0/). Peer–review under responsibility of AMER (Association of Malaysian Environment-Behaviour
Researchers), ABRA (Association of Behavioural Researchers on Asians) and cE-Bs (Centre for EnvironmentBehaviour Studies), Faculty of Architecture, Planning & Surveying, Universiti Teknologi MARA, Malaysia.
https://doi.org/10.21834/aje-bs.v2i4.199

Banaei, M., et.al. / Asian Journal of Environmen-Behaviour Studies, ajE-Bs, 2(3), Apr./Jun. 2017 (p.67-75)

1.0 Introduction

These days new developments lead cities to have more walkways and walking strategies
(Azmi & Karim, 2012). Urban trails are the walkways in the cities that build for encouraging
people to stroll in them and they would have a direct relation to users. Studies
demonstrated that walking and cycling in urban trails can have positive effects on user’s
mental and physical well-being (Shamsuddin, Hassan, & Bilyamin, 2012). Other studies
showed that having urban trails near residential neighbourhoods can encourage children to
play in them (Aziz & Said, 2012).
Recent studies showed that design quality have some influences on people’s desire to
use the place (Mohamed & Othman, 2012). Architects and urban designers try to design in
a way that encourage people to be in a place and enjoy the ambience. Urban trails are
necessary for citizen’s health and activity, and they should have human oriented design
(Shamsuddin et al., 2012). As urban trails have a direct relation to users and influence their
health, enhancing their design quality can encourage people to use them more and be
healthy (Marans, 2012).
Urban walkways are designed in the way that people can stroll in them for a while, and
most of them have some starting and ending points. Walking ways usually have long
distance and because of that people would get bored while strolling. Hence, their design
should be in an exciting and motivating way (Ujang, 2010). Usually for creating long
walkways designers try to create noticeable signs in different places to catch people’s
attention.
Recently, new fields like neuroscience and cognitive science propose new ways to
study people’s reaction toward environment (Vartanian et al., 2013). By having these new
technologies architectural studies can develop.
The aim of the current study is to enhance the urban trails quality by using cognitive
tools and understanding human’s reaction. This research tries to find out that while walking
on the urban trails which part of the path has the most effects on the cognitive functions of
users. We design a study to compare two different urban trails such as; recreational (park)
and commercial (bazaar) walkways according to calmness and excitement feelings. We test
the feeling by using research tools in neuroscience.

2.0 Literature Review
2.1 Cognitive science and design
New technologies and developments in cognitive science lead architects and urban
designers to use them in their researches. Historically, architectural research relied on
philosophical constructs or analysis of behaviour patterns to relate human responses to
design (Pardalos, 2012, p. 28). Two major research methodologies and one design process
have been developed for environmental behaviour studies mainly to relate to architecture

68

Banaei, M., et.al. / Asian Journal of Environmen-Behaviour Studies, ajE-Bs, 2(3), Apr./Jun. 2017 (p.67-75)

and other design professions and processes. Those are user needs programming studies,
post-occupancy evaluation (POE) studies, and evidence-based design (Eberhard, 2009, p.
171).
Environment-Behaviour studies—user needs studies and POEs—can help us understand
what kind of the relationship might be between designed environments and behavioral
outcomes. They will never be able to tell us, from a physiological and neuroscience point of
view, ―why‖ these relationships occur. It requires that neuroscience knowledge to be applied
(Eberhard, 2009, p. 177). Neuroscientific data have an important role to play in bridging the
conceptual gap between architecture and psychology by explaining some of the underlying
mechanisms. The mechanisms that explain how systematic variations in architectural
features lead to behavioral outcomes (Vartanian et al., 2013).
Tools in neuroscience such as; Electroencephalography (EEG), Functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI), Eye tracking, etc. can be used in architecture and environmental
researches. Many studies were performed by these devices. For example, studying
systematic variation in contour impacts aesthetic judgments and approach-avoidance
decisions by using a functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) (Vartanian et al., 2013).
Their results show that participants were more likely to judge spaces as beautiful if they
were curvilinear than rectilinear. Also, there are vast number of studies related to colors
according to neuroscience and physiological data (Jalil, Yunus, & Said, 2012).
2.2 Electroencephalography (EEG)
EEG is a device in the neuroscience field that has usage in both clinical and research areas
(Buzsaki, 2009). EEG device records the electrical activity along the scalp. EEG possesses
many advantages over other brain monitoring tools, like its lower costs and few side effects
for the patient (Niedermeyer & da Silva, 2005, p. 17). EEG signals divided into bands by
frequencies. Four basebands are Alpha, Beta, Delta, and Theta.
Alpha is the frequency range from 7 to 13 Hz it is usually seen in the posterior regions of
the head on both sides (Sadock, 2000, p. 159). Alpha is most often associated with quiet,
passive, resting, but wakeful states (Zillmer, Spiers, & Culbertson, 2008, p. 41).
Beta is a low-amplitude, fast-activity wave with a frequency of more than 13Hz. Beta is
usually seen in frontal lobe and is often divided into high beta (24–30 Hz), typically related
to a narrow focus, over arousal, and anxiety; mid-beta (18–24 Hz), often linked to being
active, alert, excited, or focused; and low beta (13–18 Hz), which has been connected with
relaxed, external attention (Zillmer et al., 2008, p. 41).
Delta is the frequency range up to 3.5 Hz. It is considered normally in adults in deep sleep.
Also, Theta is the frequency between 4 Hz to 7 Hz; sometimes Theta can be seen in the
frontal lobe in healthy adults (Sadock, 2000, p. 159).
Many studies worked on EEG in relation to the environment. One study focused on the
impact of fluorescent light on neurophysiological, and subjective indices of wellbeing and
stress(R Küller & Wetterberg, 1993). Other studies show that we can use mobile EEG such
as; Emotiv device in architecture and urban design for studying real environment, also this

69

Banaei, M., et.al. / Asian Journal of Environmen-Behaviour Studies, ajE-Bs, 2(3), Apr./Jun. 2017 (p.67-75)

study shows some evidences to use EEG in acoustic researches(Roe, Aspinall, Mavros, &
Coyne, 2013). Furthermore, another study worked on EEG signals for evaluating the
arousal and performance toward the interior color (Rikard Küller, Mikellides, & Janssens,
2009).

3.0 Methodology
3.1 Study Design
This study tries to clarify the effects of urban trails on cognitive functions of users while
strolling. We compared two different urban trails with recreational (Park-e-Shahr) and
commercial function (Sepah-Salar) in Tehran (Fig.1).

Figure 1: Locations of two urban trails in Tehran, Iran. (Park-E-Shahr and Sepah-Salar)
(Source: https://www.google.com/maps)

SWOT chart was used to analyse these two walkways. SWOT (strength, weakness,
opportunity, threat) analyses involve brainstorming and recording a place’s strengths and
weaknesses, the opportunities that could be exploited and the likely threats(Carmona,
2010, p. 304).
Two walkways that had the same design quality were chosen. Both of them had NorthSouth orientation with 10 m width and 250-300 m length. 20 healthy subjects (9 men and 11
women) participated in this study and their average age was29 years old (20 to 35). It was
a convenience sampling, and they were volunteers from university students with different
academic majors. Participants shouldn’t be addicted to a cigarette, alcohol and, etc. Also,
they shouldn’t have any mental disease like; depression, stress and, etc. Moreover, they
shouldn’t use any drugs related to mental health. We asked participants about their level of
health for choosing them for the test.
Participants were strolling the ways for about 10 minutes while the EEG EMOTIV
device was recording their brain functions. EEG signals were recorded by the Emotiv EPOC
device with 14 channels. Emotiv is a mobile EEG device. In this study, EEG signals were
recorded by a laptop.

70

Banaei, M., et.al. / Asian Journal of Environmen-Behaviour Studies, ajE-Bs, 2(3), Apr./Jun. 2017 (p.67-75)

3.2 Data processing
Frequency changes of each part of the brain have different meaning in EEG analysis
(Zillmer et al., 2008, p. 40). Researches in neuroscience field show that relaxing is related
to 7-13Hz (Alpha) changes of occipital part of the head and excitement is related to 18-24
Hz (Mid-Beta) changes of the frontal part of the head (Zillmer et al., 2008, p. 41). Therefore,
in this study, we calculated frequency changes for relaxing and exciting in those two parts
of the head.
EEG signals were recorded by Emotiv EPOC device according to 10-20 standards with
14 channels with references to both mastoids. Its channels include AF3, AF4, F3, F4, F7,
F8, FC5, FC6, T7, T8, P7, P8, O1 and O2. In this paper, we analyzed AF3, AF4, O1 and
O2 channels. Also, Frequency sampling was 128 Hz. Fig. 3 shows the channel locations of
electrodes for occipital and frontal lobe.
EEG signals were analysed by EEGLAB and MATLAB software. Paired samples t-test
was done for signifying the data (p<0.05). EEG frequency bands were extracted, and Highpass filtering EEG at 0.1 Hz was done. Also, Direct Current (DC offset) was removed from
the EEG signals. Time were devided into three equal parts and examined each period
according to calmness and excitement changes.

4.0 Results and Discussions

Six different dimensions for urban design were defined by Carmona, such as;
morphological, perceptual, social, visual, functional and temporal dimensions(Carmona,
2010). In this study, we focus on the visual dimension and compare these two urban trails
in this field with SWOT chart. For visual dimension, we worked on townscape aesthetic,
serial visions, height-to-width ratio, rhythm, and harmony.
Table 1. shows the SWOT analyses comparision result according to the visual
dimension. It shows that both walkways have the same level of strengths and weaknesses
in the visual dimension. Interviews after the test showed that the experiment locations were
not regular and usual places for the participants. Therefore, it can cause the participants to
pay more attention to the environment.
Table 2. shows Alpha changes in park and bazaar (commercial trail) for each period.
The Paired samples t-test has significant meaning in the first period (p=0.04). The level of
Alpha band in the park for the first period is higher than Beta.

71

Banaei, M., et.al. / Asian Journal of Environmen-Behaviour Studies, ajE-Bs, 2(3), Apr./Jun. 2017 (p.67-75)

Table 1: SWOT analysis according to visual dimensions for park and commercial trails

Strength

Weakness

Opportunity
Threat

Urban Design Dimensions (Visual Dimension)
Park
Commercial
Trees make soft landscape
Shop’s facade make the
Having statue and
townscape active
landscape facilities
Having statue and landscape
Trees have fabulous
facilities
harmony
Monotone serial visions
Monotone serial visions
Monotone Height-toMonotone Height-to-width
width ratio
ratio
Not suitable pedestrian
Weaknesses in townscape
materials
aesthetics by paying no
attention to rhythm, color,
harmony, etc.
Façade’s old materials
Natural aesthetic potential
Shops have high potential to
of old trees
rebuild the townscape
Few number of visitors
Lack of harmony in building
new shops
(Source: authors)

Table 2: Paired Sample T-Test for Alpha band (7-13 Hz) in each period for the park and Bazaar(*P<0.05)

(Source: authors)

72

Banaei, M., et.al. / Asian Journal of Environmen-Behaviour Studies, ajE-Bs, 2(3), Apr./Jun. 2017 (p.67-75)

Table 3. shows the Mid-Beta changes in park and commercial trial for each period. It
illustrates that first period has significant meaning (p=0.033). Second and third periods did
not show significant result (ps>0.221).
Table 3: Paired Sample T-Test for Mid-Beta band (18-24 Hz) in each period for the park and Bazaar(*P<0.05)

(Source: authors)

Moreover, Comparing the brain maps shows that Alpha activity of the occipital part in
the park is higher than bazaar that illustrates relaxing feeling in the park. Also, Mid-Beta
activity in the bazaar of the frontal lobe is greater than the park that shows more
excitement.
It is deducible that the park makes us feel calm, and bazaar makes us feel the
excitement. This study showed that these ambiences fade after some minutes. Results

73

Banaei, M., et.al. / Asian Journal of Environmen-Behaviour Studies, ajE-Bs, 2(3), Apr./Jun. 2017 (p.67-75)

illustrated that first period (0-3 minutes) had the most cognitive and emotional effects on
users in relation to space function. In addition, EEG results showed that the relaxing level
was significantly higher in the first period in the park and decreased during the time. Also,
EEG findings in the commercial walkway demonstrated that the excitement level was
significantly greater in the first period and reduced by the time passing.

5.0 Conclusion

Current study tries to use new tools in neuroscience field to improve architecture and urban
studies. We compare park and commercial walking pass by using Mobile EEG device.
Results showed that the primary moments of strolling in the area had the most effects on
people, and they felt the environment ambience. After walking for some minutes, the effects
of the space faded. Hence, for catching the attention of people, we suggest putting some
noticeable elements in this part of the way and improve the design.

References
Aziz, Nor Fadzila, & Said, Ismail. (2012). The Trends and Influential Factors of Children's Use of Outdoor
Environments: A Review. Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences, 38, 204-212.
Azmi, Diyanah Inani, & Karim, Hafazah Abdul. (2012). Implications of walkability towards promoting sustainable
urban neighbourhood. Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences, 50, 204-213.
Buzsaki, Gyorgy. (2009). Rhythms of the Brain: Oxford University Press.
Carmona, Matthew. (2010). Public places, urban spaces: the dimensions of urban design: Routledge.
Eberhard, John Paul. (2009). Brain landscape. California: oxford university press.
Jalil, Nurlelawati Ab, Yunus, Rodzyah Mohd, & Said, Normahdiah S. (2012). Environmental colour impact upon
human behaviour: A review. Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences, 35, 54-62.
Küller, R, & Wetterberg, L. (1993). Melatonin, cortisol, EEG, ECG and subjective comfort in healthy humans:
impact of two fluorescent lamp types at two light intensities. Lighting Research and Technology, 25(2), 71-80.
Küller, Rikard, Mikellides, Byron, & Janssens, Jan. (2009). Color, arousal, and performance—A comparison of
three experiments. Color Research & Application, 34(2), 141-152.
Marans, Robert W. (2012). Quality of Urban Life Studies: An Overview and Implications for Environment-Behaviour
Research. Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences, 35, 9-22.
Mohamed, Noralizawati, & Othman, Noriah. (2012). Push and Pull Factor: Determining the Visitors Satisfactions at
Urban Recreational Area. Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences, 49, 175-182.

74

Banaei, M., et.al. / Asian Journal of Environmen-Behaviour Studies, ajE-Bs, 2(3), Apr./Jun. 2017 (p.67-75)

Niedermeyer, Ernst, & da Silva, FH Lopes. (2005). Electroencephalography: basic principles, clinical applications,
and related fields: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Pardalos, S.Th. Rassia and P.M. (2012). Sustainable Environmental Design in Architecture: Impacts on Health:
Springer.
Roe, Jenny J, Aspinall, Peter A, Mavros, Panagiotis, & Coyne, Richard. (2013). Engaging the Brain: The Impact of
Natural versus Urban Scenes Using Novel EEG Methods in an Experimental Setting. Environmental Sciences,
1(2), 93-104.
Sadock, Benjamin J. (2000). Kaplan & Sadock's Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry (2 Volume Set): Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.
Shamsuddin, Shuhana, Hassan, Nur Rasyiqah Abu, & Bilyamin, Siti Fatimah Ilani. (2012). Walkable environment
in increasing the liveability of a city. Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences, 50, 167-178.
Ujang, Norsidah. (2010). Place attachment and continuity of urban place identity. Asian Journal of EnvironmentBehaviour Studies, 1(2), 61-76.
Vartanian, Oshin, Navarrete, Gorka, Chatterjee, Anjan, Fich, Lars Brorson, Leder, Helmut, Modroño, Cristián, . . .
Skov, Martin. (2013). Impact of contour on aesthetic judgments and approach-avoidance decisions in architecture.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 110(Supplement 2), 10446-10453.
Zillmer, Eric, Spiers, Mary, & Culbertson, William C. (2008). Principles of neuropsychology: CengageBrain. com

75

