King’s Research Portal
DOI:
10.1016/j.dcn.2019.100635
Document Version
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record
Link to publication record in King's Research Portal

Citation for published version (APA):
Lau-Zhu, A., Lau, M. P. H., & McLoughlin, G. (2019). Mobile EEG in research on neurodevelopmental disorders:
Opportunities and challenges. Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience, 36, 100635. [100635].
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dcn.2019.100635

Citing this paper
Please note that where the full-text provided on King's Research Portal is the Author Accepted Manuscript or Post-Print version this may
differ from the final Published version. If citing, it is advised that you check and use the publisher's definitive version for pagination,
volume/issue, and date of publication details. And where the final published version is provided on the Research Portal, if citing you are
again advised to check the publisher's website for any subsequent corrections.
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the Research Portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright
owners and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognize and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
•Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the Research Portal for the purpose of private study or research.
•You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
•You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the Research Portal
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact librarypure@kcl.ac.uk providing details, and we will remove access to
the work immediately and investigate your claim.

Download date: 21. Mar. 2020

Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 36 (2019) 100635

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/dcn

Mobile EEG in research on neurodevelopmental disorders: Opportunities
and challenges

T

Alex Lau-Zhu , Michael P.H. Lau, Gráinne McLoughlin
⁎

Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry Centre, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King’s College London, London, United Kingdom

ARTICLE INFO

ABSTRACT

Keywords:
EEG
ERP
Biomarker
Neurodevelopmental disorders
Developmental psychopathology

Mobile electroencephalography (mobile EEG) represents a next-generation neuroscientific technology – to study
real-time brain activity – that is relatively inexpensive, non-invasive and portable. Mobile EEG leverages state-ofthe-art hardware alongside established advantages of traditional EEG and recent advances in signal processing.
In this review, we propose that mobile EEG could open unprecedented possibilities for studying neurodevelopmental disorders. We first present a brief overview of recent developments in mobile EEG technologies,
emphasising the proliferation of studies in several neuroscientific domains. As these developments have yet to be
exploited by neurodevelopmentalists, we then identify three research opportunities: 1) increase in the ease and
flexibility of brain data acquisition in neurodevelopmental populations; 2) integration into powerful developmentally-informative research designs; 3) development of innovative non-stationary EEG-based paradigms.
Critically, we address key challenges that should be considered to fully realise the potential of mobile EEG for
neurodevelopmental research and for understanding developmental psychopathology more broadly, and suggest
future research directions.

1. Introduction
Neurodevelopmental disorders, such as attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and autism spectrum disorder (ASD), are
known to impact brain function across the lifespan (Boivin et al., 2015;
Thapar et al., 2017), driven by a complex interplay between genetic and
environmental influences. Efforts have been dedicated to the search for
biological markers (or biomarkers) of these conditions (Insel et al.,
2010), including those that may be along the pathway from genetic/
environmental influences to behavioural symptoms (Meyer-Lindenberg
and Weinberger, 2006; Thapar et al., 2017; Walters and Owen, 2007).
Sensitive and specific brain-based markers of atypical development are
likely to inform optimised interventions (e.g., earlier or more targeted),
potentially mitigating life-long difficulties typically associated with
neurodevelopmental conditions.
The last decade has observed a proliferation of mobile sensing
technologies (Trull and Ebner-Priemer, 2013; Wilhelm and Grossman,
2010). Among these, emerging state-of-the-art electroencephalography
(EEG) tools now enable flexible recording of brain activity in real-time.
We refer to these collectively as mobile EEG. These advances have initially been driven by an interest in incorporating real-time neural recording into consumer-oriented applications, including the development of brain-computer interfaces (or BCI) for a vast range of
⁎

applications such as gaming control (Liao et al., 2012a) and drowsiness
detection during driving (Lim et al., 2014). Other areas of interest include marketing (Lee et al., 2007), architectural and urban design
(Karandinou and Turner, 2017), and personalised health, for instance,
sleep monitoring (Quante et al., 2018) and ‘brain-training’
(Maskeliunas et al., 2016; Wei et al., 2017). These developments have
fuelled the need for forms of EEG that are increasingly more available
and appealing to everyday users, ideally without specialist researchers.
Consequently, the field of EEG has observed dramatic advances in the
last decade which have further promoted its scientific utility. Interest in
this technology has already prompted special issues dedicated to its
neuroscientific use within several prominent academic journals (De Vos
and Debener, 2014; Gramann et al., 2014b), yet its relevance for neurodevelopmentalists remains little discussed.
In this review, we highlight the opportunities afforded by mobile
EEG to overcome limitations of traditional neuroimaging modalities for
studying neurodevelopmental disorders. If optimally implemented, the
incorporation of mobile EEG promises to illuminate developmental
psychopathology mechanisms and facilitate the identification of putative brain-based biomarkers. Although promising, the use of mobile
EEG in neurodevelopmental research is still in its infancy, thus we also
discuss key challenges lying ahead.

Corresponding author.
E-mail address: alex.lauzhu@kcl.ac.uk (A. Lau-Zhu).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dcn.2019.100635
Received 15 October 2018; Received in revised form 6 March 2019; Accepted 6 March 2019
Available online 08 March 2019
1878-9293/ © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY/4.0/).

Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 36 (2019) 100635

Task paradigms

2. Recent advances
Human EEG was first recorded by Hans Berger in 1924, representing
one of the oldest non-invasive tools to record brain activity in real-time.
EEG primarily captures summed electrical field activity (measured in
voltage) produced by pyramidal cortical neurons that are aligned parallel to the scalp.
EEG has excellent temporal resolution, but relatively poorer spatial
resolution (Table 1). Traditional EEG systems have a long-standing
history in neurodevelopmental research (Loo et al., 2015; McLoughlin
et al., 2014a) but are typically restricted to the laboratory (e.g., involving heavy amplifiers and extensive wiring), thus potentially limiting the populations that can be readily studied and the research
questions that can be addressed, as we expand on later (see Section 3).
Several terms associated with mobile EEG have been used in this
rapidly expanding literature (e.g., portable/wireless/wearable/dry
EEG). As this field consolidates, terminology used by neurodevelopmentalists is likely to become more consistent (Bateson et al., 2017).
For example, the concept of ‘transparent EEG’ has recently been introduced to describe the combination of features deemed necessary for
everyday mobile sensing applications, such as the system also needing
to be self-applicable, motion-tolerant, near invisible and suitable for
long recordings (Bleichner and Debener, 2017). Here we use the umbrella term mobile EEG to highlight the two key novel aspects of mobility (of the systems and of the participants) and their relevance for
neurodevelopmental research.

Note. FMRI = functional magnetic resonance imaging; PET = positron emission tomography; MEG = magnetoencephalography; EEG = electroencephalography.
a
Typically needing high-density montages with subject-specific forward model (Akalin Acar and Makeig, 2013).

Stationary; motion-based; in
everyday settings
Stationary

Flexible (e.g., home visits)
Research/clinical

Research/
clinical
Stationary
Research/
clinical
Stationary
Testing setting

Primarily
clinical
Stationary

20-45
45
1900
930
Estimated cost per participant
($)

820

5-20
30-60
60
30-60
Set-up time (min)

30-60

No
No
Yes
No
Invasiveness

No

Direct
Indirect
Indirect

Direct

2
1- 5

Spatial resolution
(mm)
Neural signal

1-5

20-30 (scalp) to 5-10
(source)a
Direct

Comparable to traditional EEG

Issues with delay/jitter need to be corrected (e.g., by the manufacturers or with
additional offline alignment); see Section 4.1.2
Low-density systems provide less spatial information/limit source-based analyses
compared to high-density systems; see Section 4.2
Effective artefact rejection is critical (particularly non-stereotyped motion-based
artefacts); see Section 4.5
The study of certain time-sensitive cognitive processes might become more feasible
(e.g., in the immediate aftermath of traumas/stressors); see Section 3.1
Some of the systems could reduce set-up time (e.g., dry electrodes) but might be less
comfortable for participants; see Section 4.3
Consumer-grade/low-density systems can be inexpensive (e.g., < $1k), whereas
research-grade/higher-density systems currently can be similar in price to setting up a
whole traditional EEG lab (e.g., > $20k); see Table 2
Standardization protocols are advised for large-scale testing in everyday settings; see
Table 3
Motion-based paradigms are currently focused on neurotypical populations; see Section
3.3
1-4 msec
1-4 msec
1-4 msec
30-40 sec
1 sec
Temporal resolution

MEG
PET
fMRI

Table 1
Comparison between Mobile EEG and Other Functional Brain-Imaging Techniques.
Adapted from McLoughlin et al. (2014a)

Traditional EEG

Mobile EEG

Additional Notes on Mobile EEG

A. Lau-Zhu, et al.

2.1. Hardware
Mobile systems encompass hardware solutions that are transforming
EEG into one of the most accessible neuroscientific tools (Fig. 1 and
Table 2). These systems often consist of small, light-weight amplifiers
alongside wireless transmission, which contribute to the devices’ increased portability. These devices can be ‘wearable’. For example,
participants could in principle stand up and walk freely at any point,
with some systems allowing for relatively long recordings or even selffitting. However, given the diversity of manufacturers – for both research-grade systems (tailored to scientific research) and consumeroriented systems (targeted primarily for everyday applications) – not all
of these features are necessarily present in a given system. Thus, the
degree of the systems’ mobility can vary, such that some devices need to
be carried within a backpack while others are fully head-mounted
(Bateson et al., 2017).
Recent developments in dry electrodes (Liao et al., 2012b) could
further decrease preparation time, removing the need to apply conductive gel/saline patch and prepare the skin as required in traditional
EEG to reduce skin-electrode contact impedance (though not without
limitations; see Section 4). Some dry electrodes involve ring-like
structures with pins to reach the scalp through the hair (Hairston et al.,
2014), although others use foam-based materials wrapped in conductive fabric materials (Lin et al., 2011). An exciting possibility includes non-contact electrodes, which involve amplifying the weak biopotential without requiring electrode-skin contact at all. These have
been applied recently for detecting foetal electrocardiogram signals in
pregnant women, using only a small non-contact sensor, non-invasively
and in home settings (Ho et al., 2017; Sharma et al., 2017). Similar noncontact technologies are also being developed for EEG (e.g., Chi and
Cauwenberghs, 2010).
Complementary to advances in EEG recording, more convenient
means for task stimuli presentation are now available for everyday
settings, using lightweight and small Raspberry Pi 2 computers (Kuziek
et al., 2017), smartphones (Debener et al., 2015; Stopczynski et al.,
2014b), tablets (Griffiths et al., 2016), and augmented-reality eyewear
(Duvinage et al., 2013). These mobile presentation-devices can be
coupled with tailored commercially-available software programmes
that allow for data collection with high temporal precision (e.g.,
2

Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 36 (2019) 100635

A. Lau-Zhu, et al.

Fig. 1. Examples of some mobile EEG systems. See Table 2 for an overview of key technical specifications.

Presentation Mobile App; www.neurobs.com). Some of the smartphonebased applications can incorporate stimuli presentation, signal recording and online processing all within a single device (Blum et al.,
2017; Stopczynski et al., 2014b; Wang et al., 2013).

et al., 2004).
Powerful computational tools – many of which can be exploited in
mobile EEG studies – are beginning to improve EEG’s ability to reveal
underlying brain source dynamics. For example, a spatial filtering
technique known as independent component analysis (ICA) can be used
to separate temporally and functionally independent components into
brain and non-brain sources (Delorme et al., 2012; Delorme and
Makeig, 2004). ICA’s utility for analysing mobile EEG data has already
been demonstrated for both artefact correction (including ocular artefacts) and source-based analyses (Debener et al., 2015; Ehinger et al.,
2014; Gramann et al., 2014a; Kontson et al., 2015). Moreover, advances
in source separation have improved the localisation accuracy of EEG
sources, though typically necessitating high-density montages and
subject-specific anatomically-precise forward models (Akalin Acar and
Makeig, 2013), hence high-density mobile EEG systems would be

2.2. Signal processing
The past decade has observed significant advances in analytical
approaches to EEG data, making EEG even more attractive scientifically
and increasing the need for more practical systems. EEG data have been
traditionally analysed in the frequency domain (i.e., extracting frequency bands typically between 1–70 Hz) and time domain (i.e., identifying time- and phase-locked EEG activity to a stimulus, i.e., eventrelated potentials or ERPs); more recent techniques combine both approaches, including time-frequency analyses (Buzsáki, 2006; Makeig
Table 2
Overview of Key Technical Specifications for Example Mobile EEG Systems.
System (manufacturer)

Density
(channels)

Electrode type

Resolution
(bits)

Maximum
sampling rate
(Hz)

Bandwidth (Hz)

Weight (g)

Battery
life (h)

Wireless
transmission

Supported
platformsa

a. MindWave
(NeuroSky)
b. ENOBIO 8
(Neuroelectrics)
c. BR8+
(BRI)
d. EPOC
(Emotiv)
e. g.SAHARA
(G.Tec)
f. B-Alert X24
(Advanced Brain
Monitoring)
g. Smarting
(mBrainTrain)
h. Trilobite
(Mindo)
i. eego sports
(ANT Neuro)
j. Mobile-128
(Cognionics)

1

Dry (stainless
steel)
Wet (gel)

12

512

1–100

90

6-8

Bluetooth

Windows, Linux

24

500

0-125

65

6-23

Bluetooth/Wifi

Dry (spring,
foam)
Wet (saline)

24

500

0.12-125

269

10

Bluetooth

Windows, Mac
OS
Windows

14-16

128/256

0.16-43

116

6-12

Bluetooth

Dry (pins,
metal)
Wet (gel)

24

500

0-40

233

10

Wifi

Windows, Mac
OS, iOS, Android
Windows

16

256

0.1-100

110

8-15

Bluetooth

Windows

24

Wet (gel)

24

250/550

0-250

60

5

Bluetooth

32

Dry (spring,
foam)
Wet (gel)/
Dry (polymer)
Wet (gel)

24

500

0.23–1300

524

10

Bluetooth

Windows, Linux,
Android
PC, Android

24

2048

0–532

500

5

24

500

0–131/262

460

6–8

Wired to a tablet
(in a backpack)
Bluetooth

8
8
14
16
20 (+4
auxiliary)

64
64/128 (+8
auxiliary)

Windows, Linux
Windows, Linux,
Mac OS

Note. These systems are depicted in Fig. 1.
a
These would determine the additional hardware requirements and hence the overall weight of the recording kit; labs with the necessary engineering expertise
may adapt systems to build custom applications on new platforms.
3

Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 36 (2019) 100635

A. Lau-Zhu, et al.

needed to take advantage of these advances (see later Section 4.2). ICA
has shown to be informative for neurodevelopmental research using
traditional EEG systems (Lenartowicz et al., 2014; McLoughlin et al.,
2014b; Milne et al., 2009) and for big-data automated EEG pre-processing pipelines (Bigdely-Shamlo et al., 2015; Chaumon et al., 2015;
Mognon et al., 2011). Such methods could also be harnessed for largescale EEG-based neurodevelopmental studies now facilitated by mobile
applications (see Section 3.2).
Novel analytical methods are increasingly being exploited to gauge
functional brain networks (and their interactions) using EEG data; for a
comprehensive review readers can refer to existing coverages (Bridwell
et al., 2018; Sakkalis, 2011; Stam, 2005). One example is the use of
connectivity measures that are based on synchronisation of EEG activity
(Sakkalis, 2011), with applications in autism (O’Reilly et al., 2017; Tye
and Bolton, 2013) and schizophrenia (Maran et al., 2016). Nonlinear
signal processing methods are also being increasingly applied (e.g.,
single-trial transient events and non-sinusoidal fluctuations) (van Ede
et al., 2018). Such approaches, compared to traditional spectral analyses, promise to extract more functional information (with greater
sensitivity) to unveil biomarkers in neurodevelopmental disorders (Bosl
et al., 2018; Tierney et al., 2012).

Mobile EEG may also facilitate combination with complementary
modalities, such as functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS)
(Safaie et al., 2013), which measures hemodynamic responses and is
increasingly popular in cognitive/developmental research as this technology is also portable/wearable/wireless (Mazzoni et al., 2018; Pinti
et al., 2018).
The flexibility of mobile EEG has been demonstrated in several
existing studies (Liu et al., 2013; Poulsen et al., 2017; Wascher et al.,
2014), including one in an open cockpit biplane during flight (Callan
et al., 2015). While most commercially-available mobile EEG systems
cannot be operated with smartphones – with a few exceptions (Blum
et al., 2017; Stopczynski et al., 2014b; Wang et al., 2013) – smartphonebased EEG holds promise for further increasing the portability of a
‘mobile EEG lab’ that would allow for controlled stimuli-delivery in
everyday settings with minimal equipment. Testing in convenient locations (e.g., schools or homes) can be advantageous for neurodevelopmentalists, as this reduces the burden on participants and their families from travelling, and is also more inclusive of those who would
prefer not to travel, for example, autistic participants who may be anxious about travelling or patients for whom leaving a hospital could be
counterindicated. For certain time-sensitive neurocognitive processes,
mobile EEG might be preferred. For instance, trauma victims may find
noisy scanners/confined spaces/extensive wiring (inherent to traditional neuroimaging) undesirable, particularly soon after trauma (e.g.,
up to 6 hours post-trauma) – a putative critical time window for trauma
memory consolidation (McGaugh, 2015). Mobile EEG could lead to new
possibilities to study this process in real-life traumas/stressors, in contrast to prevailing studies using laboratory ‘trauma’ instead (James
et al., 2016; Lau-Zhu et al., 2018).

3. Key opportunities
Although mobile EEG research is in its infancy, this technology has
already been used by cognitivists to study a variety of processes such as
attention (Jungnickel and Gramann, 2016), memory (Griffiths et al.,
2016; Piñeyro Salvidegoitia et al., 2019), spatial cognition (Ehinger
et al., 2014), speech/auditory processing (Callan et al., 2015; Mirkovic
et al., 2016) and motor processing (Lin et al., 2016; Lo et al., 2016;
Wong et al., 2014). Mobile EEG has also been used for everyday applications in sports (Park et al., 2015), urban behaviours (Mavros et al.,
2016), emotion recognition (Aspinall et al., 2015; Bercik et al., 2016; Li
et al., 2015), neurofeedback (Stopczynski et al., 2014b), motor rehabilitation (Kranczioch et al., 2014; Wagner et al., 2012), epilepsy
(Askamp and van Putten, 2014), and cognitive impairment (Kashefpoor
et al., 2016). The explosion of studies employing mobile EEG, although
predominantly in neurotypical populations, signals similar opportunities for neurodevelopmental research.

3.2. Integration into developmentally-informative research designs
Mobile EEG could facilitate large-scale studies (though not without
challenges; see Section 4.4). Powerful designs for neurodevelopmental
research incorporate longitudinal and/or genetically-informative elements (e.g., twin/family studies) alongside cross-disorder comparisons
(Kendler and Neale, 2010; Lau-Zhu et al., 2019), to illuminate causal
directions and identify converging/diverging neurodevelopmental
pathways. One study used a commercial EEG system to acquire data
from 400 people under only three months in a museum setting (Kontson
et al., 2015), demonstrating the potential increased in efficiency of
EEG-based data collection. Another study involved four daily mobile
EEG recordings in the home environment (Zich et al., 2015) or even
every other day over a month (Zich et al., 2017) to train motor imagery,
illustrating again the feasibility of highly-frequent mobile EEG-based
assessments (e.g., within longitudinal designs), which could be facilitated with future self-fitting systems.
Mobile EEG could be integrated seamlessly into research centres (de
Wit et al., 2017), stimulating interdisciplinary collaborations in psychopathology research, such as combining neuroscience with epidemiology/genetics (McGuffin and Plomin, 2004), as well as data collection in non-western samples worldwide to broaden the study of
sociocultural factors in developmental neuroscience (Choudhury,
2010). Additionally, mobile EEG could promote cross-site collaborations, joining efforts for large-sample studies with independent replications that can be transformative for the field, in light of recent
controversies with replicability in neuroscience (Carp, 2012). Robust
mobile EEG data, alongside source-resolved EEG analytical approaches
(Makeig et al., 2004), could serve as a foundation for targeted analyses
with subgroups using more expensive, invasive and/or multimodal
imaging (Bridwell et al., 2013; McLoughlin et al., 2014a). Furthermore,
sensitive EEG-based genetic risk markers derived from well-powered
studies may inform greater phenotypic specificity for more targeted
molecular genetic studies (McLoughlin et al., 2018), and uncover genebehaviour neurodevelopmental pathways (Anokhin, 2014; Walters and
Owen, 2007).

3.1. Increased ease of use in neurodevelopmental populations
EEG has a long tradition of superior practicality and flexibility as a
functional brain method in children and individuals across ages and
abilities (Loo et al., 2015; McLoughlin et al., 2014a), and the same
appears to be the case for mobile EEG as exemplified by a recent case
study investigating auditory brain responses in a minimally-verbal child
with cerebral palsy (Yau et al., 2015). Mobile EEG could even better
cater for the cognitive, sensory, and/or motor sensitivities that characterise various neurodevelopmental conditions. For instance, participants with ADHD may struggle to stay still for an extended period, and
participants with a learning disability could find long assessments demanding. Mobile EEG offers a solution to these issues with the possibility of high-quality EEG data via maximally flexible testing protocols.
Some mobile systems require as little as 5–10 minutes preparation
which provides the possibility of more breaks and allows for more interruptions with minimal impact on the data. Miniature and concealed
forms of EEG could minimise drop-out of those who find electrode-scalp
contact uncomfortable for an extended period (e.g., autistic participants
with sensory hypersensitivities) along with an improvement in aesthetics (Debener et al., 2015).
Mobile EEG could increase the feasibility of neonate neuroscientific
research. A proof-of-concept study successfully applied an 8-electrode
mobile EEG system in a clinical setting to monitor sleep states in six
nonclinical neonate, and also seizure-related activities in two neonates
with congenital abnormal cortical development (Demene et al., 2017).
4

Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 36 (2019) 100635

A. Lau-Zhu, et al.

Fig. 2. Illustration of innovative EEG-based paradigms facilitated by ongoing mobile EEG developments. Examples include a set-up a) for mobile brain/body imaging
(MoBI) allowing for body movements merging EEG with other motion-based sensors, adapted from Gramann et al. (2010); b) using mobile EEG while walking with
smartphone-based stimuli presentation (of word stimuli) in an outdoor setting (i.e., a pre-specified route), adapted from Piñeyro Salvidegoitia et al. (2019); c) using
mobile EEG simultaneously in multiple individuals within an indoor social setting (i.e., in the classroom), adapted from Dikker et al. (2017).

3.3. Development of innovative neurocognitive paradigms

neurodevelopmental research is likely to bring additional challenges
too (Section 4.5).

An exciting and unprecedented opportunity is the assessment of
brain activity during novel paradigms where participants’ movements
are allowed (Fig. 2). For example, some recent studies with typical
populations have used mobile EEG during lab-based simulations of reallife events, such as in a driving simulator (Gevins et al., 2012), flying
simulator (Callan et al., 2015), shop-browsing simulation (Bercik et al.,
2016), as well as simulation of a social gathering (Gevins et al., 2012;
Poulsen et al., 2017). There is enormous potential for novel paradigms
to improve understanding of atypical cognitive and affective processes.
For instance, while several neurodevelopmental conditions are associated with difficulties in social interactions and communication,
paradigms that aim to probe for these difficulties tend not to involve an
interaction element. Creative approaches have begun to incorporate
EEG in naturalistic interactions in dyads (Kinreich et al., 2017; Leong
et al., 2017; Liao et al., 2015) or even multiple individuals simultaneously known as ‘hyperscanning’ (Babiloni and Astolfi, 2014; Dikker
et al., 2017). Mobile EEG systems might facilitate adaptation of such
paradigms into neurodevelopmental populations and everyday settings.
An approach coined as mobile brain/body imaging (MoBI) has
pioneered the development of EEG-based ecologically-valid paradigms
incorporating participants’ physical actions (e.g., walking or pointing)
(Beurskens et al., 2016; De Sanctis et al., 2014; Gramann et al., 2014a;
Makeig et al., 2009; Wagner et al., 2016). To this end, mobile EEG has
been combined with bicycles (Zink et al., 2016), walkways (Beurskens
et al., 2016), body-sensing technologies (Cruz-Garza et al., 2014; De
Sanctis et al., 2014) and virtual reality (Banaei et al., 2017; Ehinger
et al., 2014), resulting in relatively complex laboratory set-ups to model
real-world scenarios. Similar approaches could inform naturalistic
paradigms for neurodevelopmental research where atypical movementrelated processes are implicated, including gesture development
(Capone and McGregor, 2004) and developmental coordination disorder (Visser, 2003). While promising, developing such paradigms for

4. Current challenges
While the application of several mobile EEG advances in neurodevelopmental research is now feasible, a number of challenges lie ahead
for their maximal exploitation. We refrain from evaluating specific
systems, given the ever-growing number of manufacturers and rapid
developments in this area – evaluation of a specific system now may not
be relevant in the near future (e.g., a given headset with its specifications may no longer be produced). Ultimately, any system could be
useful depending on specific circumstances, including the research
question, intended analyses, targeted population, experimental paradigm, expertise involved and relationships to the manufacturers. Hence,
we raise general issues – including those that could inform industry
(e.g., in designing specific headsets tailored to neurodevelopmental
research) – and suggest future directions to increase the utility of this
new technology for developmental psychopathology research.
4.1. Signal quality
Of utmost importance is the signal quality afforded by these new
systems, to decide on their scientific appropriateness and better evaluate trade-offs with costs. Despite the proliferation of this technology,
often little information about signal quality is provided. Nevertheless,
we summarise some emerging findings regarding validity and reliability
of mobile EEG data.
4.1.1. Validity
Most available studies use traditional EEG systems as the ‘goldstandard’ for reference. One type of study shows that mobile systems
are able to replicate findings derived from traditional EEG (providing
support for construct validity), such as capturing several expected ERPs
5

Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 36 (2019) 100635

A. Lau-Zhu, et al.

Fig. 3. Example of spectral features detected by different mobile EEG systems (***: p ≤ .001; **: .001 < p ≤ 0.01; *: .01 < p ≤ .05; error bars indicate ± 1 SD).
Top panels show that, as expected, parietal alpha-band power significantly increased from an eyes-opened to an eyes-closed resting condition (except for Trilobite – a
dry system), and from an easy to a more demanding cognitive-task condition (except for Trilobite and EPOC, the latter being a saline-based system). Bottom panel
shows that the expected frontal theta-band power significantly increased from an easy to a more demanding cognitive-task condition only in two systems, one which
is research-grade and gel-based (g.LADYbird), and one dry system (which only had frontal electrodes called Jellyfish). Results were aggregated across a selection of
electrodes depending on the specific configuration of each system. Depiction of some of these systems can be found in Fig. 1. Adapted from Radüntz (2018).

(N2, P3 and reward-positivity) during well-established lab-based stationary cognitive paradigms (Krigolson et al., 2017). Expected frequency-based features can also be extracted, for example, reduction in
theta power and increase in alpha power from eyes-closed to eyes-open
resting conditions (Debener et al., 2015), even in a single-channel dry
system (Johnstone et al., 2012), as well as event-related decrease in
beta power for successful memory retrieval in a outdoor walking-based
paradigm (Griffiths et al., 2016; Piñeyro Salvidegoitia et al., 2019).
Nevertheless, in a recent study only a research-grade gel-based system
(e.g., compared to dry EEG) was able to simultaneously capture several
expected EEG-based patterns (Radüntz, 2018; see Fig. 3), underscoring
the importance of multiple metrics in assessing a system’s utility.
Moreover, dry electrodes in their current form appear to be particularly
sensitive to motion artefacts and consistently outperformed by gelbased systems (Oliveira et al., 2016; Radüntz, 2018; Zerafa et al.,
2018). This may be because the use of electrodes through hair is more
susceptible to signal degradation and movement artefacts (Chi et al.,

2012), hence dry EEG requires further work (Chi et al., 2010; Ratti
et al., 2017).
Another type of study directly compared the data produced by
mobile versus traditional systems (providing support for criterion validity) using indices such as intraclass correlations (ICC) to evaluate
their degree of similarity, with > .75 indicating excellent agreement
(Cicchetti, 1994). In the time domain, a consumer-oriented system
(EPOC; see Table 1) was able to produce equivalent patterns on facesensitive N170 ERP as with a traditional system (ICC = .89–95) (de
Lissa et al., 2015; see Fig. 4). Similar promising results have been found
for averaged ERP waveforms such as N2 and P3 (ICC = .74–92) in
oddball tasks in adults (Badcock et al., 2013; Barham et al., 2017) and
children (Badcock et al., 2015). However, some mobile systems may
capture other features, such as mismatched negativity, with lower
agreement (ICC = .44–74); require higher rejection rates (Badcock
et al., 2015, 2013); and be outperformed in single-trial classifications –
for example, of P3 (Duvinage et al., 2013) – by traditional systems.
6

Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 36 (2019) 100635

A. Lau-Zhu, et al.

Fig. 4. Example of face-sensitive N170 ERP assessed using a consumer-oriented mobile and wireless EEG system (EPOC by Emotiv; see also Fig. 1 and Table 2).
Compared to a research-grade wired EEG system, this mobile system showed excellent interclass correlations in recording N170 amplitude/latency. The N170
recorded in both system showed higher amplitude in response to faces versus non-faces (e.g., watches), and longer latencies in response to upright faces versus
inverted faces. Data presented here were restricted to channel P8 for simplicity (though data in channel P7 showed a similar pattern) and because it was where the
grand-averaged peak amplitude was highest. Adapted from de Lissa et al. (2015).

4.1.2. Reliability
Reliability broadly refers to the consistency of a measure across
testing conditions. A recent study suggested that ‘session’ (of three
different testing occasions) accounted for only little variance (1%)
compared to ‘participants’ or ‘systems’ (Melnik et al., 2017), indicating
that variability is driven by individual differences, although no metric
was reported to assess each system’s reliability. Other studies have
begun to incorporate indices of test-retest reliability. For example, good
test-retest reliabilities have been reported for spectral features in auditory oddball tasks (more consistently with wet systems) during seated
(ICC = .68–93) and walking conditions (ICC = .93–.99) (Oliveira et al.,
2016), and similarly in eyes-open and eyes-closed resting states, for
retesting one-day, one-week and one-month later (Ratti et al., 2017),
and even with a single-electrode wireless system during eyes-closed
states (ICCs = .76–.85). Nevertheless, reliabilities may be lower for
eyes-open resting states or cognitive paradigms (ICCs = .57–.85)
(Rogers et al., 2016), or for some dry systems due to misplacement of
electrodes (Ratti et al., 2017).
For ERPs, good test-retest reliability for P3 amplitude can be obtained in an auditory oddball task with Pearson correlation r > .74
(Debener et al., 2015). Even while walking on a treadmill concurrent to
a go/no-go task, good test-retest reliabilities were obtained for N2
amplitude/latency on average more than 2 years later (ICC > .64),
although with lower reliabilities for P3 amplitude/latency (ICC =
.32–.80) (Malcolm et al., 2017). Some mobile systems can be susceptible to delays/jitters due to the use of wireless transmission (Hairston
et al., 2014), which can result in measurement error for time-based
analyses, although some EEG features (e.g., Nc of negative central
which consists of a slow wave) may not be necessarily affected by offtiming by a few msec. If needed, offline alignment corrections can be
applied (Debener et al., 2015; Melnik et al., 2017; Ries et al., 2014).

Nevertheless, several mobile (research-grade) systems now have hardware-based provision for integrating event triggers into the EEG data
stream with minimal delay/jitter, potentially obviating the need for
analytical compensations (Hairston et al., 2014; Ries et al., 2014).
A group of studies compared mobile systems during stationary
versus non-stationary conditions using well-established paradigms, informing reliability across testing settings. Auditory oddball tasks
(Debener et al., 2012; Scanlon et al., 2017; Zink et al., 2016) to elicit
the P3 ERP can be performed in non-lab conditions. Even if significant
artefacts may be present in a moving condition (i.e., biking freely in a
university campus), above chance P3 single-trial classification is still
possible (Zink et al., 2016; see Fig. 5). Similar promising data are
emerging for use of mobile EEG during whole-body motion (e.g.,
Gramann et al., 2010), although not without additional analytical
challenges (see Section 4.5).
4.1.3. Overall assessment and suggestions for future steps
Validation studies for mobile EEG have used a multiplicity of
methodologies. There is currently a lack of consensus on the most appropriate benchmarking criteria, making direct comparisons across
studies/systems challenging, although some recent frameworks have
been proposed (Melnik et al., 2017; Oliveira et al., 2016; Radüntz,
2018; Zerafa et al., 2018). It is clear that at least some current mobile
systems can produce the expected signal, and that overall researchgrade, gel-based systems (akin to traditional systems) offer the best
signal quality, but potentially at a higher cost (see Sections 4.2 and 4.3
for other criteria for system selection). Nevertheless, some consumeroriented systems can still be useful under certain circumstances (e.g.,
averaged ERPs). It remains to be shown whether more advanced techniques (e.g., connectivity and nonlinear approaches) can extract
meaningful information from mobile EEG data beyond traditional
7

Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 36 (2019) 100635

A. Lau-Zhu, et al.

Fig. 5. Grand average ERPs to three types of stimuli (Target, NonTarget and Baseline) for the three conditions of an auditory oddball task (including schematic for
each condition; Still, Pedal and Move) at channel Pz, with topographies for N1 and P3 ERPs for the target stimuli (using SMARTING by mBrainTrain; also see Fig. 1
and Table 2). In the Still condition, participants performed one recording while sitting still on a bike in a fixed standard facing nature; in the Pedal condition, they
performed one recording while pedalling on the bike while the bike remained in a fixed position; in the Move condition, they biked freely around on a 500 m course
on a university campus. In all conditions, a clear posterior focus of the P3 topography is visible whereas the N1 is more central. P3 amplitude (but not N1 amplitude)
in the Move condition was on average 31% and 26% lower as compared to the Still and Pedal conditions, respectively. Adapted from Zink et al. (2016).

analyses (Morán and Soriano, 2018). Moving forward, what would be
most informative are systematic studies that report on both validity and
reliability using multiple systems, paradigms and EEG parameters, and
based on agreed benchmarking metrics as the field matures, to allow for
systematic reviews/meta-analyses. Neurodevelopmentalists may also
wish to test these systems independently if the information needed is
unavailable, or to clarify potential developmentally-sensitive adaptations required for task/protocols, for example, the necessary number of
trials to obtain a stable EEG signal in infants (Webb et al., 2015).
Opportunities could arise from dialogue between neurodevelopmentalists and manufacturers to share insights regarding the ideal
mobile system given a specific population/purpose. This dialogue could
draw from recent successful efforts such as the Lab Streaming Layer
technology (Delorme et al., 2011), an academia-initiated standard to
synchronize timing across platforms (e.g., EEG, eye-tracking, motion
capture, etc.,) in which now many manufacturers participate, dramatically facilitating mobile EEG research (Kothe and Makeig, 2013; Ojeda
et al., 2014). Our field can also take inspiration from existing open
hackathons (e.g., bringing engineers and neurodevelopmentalists to
collaborate intensively to produce a final hardware/software) and other
related workshops tailored to neurodevelopmental questions.

lightweight, but not necessarily suitable for all types of research. Some
systems do not have sensors on the midline (Maskeliunas et al., 2016)
or occipital sites (Radüntz, 2018), while others are placed around the
ear (Bleichner and Debener, 2017; Debener et al., 2012; Mirkovic et al.,
2016).
Reduced scalp coverage might constraint what processes can be
studied and what analyses can be performed, although there is emerging evidence that even ear-based coverage can capture brain-based
EEG features (Bleichner and Debener, 2017). Sufficient scalp coverage
is critical for source localisation (Akalin et al., 2013). It can also be
important for signal quality (as discussed in Section 4.1), reliable reference/re-reference scheme, and effective artefact rejection analyses
(Picton et al., 2000), including muscle artefacts during motion-based
paradigms (Reis et al., 2014; also see Section 4.5).
Higher-density systems may allow for more flexible applications
across paradigms/analyses, and higher sensitivity to capture multiple
brain sources of varying positions/orientations. Lower-density systems
could sometimes be more advantageous, such as quicker set-ups with
minimal preparation in a large sample of neonates. It remains to be seen
whether the longevity of and the maintenance required for current
research-grade mobile systems necessarily outweigh investment in a
traditional EEG lab. However, the associated costs are likely to decrease
over time.

4.2. Selection of electrode density
Low-density systems may be more affordable, comfortable and
8

Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 36 (2019) 100635

A. Lau-Zhu, et al.

4.3. Comfort issues

Given that we lack consensus guidelines, creative (but sensible)
solutions are paramount, ideally with input from developmental/clinical experts. As mobile EEG becomes more widespread in neurodevelopmental research, it would be an asset to refine such protocols/
guidelines by sharing advice across research groups, to help ensure
protocol fidelity in multi-site collaborations and to encourage cross-lab
replications. The latter would greatly benefit from developing EEG data
sharing standards, such as following similar initiatives on developing
brain imaging data structure (BIDS) for magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI; Gorgolewski et al., 2016) and magnetoencephalography (MEG;
Niso et al., 2018) to facilitate open data-sharing.

The ability to tailor to the various cognitive, sensory and motor
characteristics of neurodevelopmental populations varies greatly across
available systems. It is important to flexibly adjust to different head
sizes/shapes without compromising set-up quality, as for example extreme outliers in head size can be common in some neurodevelopmental populations (Miles et al., 2005). Some consumer-oriented systems – primarily developed for everyday use – can produce position
errors due to design issues, such as electrode size, fixed lengths and
rigid structures (Hairston et al., 2014).
Further, dry EEG can be uncomfortable (sometimes causing skin
irritation). Because dry electrodes exert pressure to ensure direct contact with the scalp, these can become tangled with long/thick hair
(Hairston et al., 2014). Dry systems – at least in their current form – are
thus not appealing for extensive periods of data collection. Non-contact
EEG is promising but not available yet for routine use.
Recent studies evaluating mobile EEG have increasingly considered
the user experience (Hairston et al., 2014; Melnik et al., 2017; Zerafa
et al., 2018). This approach would also be important when evaluating a
system’s suitability for neurodevelopmental populations, to inform
practical issues such as whether it would indeed improve recruitment
rates (e.g., is the system more appealing?), reduce attrition rates (e.g., is
it tolerated for longer?) and minimise the need for desensitization
protocols (e.g., does it look less ‘scary’?).

4.5. Considerations for motion-based paradigms
Participants’ motion inevitably introduces novel types of artefacts
(for a more detailed review see Reis et al., 2014). Emerging evidence
indicates that movement in motion-based mobile EEG paradigms can be
dealt with given the appropriate technical and analytical approaches
(Gramann et al., 2010; Gwin et al., 2010; Malcolm et al., 2015; Nathan
and Contreras-Vidal, 2015; Wagner et al., 2014), for example drawing
from advances in simultaneous fMRI-EEG data analyses which combine
channel-based and source-based approaches (Gwin et al., 2010). Further evidence is needed for the applicability of these methods to neurodevelopmental research, especially if systems with lower samplingrates are used (< 128–250 Hz), which could constraint feature extraction (Reis et al., 2014). The advent of routine multi-modal data acquisition – including the incorporation of motion sensors using inertia
measurement unit (IMU) acquisition alongside mobile EEG – would
further contribute to the improvement of artefact-correction procedures
(Reis et al., 2014).
Several challenges remain for designing non-stationary paradigms
for neurodevelopmental research. One approach has been to attempt to
model real-world complexities in the laboratory (Fig. 2). Such set-ups
tend to be restricted to dedicated laboratories involving cumbersome/
heavyweight equipment and no fully head-mounted headsets, including
relatively large amplifiers stored in rucksacks worn by participants or
attached to their waists (Banaei et al., 2017; Jungnickel and Gramann,
2016). Such paradigms can be impractical and uncomfortable for
neurodevelopmental populations. Many of these also constitute proofof-concept studies and are concerned primarily with the impact of
different types of motions (Banaei et al., 2017; Doppelmayr et al., 2012;
Jungnickel and Gramann, 2016; Zink et al., 2016). Thus, translations
are pending for mobile paradigms that are appropriate and specific for
interrogating developmentally-relevant neurocognition.
An alternative approach has been to introduce experimental manipulations within everyday settings, which faces the challenge of how
to maximise control of stimuli delivery (Fig. 2). Creative solutions have
included the presentation of auditory stimuli on headphones while
cycling around a limited area (Zink et al., 2016), and of to-be-memorised word stimuli while participants walked on a pre-established
route shown using a tablet screen held by the researcher (Griffiths et al.,
2016). Smartphone-based stimuli presentation is also increasingly
being incorporated into outdoor-based studies (Piñeyro Salvidegoitia
et al., 2019). A smartphone-based mobile EEG system was worn for up
to seven hours (Debener et al., 2015), further emphasising the possibility of real-world long-lasting recording. Nevertheless, these examples
still consider ‘simple’ stimuli. Further mobile studies can incorporate
more naturalistic/complex stimuli such as moving faces (Leong et al.,
2017) or using turn-taking paradigms (Liao et al., 2015).
A particularly exciting possibility is the advent of truly naturalistic
paradigms to link EEG activity with spontaneous behaviours. These
could leverage existing methods for comprehensive moment-to-moment
coding and annotation (Bakeman and Gottman, 1997; de Barbaro et al.,
2013), together with advances in automated event detection/labelling
using additional everyday sensors (Mohr et al., 2017) and even from the
EEG signal itself (Su et al., 2018). These numerous possibilities may

4.4. Considerations for large-scale data collection
The use of consumer-oriented low-density mobile EEG systems for
efficient data collection is promising (Kontson et al., 2015), but it remains to be seen if the same applies to the use of research-grade highdensity systems in neurodevelopmental populations while maintaining
high signal quality. Not every system would suit this purpose. The
choice of system would depend on headset-specific characteristics (e.g.,
shelf-life and battery duration) and also the weight of the broader
‘mobile’ kit (e.g., devices for stimuli presentation, EEG monitoring and
data storage; cameras; and in-person interview materials). Smartphonebased EEG could be helpful to minimise equipment burden (Piñeyro
Salvidegoitia et al., 2019; Stopczynski et al., 2014a, 2014b). For some
types of EEG studies, a ‘mobile lab’ might be the most viable solution
(e.g., studies involving large-scale nation-wide data collection in twin
siblings). Concrete evidence for increased efficiency and cost-effectiveness compared to past studies using similar designs with traditional
EEG would be informative.
A key challenge is to devise protocols for testing in multiple/nonstandardised settings, particularly when the impact of environmental
variables on mobile EEG data remains unknown. There is little discussion about potential environmental noise (e.g., electromagnetic interference) generated from other devices that might be encountered in
homes and schools (e.g., mobile phones, microwaves and air conditioning units). Note that the use of active electrodes (which can actively amplify voltage at the electrode), at least in traditional EEG
systems, has shown to be useful in minimising such sources of noise
(Kappenman and Luck, 2010; Metting van Rijn et al., 1990) and are
increasingly incorporated into mobile EEG systems. Further, active
shielding in many mobile systems appears to protect from 50/60 Hz
‘line’ noise interference (Bateson et al., 2017). While such electromagnetic interference may be unsystematic and has little impact
overall, it remains an important issue to be considered more thoroughly
as EEG testing for routine scientific research becomes increasingly
performed in several set-ups within the same study. Further to the already excellent guidelines for EEG research (Picton et al., 2000; Webb
et al., 2015) which contain many relevant points for mobile EEG studies, we propose some additional suggestions (Table 3) drawing from
some initial experience with a mobile EEG system in a large-scale
neurodevelopmental study (Fig. 6).
9

Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 36 (2019) 100635

A. Lau-Zhu, et al.

Table 3
Some Good Practice Suggestions for Mobile EEG Testing in Large-scale Studies with Several Non-Standard Settings.
Before the visit

on the minimum requirements for testing, e.g.,:
• Decide
- availability of a quiet space
- availability of desk/table of appropriate size

the additional features that would enhance standardisation, e.g.,:
• Establish
- space-layout that allows the researcher to be completely out of sight of the participant

- available space to position a video camera to monitor the participant’s whole body and facial expressions during testing

a pre-visit interview (e.g., by phone/email/text) to:
• Conduct
- ascertain environmental conditions to pre-empt challenges (e.g., other people who may be at home that day; sources of ambient noise; large windows
During the visit

After the visit

•
•
•
•
•
•

without curtains which may allow for distractions; sources of lighting; location of plug sockets, etc.)
- consider sending a video of the mobile system (and preparation process) prior to the visit to elicit potential concerns or special considerations
Maximise signal quality by using additional devices from the ‘mobile lab kit’ (note that these suggestions would not be suitable for every study/population,
and some may be stress-inducing for certain participants):
- inner headphones or foldable panels to reduce visual/auditory distractions
- portable mini-fans to regulate room temperature
- ventilation vests to regulate body temperature (during motion)
- double-layered caps (or alternatively using soft cotton bandages) to restrain cables between layers and minimise cable movement
Take note of any deviations from standard protocol and annotations of events given the typical higher rates of modifications needed to work with
neurodevelopmental cohorts
Document the general set-up in images (e.g., with photographs or videos; also see Fig. 6)
Perform active and continuous monitoring of the participant and of the EEG recording (both on-task and off-task) to ensure compliance levels
Review notes and visual documentations as a team to:
- continue with protocol refinement and standardization
- reinforce a culture of joint problem-solving and good scientific practice (critical for early use of this technology)
- identify retrospectively unexpected noise sources (e.g., including potential interference from electronic devices)
- facilitate characterisation of the environment into quantifiable variables to be considered in later analyses.
Store and archive EEG data in line with community-agreed standards to facilitate open science

Note. This list is not meant to be final or exhaustive and is only based on one group’s initial experience with these new technologies.

signify a paradigm shift away from reliance on lab-based protocols, but
not without substantial challenges for methods (e.g., potential channel
movement if the cap shifts in a free-moving interaction), as well as for
analyses and interpretations. The initial adaptation/validation of wellestablished stationary cognitive paradigms using emerging EEG systems
in everyday settings (e.g., and in large samples) may serve as a
springboard to refine theories, hypotheses, and methodologies. This
approach could then guide the development of mobile EEG paradigms
in everyday settings with free-moving conditions in response to realworld stimuli (e.g., to study social communication in a real-life interaction or executive functioning in a shopping task).

standardisations across neurodevelopmentalists are encouraged.
Finally, the advent of paradigms that examine real-world behaviours in
everyday settings is an exciting possibility, but may require careful
design to ensure good signal quality and neurodevelopmental relevance.
Increased input from neurodevelopmentalists would be an asset to
further tailor mobile EEG advances for neurodevelopmental research
and provide critical information for colleagues in the field. How current
forms of mobile EEG can be used would depend on many factors, hence
the decisions on EEG system selection would ultimately lie in the individual research group. For example, there is no reason why a neurodevelopmentalist could not start validating the use of some new EEG
systems in a small sample of participants with specific neurodevelopmental disorders and using a well-established cognitive paradigm to
study a novel EEG parameter for which information is lacking (e.g.,
time-frequency or network analyses). Alternatively, for neurodevelopmentalists who have access to signal-processing colleagues and
collaborative links with manufacturers, it would be exciting to embark
on a relatively ambitious and larger-scale project with mobile EEG, as
they would in principle have the necessary expertise to address uncharted challenges. Continued innovation is critical, and researchers
can begin to explore these technologies while being mindful of caveats.
Several challenges lie ahead for mobile EEG advances to be maximally exploited for neurodevelopmental research. Advances in hardware and software are clearly rapidly evolving. With increased input
from neurodevelopmentalists in mobile EEG developments, mobile EEG
technologies could be at the forefront of neurodevelopmental and
psychopathology research in the years to come.

5. Conclusions and final reflections
EEG technologies marked the historical beginning of human neuroscience research to study brain activity, and now stand firmly as one
of the most accessible and flexible tools to study the brain in real-time
given recent advances in mobile applications. Together with progress in
signal processing, mobile EEG systems hold promise to advance developmental psychopathology research, particularly by increasing the
overall ease of use of EEG technologies for neurodevelopmental populations, facilitating routine large-scale neural data-collection in powerful developmentally-informative studies, and inspiring the development of novel paradigms for studying neurocognition beyond typical
stationary laboratory-based tasks. By maximally exploiting these opportunities, the field may draw closer to unravelling the aetiology and
mechanisms of psychopathology across the lifespan.
Despite the recent proliferation of studies leveraging mobile EEG,
the application of these advances in neurodevelopmental disorders is
still in its infancy. Many mobile EEG systems are available currently,
each with its strengths and drawbacks. We identified key challenges
that remain for mobile EEG technologies to fully integrate both the
relevant hardware and software advances into neurodevelopmental
research. Signal quality is promising (in at least certain mobile systems), but we need more systematic studies and additional validations
in neurodevelopmental populations. Considerations should also be
given to electrode density and headsets’ comfort, as these aspects could
constrain signal quality. Integration of mobile EEG into large-scale data
collection in everyday settings is now feasible, and shared guidelines for

Declarations of interest
None.
Funding
The research was funded by the United Kingdom Medical Research
Council (MRC) [Grant number: MR/N013182/1].
10

Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 36 (2019) 100635

A. Lau-Zhu, et al.

Fig. 6. Illustration of large-scale mobile EEG
testing across indoor locations using conventional stimuli presentation. Photographs were
taken as part of regular research documentation
to fine-tune testing protocol and inform standardization. Four mobile set-ups using a mobile
EEG headset from Cognionics in clockwise
order: testing in a home setting and of resting
state recordings, which include folding panels
to reduce visual distraction, having participants’ backs facing the window to reduce visual
interference and having the researcher out-ofsight to allow for minimal interference and
note-taking; testing also in a home setting with
a similar set-up, this time of a task-based
paradigm using stimuli delivery via a laptop;
testing in an office setting, illustrating the use
of a soft cotton-net to reduce cable movement if
required; finally, testing in a home setting, with
camera positioned to allow for recording of
potential full-body movements/facial expressions for later revisions.

Authors’ contributions

91, 30–35.
Aspinall, P., Mavros, P., Coyne, R., Roe, J., 2015. The urban brain: analysing outdoor
physical activity with mobile EEG. Br. J. Sports Med. 49, 272–276.
Babiloni, F., Astolfi, L., 2014. Social neuroscience and hyperscanning techniques: past,
present and future. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 44, 76–93. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
neubiorev.2012.07.006.
Badcock, N.A., Mousikou, P., Mahajan, Y., de Lissa, P., Thie, J., McArthur, G., 2013.
Validation of the Emotiv EPOC® EEG gaming system for measuring research quality
auditory ERP. PeerJ 1, e38. https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.38.
Badcock, N.A., Preece, K.A., de Wit, B., Glenn, K., Fieder, N., Thie, J., McArthur, G., 2015.
Validation of the Emotiv EPOC EEG system for research quality auditory event-related potentials in children. PeerJ 3, e907. https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.907.
Bakeman, R., Gottman, J.M., 1997. Observing Interaction. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511527685.
Banaei, M., Hatami, J., Yazdanfar, A., Gramann, K., 2017. Walking through architectural
spaces: the impact of interior forms on human brain dynamics. Front. Hum. Neurosci.
11, 477. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2017.00477.
Barham, M.P., Clark, G.M., Hayden, M.J., Enticott, P.G., Conduit, R., Lum, J.A.G., 2017.
Acquiring research-grade ERPs on a shoestring budget: a comparison of a modified
Emotiv and commercial SynAmps EEG system. Psychophysiology 54, 1393–1404.
https://doi.org/10.1111/psyp.12888.
Bateson, A.D., Baseler, H.A., Paulson, K.S., Ahmed, F., Asghar, A.U.R., 2017.
Categorisation of mobile EEG: a researcher’s perspective. Biomed Res. Int. 2017,
1–15. https://doi.org/10.1155/2017/5496196.
Bercik, J., Horska, E., Wang, R.W.Y., Chen, Y.C., 2016. The impact of parameters of store
illumination on food shopper response. Appetite 106, 101–109.
Beurskens, R., Steinberg, F., Antoniewicz, F., Wolff, W., Granacher, U., 2016. Neural
correlates of dual-task walking: effects of cognitive versus motor interference in
young adults. Neural Plast. 2016, 1–3.
Bigdely-Shamlo, N., Mullen, T., Kothe, C., Su, K.-M., Robbins, K.A., 2015. The PREP pipeline: standardized preprocessing for large-scale EEG analysis. Front. Neuroinform.

ALZ wrote the draft. ML and GM contributed to revisions.
Acknowledgements
The views expressed here are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the MRC. The authors declared no competing or potential conflicts of interest in relation to this work. We would like to
thank our research participants and research assistants for permission
to use photographs for research purposes, to Jason Palmer for helpful
comments on an earlier draft of the manuscript, to Rachel Rodrigues
and Claire Ellis for proofreading, and to the research assistants who
have helped shaped many of the ideas in this review through thoughtful
discussions, including Alexandra Lautarescu, Tyler Saunders and Claire
Ellis. We are also grateful for the reviewers for their generous comments.
References
Akalin Acar, Z., Makeig, S., 2013. Effects of forward model errors on EEG source localization. Brain Topogr. 26, 378–396.
Anokhin, A.P., 2014. Genetic psychophysiology: advances, problems, and future directions. Int. J. Psychophysiol. 93, 173–197.
Askamp, J., van Putten, M.J.A.M., 2014. Mobile EEG in epilepsy. Int. J. Psychophysiol.

11

Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 36 (2019) 100635

A. Lau-Zhu, et al.
9. https://doi.org/10.3389/fninf.2015.00016.
Bleichner, M.G., Debener, S., 2017. Concealed, unobtrusive ear-centered EEG acquisition:
cEEGrids for transparent EEG. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 11, 163. https://doi.org/10.
3389/fnhum.2017.00163.
Blum, S., Debener, S., Emkes, R., Volkening, N., Fudickar, S., Bleichner, M.G., 2017. EEG
recording and online signal processing on Android: a multiapp framework for braincomputer interfaces on smartphone. Biomed. Res. Int. 2017, 1–12. https://doi.org/
10.1155/2017/3072870.
Boivin, M.J., Kakooza, A.M., Warf, B.C., Davidson, L.L., Grigorenko, E.L., 2015. Reducing
neurodevelopmental disorders and disability through research and interventions.
Nature 527, S155–S160.
Bosl, W.J., Tager-Flusberg, H., Nelson, C.A., 2018. EEG analytics for early detection of
autism spectrum disorder: a data-driven approach. Sci. Rep. 8, 6828. https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41598-018-24318-x.
Bridwell, D.A., Wu, L., Eichele, T., Calhoun, V.D., 2013. The spatiospectral characterization of brain networks: fusing concurrent EEG spectra and fMRI maps. Neuroimage
69, 101–111.
Bridwell, D.A., Cavanagh, J.F., Collins, A.G.E., Nunez, M.D., Srinivasan, R., Stober, S.,
Calhoun, V.D., 2018. Moving beyond ERP components: a selective review of approaches to integrate EEG and behavior. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 12, 106. https://doi.
org/10.3389/fnhum.2018.00106.
Buzsáki, G., 2006. Rhythms of the Brain. Oxford University Press, New York, USA.
https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195301069.001.0001.
Callan, D.E., Durantin, G., Terzibas, C., 2015. Classification of single-trial auditory events
using dry-wireless EEG during real and motion simulated flight. Front. Syst. Neurosci.
9, 11. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnsys.2015.00011.
Capone, N.C., McGregor, K.K., 2004. Gesture development: a review for clinical and research practices. J. Speech Lang. Hear. Res. 47 (173). https://doi.org/10.1044/10924388(2004/015).
Carp, J., 2012. On the plurality of (methodological) worlds: estimating the analytic
flexibility of fMRI experiments. Front. Neurosci. 6, 149.
Chaumon, M., Bishop, D.V.M., Busch, N.A., 2015. A practical guide to the selection of
independent components of the electroencephalogram for artifact correction. J.
Neurosci. Methods 250, 47–63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2015.02.025.
Chi, Y.M., Cauwenberghs, G., 2010. Wireless non-contact EEG/ECG electrodes for body
sensor networks. 2010 International Conference on Body Sensor Networks 297–301.
https://doi.org/10.1109/BSN.2010.52.
Chi, Y.M., Jung, T.-P., Cauwenberghs, G., 2010. Dry-contact and noncontact biopotential
electrodes: methodological review. IEEE Rev. Biomed. Eng. 3, 106–119. https://doi.
org/10.1109/RBME.2010.2084078.
Chi, Y.M., Wang, Y.-T., Wang, Y., Maier, C., Jung, T.-P., Cauwenberghs, G., 2012. Dry and
noncontact EEG sensors for mobile brain–computer interfaces. IEEE Trans. Neural
Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 20, 228–235. https://doi.org/10.1109/TNSRE.2011.2174652.
Choudhury, S., 2010. Culturing the adolescent brain: what can neuroscience learn from
anthropology? Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci. 5, 159–167. https://doi.org/10.1093/
scan/nsp030.
Cicchetti, D.V., 1994. Guidelines, criteria, and rules of thumb for evaluating normed and
standardized assessment instruments in psychology. Psychol. Assess. 6, 284–290.
https://doi.org/10.1037/1040-3590.6.4.284.
Cruz-Garza, J.G., Hernandez, Z.R., Nepaul, S., Bradley, K.K., Contreras-Vidal, J.L., 2014.
Neural decoding of expressive human movement from scalp electroencephalography
(EEG). Front. Hum. Neurosci. 8, 188.
de Barbaro, K., Johnson, C.M., Forster, D., Deak, G.O., 2013. Methodological considerations for investigating the microdynamics of social interaction development. IEEE
Trans. Auton. Ment. Dev. 5, 258–270. https://doi.org/10.1109/TAMD.2013.
2276611.
de Lissa, P., Sorensen, S., Badcock, N., Thie, J., McArthur, G., 2015. Measuring the facesensitive N170 with a gaming EEG system: a validation study. J. Neurosci. Methods
253, 47–54. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2015.05.025.
De Sanctis, P., Butler, J.S., Malcolm, B.R., Foxe, J.J., 2014. Recalibration of inhibitory
control systems during walking-related dual-task interference: a Mobile Brain-Body
Imaging (MOBI) Study. Neuroimage 94, 55–64.
De Vos, M., Debener, S., 2014. Mobile eeg: towards brain activity monitoring during
natural action and cognition. Int. J. Psychophysiol. 91, 1–2. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.ijpsycho.2013.10.008.
de Wit, B., Badcock, N.A., Grootswagers, T., Hardwick, K., Teichmann, L., Wehrman, J.,
Williams, M., Kaplan, D.M., 2017. Neurogaming technology meets neuroscience
education: a cost-effective, scalable, and highly portable undergraduate teaching
laboratory for neuroscience. J. Undergrad. Neurosci. Educ. 15, A104–A109.
Debener, S., Minow, F., Emkes, R., Gandras, K., de Vos, M., 2012. How about taking a
low-cost, small, and wireless EEG for a walk? Psychophysiology 49, 1617–1621.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8986.2012.01471.x.
Debener, S., Emkes, R., De Vos, M., Bleichner, M., 2015. Unobtrusive ambulatory EEG
using a smartphone and flexible printed electrodes around the ear. Sci. Rep. 5, 16743.
Delorme, A., Makeig, S., 2004. EEGLAB: an open source toolbox for analysis of single-trial
EEG dynamics including independent component analysis. J. Neurosci. Methods 134,
9–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2003.10.009.
Delorme, A., Mullen, T., Kothe, C., Akalin Acar, Z., Bigdely-Shamlo, N., Vankov, A.,
Makeig, S., 2011. EEGLAB, SIFT, NFT, BCILAB, and ERICA: new tools for advanced
EEG processing. Comput. Intell. Neurosci. 2011, 130714. https://doi.org/10.1155/
2011/130714.
Delorme, A., Palmer, J., Onton, J., Oostenveld, R., Makeig, S., 2012. Independent EEG
sources are dipolar. PLoS One 7, e30135.
Demene, C., Baranger, J., Bernal, M., Delanoe, C., Auvin, S., Biran, V., Alison, M.,
Mairesse, J., Harribaud, E., Pernot, M., Tanter, M., Baud, O., 2017. Functional ultrasound imaging of brain activity in human newborns. Sci. Transl. Med. 9. https://

doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.aah6756. eaah6756.
Dikker, S., Wan, L., Davidesco, I., Kaggen, L., Oostrik, M., McClintock, J., Rowland, J.,
Michalareas, G., Van Bavel, J.J., Ding, M., Poeppel, D., 2017. Brain-to-brain synchrony tracks real-world dynamic group interactions in the classroom. Curr. Biol. 27,
1375–1380. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2017.04.002.
Doppelmayr, M., Sauseng, P., Doppelmayr, H., Mausz, I., 2012. Changes in EEG during
ultralong running. J. Hum. Perform. Extrem. Environ. 10, 4. https://doi.org/10.
7771/2327-2937.1047.
Duvinage, M., Castermans, T., Petieau, M., Hoellinger, T., Cheron, G., Dutoit, T., 2013.
Performance of the Emotiv Epoc headset for P300-based applications. Biomed. Eng.
Online 12 (56). https://doi.org/10.1186/1475-925X-12-56.
Ehinger, B.V., Fischer, P., Gert, A.L., Kaufhold, L., Weber, F., Pipa, G., König, P., 2014.
Kinesthetic and vestibular information modulate alpha activity during spatial navigation: a mobile EEG study. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 8, 71. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fnhum.2014.00071.
Gevins, A., Chan, C.S., Sam-Vargas, L., 2012. Towards measuring brain function on
groups of people in the real world. PLoS One 7, e44676. https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0044676.
Gorgolewski, K.J., Auer, T., Calhoun, V.D., Craddock, R.C., Das, S., Duff, E.P., Flandin, G.,
Ghosh, S.S., Glatard, T., Halchenko, Y.O., Handwerker, D.A., Hanke, M., Keator, D.,
Li, X., Michael, Z., Maumet, C., Nichols, B.N., Nichols, T.E., Pellman, J., Poline, J.-B.,
Rokem, A., Schaefer, G., Sochat, V., Triplett, W., Turner, J.A., Varoquaux, G.,
Poldrack, R.A., 2016. The brain imaging data structure, a format for organizing and
describing outputs of neuroimaging experiments. Sci. Data 3, 160044. https://doi.
org/10.1038/sdata.2016.44.
Gramann, K., Gwin, J.T., Bigdely-Shamlo, N., Ferris, D.P., Makeig, S., 2010. Visual evoked
responses during standing and walking. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 4, 202. https://doi.
org/10.3389/fnhum.2010.00202.
Gramann, K., Ferris, D.P., Gwin, J., Makeig, S., 2014a. Imaging natural cognition in action. Int. J. Psychophysiol. 91, 22–29.
Gramann, K., Jung, T.-P., Ferris, D.P., Lin, C.-T., Makeig, S., 2014b. Toward a new cognitive neuroscience: modeling natural brain dynamics. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 8.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00444.
Griffiths, B., Mazaheri, A., Debener, S., Hanslmayr, S., 2016. Brain oscillations track the
formation of episodic memories in the real world. Neuroimage 143, 256–266.
Gwin, J.T., Gramann, K., Makeig, S., Ferris, D.P., 2010. Removal of movement artifact
from high-density EEG recorded during walking and running. J. Neurophysiol. 103,
3526–3534.
Hairston, W.D., Whitaker, K.W., Ries, A.J., Vettel, J.M., Cortney Bradford, J., Kerick, S.E.,
McDowell, K., 2014. Usability of four commercially-oriented EEG systems. J. Neural
Eng. 11, 046018. https://doi.org/10.1088/1741-2560/11/4/046018.
Ho, D.S.V., Ritchie, P., Sharma, M., Ghirmai, T., Bustillos, D., Ezeonwu, M., Krishnan, S.,
Lau, M.P.H., Chiao, J.-C., Cao, H., 2017. Non-invasive home-based maternal-fetal
ECG monitoring system. IEEE APS.
Insel, T.R.T., Cuthbert, B., Garvey, M., Heinssen, R., Pine, D.S., Quinn, K., Sanislow, C.,
Wang, P., 2010. Research domain criteria (RDoC): toward a new classification framework for research on mental disorders. Am. J. Psychiatry 167, 748–751. https://
doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.2010.09091379.
James, E.L., Lau-Zhu, A., Clark, I.A., Visser, R.M., Hagenaars, M.A., Holmes, E.A., 2016.
The trauma film paradigm as an experimental psychopathology model of psychological trauma: intrusive memories and beyond. Clin. Psychol. Rev. 47, 106–142.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpr.2016.04.010.
Johnstone, S.J., Blackman, R., Bruggemann, J.M., 2012. EEG from a single-channel drysensor recording device. Clin. EEG Neurosci. 43, 112–120. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1550059411435857.
Jungnickel, E., Gramann, K., 2016. Mobile brain/body imaging (MoBI) of physical interaction with dynamically moving objects. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 10, 306. https://
doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2016.00306.
Kappenman, E.S., Luck, S.J., 2010. The effects of electrode impedance on data quality and
statistical significance in ERP recordings. Psychophysiology 47, 888–904. https://
doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8986.2010.01009.x.
Karandinou, A., Turner, L., 2017. Architecture and neuroscience; what can the EEG recording of brain activity reveal about a walk through everyday spaces? Int. J.
Parallel, Emergent Distrib. Syst. 32, S54–S65. https://doi.org/10.1080/17445760.
2017.1390089.
Kashefpoor, M., Rabbani, H., Barekatain, M., 2016. Automatic diagnosis of mild cognitive
impairment using electroencephalogram spectral features. J. Med. Signals Sens. 6,
25–32.
Kendler, K.S., Neale, M.C., 2010. Endophenotype: a conceptual analysis. Mol. Psychiatry
15, 789–797. https://doi.org/10.1038/mp.2010.8.
Kinreich, S., Djalovski, A., Kraus, L., Louzoun, Y., Feldman, R., 2017. Brain-to-brain
synchrony during naturalistic social interactions. Sci. Rep. 7, 17060. https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41598-017-17339-5.
Kontson, K.L., Megjhani, M., Brantley, J.A., Cruz-Garza, J.G., Nakagome, S., Robleto, D.,
White, M., Civillico, E., Contreras-Vidal, J.L., 2015. Your brain on art: emergent
cortical dynamics during aesthetic experiences. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 9, 626.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2015.00626.
Kothe, C.A., Makeig, S., 2013. BCILAB: a platform for brain–computer interface development. J. Neural Eng. 10, 056014. https://doi.org/10.1088/1741-2560/10/5/
056014.
Kranczioch, C., Zich, C., Schierholz, I., Sterr, A., 2014. Mobile EEG and its potential to
promote the theory and application of imagery-based motor rehabilitation. Int. J.
Psychophysiol. 91, 10–15.
Krigolson, O.E., Williams, C.C., Norton, A., Hassall, C.D., Colino, F.L., 2017. Choosing
MUSE: validation of a low-cost, portable EEG system for ERP research. Front.
Neurosci. 11, 109. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2017.00109.

12

Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 36 (2019) 100635

A. Lau-Zhu, et al.
Kuziek, J.W.P., Shienh, A., Mathewson, K.E., 2017. Transitioning EEG experiments away
from the laboratory using a Raspberry Pi 2. J. Neurosci. Methods 277, 75–82. https://
doi.org/10.1016/J.JNEUMETH.2016.11.013.
Lau-Zhu, A., Holmes, E.A., Porcheret, K., 2018. Intrusive memories of trauma in the laboratory: methodological developments and future directions. Curr. Behav. Neurosci.
Rep. 5, 61–71. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40473-018-0141-1.
Lau-Zhu, A., Fritz, A., McLoughlin, G., 2019. Overlaps and distinctions between attention
deficit/hyperactivity disorder and autism spectrum disorder in young adulthood:
systematic review and guiding framework for EEG-imaging research. Neurosci.
Biobehav. Rev. 96, 93–115. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2018.10.009.
Lee, N., Broderick, A.J., Chamberlain, L., 2007. What is ‘neuromarketing’? A discussion
and agenda for future research. Int. J. Psychophysiol. 63, 199–204. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2006.03.007.
Lenartowicz, A., Delorme, A., Walshaw, P.D., Cho, A.L., Bilder, R.M., McGough, J.J.,
McCracken, J.T., Makeig, S., Loo, S.K., 2014. Electroencephalography correlates of
spatial working memory deficits in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: vigilance, encoding, and maintenance. J. Neurosci. 34, 1171–1182. https://doi.org/10.
1523/JNEUROSCI.1765-13.2014.
Leong, V., Byrne, E., Clackson, K., Georgieva, S., Lam, S., Wass, S., 2017. Speaker gaze
increases information coupling between infant and adult brains. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U. S. A. 114, 13290–13295. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1702493114.
Li, X., Hu, B., Shen, J., Xu, T., Retcliffe, M., 2015. Mild depression detection of college
students: an EEG-based solution with free viewing tasks. J. Med. Syst. 39, 187.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10916-015-0345-9.
Liao, L.-D., Chen, C.-Y., Wang, I.-J., Chen, S.-F., Li, S.-Y., Chen, B.-W., Chang, J.-Y., Lin,
C.-T., 2012a. Gaming control using a wearable and wireless EEG-based brain-computer interface device with novel dry foam-based sensors. J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. 9, 5.
https://doi.org/10.1186/1743-0003-9-5.
Liao, L.-D., Lin, C.T., McDowell, K., Wickenden, A.E., Gramann, K., Jung, T.P., Ko, L.W.,
Chang, J.Y., 2012b. Biosensor technologies for augmented brain-computer interfaces
in the next decades. Proceedings of the IEEE. pp. 1553–1566.
Liao, Y., Acar, Z.A., Makeig, S., Deak, G., 2015. EEG imaging of toddlers during dyadic
turn-taking: mu-rhythm modulation while producing or observing social actions.
Neuroimage 112, 52–60. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.NEUROIMAGE.2015.02.055.
Lim, C.-K.A., Wai, Chong, Chia, Siew Wen Chin, 2014. A mobile driver safety system:
analysis of single-channel EEG on drowsiness detection. 2014 International
Conference on Computational Science and Technology (ICCST) 1–5. https://doi.org/
10.1109/ICCST.2014.7045175.
Lin, C.-T., Liao, L.-D., Liu, Y.-H., Wang, I.-J., Lin, B.-S., Chang, J.-Y., 2011. Novel dry
polymer foam electrodes for long-term EEG measurement. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.
58, 1200–1207. https://doi.org/10.1109/TBME.2010.2102353.
Lin, B.S., Pan, J.S., Chu, T.Y., Lin, B.S., 2016. Development of a wearable motor-imagerybased brain-computer interface. J. Med. Syst. 40, 71. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10916-015-0429-6.
Liu, N.H., Chiang, C.Y., Chu, H.C., 2013. Recognizing the degree of human attention using
EEG signals from mobile sensors. Sensors 13, 10273–10286.
Lo, C.C., Chien, T.Y., Chen, Y.C., Tsai, S.H., Fang, W.C., Lin, B.S., 2016. A wearable
channel selection-based brain-computer interface for motor imagery detection.
Sensors 16, 213.
Loo, S.K., Lenartowicz, A., Makeig, S., 2015. Research review: use of EEG biomarkers in
child psychiatry research - current state and future directions. J. Child Psychol.
Psychiatry 57, 4–17. https://doi.org/10.1111/jcpp.12435.
Makeig, S., Debener, S., Onton, J., Delorme, A., 2004. Mining event-related brain dynamics. Trends Cogn. Sci. 8, 204–210.
Makeig, S., Gramann, K., Jung, T.P., Sejnowski, T.J., Poizner, H., 2009. Linking brain,
mind and behavior. Int. J. Psychophysiol. 73, 95–100.
Malcolm, B.R., Foxe, J.J., Butler, J.S., De Sanctis, P., 2015. The aging brain shows less
flexible reallocation of cognitive resources during dual-task walking: a mobile brain/
body imaging (MoBI) study. Neuroimage 117, 230–242.
Malcolm, B.R., Foxe, J.J., Butler, J.S., Mowrey, W.B., Molholm, S., De Sanctis, P., 2017.
Long-term test-retest reliability of event-related potential (ERP) recordings during
treadmill walking using the mobile brain/body imaging (MoBI) approach. Brain Res.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.BRAINRES.2017.05.021.
Maran, M., Grent-‘t-Jong, T., Uhlhaas, P.J., 2016. Electrophysiological insights into
connectivity anomalies in schizophrenia: a systematic review. Neuropsychiatr.
Electrophysiol. 2, 6. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40810-016-0020-5.
Maskeliunas, R., Damasevicius, R., Martisius, I., Vasiljevas, M., 2016. Consumer-grade
EEG devices: are they usable for control tasks? PeerJ 4, e1746. https://doi.org/10.
7717/peerj.1746.
Mavros, P., Austwick, M.Z., Smith, A.H., 2016. Geo-EEG: towards the use of EEG in the
study of urban behaviour. Appl. Spat. Anal. Policy 9, 191–212.
Mazzoni, A., Grove, R., Eapen, V., Lenroot, R.K., Bruggemann, J., 2018. The promise of
functional near-infrared spectroscopy in autism research: what do we know and
where do we go? Soc. Neurosci. 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1080/17470919.2018.
1497701.
McGaugh, J.L., 2015. Consolidating memories. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 66, 1–24. https://doi.
org/10.1146/annurev-psych-010814-014954.
McGuffin, P., Plomin, R., 2004. A decade of the Social, Genetic and Developmental
Psychiatry Centre at the Institute of Psychiatry. Br. J. Psychiatry 185, 280–282.
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjp.185.4.280.
McLoughlin, G., Makeig, S., Tsuang, M.T., 2014a. In search of biomarkers in psychiatry:
EEG-based measures of brain function. Am. J. Med. Genet. Part B Neuropsychiatr.
Genet. 165, 111–121.
McLoughlin, G., Palmer, J.A., Rijsdijk, F., Makeig, S., 2014b. Genetic overlap between
evoked frontocentral theta-band phase variability, reaction time variability, and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder symptoms in a twin study. Biol. Psychiatry 75,

238–247.
McLoughlin, G., Palmer, J., Makeig, S., Bigdely-Shamlo, N., Banaschewski, T., Laucht, M.,
Brandeis, D., 2018. EEG source imaging indices of cognitive control show associations with dopamine system genes. Brain Topogr. 31, 392–406. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s10548-017-0601-z.
Melnik, A., Legkov, P., Izdebski, K., Kärcher, S.M., Hairston, W.D., Ferris, D.P., König, P.,
2017. Systems, subjects, sessions: to what extent do these factors influence EEG data?
Front. Hum. Neurosci. 11, 150. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2017.00150.
Metting van Rijn, A.C., Peper, A., Grimbergen, C.A., 1990. High-quality recording of
bioelectric events. Med. Biol. Eng. Comput. 28, 389–397. https://doi.org/10.1007/
BF02441961.
Meyer-Lindenberg, A., Weinberger, D.R., 2006. Intermediate phenotypes and genetic
mechanisms of psychiatric disorders. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 7, 818–827.
Miles, J.H., Takahashi, T.N., Bagby, S., Sahota, P.K., Vaslow, D.F., Wang, C.H., Hillman,
R.E., Farmer, J.E., 2005. Essential versus complex autism: definition of fundamental
prognostic subtypes. Am. J. Med. Genet. 135, 171–180. https://doi.org/10.1002/
ajmg.a.30590.
Milne, E., Scope, A., Pascalis, O., Buckley, D., Makeig, S., 2009. Independent component
analysis reveals atypical electroencephalographic activity during visual perception in
individuals with autism. Biol. Psychiatry 65, 22–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
biopsych.2008.07.017.
Mirkovic, B., Bleichner, M.G., De Vos, M., Debener, S., 2016. Target speaker detection
with concealed EEG around the ear. Front. Neurosci. 10, 349.
Mognon, A., Jovicich, J., Bruzzone, L., Buiatti, M., 2011. ADJUST: an automatic EEG
artifact detector based on the joint use of spatial and temporal features.
Psychophysiology 48, 229–240. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8986.2010.
01061.x.
Mohr, D.C., Zhang, M., Schueller, S.M., 2017. Personal sensing: understanding mental
health using ubiquitous sensors and machine learning. Annu. Rev. Clin. Psychol. 13,
23–47. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-clinpsy-032816-044949.
Morán, A., Soriano, M.C., 2018. Improving the quality of a collective signal in a consumer
EEG headset. PLoS One 13, e0197597. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.
0197597.
Nathan, K., Contreras-Vidal, J.L., 2015. Negligible motion artifacts in scalp electroencephalography (EEG) during treadmill walking. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 9, 708.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2015.00708.
Niso, G., Gorgolewski, K.J., Bock, E., Brooks, T.L., Flandin, G., Gramfort, A., Henson, R.N.,
Jas, M., Litvak, V.T., Moreau, J., Oostenveld, R., Schoffelen, J.-M., Tadel, F., Wexler,
J., Baillet, S., 2018. MEG-BIDS, the brain imaging data structure extended to magnetoencephalography. Sci. Data 5, 180110. https://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2018.110.
O’Reilly, C., Lewis, J.D., Elsabbagh, M., 2017. Is functional brain connectivity atypical in
autism? A systematic review of EEG and MEG studies. PLoS One 12, e0175870.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0175870.
Ojeda, A., Bigdely-Shamlo, N., Makeig, S., 2014. MoBILAB: an open source toolbox for
analysis and visualization of mobile brain/body imaging data. Front. Hum. Neurosci.
8, 121. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00121.
Oliveira, A.S., Schlink, B.R., Hairston, W.D., König, P., Ferris, D.P., 2016. Proposing
metrics for benchmarking novel EEG technologies towards real-world measurements.
Front. Hum. Neurosci. 10, 188. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2016.00188.
Park, J.L., Fairweather, M.M., Donaldson, D.I., 2015. Making the case for mobile cognition: EEG and sports performance. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 52, 117–130.
Picton, T.W., Bentin, S., Berg, P., Donchin, E., Hillyard, S.A., Johnson, R., Miller, G.A.,
Ritter, W., Ruchkin, D.S., Rugg, M.D., Taylor, M.J., 2000. Guidelines for using human
event-related potentials to study cognition: recording standards and publication criteria. Psychophysiology 37, 127–152.
Piñeyro Salvidegoitia, M., Jacobsen, N., Bauer, A.-K.R., Griffiths, B., Hanslmayr, S.,
Debener, S., 2019. Out and about: subsequent memory effect captured in a natural
outdoor environment with smartphone EEG. Psychophysiology, e13331. https://doi.
org/10.1111/psyp.13331.
Pinti, P., Tachtsidis, I., Hamilton, A., Hirsch, J., Aichelburg, C., Gilbert, S., Burgess, P.W.,
2018. The present and future use of functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) for
cognitive neuroscience. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. https://doi.org/10.1111/nyas.13948.
Poulsen, A.T., Kamronn, S., Dmochowski, J., Parra, L.C., Hansen, L.K., 2017. EEG in the
classroom: synchronised neural recordings during video presentation. Sci. Rep. 7,
43916. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep43916.
Quante, M., Kaplan, E.R., Cailler, M., Rueschman, M., Wang, R., Weng, J., Taveras, E.M.,
Redline, S., 2018. Actigraphy-based sleep estimation in adolescents and adults: a
comparison with polysomnography using two scoring algorithms. Nat. Sci. Sleep 10,
13–20. https://doi.org/10.2147/NSS.S151085.
Radüntz, T., 2018. Signal quality evaluation of emerging EEG devices. Front. Physiol. 9,
98. https://doi.org/10.3389/fphys.2018.00098.
Ratti, E., Waninger, S., Berka, C., Ruffini, G., Verma, A., 2017. Comparison of medical and
consumer wireless EEG systems for use in clinical trials. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 11,
398. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2017.00398.
Reis, P.M.R., Hebenstreit, F., Gabsteiger, F., von Tscharner, V., Lochmann, M., 2014.
Methodological aspects of EEG and body dynamics measurements during motion.
Front. Hum. Neurosci. 8, 156. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00156.
Ries, A.J., Touryan, J., Vettel, J., McDowell, K., Hairston, W.D., 2014. A comparison of
electroencephalography signals acquired from conventional and mobile systems. J.
Neurosci. Neuroeng. 3, 10–20. https://doi.org/10.1166/jnsne.2014.1092.
Rogers, J.M., Johnstone, S.J., Aminov, A., Donnelly, J., Wilson, P.H., 2016. Test-retest
reliability of a single-channel, wireless EEG system. Int. J. Psychophysiol. 106, 87–96.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2016.06.006.
Safaie, J., Grebe, R., Abrishami Moghaddam, H., Wallois, F., 2013. Toward a fully integrated wireless wearable EEG-NIRS bimodal acquisition system. J. Neural Eng. 10,
056001.

13

Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 36 (2019) 100635

A. Lau-Zhu, et al.
Sakkalis, V., 2011. Review of advanced techniques for the estimation of brain connectivity measured with EEG/MEG. Comput. Biol. Med. 41, 1110–1117. https://doi.
org/10.1016/J.COMPBIOMED.2011.06.020.
Scanlon, J.E.M., Townsend, K.A., Cormier, D.L., Kuziek, J.W.P., Mathewson, K.E., 2017.
Taking off the training wheels: measuring auditory P3 during outdoor cycling using
an active wet EEG system. Brain Res. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2017.12.
010.
Sharma, M., Ritchie, P., Ghirmai, T., Cao, H., Lau, M.P.H., 2017. Unobtrusive acquisition
and extraction of fetal and maternal ECG in the home setting. 2017 IEEE SENSORS
1–3. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSENS.2017.8234188.
Stam, C.J., 2005. Nonlinear dynamical analysis of EEG and MEG: review of an emerging
field. Clin. Neurophysiol. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinph.2005.06.011.
Stopczynski, A., Stahlhut, C., Larsen, J.E., Petersen, M.K., Hansen, L.K., 2014a. The
smartphone brain scanner: a portable real-time neuroimaging system. PLoS One 9,
e86733. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0086733.
Stopczynski, A., Stahlhut, C., Petersen, M.K., Larsen, J.E., Jensen, C.F., Ivanova, M.G.,
Andersen, T.S., Hansen, L.K., 2014b. Smartphones as pocketable labs: visions for
mobile brain imaging and neurofeedback. Int. J. Psychophysiol. 91, 54–66.
Su, K., Hairston, W.D., Robbins, K., 2018. EEG-Annotate: automated identification and
labeling of events in continuous signals with applications to EEG. J. Neurosci.
Methods 293, 359–374. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JNEUMETH.2017.10.011.
Thapar, A., Cooper, M., Rutter, M., 2017. Neurodevelopmental disorders. Lancet
Psychiatry 4, 339–346. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2215-0366(16)30376-5.
Tierney, A.L., Gabard-Durnam, L., Vogel-Farley, V., Tager-Flusberg, H., Nelson, C.A.,
2012. Developmental trajectories of resting EEG power: an endophenotype of autism
spectrum disorder. PLoS One 7, e39127. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.
0039127.
Trull, T.J., Ebner-Priemer, U., 2013. Ambulatory assessment. Annu. Rev. Clin. Psychol. 9,
151–176.
Tye, C., Bolton, P., 2013. Neural connectivity abnormalities in autism: insights from the
Tuberous Sclerosis model. BMC Med. 11 (55). https://doi.org/10.1186/1741-701511-55.
van Ede, F., Quinn, A.J., Woolrich, M.W., Nobre, A.C., 2018. Neural oscillations: sustained rhythms or transient burst-events? Trends Neurosci. 41, 415–417. https://doi.
org/10.1016/J.TINS.2018.04.004.
Visser, J., 2003. Developmental coordination disorder: a review of research on subtypes
and comorbidities. Hum. Mov. Sci. 22, 479–493.
Wagner, J., Solis-Escalante, T., Grieshofer, P., Neuper, C., Müller-Putz, G., Scherer, R.,
2012. Level of participation in robotic-assisted treadmill walking modulates midline
sensorimotor EEG rhythms in able-bodied subjects. Neuroimage 63, 1203–1211.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.08.019.
Wagner, J., Solis-Escalante, T., Scherer, R., Neuper, C., Müller-Putz, G., 2014. It’s how you

get there: walking down a virtual alley activates premotor and parietal areas. Front.
Hum. Neurosci. 8, 93. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00093.
Wagner, J., Makeig, S., Gola, M., Neuper, C., Muller-Putz, G., 2016. Distinct band oscillatory networks subserving motor and cognitive control during gait adaptation. J.
Neurosci. 36, 2212–2226. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3543-15.2016.
Walters, J.T.R., Owen, M.J., 2007. Endophenotypes in psychiatric genetics. Mol.
Psychiatry 12, 886–890.
Wang, Y.-T., Wang, Y., Cheng, C.-K., Jung, T.-P., 2013. Developing stimulus presentation
on mobile devices for a truly portable SSVEP-based BCI. 2013 35th Annual
International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society
(EMBC) 5271–5274. https://doi.org/10.1109/EMBC.2013.6610738.
Wascher, E., Heppner, H., Hoffmann, S., 2014. Towards the measurement of event-related
EEG activity in real-life working environments. Int. J. Psychophysiol. 91, 3–9.
Webb, S.J., Bernier, R., Henderson, H.A., Johnson, M.H., Jones, E.J.H., Lerner, M.D.,
McPartland, J.C., Nelson, C.A., Rojas, D.C., Townsend, J., Westerfield, M., 2015.
Guidelines and best practices for electrophysiological data collection, analysis and
reporting in autism. J. Autism Dev. Disord. 45, 425–443. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10803-013-1916-6.
Wei, T.-Y., Chang, D.-W., Liu, Y.-D., Liu, C.-W., Young, C.-P., Liang, S.-F., Shaw, F.-Z.,
2017. Portable wireless neurofeedback system of EEG alpha rhythm enhances
memory. Biomed. Eng. Online 16, 128. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12938-017-0418-8.
Wilhelm, F.H., Grossman, P., 2010. Emotions beyond the laboratory: theoretical fundaments, study design, and analytic strategies for advanced ambulatory assessment.
Biol. Psychol. 84, 552–569.
Wong, S.W.H., Chan, R.H.M., Mak, J.N., 2014. Spectral modulation of frontal EEG during
motor skill acquisition: a mobile EEG study. Int. J. Psychophysiol. 91, 16–21.
Yau, S.H., McArthur, G., Badcock, N.A., Brock, J., 2015. Case study: auditory brain responses in a minimally verbal child with autism and cerebral palsy. Front. Neurosci.
9, 208. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2015.00208.
Zerafa, R., Camilleri, T., Falzon, O., Camilleri, K.P., 2018. A comparison of a broad range
of EEG acquisition devices – is there any difference for SSVEP BCIs? Brain-Comput.
Interfaces 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1080/2326263X.2018.1550710.
Zich, C., De Vos, M., Kranczioch, C., Debener, S., 2015. Wireless EEG with individualized
channel layout enables efficient motor imagery training. Clin. Neurophysiol. 126,
698–710.
Zich, C., Debener, S., Schweinitz, C., Sterr, A., Meekes, J., Kranczioch, C., 2017. Highintensity chronic stroke motor imagery neurofeedback training at home: three case
reports. Clin. EEG Neurosci. 48, 403–412. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1550059417717398.
Zink, R., Hunyadi, B.B., Huffel, S., Van, Vos, M., De, 2016. Mobile EEG on the bike:
disentangling attentional and physical contributions to auditory attention tasks. J.
Neural Eng. 13, 46017. https://doi.org/10.1088/1741-2560/13/4/046017.

14

