EEG Wheelchair for People of Determination
1

Mariam AlAbboudi, 1Maitha Majed, 1Fatima Hassan, 2Ali Bou Nassif

1

Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, University of Sharjah
2
Department of Computer Engineering, University of Sharjah
Sharjah, United Arab Emirates

Abstract—the aim of this paper is to design and construct an
electroencephalograph (EEG) based brain-controlled wheelchair
to provide a communication bridge from the nervous system to
the external technical device for people of determination or
individuals suffering from partial or complete paralysis. EEG is a
technique that reads the activity of the brain by capturing brain
signals non- invasively using a special EEG headset. The signals
acquired go through pre-processing, feature extraction and
classification. This technique allows human thoughts alone to be
converted to control the wheelchair. The commands used are
moving to the right, left, forward, and backward and stop. The
brain signals are acquired using the Emotiv Epoc headset.
Discrete Wavelet Transform is used for feature extraction and
Support Vector Machine (SVM) is used for classification.
Index Terms—EEG, brain, signals, preprocessing, feature,
extraction, classification, WT, SVM.

I. INTRODUCTION
The aim of this paper is to design a prototype to help those
who cannot use their muscles to move by creating a prototype
that works by brain signals. We focused on the simplicity of
the project design where it will only require wearing the
headset and think of the direction desired. The system is based
upon a technique called Brain-Computer Interface BCI. It is a
technique that provides a connection between the brain and the
controller to translate the individual brain commands into
actions. The system uses the brain electrical signals which are
EEG signals where these signals can be used in many
applications such as controlling a wheelchair, robot…etc.
Electroencephalography (EEG) is the study of the recording of
brain electrical signals that are used in analyzing
neurocognitive processing of human activity to allow the user
to have an insight of the real processing of the brain. Brain
signals are collected using electrodes that are placed on the
scalp with a conductive paste to allow the collecting of brain
signals. The EEG frequency ranges are divided into five
different frequency bands such as Delta (up to 4 Hz), Theta (48Hz), Alpha (8-15 Hz), Beta (15-32 Hz) and Gamma (greater
than 32 Hz) [1].
The remaining of the paper is structured as follows: Section
II presents related work where Section III proposes the system
design. Sections IV and V demonstrate software and hardware
design, respectively. Section VI presents the results and
finally, VII concludes the paper and suggests future work.

II. RELATED WORK
Brain-controlled wheelchairs have been implemented by
many researchers and engineers in the field. “A BrainControlled Wheelchair to Navigate in Familiar Environments,”
was implemented in 2010 by Brice Rebsamen and his
colleagues at the University of Singapore and Imperial College
of London which is based on P300 interface and they got an
average error rate of 12% [2]. In addition, Shedeed et al.
developed “Brain EEG signal processing for controlling a
robotic arm,” in Ain Shams and Benha University in Egypt in
2008 where they achieved an error rate of 9% for 3 actions [3].
Zaki et al. also implemented a “Home Automation using
EMOTIV: Controlling TV by Brainwaves,” in 2018 at King
Fahad University of Petroleum and Minerals in Dhahran, Saudi
Arabia [4]. Additionally, Hamzah et al. also developed
“Special Issue EEG signal classification to detect left and right
command,” a system based on Artificial Neural Network
(ANN) algorithm in 2017 [1].
The main contribution of our work is that we fully
implemented a system composed of software and hardware that
works based on EEG signals. Our system works on 5
commands; right direction, left direction, forward, backword
and stop with high accuracy.
III. PROPOSED SYSTEM DESIGN
The aim of this project is to design a brain-controlled
wheelchair for individuals suffering from partial or complete
paralysis by constructing a wheelchair prototype to
demonstrate the project concept which has five classified
commands which are moving to the right, left, forward,
backward or stop. The data is being collected using an EEG
Emotiv Epoc headset to be able to control the wheelchair, the
signals acquired must go through pre-processing, feature
extraction and classification. Finally, the classified command
will be sent to the controller to execute the command.
A. Data acquisition
Raw data from the brain are acquired using an EEG
headset called Emotiv EPOC+ headset according to the 10/20
international system for electrodes positioning as shown in the
Figure 1. The Emotiv headset has 14 channel electrodes
including two reference electrodes which are AF3, F7, F3,
FC5, T7, P7, O1, O2, P8, T8, FC6, F4, F8, and AF4. The
headset samples the collected signals at 128 Hz. The collected

signals are sent to the microprocessor using Bluetooth. Data is
collected for a total of 200 records where each command is
recorded 50 times for an 8-second interval. However, the data
collected size from all 14 channels is huge, the system has
been programmed to select the 5 maximum power channels
automatically using power spectral density to avoid taking a
long time in processing and enhance the system performance
[5][1].

building block by contractions, shifting, compressing and
stretching which is acquired from a single prototype wavelet,
known as mother wavelet. The decomposed signal leads to a
set of coefficients known as wavelet coefficients. Wavelet
provides a better alternative over STFT since it uses an
adjustable size window and can represent non-stationary
signals such as EEG. For this system, Discrete Wavelet
Transform (DWT) was used for feature extraction, the DWT
decomposes the signals into different frequency bands by
filtering the signal using Low-pass filter and High-pass filter
repeatedly which is indicated by an approximation and detailed
coefficients. For this system, the acquired signals have been
decomposed with dB4 into 5 levels as indicated in the figure
below. The approximation coefficients or the low-pass part
(A1-A5) have been used to obtain the EEG frequency range
which is from Delta to Gamma [7]–[9].

Figure 1. Emotiv Epoc Headset.
B. Preprocessing
The second step is to preprocess the signals to make it
more suitable and noise-free for feature extraction and
classification. It is important to make sure the signals acquired
have minimum artifacts such as muscle movement, deep
breathing or electrocardiograms (ECGs). In addition, the
signals were collected in a calm environment to avoid
recording noise in signals. Furthermore, the surrounding
environment includes power line frequency, the headset has an
inbuilt digital notch filter at 50 Hz and 60 Hz to filter power
line frequency. Later, the EEG signals must be divided into
different bands such as Delta, Theta…etc. for the feature
extraction process [1][6].
C. Feature Extraction
At this stage, the signals are noise-free but are not suitable
for classification. Feature extraction is considered as one of the
most crucial parts of the process where it can define the success
of the system. Feature extraction aims to capture the required
data embedded in the EEG signals to be able to describe a
specific task, it tries to represent EEG signals by extracting
special features and reduce the dimension to be more suitable
for classification. There are many methods that can represent
EEG signals such as Fast Fourier Transform (FFT), Short Time
Fourier Transform (STFT), and Wavelet Transform
(WT)…etc. EEG signals are non-stationary which means it
changes with time, due to this fact FFT cannot represent nonstationary signals such as EEG. As a result, STFT is introduced
which is a Time-Frequency representation STFT divides the
signal into a set of segments or frames where FFT processes
each frame and in the end, all results are summed up in the
frequency domain to provide a time-frequency representation
of the signals studied. Wavelet Transform is a time-frequency
domain method. It is a critical approach for feature extraction.
Wavelet divides the signals into wavelets represented as a

Figure 2. Five level decomposition of DWT.
D. Classification
The last step in EEG signal processing is to classify the
signals into the desired commands such as moving to the right,
left, forward, backward or stop. We have tested the accuracy of
our program on 4 different classifiers such as Support vector
machine (SVM), K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN), Random Forest
and Artificial Neural Network (ANN). Machine learning
algorithms are very powerful in regression and classification
problems [10]–[13]. SVM consists of support vectors that are
separated by a hyperplane which has a maximum margin
between each class and the hyperplane that is being classified
[14]. KNN measures the distance between the unknown and
other points in the dataset and classifies the unknown to the
nearest K neighbors [15]. Random forest classifier uses an
ensemble learning method which aggregates the outputs from
many learning algorithms to improve the classifier [16], [17].
The random forest consists of many decision trees where each
decision tree votes for the class it considers that the unknown
should be classified in, then based on the majority votes the
unknown will be classified [18]. ANN is a method used for
computation and processing of information that can mimic the
behavior neurons found in the real human brain [19]. ANN has
three layers which are the input layer, hidden layers, and an
output layer. The layers consist of neurons that have biases and
are connected using links with weights. The biases and weights
are adjusted continuously until the accuracy of the classifier are
very high [1]. To test our system accuracy we have assigned

80% of the data for training and 20% of data for testing for all
four classifiers. Figure 3, illustrates the accuracies obtained for
each classifier.

Figure 3. Accuracy of different classifiers
As shown in Figure 3, SVM is the most accurate classifier with
an overall accuracy of 70% whereas KNN has an accuracy of
55%. Furthermore, ANN has an accuracy of 50% and lastly,
the random forest has the lowest accuracy of 48%. Due to this
fact, SVM was used as the classifier for the project.
E. High-Level block diagram
The block diagram in Figure 4, demonstrates how the
system works. First, the data is collected using the Emotiv
headset where it is sent to the microprocessor (Latte-Panda)
using Bluetooth. Pre-processing, feature extraction and
classification run in the microprocessor. Then based on the
classified data, the command is sent to the microcontroller
(Arduino Mega) to controls the prototype’s movement based
on the command received. We have a PC screen in the block
diagram to initially run the system and visualize the processing
of the system only.

IV. SOFTWARE DESIGN
The project depends greatly on the software part, where the
signal processing part holds the most weight. We have used
different software in our project, and they are:
a) Emotiv BCI
This software allows the user to train using the headset, in
which it displays a virtual cube for testing thought actions such
as neutral, relax, pull, push, rotate...etc. to be familiar with the
headset.
b) EmotivPRO
The Emotiv headset is capable of acquiring real-time raw EEG
data of all channels and send it to a personal computer via
Bluetooth at a rate of 128 Hz to display it as a waveform using
EmotivPRO software. The raw data acquired can be exported
to a .edf file or .csv file format to be imported for further
analysis.
c) Emotiv App
Emotiv app manages all the interactions between the Emotiv
headset, other Emotiv applications, and the PC. It is used to
connect the Emotiv headset to the PC and to obtain information
about the user’s Emotiv account [20].
d) PyCharm
PyCharm is an integrated development environment (IDE) for
python. It is developed by JetBrains. PyCharm is a popular IDE
for python since it has many features that ease the coding
process for programmers. We have written our code using
Python since it has many libraries for signal processing and
machine learning and free to use [21].
e) Arduino IDE
Arduino IDE (Integrated development environment). It is used
for writing the code to control the hardware prototype [22].
V. HARDWARE DESIGN
For the hardware, as seen in Figure 5, we demonstrated the
concept of our project on a three-wheel car prototype. All the
components are attached to the prototype such as the Arduino
Mega, H-bridge, Latte-panda, power bank for power supply
and two ultrasonic sensors to the car one at the back and
another at the front for obstacle detection and to prevent
crashes.

Figure 4. Block diagram.
Figure 5. Prototype.

VI. EXPERIMENT RESULTS
The user is required to sit calmly for the 8-second interval
to record the required command, the data is being collected
using Emotiv Epoc headset where the EEG signals then go
through pre-processing, feature extraction and classification to
execute the command. We have used Discrete Wavelet
transform (DWT) for feature extraction and Support vector
machine (SVM) for classification. We used python for writing
the program software and Arduino to control the movement of
the prototype depending on the command passed to it from the
classifier. We have tested our system for 20 trials in real-time
and obtained an overall accuracy of 68% and the accuracies for
each command are shown in the Table 1. The most accurate
command is Stop command while the least accurate is Reverse
command.

[2]
[3]

[4]

[5]
[6]

[7]

[8]
Table 1. Accuracy Table of all commands

VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In conclusion, the purpose of the project is to help paralyzed
people to be more dependent on themselves by providing a
solution to aid them in their mobility problems. As a result, this
paper demonstrates an EEG based mind-controlled wheelchair
as a solution to aid them. The wheelchair is controlled using
thought by wearing an EEG headset called Emotiv Epoc
headset that communicates using Bluetooth. The report
explains the method used in implementing the project with all
the software and hardware parts included. Nevertheless, the
system is not ideal and definitely, there is room for
improvement. The project can be further improved by adding a
GPS system for navigation, converting thoughts to voice to
communicate with others. As for safety improvements, the
system could have a water sensing mechanism to avoid puddles
and an edge detection mechanism could be added to avoid
falling off cliffs. Furthermore, adjusting the speed range by
thought can also be added.

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors thank the University of Sharjah for supporting
this project.

References
[1]

N. Hamzah, N. A. M. Syukur, N. Zaini, and F. H. K.
Zaman, “Special Issue EEG Signal Classification To

[14]

[15]
[16]

Detect Left and Right Command,” 2017.
B. Rebsamen, “A Brain Controlled Wheelchair to
Navigate in Familiar Environments,” Fam. Environ.
DEGREE Dr. Philos., 2010.
H. A. Shedeed, M. F. Issa, and S. M. El-Sayed, “Brain
EEG signal processing for controlling a robotic arm,”
in 2013 8th International Conference on Computer
Engineering and Systems, ICCES 2013, 2013, no.
November, pp. 152–157.
M. Zaki, A. Alquraini, and T. Sheltami, “Home
Automation using EMOTIV: Controlling TV by
Brainwaves,” J. Ubiquitous Syst. Pervasive Networks,
vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 27–32, 2018.
Emotiv Systems, “Emotiv EPOC Manual: Brain
computer interface and scientific contextual EEG,”
Emot. EPOC, 2014.
L. Vokorokos, B. Madoš, N. Ádám, and A. Baláž,
“Data Acquisition in Non-Invasive Brain-Computer
Interface Using Emotiv Epoc Neuroheadset,” Acta
Electrotech. Inform., vol. 12, no. 1, 2012.
M. Li, W. Chen, and T. Zhang, “Classification of
epilepsy EEG signals using DWT-based envelope
analysis and neural network ensemble,” Biomed.
Signal Process. Control, vol. 31, pp. 357–365, 2017.
L. C. Cheong, R. Sudirman, and S. S. Hussin, “Feature
extraction of EEG signal using wavelet transform for
autism classification,” ARPN J. Eng. Appl. Sci., vol.
10, no. 19, pp. 8533–8540, 2015.
V. Giurgiutiu and L. Yu, “Comparison of short-time
fourier transform and wavelet transform of transient
and tone burst wave propagation signals for structural
health monitoring,” in 4th International Workshop on
Structural Health Monitoring, 2003, pp. 1267–1274.
A. B. Nassif, M. Azzeh, A. Idri, and A. Abran,
“Software Development Effort Estimation Using
Regression Fuzzy Models,” Comput. Intell. Neurosci.,
vol. 2019, pp. 1–17, 2019.
M. Azzeh, “Fuzzy Model Tree for early effort
estimation,” in Proceedings - 2013 12th International
Conference on Machine Learning and Applications,
ICMLA 2013, 2013, vol. 2, pp. 117–121.
M. Azzeh, S. Banitaan, and F. Almasalha, “Pareto
efficient multi-objective optimization for local tuning
of analogy-based estimation,” Neural Comput. Appl.,
vol. 27, no. 8, pp. 2241–2265, 2016.
M. Azzeh, and S. Banitaan, “Comparative analysis of
soft computing techniques for predicting software
effort based use case points,” IET Softw., vol. 12, no.
1, pp. 19–29, 2018.
A. Subasi and M. I. Gursoy, “EEG signal
classification using PCA, ICA, LDA and support
vector machines,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 37, no. 12,
pp. 8659–8666, 2010.
Z. Zhang, “Introduction to machine learning: Knearest neighbors,” Ann. Transl. Med., vol. 4, no. 11,
pp. 1–7, 2016.
M. Injadat, F. Salo, A. Essex, and A. Shami,

[17]

[18]
[19]

[20]
[21]
[22]

“Bayesian Optimization with Machine Learning
Algorithms Towards Anomaly Detection,” 2018 IEEE
Glob. Commun. Conf. GLOBECOM 2018 - Proc., pp.
1–6, 2018.
M. Azzeh, L. F. Capretz, and D. Ho, “A comparison
between decision trees and decision tree forest models
for software development effort estimation,” in 2013
3rd International Conference on Communications and
Information Technology, ICCIT 2013, 2013, pp. 220–
224.
L. Breiman, “Random Forests,” Mach. Learn., vol. 45,
no. 1, pp. 5–32, 2001.
L. F. Capretz, and D. Ho, “Estimating software effort
using an ANN model based on use case points,” in
Proceedings - 2012 11th International Conference on
Machine Learning and Applications, ICMLA 2012,
2012, vol. 2, pp. 42–47.
“Get Started - Neurotechnology for the global
community | EMOTIV,” https://www.emotiv.com/getstarted/, 2019.
D. Sarkar, R. Bali, and T. Sharma, Practical Machine
Learning with Python. Berkeley, CA: Apress, 2018.
“Arduino,” https://www.arduino.cc/, 2019.

