1

EEG-based Brain-Computer Interfaces (BCIs): A
Survey of Recent Studies on Signal Sensing
Technologies and Computational Intelligence
Approaches and Their Applications
arXiv:2001.11337v1 [eess.SP] 28 Jan 2020

Xiaotong Gu, Zehong Cao*, Member, IEEE, Alireza Jolfaei, Member, IEEE, Peng Xu, Member, IEEE,
Dongrui Wu, Senior Member, IEEE, Tzyy-Ping Jung, Fellow, IEEE, and Chin-Teng Lin, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) is a powerful communication tool between users and systems, which enhances the
capability of the human brain in communicating and interacting with the environment directly. Advances in neuroscience and computer
science in the past decades have led to exciting developments in BCI, thereby making BCI a top interdisciplinary research area in
computational neuroscience and intelligence. Recent technological advances such as wearable sensing devices, real-time data
streaming, machine learning, and deep learning approaches have increased interest in electroencephalographic (EEG) based BCI for
translational and healthcare applications. Many people benefit from EEG-based BCIs, which facilitate continuous monitoring of
fluctuations in cognitive states under monotonous tasks in the workplace or at home. In this study, we survey the recent literature of
EEG signal sensing technologies and computational intelligence approaches in BCI applications, compensated for the gaps in the
systematic summary of the past five years (2015-2019). In specific, we first review the current status of BCI and its significant
obstacles. Then, we present advanced signal sensing and enhancement technologies to collect and clean EEG signals, respectively.
Furthermore, we demonstrate state-of-art computational intelligence techniques, including interpretable fuzzy models, transfer
learning, deep learning, and combinations, to monitor, maintain, or track human cognitive states and operating performance in
prevalent applications. Finally, we deliver a couple of innovative BCI-inspired healthcare applications and discuss some future research
directions in EEG-based BCIs.

F

1
1.1

I NTRODUCTION
An overview of brain-computer interface (BCI)

1.1.1 What is BCI
The research of brain-computer interface (BCI) was first
released in the 1970s, addressing an alternative transmission
channel without depending on the normal peripheral nerve
and muscle output paths of the brain [1]. An early concept
of BCI proposed measuring and decoding brainwave signals
to control prosthetic arm and carry out a desired action [2].
Then a formal definition of the term ’BCI’ is interpreted as
a direct communication pathway between the human brain
and an external device [3]. In the past decade, human BCIs
have attracted a lot of attention.
The corresponding human BCI systems aim to translate
human cognition patterns using brain activities. It uses
recorded brain activity to communicate the computer for
controlling external devices or environments in a manner
that is compatible with the intentions of humans [4], such
as controlling a wheelchair or robot as shown in Fig. 1.
There are two primary types of BCIs. The first type is active
•
•
•
•
•
•

X. Gu and Z. Cao are with the University of Tasmania, Australia.
A. Jolfaei is with the Macquarie University, Australia.
P. Xu is with the University of Electronic Science and Technology of
China, China.
D. Wu is with the Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China.
T.P Jung is with the University of California, San Diego, USA.
C.T. Lin is with the University of Technology Sydney, Australia.
∗ Corresponding to Email: Zehong.cao@utas.edu.au

Fig. 1. The framework of brain-computer interface (BCI)

and reactive BCI. The active BCI derives pattern from brain
activity, which is directly and consciously controlled by the
user, independently from external events, for controlling a
device [5]. The reactive BCI extracted outputs from brain
activities in reaction to external stimulation, which is indirectly modulated by the user for controlling an application.
The second type is passive BCI, which explores the user’s
perception, awareness, and cognition without the purpose
of voluntary control, for enriching a human-computer interaction (HCI) with implicit information [6].
1.1.2 Application areas
The promising future of BCIs has encouraged the research
community to interpret brain activities to establish various

2

research directions of BCIs. Here, we address the bestknown application areas that BCIs have been widely explored and applied: (1) BCI is recognised with the potential
to be an approach that uses intuitive and natural human
mechanisms of processing thinking to facilitate interactions
[7]. Since the common methods of traditional HCI are
mostly restricted to manual interfaces and the majority
of other designs are not being extensively adopted [8],
BCIs change how the HCI could be used in complex and
demanding operational environments and could become
a revolution and mainstream of HCIs for different areas
such as computer-aided design (CAD) [9]. Using BCIs to
monitor user states for intelligent assistive systems is also
substantially conducted in entertainment and health areas
[10]. (2) Another area where BCI applications are broadly
used is as game controllers for entertainment. Some BCI
devices are inexpensive, easily portable and easy to equip,
which making them feasible to be used broadly in entertainment communities. The compact and wireless BCI headsets
developed for the gaming market are flexible and mobile,
and require little effort to set up. Though their accuracy is
not as precise as other BCI devices used in medical areas,
they are still practical for game developers and successfully commercialised for the entertainment market. Some
specific models [11] are combined with sensors to detect
more signals such as facial expressions that could upgrade
the usability for entertainment applications. (3) BCIs have
also been playing a significant role in neurocomputing for
pattern recognition and machine learning on brain signals,
and the analysis of computational expert knowledge. Recently, researches have shown [12] [13] [14] that network
neuroscience approaches have been used to quantify brain
network reorganisation from different varieties of human
learning. The results of these studies indicate the optimisation of adaptive BCI architectures and the prospective to
reveal the neural basis and future performance of BCI learning. (4) For the healthcare field, brainwave headset, which
could collect expressive information with the software development kit provided by the manufacturer, has also been
utilised to facilitate severely disabled people to effectively
control a robot by subtle movements such as moving neck
and blinking [15]. BCI has also been used in assisting people
who lost the muscular capacity to restore communication
and control over devices. A broadly investigated clinical
area is to implement BCI spelling devices, one well-known
application of which is a P300-based speller. Building upon
the P300-based speller, [16] using a BCI2000 platform [17]
to develop the BCI speller has a positive result on nonexperienced users to use this brain-controlled spelling tool.
Overall, BCIs have contributed to various fields of research.
As briefed in Fig. 2, they are involved in the entertainment
of game interaction, robot control, emotion recognition, fatigue detection, sleep quality assessment, and clinical fields,
such as abnormal brain disease detection and prediction
including seizure, Parkinson’s disease, Alzheimer’s disease,
Schizophrenia.
1.1.3 Brain imaging techniques
Brain-sensing devices for BCI can be categorised into three
groups: invasive, partially invasive, and non-invasive [18].
In terms of invasive and partially invasive devices, brain

Fig. 2. BCI contributes to various fields of research

signals are collected from intracortical and electrocorticography (ECoG) electrodes with sensors tapping directly into
the brain’s cortex. Due to the invasive devices inserting electrodes into brain cortex, each electrode of the intracortical
collection technique could provide spiking to produce the
population’s time developing output pattern, which causes
only a slight sample of the complete set of neurons in
bonded regions presented, because microelectrodes could
only detect spiking when they are in the proximity of a neuron. In this case, ECoG, as an extracortical invasive electrophysiological monitoring method, uses electrodes attached
under the skull. With lower surgical risk, a rather high
Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR), and a higher spatial resolution,
compared with intracortical signals of invasive devices,
ECoG has a better prospect in the medical area. In specific,
ECoG has a wider bandwidth to gather significant information from functional brain areas to train a high-frequency
BCI system, and high SNR signals that are less prone to
artefacts arising from, for instance, muscle movement and
eye blink.
Even though reliable information of cortical and neuronal dynamics could be provided by invasive or partially
invasive BCIs, when considering everyday applications, the
potential benefit of increased signal quality is neutralised
by the surgery risks and long-term implantation of invasive devices [19]. Recent studies started to investigate
the non-invasive technology that uses external neuroimaging devices to record brain activity, including Functional
Near-Infrared Spectroscopy (fNIRS), Functional Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (fMRI), and Electroencephalography
(EEG). To be specific, fNIRS uses near-infrared (NIR) light
to assess the aggregation level of oxygenated hemoglobin
and deoxygenated-hemoglobin. fNIRS depends on hemodynamic response or blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD)
response to formulate functional neuroimages [20]. Because
of the power limits of the light and spatial resolution, fNIRS
cannot be employed to measure cortical activity presented
under 4cm in the brain. Also, due to the fact that blood
flow changes slower than electrical or magnetic signals, Hb

3

and deoxy-Hb have a slow and steady variation, so the
temporal resolution of fNIRS is comparatively lower than
electrical or magnetic signals. fMRI monitors brain activities
by assessing changes related to blood flow in brain areas,
and it relies on the magnetic BOLD response, which enables
fMRI to have a higher spatial resolution and collect brain
information from deeper areas than fNIRS, since magnetic
fields have better penetration than the NIR light. However,
similar to fNIRS, the drawback of fMRI with low temporal
resolutions is obvious because of the blood flow speed constraint. With the merits of relying on the magnetic response,
fMRI technique also has another flaw since the magnetic
fields are more prone to be distorted by deoxy-Hb than Hb
molecule. The most significant disadvantage for fMRI being
used in different scenarios is that it requires an expensive
and heavy scanner to generate magnetic fields and the scanner is not portable and requires a lot of effort to be moved.
Considering the relative rises in signal quality, reliability
and mobility compared with other imaging approaches,
non-invasive EEG-based devices have been used as the most
popular modality for real-world BCIs and clinical use [21].
EEG signals, featuring direct measures of cortical electrical activity and high temporal resolutions, have been
pursued extensively by many recent BCI studies [22] [23]
[24]. As the most generally used non-invasive technique,
EEG electrodes could be installed in a headset that is more
accessible and portable for diverse occasions. EEG headsets
can collect signals in several non-overlapping frequency
bands (e.g. Delta, Theta, Alpha, Beta, and Gamma). This is
based on the powerful intra-band connection with distinct
behavioural states [25], and the different frequency bands
can present diverse corresponding characteristics and patterns. Furthermore, the temporal resolution is exceedingly
high on milliseconds level, and the risk on subjects is very
low, compared to invasive and other non-invasive techniques that require high-intensive magnetic field exposure.
In this survey, we discussed different high portability and
comparatively low-price EEG devices. A drawback of the
EEG technique is that because of the limited number of
electrodes, the signals have a low spatial resolution, but
the temporal resolution is considerably high. When using
EEG signals for BCI systems, the inferior SNR needs to be
considered because objective factors such as environmental
noises, and subjective factors such as fatigue status might
contaminate the EEG signals. The recent research conducted
to cope with this disadvantage of EEG technology is discussed in our survey as well.
By recording small potential changes in EEG signals immediately after visual or audial stimuli appear, it is possible
to observe a specific brain’s response to specific stimuli
events. This phenomenon is formally called Event-Related
Potentials (ERPs), defined as slight voltages originated in
the brain as responses to specific stimuli or events [26],
which are separated into Visual Evoked Potential (VEP)
and Auditory Evoked Potential (AEP). For EEG-based BCI
studies, P300 wave is a representative potential response
of ERP elicited in the brain cortex of a monitored subject,
presenting as a positive deflection in voltage with a latency
of roughly 250 to 500 ms. [27]. In specific to VEP tasks,
Rapid Serial Visual Presentation (RSVP), the process of
continuously presented multiple images per second at high

displaying rates, is considered to have potential in enhancing human-machine symbiosis [28], and Steady-State visual evoked potentials (SSVEP) is a resonance phenomenon
originating mainly in the visual cortex when a person is
focusing the visual attention on a light source flickering with
a frequency above 4 Hz [29]. In addition, the psychomotor
vigilance task (PVT) is a sustained-attention, reaction-timed
task, measuring the speed with which subjects respond to a
visual stimulus, correlates with the assessment of alertness,
fatigue, or psychomotor skills [30].
1.2

Our Contributions

Recent (2015-2019) EEG survey articles more focused on
separately summarising statistical features or patterns, collecting classification algorithms, or introducing deep learning models. For example, a recent survey [31] provided
a comprehensive outline regarding the latest classification
algorithms utilised in EEG-based BCIs, which comprised
adaptive classifiers, transfer and deep learning, matrix and
tensor classifiers, and several other miscellaneous classifiers.
Although [31] believes that deep learning methods have not
demonstrated convincing enhancement over some state-ofthe-art BCI methods, the results reviewed recently in [32]
illustrated that some deep learning methods, for instance,
convolutional neural networks (CNN), generative adversarial network (GAN), and deep belief networks (DBN) have
outstanding performance in classification accuracy. The later
review [32] synthesised performance results and the several
general task groups in using deep learning for EEG classification, including sleep classifying, motor imagery, emotion
recognition, seizure detection, mental workload, and eventrelated potential detection. In general, this review demonstrated that several deep learning methods outperformed
other neural networks. However, there is no comparison
between deep learning neural networks with traditional
machine learning methods to prove the improvement of
modern neural network algorithms in EEG-based BCIs. Another recent survey [33] systematically reviewed articles that
applied deep learning to EEG in diverse domains by extracting and analysing various datasets to identify the research
trend(s). It provides a comprehensive statistic evaluation
for articles published between 2010 to 2018, but it does
not comprise information about EEG sensors or hardware
devices that collect EEG signals. Additionally, an up-to-date
survey article released in early 2019 [34] comprehensively
reviewed brain signal categories for BCI and deep learning
techniques for BCI applications, with a discussion of applied areas for deep learning-based BCI. While this survey
provides a systematic summary over relevant publications
between 2015-2019, it does not investigate thoroughly about
combined machine learning, from which deep learning is
originated and evolved, deep transfer learning, or the interpretable fuzzy models that are used for the non-stationary
and non-linear signal processing.
In short, the recent review articles lack a comprehensive survey in recent EEG sensing technologies, signal
enhancement, relevant machine learning algorithms with
interpretable fuzzy models, and deep learning methods for
specific BCI applications, in addition to healthcare systems.
In our survey, we aim to address the above limitations and

4

include the recently released BCI studies in 2019. The main
contributions of this study could be summarised as follow:
Advances in sensors and sensing technologies.
Characteristics of signal enhancement and online processing.
Recent machine learning algorithms and the interpretable fuzzy models for BCI applications.
Recent deep learning algorithms and combined approaches for BCI applications.
Evolution of healthcare systems and applications in
BCIs.

2
2.1

A DVANCES IN S ENSING T ECHNOLOGIES
An overview of EEG sensors/devices

The advanced sensor technology has enabled the development of smaller and smarter wearable EEG devices for
lifestyle and related medical applications. In particular, recent advances in EEG monitoring technologies pave the
way for wearable, wireless EEG monitoring devices with
dry sensors. In this section, we summarise the advances of
EEG devices with wet or dry sensors. We also compare the
commercially available EEG devices in terms of the number
of channels, sampling rate, a stationary or portable device,
and covers many companies that are able to cater to the
specific needs of EEG users.
2.1.1 Wet sensor technology
For non-invasive EEG measurements, wet electrode caps are
normally attached to users’ scalp with gels as the interface
between sensors and the scalp. The wet sensors relying on
electrolytic gels provide a clean conductive path. The application of the gel interface is to decrease the skin-electrode
contact interface impedance, which could be uncomfortable
and inconvenient for users and can be too time-consuming
and laborious for everyday use [35]. However, without
the conductive gel, the electrode-skin impedance cannot be
measured, and the quality of measured EEG signals could
be compromised.
2.1.2 Dry sensor technology
Because of the fact that using wet electrodes for collecting
EEG data requires attaching sensors over the experimenter’s
skin, which is not desirable in the real-world application, the
development of dry sensors of EEG devices has enhanced
dramatically over the past several years [36]. One of the
major advantages for dry sensors, compared with wet counterparts, is that it substantially enhances system usability
[37], and the headset is very easy to wear and remove,
which even allows skilled users to wear it by themselves in a
short time. For example, Siddharth et al. [38] designed biosensors to measure physiological activities to refrain from
the limitations of wet-electrode EEG equipment. These biosensors are dry-electrode based, and the signal quality is
comparable to that obtained with wet-electrode systems but
without the need for skin abrasion or preparation or the use
of gels. In a follow-up study [38], novel dry EEG sensors that
could actively filter the EEG signal from ambient electrostatic noise are designed and evaluated with ultra-low-noise
and high-sampling analog to digital converter module. The
study compared the proposed sensors with commercially

available EEG sensors (Cognionics Inc.) in a steady-state visually evoked potentials (SSVEP) BCI task, and the SSVEPdetection accuracy was comparable between two sensors,
with 74.23% averaged accuracy across all subjects.
Further, on the trend of wearable biosensing devices, Chi
et al. [39] [40] reviewed and designed wireless devices with
dry and noncontact EEG electrode sensors. Chi et al. [40]
developed a new integrated sensor controlling the sensitive
input node to attain prominent input impedance, with a
complete shield of the input node from the active transistor, bond-pads, to the specially built chip package. Their
experiment results, using data collected from a noncontact
electrode on the top of the hair demonstrate a maximum
information transfer rate at 100% accuracy, show the promising future for dry and noncontact electrodes as viable tools
for EEG applications and mobile BCIs.
Augmented BCIs (ABCIs) concept is proposed in [37] for
everyday environments, with which signals are recorded via
biosensors and processed in real-time to monitor human
behaviour. An ABCI comprises non-intrusive and quicksetup EEG solutions, which requires minimal or no training,
to accurately collect long-term data with the benefits of
comfort, stability, robustness, and longevity. In their study of
a broad range of approaches to ABCIs, developing portable
EEG devices using dry electrode sensors is a significant
target for mobile human brain imaging, and future ABCI applications are based on biosensing technology and devices.
2.2

Commercialised EEG devices

Table I lists 21 products of 17 brands with eight attributes
providing a basic overview of EEG headsets. The attribute
’Wearable’ shows if the monitored human subjects could
wear the devices and move around without movement constrains, which partially depends on the transmission types
whether the headset devices are connected to software via
Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, or other wireless techniques, or tethered
connections. The numbers of channels of each EEG device
could be categorised into three groups: a low-resolution
group with 1 to 32 numbers; a medium-resolution group
with 33 to 128 channels, and a high-resolution group with
more than 128 channels. Most brands offer more than one
device, therefore the numbers of channels in Table I have
a wide range. The low-resolution devices mainly cover the
frontal and temporal locations, some of which also deploy
sensors to collect EEG signals from five locations, while the
medium and high-resolution groups could cover locations
of scalp more comprehensively. The numbers of channels
also affect the EEG signal sampling rate of each device, with
low and medium-resolution groups having a general sampling rate of 500 Hz and a high-resolution group obtaining a
sampling rate of higher than 1,000 Hz. Additionally, Figure
3 presents all listed commercialised EEG devices listed in
Table I.

3

S IGNAL E NHANCEMENT AND O NLINE P RO -

CESSING

3.1

Artefact handling

Based on a broad category of unsupervised learning algorithms for signal enhancement, Blind Source Separation

5

TABLE 1
An Overview of EEG Devices
Brand
Product
Wearable
Sensors type
NeuroSky
MindWave
Yes
Dry
Emotiv
EPOC(+)
Yes
Dry
Muse
Muse 2
Yes
Dry
OpenBCI
EEG Electrode Cap Kit
Yes
Wet
Wearable Sensing
DSI 24; NeuSenW
Yes
Wet; Dry
ANT Neuro
eego mylab / eego sports
Yes
Dry
Neuroelectrics
STARSTIM; ENOBIO
Yes
Dry
G.tec
g.NAUTILUS series
Yes
Dry
Advanced Brain Monitoring
B-Alert
Yes
Dry
Cognionics
Quick
Yes
Dry
mBrainTrain
Smarting
Yes
Wet
Brain Products
LiveAmp
Yes
Dry
Brain Products
AntiCHapmp
Yes
Dry
BioSemi
ActiveTwo
No
Wet (Gel)
EGI
GES 400
No
dry
Compumedics Neuroscan
Quick-Cap + Grael 4k
No
Wet
Mitsar
Smart BCI EEG Headset
Yes
Wet
Mindo
Mindo series
Yes
Dry
Abbreviation: Frontal (F), Central (C), Temporal (T), Partial (P), and Occipital (O)

Channels No.
1
5-14
4-7
8- 21
7-21
32 - 256
8-32
8-64
10-24
8-30; (64-128)
24
8-64
32-160
280
32-256
32-256
24-32
4-64

Locations
F
F, C, T, P, O
F, T
F, C, T, P, O
F, C, T, P, O
F, C, T, P, O
F, C, T, P, O
F, C, T, P, O
F, C, T, P, O
F, C, T, P, O
F, C, T, P, O
F, C, T, P, O
F, C, T, P, O
F, C, T, P, O
F, C, T, P, O
F, C, T, P, O
F, C, T, P, O
F, C, T, P, O

Sampling rate
500 Hz
500 Hz
300/600 Hz
Up to 16 kHz
125-500 Hz
500 Hz
256Hz
250/500/1k/2k Hz
250-500 Hz
250/500/1k Hz
10k Hz
2k/4k/8k/16k Hz
8k Hz
2k Hz

Transmission
Bluetooth
Bluetooth
Bluetooth
Cable
Bluetooth
Wi-Fi
Wi-Fi; USB
Wireless
Bluetooth
Bluetooth
Bluetooth
Wireless
Wireless
Cable
Cable
Cable
Bluetooth
Wireless

by removing the ICs contained artefacts. ICA is the majority
approach for artefacts removal in EEG signals, so we review
the methods utilised ICA to support signal enhancement in
the following sections.
3.1.1

Fig. 3. Commercialized EEG devices for BCI applications

(BSS) estimates original sources and parameters of a mixing system and removes the artefact signals, such as eye
blinks and movement, represented in the sources [41]. There
are several prevalent BSS algorithms in BCI researches,
including Principal Component Analysis (PCA), Canonical
Correlation Analysis (CCA) and Independent Component
Analysis (ICA). PCA is one of the simplest BSS techniques,
which converts correlated variables to uncorrelated variables, named principal components (PCs), by orthogonal
transformation. However, the artefact components are usually correlated with EEG data and the potential of drifts are
similar to EEG data, which both would cause the PCA to fail
to separate the artefacts [42]. CCA separates components
from uncorrelated sources and detects a linear correlation
between two multi-dimensional variables [43], which has
been applied in muscle artefacts removal from EEG signals.
In terms of ICA, it decomposes observed signals into the independent components (ICs), and reconstruct clean signals

Eye blinks and movements

Eyes blinks are more prevalent during the eyes-open condition, while rolling of the eyes might influence the eyesclosed condition. Also, the signal of eye movements located in the frontal area can affect further EEG analysis.
To minimise the influence of eye contamination in EEG
signals, visual inspection of artefacts and data augmentation
approaches are often used to remove eye contamination.
Artefact subspace reconstruction (ASR) is an automatic
component-based mechanism as a pre-processing step,
which could effectually remove large-amplitude or transient artefacts that contaminate EEG data. There are several
limitations of ASR, first of which is that ASR effectually
removes artefacts from the EEG signals collected from a
standard 20-channel EEG device, while single-channel EEG
recordings could not be applied for. Furthermore, without
substantial cut-off parameters, the effectiveness of removing
regularly occurring artefacts, such as eye blinks and eye
movements, is limited. A possible enhancement has been
proposed by using ICA-based artefact removal mechanism
as a complement for ASR cleaning [44]. A recent study in
2019 [45] also considered ICA and used an automatic IC
classifier as a quantitative measure to separate brain signals
and artefacts for signal enhancement. In above studies, they
extended Infomax ICA [46], and the results showed that by
using an optimal ASR parameter between 20 and 30, ASR
removes more eye artefacts than brain components.
For online processing of EEG data in near real-time to
remove artefacts, a combination method of online ASR,
online recursive ICA, an IC classifier was proposed in [44]
to remove large-amplitude transients as well as to compute, categorise, and remove artefactual ICs. For the eye
movement-related artefacts, the results of their proposed
methods have a fluctuated saccade-related IC EyeCatch
score, and the altered version of EyeCatch of their study
is still not an ideal way of eliminating eye-related artefacts.

Weight
90g
125g
600g
500g
140g
110g
610g
60g
30g
1.1kg
1.1kg
50g

6

3.1.2

Muscle artefacts

Contamination of EEG data by muscle activity is a wellrecognized tough problem. These artefacts can be generated
by any muscle contraction and stretch in proximity to the
recording sites, such as the subject talks, sniffs, swallows,
etc. The degree of muscle contraction and stretch will affect
the amplitude and waveform of artefacts in EEG signals. In
general, the common techniques that have been used to remove muscle artefacts include regression methods, Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA), Empirical Mode Decomposition (EMD), Blind Source Separation (BSS), and EMDBSS [42]. A combination of the ensemble EMD (EEMD) and
CCA, named EEMD-CCA, is proposed to remove muscle
artefacts by [47]. By testing on real-life, semi-simulated, and
simulated datasets under single-channel, few-channel and
multichannel settings, the study result indicates that the
EEMD-CCA method can effectively and accurately remove
muscle artefacts, and it is an efficient signal processing
and enhancement tool in healthcare EEG sensor networks.
There are other approaches combining typical methods,
such as using BSS-CCA followed by spectral-slope rejection
to reduce high-frequency muscle contamination [48], and
independent vector analysis (IVA) that takes advantage of
both ICA and CCA by exploiting higher-order statistics
(HOS) and second-order statistics (SOS) simultaneously to
achieve high performance in removing muscle artefacts [49].
A more extensive survey on muscle artefacts removal from
EEG could be found in [42].
3.1.3

Introducing toolbox of signal enhancement

As one of the most widely used Matlab toolbox for EEG and
other electrophysiological data processing, EEGLAB is developed by Swartz Center for Computational Neuroscience,
in which provides an interactive graphic user interface for
users to apply ICA, time/frequency analysis (TFA) and
standard averaging methods to the recorded brain signals.
EEGLAB extensions, previously called EEGLAB plugins, are
the toolboxes that provide data processing and visualization
functions for the EEGLAB users to process the EEG data. At
the time of writing, there are 106 extensions available on the
EEGLAB website, with a broad functional range including
importing data, artefact removal, feature detection algorithms, etc. For example, many extensions are developed
for artefact removal. Automatic artefact Removal (AAR)
toolbox is for automatic EEG ocular and muscular artefact
removal; Cochlear implant artefact correction (CIAC), as
its name, is an ICA-based tool particularly for correcting
electrical artefacts arising from cochlear implants; Multiple
Artefact Rejection Algorithm (MARA) toolbox uses EEG
features in the temporal, spectral and spatial domains to
optimize a linear classifier to solve the component-reject
vs. -accept problem and to remove loss electrodes; icablinkmetrics toolbox aims at selecting and removing ICA
components associated with eyeblink artefacts using timedomain methods. Some of the toolboxes have more than
one major function, such as artefact rejection and preprocessing: clean rawdata is a suite of pre-processing methods including ASR for correcting and cleaning continuous
data; ARfitStudio could be applied to quickly and intuitively
correct event-related spiky artefacts as the first step of data

pre-processing using ARfit. ADJUST identifies and removes
artefact independent components automatically without affecting neural sources or data. A more comprehensive list of
toolbox functions can be found on the EEGLAB website.
3.2

EEG Online Processing

For neuronal information processing and BCI, the ability to
monitor and analyze cortico-cortical interactions in real time
is one of the trends in BCI research, along with the development of wearable BCI devices and effective approaches
to remove artefacts. It is challenging to provide a reliable
real-time system that could collect, extract and pre-process
dynamic data with artefact rejection and rapid computation.
In the model proposed by [50], EEG data collected from a
wearable, high-density (64-channel), and dry EEG device
is firstly reconstructed by 3751-vertex mesh, anatomically
constrained low resolution electrical tomographic analysis
(LORETA), singular value decomposition (SVD) based reformulation and Automated Anatomical Labelling (AAL) before forwarded to Source Information Flow Toolbox (SIFT)
and vector autoregressive (VAR) model. By applying a regularized logistic regression and testing on both simulation
and real data, their proposed system is capable of real-time
EEG data analysis. Later, [36] expanded their prior study
by incorporating ASR for artefact removal, implementing
anatomically constrained LORETA to localize sources, and
adding an Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers
and cognitive-state classification. The evaluation results of
the proposed framework on simulated and real EEG data
demonstrate the feasibility of the real-time neuronal system
for cognitive state classification and identification. A subsequent study [51] aimed to present data in instantaneous incremental convergence. Online recursive least squares (RLS)
whitening and optimized online recursive ICA algorithm
(ORICA) are validated for separating the blind sources from
high-density EEG data. The experimental results prove the
proposed algorithm’s capability to detect nonstationary in
high-density EEG data and to extract artefact and principal
brain sources quickly. Open-source Real-time EEG Sourcemapping Toolbox (REST) to provide support for online artefact rejection and feature extraction are available to inspire
more real-time BCI research in different domain areas.

4 M ACHINE L EARNING AND F UZZY M ODELS IN
BCI A PPLICATIONS
4.1

An overview of machine learning

Machine learning, a subset of computational intelligence,
relies on patterns and reasonings by computer systems to
explore a specific task without using explicit instructions.
Machine learning tasks are generally classified into several models, such as supervised learning and unsupervised
learning [52]. In terms of supervised learning, it is usually
dividing the data into two subsets: training set (a dataset
to train a model) and test set (a dataset to test the trained
model) during the learning process. Supervised learning can
be used for classification and regression tasks, by applying
what has been learned in the training stage using labeled
examples, to test the new data (testing data) for classifying
types of events or predicting future events. In contrast,

7

unsupervised machine learning is used when the data used
to train is neither classified nor labelled. It contains only
input data and refers to a probability function to describe a
hidden structure, like grouping or clustering of data points.
Performing machine learning requires to create a model
for training purpose. In EEG-based BCI applications, various types of models have been used and developed for
machine learning. In the last ten years, the leading families
of models used in BCIs include linear classifiers, neural
networks, non-linear Bayesian classifiers, nearest neighbour
classifiers and classifier combinations [53]. The linear classifiers, such as Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA), Regularized LDA, and Support Vector Machine (SVM), classify
discriminant EEG patterns using linear decision boundaries between feature vectors for each class. In terms of
neural networks, they assemble layered human neurons
to approximate any nonlinear decision boundaries, where
the most common type in BCI applications is the Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) that typically uses only one or two
hidden layers. Moving to a nonlinear Bayesian classifier,
such as a Bayesian quadratic classifier and Hidden Markov
Model (HMM), the probability distribution of each class is
modelled, and Bayes rules are used to select the class to
be assigned to the EEG patterns. Considering the physical
distances of EEG patterns, the nearest neighbour classifier,
such as the k nearest neighbour (kNN) algorithm, proposes
to assign a class to the EEG patterns based on its nearest
neighbour. Finally, classifier combinations are combining the
outputs of multiple above classifiers or training them in a
way that maximizes their complementarity. The classifier
combinations used for BCI applications can be an enhanced,
voting or stacked combination approach.
Additionally, to apply machine learning algorithms to
the EEG data, we need to pre-process EEG signals and
extract features from the raw data, such as frequency
band power features and connectivity features between two
channels [54]. Figure 4 demonstrates an EEG-based data
pre-processing, pattern recognition and machine learning
pipeline, to represent EEG data processing in a compact and
relevant manner.
4.2

Transfer learning

4.2.1 Why we need transfer learning?
Recently, one of the major hypotheses in traditional machine
learning, such as supervised learning described above, is
that training data used to train the classifier and test data
used to evaluate the classifier, belong to the same feature
space and follow the same probability distribution. However, this hypothesis is often violated in many applications
because of human variability [55]. For example, a change
in EEG data distribution typically occurs when data are
acquired from different subjects or across sessions and time
within a subject. Also, as the EEG signals are variant and
not static, extensive BCI sessions exhibit distinctive classification problems of consistency [56].
Thus, transfer learning aims at coping with data that
violate this hypothesis by exploiting knowledge acquired
while learning a given task for solving a different but
related task. In other words, transfer learning is a set of
methodologies considered for enhancing the performance

Fig. 4. Data pre-processing, pattern recognition and machine learning
pipeline in BCIs

of a learned classifier trained on one task (also extended to
one session or subject) based on information gained while
learning another one. The advances of transfer learning can
relax the limitations of BCI, as it is no need to calibrate from
the beginning point, less noisy for transferred information,
and relying on previous usable data to increase the size of
datasets.
4.2.2 What is transfer learning?
Transferring knowledge from the source domain to the
target domain acts as bias or as a regularizer for solving
the target task. Here, we provide a description of transfer
learning based on the survey of Pan and Yang [57]. The
source domain is known, and the target domain can be
inductive (known) or transductive (unknown). The transfer
learning classified under three sub-settings in accord with
source and target tasks and domains, as inductive transfer
learning, transductive transfer learning, and unsupervised
transfer learning. All learning algorithms transfer knowledge to different tasks/domains, in which situation the
skills should be transferred to enhance performance and
avoid a negative transfer.
In the inductive transfer learning, the available labelled
data of the target domain are required, while the tasks of
source and target could be different from each other regardless of their domain. The inductive transfer learning could
be sub-categorized into two cases based on the labelled data
availability. If available, then a multitask learning method
should be applied for the target and source tasks to be
learned simultaneously. Otherwise, a self-taught learning
technique should be deployed. In terms of transductive
transfer learning, the labelled data are available in the
source domain instead of the target domain, while the target
and source tasks are identical regardless of the domains (of
target and source). Transductive transfer learning could be

8

sub-categorized into two cases based on whether the feature
spaces between the source domain and target domain are
the same. If yes, then the sample selection bias/covariance
shift method should be applied. Otherwise, a domain adaptation technique should be deployed. Unsupervised transfer
learning applied if available data in neither source nor target
domain, while the target and source tasks are relevant but
different. The target of unsupervised transfer learning is to
resolve clustering, density estimation and dimensionality
reduction tasks in the target domain [58].
4.2.3 Where to transfer in BCIs?
In BCIs, discriminative and stationary information could be
transferred across different domains. The selection of which
types of information to transfer is based on the similarity
between the target and source domains. If the domains are
very similar and the data sample is small, the discriminative information should be transferred; if the domains are
different while there could be common information across
target and source domains, stationary information should
be transferred to establish more invariable systems [59] [60].
Domain adaption, a representative of transductive transfer learning, attempts to find a strategy for transforming
the data space in which the decision rules will classify all
datasets. Covariate shifting is a very related technique to
domain adaptation, which is the most frequent situation
encountered in BCIs. In covariate shifting, the input distributions in the training and test samples are different,
while output values conditional distributions are the same
[61]. There exists an essential assumption - the marginal
distribution of data changes from subjects (or sessions)
to subjects (or sessions), and the decision rules for this
marginal distribution remain unchanged. This assumption
allows us to re-weight the training data from other subjects
(or previous sessions) for correcting the difference in the
marginal distributions in the different subjects (or sessions).
Naturally, the effectiveness of transfer learning strongly
depends on how well the two circumstances are related.
The transfer learning in BCI applications can be used to
transfer information (a) from tasks to tasks, (b) from subjects
to subjects, and (c) from sessions to sessions. As shown in
Fig. 5, given a set of the training dataset (e.g., source task,
subject, or session), we attempt to find a transformation
space in which a training model will be beneficial to classify
or predict the samples in the new dataset (e.g., target task,
subject, or session).
4.2.3.1 Transfer from tasks to tasks: In the domain
of BCI where EEG signals are collected for subjects analysis,
in some situations, the mental tasks and the operational
tasks could be different but dependent. For instance, in a
laboratory environment, a mental task is to assess the device
action, such as mental subtraction and motor imagery, while
the operational task is the device action itself and the performance of a device from event-related potentials. Transferring decision rules between different tasks would introduce
novel signal variations and affect error-related potential that
represents as a response as an error was recognized by users
[62]. The study of [63] showed that the signal variations
originated from task-to-tasks transfer which substantially
influenced classification feature distribution and the classifiers’ performance. Other results of their study are that the

Fig. 5. Transfer learning in BCI

accuracy based on the baseline descended when operational
tasks and subtasks were generalised, while the differences
of features were larger compared with non-error responses.
4.2.3.2 Transfer from subjects to subjects: For EEGbased BCIs, before applying features learned by the conventional approaches to different subjects, it requires a training
period of pilot data on each new subject due to inter-subject
variability [64]. In the driving drowsiness detection study of
Wei et al. [65], inter- and intra-subject variability were evaluated as well as transferring models’ feasibility was validated
by implementing hierarchical clustering in a large-scale EEG
dataset collected from many subjects. The proposed subjectto-subject transferring framework comprises a large-scale
model pool, which assures sufficient data are available for
positive model transferring to obtain prominent decoding
performance and a small-scale baseline calibration data
from the target subject as a selector of decoding models
in the model pool. Without jeopardizing performance, their
results in driving drowsiness detection demonstrated 90%
calibration time reduction.
In BCIs, cross-subject transfer learning could be used to
decrease training data collecting time, as the least-squares
transformation (LST) method proposed by Chiang et al.
[66]. The experiments conducted to validate the LST method
performance of cross-subject SSVEP data showed the capability of reducing the number of training templates for an
SSVEP BCI. Inter- and intra-subject transfer learning is also
applied to unsupervised conditions when no labelled data is
available. He and Wu [67] presented a method to align EEG
trails directly in the Euclidean space across different subjects
to increase the similarity. Their empirical results showed
the potential of transfer learning from subjects to subjects
in an unsupervised EEG-based BCI. In [68], He and Wu
proposed a novel different set domain adaptation approach
for task-to-task and also subject-to-subject transfer, which
considers a very challenging case that the source subject
and the target subject have partially or completely different
tasks. For example, the source subject may perform lefthand and right-hand motor imageries, whereas the target
subject may perform feet and tongue motor imageries. They
introduced a practical setting of different label sets for BCIs,
and proposed a novel label alignment (LA) approach to
align the source label space with the target label space. LA

9

only needs as few as one labelled sample from each class
of the target subject, which label alignment can be used
as a preprocessing step before different feature extraction
and classification algorithms, and can be integrated with
other domain adaptation approaches to achieve even better
performance. For applying transferring learning in BCIs, especially EEG-based BCIs, subject-to-subject transfer among
the same tasks are more frequently investigated.
For subject-to-subject transfer in single-trial eventrelated potential (ERP) classification, Wu [69] proposed
both online and offline weighted adaptation regularization
(wAR) algorithms to reduce the calibration effort. Experiments on a visually-evoked potential oddball task and three
different EEG headsets demonstrated that both online and
offline wAR algorithms are effective. Wu also proposed a
source domain selection approach, which selects the most
beneficial source subjects for transfer. It can reduce the computational cost of wAR by about 50%, without sacrificing the
classification performance, thus making wAR more suitable
for real-time applications.
Very recently, Cui et al. [70] proposed a novel approach,
feature weighted episodic training (FWET), to completely
eliminate the calibration requirement in subject-to-subject
transfer in EEG-based driver drowsiness estimation. It integrates feature weighting to learn the importance of different
features, and episodic training for domain generalization.
FWET does not need any labelled or unlabelled calibration
data from the new subject, and hence could be very useful
in plug-and-play BCIs.
4.2.3.3 Transfer from sessions to sessions: The assumption of the session-to-session transfer learning in BCI
is that features extracted by the training module and algorithms could be applied to a different session of a subject in
the same task. It is important to evaluate what is in common
among training sections for optimizing the decision distribution among different sessions.
Alamgir et al. [71] reviewed several transfer learning
methodologies in BCIs that explore and utilise common
training data structures of several sessions to reduce training time and enhance performance. Building on the comparison and analysis of other methods in the literature, Alamgir
et al. proposed a general framework for transfer learning
in BCIs, which is in contrast to a general transfer learning
study that focuses on domain adaptation where individual
sessions feature attributes are transferred. Their framework
regards decision boundaries as random variables, so the distribution of decision boundaries could be conducted from
previous sessions. With an altered regression method and
the consideration for feature decomposition, their experiments on amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients using an MI
BCI revealed its effectiveness in learning structure. There are
also some problematic conditions of the proposed transfer
learning method, including the difficulty in balancing the
initialization of spatial weights, and the necessity of adding
an extra loop in the algorithm for determining the spectral
and spatial combination.
In one of the latest paradigms studying imagined speech,
in which a human subject imagines uttering a word without physical sound or movement, Garca-Salinas et al. [72]
proposed a method to extract codewords related to the
EEG signals. After a new imagined word being represented

by the EEGs characteristic codewords, the new word was
merged with the prior class’s histograms and a classifier
for transfer learning. This study implies a general trend
of applying session-based transfer learning to an imagined
speech domain in EEG-based BCIs.
4.2.3.4 Transfer from headset to headset: Apart
from the above cases of transfer learning in BCIs, ideally,
a BCI system should be completely independent of any
specific EEG headset, such that the user can replace or
upgrade his/her headset freely, without re-calibration. This
should greatly facilitate real-world applications of BCIs.
However, this goal is very challenging to achieve. One step
towards it is to use historical data from the same user to
reduce the calibration effort on the new EEG headset.
Wu et al. [73] proposed active weighted adaptation
regularization (AwAR) for headset-to-headset transfer. It
integrates wAR, which uses labelled data from the previous
headset and handles class-imbalance, and active learning,
which selects the most informative samples from the new
headset to label. Experiments on single-trial ERP classification showed that AwAR could significantly reduce the
calibration data requirement for the new headset.
4.3

Interpretable Fuzzy Models

Currently, machine learning methods behave like black
boxes because they cannot be explained. Exploring interpretable models may be useful for understanding and
improving BCI learned automatically from EEG signals,
or possibly gaining new insights in BCI. Here, we collect
some interpretable models from fuzzy sets and systems to
estimate interpretable BCI applications.
4.3.1 Fuzzy models for interpretability
Zadeh suggests that all classes cannot be of clear value in
the real world, so that it is very difficult to define true or
false or real numbers [74]. He introduced the concept of
fuzzy sets with the definition ”A fuzzy set is a set with
no boundaries, and the transition from boundary to the
boundary is characterized by a member function [75]. Using
fuzzy sets allows us to provide the advantage of flexible
boundary conditions, and the advances of this have applied
in BCI applications, as shown in Fig. 6.
Furthermore, a Fuzzy Inference System (FIS) also used
in BCI applications to automatically extract fuzzy ”If-Then”
rules from the data that describe which input feature values
correspond to which output category [76]. Such fuzzy rules
enable us to classify EEG patterns and interpret what the
FIS has learned, as shown in Fig. 6. What is more, the fuzzy
measure theory, such as fuzzy integral, as shown in Fig. 6,
is suitable to apply where data fusion requires to consider
possible data interactions [77], such as the fuzzy fusion of
multiple information sources.
Another category for interpretability is a hybrid model
integrating fuzzy models to machine learning. For example,
fuzzy neural networks (FNN) combine the advantages of
neural networks and FIS. Its architecture is similar to the
neural networks, and the input (or weight) is fuzzified
[78]. The FNN recognizes the fuzzy rules and adjusts the
membership function by tuning the connection weights.
Especially, a Self-Organizing Neural Fuzzy Inference Network (SONFIN) is proposed by [79] using a dynamic FNN

10

measurement [91], to identify the sleep stages. Furthermore,
[90] proposed a recurrent self-evolving fuzzy neural network (RSEFNN) that employs an on-line gradient descent
learning rule to predict EEG-based driving fatigue.

5

D EEP L EARNING A LGORITHMS WITH BCI A P -

PLICATIONS

Fig. 6. Fuzzy sets, fuzzy rules, and fuzzy integrals for interpretability

architecture to create a self-adaptive architecture for the
identification of the fuzzy model. The advantage of designing such a hybrid structure is more explanatory because it
utilises the learning capability of the neural network.
4.3.2

EEG-based fuzzy models

Here, we summarized up-to-date interpretable solutions
based on fuzzy models for BCI systems and applications.
By using fuzzy sets, Wu et al. [80] proposed to extend the
multiclass EEG typical spatial pattern (CSP) filters from classification to regression in a large-scale sustained-attention
PVT, and later further integrated them with Riemannian
tangent space features for improved PVT reaction time estimation performance [81]. Considering the advances of fuzzy
membership degree, [82] used a fuzzy membership function
instead of a step function, which decreased the sensitivity of
entropy values from noisy EEG signals. It did improve EEG
complexity evaluation in resting state and SSVEP sessions
[83], associated with healthcare applications [84].
By integrating fuzzy sets with domain adaptation, [85]
proposed an online weighted adaptation regularization for
regression (OwARR) algorithm to reduce the amount of
subject-specific calibration EEG data. Furthermore, by integrating fuzzy rules with domain adaptation, [86] generated
a fuzzy rule-based brain-state-drift detector by Riemannmetric-based clustering, allowing that the distribution of the
data can be observable. By adopting fuzzy integrals [87],
motor-imagery-based BCI exhibited robust performance for
offline single-trial classification and real-time control of a
robotic arm. A follow-up work [88] explored the multimodel fuzzy fusion-based motor-imagery-based BCI, which
also considered the possible links between EEG patterns
after employing the classification of traditional BCIs. Additionally, the fusion of multiple information sources is
inspired by fuzzy integrals as well, such as fusing eye
movement and EEG signals to enhance emotion recognition
[89].
Moving to FNN, due to the non-linear and nonstationary characteristics of EEG signals, the application of
neural networks and fuzzy logic unveils a safe, accurate and
reliable detection and pattern identification. For example,
a fuzzy neural detector proposed in backpropagation with
a fuzzy C-means algorithm [90] and Takagi-Sugeno fuzzy

Deep learning is a specific family of machine learning
algorithms in which features and the classifier are jointly
learned directly from data. The term deep learning refers to
the architecture of the model, which is based on a cascade
of trainable feature extractor modules and nonlinearities
[92]. Owing to such a cascade, learned features are usually
related to increasing levels of concepts. The representative
architectures of deep learning include Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNN), Generative Adversarial Network (GAN),
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN), and broad Deep Neural networks (DNN). For BCI applications, deep learning
has been applied broadly compared with machine learning technology mainly because currently most machine
learning research concentrates on static data which is not
the optimal method for accurately categorizing the quickly
changing brain signals [34]. In this section, we introduce the
spontaneous EEG applications with CNN architectures, the
utilisation of GAN in recent researches, the procedure and
applications of RNN, especially Long Short-Term Memory
(LSTM). We also illustrate deep transfer learning extended
from deep learning algorithms and transfer learning approaches, followed by exemplification of adversarial attacks
to deep learning models for system testing.
5.1

Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN)

A Convolutional Neural Network (simplifying ConvNet or
CNN) is a feedforward neural network in which information flows uni-directionally from the input to the convolution operator to the output [93]. As shown in Fig. 7, such a
convolution operator includes at least three stacked layers in
CNN comprising the convolutional layer, pooling layer, and
fully connected layer. The convolutional layer convolves a
tensor with shape, and the pooling layer streamlines the
underlying computation to reduce the dimensions of the
data. The fully connected layer connects every neuron in the
previous layer to a new layer, resemble a traditional multilayer perceptron neural network.
The nature of CNNs with stacked layers is to reduce input data to easily-identifiable formations with minimal loss,
and distinctive spatial dependencies of the EEG patterns
could be captured by applying CNN. For instance, CNN
has been used to automatically extract signal features from
epileptic intracortical data [22] and perform an automatic
diagnosis to supersede the time-consuming procedure of
vision examination conducted by experts [23]. In addition
to this, the recent five BCI applications employing CNNs
in fatigue, stress, sleep, motor imagery (MI), and emotional
studies, are reviewed below.
5.1.1 Fatigue-related EEG
As a complex mental condition, fatigue and drowsiness
are stated lack of vigilance that could lead to catastrophic

11

framework with a CNN algorithm might be the ultimate
classifier for EEG-based stress recognition.
5.1.3

Fig. 7. CNN and GAN for BCI applications

incidents when the subjects are conducting activities that require high and sustained attention, such as driving vehicles.
Driving fatigue detection research has been attracting considerable attention in the BCI community, [94] [95] especially
in recent years with the significant advancement of CNN
in classification [96] [97]. An EEG-based spatial-temporal
convolutional neural network (ESTCNN) was proposed by
Gao et al. [98] for driver fatigue detection. This structure was
applied to eight human subjects in an experiment in which
multichannel EEG signals were collected. The framework
comprises a core block that extracts temporal dependencies
and combines with dense layers for spatial-temporal EEG
information process and classification. It is illustrated that
this method could consistently decrease the data dimension
in the inference process and increase reference response
with computational efficiency. The results of the experiments with ESTCNN reached an accuracy rate of 97.37%
in fatigue EEG signal classification. CNN has also been
used in other EEG-based fatigue recognition and evaluation
applications. Yue and Wang [99] applied various fatigue
levels’ EEG signals to their multi-scale CNN architecture
named MorletInceptionNet for visual fatigue evaluation.
This framework uses a space-time-frequency combined features extraction strategy to extract raw features, after which
multi-scale temporal features are extracted by an inception
architecture. The features are then provided to the CNN
layers to classify visual fatigue evaluation. Their structure
has a better performance in classification accuracy than the
other five state-of-the-art methodologies, which is proof
of the effectiveness of CNN in fatigue-related EEG signal
processing and classification.
5.1.2 Stress-related EEG
Since stress is one of the leading causes of hazardous human
behaviour and human errors that could cause dreadful
industrial accidents, stress detection and recognition using
EEG signals have become an important research area [100].
A recent study [101] proposed a new BCI framework with
the CNN model and collected EEG signals from 10 construction workers whose cortisol levels, hormone-related
human stress, were measured to label tasks’ stress level. The
result of the proposed configuration obtained the maximum
accuracy rate of 86.62%. This study proved that the BCI

Sleep-related EEG

Sleep quality is crucial for human health in which the
sleep stage classification, also called sleep scoring, has been
investigated to understand, diagnose and treat sleep disorders [102]. Because of the lightness and portability of
EEG devices, EEG is particularly suitable to recognize sleep
scores. CNN has been applied to sleep stage classification
by numerous studies, while the approaches of CNN using
single-channel EEG are the mainstream of research investigation [103] [104] mainly due to the simplicity [105]. A
single-channel EEG-based method using CNN for 5-class
sleep stage conjecture in [102] shows competitive performance in sensible pattern detection and visualization. The
significance of this research for single-channel sleep EEG
processing is that it does not require feature extraction
from expert knowledge or signal to learn the most suitable
features to task classification end-to-end. Mousavi et al.
[103] use a data-augmentation preprocessing method and
apply raw EEG signals directly to nine convolutional layers
and two fully connected layers without implicating feature
extraction or feature selection. The simulation results of the
study indicate the accuracy of over 93% for the classification of 2 to 6 sleep stages classes. Furthermore, a CNNbased combined classification and prediction framework,
called multitask neural networks, has also been considered
for automatic sleep classifying in a recent study [105]. It
is stated that this framework has the ability to generate
multiple decisions, the reliability to form a final decision by
aggregation, and the capability to avoid the disadvantages
of the conventional many-to-one approach.
5.1.4

MI-related EEG

MI indicates imaging executing movement of a body part
rather than conducting actual body movement in BCI systems [106]. MI is based on the fact that brain activation will
change and activate correlated brain path when actually
moving a body part. The common spatial pattern (CSP)
algorithm [107] is an effective spatial filter that searches for a
discriminative subspace to maximize one class variance and
minimize the other simultaneously to classify the movement
actions. CNN has also been employed to MI EEG data
processing for stimulating classification performance, and
there is a stream of recent research trends of combining
CNN with CSP together, improving the methodology, and
enhance MI classification performance [108]. The MI classification framework proposed by Sakhavi, Guan and Yan
[109] presents a new data temporal representation generated
from the filter-bank CSP algorithm, with CNN classification
architecture. Their accuracy on the 4-class MI BCI dataset
approves the usability and effectiveness of the proposed
application. Olivas-Padilla and Chacon-Murguia [110] presented two multiple MI classification methodologies that
used a variation of Discriminative Filter Bank Common
Spatial Pattern (DFBCSP) to extract features, after which the
outcome samples have proceeded to a matrix with one or
multiple pre-optimized CNN. It is stated that this proposed
method could be an applicable alternative for multiple MI

12

classification of a practical BCI application both online and
offline.
5.1.5 Emotion-related EEG
Since it is believed that EEG contains comparatively comprehensive emotional information and better accessibility
for affective research, while CNN holds the capacity to take
spatial information into account with two-dimensional filters, CNN-based deep learning algorithm has been applied
to EEG signals for emotion recognition and classification in
numerous recent studies [111] [112] [113] [114]. Six basic
emotional states that could be recognized and classified
by using EEG signals [115] [116], including joy, sadness,
surprise, anger, fear, and disgust, while the emotions could
also be simply categorized in binary classification as positive
or negative [117]. To apply EEG signals to CNN-based
modules, EEG signals could be directly introduced to the
modules, or to extract diverse entropy and power spectral
density (PSD) features as the input of the models. Three
connectivity features extracted from EEG signals, phaselocking value (PLV), Pearson correlation coefficient (PCC)
and phase lag index (PLI), were examined in [117] to
the proposed three different CNN structures. A popular
EEG-based emotion classification database DEAP [118] was
applied to the framework, and the PSD features performance was enhanced by the connectivity features, with
PLV matrices obtaining 99.72% accuracy utilizing CNN-5.
Further, on this, dynamical graph CNN (DGCNN) has also
been proposed for multichannel EEG emotion recognition.
In the study of Song et al. [119], the presented DGCNN
method uses a graph to model EEG features by learning
intrinsic correlations between each EEG channel to produce
an adjacency matrix, which is then applied to learn more
discriminative features. The experiments conducted in the
SJTU emotion EEG dataset (SEED) [120] and the DREAMER
dataset [121] achieved recognition accuracy rate at 90.4%
and 86.23% respectively.
5.2

Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN)

5.2.1 GAN for data augmentation
In classification tasks, a substantial amount of real-world
data is required for training machine learning and deep
learning modules, and in some cases, there are limitations
of acquiring enough amount of real data or simply the
investment of time and human resources could be too
overwhelming. Proposed in 2014 and becoming more active
in recent years, GAN is mainly used data augmentation to
address the question of how to generate artificial natural
looking samples to mimic real-world data via implying
generative models, so that unrevealed training data sample
number could be increased [122].
GAN includes two synchronously trained neural networks, generator networks and discriminator networks as
shown in Fig. 7. The generator networks can capture the input data distribution and aim to generate fake sample data,
and the discriminator networks can distinguish whether the
sample comes from the true training data. These two neural
networks aim to generate an aggregation of samples from
the pre-trained generator and to employ the samples for
additional functions such as classification.

5.2.2 EEG data augmentation
The significance of applying GAN for EEG is that it could
address the major practical issue of insufficient training
data. Abdelfattah, Abdelrahman and Wang [123] proposed
a novel GAN model that learns statistical characteristics
of the EEG and increases datasets to improve classification
performance. Their study showed that the method outperforms other generative models dramatically. The Wasserstein GAN with gradient penalty (WGAN-GP) proposed
by Panwar et al. [124] incorporates a BCI classifier into
the framework to synthesize EEG data and simulate timeseries EEG data. WGAN-GP was applied to event-related
classification and perform task classification with the ClassConditioned WGAN-CP. GAN has also been used in EEG
data augmentation for improving recognition performance,
such as emotion recognition. The framework presented in
[125] was built upon a conventional GAN, named Conditional Wasserstein GAN (CWGAN), to enhance EEG-based
emotion recognition. The high-dimensional EEG data generated by the proposed GAN framework was evaluated
by three indicators to ensure high-quality synthetic data
are appended to manifold supplement. The positive experiment results on SEED and DEAP emotion recognition
datasets proved the effectiveness of the CWGAN model.
A conditional Boundary Equilibrium GAN based EEG data
augmentation method [126] for artificial differential entropy
features generation was also proven to be effective in improving multimodal emotion recognition performance.
As a branch of deep learning, GAN has been employed to generate super-resolution image copies from
low-resolution images. A GAN-based deep EEG superresolution method proposed by Corley and Huang [127] is a
novel approach to generate high spatial resolution EEG data
from low-resolution EEG samples via producing unsampled
data from different channels. This framework could address
the limitation of insufficient data collected from low-density
EEG devices by interpolating multiple missing channels
effectively.
To the best of our knowledge, in contrast with CNN,
GAN was comparatively less studied in BCIs. One major
reason is that the feasibility of using GAN for generating
time sequence data is yet to be fully evaluated [128]. In the
investigation of GAN performance in producing synthetic
EEG signals, Fahimi et al. used real EEG signals as random
input to train a CNN-based GAN to produce synthetic EEG
data and then evaluate the similarities in the frequency
and time domains. Their result indicates that the generated
EEG data from GAN resemble the spatial, spectral, and
temporal characteristics of real EEG signals. This initiates
novel perspectives for future research of GAN in EEG-based
BCIs.
5.3 Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) and Long ShortTerm Memory (LSTM)
The traditional neural networks usually are not capable of
reasoning from the previous information, but RNN, inspired
by humans memory, can address this issue by adding a
loop that allows information to be passed from one step
of the network to the next. As shown in Fig. 8, the recurrent
procedure of RNN describes a specific node A in the time

13

range [1, t + 1]. The node A at time t receives two inputs
variables: Xt denotes the input at time t and the backflow
loop represents the hidden state in time [0, t1], and the node
A at time t exports the variable ht . However, the current
RNN only looks at recent information to perform the present
tasks in practice, so it cannot retain long-term dependencies.
In this case, long short-term memory (LSTM) networks, a
special kind of RNN that is capable of learning long-term
dependencies, are proposed. As shown in Fig. 8, an LSTM
cell receives three inputs: the input X at the current time t,
the output h of previous time t − 1, and the input arrows
representing the hidden state of previous time t − 1. Then,
the LSTM cell exports two outputs: the output h and the
hidden state (representing as the out arrows) of the current
time t. The LSTM cell contains four gates, input gate, output
gate, forget gate, and input modulation gate, to control
the data flow by the operations and the sigmoid and tanh
functions.
Compared with traditional classification algorithms,
Deep learning methods of RNN with LSTM lead to superior
accuracy [129]. Attia et al. [130] presented a hybrid architecture of CNN and RNN model to categorize SSVEP signals
in the time domain. Using RNN with LSTM architectures
could take temporal dependence into account for EEG timeseries signals and could achieve an average classification
accuracy of 93.0% [131]. In the research of applying RNN
to auditory stimulus classification, [132] used a regulated
RNN reservoir to classify three English vowels a, u and i.
Their result showed an average accuracy rate of 83.2% with
the RNN approach outperformed a deep neural network
method. A framework aiming at addressing visual object
classification was proposed by [133] by applying RNN to
EEG data invoked by visual stimulation. After discriminative brain activities are learned by the RNN, they are
trained by a CNN-based regressor to project images onto
the learned manifold. This automated object categorization
approach achieved an accuracy rate of approximate 83%,
which proved its comparability to those empowered merely
by CNN models.
Over the past several years, the research of the RNN
framework in EEG-based BCIs has increased substantially
with many studies showing that the results of RNN-based
methods outperform a benchmark or other traditional algorithms [134] or the RNN combined with other deep neural
networks such as CNN to optimize performance [135]. The
RNN framework has also been applied to other EEG-based
tasks, such as identifying individuals [25], hand motion
identification [136], sleep staging [137], and emotion recognition [138]. It is worth noting that in [137], the best performance model among basic machine learning, CNN, RNN, a
combination of RNN and CNN (RCNN) is an RNN model
with expert-defined features for sleep staging, which could
inspire further research of combining the expert system with
DL algorithms. Other novel framework proposals based on
RNN, such as the spatial-temporal RNN (STRNN) [138] for
feature learning integration from both temporal and spatial
information of the signals, are also being explored in recent
years.
As a special kind of RNN, LSTM has also been combined
with CNN algorithms for a diverse range of EEG-based
tasks. For automatic sleep stage scoring, Supratak et al.

Fig. 8. Illustration of RNN and LSTM

[139] employed CNN to extract time-invariable features
and an LSTM bidirectional algorithm for transitional rules
learning. To predict human decisions from continuous EEG
signals, [140] proposed a hierarchical LSTM model with two
layers encoding local-temporal correlations and temporal
correlations respectively to address non-stationarities of the
EEG.
Being able to learn sequential data and improve classification performance, LSTM could also be added to other
neural networks for temporal sequential pattern detection
and optimize the overall prediction accuracy for the entire
framework. For temporal sleep stage classification, [141]
proposed a Mixed Neural Network with an LSTM for its
capacity in learning sleep-scoring strategy automatically
compared to the decision tree in which rules are defined
manually.
5.4

Deep Transfer Learning (DTL)

A recent survey [142] classified deep transfer learning into
four categories: instance-based, mapping-based, networkbased, and adversarial based deep transfer learning. In specific, the instance-based and mapping-based deep transfer
learning consider instances by adjusting weights from the
source domain and mapping similarities from the source
to the target domains, respectively. The main benefits of
applying deep learning are saving the time-consuming preprocessing while featuring engineering steps, and capturing
high-level symbolic features and imperceptible dependencies simultaneously [143]. The realization of these two advantages is because deep learning operates straightly on raw
brain signals to learn identifiable information through backpropagation and deep structures, while transfer learning is
commonly applied to improve the capacity in generalization
for machine learning.
Network-based deep transfer learning reuses the parts
of the network pre-trained in the source domain, such as
extracting the front-layers trained by CNN. Adversarialbased deep transfer learning uses adversarial technology,
such as GAN, to find transferable features that are suitable
for two domains.
The combination of transfer learning and CNN has been
widely used in medical applications [144] [145] [146] and

14

the general applicational purposes for instance image classification [147] and object recognition [148]. In this section,
we focus on transfer learning using deep neural network
and its EEG-based BCI applications.
MI EEG signal classification is one of the major areas
where deep transfer learning is applied. Sakhavi and Guan
[149] used a CNN model to transfer knowledge from subjects to subjects to decrease calibration time for recording
data and training the model. The EEG data pipeline of deep
CNN, transferring model parameters and fine-tuning on
new data and using labels to regularize fine-tuning/training
process, is a novel method for subjects to subjects and
session to session deep transfer learning. Xu et al. [150] proposed a deep transfer CNN framework comprising a pretrained VGG-16 CNN model and a target CNN model, between which the parameters are directly transferred, frozen
and fine-tuned in the target model and MI dataset. The
performance of their framework in terms of efficiency and
accuracy exceed many traditional methods such as standard
CNN and SVM. Dose et al. [151] applied a Deep Learning
approach to an EEG-based MI BCI system in healthcare,
aiming to enhance the present stroke rehabilitation process.
The unified model they build includes CNN layers that
learn generalized features and reduce dimension, and a conventional fully connected layer for classification. By using
transfer learning in this approach for adapting global classifiers to single individuals and applying raw EEG signals
to this model, the results of their study reached a mean accuracy of 86.49%, 79.25%, and 68.51% for datasets with two,
three and four classes, respectively. For the effectiveness of
alleviating training burden with transfer learning, a recent
research [152] encoded EEG features extracted from the
traditional CSP by a separated channel convolutional neural
network. The encoded features were then used to train
a recognition network for MI classification. The accuracy
of the proposed method outperformed multiple traditional
machine learning algorithms.
Generally, the purpose of proposing a DTL framework
as a classification strategy is to avoid time-consuming retraining and improve accuracy compared with solitary CNN
and transfer learning. A deep CNN with an inter-subject
transfer learning method was applied to detect attention
information from the EEG time series [153]. DTL has also
been applied to classify EEG data in imagined vowel pronunciation [154].
As introduced in the previous section, GAN, combined
with transfer learning, could be rewarding in restraining
domain divergence to improve domain adaptation [155]
[156]. Hu et al. [157] proposed DupGAN, a GAN framework with one encoder, one generator and two adversarial
discriminators, to attain domain transformation for classification. In other streams of deep transfer learning, RNN
is also applied in many EEG-based BCI studies. For EEG
classification with attention-based transfer learning, [158]
proposed a framework of a cross-domain TL encoder and
an attention-based TL decoder with RNN for improvement
in EEG classification and brain functional areas detection
under different tasks.

5.5 Adversarial Attacks to Deep Learning Models in
BCI
Albeit their outstanding performance, deep learning models
are vulnerable to adversarial attacks, where deliberately
designed small perturbations, which may be hard to be
detected by human eyes or computer programs, are added
to benign examples to mislead the deep learning model and
cause dramatic performance degradation. This phenomena
was first discovered in 2014 in computer vision [159] and
soon received great attention [160] [161] [162].
Adversarial attacks to EEG-based BCIs could also cause
great damage. For example, EEG-based BCIs can be used
to control wheelchairs or exoskeleton for the disabled [163],
where adversarial attacks could cause malfunction. In the
worst case, adversarial attacks can hurt the user by driving
him/her into danger on purpose. In clinical applications of
BCIs in awareness/consciousness evaluation [163], adversarial attacks could lead to serious misdiagnosis.
Zhang and Wu [164] were the first to study adversarial
attacks in EEG-based BCIs. They considered three different
attack scenarios: 1) White-box attacks, where the attacker
has access to all information of the target model, including
its architecture and parameters; 2) Black-box attacks, where
the attacker can observe the target model’s responses to
inputs; 3) Gray-box attacks, where the attacker knows some
but not all information about the target model, e.g., the
training data that the target model is tuned on, instead
of its architecture and parameters. They showed that three
popular CNN models in EEG-based BCIs, i.e., EEGNet [165],
DeepCNN and ShallowCNN [166], can all be effectively
attacked in all three scenarios.
Recently, Jiang et al. [167] showed that query synthesis
based active learning could help reduce the number of
required training EEG trials in black-box adversarial attacks to the above three CNN classifiers, and Meng et al.
[168] studied white-box target attacks for EEG-Based BCI
regression problems, i.e., by adding a tiny perturbation, they
can change the estimated driver drowsiness level or user
reaction time by at least a fixed amount. Liu et al. [169]
proposes a novel total loss minimization approach to generate universal adversarial perturbations for EEG classifiers.
Their approach resolved two limitations of Zhang and Wu’s
approaches (the attacker needs to know the complete EEG
trial in advance to compute the adversarial perturbation,
and the perturbation needs to be computed specifically for
each input EEG trial), and hence made adversarial attacks
more practical.

6

BCI- BASED H EALTHCARE S YSTEMS

With the enhancement in the affordability and quality of
EEG headsets, EEG-based BCI researches for classifying
and predicting cognitive states have increased dramatically,
such as tracking operators inappropriate states for tasks
and monitoring mental health and productivity [170]. EEG
and other brain signals such as MEG contain substantial
information related to the health and disease conditions
of the human brain, for instance, extracting the slowing
down features of EEG signals could be used to categorise
neurodegenerative diseases [171].

15

One excessive and abnormal brain disorder is epilepsy
that patients suffer from recurring unprovoked seizures,
which is a cause and symptom of abrupt upsurge. Clinically,
EEG signals are one of the leading indicators that could be
monitored and studied for seizure brain electrical activity,
while EEG-based BCI researches contribute to the prediction
of epilepsy. In the medical area, EEG recordings are used for
screening seizures of epilepsy patients with an automated
seizure detection system. The Gated Recurrent Unit RNN
framework developed by [172] showed approximate 98%
accuracy in epileptic seizure detection. Tsiouris et al. [173]
introduced a two-layer LSTM network to assess seizure prediction performance by exploiting a broad scope of features
before classification between EEG channels. The empirical
results showed that the LSTM-based methodology outperforms traditional machine learning and CNN in seizure
prediction performance. A novel method of EEG based automatic seizure detection was proposed by [174] with a multirate filter bank structure and statistic model to optimise
signal attributes for better seizer classification accuracy. For
seizure detection, one of the main confusing elements is
an artefact, which appears on several EEG channels that
could be misinterpreted with wave and spike discharges
similar to the occurrence of seizure. To optimise channel
selection and accuracy for seizure detection with minimal
false alarms, [175] proposed a CNN-LSTM algorithm to
reject artefacts and optimise the frameworks performance
on seizure detection. It is believed that the implementation
of BCI and real-time EEG signal processing are suitable
for the standard clinical application and caring for epilepsy
patients [176].
Parkinsons disease (PD) is a progressive degradation
illness classified by brain motor function, which, as an
abnormal brain disease, is usually diagnosed with EEG signals. Oh et al. [177] proposed an EEG-based deep learning
approach with CNN architecture as a computer-aided diagnosis system for PD detection. The positive performance
result of the proposed model demonstrates its possibility in
clinical usage. A specific class of RNN framework, called
Echo State Networks (ESNs), was proposed by [178] to classify EEG signals collected from random eye movement sleep
(REM) Behavioural Disorder (RBD) patients and healthy
controls subjects, while RBD is a major risk feature for
neurodegenerative diseases such as PD. ESNs possess RNNs
competence of temporal pattern classification and could
expedite training, and the test set performance accuracy of
the proposed ESN by [178] reached 85% as an approve of
effectiveness.
As one of the most mysterious pathology, the cause of
Alzheimers disease (AD) is still deficiently understood, and
intelligent assistive technologies are believed to have the potential in supporting dementia care [10]. BCI with machine
learning and deep learning models is also utilised in novel
researches of classifying and detecting AD, while monitoring disease effect is increasingly significant for clinical
intervention. For supporting the clinical investigation, EEG
signals screening of people who are vulnerable to AD could
be utilised to spot the origination of AD development. With
the potentiality of classification in CNN, a deep learning
model with multiple convolutional-subsampling layers is
proposed in [179] and attained an averaged 80% accuracy

in categorising sets of EEG from two different classifications
of subjects, one is from mild cognitive impairment subjects,
a prodromal version of AD, and the other is from same age
healthy control group. Simpraga et al. [180] used machine
learning with multiple EEG biomarkers to enhance AD
classification performance and demonstrated the effectiveness of their research in improving disease identification
accuracy and supports in clinical trials.
Comparable to using deep learning models with multiple EEG biomarkers for AD classification, machine learning
techniques have also been applied to EEG biomarkers for
diagnosing schizophrenia. Shim et al. [181] used sensor and
source level EEG features to classify schizophrenia patients
and healthy controls. The result of their research indicates
that the proposed tool could be promising in supporting
schizophrenia diagnosis. In [182], a modified deep learning
architecture with a voting layer was proposed for individual schizophrenia classification of EEG streams. The high
classification accuracy result indicates the frameworks feasibility in categorising first-episode schizophrenia patients
and healthy controls.
As non-conventional neurorehabilitation methodology,
BCI has been investigated for assisting and aiding motor
impairment rehabilitation, such as for patients who suffered
and survived the stroke, which is a frequent high disease
and generally declines patients mobility afterwards [183].
Non-invasive BCI, for instance, EEG-based technology, supports volitional transmission of brain signals to aid hand
movement. BCI has great potentials in facilitating motor
impairment rehabilitation via the utilisation of assistive
sensation by rewarding cortical action related to sensorymotor features [184]. Frolov et al. [185] investigated the
effectiveness of rehabilitation for stroke survivors with BCI
training session and the research results of the participated
patients indicates that combining BCI to physical therapy
could enhance the results of post-stroke motor impairment
rehabilitation. Other researchers also found that using BCI
for motor impairment rehabilitation for post-stroke patients
could help them regain body function and improve life
quality [186] [187] [188].
BCIs have also been employed in other healthcare areas
such as investigation of migraine, pain and depressive disorders [189] [190] [191] [192] [193]. Patil et al. [194] proposed
an artificial neural network with supervised classifiers for
EEG classification to detect migraine subjects. They believed
that the positive results confirm that EEG-based neural network classification framework could be used for migraine
detection and as a substitution for migraine diagnosis. Cao
et al. [195] [84] presented a multi-scale relative inherent
fuzzy entropy application for SSVEPs-EEG signals of two
migraine phases, the pre-ictal phase before migraine attacks
and the inter-ictal phase which is the baseline. The study
found that for migraine patients compared with healthy
controls, there are changes in EEG complexity in a repetitive
SSVEP environment. Their study proved that inherent fuzzy
entropy could be used in visual stimulus environments
for migraine studies and has the potential in pre-ictal migraine prediction. EEG signals have also been monitored
and analysed to prove the correlation between cerebral
cortex spectral patterns and chronic pain intensity [196]. BCI
based signal processing approaches could also be used in

16

training for phantom limb pain controls by helping patients
to reorganise sensorimotor cortex with the practice of hand
control [197]. The potential of BCI in healthcare for the
general public could attract more novel researches being
conducted in the near future.
Machine learning and deep learning neural networks
have been productively applied to EEG signals for various
neurological disorders screening, recognition and diagnosing, and the recent researches revealed some important
findings for depression detection with BCI [198] [199]. The
EEG based CAD system with CNN architecture and transfer learning method proposed by [199] indicates that the
spectral information of EEG signals is critical for depression recognition while the temporal information of EEG
could significantly improve accuracy for the framework.
Liao et al. citeliao2017major proved in their research that
the 8 electrodes of EEG devices from the temporal areas
could provide higher accuracies in major depression detection compared with other scalp areas, which could be
efficient implications for future EEG-based BCI system for
depression screening. The CNN approach proposed by [198]
for EEG-Based depression screening experiments on EEG
signals of depressive and normal subjects and obtain an
accuracy rate of 93.5% and 96.0% of left and right hemisphere EEG signals respectively. Their study also confirmed
the findings of a theory that depression is linked to a
hyperactive right hemisphere that could inspire more novel
researches for depression detection and diagnosis.

7

D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSION

In this review, we highlighted the recent studies in the
field of EEG-based by analysing over 150 studies published
between 2015 and 2019 developing signal sensing technologies and applying computational intelligence approaches to
EEG data. Although the advances of the dry sensor, wearable devices, the toolbox for signal enhancement, transfer
learning, deep learning, or interpretable fuzzy models have
lifted the performance of EEG-based BCI systems, the realworld usability challenges remain, such as the prediction
or classification capability and stability in complex BCI
scenarios.
By mapping out the trend of BCI study in the past
five years, we would also like to share the tendency of
future directions of BCI researches. The cost-effectiveness
and availability of EEG devices are attributed to the evolution of dry sensors, which in turn stimulate more research
in developing enhanced sensors. The current tendency of
sensor techniques focuses on augmenting signal quality
with the improvement of sensor materials and emphasising
user experience when collecting signals via BCI devices with
comfortable sensor attachments. Fiedler et al. presented
the basis for improved EEG cap designs of dry multipin
electrodes in their research of polymer-based multichannel
EEG electrodes system [200]. Their study was focused on
the correlation of EEG recording quality with applied force
and resulting contact pressure. Considering the comfort of
wearing an EEG device for subjects, Lin et al. [201] developed a soft, pliable pad for an augmented wire-embedded
silicon-based dry-contact sensors (WSBDSs). Their study

introduced copper wires in the acicular WSBDSs to ensure scalp contact on hair-covered sites and shows good
performance and feasibility for applications. Chen et al.
[47] proposed flexible material-based wearable sensors for
EEG and other bio-signals monitoring for the tendency of
smart personal devices and e-health. A closed-loop (CL)
BCI method that uses biosignal simulation instant resolution
could be beneficial for healthcare therapy [202]. As an example, reinforcement learning (RL) could also support improving training model accuracy in BCI applications [203]. Based
on the illustration of TL and DTL, the benefits of transferring
extracted features and training models among subjects or
tasks are apparent, such as improving training efficiency
and enhancing classification accuracy. Therefore it would
be encouraging to pursue experiments with adaptive EEGbased BCI training. One of the significant challenges for
EEG-based technology is artefacts removal, while despite
the multiple novels approaches discussed in the previous
section, integrating BCI with other technical or physiological
signals, which is hybrid BCI system, would be a future
focus of research for improving classification accuracy and
general outcomes [204] [205]. The scientific community is
also investigating enhanced conjunction of technology and
interface for HCI that is the combination of Augmented
Reality (AR) and EEG-based BCI [206]. Previous researches
have been inducing one popular protocol used in exogenous
BCIs, SSVEPs, with visual stimulus from AR glasses such
as smart glasses used in [207], and capturing the SSVEP
response by measuring EEG signals to perform tasks [208]
[209]. With the accessibility of AR and commercialised noninvasive BCI devices, using AR and EEG devices, augmentation becomes feasible and also effective in outcomes. Finally,
recent research has shown that deep learning (and even
traditional machine learning) models in EEG-based BCIs
are vulnerable to adversarial attacks, and there is an urgent
need to develop strategies to defend such attacks.
In this paper, we systematically survey the recent advances in advances of the dry sensor, wearable devices,
signal enhancement, transfer learning, deep learning, and
interpretable fuzzy models for EEG-based BCIs. The various computational intelligence approaches enable us to
learn reliable brain cortex features and understand human
knowledge from EEG signals. In a word, we summarise the
recent EEG signal sensing and interpretable fuzzy models,
followed by discussing dominant transfer and deep learning for BCI applications. Finally, we overview healthcare
applications and point out the open challenges and future
directions.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Credit authors for icons made from www.flaticon.com.

R EFERENCES
[1]
[2]

J. J. Vidal, “Toward direct brain-computer communication,” Annual review of Biophysics and Bioengineering, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 157–
180, 1973.
C. Guger, W. Harkam, C. Hertnaes, and G. Pfurtscheller, “Prosthetic control by an eeg-based brain-computer interface (bci),” in
Proc. aaate 5th european conference for the advancement of assistive
technology. Citeseer, 1999, pp. 3–6.

17

[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]

[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]

[11]
[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]
[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]
[23]
[24]

J. Wolpaw and E. W. Wolpaw, Brain-computer interfaces: principles
and practice. OUP USA, 2012.
F. Lotte, L. Bougrain, and M. Clerc, “Electroencephalography
(eeg)-based brain–computer interfaces,” Wiley Encyclopedia of
Electrical and Electronics Engineering, pp. 1–20, 1999.
E. E. Fetz, “Real-time control of a robotic arm by neuronal
ensembles,” Nature neuroscience, vol. 2, no. 7, p. 583, 1999.
T. O. Zander and C. Kothe, “Towards passive brain–computer
interfaces: applying brain–computer interface technology to
human–machine systems in general,” Journal of neural engineering,
vol. 8, no. 2, p. 025005, 2011.
S. S. Shankar and R. Rai, “Human factors study on the usage of
bci headset for 3d cad modeling,” Computer-Aided Design, vol. 54,
pp. 51–55, 2014.
B. Kerous, F. Skola, and F. Liarokapis, “Eeg-based bci and video
games: a progress report,” Virtual Reality, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 119–
135, 2018.
R. Rai and A. V. Deshpande, “Fragmentary shape recognition: A
bci study,” Computer-Aided Design, vol. 71, pp. 51–64, 2016.
M. Ienca, J. Fabrice, B. Elger, M. Caon, A. S. Pappagallo, R. W.
Kressig, and T. Wangmo, “Intelligent assistive technology for
alzheimers disease and other dementias: a systematic review,”
Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 1301–1340, 2017.
T. McMahan, I. Parberry, and T. D. Parsons, “Modality specific
assessment of video game players experience using the emotiv,”
Entertainment Computing, vol. 7, pp. 1–6, 2015.
N. A. Badcock, K. A. Preece, B. de Wit, K. Glenn, N. Fieder, J. Thie,
and G. McArthur, “Validation of the emotiv epoc eeg system for
research quality auditory event-related potentials in children,”
PeerJ, vol. 3, p. e907, 2015.
K. Finc, K. Bonna, M. Lewandowska, T. Wolak, J. Nikadon,
J. Dreszer, W. Duch, and S. Kühn, “Transition of the functional
brain network related to increasing cognitive demands,” Human
brain mapping, vol. 38, no. 7, pp. 3659–3674, 2017.
C. Schmidt, D. Piper, B. Pester, A. Mierau, and H. Witte, “Tracking
the reorganization of module structure in time-varying weighted
brain functional connectivity networks,” International journal of
neural systems, vol. 28, no. 04, p. 1750051, 2018.
A. Siswoyo, Z. Arief, and I. A. Sulistijono, “Application of artificial neural networks in modeling direction wheelchairs using
neurosky mindset mobile (eeg) device,” EMITTER International
Journal of Engineering Technology, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 170–191, 2017.
F. D. V. Fallani and D. S. Bassett, “Network neuroscience for optimizing brain-computer interfaces,” Physics of life reviews, 2019.
W. A. Jang, S. M. Lee, and D. H. Lee, “Development bci for
individuals with severely disability using emotiv eeg headset and
robot,” in 2014 International Winter Workshop on Brain-Computer
Interface (BCI). IEEE, 2014, pp. 1–3.
A. Girouard, E. T. Solovey, L. M. Hirshfield, K. Chauncey,
A. Sassaroli, S. Fantini, and R. J. Jacob, “Distinguishing difficulty
levels with non-invasive brain activity measurements,” in IFIP
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction. Springer, 2009, pp.
440–452.
F. Velasco-Álvarez, S. Sancha-Ros, E. Garcı́a-Garaluz,
Á. Fernández-Rodrı́guez, M. T. Medina-Juliá, and R. RonAngevin, “Uma-bci speller: an easily configurable p300 speller
tool for end users,” Computer methods and programs in biomedicine,
vol. 172, pp. 127–138, 2019.
T. Arichi, G. Fagiolo, M. Varela, A. Melendez-Calderon, A. Allievi, N. Merchant, N. Tusor, S. J. Counsell, E. Burdet, C. F.
Beckmann et al., “Development of bold signal hemodynamic
responses in the human brain,” Neuroimage, vol. 63, no. 2, pp.
663–673, 2012.
G. Schalk, D. J. McFarland, T. Hinterberger, N. Birbaumer, and
J. R. Wolpaw, “Bci2000: a general-purpose brain-computer interface (bci) system,” IEEE Transactions on biomedical engineering,
vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 1034–1043, 2004.
R. A. Ramadan and A. V. Vasilakos, “Brain computer interface:
control signals review,” Neurocomputing, vol. 223, pp. 26–44, 2017.
T. O. Zander, J. Brönstrup, R. Lorenz, and L. R. Krol, “Towards
bci-based implicit control in human–computer interaction,” in
Advances in Physiological Computing. Springer, 2014, pp. 67–90.
P. Aricò, G. Borghini, G. Di Flumeri, N. Sciaraffa, and F. Babiloni, “Passive bci beyond the lab: current trends and future
directions,” Physiological measurement, vol. 39, no. 8, p. 08TR02,
2018.

[25]
[26]
[27]
[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]
[33]
[34]

[35]
[36]

[37]

[38]

[39]
[40]
[41]

[42]
[43]

[44]

[45]

X. Zhang, L. Yao, C. Huang, T. Gu, Z. Yang, and Y. Liu, “Deepkey:
An eeg and gait based dual-authentication system,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1706.01606, 2017.
S. Sur and V. Sinha, “Event-related potential: An overview,”
Industrial psychiatry journal, vol. 18, no. 1, p. 70, 2009.
H. Serby, E. Yom-Tov, and G. F. Inbar, “An improved p300-based
brain-computer interface,” IEEE Transactions on neural systems and
rehabilitation engineering, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 89–98, 2005.
S. Lees, N. Dayan, H. Cecotti, P. Mccullagh, L. Maguire, F. Lotte,
and D. Coyle, “A review of rapid serial visual presentation-based
brain–computer interfaces,” Journal of neural engineering, vol. 15,
no. 2, p. 021001, 2018.
M. Nakanishi, Y. Wang, X. Chen, Y.-T. Wang, X. Gao, and T.P. Jung, “Enhancing detection of ssveps for a high-speed brain
speller using task-related component analysis,” IEEE Transactions
on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 104–112, 2017.
Y. Li, A. Vgontzas, I. Kritikou, J. Fernandez-Mendoza, M. Basta,
S. Pejovic, J. Gaines, and E. O. Bixler, “Psychomotor vigilance test
and its association with daytime sleepiness and inflammation in
sleep apnea: clinical implications,” Journal of clinical sleep medicine,
vol. 13, no. 09, pp. 1049–1056, 2017.
F. Lotte, L. Bougrain, A. Cichocki, M. Clerc, M. Congedo,
A. Rakotomamonjy, and F. Yger, “A review of classification
algorithms for eeg-based brain–computer interfaces: a 10 year
update,” Journal of neural engineering, vol. 15, no. 3, p. 031005,
2018.
A. Craik, Y. He, and J. L. Contreras-Vidal, “Deep learning for
electroencephalogram (eeg) classification tasks: a review,” Journal
of neural engineering, vol. 16, no. 3, p. 031001, 2019.
Y. Roy, H. Banville, I. Albuquerque, A. Gramfort, T. H. Falk,
and J. Faubert, “Deep learning-based electroencephalography
analysis: a systematic review,” Journal of neural engineering, 2019.
X. Zhang, L. Yao, X. Wang, J. Monaghan, and D. Mcalpine, “A
survey on deep learning based brain computer interface: Recent
advances and new frontiers,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.04149,
2019.
T. C. Ferree, P. Luu, G. S. Russell, and D. M. Tucker, “Scalp
electrode impedance, infection risk, and eeg data quality,” Clinical
Neurophysiology, vol. 112, no. 3, pp. 536–544, 2001.
T. R. Mullen, C. A. Kothe, Y. M. Chi, A. Ojeda, T. Kerth, S. Makeig,
T.-P. Jung, and G. Cauwenberghs, “Real-time neuroimaging and
cognitive monitoring using wearable dry eeg,” IEEE Transactions
on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 62, no. 11, pp. 2553–2567, 2015.
L.-D. Liao, C.-T. Lin, K. McDowell, A. E. Wickenden, K. Gramann,
T.-P. Jung, L.-W. Ko, and J.-Y. Chang, “Biosensor technologies
for augmented brain–computer interfaces in the next decades,”
Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 100, no. Special Centennial Issue, pp.
1553–1566, 2012.
Siddharth, A. N. Patel, T. Jung, and T. J. Sejnowski, “A wearable multi-modal bio-sensing system towards real-world applications,” IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 66, no. 4,
pp. 1137–1147, April 2019.
Y. M. Chi, T.-P. Jung, and G. Cauwenberghs, “Dry-contact
and noncontact biopotential electrodes: Methodological review,”
IEEE reviews in biomedical engineering, vol. 3, pp. 106–119, 2010.
Y. M. Chi and G. Cauwenberghs, “Wireless non-contact eeg/ecg
electrodes for body sensor networks,” in 2010 International Conference on Body Sensor Networks. IEEE, 2010, pp. 297–301.
K. T. Sweeney, T. E. Ward, and S. F. McLoone, “Artifact removal
in physiological signalspractices and possibilities,” IEEE transactions on information technology in biomedicine, vol. 16, no. 3, pp.
488–500, 2012.
X. Jiang, G.-B. Bian, and Z. Tian, “Removal of artifacts from eeg
signals: a review,” Sensors, vol. 19, no. 5, p. 987, 2019.
L. Dong, Y. Zhang, R. Zhang, X. Zhang, D. Gong, P. A. ValdesSosa, P. Xu, C. Luo, and D. Yao, “Characterizing nonlinear relationships in functional imaging data using eigenspace maximal
information canonical correlation analysis (emicca),” NeuroImage,
vol. 109, pp. 388–401, 2015.
L. Pion-Tonachini, S.-H. Hsu, C.-Y. Chang, T.-P. Jung, and
S. Makeig, “Online automatic artifact rejection using the realtime eeg source-mapping toolbox (rest),” in 2018 40th Annual
International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and
Biology Society (EMBC). IEEE, 2018, pp. 106–109.
C.-Y. Chang, S.-H. Hsu, L. Pion-Tonachini, and T.-P. Jung, “Evaluation of artifact subspace reconstruction for automatic artifact

18

[46]

[47]
[48]

[49]

[50]

[51]

[52]

[53]
[54]
[55]

[56]

[57]
[58]
[59]

[60]

[61]
[62]
[63]

[64]

[65]

components removal in multi-channel eeg recordings,” IEEE
Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, 2019.
T.-W. Lee, M. Girolami, and T. J. Sejnowski, “Independent component analysis using an extended infomax algorithm for mixed
subgaussian and supergaussian sources,” Neural computation,
vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 417–441, 1999.
X. Chen, Q. Chen, Y. Zhang, and Z. J. Wang, “A novel eemd-cca
approach to removing muscle artifacts for pervasive eeg,” IEEE
Sensors Journal, 2018.
A. S. Janani, T. S. Grummett, T. W. Lewis, S. P. Fitzgibbon, E. M.
Whitham, D. DelosAngeles, H. Bakhshayesh, J. O. Willoughby,
and K. J. Pope, “Improved artefact removal from eeg using
canonical correlation analysis and spectral slope,” Journal of neuroscience methods, vol. 298, pp. 1–15, 2018.
X. Chen, H. Peng, F. Yu, and K. Wang, “Independent vector
analysis applied to remove muscle artifacts in eeg data,” IEEE
Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement, vol. 66, no. 7,
pp. 1770–1779, 2017.
T. Mullen, C. Kothe, Y. M. Chi, A. Ojeda, T. Kerth, S. Makeig,
G. Cauwenberghs, and T.-P. Jung, “Real-time modeling and 3d
visualization of source dynamics and connectivity using wearable eeg,” in 2013 35th annual international conference of the IEEE
engineering in medicine and biology society (EMBC). IEEE, 2013,
pp. 2184–2187.
S.-H. Hsu, T. R. Mullen, T.-P. Jung, and G. Cauwenberghs, “Realtime adaptive eeg source separation using online recursive independent component analysis,” IEEE transactions on neural systems
and rehabilitation engineering, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 309–319, 2015.
N. Kasabov, “Evolving fuzzy neural networks for supervised/unsupervised online knowledge-based learning,” IEEE
Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part B (Cybernetics),
vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 902–918, 2001.
S. B. Kotsiantis, I. D. Zaharakis, and P. E. Pintelas, “Machine
learning: a review of classification and combining techniques,”
Artificial Intelligence Review, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 159–190, 2006.
I. Daly, S. J. Nasuto, and K. Warwick, “Brain computer interface
control via functional connectivity dynamics,” Pattern recognition,
vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2123–2136, 2012.
A. M. Azab, J. Toth, L. S. Mihaylova, and M. Arvaneh, “A review
on transfer learning approaches in brain–computer interface,” in
Signal Processing and Machine Learning for Brain-Machine Interfaces.
Institution of Engineering and Technology, 2018, pp. 81–101.
H. A. Abbass, J. Tang, R. Amin, M. Ellejmi, and S. Kirby, “Augmented cognition using real-time eeg-based adaptive strategies
for air traffic control,” in Proceedings of the human factors and ergonomics society annual meeting, vol. 58, no. 1. SAGE Publications
Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA, 2014, pp. 230–234.
S. J. Pan and Q. Yang, “A survey on transfer learning,” IEEE
Transactions on knowledge and data engineering, vol. 22, no. 10, pp.
1345–1359, 2009.
Z. Wang, Y. Song, and C. Zhang, “Transferred dimensionality
reduction,” in Joint European Conference on Machine Learning and
Knowledge Discovery in Databases. Springer, 2008, pp. 550–565.
W. Samek, F. C. Meinecke, and K.-R. Müller, “Transferring subspaces between subjects in brain–computer interfacing,” IEEE
Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 60, no. 8, pp. 2289–
2298, 2013.
P. Wang, J. Lu, B. Zhang, and Z. Tang, “A review on transfer learning for brain-computer interface classification,” in 2015
5th International Conference on Information Science and Technology
(ICIST). IEEE, 2015, pp. 315–322.
H. Shimodaira, “Improving predictive inference under covariate
shift by weighting the log-likelihood function,” Journal of statistical planning and inference, vol. 90, no. 2, pp. 227–244, 2000.
R. Chavarriaga, A. Sobolewski, and J. d. R. Millán, “Errare
machinale est: the use of error-related potentials in brain-machine
interfaces,” Frontiers in neuroscience, vol. 8, p. 208, 2014.
I. Iturrate, L. Montesano, and J. Minguez, “Task-dependent signal variations in eeg error-related potentials for brain–computer
interfaces,” Journal of neural engineering, vol. 10, no. 2, p. 026024,
2013.
X. Chen, Y. Wang, M. Nakanishi, X. Gao, T.-P. Jung, and S. Gao,
“High-speed spelling with a noninvasive brain–computer interface,” Proceedings of the national academy of sciences, vol. 112, no. 44,
pp. E6058–E6067, 2015.
C.-S. Wei, Y.-P. Lin, Y.-T. Wang, C.-T. Lin, and T.-P. Jung, “A
subject-transfer framework for obviating inter-and intra-subject

[66]

[67]
[68]
[69]
[70]

[71]
[72]

[73]

[74]
[75]

[76]

[77]
[78]
[79]
[80]

[81]

[82]
[83]
[84]

[85]

[86]

variability in eeg-based drowsiness detection,” NeuroImage, vol.
174, pp. 407–419, 2018.
K.-J. Chiang, C.-S. Wei, M. Nakanishi, and T.-P. Jung, “Crosssubject transfer learning improves the practicality of real-world
applications of brain-computer interfaces,” in 2019 9th International IEEE/EMBS Conference on Neural Engineering (NER). IEEE,
2019, pp. 424–427.
H. He and D. Wu, “Transfer learning for brain-computer interfaces: A euclidean space data alignment approach,” IEEE
Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, 2019.
——, “Different set domain adaptation for brain-computer
interfaces: A label alignment approach,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1912.01166, 2019.
D. Wu, “Online and offline domain adaptation for reducing bci
calibration effort,” IEEE Transactions on human-machine Systems,
vol. 47, no. 4, pp. 550–563, 2016.
Y. Cui, Y. Xu, and D. Wu, “Eeg-based driver drowsiness estimation using feature weighted episodic training,” IEEE transactions
on neural systems and rehabilitation engineering, vol. 27, no. 11, pp.
2263–2273, 2019.
V. Jayaram, M. Alamgir, Y. Altun, B. Scholkopf, and M. GrosseWentrup, “Transfer learning in brain-computer interfaces,” IEEE
Computational Intelligence Magazine, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 20–31, 2016.
J. S. Garcı́a-Salinas, L. Villaseñor-Pineda, C. A. Reyes-Garcı́a, and
A. A. Torres-Garcı́a, “Transfer learning in imagined speech eegbased bcis,” Biomedical Signal Processing and Control, vol. 50, pp.
151–157, 2019.
D. Wu, V. J. Lawhern, W. D. Hairston, and B. J. Lance, “Switching
eeg headsets made easy: Reducing offline calibration effort using
active weighted adaptation regularization,” IEEE Transactions on
Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, vol. 24, no. 11, pp.
1125–1137, 2016.
L. A. Zadeh, “On fuzzy algorithms,” in fuzzy sets, fuzzy logic, and
fuzzy systems: selected papers By Lotfi A Zadeh. World Scientific,
1996, pp. 127–147.
J.-S. R. Jang, C.-T. Sun, and E. Mizutani, “Neuro-fuzzy and soft
computing-a computational approach to learning and machine
intelligence [book review],” IEEE Transactions on automatic control,
vol. 42, no. 10, pp. 1482–1484, 1997.
L. Fabien, L. Anatole, L. Fabrice, and A. Bruno, “Studying the
use of fuzzy inference systems for motor imagery classification,”
IEEE transactions on neural systems and rehabilitation engineering,
vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 322–324, 2007.
M. Sugeno, “Fuzzy measures and fuzzy integralsa survey,” in
Readings in Fuzzy Sets for Intelligent Systems. Elsevier, 1993, pp.
251–257.
J. J. Buckley and Y. Hayashi, “Fuzzy neural networks: A survey,”
Fuzzy sets and systems, vol. 66, no. 1, pp. 1–13, 1994.
C.-F. Juang and C.-T. Lin, “A recurrent self-organizing neural
fuzzy inference network,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks,
vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 828–845, 1999.
D. Wu, J.-T. King, C.-H. Chuang, C.-T. Lin, and T.-P. Jung, “Spatial
filtering for eeg-based regression problems in brain–computer
interface (bci),” IEEE Transactions on Fuzzy Systems, vol. 26, no. 2,
pp. 771–781, 2017.
D. Wu, B. J. Lance, V. J. Lawhern, S. Gordon, T.-P. Jung, and C.-T.
Lin, “Eeg-based user reaction time estimation using riemannian
geometry features,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, vol. 25, no. 11, pp. 2157–2168, 2017.
Z. Cao and C.-T. Lin, “Inherent fuzzy entropy for the improvement of eeg complexity evaluation,” IEEE Transactions on Fuzzy
Systems, vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 1032–1035, 2017.
Z. Cao, W. Ding, Y.-K. Wang, F. K. Hussain, A. Al-Jumaily, and
C.-T. Lin, “Effects of repetitive ssveps on eeg complexity using
multiscale inherent fuzzy entropy,” Neurocomputing, 2019.
Z. Cao, C.-T. Lin, K.-L. Lai, L.-W. Ko, J.-T. King, K.-K. Liao, J.-L.
Fuh, and S.-J. Wang, “Extraction of ssveps-based inherent fuzzy
entropy using a wearable headband eeg in migraine patients,”
IEEE Transactions on Fuzzy Systems, 2019.
D. Wu, V. J. Lawhern, S. Gordon, B. J. Lance, and C.-T. Lin,
“Driver drowsiness estimation from eeg signals using online
weighted adaptation regularization for regression (owarr),” IEEE
Transactions on Fuzzy Systems, vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 1522–1535, 2016.
Y.-C. Chang, Y.-K. Wang, D. Wu, and C.-T. Lin, “Generating a
fuzzy rule-based brain-state-drift detector by riemann-metricbased clustering,” in 2017 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC). IEEE, 2017, pp. 1220–1225.

19

[87]

[88]

[89]
[90]

[91]

[92]
[93]

[94]

[95]
[96]
[97]
[98]

[99]
[100]

[101]

[102]

[103]

[104]
[105]

[106]
[107]

S.-L. Wu, Y.-T. Liu, T.-Y. Hsieh, Y.-Y. Lin, C.-Y. Chen, C.-H.
Chuang, and C.-T. Lin, “Fuzzy integral with particle swarm optimization for a motor-imagery-based brain–computer interface,”
IEEE Transactions on Fuzzy Systems, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 21–28, 2016.
L.-W. Ko, Y.-C. Lu, H. Bustince, Y.-C. Chang, Y. Chang, J. Ferandez, Y.-K. Wang, J. A. Sanz, G. P. Dimuro, and C.-T. Lin, “Multimodal fuzzy fusion for enhancing the motor-imagery-based brain
computer interface,” IEEE Computational Intelligence Magazine,
vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 96–106, 2019.
Y. Lu, W.-L. Zheng, B. Li, and B.-L. Lu, “Combining eye movements and eeg to enhance emotion recognition,” in Twenty-Fourth
International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2015.
Y.-T. Liu, Y.-Y. Lin, S.-L. Wu, C.-H. Chuang, and C.-T. Lin,
“Brain dynamics in predicting driving fatigue using a recurrent
self-evolving fuzzy neural network,” IEEE transactions on neural
networks and learning systems, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 347–360, 2015.
T.-H. Tsai, L.-J. Kau, and K.-M. Chao, “A takagi-sugeno fuzzy
neural network-based algorithm with single-channel eeg signal
for the discrimination between light and deep sleep stages,” in
2016 IEEE Biomedical Circuits and Systems Conference (BioCAS).
IEEE, 2016, pp. 532–535.
Y. LeCun and M. Ranzato, “Deep learning tutorial,” in Tutorials in
International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML13). Citeseer,
2013, pp. 1–29.
H. Cecotti and A. Graser, “Convolutional neural networks for
p300 detection with application to brain-computer interfaces,”
IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence,
vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 433–445, 2010.
C.-H. Chuang, Z. Cao, J.-T. King, B.-S. Wu, Y.-K. Wang, and C.-T.
Lin, “Brain electrodynamic and hemodynamic signatures against
fatigue during driving,” Frontiers in neuroscience, vol. 12, p. 181,
2018.
Z. Cao, C.-H. Chuang, J.-K. King, and C.-T. Lin, “Multi-channel
eeg recordings during a sustained-attention driving task,” Scientific data, vol. 6, 2019.
H. Zeng, C. Yang, G. Dai, F. Qin, J. Zhang, and W. Kong, “Eeg
classification of driver mental states by deep learning,” Cognitive
neurodynamics, vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 597–606, 2018.
E. J. Cheng, K.-Y. Young, and C.-T. Lin, “Image-based eeg signal
processing for driving fatigue prediction,” in 2018 International
Automatic Control Conference (CACS). IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–5.
Z. Gao, X. Wang, Y. Yang, C. Mu, Q. Cai, W. Dang, and S. Zuo,
“Eeg-based spatio-temporal convolutional neural network for
driver fatigue evaluation,” IEEE transactions on neural networks
and learning systems, 2019.
K. Yue and D. Wang, “Eeg-based 3d visual fatigue evaluation
using cnn,” Electronics, vol. 8, no. 11, p. 1208, 2019.
D. Shon, K. Im, J.-H. Park, D.-S. Lim, B. Jang, and J.-M. Kim,
“Emotional stress state detection using genetic algorithm-based
feature selection on eeg signals,” International journal of environmental research and public health, vol. 15, no. 11, p. 2461, 2018.
H. Jebelli, M. M. Khalili, and S. Lee, “Mobile eeg-based workers
stress recognition by applying deep neural network,” in Advances
in Informatics and Computing in Civil and Construction Engineering.
Springer, 2019, pp. 173–180.
A. Sors, S. Bonnet, S. Mirek, L. Vercueil, and J.-F. Payen, “A
convolutional neural network for sleep stage scoring from raw
single-channel eeg,” Biomedical Signal Processing and Control,
vol. 42, pp. 107–114, 2018.
Z. Mousavi, T. Y. Rezaii, S. Sheykhivand, A. Farzamnia, and
S. Razavi, “Deep convolutional neural network for classification
of sleep stages from single-channel eeg signals,” Journal of neuroscience methods, p. 108312, 2019.
M. M. Rahman, M. I. H. Bhuiyan, and A. R. Hassan, “Sleep stage
classification using single-channel eog,” Computers in biology and
medicine, vol. 102, pp. 211–220, 2018.
H. Phan, F. Andreotti, N. Cooray, O. Y. Chén, and M. De Vos,
“Joint classification and prediction cnn framework for automatic
sleep stage classification,” IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 66, no. 5, pp. 1285–1296, 2018.
Y. R. Tabar and U. Halici, “A novel deep learning approach
for classification of eeg motor imagery signals,” Journal of neural
engineering, vol. 14, no. 1, p. 016003, 2016.
H. Ramoser, J. Muller-Gerking, and G. Pfurtscheller, “Optimal
spatial filtering of single trial eeg during imagined hand movement,” IEEE transactions on rehabilitation engineering, vol. 8, no. 4,
pp. 441–446, 2000.

[108] N. Korhan, Z. Dokur, and T. Olmez, “Motor imagery based eeg
classification by using common spatial patterns and convolutional neural networks,” in 2019 Scientific Meeting on ElectricalElectronics & Biomedical Engineering and Computer Science (EBBT).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–4.
[109] S. Sakhavi, C. Guan, and S. Yan, “Learning temporal information
for brain-computer interface using convolutional neural networks,” IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems,
vol. 29, no. 11, pp. 5619–5629, 2018.
[110] B. E. Olivas-Padilla and M. I. Chacon-Murguia, “Classification
of multiple motor imagery using deep convolutional neural
networks and spatial filters,” Applied Soft Computing, vol. 75, pp.
461–472, 2019.
[111] B. Ko, “A brief review of facial emotion recognition based on
visual information,” sensors, vol. 18, no. 2, p. 401, 2018.
[112] K.-Y. Wang, Y.-L. Ho, Y.-D. Huang, and W.-C. Fang, “Design of
intelligent eeg system for human emotion recognition with convolutional neural network,” in 2019 IEEE International Conference
on Artificial Intelligence Circuits and Systems (AICAS). IEEE, 2019,
pp. 142–145.
[113] Y. Yang, Q. Wu, M. Qiu, Y. Wang, and X. Chen, “Emotion recognition from multi-channel eeg through parallel convolutional
recurrent neural network,” in 2018 International Joint Conference
on Neural Networks (IJCNN). IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–7.
[114] S. Lee, S. Han, and S. C. Jun, “Eeg hyperscanning for eight
or more persons-feasibility study for emotion recognition using
deep learning technique,” in 2018 Asia-Pacific Signal and Information Processing Association Annual Summit and Conference (APSIPA
ASC). IEEE, 2018, pp. 488–492.
[115] E. L. Broek, “Ubiquitous emotion-aware computing,” Personal
and Ubiquitous Computing, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 53–67, 2013.
[116] Y.-P. Lin, C.-H. Wang, T.-P. Jung, T.-L. Wu, S.-K. Jeng, J.-R.
Duann, and J.-H. Chen, “Eeg-based emotion recognition in music
listening,” IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 57,
no. 7, pp. 1798–1806, 2010.
[117] S.-E. Moon, S. Jang, and J.-S. Lee, “Convolutional neural network
approach for eeg-based emotion recognition using brain connectivity and its spatial information,” in 2018 IEEE International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 2556–2560.
[118] S. Koelstra, C. Muhl, M. Soleymani, J.-S. Lee, A. Yazdani,
T. Ebrahimi, T. Pun, A. Nijholt, and I. Patras, “Deap: A database
for emotion analysis; using physiological signals,” IEEE transactions on affective computing, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 18–31, 2011.
[119] T. Song, W. Zheng, P. Song, and Z. Cui, “Eeg emotion recognition
using dynamical graph convolutional neural networks,” IEEE
Transactions on Affective Computing, 2018.
[120] W.-L. Zheng and B.-L. Lu, “Investigating critical frequency bands
and channels for eeg-based emotion recognition with deep neural
networks,” IEEE Transactions on Autonomous Mental Development,
vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 162–175, 2015.
[121] S. Katsigiannis and N. Ramzan, “Dreamer: A database for emotion recognition through eeg and ecg signals from wireless lowcost off-the-shelf devices,” IEEE journal of biomedical and health
informatics, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 98–107, 2017.
[122] K. G. Hartmann, R. T. Schirrmeister, and T. Ball, “Eeg-gan:
Generative adversarial networks for electroencephalograhic (eeg)
brain signals,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.01875, 2018.
[123] S. M. Abdelfattah, G. M. Abdelrahman, and M. Wang, “Augmenting the size of eeg datasets using generative adversarial networks,” in 2018 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks
(IJCNN). IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–6.
[124] S. Panwar, P. Rad, T.-P. Jung, and Y. Huang, “Modeling eeg data
distribution with a wasserstein generative adversarial network to
predict rsvp events,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.04379, 2019.
[125] Y. Luo and B.-L. Lu, “Eeg data augmentation for emotion recognition using a conditional wasserstein gan,” in 2018 40th Annual
International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and
Biology Society (EMBC). IEEE, 2018, pp. 2535–2538.
[126] Y. Luo, L.-Z. Zhu, and B.-L. Lu, “A gan-based data augmentation
method for multimodal emotion recognition,” in International
Symposium on Neural Networks. Springer, 2019, pp. 141–150.
[127] I. A. Corley and Y. Huang, “Deep eeg super-resolution: Upsampling eeg spatial resolution with generative adversarial networks,” in 2018 IEEE EMBS International Conference on Biomedical
& Health Informatics (BHI). IEEE, 2018, pp. 100–103.

20

[128] F. Fahimi, Z. Zhang, W. B. Goh, K. K. Ang, and C. Guan,
“Towards eeg generation using gans for bci applications,” in
2019 IEEE EMBS International Conference on Biomedical & Health
Informatics (BHI). IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–4.
[129] J. Thomas, T. Maszczyk, N. Sinha, T. Kluge, and J. Dauwels,
“Deep learning-based classification for brain-computer interfaces,” in 2017 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and
Cybernetics (SMC). IEEE, 2017, pp. 234–239.
[130] M. Attia, I. Hettiarachchi, M. Hossny, and S. Nahavandi, “A time
domain classification of steady-state visual evoked potentials
using deep recurrent-convolutional neural networks,” in 2018
IEEE 15th International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI
2018). IEEE, 2018, pp. 766–769.
[131] R. G. Hefron, B. J. Borghetti, J. C. Christensen, and C. M. S. Kabban, “Deep long short-term memory structures model temporal
dependencies improving cognitive workload estimation,” Pattern
Recognition Letters, vol. 94, pp. 96–104, 2017.
[132] M.-A. Moinnereau, T. Brienne, S. Brodeur, J. Rouat, K. Whittingstall, and E. Plourde, “Classification of auditory stimuli from
eeg signals with a regulated recurrent neural network reservoir,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.10322, 2018.
[133] C. Spampinato, S. Palazzo, I. Kavasidis, D. Giordano, N. Souly,
and M. Shah, “Deep learning human mind for automated visual
classification,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2017, pp. 6809–6817.
[134] S. Patnaik, L. Moharkar, and A. Chaudhari, “Deep rnn learning
for eeg based functional brain state inference,” in 2017 International Conference on Advances in Computing, Communication and
Control (ICAC3). IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–6.
[135] C. Tan, F. Sun, W. Zhang, J. Chen, and C. Liu, “Multimodal
classification with deep convolutional-recurrent neural networks
for electroencephalography,” in International Conference on Neural
Information Processing. Springer, 2017, pp. 767–776.
[136] J. An and S. Cho, “Hand motion identification of grasp-andlift task from electroencephalography recordings using recurrent
neural networks,” in 2016 International Conference on Big Data and
Smart Computing (BigComp). IEEE, 2016, pp. 427–429.
[137] S. Biswal, J. Kulas, H. Sun, B. Goparaju, M. B. Westover, M. T.
Bianchi, and J. Sun, “Sleepnet: automated sleep staging system
via deep learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.08262, 2017.
[138] T. Zhang, W. Zheng, Z. Cui, Y. Zong, and Y. Li, “Spatial–temporal
recurrent neural network for emotion recognition,” IEEE transactions on cybernetics, vol. 49, no. 3, pp. 839–847, 2018.
[139] A. Supratak, H. Dong, C. Wu, and Y. Guo, “Deepsleepnet: A
model for automatic sleep stage scoring based on raw singlechannel eeg,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, vol. 25, no. 11, pp. 1998–2008, 2017.
[140] M. M. Hasib, T. Nayak, and Y. Huang, “A hierarchical lstm model
with attention for modeling eeg non-stationarity for human decision prediction,” in 2018 IEEE EMBS international conference on
biomedical & health informatics (BHI). IEEE, 2018, pp. 104–107.
[141] H. Dong, A. Supratak, W. Pan, C. Wu, P. M. Matthews, and
Y. Guo, “Mixed neural network approach for temporal sleep
stage classification,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and
Rehabilitation Engineering, vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 324–333, 2017.
[142] C. Tan, F. Sun, T. Kong, W. Zhang, C. Yang, and C. Liu, “A survey
on deep transfer learning,” in International Conference on Artificial
Neural Networks. Springer, 2018, pp. 270–279.
[143] M. Mahmud, M. S. Kaiser, A. Hussain, and S. Vassanelli, “Applications of deep learning and reinforcement learning to biological
data,” IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems,
vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 2063–2079, 2018.
[144] S. A. Prajapati, R. Nagaraj, and S. Mitra, “Classification of
dental diseases using cnn and transfer learning,” in 2017 5th
International Symposium on Computational and Business Intelligence
(ISCBI). IEEE, 2017, pp. 70–74.
[145] G. Wimmer, A. Vécsei, and A. Uhl, “Cnn transfer learning for the
automated diagnosis of celiac disease,” in 2016 Sixth International
Conference on Image Processing Theory, Tools and Applications (IPTA).
IEEE, 2016, pp. 1–6.
[146] A. Khatami, M. Babaie, H. R. Tizhoosh, A. Khosravi, T. Nguyen,
and S. Nahavandi, “A sequential search-space shrinking using
cnn transfer learning and a radon projection pool for medical
image retrieval,” Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 100, pp.
224–233, 2018.
[147] D. Han, Q. Liu, and W. Fan, “A new image classification method

[148]
[149]

[150]

[151]

[152]

[153]

[154]

[155]
[156]

[157]

[158]

[159]
[160]
[161]
[162]
[163]
[164]
[165]

[166]

[167]
[168]

using cnn transfer learning and web data augmentation,” Expert
Systems with Applications, vol. 95, pp. 43–56, 2018.
L. A. Alexandre, “3d object recognition using convolutional neural networks with transfer learning between input channels,” in
Intelligent Autonomous Systems 13. Springer, 2016, pp. 889–898.
S. Sakhavi and C. Guan, “Convolutional neural network-based
transfer learning and knowledge distillation using multi-subject
data in motor imagery bci,” in 2017 8th International IEEE/EMBS
Conference on Neural Engineering (NER). IEEE, 2017, pp. 588–591.
G. Xu, X. Shen, S. Chen, Y. Zong, C. Zhang, H. Yue, M. Liu,
F. Chen, and W. Che, “A deep transfer convolutional neural
network framework for eeg signal classification,” IEEE Access,
vol. 7, pp. 112 767–112 776, 2019.
H. Dose, J. S. Møller, H. K. Iversen, and S. Puthusserypady, “An
end-to-end deep learning approach to mi-eeg signal classification
for bcis,” Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 114, pp. 532–542,
2018.
X. Zhu, P. Li, C. Li, D. Yao, R. Zhang, and P. Xu, “Separated
channel convolutional neural network to realize the training
free motor imagery bci systems,” Biomedical Signal Processing and
Control, vol. 49, pp. 396–403, 2019.
F. Fahimi, Z. Zhang, W. B. Goh, T.-S. Lee, K. K. Ang, and
C. Guan, “Inter-subject transfer learning with end-to-end deep
convolutional neural network for eeg-based bci,” Journal of neural
engineering, 2018.
C. Cooney, F. Raffaella, and D. Coyle, “Optimizing input layers
improves cnn generalization and transfer learning for imagined
speech decoding from eeg,” in IEEE International Conference on
Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 2019: Industry 4.0, 2019.
M.-Y. Liu and O. Tuzel, “Coupled generative adversarial networks,” in Advances in neural information processing systems, 2016,
pp. 469–477.
J.-Y. Zhu, T. Park, P. Isola, and A. A. Efros, “Unpaired image-toimage translation using cycle-consistent adversarial networks,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision,
2017, pp. 2223–2232.
L. Hu, M. Kan, S. Shan, and X. Chen, “Duplex generative
adversarial network for unsupervised domain adaptation,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2018, pp. 1498–1507.
C. Tan, F. Sun, T. Kong, B. Fang, and W. Zhang, “Attention-based
transfer learning for brain-computer interface,” in ICASSP 20192019 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing (ICASSP). IEEE, 2019, pp. 1154–1158.
C. Szegedy, W. Zaremba, I. Sutskever, J. Bruna, D. Erhan, I. Goodfellow, and R. Fergus, “Intriguing properties of neural networks,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6199, 2013.
I. J. Goodfellow, J. Shlens, and C. Szegedy, “Explaining and
harnessing adversarial examples,” stat, vol. 1050, p. 20, 2015.
A. Kurakin, I. Goodfellow, and S. Bengio, “Adversarial examples
in the physical world,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.02533, 2016.
A. Athalye, L. Engstrom, A. Ilyas, and K. Kwok, “Synthesizing
robust adversarial examples,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.07397,
2017.
J. Li, K. Cheng, S. Wang, F. Morstatter, R. P. Trevino, J. Tang, and
H. Liu, “Feature selection: A data perspective,” ACM Computing
Surveys (CSUR), vol. 50, no. 6, p. 94, 2018.
X. Zhang and D. Wu, “On the vulnerability of cnn classifiers in
eeg-based bcis,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 814–825, 2019.
V. J. Lawhern, A. J. Solon, N. R. Waytowich, S. M. Gordon,
C. P. Hung, and B. J. Lance, “Eegnet: a compact convolutional
neural network for eeg-based brain–computer interfaces,” Journal
of neural engineering, vol. 15, no. 5, p. 056013, 2018.
R. T. Schirrmeister, J. T. Springenberg, L. D. J. Fiederer,
M. Glasstetter, K. Eggensperger, M. Tangermann, F. Hutter,
W. Burgard, and T. Ball, “Deep learning with convolutional
neural networks for eeg decoding and visualization,” Human
brain mapping, vol. 38, no. 11, pp. 5391–5420, 2017.
X. Jiang, X. Zhang, and D. Wu, “Active learning for blackbox adversarial attacks in eeg-based brain-computer interfaces,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.04338, 2019.
L. Meng, C.-T. Lin, T.-P. Jung, and D. Wu, “White-box target
attack for eeg-based bci regression problems,” in International
Conference on Neural Information Processing. Springer, 2019, pp.
476–488.

21

[169] Z. Liu, X. Zhang, and D. Wu, “Universal adversarial perturbations for cnn classifiers in eeg-based bcis,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1912.01171, 2019.
[170] P. Bashivan, I. Rish, and S. Heisig, “Mental state recognition via
wearable eeg,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.00985, 2016.
[171] J. R. Brazète, J.-F. Gagnon, R. B. Postuma, J.-A. Bertrand, D. Petit,
and J. Montplaisir, “Electroencephalogram slowing predicts neurodegeneration in rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder,”
Neurobiology of aging, vol. 37, pp. 74–81, 2016.
[172] S. S. Talathi, “Deep recurrent neural networks for seizure detection and early seizure detection systems,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1706.03283, 2017.
[173] K. M. Tsiouris, V. C. Pezoulas, M. Zervakis, S. Konitsiotis, D. D.
Koutsouris, and D. I. Fotiadis, “A long short-term memory deep
learning network for the prediction of epileptic seizures using
eeg signals,” Computers in biology and medicine, vol. 99, pp. 24–37,
2018.
[174] A. Gupta, P. Singh, and M. Karlekar, “A novel signal modeling approach for classification of seizure and seizure-free eeg
signals,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation
Engineering, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 925–935, 2018.
[175] V. Shah, M. Golmohammadi, S. Ziyabari, E. Von Weltin, I. Obeid,
and J. Picone, “Optimizing channel selection for seizure detection,” in 2017 IEEE Signal Processing in Medicine and Biology
Symposium (SPMB). IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–5.
[176] R. Alkawadri, “Brain computer interface (bci) applications in
mapping of epileptic brain networks based on intracranial-eeg,”
Frontiers in Neuroscience, vol. 13, p. 191, 2019.
[177] S. L. Oh, Y. Hagiwara, U. Raghavendra, R. Yuvaraj, N. Arunkumar, M. Murugappan, and U. R. Acharya, “A deep learning
approach for parkinsons disease diagnosis from eeg signals,”
Neural Computing and Applications, pp. 1–7, 2018.
[178] G. Ruffini, D. Ibañez, M. Castellano, S. Dunne, and A. SoriaFrisch, “Eeg-driven rnn classification for prognosis of neurodegeneration in at-risk patients,” in International Conference on Artificial Neural Networks. Springer, 2016, pp. 306–313.
[179] F. C. Morabito, M. Campolo, C. Ieracitano, J. M. Ebadi, L. Bonanno, A. Bramanti, S. Desalvo, N. Mammone, and P. Bramanti,
“Deep convolutional neural networks for classification of mild
cognitive impaired and alzheimer’s disease patients from scalp
eeg recordings,” in 2016 IEEE 2nd International Forum on Research
and Technologies for Society and Industry Leveraging a better tomorrow
(RTSI). IEEE, 2016, pp. 1–6.
[180] S. Simpraga, R. Alvarez-Jimenez, H. D. Mansvelder, J. M.
Van Gerven, G. J. Groeneveld, S.-S. Poil, and K. LinkenkaerHansen, “Eeg machine learning for accurate detection of cholinergic intervention and alzheimers disease,” Scientific reports,
vol. 7, no. 1, p. 5775, 2017.
[181] M. Shim, H.-J. Hwang, D.-W. Kim, S.-H. Lee, and C.-H. Im,
“Machine-learning-based diagnosis of schizophrenia using combined sensor-level and source-level eeg features,” Schizophrenia
research, vol. 176, no. 2-3, pp. 314–319, 2016.
[182] L. Chu, R. Qiu, H. Liu, Z. Ling, T. Zhang, and J. Wang, “Individual recognition in schizophrenia using deep learning methods
with random forest and voting classifiers: Insights from resting
state eeg streams,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.03467, 2017.
[183] S. R. Soekadar, N. Birbaumer, M. W. Slutzky, and L. G. Cohen,
“Brain–machine interfaces in neurorehabilitation of stroke,” Neurobiology of disease, vol. 83, pp. 172–179, 2015.
[184] A. Remsik, B. Young, R. Vermilyea, L. Kiekhoefer, J. Abrams,
S. Evander Elmore, P. Schultz, V. Nair, D. Edwards, J. Williams
et al., “A review of the progression and future implications of
brain-computer interface therapies for restoration of distal upper
extremity motor function after stroke,” Expert review of medical
devices, vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 445–454, 2016.
[185] A. A. Frolov, O. Mokienko, R. Lyukmanov, E. Biryukova, S. Kotov,
L. Turbina, G. Nadareyshvily, and Y. Bushkova, “Post-stroke rehabilitation training with a motor-imagery-based brain-computer
interface (bci)-controlled hand exoskeleton: a randomized controlled multicenter trial,” Frontiers in neuroscience, vol. 11, p. 400,
2017.
[186] E. Clark, A. Czaplewski, S. Dourney, A. Gadelha, K. Nguyen,
P. Pasciucco, M. Rios, R. Stuart, E. Castillo, and M. Korostenskaja,
“Brain-computer interface for motor rehabilitation,” in International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction. Springer, 2019,
pp. 243–254.

[187] M. A. Cervera, S. R. Soekadar, J. Ushiba, J. d. R. Millán, M. Liu,
N. Birbaumer, and G. Garipelli, “Brain-computer interfaces for
post-stroke motor rehabilitation: a meta-analysis,” Annals of clinical and translational neurology, vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 651–663, 2018.
[188] D. C. Irimia, W. Cho, R. Ortner, B. Z. Allison, B. E. Ignat,
G. Edlinger, and C. Guger, “Brain-computer interfaces with
multi-sensory feedback for stroke rehabilitation: a case study,”
Artificial organs, vol. 41, no. 11, pp. E178–E184, 2017.
[189] Z.-H. Cao, L.-W. Ko, K.-L. Lai, S.-B. Huang, S.-J. Wang, and C.-T.
Lin, “Classification of migraine stages based on resting-state eeg
power,” in 2015 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks
(IJCNN). IEEE, 2015, pp. 1–5.
[190] Z. Cao, C.-T. Lin, C.-H. Chuang, K.-L. Lai, A. C. Yang, J.-L. Fuh,
and S.-J. Wang, “Resting-state eeg power and coherence vary
between migraine phases,” The journal of headache and pain, vol. 17,
no. 1, p. 102, 2016.
[191] Z. Cao, K.-L. Lai, C.-T. Lin, C.-H. Chuang, C.-C. Chou, and S.-J.
Wang, “Exploring resting-state eeg complexity before migraine
attacks,” Cephalalgia, vol. 38, no. 7, pp. 1296–1306, 2018.
[192] C.-T. Lin, C.-H. Chuang, Z. Cao, A. K. Singh, C.-S. Hung, Y.-H.
Yu, M. Nascimben, Y.-T. Liu, J.-T. King, T.-P. Su et al., “Forehead
eeg in support of future feasible personal healthcare solutions:
sleep management, headache prevention, and depression treatment,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 10 612–10 621, 2017.
[193] Z. Cao, C.-T. Lin, W. Ding, M.-H. Chen, C.-T. Li, and T.-P.
Su, “Identifying ketamine responses in treatment-resistant depression using a wearable forehead eeg,” IEEE Transactions on
Biomedical Engineering, vol. 66, no. 6, pp. 1668–1679, 2018.
[194] A. U. Patil, A. Dube, R. K. Jain, G. D. Jindal, and D. Madathil,
“Classification and comparative analysis of control and migraine
subjects using eeg signals,” in Information Systems Design and
Intelligent Applications. Springer, 2019, pp. 31–39.
[195] Z. Cao, M. Prasad, and C.-T. Lin, “Estimation of ssvep-based
eeg complexity using inherent fuzzy entropy,” in 2017 IEEE
International Conference on Fuzzy Systems (FUZZ-IEEE). IEEE,
2017, pp. 1–5.
[196] D. Camfferman, G. L. Moseley, K. Gertz, M. W. Pettet, and
M. P. Jensen, “Waking eeg cortical markers of chronic pain and
sleepiness,” Pain Medicine, vol. 18, no. 10, pp. 1921–1931, 2017.
[197] T. Yanagisawa, R. Fukuma, B. Seymour, K. Hosomi, H. Kishima,
T. Shimizu, H. Yokoi, M. Hirata, T. Yoshimine, Y. Kamitani et al.,
“Using a bci prosthetic hand to control phantom limb pain,” in
Brain-Computer Interface Research. Springer, 2019, pp. 43–52.
[198] U. R. Acharya, S. L. Oh, Y. Hagiwara, J. H. Tan, H. Adeli,
and D. P. Subha, “Automated eeg-based screening of depression
using deep convolutional neural network,” Computer methods and
programs in biomedicine, vol. 161, pp. 103–113, 2018.
[199] X. Li, R. La, Y. Wang, J. Niu, S. Zeng, S. Sun, and J. Zhu, “Eegbased mild depression recognition using convolutional neural
network,” Medical & biological engineering & computing, vol. 57,
no. 6, pp. 1341–1352, 2019.
[200] P. Fiedler, R. Mühle, S. Griebel, P. Pedrosa, C. Fonseca, F. Vaz,
F. Zanow, and J. Haueisen, “Contact pressure and flexibility of
multipin dry eeg electrodes,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems
and Rehabilitation Engineering, vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 750–757, 2018.
[201] C.-T. Lin, Y.-H. Yu, J.-T. King, C.-H. Liu, and L.-D. Liao,
“Augmented wire-embedded silicon-based dry-contact sensors
for electroencephalography signal measurements,” IEEE Sensors
Journal, 2019.
[202] B. Houston, M. Thompson, A. Ko, and H. Chizeck, “A machinelearning approach to volitional control of a closed-loop deep
brain stimulation system,” Journal of neural engineering, vol. 16,
no. 1, p. 016004, 2018.
[203] J. Liu, S. Qu, W. Chen, J. Chu, and Y. Sun, “Online adaptive
decoding of motor imagery based on reinforcement learning,” in
2019 14th IEEE Conference on Industrial Electronics and Applications
(ICIEA). IEEE, 2019, pp. 522–527.
[204] G. Müller-Putz, R. Leeb, M. Tangermann, J. Höhne, A. Kübler,
F. Cincotti, D. Mattia, R. Rupp, K.-R. Müller, and J. d. R. Millán,
“Towards noninvasive hybrid brain–computer interfaces: framework, practice, clinical application, and beyond,” Proceedings of
the IEEE, vol. 103, no. 6, pp. 926–943, 2015.
[205] K.-S. Hong and M. J. Khan, “Hybrid brain–computer interface
techniques for improved classification accuracy and increased
number of commands: a review,” Frontiers in neurorobotics, vol. 11,
p. 35, 2017.

22

[206] U. H. Govindarajan, A. J. Trappey, and C. V. Trappey, “Immersive technology for human-centric cyberphysical systems in
complex manufacturing processes: a comprehensive overview of
the global patent profile using collective intelligence,” Complexity,
vol. 2018, 2018.
[207] L. Angrisani, P. Arpaia, N. Moccaldi, and A. Esposito, “Wearable
augmented reality and brain computer interface to improve
human-robot interactions in smart industry: A feasibility study
for ssvep signals,” in 2018 IEEE 4th International Forum on Research
and Technology for Society and Industry (RTSI). IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–5.
[208] R. Zerafa, T. Camilleri, O. Falzon, and K. P. Camilleri, “A realtime ssvep-based brain-computer interface music player application,” in XIV Mediterranean Conference on Medical and Biological
Engineering and Computing 2016. Springer, 2016, pp. 173–178.
[209] J. Faller, B. Z. Allison, C. Brunner, R. Scherer, D. Schmalstieg,
G. Pfurtscheller, and C. Neuper, “A feasibility study on ssvepbased interaction with motivating and immersive virtual and
augmented reality,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.03981, 2017.

