FlyingBuddy2: A Brain-controlled Assistant
for the Handicapped
Yipeng Yu Dan He Weidong Hua Shijian Li Yu Qi Yueming Wang Gang Pan*
Zhejiang University
{yuyipeng, gpan}@zju.edu.cn
based applications emerging in the pervasive computing
community. Andrew et al. designed a NeuroPhone system,
which allows neural signals to drive mobile phone
applications on the iPhone using Emotiv EPOC EEG
headset [5]. Haapalainen et al. use a wireless EEG headset
and other sensor devices to measure the psychophysiological signals for assessing cognitive load [6]. And
EEG signals have already attracted the interest of
researchers in fatigue prediction [7] and game developers
[8].

ABSTRACT

The motor impaired people have much limit in moving. The
devices augmenting their mobility will be much helpful for
improving their living experiences. This poster develops a
brain-controlled assistive system, called FlyingBuddy2, to aid
the handicapped in mobility. It uses the brain EEG signals to
directly control a quadrotor. Signals from an EEG headset are
transmitted wirelessly to a computer, then the decoded brain
signals are converted to trigger the quadrotor to move in 3D
space. Three applications are developed: thinking to play
games, thinking to see, and thinking to take pictures.

In this poster, we develop an EEG controlled quadrotor
named FlyingBuddy2. It is an extension on our previous
work [9], in which we developed an intelligent flying
system named FlyingBuddy. The main difference between
FlyingBuddy2 and FlyingBuddy is that the former is also
suitable for people who have a difficulty in interacting with
outside world through traditional ways (such as voice and
action). With the camera installed in AR.Drone’s bottom
and front, it can augment mobility and perceptibility of the
handicapped.

Author Keywords

Assistive technology, brain-computer interface, quadrotor.
ACM Classification Keywords

K.4.2 [Social Issues]: Assistive technologies for persons
with disabilities.
General Terms

Design, Human Factors.
INTRODUCTION

According to the 2011 WHO’s world report on disability
[1], about 15% of the world's population lives with some
form of disability, of whom 2-4% experience significant
difficulties in functioning. Governments are finally
recognizing that people with disabilities face significant
barriers to recreation, sport, and wellness, and that access to
these opportunities are more critical to people with
disabilities than those without disabilities. For example,
people with physical disability (such as quadriplegic) are
often trapped in a wheelchair. They cannot go anywhere
they want to go by themselves, or play games with the
normal people. It is becoming a very important factor of a
smart environment that how well it can facilitate the
handicapped [2, 3].

SYSTEM OVERVIEW

The system architecture of FlyingBuddy2 is illustrated in
Figure 1. It is composed of three components: signal
processing, control strategy, and AR.Drone control
application. The EEG data acquisition device uses the
Emotiv EPOC EEG headset, which is a commercial product.
It can be effortlessly set up and connected to a computer.
AR.Drone is a quadrotor. It has an ultrasound telemeter for
altitude measures, two cameras separately mounted in the
bottom and front, and many other motion sensors.
Computer
Bluetooth

In recent years, brain-computer interface is becoming a
natural way to augment human capabilities by providing a
direct communication pathway between the brain and an
external device, and is particularly relevant as an aid for
disabled people. The BCI technology can be seen as a
special assistive technology [4]. At the same time,
consumer oriented EEG headsets are becoming
considerably cheaper and easy-to-use. There are many BCI-

Signal
Processing

Control
Strategy

AR.Drone
Control
Application

Figure 1. System Architecture

AR.Drone control application module gets commands from
control strategy module, and sends it to the AR.Drone
through Wi-Fi. Also it constantly receives the video streams
and motion parameters from the sensors. Signals processing
module evaluates real time brainwave activity to discern the
intents of the user. The amplitude of filtered brain signals is
used as feature that reflects ERD/ERS, by means of
quantification of different temporal-spatial patterns, we
could detect three motor imagery brain activities: think left,

*Corresponding author.
UbiComp’12, September 5-8, 2012, Pittsburgh, USA.
Copyright 2012 ACM 978-1-4503-1224-0/12/09...$15.00.

669

think right, and think push. Eye blinking and tooth
clenching can introduce artifacts to EEG signals, which can
also be detected and converted to specific control
commands.

Thinking to Take Pictures

FlyBuddy2 can be used as a mobile camera. The disabled
can mind control AR.Drone to the right place, adjust the
front camera’s position and angle, through the real-time
video on the screen, he could choose which scene he wants.
By continuously blinking four times, he could trigger the
camera to take pictures, and the picture will pop up on the
laptop screen instantly. Thus, FlyingBuddy2 can be used to
photography and play self-timer.

In our control strategies, we use "think left hard" to take
off/land, "think left lightly" (It can be distinguished from
the former by signal strength) to fly clockwise, "think right"
to fly forward, "think push" to fly up, "clench" to fly down,
"neutral (idle)" to hover, "blink" to take pictures.
Sometimes we trigger the "fly clockwise" order when we
think left to land, but this doesn’t matter at all.

CONCLUSION

We develop a system to augment mobility and
perceptibility of the handicapped, and implement three
applications: thinking to play games, thinking to see,
thinking to take pictures. We believe this system will enrich
life of the disabled. The more intelligent the plane is, and
more advanced the BCI technology is, the more we can do.
Maybe one day in the future, the handicapped can use brain
to drive a mini plane in which they were seated, and go
anywhere they want to go.

USER SCENARIOS

The handicapped are often trapped in a wheelchair for their
dysfunction. After someone can smoothly control the
FlyingBuddy2, it could be a good assistant (see figure 2)
and enhance his ability to do the things he could not do
before. When the system is utilized, the following scenarios
can be demonstrated.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work is partly supported by Qianjiang Talent Program
of Zhejiang (2011R10078).
REFERENCES

1. World Health Organization, World report on disability,
http://www.who.int/disabilities/world_report/2011/en/in
dex.html
2. G. Pan, Y. Xu, Z. Wu, et al, TaskShadow: Toward
Seamless Task Migration across Smart Environments,
IEEE Intelligent Systems, 26(3): 50-57, 2011
3. G.Pan, J.Wu, D.Zhang, Z.Wu, GeeAir: a universal
multimodal remote control device for home appliances,
PUC, 14(8), 2010.
4. J.d.R Millán., R. Rupp, G.R. Müller-Putz, et al.,
Combining brain-computer interfaces and assistive
technologies: state-of-the-art and challenges. Frontiers
in Neuroscience, 4, 2010.
5. A. Campbell, T. Choudhury, S. Hu, et al., NeuroPhone:
brain-mobile phone interface using a wireless EEG
headset. The 2nd ACM SIGCOMM Workshop on
Networking, Systems, and Applications on Mobile
Handhelds, 3-8, 2010.
6. E. Haapalainen, S. Kim, J. F. Forlizzi, et al., PsychoPhysiological Measures for Assessing Cognitive Load.
Ubicomp'10, 301-310, 2010.
7. G. Yang, Y. Lin, and P. Bhattacharya, A driver fatigue
recognition model based on information fusion and
dynamic Bayesian network, Information Sciences,
180(10):1942-1954, 2010.
8. F. Lotte and I. B. Sud-ouest, Brain-Computer Interfaces
for 3D Games: Hype or Hope?. Foundations of Digital
Games (FDG'11), 2011.
9. D He, H Ren, W Hua, et al., FlyingBuddy: Augment
Human Mobility and Perceptibility. Ubicomp 2011,
Video Session, 2011

Figure 2. FlyingBuddy2 and the Handicapped
Thinking to Play Games

Games can bring happiness. In this video, we design a
boxing game, in which the handicapped could play with the
normal people. One boxer is the FlyingBuddy2, and the
other boxer is the AR.Drone which is driven by handheld
devices. The loser is the one who first falls to the ground or
flies out of the box ring. The handicapped can use "fly up",
"fly down" and "fly forward" to escape the enemy's attack,
use "fly down" to pressure on the enemy, and "fly forward"
to push the enemy out of the edge of boxing ring. It is very
funny and full of challenging. Other games, such as race
and VR games, can also be designed for FlyingBuddy2.
Thinking to See

People with physical disabilities often must rely upon
assistive devices such as wheelchairs, crutches, canes, and
artificial limbs to obtain mobility, and cannot gain access to
inaccessible building or scenery. FlyingBuddy2 can be used
as a telescope, real-time video stream from both cameras
will be sent to the laptop screen which is in front of the
handicapped via Wi-Fi.

670

