Session: Brain Computer Interfaces

CHI 2014, One of a CHInd, Toronto, ON, Canada

Error Related Negativity in Observing Interactive Tasks
Chi Thanh Vi, Izdihar Jamil, David Coyle, Sriram Subramanian
Department of Computer Science, University of Bristol, UK.
{Chi.Vi; David.Coyle; Sriram.Subramanian}@bristol.ac.uk
ABSTRACT

Error Related Negativity (ERN) is another form of ERP
that can be triggered in the brain when a user is aware of
the obvious error(s) or confused about the last decision
made in a time-critical task or the application behaves
differently from their expectation [4, 8]. For example,
ERN would be produced when pressing the LEFT key
while intending to press the RIGHT key in a time critical
multiple choice task. Previous studies have shown that
ERN signals usually appear and peak within 150ms of the
committed action [9]. Often ERN is detected offline using
an averaging of EEG signals around the event onset from
multiple trials (e.g. [4, 18]). However, recent studies
demonstrate that ERN can be detected online and on a
single-trial with expensive, clinical headsets (e.g. [5, 8])
and commodity headset (e.g. [23]). This opens ERN’s use
in interactive applications where the system can provide
assistance once it can detect that the user is aware of their
accidental action (i.e. in gaming or spatial navigation).

Error Related Negativity is triggered when a user either
makes a mistake or the application behaves differently
from their expectation. It can also appear while observing
another user making a mistake. This paper investigates
ERN in collaborative settings where observing another
user (the executer) perform a task is typical and then
explores its applicability to HCI. We first show that ERN
can be detected on signals captured by commodity EEG
headsets like an Emotiv headset when observing another
person perform a typical multiple-choice reaction time
task. We then investigate the anticipation effects by
detecting ERN in the time interval when an executer is
reaching towards an answer. We show that we can detect
this signal with both a clinical EEG device and with an
Emotiv headset. Our results show that online single trial
detection is possible using both headsets during tasks that
are typical of collaborative interactive applications.
However there is a trade-off between the detection speed
and the quality/prices of the headsets. Based on the
results, we discuss and present several HCI scenarios for
use of ERN in observing tasks and collaborative settings.

To date most examples of ERN have focused on detecting
the signal by recording signals from the executer of the
task. Recent endeavors [6, 19, 22] suggest that ERN
signals even appear while observing another user making
errors. These studies confirm the existence of negative
potential within 250ms after the event onset and analysis
of the signals' origin confirm that they are ERNs. This is
useful in scenarios where the executer is not aware of
their error but that error is spotted by an observer or
supervisor. In current studies, the observer did not have
much opportunity to anticipate the executer’s actions and
often relied on the answer displayed. In HCI scenarios,
the executer’s actions may become visible to the observer
even before the action is committed. For example, in
collaborative tabletops, an observer has awareness of an
executer’s actions through their reaching gesture [21].

Author Keywords

EEG; BCI; Error Related Negativity; ERN, Tabletop
ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.2 [Information interfaces and presentation]: User
Interfaces - Graphical user interfaces;
INTRODUCTION

Off-the-shelf Electroencephalogram (EEG) headsets are
becoming widely available at affordable prices and
improving signal quality enabling a growing number of
interactive applications for competitive gaming [13] or
task classification [16]. Typically, EEG studies focus on
Event Related Potential (ERP) which is the time- and
phase-locked brain response following an event. A
popular example is P300, a positive signal that is elicited
about 300ms after the process of decision making. It has
been widely used to recognize an intended selection of a
speller [15] or an object on a multi-touch surface [27].

We investigate the effect of anticipation in an observing
task where the outcome of an action is revealed before
that action is committed which has not been investigated
with ERN in an observing task before. This can have
many applications in pair-programming, collaborative
tabletops and emergency response applications. We first
investigate these anticipation effects with an expensive
clinical EEG system to demonstrate that the signal is
present and can be detected. Following this we investigate
if an Emotiv headset has the similar detection capability.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for
components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
CHI 2014, April 26–May 1, 2014, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
Copyright © 2014 ACM 978-1-4503-2473-1/14/04..$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557015

We start by repeating an experiment from van Schie et al.
[22] with an Emotiv headset to demonstrate that Observer
ERN can be detected in a single trial and online basis,
with the accuracy up to 64%, using a commodity headset.

3787

Session: Brain Computer Interfaces

CHI 2014, One of a CHInd, Toronto, ON, Canada
Error Related Negativity (ERN) in Observing Task

After that, we investigated the anticipation effect in
observing tasks when one person observes another person
committing errors. Our results show that there are ERNlike patterns detected in the observer’s EEG about 368ms
after the initial movements happened and 55ms before the
errors are committed. Following this result, we then show
that the Emotiv headset can capture these patterns in the
same experiment settings. Finally, we discuss the
implications of our results on interactive applications.

Recent endeavors [1, 6, 19, 22] suggest that ERN signals
even appear while observing another user making errors.
For example, Miltner et al. [19] reported the generation of
an ERN potential when participants observed errors
committed in a choice reaction time (RT) task. Moreover,
van Schie et al. [22] reported an ERN pattern elicited in
an observer when observing another person performing a
modified Eriksen flanker task [7]. Other researches have
confirmed these results by showing observed ERN
following observations of other’s errors [1, 19]. These
results suggested that similar neural processes trigger the
detection of a person’s own error as well as the detection
of others. Interestingly, de Bruijn et al. [6] aimed to
disentangle the dependency of ERN on error or reward.
Their results show that the performance monitoring as
reflected by the ERN is error-specific and not directly
dependent on reward. As a result, our study focuses on the
error awareness of the observers.

The contributions of this paper are: (a) we demonstrate
that off-the-shelf EEG devices like an Emotiv EEG
headset can capture ERN in an observing task from
channels in the frontal-central part of the brain; (b) we
investigate the anticipation effects in collaborative
settings demonstrated by the ERN detected in an
observer’s EEG signals before the action is committed;
(c) through a final experiment we show that these
anticipation effects can still be demonstrated using offthe-shelf EEG devices such as the Emotiv EEG headset.

To date, all studies of ERN in observation tasks only look
at situations where the outcome of the action becomes
visible around the moment where the action is committed
(e.g. in [22]). Furthermore, these studies focus on
detecting the ERN pattern using averaging methods for
the purpose of confirming the pattern’s existence. We are
not aware of studies that investigate the context where the
observer can anticipate the executer’s actions through
their gestures towards the target.

RELATED WORK
EEG and Passive Brain Computer Interface

In the field of physiological computing, EEG is widely
chosen because of its high temporal resolution, ease of
use and the reasonably low cost. EEG-based BCI system
for healthy users has been gaining interest because of its
reliability and usability; opening them for creating new
types of applications [29]. Because of this, passive BCI
(beside active BCI and reactive BCI) was proposed as one
type of new BCI systems [28, 29]. It can be defined as a
BCI system that processes neural activity arising from
users’ involuntary control. An example of this is ERN, an
error-potential used to correct a user’s erroneous action.

In these contexts, anticipation effects can cause the
observer to trigger an ERN before the moment when the
executer finishes the action. Successfully detecting this
pattern can be useful in many HCI applications such as
collaborative tabletops, pair-programming and emergency
response scenarios.

Error Related Negativity (ERN)

ERN is a form of an ERP triggered in the brain when a
person makes a mistake or the application behaves
differently from their expectation [4]. This pattern is
produced in a person’s brain when they are aware of the
obvious error(s) that they have made; either through
system feedback or individual realization [8]. ERN peaks
within 150ms after the action onset and has amplitude
varied in accordance with the awareness of the mistake.
Interestingly, ERN also appears when the user is confused
about their last decision [4]. This pattern has been
discovered by researchers using both expensive devices
[4, 8] and commodity devices (such as Emotiv) [23]. ERN
is useful in interactive applications when it is detected
immediately following the triggered moment. To this end,
researchers have looked at detecting this pattern in realtime, and on a single trial basis with accuracy up to 80%
[3, 8, 20]. Vi and Subramanian [23] showed that this
detection can be done using a low-cost and off-the-shelf
headset like Emotiv with around 65% accuracy. This
makes ERN more accessible to game developers and
other consumer application designers.

EXPERIMENT 1: ERIKSEN FLANKER TASK ON PC

The purpose of this experiment is twofold: first to
validate, based on the study in [22] and [6] that we can
detect the ERN signal on an observer using off the shelf
brain sensing technology; second to verify that the ERN
pattern can be detected using the classifier presented in
[23] using an off the shelf headset.
Task and Procedure

Each participant performed the experiment paired with an
actor. We used an actor in all of our experiments to
trigger the ERN signal on the participant. Only the
participants wore an Emotiv EEG headset which has the
ability to capture EEG signals of 14 channels in the 10-20
international system. Participants were told about the
experimental goals to explain why they had to wear the
EEG headset and not the actor. Participants were not
aware of the actor's role and were led to believe that the
actor is another participant. As the window of recognizing
the ERN signal is very small, the role of the actor is to
perform certain actions that will maximize the ERN
detection from the observer during the task period.

3788

Session: Brain Computer Interfaces

CHI 2014, One of a CHInd, Toronto, ON, Canada
were exactly like the pressed button. We did not collect
EEG signals or any data during practice block.

The experimental procedure is similar to the task carried
out in [4] and [7]. To mimic the experimental conditions
for a typical Flanker task experiment and reduce noise in
data collection (such as in [4]), both the actor and
observer were seated side by side in front of a screen in a
dimly lit room. Participants were told to sit comfortably
and minimize body, facial, and eye movement as well as
to blink as infrequently as possible during the task.

Experimental Trial: After finishing the practice block,
the participant and the actor switched places. The actor
now had to press the directional keys and the participant
(the observer) rated the actor's last performance.
However, the actor hid her hands under a box to prevent
the observer from seeing which button was physically
pressed (see Figure 1). The observer was instructed to
focus on the screen to judge the correctness of the actor's
answers. As in [1, 19] participants were instructed to
silently count the number of incorrect selection. However,
the result displayed on the screen was independent of the
button press: 40% of the time the computer displayed a
wrong answer (the 'pressed button' is opposite of the
middle arrow of the stimulus). This allowed us precise
control of the experiment settings.

Figure 1. Observation of Flanker Task with the
executer (left) and the observer (right)

The actor performed 4 blocks of 50 trials each with 3
minutes break after each block. We collected 200 trials
from each participants of the experiment. We recruited 6
university students, aged between 21 and 29 years old to
give us a total of 1200 trials for this experiment.

Trial: Each trial began with a black screen for 3s,
followed by a fixation dot in the center of the screen for
200ms. After that, the screen remains clear for 200ms
before one of four stimuli was displayed for 300ms. There
were two types of arrows, each type had two stimuli:
congruent stimuli (<<<<< and >>>>>) and incongruent
stimuli (<<><< and >><>>). All four stimuli were used in
our trials in random order. At a viewing distance of about
100cm, the visual angle of the arrow stimuli was 0.4°
vertically and 0.6° horizontally, and between them was
0.3° space. The executer was asked to press the direction
key as soon as they saw the stimulus to indicate the
direction of the middle arrow. The input device used for
this key press was a remote control (Genius Media
Pointer). The pressed key (< or >) was displayed for 1s
afterward. Note that the executer can be either the
participant or the actor depending on the trial condition,
as explained below.

Data Collection and Analysis

The EEG signals were captured from the Emotiv headset.
Although Emotiv is an off-the-shelf headset, its ability of
capturing EEG signals were validated by previous studies
such as in [23, 24]. EEG signals were divided into 2s
length epochs; 1s before and 1s after the key press
moment. With the sampling frequency at 128Hz the
length of each epoch is 256 samples. The first 200ms
(about 25 samples) of each epoch were used to remove
DC offset following which all epochs were filtered in 38Hz to remove components that are not in the ERN
frequency bands of that particular epoch. Our chosen
band ([3 – 8Hz]) was narrower compared to [22] ([110Hz]) but still keeps valuable information about ERN
that is at least in part in the θ-freq band (4-7Hz) [17].

The observer was then asked to rate the correctness of
their last action by choosing one of three options: 1. Sure
correct, 2. Do Not Know, and 3. Sure Incorrect. This was
input through a mini keypad.

We then employed the classifying method described in [3]
and validated in [20, 23] to analyze the data. It can be
summarized as follow. For each channel, we used the
holdout method where half of the trials (100 trials) were
used for training via a logistic regression technique and
other half were used for testing. We performed a t-test on
the classifier output for each channel per user to check if
there was a significant difference between two types of
output (correct and incorrect epochs). Here, there were
two categories to classify: correct or incorrect. Epochs
were divided as correct and incorrect trials based on the
participants ratings. “Do not know” rated epochs were
removed from the analysis (~5% of 1200 trials in total).

Practice trials: Participants were asked to perform a
version of the Flanker task where they had to press one of
two keys to specify the direction of a central arrow that
was bounded by flanker arrows. This was done to make
the participant familiar with the task that will be
performed by the actor giving them an idea of what to
expect as quick as possible when the stimuli appears.
Each participant performed a practice block of 40 trials
where they had to press the direction key and rate the
correctness of their action in each trial. During this time,
the actor sat beside the participant and played a dormant
role. In these trials, the directional arrows, which
appeared on the screen after participants pressed a button,

The classifier performed the classification on a single trial
basis. The result then was compared with the ground truth
of each trial. This holdout method has advantages of large
training and testing datasets, and fast processing time. It

3789

Session: Brain Computer Interfaces

CHI 2014, One of a CHInd, Toronto, ON, Canada
Discussion

also mimicked an online working version where a
coefficient matrix is extracted for each user through
performing a training block (the first consecutive half
number of trials), this is used for detecting ERN pattern
online (the second consecutive half). To minimize the
bias of this method, no samples of the first half was used
in the second half. Also in the training set, the number of
correct trial was randomly picked so that it equals the
number of the incorrect trials. This classification model
was trained blindly (with no estimation of the expected
accuracy) and test it on an unseen, fixed test set. As this
approach was not repeated for a set of parameters, it
should not cause any over-fitting effect.

This study demonstrates that Emotiv EEG headset is
capable of capturing EEG signals with sufficient quality
for a classifier to be able to detect ERN pattern with an
accuracy of about 65%. The characteristic of detected
ERN patterns is similar to previous studies using more
expensive devices [22]. Our results further demonstrate
that the classifier described in [3] and validated in [20,
23] can be used to detect ERN in observer tasks. This
means an interactive application can have a similar
classifier detecting both observer and executer ERNs with
minimal modification to the software.

Result

Using the above method, our results reveal significant
differences in classification rates (for correct and
incorrect epochs) for FC5, F7, and F3 channels. The
classification rate for the rest of the channels was not
significantly better than chance.
1
1
correct incorrect
0.75
0.75
0.5

0.5

0.25

0.25

0

0
F3
F7
FC5
F3 F7 FC5
Figure 2. Mean classifier accuracy (left) and AUC
(right) for different channels with error bars.

Figure 3. Average EEG signals at channel F3 (top) and
F7 (bottom).

Figure 2 shows the average accuracy of three sensing
channels. These three channels correspond to the frontal
lobe which is in line with the literature about the origin of
ERN (the Anterior Cingulate Cortex - ACC) [26]. Figure
3 illustrates the average EEG signals at F3 and F7 over all
epochs belonging to two cases: correct and incorrect.
Here, the averaged EEG signals for correct and incorrect
over all trials and all participants are displayed in blue and
red, respectively. For the incorrect trials (the red curve),
we can see an ERN-like pattern (a negative peak followed
by a positive peak) at around 250ms after the actor’s
committed action (the black vertical line). Note that as a
convention, ERPs are usually plotted upside down.

Figure 4. ROC curves for channels F3 and F7
One example of interactive tasks that can benefit from our
results is in pair programming where two programmers
work together as partner, on the same machine, to
complete a programming work with their roles switched
frequently [25]. One programmer is the driver, who
performs all “on computer” tasks. The other is the
observer or navigator who reviews each line of code and
points out the errors as it is being written. Usually this
error correction process requires the observer to interrupt
the programming process, point out the location of the
errors in his opinion either using his hand or using the
mouse/keyboard that the driver is controlling.

We did a Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC)
Analysis to investigate the efficiency of the classifier by
evaluating its discriminating power. ROC analysis uses
two distinct inputs: hit rate (or true positive rate) and false
alarm rate (or false positive rate) as two separate
performance measures. Figure 4 shows ROC curves for
F3 and F7 channels. The further the curve is from the
diagonal line, the more effective the classifier. The area
under the curve (AUC) gives an indication of the
performance of the classifier. An AUC of 1 indicates a
perfect classifier and 0.5 indicates a random chance of
classification. Our classifier achieves an averaged value
of 0.66 over these three channels (F3, F7, and FC5). Their
AUC are shown in Figure 2 (right).

However, our experiment results suggest that monitoring
the appearance of ERN in the observer’s EEG can speed
up this error correction process. Each action of the driver
is considered a trial of a multiple choice RT task. If the

3790

Session: Brain Computer Interfaces

CHI 2014, One of a CHInd, Toronto, ON, Canada

ERN is detected in the observer’s brain, it can be used to
pinpoint the whereabouts of the error (e.g. highlighting
the code section) which is 250ms after the action’s
committed moment. The system can also provide suitable
suggestions based on the context of the location where the
error was triggered. This can happen either with or
without the error awareness of the executer.

In the close layout the actor’s buttons (size 100x100
pixels each) were placed right under their hands and next
to each other. The participant would struggle to see the
actors hand movement limiting their ability to anticipate
the outcome before the actor commits to the action. Any
ERN elicited in the participant (observer) in this condition
would be because of the committed action of the actor.

In addition, we believe the detection accuracy can be
enhanced by improving the visibility and awareness of the
performer’s actions through better visualization. This will
elicit higher amplitude of ERN which can improve the
classification rate. More detailed implications of this
study to HCI are discussed at the end of this paper.

In the far layout the two confirmation buttons were placed
close to the left and right edges of the table (200 pixel
gaps to left and right edges with 524 pixels distance
between them; 80 pixels gap from two buttons’ centers to
the edge of the actor’s table side). The actor was asked to
keep his hands touching two touch sensors placed on his
side of the table (see the table’s top edge in Figure 5,
right). In order to select a response the actor had to lift
one hand from the rest position and move towards the
button. This action took approximately 400ms giving the
participant sufficient time to anticipate the actor’s actions.
The actor’s other hand was left in the rest position
touching the sensor during this action.

OBERSEVER ERN IN A TABLETOP TASK

In the first study the participant did not have any
opportunity to see the actions of the actor and often relied
on the answer displayed. In collaborative HCI scenarios
like around a tabletop, a participant can usually anticipate
the executer’s actions through their gestures which reveal
the outcome of an action before that action is committed.

Task and Procedure

The awareness caused by anticipation gives the observer
more time to form an opinion on the action. This could
potentially reduce the time-critical aspect of the ERN
leading to a low signal quality. Alternatively, the observer
may reach an opinion of the executer’s action as soon as
they see the initial cues. In this case, we may detect a
good quality ERN in the observer well before the executer
has even completed the action.

Each participant wore the EEG cap of the BE-MRI
System from EbNeuro. In this experiment, 19 electrodes
were used (Fp1, Fp2, F7, F3, Fz, F4, F8, T3, C3, Cz, C4,
T4, T5, P3, Pz, P4, T6, O1, O2). This system has higher
sampling frequency, larger coverage, and has access to Cz
channel compare to Emotiv EEG headset. Participants
observed and gave feedback about the correctness of the
actor’s performance in an Eriksen flanker task.

We are not aware of any experimental investigation of the
effect of anticipation in an observing task where the
outcome of an action is revealed before that action is
committed. Therefore we extended the duration between
start and committed moments of the actor’s action to
investigate this effect. We also aimed to determine the
moment when the observer elicits an ERN. Successfully
detecting this opens a rich design space of interest to HCI
such as collaborative tabletops and pair-programming.

Each trial began with a black screen for 3s, followed by a
fixation dot in the center of the screen for 200ms. After
that, the screen remains clear for 200ms before one of
four stimuli was displayed at the center of the table for
300ms. All four stimuli were used in a random order.
In both close and far layouts (Figure 5 left and right), the
actor then touched one of two buttons to indicate the
direction of the middle arrow. In close layout there is no
noticeable hand movement whereas in the far layout the
actor has to reach the button to make a selection.

Experiment Setup

Each experimental session involved two users – an
executer and an observer seated around a rear-projected
FTIR interactive table of height 76cm. The executer was
an actor trained to do this study while the observer was
our experiment participant. The executer and observer sat
opposite to each other so that they were aware of each
other’s movements and actions (similar to the setup in
[22]). The projection area of the table was 72cm x 48cm
(resolution 1024x768 pixels) and touch detection was
done through a Point-Grey Dragonfly 2 camera.

After the answer button was selected, it was highlighted
in red for 1s before turning back to the initial color. This
is to re-enforce to the observer the actor’s selection. The
participant was then asked to rate the correctness of their
last action by choosing one of three options: 1. Sure
correct, 2. Do Not Know, and 3. Sure Incorrect. During
the experiment, the observers were asked to minimize
their body and facial movements as well as blink as
infrequent as possible. They were also instructed to guess
the outcome of each answer as quick as possible although
they could input that answer at their own pace. As in [1,
19] participants were instructed to silently count the
number of incorrect selection. Since it was not possible to
control the ratio of correct and incorrect trials to the
extent done in Experiment 1, the actor was asked to keep

All participants performed the task with the same actor
(the person at the top in Figure 5). However, participants
were led to believe that the actor is just another
participant like themselves. In order to study the effect of
anticipation, we had two experimental conditions – a
close layout and far layout.

3791

Session: Brain Computer Interfaces

CHI 2014, One of a CHInd, Toronto, ON, Canada

the incorrect selection rate to between 25 and 30%. The
actor received practice to minimize difference in action
between correct and incorrect gestures.

and electrode impedance was below 5 KΩ. EEG signals
were then down sampled to 1 KHz before being divided
into 2s epochs around the touching moment, which is also
the moment that the results were displayed or the touched
button was highlighted in red. It is also assumed to be the
moment when participants became aware that the actor
had or had not made a mistake. Epochs were averaged,
filtered, and divided into groups as in prior experiment.

Each participant performed 2 blocks of 80 trials each per
layout. The order of presentation of the blocks was
controlled using a Latin square to reduce order effects.
Participants received 3mins break between blocks and the
whole experiment took about 90mins per participants
including about 40mins of setup time.

Result

We collected 3200 trials, 1600 each for close and far
layout. The number of incorrect trials was 27% in the
close layout and 30% in the far layout. 7 trials in the close
layout and 30 in the far layout were rated as “Do Not
Know” by the participant.
Close Layout Analysis: Figure 6 shows the averaged
signals in Cz channel in the close layout. It can be seen
that there is a difference, however small, between
incorrect trials (red curve) and correct trials (blue curve).
Latency of the highest peak after the touch button was
pressed was 140ms. However, the topographic
distribution (Figure 7) shows a clear difference between
correct and incorrect trials around the time of the peak. It
can be seen that there is a high density of negative EEG at
the central and frontal area around the latency of the
highest peak after the key press onset (Figure 7, middle).

Figure 5. Tabletop Flanker task a) close, b) far layout.
Ten participants (7 males) between the age of 19 and 31
volunteered for the study. All were from the local
university and did not participate in the earlier
experiment. All participants had normal or correct-tonormal vision, and none of them were color blind. Also
no participant had undergone brain surgery or had any
known neurological disorders. Participants wore EEG cap
during the experiment. Participants received a financial
compensation for their participation in the study.

Figure 8. Averaged signals of the ‘far’ layout at Cz

Figure 6. Averaged signals of the ‘close’ layout at Cz

Figure 9. Topographic distribution of correct trials
(top) and incorrect trials (bottom) in the ‘far’ layout at
the intervals: 50ms before key press (left), key press
(middle), and 50ms after key press (right).
Far Layout Analysis: In the far layout, the differences can
be seen clearer with the averaged EEG signals in Figure
8. The left vertical line depicts the averaged moment that
the actor lifted up his hand and started to reach to the
answer button. The right vertical line depicts the moment
that the actor pressed the answer button. It took the actor
averagely 428ms (correct trials) and 423ms (incorrect
trials) to touch the answer. There was no significant
difference found between these two durations (p > 0.05).

Figure 7. Topographic distribution of correct trials
(top) and incorrect trials (bottom) in the ‘close’ layout
at the intervals: key press (left), 100ms after (middle),
and 200ms after (right).
Data Collection and Analysis

EEG signals were collected using the BE-MRI System
from EbNeuro. The sampling frequency was set at 4 KHz

3792

Session: Brain Computer Interfaces

CHI 2014, One of a CHInd, Toronto, ON, Canada

The signals peak at 55ms before the answer buttons were
touched. The topographic distribution (Figure 9) shows a
clear difference (in the density of negative EEG at the
frontal and central area) between correct and incorrect
trials at the time of the peak (~ 50ms before button touch,
left figures) and at the time of the touch (middle figures).

require the observer to move freely within the
experimental environment. This further limits the
possibility of both the observer and the executer wearing
the cap in a realistic environment. The following
experiment aims to address this drawback.
0.8
0.8

Using the same classifying method described in the
previous experiment, we found that several channels in
the frontal-central area of the brain yield successful
classification. More details are in depicted in Figure 10.
The highest classification rates are from channel Cz for
both close layout (correct/incorrect = 70.43%/68.71%)
and far layout (correct/incorrect = 73.02%/72.40%).

0.6
0.4
0.2
0

0.4
0
Fp1
F7
F3
F4
C3
Cz

Fp1
Fp2
F3
Fz
C3
Cz
C4

0.2

Figure 11. AUC for close (left) and far layouts (right)
with error bars

We also calculated the AUC for the above channels. Their
values are plotted in Figure 11. Overall, the classifier
achieved averaged AUC values of 0.6733 for the close
layout and 0.6602 for the far layout.
1
1
correct incorrect
correct incorrect 0.8
0.8
0.6
0.6
0.4
0.4
0.2
0.2
0
0

TABLETOP OBSERVER ERN WITH EMOTIV

The purpose of this experiment is to see if the Emotiv
EEG headset can be used to detect the same pattern as in
experiment 2. This would then open up the use of
observer ERN to a wide range of interactive applications
by detecting and predicting errors in observers’ mind.
Task and Procedure

The experimental setup, task and procedure were identical
to the previous experiment. We recruited 11 participants
(8 males), aged between 20 and 31 years old. None of
them took part in previous studies. The experiment took
about 60mins per participant. This shorter experiment
time, compared to the previous experiment, was due to
the shorter setup time needed for Emotiv headset.

Fp1
F7
F3
F4
C3
Cz

Fp1
Fp2
F3
Fz
C3
Cz
C4

0.6

Figure 10. Classification rates of close layout (left) and
far layout (right) with error bars
Discussion

The result of this experiment demonstrates that ERN can
be detected in an observer in both hand layouts. It also
shows that there is an anticipation effect where the ERN
pattern in the observer’s mind appears about 55ms before
the touching action is committed.

As with experiment 2, we collected 320 trials per
participants yielding a total of 3520 trials from all
participants of the experiment for both close and far
layouts with 1760 trials each. The number of incorrect
trials was 26% in the close layout and 28% in the far
layout. 19 trials in the close layout and 34 in the far
layout were rated as “Do Not Know” by the participant.

The experiment mimicked a classic Flanker task to keep
our experimental settings in line with other research in
this area. Interactive applications can trigger ERN using a
similar paradigm. It may be possible to detect the ERN
pattern earlier by making the actor’s movement clearer to
the observers that can trigger the awareness sooner.

Data Collection and Analysis

Signals were collected at a sampling frequency of 128 Hz
using the Emotiv EEG Neuroheadset. They were then
divided into 2s epochs around the touching moments,
which is also the moment that the results were displayed.
The analysis was the same as in previous experiment.

It is worth noting that the classifier used is a light-weight
module which can provide an output in less than 1ms for
a 1kHz sample once the β coefficient matrix is known for
that participant (tested in Matlab ®R2013a 64 bit, Intel®
Core™ i3 CPU 3.10GHz, 8GB RAM). This means any
interactive application could act on an executer’s action
based on the ERN of an observer. For example, in
collaborative tabletops a user could be asked for a
stronger confirmation if the system detects an ERN in the
observer. This could also benefit peer-learning activities
where the observer and executer can constantly switch
roles to learn from each other.

Result

Close layout: Figure 12 shows average signals at channel
AF3 in the close layout over all participants and all trials.
It can be seen that there is a difference between incorrect
trials (red curve) and correct trials (blue curve) at the
latency of 188ms after the moments where the button
answers were pressed. This pattern has a negative peak
appeared within the time period of 250ms after the event
onset, similar to previous studies such as in [6, 22].
Far layout: Figure 13 shows the averaged EEG signals
for the far layout over all participants and all trials. There
is also an ERN-like pattern which peaks at about 3ms

A drawback of this study is that the EEG cap is an
expensive clinical system that is cumbersome to wear,
tethered and does not lend itself to applications that

3793

Session: Brain Computer Interfaces

CHI 2014, One of a CHInd, Toronto, ON, Canada
Discussion

after the answer button was touched. This indicates that if
this is the ERN pattern, the observer must have the
judgment about the actor’s action’s correctness about
250ms before which also is an indication that the
observers have made the decisions before the answer
buttons were touched.

The results from this experiment show that it is possible
that ERN can be observed in collaborative tasks from the
observers’ EEG. Although the channels that show the
detection are limited to AF3 (close layout) and F3 (far
layout), it is an indication that an off-the-shelf EEG
headset such as Emotiv is capable of detecting this
pattern. As a result, other commodity headsets which have
access to these channels can also harness the advantage of
detecting ERN pattern in observing tasks.
There is a shift in latency of the ERN peaks between
experiments 2 and 3. The latency differences of about
40ms (close layout) and 60ms (far layout) are due to the
devices used in each experiment; EbNeuro BE-MRI
system (~USD 10k) and Emotiv headset (~USD 300). We
can postulate many reasons for the difference:

Figure 12. Averaged signals of the close layout at AF3.
The vertical line is the button touched moments

 The buffer used in each device is different. While
Emotiv headset waits for the buffer to be filled before
pushing signals toward the receiving Bluetooth dongle,
EbNeuro pushes the signals continuously for each
collected data sample. As the process of continuously
pushing signals requires much more expensive Digital
Signal Processing (DSP) module, this reflects the price
difference between the two devices. Furthermore using
Bluetooth to transfer might add to the latency.

Figure 13. Average signals of the far layout at F3. The
left vertical line is the averaged hand lift-off moments,
the right vertical line is the button touched moments.

 While EbNeuro pushes signals continuously at the
original sampling frequency (4KHz), Emotiv samples
EEG signals internally at 2KHz then down samples it to
128Hz. This can introduce latency.

Between Figure 6 & Figure 12 and Figure 8 & Figure 13,
we observer similar ERN-like patterns (negative peaks
140ms after touch moments in Figure 6; 188ms after
touch moments in Figure 12; 50ms before touch moment
in Figure 8; 3ms after touch moment in Figure 13).
1
correct
incorrect
0.75
0.5
0.25
0
F3
AF3
Figure 14. Classification rates with error bars

From the experiment’s results, it can be seen that there is
a trade-off between how early the ERN pattern in
observing tasks can be observed vs. the prices and quality
of EEG headsets. Although the differences are small
(from about 40ms to 60ms), they should be considered
carefully to fit with the goals of each interactive task.
DISCUSSION

In addition to the benefit of correcting one’s own errors,
ERN has the potential to enrich interactive applications in
the collaborative working setting. The results from our
studies can provide guidance on how best to begin
harnessing ERN for such interactive experiences. From
our results, HCI designers can employ ERN in interactive
tasks to pinpoint the executer’s error’s whereabouts,
which can be from 50ms before to 250ms following the
triggered action, depend on the interaction technique.

Using the same classifying method described in the first
experiment on the collected signals from Emotiv device,
we found that in close layout, channel AF3 yields the
classifying results with 67.32% of correct trials were
classified as correct and 64.57% of incorrect trials were
classified as incorrect. Additionally, in far layout, channel
F3 yields the successful classification with classification
rates for correct and incorrect trials are 65.03% and
62.30% respectively (see Figure 14).

The usefulness of executer’ and observer’ ERNs in
interactive tasks depends on the usage context and the
designer’s creativity in making use of it. Here we suggest
some applications to highlight design possibilities.

Additionally, we calculated the area under the curve
(AUC) values for channels AF3 and F3 to justify how
well the classifier performs on these two channels. Our
obtained results show that AUC for channels AF3 and F3
were 0.6483 and 0.6486 respectively.

Collaborative tabletop settings

Groupware applications use embodiments to help people
stay aware of the presence, location and movement of
users in collaborative tasks [11]. They can either be real
embodiments which make use of the actual physical body

3794

Session: Brain Computer Interfaces

CHI 2014, One of a CHInd, Toronto, ON, Canada

of the user or virtual embodiments which are digital
representations of users (e.g. Telepointers [10]).

and when they committed a mistake, which could add to
the game tactics a new dimension. This ERN
communicating channel, beside verbal and chatting ones,
can be used to improve the teamwork and strategic
analysis skills during the game hence make it more
challenging between teams. However, the mechanism to
trigger error-events has to follow an oddball paradigm in
the context of a reaction time task.

In these settings, real and virtual embodiments both
provide obvious information of awareness to other group
users. Therefore, an observer can judge quickly about the
correctness of the action being performed. However, this
information is not accessible unless the observers provide
feedback to the performer or the system. This is a time
consuming process and can interrupt the performance.

Limitations of the classification method

Our classifier is based on a linear regression method
described in [3] and validated in [20, 23] for single trial
ERN detection. Applying this method provides
classifying rates of up to 73% accuracy. [23] evaluated
the usefulness of different ERN detection accuracies and
showed that when integrating an ERN detection module
in an interactive application a classifier with 65%
accuracy is as good as a classifier with 80% accuracy.
Moreover, if a system has very high accuracy (less error
rate), it may promote hasty commitment to selections [12]
and thereby increase the cost of recovery from an error.

Our results show that an integrated ERN detection module
can be used to monitor an ERN’s appearance in the
observers. As the classification time is about 1ms with the
coefficient matrix known, the detected ERN can be used
to trace back the time period where the observer thinks
the performing user made a mistake or is confused about
their action. Although these time periods range from
50ms before to 250ms following the committed action,
careful task design can help to shorten this range to
specific time points. This is due to different interaction
techniques providing different awareness to the observers
leading to different ERN triggered moments. Therefore,
HCI designers should design their applications to
maximize the in order to trigger clearer ERNs.

In addition, our classifier requires input EEG signals ±1s
around the time-locked event which means that it can
detect the ERN pattern 1s after the action. However it can
be used to pinpoint the ERN’s triggered moment which
can be up to 50ms before the action. Despite the delay,
this form of ERN detection can still be useful in many
applications like in the earlier outlined case of Pair
programming. A 1s delay will not affect the benefit of
ERN in such activities especially when we can highlight
the code-section that is in question. Additionally, other
classifier methods can improve accuracy and reduce the
window size of input signals leading to earlier detection
of the ERN after it is triggered. For instance, a BCI
competition on customized classifier increased
classification rates of P300 up to 96.5% and motor
imaginary up to 94.2% [2].

As a simple example, an action of a performer leading to
an observer ERN can result in an ignorable pop-up menu
that can help revert or discuss based on the source of ERN
in the observer. Rather than merely automate the action’s
reversion, ERN can serve as an information point for
discussion and clarification between the collaborators.
The pop-up menu can then provide contextually relevant
information including an “undo” item.
The goal is to maximize group awareness of individual’s
actions without disrupting the work-flow of the task.
Further contextual studies can explore this trade-off.
War-rooms / Emergency response

Moreover, the selection of channels is based on a set of ttests on the output of the training set. Then, the test set
was used to remove under-the-chance classification rate
channels as a beta-correction method. A more robust
method (e.g. bootstrapping) can be used here to reduce
the chance of selecting randomly significant channels.

In emergency scenarios, it is crucial to give instructions
and make decisions. ERN can be integrated into the
Emergency Management Information System [14] so that
each decision that has been made can be crossed checked
by the observers/ supervisors in the same team. If the
executer is made aware that other teammates thinks a
mistake is about to be made by the performing action, it
can be avoided before it is made. Moreover, if the mistake
is already committed, the system can sense if an ERN
appears in an observer’s brain to speed up the correction.

CONCLUSION

The experiments described in this paper offer some
valuable guidelines for HCI designers. We show that
ERN patterns can be detected in an observing task using
an off-the-shelf EEG headset on a single trial basis.
Moreover, we show the anticipation effects in
collaborating work where ERN can be detected before a
committed action in the observer’s mind. We then
extended our finding to a commodity headset to show that
it can also detect the anticipation effect through the
existence of ERN. In our discussions, we suggested novel
ways in which HCI applications can benefit from ERN in
collaborative and observing environments.

Gaming scenarios

Usually in shooting games and MMORPGs gamers team
up to act against other teams. Here, every decision needs
to be precise and made in a timely manner. ERN could be
integrated to provide a new tool to team members to
observe and react to each other’s actions. Detected ERNs
from teammates can be combined and displayed as
feedback to every continuous action say in the form of an
overlay window. This can give gamers an idea of where

3795

Session: Brain Computer Interfaces

CHI 2014, One of a CHInd, Toronto, ON, Canada

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

15. Krusienski, D. J., Sellers, E. W., McFarland, D. J.,
Vaughan, T. M. and Wolpaw, J. R. Toward enhanced
P300 speller performance. Neuroscience Methods2008

We thank Dr. Jade Thai (CRICBristol, University of
Bristol) and Dr. Rafal Bogacz (University of Oxford) for
their help in providing access to the EbNeuro equipment.

16. Lee, J. C. and Tan, D. S. Using a low-cost
electroencephalograph for task classification in HCI
research. UIST. 2006.

REFERENCES

1. Bates, A. T., Patel, T. P. and Liddle, P. F. External
Behavior Monitoring Mirrors Internal Behavior
Monitoring. J. of Psychophysiology281-288. 2005.

17. Luu, P., Tucker, D. M. and Makeig, S. Frontal midline
theta and the error-related negativity:
neurophysiological mechanisms of action regulation.
J. Clin Neurophysiol, 115, 8 1821-1835. 2004.

2. Blankertz, B., Muller, K., Krusienski, D. J., Schalk,
G., Wolpaw, J. R., Schlogl, A., Pfurtscheller, G.,
Millan, J. R., Schroder, M. and Birbaumer, N. The
BCI competition III: validating alternative approaches
to actual BCI problems. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst.
Rehabil. Eng. 2006.

18. Miltner, W. H. R., Braun, C. H. and Coles, M. G. H.
Event-related brain potentials following incorrect
feedback in a time-estimation task: Evidence for a
neural system for error detection. Cognitive
Neuroscience. 1997.

3. Christoforos, A., Dimitris, T., Niall, A. and David, H.
Temporally adaptive estimation of logistic classifiers
on data streams. ADAC, 3, 3 243-261. 2009.

19. Miltner, W. H. R., Brauer, J., Hecht, H., Trippe, R.
and Coles, M. Parallel brain activity for self-generated
and observed errors. 2004.

4. Coles., M. K. S. a. M. G. H. Performance Monitoring
in a Confusing World: Error-Related Brain Activity,
Judgments of Response Accuracy, and Types of
Errors. Proc. of JEPHPP, 26, 1 141-151. 2000.

20. Parra, L., Alvino, C., Tang, A., Pearlmutter, B.,
Yeung, N., Osman, A. and Sajda, P. Linear Spatial
Integration for Single-Trial Detection in
Encephalography. NeuroImage, 17, 1 223-230. 2002.

5. Dal Seno, B., Matteucci, M. and Mainardi, L. Online
detection of P300 and error potentials in a BCI speller.
Computational Intelligence and Neuroscience. 2010.

21. Pinelle, D., Nacenta, M., Gutwin, C. and Stach, T. The
effects of co-present embodiments on awareness and
collaboration in tabletop groupware. GI. 2008.

6. De Bruijn, E. R. A. and von Rhein, D. T. Is your error
my concern? An event-related potential study on own
and observed error detection in cooperation and
competition. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 6. 2012.

22. van Schie, H. T., Mars, R. B., Coles, M. G. H. and
Bekkering, H. Modulation of activity in medial frontal
and motor cortices during error observation. Nature
Neuroscience, 7, 5 549-554. 2004.

7. Eriksen, C. and Schultz, D. Information processing in
visual search: A continuous flow conception and
experimental results. Attention, Perceptionn &
Psychophysics, 25, 4 249-263. 1979.

23. Vi, C. and Subramanian, S. Detecting error-related
negativity for interaction design. CHI. ACM. 2012.
24. Vi, C., Takashima, K., Yokoyama, H., Liu, G., Itoh,
Y., Subramanian, S. and Kitamura, Y. D-FLIP:
Dynamic and Flexible Interactive PhotoShow.
Springer. 2013.

8. Ferrez, P. W. and Millán, J. D. R. You are wrong!:
automatic detection of interaction errors from brain
waves. Proc. of IJCAI. 2005.
9. Ganushchak, L. Y. and Schiller, N. O. Brain
errormonitoring activity is affected by semantic
relatedness: An event-related brain potentials study. J.
Cognitive Neuroscience, 20, 5 927-940. 2008.

25. Williams, L. and Kessler, R. Pair Programming
Illuminated. Addison-Wesley Longman. 2002.

10. Greenberg, S., Gutwin, C. and Roseman, M. Semantic
Telepointers for Groupware. OZCHI. 1996.

26. Yeung, N. and Cohen, J. D. The Impact of Cognitive
Deficits on Conflict Monitoring: Predictable
Dissociations Between the Error-Related Negativity
and N2. Psychological Science, 17164-171. 2006.

11. Gutwin, C. and Greenberg, S. A Descriptive
Framework of Workspace Awareness for Real-Time
Groupware. CSCW, 11, 3 411-446. 2002.

27. Yuksel, B. F., Donnerer, M., Tompkin, J. and Steed,
A. A novel brain-computer interface using a multitouch surface. CHI. 2010.

12. Gutwin, C. and Cockburn, A. Improving list
revisitation with ListMaps. AVI. ACM. 2006.

28. Zander, T., Kothe, C., Jatzev, S. and Gaertner, M.
Enhancing Human-Computer Interaction with Input
from Active and Passive Brain-Computer Interfaces.
2010.

13. Hjelm, S. I. and Browall, C. Brainball - using brain
activity for cool competition. NordiCHI. 2000.
14. Kristensen, M., Kyng, M. and Palen, L. Participatory
design in emergency medical service: designing for
future practice. CHI. ACM. 2006.

29. Zander, T. O. and Kothe, C. Towards passive brain–
computer interfaces: applying brain–computer
interface technology to human–machine systems in
general. Journal of Neural Engineering, 8, 2. 2011.

3796

