International Journal of Mechanical Engineering and Robotics Research Vol. 7, No. 2, March 2018

Navigation of an Electric Wheelchair Using
Electromyograms, Electrooculograms, and
Electroencephalograms
Chiharu Ishii
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Hosei University, Tokyo, Japan
Email: c-ishii@hosei.ac.jp

Shunsuke Murooka and Minato Tajima
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Hosei University Graduate School, Tokyo, Japan

Abstract—In this paper, we discuss the navigation of an
electric wheelchair (EWC) using biosignals. As biosignals,
electromyograms (EMGs), electrooculograms (EOGs), and
electroencephalograms (EEGs) are considered. During the
navigation of the EWC using EMGs, by taking the degree
and duration of the muscular activity into consideration, the
travel time of the EWC is reduced. This enhances the
maneuverability of the EWC. During the navigation of the
EWC using the EOG, a voluntary blink and an involuntary
blink were distinguished using support vector machine
(SVM). As a result, the average distinction accuracy for a
voluntary blink of 98.9% was obtained. This implies that the
safety to stop the EWC is enhanced. During the navigation
of the EWC using the EEG, the operator’s EEGs of
concentrated and relaxed states were distinguished using the
SVM. Then, forward moving of the EWC, when the
operator’s EEG of concentrated state was recognized, was
successfully achieved. In addition, a navigation method of
the EWC based on Steady-State Visual Evoked Potentials
(SSVEP) was proposed.

from these biosignals. In the case where biosignals are
used to navigate the EWC, first of all, signal processing is
performed to facilitate an analysis, which includes
processes such as the application of the fast Fourier
transform to the measured biosignal and the calculation
of signal averaging of the measured biosignal. Next,
feature extraction, which extracts the portion in which the
intention of the operator is included from the processed
signal, is performed. Finally, distinction of the intention
of the operator is performed using the threshold criteria,
or machine learning techniques such as neural networks
(NNs) and support vector machine (SVM). In this paper,
navigation methods of EWCs using EMGs, EOGs, and
EEGs developed in our laboratory are described.
II.

Index Terms—Electric wheelchair, electromyogram,
electrooculogram, electroencephalogram, brain-machineinterface.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Electric wheelchairs (EWCs) are an independent
transportation apparatus for those whose legs are disabled.
Usually, EWCs are navigated using a joystick. However,
such patients who suffer from spinal cord injuries or
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis are unable to operate the
joystick using their hands. In order to assist the mobility
of elderly people and physically disabled persons, the
development of EWCs that are navigated using biosignals,
such as the electromyogram (EMG), electrooculogram
(EOG), or electroencephalogram (EEG), has been studied
[1–8].
Biosignals include information of physical activity.
Therefore, the intention of the operator can be extracted


Manuscript received July 16, 2017; revised November 28, 2017.

© 2018 Int. J. Mech. Eng. Rob. Res.
doi: 10.18178/ijmerr.7.2.143-149

143

CONTROL JOYSTICK

In our laboratory, a control joystick of the EWC
shown in Fig. 1, which can be retrofitted to a ready-made
EWC, was developed. The joystick lever is inserted
between two arch-shaped arms in a forward/backward
direction and left/right direction, respectively. Then, by
driving each arm by a motor, the joystick lever is leaned
in a forward/backward and left/right direction arbitrarily.
In this study, an EWC (model MC3P4) produced by
Suzuki Motor Co. was used.

Figure 1. Control joystick for the EWC.

International Journal of Mechanical Engineering and Robotics Research Vol. 7, No. 2, March 2018

III.

NAVIGATION OF THE EWC USING EMGS

activity becomes large, the value of the iEMG becomes
large too. However, the value of the iEMG differs
depending on the operators and measurement positions.
Therefore, the iEMGs obtained by Eq. (1) were
normalized by dividing by the maximum value of the
iEMG.
When the value of the iEMG in each electrode
exceeds a specified threshold value, the EWC is
navigated as shown in Table I. For example, when the
operator strains his both shoulders at the same time, the
EWC moves forward. When the operator only strains his
right shoulder, the EWC turns right. When the operator
strains his neck, the direction of the EWC is switched.
Finally, when the operator strains his cheek, the EWC
stops. These are illustrated in Fig. 4.

A. EMGs
When we move our muscles, a tiny amount of
electricity is generated in the muscle fibers. EMGs are
electric signals that are generated by adding each action
potential generated from the muscle fibers. There are two
methods to measure EMGs. The first is to measure EMGs
by attaching a surface electrode on the skin’s surface. The
other method is to measure EMGs by sticking a needle
electrode into the muscle. In many cases, the former
method is employed to measure EMGs, and the measured
EMG is generally called surface electromyogram
(SEMG). A typical SEMG when a grasp operation is
performed twice is shown in Fig. 2. When grasp
operations are performed, the waveform vibrates greatly.

TABLE I.

ELECTRODE AND CORRESPONDING MOTION.

Electrode
Ch.1
Ch.2 and Ch.3
(both shoulders)
Ch.2 only
(right shoulder)
Figure 2. An SEMG.

Ch.3 only
(left shoulder)
Ch.4

B. Navigation Using SEMG
The measurement points of the SEMG signals are the
right masseter of the cheek (Ch.1), the right trapezius of
the right shoulder (Ch.2), the left trapezius of the left
shoulder (Ch.3), and the left sternocleidomastoid of the
neck (Ch.4). The positions of the electrodes are illustrated
in Fig. 3.

Motion
Stop (St)
Forward (Fw)
Backward (Bw)
Right turn (R)
Back right turn (BR)
Left turn (L)
Back left turn (BL)
Switching forward and backward

Ch.4
Off
On
Off
On
Off
On
-

Figure 4. Navigation method of an EWC.

In order to investigate the accuracy of the distinction
rate by the proposed navigation method of the EWC,
distinction experiments were performed for five healthy
subjects in their 20s. The results are shown in Table II.
Figure 3. Measurement positions of the SEMG.
TABLE II.

Navigation of the EWC was determined as the
following seven types of motion, namely, stop, forward,
backward, right turn, left turn, back right turn, and back
left turn. Integrated electromyograms (iEMGs), which are
calculated by Eq. (1), are used to determine the motion of
the EWC. It is well known that the iEMG shows the
degree of muscular activity.
 iEMG j 

t



t Δt

Seven motions

Subject
Fw (%)
R (%)
L (%)
Bw (%)
BR (%)
BL (%)
St (%)
Switch (%)

| SEMG j | dt j 

A
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
94.3

B
100
100
100
91.0
100
83.0
100
87.0

C
85.7
90.9
100
90.9
100
100
98.3
75.0

D
90.0
75.0
90.0
100
63.0
92.0
98.0
93.0

E
100
100
90.0
100
92.8
88.9
98.3
97.1

Ave.
95.7
93.0
96.0
96.3
92.6
92.3
99.0
89.7

From Table II, as a result of the distinction
experiments for the five subjects, an average distinction
accuracy of more than 89.7% was obtained for the seven
motions and switching of the EWC. Thus, the

where SEMGj is the SEMG signal of the corresponding
muscle, j (1~4) is the number of electrode channels, and
∆t expresses the interval of integration. As the muscular

© 2018 Int. J. Mech. Eng. Rob. Res.

RESULTS OF DISTINCTION EXPERIMENTS.

144

International Journal of Mechanical Engineering and Robotics Research Vol. 7, No. 2, March 2018

effectiveness of the proposed navigation method of the
EWC using an SEMG was verified.
Let the above-mentioned navigation method be called
Method 1. In Method 1, the operator cannot perform fine
adjustments of the travel direction of the EWC, since the
tilt angle of the joystick lever is a fixed value for each
motion. Then, a navigation method capable of fine
adjustment of the travel direction of the EWC was
proposed in [9], in which the tilt angle of the joystick
lever could be changed on the basis of the degree and
duration of the operator’s muscular activity. Let this
navigation method be called Method 2.
In order to verify the drivability of the proposed
navigation methods, experiments of slalom trials were
carried out on the test course shown in Fig. 5, using three
navigation methods (navigation using the joystick,
Method 1, and Method 2). Then, the travel times were
compared. The average travel time in each navigation
method for four healthy subjects in their 20s is shown in
Table III.

Figure 6. Position of surface and reference electrodes.

Then, the waveform of the EOG in each surface
electrode at the time when five kinds of eye movement,
namely, right gaze, left gaze, up gaze, down gaze, and
blink, were performed is shown in Fig. 7.

Figure 7. An EOG.

Figure 5. Test course for a slalom trial.

TABLE III.

Average travel time (s)

TRAVEL TIME IN A SLALOM TRIAL.
Joystick
operation
38.74

Method 1
54.19

Method 2
41.14

Although the travel time when using a joystick was
the shortest, by adopting the degree and duration of the
operator’s muscular activity in the navigation of the EWC,
the travel time in Method 2 became shorter than that in
Method 1.
IV.

NAVIGATION OF THE EWC USING EOGS

A. EOGs
EOGs are a variation of the electric potential between
the retina side, which is negatively charged, and the
cornea side, which is positively charged, at the time when
we perform eye movement. EOGs can be measured by
attaching electrodes around the eye. As shown in Fig. 6,
four surface electrodes were attached on the right of the
right eye (Ch.1), the left of the left eye (Ch.2), the lower
part of the right eye (Ch.3), and the upper part of the right
eye (Ch.4), respectively, and two reference electrodes
were attached on the earlobe on both sides.

© 2018 Int. J. Mech. Eng. Rob. Res.

In Fig. 7, different waveforms of EOGs are seen
according to each direction of gaze, and each waveform
has two peaks. Thus, focusing on the first and second
peaks of the waveform of the normalized EOG, the five
kinds of eye movement are distinguished on the basis of
the waveform pattern of the EOG in four electrodes when
the peak values exceed a specified threshold value.
However, since individual differences were seen in the
waveform of the EOG, distinction conditions were set by
trial and error for each individual. Distinction
experiments were performed for five healthy subjects in
their 20s after making individual conditions. The results
are shown in Table IV.
TABLE IV.
Subject
[%](%)
Right
Left (%)
Up (%)
Down (%)
Blink (%)
Total (%)

A
98.3
100
95.0
93.3
99.6
97.3

RESULTS OF DISTINCTION EXPERIMENTS.
B
100
100
66.7
94.4
99.2
92.1

C
90.0
66.7
66.7
33.3
93.3
70.0

D
100
83.3
63.3
83.3
88.2
83.6

E
96.7
96.7
86.7
96.7
96.7
94.7

Ave.
97.0
89.3
75.7
80.2
95.4
87.5

From Table IV, as a result of the distinction
experiments for five subjects, an average distinction
accuracy of 87.5% was obtained for the five types of eye
movement.

145

International Journal of Mechanical Engineering and Robotics Research Vol. 7, No. 2, March 2018

B. Navigation Using EOGs
The navigation method of the EWC was determined
as shown in Table V. When the operator performs a right
gaze, a left gaze, an up gaze, and a down gaze,
respectively, within two seconds, after performing two
consecutive blinks, the EWC turns to the right, turns to
the left, moves forward, and moves backward,
respectively.
TABLE V.

EYE OPERATION AND CORRESPONDING MOTION.
Eye operation

Motion

One blink

Stop

Two consecutive blinks + right gaze

Right turn

Two consecutive blinks + left gaze

Left turn

Two consecutive blinks + up gaze

Forward

Two consecutive blinks + down gaze

Backward

In this navigation method, however, the EWC stops
frequently even with involuntary blinks, and this
degrades the drivability of the EWC. Therefore, in order
to enhance the drivability of the EWC, distinction
between voluntary blinks and involuntary blinks was
attempted.
As shown in Fig. 8, no remarkable difference could be
seen between the waveforms of involuntary blinks and
voluntary blinks. However, it turned out that a difference
can be seen in the amplitude spectrum after performing
short-time Fourier transform as shown in Fig. 9.

Figure 9. Amplitude spectrum of involuntary and voluntary blinks.

Therefore, the feature vector for feature extraction
was determined in the following way. The amplitude
spectrum in a low-frequency zone (4.2, 8.3, 12.5, and
16.7 Hz) was focused on, since the future of biosignals
often appears in the low-frequency zone. Then, the
maximum spectrum value of each of the four electrodes
was set as the features, and the feature vector x was
determined as follows:

x  SPmaxCh1 SPmaxCh2

SPmaxCh3

T
SPmaxCh4  


where SPmaxChi (i = 1~4) is the maximum spectrum
value in the low-frequency zone in each electrode.
Thus, voluntary blinks and involuntary blinks were
distinguished using the SVM.
Voluntary blinks must not be incorrectly recognized
as involuntary blinks, since voluntary blinks are used as a
command to stop the EWC. Hence, teacher data were
extracted so that the distinction accuracy of voluntary
blinks could be raised, and a discrimination circuit based
on the SVM was created. Distinction of 2,460 voluntary
blinks and involuntary blinks was carried out for a
healthy subject in his 20s. The result is shown in Table
VI.
TABLE VI.

RESULT OF BLINK DISTINCTION.
Voluntary blinks

Figure 8. Waveform of involuntary and voluntary blinks.

© 2018 Int. J. Mech. Eng. Rob. Res.

Average accuracy (%)

146

98.9

Involuntary
blinks
77.9

International Journal of Mechanical Engineering and Robotics Research Vol. 7, No. 2, March 2018

As a result, a distinction accuracy of 98.9% and
77.9% was obtained for voluntary blinks and involuntary
blinks, respectively. Thus, it can be said that the safety to
stop is high, since voluntary blinks are recognized with a
high accuracy.
Let the navigation method in which voluntary blinks
and involuntary blinks are not distinguished be called
Method 3, and let the navigation method in which
voluntary blinks and involuntary blinks are distinguished
using the discrimination circuit based on the SVM be
called Method 4. In order to verify the drivability of the
proposed navigation methods, experiments of slalom
trials were carried out on the same test course shown in
Fig. 5, using three navigation methods (navigation using
a joystick, Method 3, and Method 4). Then, the travel
times and stop times were compared. The average travel
time and average stop times in each navigation method
for a healthy subject in his 20s are shown in Table VII.
TABLE VII.

Figure 10. An EEG.

The brain–machine interface (BMI) is a program or
apparatus for operating machines, such as EWCs, in
accordance with the operator’s intention on the basis of
EEGs. When operating a computer on the basis of EEGs,
this is called brain–computer interface (BCI).
There exist BMIs using evoked brainwaves and BMIs
using spontaneous brainwaves. As for BMIs based on
evoked brainwaves, there exists a phenomenon called
Steady-State Visual Evoked Potentials (SSVEP). SSVEP
is a phenomenon where, at the time when the subject
receives a vision stimulus of a certain frequency, an
evoked potential appears on the subject’s brainwaves at
the same frequency of the vision stimulus. As for BMIs
based on spontaneous brainwaves, there exist EventRelated
Desynchronization
and
Event-Related
Synchronization.
In the case where EEGs are measured by electrodes
attached on the scalp in a noninvasive manner, two or
more brainwaves would be mixed inside the brain until
they reach the scalp from the source of brainwaves. In
order to extract the features of EEGs clearly, it is
effective to restore the brainwaves by presuming the
brainwaves before mixture from the measured
brainwaves, using the Independent Component Analysis.

TRAVEL TIME AND STOP TIMES IN A SLALOM TRIAL.

Average travel time (s)
Average stop times

Joystick
operation
26.58
-

Method 3
66.41
10.2

Method 4
66.46
8.6

Navigation using EOGs took longer than navigation
by a joystick. Comparing Method 3 and Method 4,
although no great difference was seen in the travel time, a
tendency for the stop times to decrease was seen. In
addition, when the migration length became long in the
experiment, the reduction of stop times in Method 4
became remarkable, and the travel time in Method 4 also
became shorter than that in Method 3 in this case. Thus,
by distinguishing voluntary blinks from involuntary
blinks, the times of an unintended stop can be reduced
and the maneuverability of the EWC can be enhanced.
V.

NAVIGATION OF THE EWC USING EEGS

B. Electroencephalograph
Recently, the BCI has been widely recognized by the
public and simple electroencephalographs are being sold
at a reasonable price. In this research, the headset-type
biosignal acquisition system, Emotiv EPOC, shown in
Fig. 11 (left), produced by Emotiv Inc., was used. This
headset has 14 measurement electrodes and two ground
electrodes; the arrangement of electrodes is based on the
10–20-electrode system shown in Fig. 11 (right). In
addition, the headset has a two-axis gyroscope. Therefore,
the operator’s head motion can also be measured.

A. EEGs
Brainwaves are the electric activity of the brain’s
neurons measured by electrodes. Generally, recorded
brainwaves are called EEGs. There are two methods to
measure EEGs. The first is by measuring EEGs by
attaching an electrode on the scalp. The other method is
by measuring EEGs by embedding an electrode directly
into the brain. In general, the former method is employed
to measure EEGs. There are two types of brainwaves:
spontaneous brainwaves and evoked brainwaves.
Spontaneous brainwaves are brainwaves that are always
generated even in the state where nothing is done,
whereas evoked brainwaves are brainwaves that are
generated temporarily when a certain external stimulus is
given. Unlike EMGs or EOGs, it is comparatively
difficult to read the operator’s intention from EEGs, since
the waveform of the EEG always varies. The typical EEG
measured at the time when the operator is in a relaxed
state is shown in Fig. 10.

Figure 11. Emotiv EPOC (left) and the 10–20-electrode system (right).

© 2018 Int. J. Mech. Eng. Rob. Res.

147

International Journal of Mechanical Engineering and Robotics Research Vol. 7, No. 2, March 2018

It can be said that it is difficult to measure EEGs with
a high reliability using Emotiv EPOC, since the
measurement accuracy of Emotiv EPOC is low compared
with common electroencephalographs. However, Emotiv
EPOC can be sufficiently used as equipment to
distinguish the operator’s intention. Indeed, in [10], we
succeeded in navigating an EWC using the Emotiv EPOC
according to the three detected kinds of head motion and
two kinds of facial expression identified by the NN.

extension of this navigation method is being carried out
so that the EWC can turn right, turn left, and move
backward by motor imagery.

C. Navigation Using EEGs
As mentioned above, since it is comparatively
difficult to read an intention from EEGs, at first,
recognition of EEGs in a consciousness concentration
state was attempted when the operator concentrated his
consciousness by gazing at a specific object from the
relaxed state. Then, when the EEG in the consciousness
concentration state was detected, the EWC moved
forward. Using Emotiv EPOC, EEGs are measured by
four electrodes (P7, O1, O2, and P8) covering from the
occipital lobe to the parietal lobe, shown in Fig. 11 (right).
The operator gazes at a cube as the object in the software,
“Control Panel,” attached to Emotiv EPOC to concentrate
his consciousness. After performing a short-time Fourier
transform to the measured EEG, a summation of the
amplitude spectrum in a specific frequency zone (28–42
Hz) in each electrode was set as the features for feature
extraction. Thus, the feature vector x was determined as
follows:

x  X P 7

X O1

X O2

T
X P8  

where X i (i = P7, O1, O2, and P8) is the summation of
the amplitude spectrum in the specific frequency zone in
each electrode.
Then, the consciousness concentration state and the
relaxed state are distinguished using the SVM.
Distinction experiments were performed for four
healthy subjects in their 20s. Using the Control Panel,
each subject performed training in advance to concentrate
his consciousness from the relaxed state; learning of the
SVM was executed for every subject. In the experiment,
under the condition where the EWC was navigated, each
subject made the consciousness concentration state from
the relaxed state ten times. The accumulated distinction
accuracy according to the elapsed time for the four
subjects is shown in Table VIII.
TABLE VIII.
Subject
0～1.5 s (%)
0～2.0 s (%)
0～3.0 s (%)
0～5.0 s (%)

Figure 12. Three visual stimuli presented on display.

The form and color of a blinking symbol were
determined as a white square with a black background
through the preliminary experiment executed for each
vision stimulus. However, when the three visual stimuli
were presented simultaneously on the display, they
interfered mutually and the subject was affected. As a
result, the distinction accuracy of the 15 Hz vision
stimulus degraded. In order to equalize the distinction
rate of each vision stimulus, the blinking symbol in the 15
Hz vision stimulus was somewhat enlarged, and the
background color was also changed into blue. The
influence caused by such interference is based on
individual characteristics, and it is considered that the
adjustment of the presenting way of the vision stimulus is
necessary for each subject.
Distinction experiments were carried out on a healthy
subject in his 20s in a quiet environment where the EWC
was not navigated. In the experiment, the subject
randomly stared at each vision stimulus, 10 Hz, 12 Hz,
and 15 Hz, ten times each. The accumulated distinction
accuracy for each stimulus frequency according to the
elapsed time is shown in Table IX.

RESULT OF CONSCIOUSNESS CONCENTRATION
DISTINCTION.
A
20.0
30.0
60.0
80.0

B
0
40.0
80.0
90.0

C
60.0
70.0
90.0
90.0

D
20.0
70.0
80.0
90.0

Ave.
25.0
52.5
77.5
87.5

From Table VIII, the result in which the distinction
rate was improved as the elapsed time becomes long was
obtained. So far, using this navigation method, only
forward moving of the EWC is possible. Currently, an
© 2018 Int. J. Mech. Eng. Rob. Res.

D. SSVEP
The navigation method of EWCs using SSVEP is also
under consideration. In this method, as shown in Fig. 12,
the animation in which the white square symbol blinks at
10 Hz, 15 Hz, and 12 Hz is arranged at the lower left, top
center, and lower right of the display, respectively. In the
case where the frequency analysis of the measured EEG
at the time when the operator stares at each animation is
performed, the amplitude spectrum of the blinking
frequency and its harmonics appears more strongly than
other frequencies. Therefore, the animation at which the
operator is staring can be distinguished. From this, the
navigation method of the EWC is determined as follows.
When the operator stares at the lower left animation, the
EWC turns to the left. When the operator stares at the top
center animation, the EWC moves forward. When the
operator stares at the lower right animation, the EWC
turns to the right.

148

International Journal of Mechanical Engineering and Robotics Research Vol. 7, No. 2, March 2018

TABLE IX.
Frequency
2～4 s (%)
2～6 s (%)

RESULT OF DISTINCTION BY SSVEP.
10 Hz
70.0
90.0

12 Hz
70.0
90.0

15 Hz
100
100

[7]

[8]

For every stimulus frequency, a distinction accuracy
of more than 90% was obtained in 2–6 s. However, it
takes some time for the signal processing, since the
moving-average method is used. So far, the driving
experiment of the EWC using this navigation method has
not been performed yet. When it is carried out, an
increase of time required for distinction and a decrease of
the distinction accuracy are anticipated, since the subject
is affected from the outside environment.
VI.

[9]

[10]

the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Biomimetics, 2013, pp. 19-25.
R. Mahendran, “EMG signal based Control of an
Intelligent Wheelchair,” in Proc. of International
Conference on Communication and Signal Processing,
2014, pp. 1267-1272.
G. Jang and Y. Choi, “EMG-based Continuous Control
Method for Electric Wheelchair,” in Proc. of 2014
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots
and Systems, 2014, pp.3549-3554.
C. Ishii and R. Konishi, “A control of electric wheelchair
using an EMG based on degree of Muscular activity,” in
Proc. of the 19th Euromicro Conference on DSD, 2016,
pp.567-574.
K Matsuzawa and C. Ishii, “Control of an electric
wheelchair with a brain-computer interface headset,” Proc.
of ICAMechS, pp. 504-509, 2016.

CONCLUSION

In this paper, we presented some examples of the
navigation methods of EWCs using EMGs, EOGs, and
EEGs. There are individual differences in biosignals.
Generally, analyses become complicated in the order of
EMG, EOG, and EEG, and with this order, it becomes
difficult to distinguish the intention correctly. However,
the measurement technology of the biosignals is
improving day by day. On the basis of the BMI, the
utilization of EWCs that can be navigated only by
performing motor imagery is expected in the near future.

Chiharu Ishii received his Ph.D. degree in
mechanical engineering from Sophia University,
Japan, in 1997. From 2002 to 2009, he was an
Assistant Professor at Kogakuin University.
Currently, he is a Professor at the Department of
Mechanical Engineering, Hosei University,
Japan. His research interests are in medical
robotics, assistive technology, and robust
control. He is a Member of the JSME, SICE,
RSJ, IEEJ, and IEEE and is a student at the
Graduate School of Engineering, Hosei University, Japan.

REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

K. Tanaka, K. Matsunaga, “Electroencephalogram-Based
Control of an Electric Wheelchair,” IEEE Transactions on
Robotics, vol.21, no.4, pp.762-766, 2005.
C. S. L. Tsui, P. Jia, J. Q. Gan, H. Hu, and K. Yuan,
“EMG-based Hands-Free Wheelchair Control with EOG
Attention Shift Detection,” Proc. of the 2007 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics,
pp.1266-1271, 2007.
M. Hashimoto, K. Takahashi, and M. Shimada,
“Wheelchair Control Using an EOG- and EMG-Based
Gesture Interface,” in Proc. of 2009 IEEE/ASME
International Conference on Advanced Intelligent
Mechatronics, 2009 pp. 1212-1217.
N.
Kim-Tien
and
N.
Truong-Thinh,
“Using
Electrooculogram and Electromyogram for powered
wheelchair,” in Proc. of the 2011 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics, 2011, pp. 15851590.
Z. Yi, D. Lingling, L. Yuan 1, and H. Huosheng, “Design
of a surface EMG based human-machine interface for an
intelligent wheelchair,” in Proc. of the Tenth International
Conference on Electronic Measurement & Instruments,
2011, pp. 132-136.
Z. Li, S. Lei, C. Y. Su, and G. Li, “Hybrid brain/muscleactuated control of an intelligent wheelchair,” in Proc. of

© 2018 Int. J. Mech. Eng. Rob. Res.

Shunsuke Murooka received his B.E. degree in
mechanical engineering from Hosei University,
Japan, in 2016. Currently, he is a Master Course
Student at the Graduate School of Engineering,
Hosei University, Japan. His research interest is
in assistive technology.

Minato Tajima received his B.E. degree in
mechanical engineering from Hosei University,
Japan, in 2017. Currently, he is a Master Course
Student at the Graduate School of Engineering,
Hosei University, Japan. His research interest is
in assistive technology.

149

