International Journal of Electrical and Electronic Engineering & Telecommunications Vol. 7, No. 4, October 2018

LabVIEW GUI for Emotiv EPOC of Prosthetic
Hand Control
Muhammad Azmi Ayub1, Aainaa Zainal1, Khairunnisa Johar1, Noor Ayuni Che Zakaria1, and Cheng Yee
Low2
1

2

Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Universiti Teknologi MARA Shah Alam, Selangor, Malaysia
Faculty of Mechanical and Manufacturing Engineering, Universiti Tun Hussein Onn Malaysia, Johor, Malaysia
Email: {muhammadayub, ayuni8098}@salam.uitm.edu.my; {naina_aainaa, khairunnisa_johar}@yahoo.com;
cylow@uthm.edu.my

Abstract—The usual body-powered prosthetics is tiring and
lead to compliance and restoration problems. Brain
computer interface (BCI) prosthetic is one of the advanced
technologies opening up new possibility in providing
healthcare solutions for people with severe motor
impairment. Generally, electroencephalography (EEG) is
historically dominated by BCI researchers for prosthetics
control. An issue with EEG user BCI researchers are tend to
use invasive recording methods, posing surgical risks to
generate control signals from brain activity patterns. This
paper aims at reviewing the conceptual design for a noninvasive approach for controlling a prosthetic hand using an
Emotiv EEG Headset integrated with a graphical user
interface (GUI) designed in LabVIEW. EEG signals were
recorded from healthy subjects through brain wave rhythm
at F3 and FC5 of motor cortex area focusing on the artifact
of upper limb movement; finger flexion-rest-extension. Five
healthy subjects was selected for the conceptual proof and
controlling a robot hand. The accuracies of data
classification for the finger movement for all subjects
exceeding the 50% for binary classification with average of
57.96%. This device can be used for paralyzed individuals
with limited communication to control prosthetics using
simple GUI. 
Index Terms—electroencephalography,
LabVIEW, prosthetic hand

emotiv

EPOC,

I. INTRODUCTION
People who are having difficulties in interacting with
the community due to the long-term physical, mental,
intellectual or sensory impairments are called amputees
[1]. The lives of the amputees are very challenging in
struggling with the disabilities and the self-esteem. The
disabilities are divided into several groups such as
Hearing Impairment, Lack of Vision, Physical
Disabilities, Speech Disabilities, Learning Disabilities,
Mental Disabilities and Cerebral Palsy. Amputees in
Malaysia must be registered with the Ministry of National
Unity and Social Development under the Ministry of
Women and Family Development. From WHO data,
0.5% of the population of a developing country have a
disability that require prosthetics/orthotics devices [1].
From this WHO prediction, it suggests that around
150,000 of Malaysia’s current population of 30 million [2]
need prosthetic or orthotic devices. This number shows
that, an amputee in Malaysia is very high. Medical

II. CONCEPT OF BCI-EEG SYSTEM
Apart from the neuro-prosthetics hand applications,
BCI is also used to control Wheelchair [8], [9],

Manuscript received February 25, 2018; revised July 19, 2018.
©2018 Int. J. Elec. & Elecn. Eng. & Telcomm.
doi: 10.18178/ijeetc.7.4.190-194

allowances incentives were given to the registered
disabled employer by the Malaysian government for them
to purchase the prosthetics products through the
government hospitals. Based on the development of
modern technology now, various tools can help amputee
to improve and increase the ability of human cognitive or
sensory-motor functions [3].
One of the technologies, is known as brain computer
interfaces (BCI); a modern technology and is explored in
many different fields such as communication, neuroprosthetics, robotics and mobility. The signals are
collected whether using invasive, partial invasive or noninvasive method. There are four methods to record
microvolt-level extracellular potentials generated by
neurons in the cortical layers; electroencephalography
(EEG), electrocorticography (ECoG), local field
potentials (LFPs), and single-neuron action potential
recordings (single units) [4]. Invasive method requires the
patient undergo surgery of electrode implantation into
their skull. Partial invasive method or called ECoG also
required the implantation of electrode inside the skull but
above the grey matter. The non-invasive method or EEG
which is the most popular method used among
researchers only placed on the scalp to obtain the signal
[5]. These signals then will be processed and send as
command to the output devices. BCI can be used to
restore communication to people who suffer severe motor
disabilities such as brainstem stroke, amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis and spinal cord injury (quadriplegia) [6], [7].
The most challenging part in BCI researches is the
features extraction process of random time-varying EEG
signals and its classification according to the brain signal
unique pattern. Thus, EEG based neuro-prosthetic
devices is yet to be in the market and still undergoes
demonstration. The aim of this study is to develop a
concept of a neuro-prosthetics hand for amputee which
includes the designing of a graphical user interface (GUI)
using LabVIEW software to capture brain signal using
Emotiv EEG Headset. An experimental evaluation to
recognize brain wave pattern is conducted to evaluate the
concept.

190

International Journal of Electrical and Electronic Engineering & Telecommunications Vol. 7, No. 4, October 2018

humanoid robot [10] and mobile robot [11]. There are
several techniques to collect or mapping the brain which
is through computational topography (CT), magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI), functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI), positron emission tomography (PET),
magnetoencephalography (MEG), EEG, and functional
near infra-red (FNIR) Spectroscopy.
In this concept, we are focusing on implementation of
BCI with EEG. EEG is an activity of recording the
electric fields produced by brain by placing electrodes on
the scalp. Local field potential (LFP) are generated as a
result of the synaptic activities from hundreds of neurons
over the integrated area at the electrode in a synchronized
manner [12]. In 1924, according to Hans Berger who was
the first to record the EEG, human brain waves called
Berger or also known as the Alpha wave (8-12 Hz) have a
very low signal. Electrodes are able to measures voltage
differences on the skin in the microvolt (µV) range. By
providing some amplification to the acquired signals will
bring it up to the millivolt level and can make it available
for digital signal processing. Electrodes used are usually
made up of conductive materials such as gold or silver
chloride. A conductive gel is applied to the electrodes to
enhance its conductivity as well as maintain an
acceptable signal to noise ratio [12].
Despite of instable signal, EEG have excellent
temporal resolution of less than a millisecond. The signal
can be analyzed according to its low frequency bands in
Herts [Hz]. The different waves of brain signals are delta,
theta, alpha, beta and gamma as demonstrated in Fig. 1.
Research has shown the advantages of deploying EEG
technology to offer new solutions in prosthetic devices.
Typically, most research using EEG for rapid
communication with the equipment for easier and cheaper
solution. Furthermore, the EEG has less procedures as
well as more practical for patients and researchers [13].
In addition, the surface EEG does not require surgery.

A complex mechanical BCI system would allow a user
to control an external system possibly a neuro-prosthetic
device by creating an output of specific EEG frequency.
The EEG records a signal by placing electrodes on the
scalp with a conductive gel. Electrodes measures voltage
differences at the skin in the microvolt (μV) range.
A BCI-EEG system is comprised of four different
stages of signal acquisition, signal pre-processing, feature
extraction and classification, and computer interaction,
illustrated in Fig. 2. Signal Acquisition is acquired
through the Emotiv EEG headset and two stages of signal
pre-processing and feature extraction and classification is
conducted using LabVIEW software. LabVIEW software
is connected to the Arduino driver via USB serial data
connection to completing the BCI four stages. The
advantage of using LabVIEW is its ability to connect
with other open source drivers. LabVIEW and Arduino is
linked with specific palette called VISA in VI. Details of
each stages is elaborated further in next sections.

Figure 2. Concept of BCI – EEG for neuro-prosthetic hand.

III.

Data Acquisition is collected through Emotiv EEG
headset. The working principle of EEG Emotiv headset is
to capture the brain signal in microvolt (μV) produced
during specific activities. Emotiv EEG headset, comes
pre-configured with 14 electrodes located over 10-20
International System positions AF3, F7, F3, FC5, T7, P7,
O1, O2, P8, T8, FC6, F4, F8, and AF4 using 2 reference
electrodes show in Fig. 3. The concept of this study is to
acquire signals from the motor cortex area, thus the
arrangement of Emotiv Headset electrodes focusing on
the pre-motor and frontal regions is found suitable for the
development process at F3 and FC5 location. The headset
aligns; band pass filters, and digitizes the signal at 128 Hz
before transmitting wirelessly to a laptop.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 3. 10-20 System electrodes position: (a) functional areas of the
cerebral cortex, (b) f3 electrodes placement on pre-motor area, part of
motor cortex, and (c) Emotiv electrode positions.

Figure 1. Brain waves classifications according to frequency [Hz].

©2018 Int. J. Elec. & Elecn. Eng. & Telcomm.

DATA ACQUISITION

191

International Journal of Electrical and Electronic Engineering & Telecommunications Vol. 7, No. 4, October 2018

IV.

used to determine the connection setting USB COM port
and bit data. While the second consumer interface
integration serves as a data graph. There is also the status
of eye movement and status subject movement of
prosthetic hand. It will also show error status if there are
problems in this programming.

SIGNAL PRE-PROCESSING, FEATURE EXTRACTION
& CLASSIFICATION

Signal pre-processing and feature extraction and
classification stages are concluded in LabVIEW
programming. LabVIEW program is one of the products
of National Instrument (NI) in 1986 under the name
Laboratory Virtual Instrument Engineering Workbench
(LabVIEW). LabVIEW program is also referred to as
virtual instrument (VI) because some operations in
LabVIEW icon resembling instruments like oscilloscopes
and multimeters. LabVIEW is a graphical programming
language or Graphical Programming lined with a variety
of virtual icons to replace the text programming in
generating application. LabVIEW Software is different
from other software compiler such as MATLAB and
visual BASIC, which are using a text programming.
Programming in LabVIEW is modular in which a
complex program can be created in a number of other
sub-programs.
In signal pre-processing phase, the EEG signal data is
validated then loaded into the LabVIEW program to
clean it from insignificant artifacts. It is required to clean
the signal data before can be processed further to get
higher classification rates [14]. Then, a cleaned signal
data is sent to be extracted and classified. Classification is
important to determine the pattern recognition of the
brain waves signal of specific activities to control the
neuro-prosthetic hand.
LabVIEW is comprised of three main components; the
first is the front panel user interface. The second is the
block diagram consisting of graphics resources that
represent functions of the VI and the third component is
intended as a connection panel to connector every
function VI for perfect data flow. Each VI has the
functions of each system and represents the specific
information that is used to transfer data to the computer.
The LabVIEW used in particular is connected to
MATLAB for the data analysis. The LabVIEW for neuroprosthetics hand is connected with MyRIO drivers. The
advantage of using LabVIEW is that it has the virtual
instrument package manager (VIPM) use toolkit that can
be upgraded and can use a third party such as a toolkit
that can be used in research such as VISA Toolkit, and
Emotiv Toolkit and Arduino Toolkit. Arduino Toolkit is
implemented in this development concept.
V.

Figure 4. Front Panel neuro-prosthetic hand

Figure 5. Subject try to control the neuro-prosthetic hand.

The feedback of the brain waves is sent to the
MechaTE LEFT Robot Hand, a completed five fingers
hand with five degrees of freedom using micro servo
motor. The MechaTE LEFT Robot Hand is improved by
adding a prosthetic hand finger tips to get more friction
for a better grasping movement. The fingertip is designed
using CATIA software and printed using a 3D Printer
Machine.
VI. EVALUATION & RESULTS
The inclusion criteria for the screening of subjects
include the following; a) adult above 18 years old, b)
healthy, c) right-handed, with d) no brain injuries history.
The subjects are trained to control the prosthetic hand
using finger flexion-rest-extension for brain wave pattern
classifications. During the recording, the subjects were
asked to sit in a comfortable armchair and a computer
monitor was fixated in front of the subjects. The subject
were asked to perform resting, isometric finger extension
and flexion movements, based on a visual stimuli
presented to the subjects via a computer monitor and to
hold those positions against resistance. The visual stimuli
presented last four seconds and is embedded into a 10
second cycle including two seconds for baseline
correction, and four seconds for the subject to relax the
hand, blink and swallow . The duration of the recording is
60 minutes for each subject. Subjects also need to
minimize the body movement, eyes movement and eyes
blinking during recording to decrease signal noise.

COMPUTER INTERACTION & FEEDBACK

Graphical user interface (GUI) is a monitoring system
which is used in this project was developed by using
LabVIEW software. The advantage of using LabVIEW
software is to monitor the voltage on pin Arduino via data
serial and controlling servo motor using LabVIEW GUI.
Arduino has the ability to transmit data in serial form and
display on a computer monitor, but only in the form of a
digit number. But LabVIEW has the capability to process
serial data which is sent to a chart or graphical graph for
more details illustrated in Fig. 4.
This simple GUI template was developed using two
consumers setting and simulation. Consumer setting is

©2018 Int. J. Elec. & Elecn. Eng. & Telcomm.

192

International Journal of Electrical and Electronic Engineering & Telecommunications Vol. 7, No. 4, October 2018

From the data classifications above, we are able to
recognize finger flexion-rest-extension pattern through
the EEG signals. The classification accuracies for finger
flexion versus finger extension for subjects 1, 2, 3, 4 and
5 are 56.5%, 56.3%, 57.9%, 60.4%, and 58.7%
respectively. Comparing to the random guessing level of
50% for binary classification [16], [17], the evaluation
shows better classification.

For classification of EEG data, ERD/ERS is referred
for any energy changes of specific frequencies at motor
cortex and increase or decrease in specific frequency
bands. An algorithm to solve this is the spectrallyweighted common spatial pattern (Spec-CSP). It
generates filter vectors that assign a weight to different
locations and frequencies in order to maximize the
difference between finger extension, flexion and rest.

Figure 6. Spec-CSP filtered spatial projections from one subject.

Fig. 6, shows the sample of Spec-CSP data projections
from one subject. The classification rates between
extension versus rest, flexion versus rest and extension
versus flexion are calculated using 5-fold cross validation.
The interval providing the best classification result is
used [15] in the analysis. This change of interval allows
finding the part of data that holds the most relevant
information for classification. In machine learning
method, data with label will be trained in training
function to calibrate a model. Then a new data with
model calibration will be applied into a predict function
to class a label.
To generalize the narrow-band ERD/ERS, the baseline
or epoch-mean power spectrum and the event-related
spectral perturbation (ERSP) of FC5 electrode at each
subject were measured in time frequency analysis.
Calculating an ERSP requires computing the power
spectrum over a sliding latency window and averaging
across data trials. The color at each image pixel indicates
power (in dB) at a given frequency and latency relative to
the time locking event. From Fig. 7, subject 1, 2, 3, 4 and
5 shows de-synchronization of beta rhythms (14-30 Hz)
in the respective area (FC5) for right finger movement.
Significant EEG changes were observed over FC5 since it
is the closest to the primary sensorimotor area. In all five
subjects, differentiation between isometric finger flexion
and extension movement for right handed subject was
possible within the beta band (14-30 Hz).

©2018 Int. J. Elec. & Elecn. Eng. & Telcomm.

193

Figure 7. Time frequency decompositions of FC5 electrode activities for
all subjects.

VII. CONCLUSION
The main objectives of this research are to develop a
concept of neuro-prosthetics hand, acquiring the signal
data from the EEG Emotiv Headset and develop a GUI
using LabVIEW software based on the signal obtained
from the Emotiv EEG headset. An EEG data
classifications of finger flexion-rest-extension movement
has been successfully conducted offline. A real-time
evaluation with the LabVIEW control system using
MechaTE Robot Hand shall proves the concept further.
Towards development of neuro-prosthetic hand with BCI
control, the classification accuracy is playing the main
role in interpreting signal data. Based on review [18],
classification of different movements of the same hand
should increase the number of separable classes available
for a BCI system.

International Journal of Electrical and Electronic Engineering & Telecommunications Vol. 7, No. 4, October 2018

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The research team thanks Universiti Teknologi MARA
(UiTM) Shah Alam, Selangor and the National
Instruments (NI) for supporting this research under the
grant number 600-IRMI/PERDANA 5/3 BESTARI
(087/2018) and 2017 Academic Research Grant Program.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]
[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

World Health Organization. Guidelines for training personnel in
developing countries for prosthetics and orthotics services,
Geneva, 2005.
Malaysia Statistics Department. Population clock. (2018). [Online].
Available: https://www.dosm.gov.my
J. R. Wolpaw, N. Birbaumer, W. J. Heetderks, D. J. McFarland, P.
H. Peckham, G. Schalk, and T. M. Vaughan, “Brain-Computer
interface technology: A review of the first international meeting,”
IEEE Trans. on Rehabilitation Engineering , vol. 8, no. 2, pp.
164–173, 2000.
A. B. Schwartz, X. T. Cui, D. J. Weber, and D. W. Moran, “Braincontrolled interfaces: Movement restoration with neural
prosthetics,” Neuron, vol. 52, pp. 205–220, 2006.
Q. Li, D. Ding, and M. Conti, “Brain-Computer Interface
applications: Security and privacy challenges,” in Proc. IEEE
Conf. on Communications and Network Security, 2015, pp. 663666.
J. Wolpaw, N. Birbaumer, D. McFarland, G. Pfurtscheller, T.
Vaughan, “Brain-computer interfaces for communication and
control.,” Clinical Neurophysiology, vol. 113, no. 6, pp. 767-91,
2002.
T. Kaufmann, S. Schulz, A. Köblitz, G. Renner, C. Wessig, and A.
Kübler, “Face stimuli effectively prevent brain-computer interface
inefficiency in patients with neurodegenerative disease,” Clinical
Neurophysiology, vol. 124, no. 5, pp. 893-900, 2013.
B. Rebsamen, C. Guan, H. Zhang, C. Wang, C. Teo, M. H. Ang,
and E. Burdet, “A brain controlled wheelchair to navigate in
familiar environments,” IEEE Trans. on Neural Systems and
Rehabilitation Engineering, vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 590–598, 2010.
Y. Wang, B. Hong, X. Gao, and S. Gao, “Implementation of a
brain-computer interface based on three states of motor imagery,”
in Proc. Annual Int. Conf. of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine
and Biology, 2007, pp. 5059–5062.
M. Bryan, J. Green, M. Chung, L. Chang, R. Scherer, J. Smith,
and R. P. N. Rao, “An Adaptive brain-computer interface for
humanoid robot control,” in Proc. 11th IEEE-RAS International
Conference on Humanoid Robots, 2011, pp. 199–204.
V. Bento, L. Paula, A. Ferreira, N. Figueiredo, A. Tomé, F. Silva,
and J. Paulo, “Advances in EEG-based brain-computer interfaces
for control and biometry,” presented at the 7th Int. Conf. on Image
Analysis and Recognition, Póvoa de Varzim, June 2010.
T. D. Sunny, T. Aparna, P. Neethu, et al., “Robotic arm with
brain-computer interfacing,” Procedia Technology, vol. 24, pp.
1089-1096, 2016.
R. G. de P. Menendez, Q. Noirhomme, F. Cincotti, D. Mattia, F.
Aloise, and S. G. Andin, “Modern electrophysiological methods
for brain-computer interfaces,” Computational Intelligence and
Neuroscience, 2007.

©2018 Int. J. Elec. & Elecn. Eng. & Telcomm.

194

[14] K. Johar, C. Y. Low, F. A. Hanapiah, A. Jaffar, and M. A. A.
Kasim, “Towards the development of an electroencephalography
based neuroprosthetic terminal device,” J. Teknol., vol. 76, no. 4,
2015.
[15] J. Boelts, A. Cerquera, and F. Ruiz-olaya, “Decoding of imaginary
motor movements of fists applying spatial filtering in a BCI
simulated application,” Artif. Comput. Biol. Med., vol. 3, pp. 153–
162, 2015.
[16] G. Lange, C. Y. Low, K. Johar, F. A. Hanapiah, and F.
Kamaruzaman, “Classification of electroencephalogram data from
hand grasp and release movements for BCI controlled prosthesis,”
Procedia Technol., vol. 26, pp. 374–381, 2016.
[17] G. R. Müller-Putz and G. Pfurtscheller, “Control of an electrical
prosthesis with an SSVEP-based BCI,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 361–364, 2008.
[18] A. Vuckovic and F. Sepulveda, “Delta band contribution in cue
based single trial classification of real and imaginary wrist
movements,” Med. Biol. Eng. Computer, no. 46, pp. 529–539,
2008.
Muhammad Azmi Ayub is currently the Dean of the Faculty of
Mechanical Engineering, Universiti Teknologi MARA Selangor,
Malaysia. His research interest are particularly related to Control
System Engineering, Design and Modeling of Mechatronic Systems,
Visual Servo Control, Vision Directed Laser Materials Processing,
Automation, Unmanned Ground Vehicles, Machine Vision,
Mechatronics And Robotics System, and Engineering Education. He has
been with Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Universiti Teknologi
MARA, Selangor Malaysia since 1990 and is registered with Board of
Engineers Malaysia as a Professional Engineer carrying the title of Ir.
Aainaa Zainal is currently registered as a student in Master of Science
in Mechanical Engineering (By Research) at Universiti Teknologi
MARA. Her research interest involves prosthetic hand and robotics
technology.
Khairunnisa Johar is currently registered as a Ph.D. candidate in the
Faculty of Mechanical Engineering at Universiti Teknologi MARA. Her
research interest involves bio-mechanical engineering, EEG-EMG data
analysis, and prosthetic hand technology. She is pursuing her study in
the field of rehabilitation engineering.
Noor Ayuni Che Zakaria is currently the Malaysia Coordinator of the
Research Alliance for Intelligent System in Medical Technology
(RAISE-MED), a project that establishing the relation of Germany –
Malaysia in system intelligent field. Her research interests include
Mechatronic Intelligent Systems, Medical Internet of Things and
Rehabilitation Engineering. She was graduated from the Shibaura
Institute of Technology, Japan with the Doctor of Philosophy
(Functional Control System) in the year of 2016.
Low Cheng Yee was graduated from Paderborn University in the state
of North Rhine-Westphalia in Germany with the Doctor of Philosophy
(Mechatronics) in the year of 2009. He is currently the Head of the
Advanced Dynamic Control Research Group in Universiti Tun Hussein
Onn Malaysia and also the Malaysia Coordinator of Research Alliance
for Intelligent System in Medical Technology (RAISE-MED). His
research interests involves Smart Health, Mechatronics Rehabilitation,
Robotics, and Design Methodology.

