International Journal of Mechanical Engineering and Robotics Research Vol. 7, No. 5, September 2018

Development of Modular Framework for the
Semi-Autonomous RISE Wheelchair with
Multiple User Interfaces Using Robot Operating
System (ROS)
Ali Bin Wahid
Robotics and Intelligent Systems Engineering (RISE) Lab, School of Mechanical and Manufacturing Engineering
(SMME), National University of Science and Technology (NUST), Islamabad, Pakistan
Email: alibinwahid@smme.edu.pk

Usama Siraj, Mohammad Affan, Habib Ahmed
RISE Lab, SMME-NUST, Islamabad, Pakistan

Fahad Islam
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
Email: fi@andrew.cmu.edu

Umar Ansari, Muhammad Naveed
SMME-NUST, Islamabad, Pakistan

Yasar Ayaz
RISE Lab, SMME-NUST, Islamabad, Pakistan
Email: yasar@smme.nust.edu.pk

Abstract— Electric wheelchairs are widely used by
individuals with various forms of physical disabilities.
Typically, these wheelchairs are controlled using a steering
device (e.g., joysticks). However, for people with limited
physical mobility, the incorporation of semi-autonomous
navigation and control within electric wheelchairs can
considerably improve their mobility and quality of life. In
this paper, we present the development of a re-configurable
framework and user interfaces for RISE wheelchair, which
provide flexibility and customizability depending on the
nature of the disability of the users. At the same time,
effective navigation and obstacle avoidance capabilities are
incorporated using Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
(SLAM) that allow the RISE wheelchair to navigate in
different environments. A goal estimation algorithm has also
developed in order to travel from the current location to the
destination with minimal guidance from the user. In this
paper, the various aspects of the RISE wheelchair will be
discussed, ranging from architectural development,
simulation, and practical experimentation to evaluation of
the functionality and feasibility of the various modules. 

I.

In the United States alone, the people suffering from
various disabilities amounted to 12.5% of the total
population in 2015 [1]. The different types of disabilities
include physical, hearing, vision, ambulatory, self-care,
independent-living, and cognitive disabilities [1], where
each form of disability poses a host of different risks and
challenges for the individuals and their families. The
chances of leading a normal life for the disabled
individuals are minimal, especially in regions of the
world with higher levels of poverty, wage gaps, and lack
of social inclusion within the society [2]. The use and
practical
application
of
various
technological
advancements has allowed some level of mobility to the
physically disabled individuals. One example of such
applications in the RISE wheelchair, which is given in
Fig. 1. However, the entailing high costs and limited
availability of such amenities prevent their widespread
usage in various societies [2].

Index Terms—Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
(SLAM), Visual Odometry, Robot Operating System (ROS),
electric wheelchair, rehabilitative robotics



Manuscript received June 1, 2018; revised August 6, 2018.

© 2018 Int. J. Mech. Eng. Rob. Res
doi: 10.18178/ijmerr.7.5.515-520

INTRODUCTION

515

International Journal of Mechanical Engineering and Robotics Research Vol. 7, No. 5, September 2018

wheelchair system has been developed that attempts to
incorporate the needs and specifications of the user
community in mind for providing a mobility solution to
individuals suffering from varying levels of physical
disabilities. In section II, an overview on the different
aspects of the system architecture of the RISE wheelchair
will be provided. Section III will expound on the results
of the simulation and practical experimentation
conducted on the RISE wheelchair. Future improvements
on the RISE wheelchair will be highlighted in section IV.
II.

This section will discuss the different components of
the system hardware and software architecture, which
enable the RISE wheelchair to perform a list of different
functions that includes functionality for supporting
multiple-user interface-based wheelchair control, object
detection and avoidance, simultaneous localization and
mapping, and proposed algorithm for effective semiautonomous navigation. The modular, plug-and-play
nature of the hardware architecture stems from the need
for incorporating the various specifications and catering
to the different physical limitations of the disabled
individuals. For example, individuals suffering from the
loss or impairment of the proper functioning of the lower
limbs might be able to navigate the wheelchair using a
joystick-based control. However, a similar control
configuration might not be suitable for individuals
suffering from upper- or full-body paralysis. Therefore,
the plug-and-play configuration of the system’s
architecture allow modifications in the wheelchair
controls. At the same time, the modular nature of the
system’s architecture facilitates the easy upgradation of
the hardware modules in response to changes in the
technological enhancements and the users’ needs in the
future. The complete details of the RISE wheelchair
system have been outlined in Fig. 2.
It can be seen from Fig. 2 that the architecture of the
RISE wheelchair can be divided into the following four
parts: (i) steering devices (e.g., eye camera for control
using eye-gaze gestures, EEG headset for using braincontrolled interface, tablet for touch-based control and
joystick for manual control); (ii) collation of sensors for
safe driving and navigation (e.g., laser-range finders,
stereo-vision camera, battery, and motor drive); and (iii)
on-board computational resources for using sensor data to
perform localization, mapping, and obstacle avoidance.
The current RISE wheelchair framework has also the
capability to incorporate a robotic manipulator for aiding
the disabled individuals (especially those unable to move
their arms) to pick up/place and use different objects. In
Fig. 2, a HMI Tablet has been used as the intermediary
module for connecting various user input devices (e.g.,
eye camera, joystick, EEG headset) to the Vision PC (a
secondary computer device used for handling the data
from the different user input devices) and the Cobra PC
(a primary computer device, which combines the user
commands with feedback from different sensors for
environmental perception and navigation to safely reach
from the initial to the final position, as specified by the

Figure 1. RISE Wheelchair Platform

Recent advancements in the field of mobile robotics
have shown promising results for developing technology
that can notably improve the lives of physically disabled
individuals. Intelligent wheelchair-based research
projects remain an active research area, which is being
actively investigated by different research groups around
the world [3]–[6]. In this regard, researchers at one of
those groups have developed a modular and semiautonomous Smart Wheelchair Component System
incorporating sonar and infrared sensors [4]. Similarly,
another wheelchair discussed in [5] utilized camera and
inertial measurement-based sensors based on the
principles of dead reckoning that allowed manual
navigation based on saved paths within known
environments. The Intelligent Wheelchair [6] detected
landmarks using visual information and navigated
autonomously using sonar, infrared and vision-based
sensors sonar-, infrared-, and vision-based sensors. In the
Intelligent Wheelchair System developed in [7], a
combination of gesture and facial expression recognition
was used to take input from the users, and a combination
of vision and sonar sensors was used to navigate from the
initial position to the designated location. Wheelchair
developed by INRO [8] allowed autonomous navigation
as well as wheelchair convoy formation and management
using Sonar and Global Positioning System (GPS).
Similarly, Luoson III [9] used sonar, vision, and inertial
measurement-based sensors to assist in navigation, along
with the ability to follow and track moving targets.
SIRIUS [10] is another wheelchair project that can save
routes and follow the recorded routes at the users’
discretion. It can also avoid obstacles by using sonar
sensors.
Within this research, an effort has been made to ensure
that a number of different features not previously
addressed in the literature could be incorporated in the
RISE wheelchair. Some of these features include the use
of multiple user interfaces to allow better usability for
individuals suffering from varying forms of physical
disabilities (ranging from limbic muscular deformities
and partial paralysis to motor neuron disease and
paraplegia) as well as plug-and-play configuration-based
architecture using the Robot Operating System (ROS) to
allow seamless addition and incorporation of features and
different hardware platforms to provide a reliable
performance. In this research, an assistive robotic
© 2018 Int. J. Mech. Eng. Rob. Res

SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE AND DESIGN

516

International Journal of Mechanical Engineering and Robotics Research Vol. 7, No. 5, September 2018

nodes that define the overall behavior of the mobile
platform. ROS was utilized for the development of a
standard robotic platform architecture for the RISE
wheelchair, which considerably facilitates the integration
of additional components to the existing robotic
framework. Due to the easy portability and transferability
of the defined ROS-based framework from one platform
to another, the robustness of the proposed framework can
be easily assessed on different mobile platforms.

user). In order to incorporate multiple-user interfaces, the
existing communication protocol between joystick and
motor control was decoded to facilitate the development
of multiple user interfaces.
The developed framework for the RISE wheelchair
provides a hierarchical approach, which specifies that the
low-level functions and decisions, such as collision
avoidance, are performed by nodes directly connected to
the sensors (e.g., motor control and laser-range finder),
whereas higher order decision-making is controlled by

Figure 2. Architectural overview for RISE wheelchair

III.

dimensional specifications. Fig. 3 outlines the 3D model
of the wheelchair. This model was incorporated within
the ROS-based simulation during the map generation,
localization, and development of the interface for goal
generation, which will be discussed in the proceeding
sections of the paper. Apart from the 3D model, the
simulation of the actual environment for localization and
mapping played an important part. The result of the
environment simulation is given in Fig. 4. The map
generation relied on the sensor data from the laser-range
finder, which aided in the development of a simulated
model for the actual environment. The simulated map of
the actual environment was updated based on the
availability of the sensor data pertaining to specific
locations within the environment.

EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

This section will discuss the results of the
experimental testing of the proposed architecture for a
rehabilitative mobile platform, namely the RISE
wheelchair. In order to elaborate on the different phases
of the actual testing, this section will be divided into four
sub-sections, which will discuss the different modes for
development and feasibility assessment of the semiautonomous RISE wheelchair. In the first sub-section, the
results pertaining to the 3D modelling aspect of the RISE
wheelchair on SolidWorks® will be discussed, along with
the environmental simulation results on ROS for map
generation using sensory feedback. In the second subsection, the results of the testing for the RISE wheelchair
will be highlighted in response to the different user
interfaces proposed for the users afflicted with varying
level of physical disabilities. In the third sub-section, the
results of the practical experimentation for localization,
mapping, and navigation of the RISE wheelchair will be
highlighted, along with the different algorithms utilized
for analyzing the sensor data. In the fourth sub-section,
the proposed goal selection algorithm will be discussed,
which is designed to allow disabled individuals to
navigate manually from one point to another, while
relying on minimal user input.

B. User Interface
The multiple interfaces for the control of the RISE
wheelchair have been developed in view of the diverging
needs of the different users in mind, which are essential
for developing technological solutions that cater to
different types of disabilities of disabled individuals.
Consequently, the different needs and specifications of
the users pertaining to their different physical disabilities
can be easily included without the need for radical
changes in the system’s hardware, architecture, or
physical design of the RISE wheelchair. Some of the
different forms of user interfaces provided include: (i)
joystick or smart phone-based control (people with partial
or full functionality in one or both hands and/or arms can
easily use the joysticks and touch screens for moving and
navigating the wheelchair directly), (ii) eye movement-

A. Simulation
In order to facilitate the accurate simulation of the
RISE wheelchair, its 3D model was developed, which
contained all of the necessary parts with exact

© 2018 Int. J. Mech. Eng. Rob. Res

517

International Journal of Mechanical Engineering and Robotics Research Vol. 7, No. 5, September 2018

comparing the eye gaze-based user interface with the
EEG-based user interface, field experiments and surveys
of different wheelchair users provided the insight that the
majority of the users generally preferred the former to the
latter, as EEG-based user interface required prior training
and long-term usage was not possible due to the limited
battery timing of the Emotiv® EEG headset.

based control (a head-mounted camera focusing on the
gaze-based gestures and eye movement of the users), and
(iii) EEG-based control (brainwaves from an EEG headset
are used to generate commands to control the wheelchair,
as shown in Fig. 5).

Figure 3. 3D model of the RISE wheelchair.

Fig. 5 demonstrates the practical working of the RISE
wheelchair with the help of the EEG headset, which
requires training of the users prior to initiating the brain
commands for movement and navigation of the
wheelchair in different directions. The different choices
of the user interfaces for driving the wheelchair were
based on survey and regular interactions with the
wheelchair users’ community, who were able to highlight
the different hurdles and difficulties faced in the day-today life and the different ways in which improvements
could be proposed to enhance the functionality and
usability of the RISE wheelchair. Fig. 6 shows the usage
of an eye-camera to facilitate the control and navigation
of the RISE wheelchair, along with the output of the
users’ gaze to direct the movement and direction of the
wheelchair. The level of physical disability was the
primary factor, which ultimately dictated the type of
control interface suitable for any particular user. For users
with fully or partially functional upper limbs, joystick and
smart phone-based controls were deemed to be suitable
options, whereas for users suffering from physical
impairments (resulting from accidents, injuries or birth
defects) as well as ailments (such as motor neuron
diseases and various other neural and/or muscular
degenerative diseases), it is more suitable to use an eye
gaze-based user interface and control system. When

Figure 4. Results of environment simulation in ROS and camera feed .

C. Localization and Mapping
Localization and mapping are two of the most
important high-level features of intelligent mobile robotic
platforms. Localization allows the mobile robots to know
their actual position within a given environment while the
mapping of the environment is critical for awareness of
its various features (e.g., location and dimensions of the
different obstacles as well as dimensions of the room and
level of accessibility of each location within the
environment for the mobile robot). In order to accurately
highlight the utilized localization strategy, Fig. 7 outlines
the internal details and gives a brief overview of the
proposed localization algorithm. The accurate
implementation of localization and mapping is essential
as it allows the extraction of robust features from the
environment in order to avoid collisions, bumps, gaps,
and other inaccessible areas in the environment, which
can potentially cause discomfort or endanger the safety of
the user in any way. It can be seen from the Fig. 7 that the
first step in the localization requires pre-processing of the
information received from each frame of the stereo vision
camera.

Figure 5. One of the authors using an EEG Emotiv® headset to drive the RISE wheelchair.

© 2018 Int. J. Mech. Eng. Rob. Res

518

International Journal of Mechanical Engineering and Robotics Research Vol. 7, No. 5, September 2018

dimensions by a single order. In order to find and select a
location within the given 2D map of the environment, a
line from the actual location of the mobile robot on the
2D map rotates in a clockwise fashion (similar to the
hands of the clock) to allow the user to select any location
by using a single push button. Fig. 9 provides the
pseudocode with a detailed overview for the selection of
a goal point within the known indoor environment.

In order to perform pre-processing, data from any
given frame are extracted from the stereovision camera
by corner extraction using FAST features [11] and
computation of 512-bit string for Fast Retina Key Points
(FREAK) descriptors [12]. The matching of key points
between the left and right cameras for FREAK points is
based on Hamming distance. The FREAK descriptors
were used instead of SIFT as calculation of FREAK
descriptors is 100 times more computationally efficient in
comparison with SIFT [12]. The second step involves the
calculation and prediction of the wheelchair’s orientation
in the near-future (for time k + 1), provided that the
existing pose of the wheelchair is already known (for
time k), which is calculated using Sigma Point Kalman
Filter (SPKF) [13]. The stereo motion estimation is
performed using features extracted by calculation of 3D
and 2D points from two different time frames, namely k
and k + 1, as given in Fig. 8. In order to update the
change in the pose of the wheelchair, the feedback from
sensors is used to periodically recalculate and update the
values of SPKF.
Fig. 8 outlines the flowchart for calculating the visual
odometry. It can be seen that data from consecutive
frames are used for calculating neighborhood points for
the frames at the times k − 1 and k. In the neighborhood
search, the 2D points in the current frame k are matched
with the 2D points in the previous frame k − 1. The 2D
points in the frame k – 1 are calculated from the 3D
points. After the 2D and 3D points are calculated and the
motion estimation is performed, the SPKF algorithm is
used for pose calculation and estimation while any
variations in the values between two consecutive
iterations are used for error minimization by comparing
the predicted values with the actual calculated values for
every frame of the stereovision camera.

IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
In this paper, an architectural framework for a semiautonomous wheelchair has been proposed, which
contains modular hardware configuration and multimodal user interfaces (e.g., touch-screen, joystick, EEG
headset, eye-based camera) for facilitating the control and
navigation of the RISE wheelchair. The different types of
user interfaces and the modular nature of the wheelchair
provide a plug-and-play configuration such that users
with different physical disabilities can successfully
operate the wheelchair without the need for additional
software or hardware modifications. The development of
the multi-modal user interface for the RISE wheelchair
has been informed by prior research efforts as well as by
actual wheelchair users with the goal to enhance the easeof-usage and operability of the rehabilitative platform.
Effort has also been made in order to enhance the easeof-usage and comfort level of the wheelchair users so that
users can traverse from one point to another without
facing discomfort or difficulty toward the control and
navigation of the wheelchair.
The RISE wheelchair provides an ideal research
platform in the field of Assistive and Rehabilitation
Robotics. There are a number of different ways to
improve the existing model of the RISE wheelchair. One
of the ways in which this can be accomplished is by
improving the performance and efficiency of the existing
implementation. Since, the existing testing of the RISE
wheelchair has been conducted in indoor environments,
the future works should focus toward improving the
coverage, robustness, and practical utility of the system in
outdoor environments. While any existing software and
hardware deficiencies will also be improved for
enhancing the performance of the RISE wheelchair
platform in varying indoor and outdoor environments.

D. Algorithm for Goal Selection
The purpose of this sub-section is to provide a goal
selection algorithm, which can allow the user to specify
the directions to control the RISE wheelchair with
minimal physical movement. In this manner, the
wheelchair can traverse from the current location to the
desired destination with minimal user input requirements,
ideal for individuals with severe physical disabilities. The
simulation of the 3D environment reduces the number of

Figure 6. One of the authors driving wheelchair using eye-based user interface

© 2018 Int. J. Mech. Eng. Rob. Res

519

International Journal of Mechanical Engineering and Robotics Research Vol. 7, No. 5, September 2018

Figure 7. Proposed and implemented strategy for localization

Figure 8. Flowchart for the Stereo visual odometry in the RISE
wheelchair
[2]
[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]
Figure 9. Pseudocode for the goal selection algorithm

[9]

In view of the state-of-the-art algorithms, the system’s
hardware specifications can also be improved in order to
allow the implementation of algorithms that can facilitate
enhanced capabilities of the RISE wheelchair toward
localization, navigation, and mapping in various indoor
and outdoor real-world environments.

[11]

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

[12]

[10]

The researchers at the RISE Lab, SMME-NUST would
like to acknowledge Sakura Wheelchair Japan, as this
project would not have been possible without their
support and collaboration.

[13]

REFERENCES
[1]

L. Kraus,“2016 Disability Statistics Annual Report” Durham, NH:
University of New Hampshire. 2017.

© 2018 Int. J. Mech. Eng. Rob. Res

520

World Bank Report “World Report on Disability,” Washington,
DC: World Bank. 2011.
Y. Tanimoto, H. Yamamoto, K. Nanba, A. Tokuhiro, K. Furusawa,
and H. Ukida, “Measurement of wheelchair users’ calorie
consumption to develop a wheelchair activity device,” in 2016
Proc. IEEE International Instrumentation and Measurement
Technology Conference Proceedings, pp. 1–6, May 2016.
R. Simpson, E. LoPresti, S. Hayashi, I. Nourbakhsh, and D. Miller,
“The smart wheelchair component system,” Journal of
Rehabilitation Research and Development, vol. 41, no. 3B, p. 429,
2004.
T. R¨ofer and A. Lankenau, “Architecture and applications of the
bremen autonomous wheelchair,” Information Sciences, vol. 126,
no. 1, pp. 1–20, 2000.
W. S. Gribble, R. L. Browning, M. Hewett, E. Remolina, and B. J.
Kuipers, Integrating Vision and Spatial Reasoning for Assistive
Navigation, pp. 179–193. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, 1998.
Y. Murakami, Y. Kuno, N. Shimada, and Y. Shirai, “Collision
avoidance by observing pedestrians’ faces for intelligent
wheelchairs,” in Proc. 2001 IEEE/RSJ International Conference
on Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2001., vol. 4, pp. 2018–2023
vol.4, 2001.
K. Schilling, H. Roth, R. Lieb, and H. Stutzle, “Sensors to
improve the safety for wheelchair users,” in Proc. 3rd Annual
TIDE Congress, 1998.
T. M. Chen and R. C. Luo, “Multilevel multi-agent based team
decision fusion for mobile robot behavior control,” in Proc. the
3rd World Congress on Intelligent Control and Automation, vol. 1,
pp. 489–494, IEEE, 2000.
A. Civit-Balcells, F. D. Del Rio, G. Jimenez, J. Sevillano, C.
Amaya, and S. Vicente,“Sirius: Improving the maneuverability of
powered wheelchairs,” in Proc. the 2002 International Conference
on Control Applications, vol. 2, pp. 790–795, IEEE, 2002.
E. Rosten and T. Drummond, “Machine learning for high-speed
corner detection,” in European Conf. Computer Vision, 2006, vol.
1, pp. 430–443, 2006.
A. Alahi, R. Ortiz, and P. Vandergheynst, “Freak: Fast retina
keypoint,” in Proc. IEEE International Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 510–517, June 2012.
G. Sibley, G. Sukhatme, and L. Matthies, “The iterated sigma
point kalman filter with applications to long range stereo” in Proc.
Robotics: Science and Systems, August 2006

