Aalborg Universitet

Neurorehabilitation therapy of patients with severe stroke based on functional
electrical stimulation commanded by a brain computer interface
Tabernig, Carolina B; Lopez, Camila A; Carrere, Lucía C; Spaich, Erika G; Ballario, Carlos H
Published in:
Journal of Rehabilitation and Assistive Technologies Engineering
DOI (link to publication from Publisher):
10.1177/2055668318789280
Creative Commons License
CC BY-NC 4.0
Publication date:
2018
Document Version
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record
Link to publication from Aalborg University

Citation for published version (APA):
Tabernig, C. B., Lopez, C. A., Carrere, L. C., Spaich, E. G., & Ballario, C. H. (2018). Neurorehabilitation therapy
of patients with severe stroke based on functional electrical stimulation commanded by a brain computer
interface. Journal of Rehabilitation and Assistive Technologies Engineering, 5, 1-12.
https://doi.org/10.1177/2055668318789280

General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
? Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
? You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
? You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal ?
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us at vbn@aub.aau.dk providing details, and we will remove access to
the work immediately and investigate your claim.

Special Collection: IFESS 2017: Original Research Article

Neurorehabilitation therapy of patients
with severe stroke based on functional
electrical stimulation commanded by
a brain computer interface

Journal of Rehabilitation and Assistive
Technologies Engineering
Volume 5: 1–12
! The Author(s) 2018
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/2055668318789280
journals.sagepub.com/home/jrt

Carolina B Tabernig1 , Camila A Lopez3, Lucı́a C Carrere1,
Erika G Spaich2 and Carlos H Ballario3

Abstract
Introduction: Brain computer interface is an emerging technology to treat the sequelae of stroke. The purpose of this
study was to explore the motor imagery related desynchronization of sensorimotor rhythms of stroke patients and to
assess the efficacy of an upper limb neurorehabilitation therapy based on functional electrical stimulation controlled by a
brain computer interface.
Methods: Eight severe chronic stroke patients were recruited. The study consisted of two stages: screening and therapy.
During screening, the ability of patients to desynchronize the contralateral oscillatory sensorimotor rhythms by motor
imagery of the most affected hand was assessed. In the second stage, a therapeutic intervention was performed. It
involved 20 sessions where an electrical stimulator was activated when the patient’s cerebral activity related to motor
imagery was detected. The upper limb was assessed, before and after the intervention, by the Fugl–Meyer score (primary
outcome). Spasticity, motor activity, range of movement and quality of life were also evaluated (secondary outcomes).
Results: Desynchronization was identified in all screened patients. Significant post-treatment improvement (p < 0.05)
was detected in the primary outcome measure and in the majority of secondary outcome scores.
Conclusions: The results suggest that the proposed therapy could be beneficial in the neurorehabilitation of stroke
individuals.
Keywords
Brain computer interface, motor imagery, functional electrical stimulation, stroke, rehabilitation, EMOTIV Epocþ,
therapy
Date received: 5 October 2017; accepted: 21 June 2018

Introduction
Approximately 25% of men and 20% of women
above 85 years of age will have a stroke, and
between 25% and 40% of the survivors will
develop signiﬁcant sequelae.1 Rehabilitation therapies
seek to generate sensorimotor stimuli through the
repetition of movements and their incorporation to
activities of daily life, favoring the activity-dependent
plasticity of the central nervous system.2–4 It is
known that the type, shape, and synchrony of sensory feedback aﬀects motor relearning.5 Current
evidence suggests that the neural correlate which
associates motor imagery generated in sensorimotor

cortical areas with activity produced by visual and
proprioceptive feedback is a basic mechanism of
motor learning.6,7
1

Laboratorio de Ingenierı́a en Rehabilitación e Investigaciones
Neuromusculares y Sensoriales (LIRINS), Facultad de Ingenierı́a,
Universidad Nacional de Entre Rı́os, Oro Verde, Argentina
2
SMIÕ , Department of Health Science and Technology, Aalborg
University, Denmark
3
Fundación Rosarina de Neuro-rehabilitación, Rosario, Argentina
Corresponding author:
Carolina B Tabernig, Laboratorio de Ingenierı́a en Rehabilitación e
Investigaciones Neuromusculares y Sensoriales (LIRINS), Facultad de
Ingenierı́a, Universidad Nacional de Entre Rı́os, Oro Verde, Argentina.
Email: ctabernig@ingenieria.uner.edu.ar

Creative Commons Non Commercial CC BY-NC: This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 License (http://
www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/) which permits non-commercial use, reproduction and distribution of the work without further permission provided the
original work is attributed as specified on the SAGE and Open Access pages (https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).

2

Journal of Rehabilitation and Assistive Technologies Engineering

Functional electrical stimulation (FES) is a neurorehabilitation therapy that assists the execution of
repetitive functional movements commanded by the
user while generating proprioceptive and visual feedback. To restitute the lost functionality of paralyzed
limbs, a stimulator is activated at the moment of the
realization of the desired motor function. In this sense,
several signals have been proposed to control FES
devices, among them heel switches, shoulder pads, pressure sensors, and brain computer interfaces (BCI).8,9,10
A BCI is a device that records and processes brain
signals to establish a communication channel between
an individual and the outside environment.11 One of the
paradigms of BCI is based on the identiﬁcation of the
brain activity related to the motor imagery (MI). MI
produces the desynchronization of the sensorimotor
rhythms in the electroencephalogram (EEG).
Sensorimotor rhythms refer to oscillations recorded
on brain activity in somatic sensorimotor areas, concentrated in the frequency bands mu (8–12 Hz) and beta
(12–30 Hz). This desynchronization is evidenced as a
decrease in the power of the EEG signal related to
rest. This event, which happens during MI, is called
event-related desynchronization (ERD).12,13
ERD can be observed on a speciﬁc EEG frequency
band and with a spatial distribution in the sensorimotor
cortex related to the MI task.14 It can be visualized
through topographic maps in which the spatial distribution of an ERD indicator for a given EEG frequency
is represented. The coeﬃcient of determination r2 is one
of the indicators of brain activity related to MI. This
coeﬃcient takes real values between 0 and 1; values
close to 1 indicate very good discrimination between
rest and MI, while values close to 0 indicate that they
are scarcely distinguishable.15
Recent works have reported topographic maps
obtained during MI and movement of foot in healthy
subjects,16 and of hands in people with stroke sequelae.17,18 They concluded that despite damage to the
motor cortex due to stroke, it is feasible to detect the
ERD associated with the MI of the aﬀected limb. In
addition, previous studies with BCI showed that correct
training to generate the desynchronization of the electroencephalographic rhythm in patients with stroke by
MI, could prove beneﬁcial in their rehabilitation.19,20 In
this sense, the ERD during MI for controlling a hand
orthosis has been shown to be useful in facilitating
motor relearning in both healthy subjects21 and stroke
patients.22 Recently, researchers demonstrated the
feasibility of continuously decoding the movement
intention of paralysed limbs in stroke survivors from
the ipsilateral unaﬀected motor cortex18 and the therapeutic potential of a BCI-driven neurorehabilitation
approach using the unaﬀected hemisphere and an exoskeleton.23 Some authors reported that, in isolated

cases, the application of BCI and FES to control paralyzed hand grasping was successful suggesting that this
methodology could also generate favorable plastic
changes at the cortical level.24,25 In addition, a recent
study recommended that FES be kept active throughout the duration of MI.26 However, the use of BCI and
FES for therapeutic purposes in patients with sequelae
of stroke is poor.
This article presents the results of a study whose
objectives were to explore the ERD of stroke patients
during MI and to evaluate the eﬀects of a neurorehabilitation therapy based on BCI and FES (BCI–FES) for
chronic patients with sequelae of ischemic stroke. It is
sought to facilitate neuroplasticity through the activation of the cerebral cortex in the presence of MI
(BCI-MI) and the sensory feedback produced by the
movement of the most aﬀected upper limb produced
by FES.

Materials and methods
The study consisted of two stages. During both of
them, patients were asked to imagine extending their
most aﬀected hand. In the ﬁrst stage, the volunteers’
ability to achieve ERD was assessed. The second stage
consisted of 20 sessions using a BCI–FES System.
During these sessions, when cortical activity related to
MI was detected, the FES device was activated to assist
contracting the wrist and ﬁnger extensor muscles of the
most aﬀected limb.

Patients
Fourty-nine patients with unilateral ischemic stroke
were contacted from September 2014 to April 2016,
of whom eight were enrolled in the study after assessing
the following criteria: at least one year of evolution
since the ictus (average evolution: 36.8  24.2 months,
two females and six males, average age: 61.2  19.0
years), with paralysis or marked weakness of the
ﬂexor-extensors of the ﬁngers and the upper limb: modiﬁed Fugl–Meyer–Assessment (mFMA) with a score
equal to or less than 25. Preservation of the cognitive
functions necessary to understand the cues of the therapy and the informed consent, good sight, and minimal
or null compromise of the sensitivity of the aﬀected
limb, were also required. The research was conducted
following the Declaration of Helsinki. All of included
patients expressed their written consent to participate in
the study, which was approved by the Ethical
Committee of the Fundación Rosarina de Neuro-rehabilitacion, Rosario, province of Santa Fe, Argentina
(RENIS No. IS001710).
Patients who had any psychiatric or neurological
condition besides stroke, cerebellar syndrome, injuries

Tabernig et al.

3

in the peripheral nervous system of the more aﬀected
limb, severe pain, spasticity grade 3 or higher on the
modiﬁed Ashworth scale (mAsh), and/or taking high
doses of medication that may cause inhibition of neuroplasticity were excluded. Table 1 shows the demographic characteristics of the patients at the start of
the study, the location of their lesions, and the
mFMA score with a maximum of 54 points.

Stage 1: Screening
Materials. For the assessment of the patients’ ability to
achieve ERD, eight monopolar EEG channels were recorded using a system consisting of the ampliﬁer
g.MOBIlabþÕ (Guger Technologies, Austria, sampling
frequency: 256 Hz, resolution: 16 bits, ﬁlters:
0.5–100 Hz, sensitivity: 500 lV) and the BCI2000 software platform.27 In the last one, a notch ﬁlter was used
to suppress the 50 Hz power line interference and the
signal was ﬁltered using a bandpass ﬁlter between
0.5 Hz and 40 Hz.
As Figure 1 shows, the cap g.GAMMAÕ was used
for the positioning of the passive electrodes
(g.LADYbirdÕ ) on the scalp according to the extended
version of the international 10-20 system. Taking into
account the cortical areas of interest for the study, positions C3, C4, T7, T8, Pz, F3, F4, and Cz were selected.
The ground and reference electrodes were placed on the
right and left mastoids, respectively.
Experimental protocol. Each subject was asked to sit in a
comfortable and relaxed position. During the experiment, subjects were instructed to avoid eye blinking
and/or muscle movement as much as possible. EEG
recordings consisted of three series with rest intervals
between 1 and 2 min. Each series included three diﬀerent tasks which involved the MI of the right hand, the
left hand or both hands in response to an auditory cue.

Every task was repeated 10 times randomly during each
series, separated by a 5 to 6 s random inter-trial interval. During the inter-trial intervals, subjects were asked
to relax. At the end, 30 EEG recordings for each task
were obtained, meanwhile the signals were visually
examined by the operator.
EEG signal processing. The EEG recordings between 8
and 30 Hz were processed. This frequency range was
divided in two frequency bands: mu rhythm and beta
rhythm. The topographic maps of r2 were computed
using the ‘‘Oﬄine Analysis’’ tool available in BCI2000
platform.27 The most discriminative frequency of ERD
(fERD) was determined as the one for which the spatial
distribution of ERD in the cortical region related to the
MI of the paretic upper limb (C3 or C4) was best and
with the highest value of r2 .

Stage 2: Therapy
Materials. The BCI–FES System was developed for an
earlier study.10 It is a robust, fast-positioning system,
which detects brain activity related to MI, and produces movement by FES. It consists of three blocks:
the ﬁrst is the BCI, made up of electrodes, ampliﬁers
and EMOTIV EpocþÕ software (EMOTIV Systems
Inc., San Francisco, USA). The EEG was recorded
with 128 Hz sampling rate and 14 bits resolution, ﬁltered with a bandpass ﬁlter between 0.2 Hz and 45 Hz,
and digital notch ﬁlters at 50 Hz and 60 Hz. The second
is a microprocessor-based module that interconnects
the other two blocks, and the third block is the FES
stimulator (Flexicar, Buenos Aires, Argentina) which
generates electrical stimulation pulses when the BCI
sends the command signal (Figure 2). EEG signal was
processed using CognitivTM Suite provided by
EMOTIV EpocÕ ,28 which operation relies on ERD,29

Table 1. Demographic and functional information of the eight stroke patients, evaluated by the modified upper limb Fugl–Meyer
Assessment (mFMA).
Patient

Age

Gender

Evolution time
since ictus (months)

Affected limb

Lesion location

mFMA

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

69
76
62
65
78
18
55
67

M
M
M
M
M
F
M
F

36
12
33
60
14
12
77
50

Left
Left
Right
Left
Left
Left
Left
Left

Subcortical
Cortical/subcortical
Subcortical
Subcortical
Cortical/subcortical
Subcortical
Subcortical
Cortical/subcortical

06
21
19
25
03
20
23
08

4

Journal of Rehabilitation and Assistive Technologies Engineering

Figure 1. (a) Position of electrodes with gGAMMAcapÕ , (b) EEG derivations, and (c) picture of a patient during motor imagination
trials.

Figure 2. Components of the Emotiv_BCI-FES Systems employed in the therapy: the headset for EEG signal acquisition; the processing
engines where the BCI and interface software run; the microprocessor-based module with the hardware adapter, and the FES device.
The movement assisted by FES gives the patient proprioceptive and visual feedback.

detected on the recorded EEG signals within the
range of frequencies between 0.2 and 43 Hz. The
Emotiv_BCI–FES System presented an average accuracy of 92.7% and an average true positive rate (TPR) of
85.4% when it was evaluated in a stroke patient during
two sessions of use in which the BCI was disabled
during the resting trials (to avoid false FES activation
to patient).
The stimulator generates biphasic rectangular pulses
of 0.2 ms duration, a frequency of 25 pps and a maximal current intensity of 40 mA. These parameters were
set for each patient prior to use and allowed them to
obtain full joint movement.
BCI–FES intervention. The intervention consisted of four
weekly sessions of 60 min duration (including the setup

time), for 5 consecutive weeks (20 sessions in total). In a
neuro-rehabilitation context, it is very important to
respect the necessity and daily state of patients. For
this reason, the amount of MI trials and resting periods
and its duration varied in each session and depended on
the patient’s capability, but ranged between 20 and
30 MI trials. MI and rest trials were executed consecutively. During the sessions, the therapist gave the
patient the same MI instruction (functional cue) as in
the ﬁrst stage ‘‘imagine extending your paretic hand to
grasp the glass in front of you’’. The MI of the aﬀected
hand should produce an ERD in cortical areas and
consequently activates the FES device.
The threshold to initiate FES was determined for
each patient during a previous training period according to the instructions in the User’s Manual of

Tabernig et al.
EMOTIV Epoc.28 The training process involved recording of EEG signals and consisted of two steps.
Each step was done in 8 s trials and repeated 5 times,
in order to construct a personalized pattern for the MI
of the most aﬀected hand. The ﬁrst step was the training of a neutral state. During it, patients relaxed and
remained still. The second step was the training of a
cognitive state while patients performed the MI task.
To test patient’s training, the therapist used a virtual
cube supplied by Emotiv. The therapist classiﬁed a trial
as correct if the patient followed the instruction and the
cube did not move during the neutral state and moved
when the patient performed the MI task.
The hold time and trigger delay time of the EMOTIV
System were set to null in order to command the FES
device when the threshold was reached. If patients, also
or instead of imaging, intended to move their limbs, the
therapist asked them to relax and to be quiet in order to
avoid muscle artefacts. Besides, the EEG signal was
examined by visual observation by the therapist. When
the patient activated the FES device, electrical stimulation was delivered during 5 s. To avoid false positives, the
BCI was disabled during the resting trials and periods.
Evaluation. The patients were evaluated 30 days and one
day before starting the intervention in order to conﬁrm
that they were in the chronic stage of the ictus. To ensure
stability in the evolution of the stroke, they were
required to present a variation of the mFMA score
equal to or less than two points between both dates;
otherwise, they were excluded from the study. Patients
were also evaluated one day after the therapy ﬁnished.
A. Primary outcome measure: The mFMA used to
assess upper limb motor function was based on
the FMA scale (total 66 points). The coordination
and speed (6 points) scores were excluded since
patients were not able to execute this part of the
test. The reﬂex scores (6 points) were also excluded
because reﬂexes are not relevant for this rehabilitation application. The maximum score in the mFMA
scale was 54 points. A higher score indicates
improvement in the evaluated function.
B. Secondary outcome measures: The mAsh scale was
used to evaluate spasticity in the following muscle
groups: ﬁnger, wrist, and elbow ﬂexors and shoulder
abductors (5 points for each joint, maximum score:
20). A lower score indicates improvement.
The Amount of Use (AU) and Quality of Movement
(QM) were evaluated using the modiﬁed Motor
Activity Log (mMAL).30,31 The MAL is a measure
of self-perceived upper extremity participation. It
uses a semi-structured interview to assess how much
and how well patients use their aﬀected arm for activities of daily living. The ﬁnal score is the average of the

5
score (between 0 and 5) obtained in each of the questions answered by the patient (maximum score: 5). A
higher score indicates improvement.
Changes in quality of life were assessed using a Visual
Analog Scale (VAS) subscale of the EQol-5D (Euro
Quality of Life) scale.32,33 The scores are between 0
and 10 (maximum score: 10). A higher score implies
perception of improvement in the patient’s quality
of life.
Finally, the active Range of Movement (RoM) of
shoulder abduction and elbow, wrist, and ﬁngers ﬂexion and extension was assessed.

Statistical processing
A Wilcoxon signed rank test was performed to compare
the scores obtained when applying the primary and secondary assessment measures before and after treatment, because data were not normally distributed or
were ordinal. The statistical processing was run in
SPSSÕ v.23. A signiﬁcance level of p < 0.05 was used.

Results
Stage 1: Screening
Figure 3 shows the topographic maps of the eight
patients for the most discriminative fERD. Each map is
a representation of the cerebral cortex seen from above
where the recording channels (in black spots) are identiﬁed and the value of the coeﬃcient of determination r2
in each cortical area is represented (in color coding). In
all the maps, desynchronization in cortical areas associated to upper limb movement are evidenced through a
high value of r2 . It is also observed that fERD is presented in both sensorimotor rhythms: mu and beta.

Stage 2: Therapy
Figure 4 shows a picture of the therapist next to a patient
during the intervention. The Emotiv_BCI–FES System
and the glass in front of the patient can also be seen.
The mFMA scores for one day and 30 days prior
to intervention were identical for all patients
(15.62  8.55). The diﬀerence in the mFMA score for
each patient was null, which indicates that the upper
limb motor function of each patient remained stable
during that month, evidencing the chronic stage of
stroke (Figure 5).
Signiﬁcant post-treatment improvement was detected
in mFMA (z ¼ 2.546; p ¼ 0.011) and in active RoM for
elbow (z ¼ 2.060; p ¼ 0.039) and wrist (z ¼ 2.041;
p ¼ 0.041) ﬂexions (Figure 5). In addition, signiﬁcant
improvements were observed in QM mMAL

6

Journal of Rehabilitation and Assistive Technologies Engineering

Figure 3. Topographic maps during imagery motor tasks of the paretic upper limbs for the selected fERD for each of the eight
patients. The color scale of r2 for each map is shown at the right of the map.

Discussion
The main ﬁndings of this study are that all of the
involved stroke patients were able to desynchronize
their ipsilesional sensorimotor rhythms during the MI
of their aﬀected hand and that signiﬁcant post-treatment improvement was detected in mFMA and in the
majority of the secondary outcome scores, when they
were treated with 20 sessions of therapy based on FES
triggered by BCI.

Characteristics of the ERD in stroke patients
Figure 4. A patient using the Emotiv_BCI-FES System. The different elements of the system are visible in the picture: the
headset for EEG signal acquisition; the computer where the
software for the BCI and the interface run; the FES device and
the electrical stimulation electrodes placed on the extensors of
the wrist.

(z ¼ 2524; p ¼ 0.012), AU mMAL (z ¼ 2.546;
p ¼ 0.011), and VAS scores (z ¼ 2.546; p ¼ 0.011)
(Figure 6). Regarding the spasticity, signiﬁcant reduction
was observed in the mAsh score for shoulder abductors
(z ¼ 2.251; p ¼ 0.024) and for wrist (z ¼ 2.236;
p ¼ 0.025), elbow (z ¼ 2.460; p ¼ 0.014), and ﬁnger
(z ¼ 2.271; p ¼ 0.023) ﬂexors (Figure 7). As it can be
observed in Figures 5 to 7, all of outcome measures
reﬂected that no patient worsened their condition.
No signiﬁcant changes were observed in RoM for
shoulder abduction and ﬁnger ﬂexion and extension.

ERD was observed in relation to the MI of the paretic
arm. The cortical topographic maps were diﬀerent
across patients with respect the value of r2 , the spatial
localization, and the frequency bands for the ERD.
The location of the ERD matched generally the sensorimotor cortex for the upper limb13,14; however, the
values of r2 diﬀered across patients. Patients 2 and 6
presented ERD well located in the contralateral sensorimotor cortex (close to the C4 electrode). They
showed also the highest r2 together with high mFMA
scores and the least chronicity (12 months), which
might be related. On the other hand, patients 4 and 7
with high mFMA scores showed the lowest r2 ; these
patients had the longest chronicity (60 and 77 months
respectively), suggesting that the time after stroke
might inﬂuence the ability to desynchronize. Very
severe patients (1, 5 and 8), with the lowest mFMA,
obtained r2 values close to 0.05, which are similar to
those reported by Antelis et al.18 Thus, there does not
seem to be an evident relationship between the

Tabernig et al.

7

Figure 5. mFMA and active RoM measures for each patient (n ¼ 8). The asterisk indicates a statistically significant change (p < 0.05).

Figure 6. Scores obtained in QM mMAL, AU mMAL and VAS measures for each patient (n ¼ 8). The asterisk indicates a statistically
significant change (p < 0.05).

Figure 7. Scores obtained in mAsh measures for each patient (n ¼ 8). The asterisk indicates a statistically significant change
(p < 0.05).

functional sequelae measured by mFMA and the
obtained r2 for the ipsilesional hemisphere during MI.
Kaiser et al.34 found no signiﬁcant relationship between
the degree of impairment and ERD during motor execution of the most aﬀected hand. But, they also
reported that patients with lower spasticity showed
weaker ERD in the ipsilesional hemisphere during MI
of the aﬀected hand.
Six of the eight patients showed desynchronization
of the beta rhythm, while the two remaining participants evidenced ERD in mu rhythm. These results coincide with those reported by McFarland et al.35 for
healthy people, where they demonstrated that there is

a desynchronization of the rhythms mu or beta, both
during movement and MI.
The spatial localization of ERD was slightly diﬀerent in all cases, but mostly focused on the contralateral
sensorimotor cortex, even though it was lesioned. In the
patients included in the present study, ipsilateral ERD
was not found during MI of the most aﬀected hand,
like other authors did.34,18 Kaiser et al.34 reported that
during MI, more impaired patients showed higher ERD
in the contralesional (ipsilateral) hemisphere as compared with less impaired patients. Antelis et al.18
reported similar observations during the attempt and
execution of movement. They found signiﬁcant cortical

8

Journal of Rehabilitation and Assistive Technologies Engineering

activation on the uninjured motor cortex when moving
or attempting to move either of the two arms. They
attributed this ipsilateral activation to interconnecting
circuits between both hemispheres. Stepień et al.36
reported that stroke people changed the amplitude
dynamics of oscillations in both hemispheres and that
their ipsilateral ERD was stronger than the contralateral ERD when moving the paretic hand. Activation of
other areas was, however, observed for instance in
patients 1 and 8, who presented a high r2 with a welllocated upper limb ERD but also some values of r2 in
frontal and temporal lobes due to eye blink artifacts as
conﬁrmed by further processing of the EEG signals.
The ERD pattern, which consists of fERD and its
cortical spatial localization, changes between sessions,
due to several issues, among them motor learning and
plasticity.37 Many BCI Systems used it as a characteristic for classiﬁcation. However, in this study the fERD
was only used in one session of Stage I to identify the
patients’ ability to desynchronize. As reported by
Scherer et al.,38 there is no evidence of a common
ERD pattern in patients with stroke, which suggests
the need for calibration of BCI systems through a
study of individual ERD. Then, in future steps, it
would be interesting to employ a BCI System which
considers these issues for MI detection.

diﬀerence pre and post treatment of 3.41 points was
reported.22 The reason for this improvement is not
clear; it could perhaps be related to the activation of
the motor cortex during BCI-MI, the FES, the type of
feedback or a combination of them.
The almost simultaneous neuronal activation provoked by the ERD and by the sensory inputs from
the kinetic, proprioceptive, and visual feedback generated by FES, could have facilitated the functional
recovery. This happened perhaps by integration of the
proprioceptive and the visuo-motor inputs associated
with the realization and observation of the movement
in the severely impaired paretic hand.43,44 This sensory
feedback might reactivate the cortical representation of
the movement in the sensorimotor cortex, which would
be reinforced for the next MI. The feedback might
facilitate hereby motor learning.45 Assessment of the
time elapsed between the neuronal activation and the
feedback generated by FES would be needed to clarify
how these were paired.
Regarding the BCI–FES therapy, Chung et al.46
found that BCI–FES training may be more eﬀective
in stimulating brain activation than only FES training
for dorsiﬂexion in post-stroke patients. Corbet et al.47
reported that the connectivity in the lesioned hemisphere signiﬁcantly increased in patients who used
BCI–FES therapy compared to those who used only
FES. Then, in the present study, the FES-assisted
wrist extension commanded by BCI-MI might have
contributed signiﬁcantly to the increased mFMA score.
Signiﬁcant reduction was obtained in mASh scores
in all tested muscles. The eﬀect of FES on spasticity is
not conclusive. Some studies reported a decrease in
spasticity, while others did not ﬁnd a reduction in spasticity of the stimulated muscle (for a review see Quandt
and Hummel41). Then, it is unclear what the cause of
the reduction of spasticity in all tested muscles was. On
the other hand, there is evidence that patients learn to
modulate their sensorimotor rhythms37 and that the
increased activation could probably reﬂect reorganization of the cortical motor system.48 The reduction of
the spasticity of the ﬂexors (Figure 7) might have inﬂuenced the signiﬁcant improvement in the active RoM of
wrist ﬂexion (Figure 5). Besides, no signiﬁcant improvement was found in the RoM for wrist extension, which
could be likely attributed to a lack of muscle force in
the wrist extensors. This is needed to counteract the
ﬂexor spasticity and could be built with help of, for
example, FES training.49 The 20 sessions provided in
this study were probably not enough to result on
increased force.
The diﬀerence in the means of QM mMAL and AU
mMAL scores was higher than one point, which reﬂects
an improvement in self-perceived upper extremity participation.50 Regarding VAS scores, three points of

Improvements due to the BCI–FES therapy
In the second stage of this study, the eﬃcacy of the
Emotiv_BCI–FES System to induce motor functional
recovery in chronic severe stroke patients was investigated. Command signals were generated from the
perilesional area which was structurally intact but functionally altered. Signiﬁcant improvement was obtained
in the main outcome measures, which reﬂected clinical
and functional recovery after the intervention.
Reports about BCI-based rehabilitation of individuals with stroke are emerging and with promising
results.22,23,39,40 Systems based on a BCI-MI paradigm
to detect ERD from ipsilesional22 or contralesional23
hemisphere, or to detect the peak negative of movement-related cortical potentials,39 or to control other
devices40 have been reported; but in all cases, the mechanisms by which the use of BCI facilitates cortical
reorganization in stroke patients are still being discussed. Additionally, the alone contribution of FES
to cortical reorganization is not clear either.41
The primary outcome measure (mFMA) showed signiﬁcant improvement after treatment. The mean
mFMA diﬀerence was 5.37 points reﬂecting clinically
important changes for functional recovery for stroke
patients.42 This improvement was larger than that
shown earlier for an intervention based on a BCI-MIactivated orthoses plus physiotherapy, where a mean

Tabernig et al.
diﬀerence were detected before-after the intervention,
which is bigger than Morone et al. reported in a BCI
study for hospitalized post-stroke patients.33 These
measures show that patients perceive an improvement
in their quality of life and motivation, which is probably associated with the changes measured with the
mFMA scores.
Regarding the dynamic during the therapy session, it
is very important that patients are focused during the
therapy. It is known that stroke patients can present a
deﬁcit of concentration;51 therefore, the functional cue
given by the therapist to the patient is very important to
improve the patients’ participation during the BCI–
FES session. This aspect also contributes to the eﬃcacy
of the intervention, as suggested by Jeunet et al.52
The patients were in a chronic and stable stage and
during the period of this intervention, they did not
change their daily routine other than incorporating
the BCI–FES therapy (assessed by means of an interview performed by the therapist). Therefore, it is likely
that the observed improvements might be attributed to
the BCI–FES intervention. Besides, in the chronic
stage, there are modiﬁcations in the neural networks,
with an interhemispheric imbalance, in which for
instance the unaﬀected hemisphere inhibits perilesional
areas.53 This imbalance, measured as the index of laterality,54 could have conditioned the intended cortical
reorganization with the present intervention. A study
in sub-acute stroke patients could help elucidate
this issue.

Methodological considerations
There were some diﬀerences between the EEG acquisition systems used during the screening and therapy
stages. In the ﬁrst stage, a portable research grade ampliﬁers and electrodes with wet gel applications were
used. In the therapy stage, a more economically accessible device, the EMOTIV EpocþÕ System, to ease the
daily use in a physical therapy environment was used.
The later system has electrodes with saline-soaked
sponges on the contacts. Regarding the quality of
these EEG signals, Ekanayake reported that the
EMOTIV system captures actual EEG but that the
quality of these signals is not as good as those used
for diagnosis in medical equipment.55 However, this
system was employed earlier to successfully record
EEG.56,57 Then, and taking into account that the aim
of the second stage of this study was therapeutic (not
diagnosis), the quality of the EEG recordings from the
EMOTIV system was regarded appropriate.
As it was described in the material and methods section, a preliminary performance study of the
Emotiv_BCI–FES System, evaluated in two sessions
by a stroke patient, showed an average accuracy of

9
92.7% and an average TPR of 85.4%. This average
accuracy was larger than 75% (the chance level for
this kind of protocol of BCI). These results were similar
to those reported by other authors, such as Darvishi
et al.58 who reported an average accuracy of 83% of
a BCI-MI System which provided intrinsic visual and
proprioceptive feedback by an orthosis in eight healthy
subjects. Muñoz et al.59 reported a BCI system based
on the Emotiv EPOC and the open source software
OpenViBe for the MI-based experiment implementation. This system was evaluated in eight healthy subjects showing an average accuracy of the best classiﬁer
of 96.7%. The average TPR of the Emotiv_BCI–FES
System used for this intervention is within the ranges
reported by other authors. Pichiorri et al.60 reported,
also in healthy subjects, an average TPR ranging from
53% to 96% for a BCI based on ERD. Using the movement related cortical potentials to detect the MI, Niazi
et al.61 reported a TPR of 64.5  5.33% for motor
imagination in healthy subjects and 55.01  12.01%
for motor attempt in patients with stroke, whereas
Aliakbaryhosseinabadi et al.62 reported a TPR of
75.3  5.5% in healthy volunteers. Then, these preliminary results of the Emotiv_BCI–FES System performance demonstrate that BCI control was actually
achieved by the user.
Even though the electrodes of the EMOTIV EpocþÕ
headset are not placed on the primary motor cortex,
this BCI allowed recording EEG signals related to the
motor cue because it can identify the attempt of the
user to perform diﬀerent physical actions.28 Further
analysis of EEG signals recorded during the therapy
stage would be needed to understand how this BCI–
FES therapy works. On the other hand, for motor
recovery purposes, it is important to register EEG
from the sensorimotor cortex for the upper limb,
although the area of the motor cortex is often displaced
in stroke patients.63 Therefore, in future studies, other
EEG acquisition systems to register and process the
EEG to generate the command signal from the upper
limb sensorimotor cortex during MI should be used.
The small sample size and the lack of a control condition are regarded as limitations of this study that prevent drawing any deﬁnitive conclusions about the
eﬃcacy of the proposed intervention, thus limiting the
current study to a preliminary study. Although other
studies have shown functional improvements in chronic
stroke people after interventions such as robotic
therapy,64 constraint-induced movement therapy,65
BCI-driven orthosis22,23 or standard physical therapy,66
the patients included in the present study did not take
part in any other rehabilitation intervention during the
BCI–FES therapy. Then, this experimental design, despite lacking a control group, resulted in evidence that
represent an important step towards developing and

10

Journal of Rehabilitation and Assistive Technologies Engineering

translating into clinics BCI–FES-driven rehabilitation
protocols for chronic stroke individuals. A randomized
controlled trial to study the eﬃcacy of this type of treatment would be the next step to take.

3. O’Dell M, Chi-Chang D and Harrison V. Stroke rehabilitation: strategies to enhance motor recovery. Annu Rev
Med 2009; 60: 55–68.
4. Malouin F and Richards C. Mental practice for relearning
locomotorskills.JAcuteCarePhysTher2010;90:240–251.
5. Levin M, Sveistrup H and Subramanian S. Feedback and
virtual environments for motor learning and rehabilitation. Schedae 2010; 1: 19–36.
6. Moritz C, Perlmutter S and Fetz E. Direct control of
paralysed muscles by cortical Neuros. Nature 2008; 456:
639–642.
7. Legenstein R, Chase S, Schwartz A, et al. A rewardmodulated Hebbian learning rule can explain experimentally observed netwrok reorganization in a brain control
task. J Neuroscience 2010; 30: 8400–8410.
8. Schiaffino L and Tabernig CB. Position control with PID
regulation for a FES system: preliminary results. J Phys
Conf Ser 2016; 705: 012058.
9. Arguissain F, Giménez D and Tabernig C. Diseño y
Desarrollo de una Interfaz ICC-FES como Herramienta
de Rehabilitación Neurológica. Revista argentina de
Bioingenierı´a 2010; 16: 31–41.
10. Jure F, Carrere L, Gentiletti G, et al. BCI-FES system for
neuro-rehabilitation of stroke patients. J Phys Conf Ser
2016; 705: 012058.
11. Birbaumer N. Breaking the silence: brain-computer interfaces (BCI) for communication and motor control.
Psychophysiology 2006; 6: 517–532.
12. Wang W, Collinger J, Perez M, et al. Neural interface
technology for rehabilitation: exploiting and promoting
neuroplasticity. In: Dicciano C and Cooper R (eds) Phys
Med Rehabil Clin N Am 2010; 21: 157–178.
13. Pfurtscheller
G
and
Lopes
da
Silva
FH.
Electroencephalography: basic principles, clinical applications, and related fields. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins, 2005, pp.1003–1016.
14. Pfurtscheller G. BCIs that use sensorimotor rhythms.
Brain–computer interfaces: principles and practice. New
York: Oxford University Press, 2013, pp.227–241.
15. Aldea R and Eva OD. Detecting sensorimotor rhythms
from the EEG signals using the independent component
analysis and the coefficient of determination. In: IEEE
Int Symp on Signals, Circuits and Systems (ISSCS)
Proc, Iasi, Romania, 11–12 July 2013, pp.1–4.
16. Carrere C and Tabernig C. Detection of foot motor imagery using the coefficient of determination for neurorehabilitation based on BCI technology. IFMBE Proc 2015;
49: 944–947.
17. Tabernig C, Carrere L, Lopez C, et al. EEG EventRelated Desynchronization of patients with stroke
during motor imagery of hand movement. J Phys Conf
Ser 2016; 705: 012058.
18. Antelis JM, Montesano L, Ramos-Murguialday A, et al.
Decoding of upper limb movement intention from EEG
measurements of the contralesional motor cortex in
chronic stroke patients. IEEE Trans Biom Eng 2017; 64:
99–111.
19. Birbaumer N and Cohen L. Brain-computer interfaces:
communication and restoration of movement in paralysis. J Physiol 2007; 579: 621–636.

Conclusions
In this study, it was possible to verify the ability to
desynchronize the sensorimotor rhythms in the
damaged motor cortex of the eight studied patients,
although they had no previous experience modulating
them. Besides, it was shown that a therapeutic intervention based on Emotiv_BCI–FES System improved the
motor function of the upper limb of severe, chronic
stroke patients. The data suggested that this BCI–
FES therapy is promising for the rehabilitation of
post-stroke individuals.
Declaration of conflicting interests
The author(s) declared no potential conﬂicts of interest with
respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this
article.

Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following ﬁnancial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this
article: This work was supported by the Fundacion Rosarina
de Neuro-rehabilitación (FRN) and by the Universidad
Nacional de Entre Rios (UNER) [PID 6163]; Argentina.
During the execution of this project, CL and CB were
employed at FRN; CT and LC were employed at UNER
and ES was employed at Aalborg University.

Guarantor
CBT

Contributorship
CHB and CBT researched literature and conceived the study.
CHB was involved in protocol development, gaining ethical
approval, patient recruitment. LCC performed the screening
stage and CL the second stage. All authors were involved in
data analysis. CBT wrote the ﬁrst draft of the manuscript.
EGS collaborated with the discussion of this article and with
the overall manuscript. All authors reviewed and edited the
manuscript and approved the ﬁnal version of the manuscript.

ORCID iD
Carolina B Tabernig

http://orcid.org/0000-0001-5122-5080

References
1. Langhorne P, Coupar F and Pollock A. Motor recovery
after stroke: a systematic review. Lancet Neurol 2009; 8:
741–54.
2. Young J and Forster A. Review of stroke rehabilitation.
BMJ 2007; 334: 86–90.

Tabernig et al.
20. Buch E, Schanechi A, Fourkas A, et al. Parietofrontal
integrity determines neural modulation associated with
grasping imagery after stroke. Brain 2012; 135: 596–614.
21. Ramos-Murguialday A, Schürholz M, et al.
Proprioceptive feedback and brain computer interface
(BCI) based neuroprostheses. PLoS ONE 2012; 7:
e47048.
22. Ramos-Murguialday A, Broetz D, et al. Brain-machineinterface in chronic stroke rehabilitation: a controlled
study. Ann Neurol 2013; 74: 100–108.
23. Bundy DT, Souders L, Baranyai K, et al. Contralesional
brain–computer interface control of a powered exoskeleton for motor recovery in chronic stroke survivors.
Stroke 2017; 48: 1908–1915.
24. Pfurtscheller G, Müller G, Pfurtscheller J, et al. Thought–
control of functional electrical stimulation to restore
hand grasp in a patient with tetraplegia. Neurosci Lett
2003; 351: 33–36.
25. Müller-Putz G, Scherer R, Pfurtscheller G, et al. EEGbased neuroprosthesis control: a step towards clinical
practice. Neurosci Lett 2005; 382: 169–174.
26. Reynolds C, Osuagwu B and Vuckovic A. Influence of
motor imagination on cortical activation during functional electrical stimulation. Clin Neurophysiol 2015;
126: 1360–1369.
27. Schalk G and Mellinger J. General-purpose software for
brain–computer interface research, data acquisition, stimulus presentation, and brain monitoring. London: SpringerVerlag London Limited, 2010, pp.9–35.
28. EMOTIV. EMOTIV user manual, https://emotiv.zendesk.com/hc/en-Us/article_attachments/200343895/
EPOCUserManual2014.pdf (2014, accessed 16 February
2018).
29. Lang, M. Investigating the EMOTIV EPOC for cognitive
control in limited training time. Honors Report.
Department of Computer Science, University of
Canterbury, NZ, 2012.
30. Taub E, McCulloch K, Uswatte G, et al. Motor activity
log manual, https://www.uab.edu/citherapy/images/pdf_
files/CIT_Training_MAL_manual.pdf (2011, accessed
January 2015).
31. Uswatte G, Taub E, Morris D, et al. Reliability and validity of the upper extremity motor activity log. Stroke
2005; 36: 2493–2496.
32. Herdmana M, Badiab X, Berra C, et al. El EuroQol-5D:
una alternativa sencilla para la medición de la calidad de
vida relacionada con la salud en atención primaria. Aten
Primaria 2001; 28: 425–429.
33. Morone M, Pisotta I, Pichiorri F, et al. Proof of principle
of a brain-computer interface approach to support poststroke arm rehabilitation in hospitalized patients: design,
acceptability and usability. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 2015;
96: S71–S78.
34. Kaiser V, Daly I, Pichiorri F, et al. Relationship between
electrical brain responses to motor imagery and motor
impairment in stroke. Stroke 2012; 43: 2735–2740.
35. McFarland D, Miner L, Vaughan T, et al. Mu and beta
rhythm topographies during motor imagery and actual
movements. Brain Topogr 2000; 12: 177–186.

11
36. Stepień M, Conradi J, Waterstraat G, et al. Event-related
desynchronization of sensorimotor EEG rhythms in
hemiparetic patients with acute stroke. Neurosci Lett
2011; 488: 17–21.
37. McFarland D, Sarnacki W, Vaughan T, et al. Brain-computer interface (BCI) operation: signal and noise during
early training sessions. Clin Neurophysiol 2005; 116:
56–62.
38. Scherer R, Mohapp A, Grieshofer P, et al.
Sensorimotor EEG patterns during motor imagery in
hemiparetic stroke patients. Int J Bioelectromagn 2007;
9: 155–162.
39. Mrachacz-Kersting N, Jiang N, Stevenson A, et al.
Efficient neuroplasticity induction in chronic stroke
patients by an associative brain-computer interface.
J Neurophysiol 2016; 115: 1410–1421.
40. Monge-Pereira E, Ibañez-Pereda J, et al. Use of
Electroencephalography brain computer interface systems as a rehabilitative approach for upper limb function
after a stroke. A systematic review. PM&R 2017; 9:
918–932.
41. Quandt F and Hummel F. The influence of functional
electrical stimulation on hand motor recovery in
stroke patients: a review. Exp Transl Stroke Med 2014;
21: 6–9.
42. Page S, Fulk G and Boyne P. Clinically important differences for the upper-extremity Fugl–Meyer Scale in people
with minimal to moderate impairment due to chronic
stroke. Physical therapy 2012; 92: 791–798.
43. Buch E, Shanechi A, Fourkas A, et al. Parietofrontal
integrity determines neural modulation associated with
grasp imagery after stroke. Brain 2012; 135: 596–614.
44. Melvyn A and Goodale. Visuomotor control: where
does vision end and action begin?. Curr Biol 1998; 8:
489–491.
45. Sigrist R, Rauter G, Riener R, et al. Augmented
visual, auditory, haptic, and multimodal feedback in
motor learning: a review. Psychonomic Bull Rev 2013;
20: 21–53.
46. Chung E, Kim J, et al. Effects of brain-computer interface-based functional electrical stimulation on brain activation in stroke patients: a pilot randomized controlled
trial. J Phys Ther Sci 2015; 27: 559–562.
47. Corbet T, Leeb R, et al. BCI-NMES therapy enhances
effective connectivity in the damaged hemisphere in
stroke patients. In: Proceedings of the 6th international
brain–computer interface meeting, CA, USA, 30 May–
3 June 2016.
48. Koritnik B, Azam S, et al. Functional changes of the
cortical motor system in hereditary spastic paraparesis.
Acta Neurol Scand 2009; 120: 182–190.
49. Elbasiouny S, Moroz D, Bakr M, et al. Management of
spasticity after spinal cord injury: current techniques and
future directions. Neurorehabil Neural Repair 2010; 24:
23–33.
50. Lang C, Edwards D, Birkenmeier R, et al. Estimating
minimal clinically important differences of upper-extremity measures early after stroke. Archive Phys Med
Rehabil 2008; 89: 1693–1700.

12
51. Cicerone K. Attention deficits and dual task demands
after mild traumatic brain injury. Brain Injury 1996; 10:
79–90.
52. Jeunet C, N’Kaoua B and Lotte F. Advances in usertraining for mental-imagery-based BCI control:
Psychological and cognitive factors and their neural correlates. Progr Brain Res 2016; 228: 3–35.
53. Koralek AC, Jin X, Long JD, et al. Corticostriatal plasticity is necessary for learning intencional neuroprosthetic
skills. Nature 2012; 483: 331–335.
54. Stinear CM, Barber PA, Coxon JP, et al. Priming the
motor system enhances the effects of upperlimb therapy
in chronic stroke. Brain 2008; 131: 1381–1390.
55. Ekanayake H. P300 and Emotiv EPOC: does Emotiv
EPOC capture real EEG?, http://neurofeedback.visaduma.info/P300nEmotiv.pdf
(2010,
accessed
16
February 2018).
56. Esfahani ET and Sundararajan V. Classification of primitive shapes using brain–computer interfaces. ComputAided Des 2012; 44: 1011–1019.
57. Badcock NA, Mousikou P, Mahajan Y, et al.
Validation of the Emotiv EPOCÕ EEG gaming system
for measuring research quality auditory ERPs. Peer J
2013; 1: e38.
58. Darvishi S, Ridding MC, Abbott D, et al. Does feedback
modality affect performance of brain computer interfaces? In: NER, 7th International IEEE/EMBS conference
on, Montpellier, France, 22–24 April 2015, pp.232–235.
59. Muñoz JE, Rı́os L and Henao O. Low cost implementation of a motor imagery experiment with BCI system and
its use in neurorehabilitation. In: Conference proceedings

Journal of Rehabilitation and Assistive Technologies Engineering

60.

61.

62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

of the IEEE Engineering Medicine and Biology Society,
Chicago, Illinois, USA, 26–30 August 2014, pp.1230–
1233.
Pichiorri F, Fallani FDV, Cincott F, et al. Sensorimotor
rhythm-based brain–computer interface training: the
impact on motor cortical responsiveness. J Neural Eng
2011; 8: 025020.
Niazi IK, Jiang N, Tiberghien O, et al. Detection of
movement intention from single-trial movement-related
cortical potentials. J Neural Eng 2011; 8: 066009.
Aliakbaryhosseinabadi S, Jiang N, Vuckovic A, et al.
Detection of movement intention from single-trial movement-related cortical potentials using random and nonrandom paradigms. Brain-Computer Interfaces 2015; 2:
29–39.
Harrison T, Silasi G, Boyd J, et al. Displacement of sensory maps and disorganization of motor cortex after targeted stroke in mice. Stroke 2013; 44: 2300–2306.
Fasoli SE, Krebs HI, Stein J, et al. Effects of robotic
therapy on motor impairment and recovery in chronic
stroke. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 2003; 84: 477–482.
Page SJ, Sisto S, Levine P, et al. Efficacy of modified
constraint-induced movement therapy in chronic stroke:
a single-blinded randomized controlled trial. Arch Phys
Med Rehabil 2004; 85: 14–18.
Winstein CJ, Stein J, Arena R, et al. Guidelines for
adult stroke rehabilitation and recovery: a guideline
for healthcare professionals from the American Heart
Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke 2016;
47: e98–e169.

