Noname manuscript No.

(will be inserted by the editor)

EmoconLite: Bridging the Gap Between Emotiv and Play
for Children With Severe Disabilities

arXiv:2101.02768v2 [cs.HC] 2 Feb 2021

Javad Rahimipour Anaraki, Chelsea Anne
Rauh, Jason Leung, Tom Chau

Received: date / Accepted: date

Abstract Brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) allow users to control computer appli-

cations by modulating their brain activity. Since BCIs rely solely on brain activity,
they have a lot of potential as an alternative access method for engaging children
with severe disabilities and/or medical complexities in Therapeutic Recreation
and leisure. In particular, one commercially available BCI platform is the Emotiv
EPOC headset, which is a portable and affordable electroencephalography (EEG)
device. Combined with the EmotivBCI software, the Emotiv system can generate
a model to discern between different mental tasks based on the user’s EEG signals in real-time. While the Emotiv system shows promise for use by the pediatric
population in the setting of a BCI clinic, it lacks integrated support that allows
users to directly control computer applications using the generated classification
output. To achieve this, users would have to create their own program, which can
be challenging for those who may not be technologically inclined. To address this
gap, we present a free and user-friendly BCI software application called EmoconLite. Using the classification output from EmotivBCI, EmoconLite allows users to
play YouTube video clips and a variety of video games from multiple platforms,
ultimately creating an end-to-end solution for users. With its use in the Holland
Bloorview Kids Rehabilitation Hospital’s BCI clinic, EmoconLite will bridge the
gap between research and clinical practice, providing children with access to BCI
technology and supporting BCI-enabled play.
Keywords Brain-computer interface · Electroencephalography · Emotiv headset ·
Assistive technology · Therapeutic recreation

J. R. Anaraki, J. Leung and T. Chau
Institute of Biomedical Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
E-mail: j.rahimipour@utoronto.ca, jasonwh.leung@mail.utoronto.ca, & tom.chau@utoronto.ca
C. A. Rauh and T. Chau
Holland Bloorview Kids Rehabilitation Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada
E-mail: crauh@hollandbloorview.ca & tchau@hollandbloorview.ca

2

Javad Rahimipour Anaraki, Chelsea Anne Rauh, Jason Leung, Tom Chau

1 Introduction

Brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) allow users to interact with computers using
only their brain activity. By performing mental tasks that generate specific brain
activity patterns, users can use BCIs to control various applications and devices
(Mak and Wolpaw, 2009). When used by children with disabilities and/or medical
complexities in the context of play and leisure, BCIs may open up a world of possibilities by reducing leisure disparities and supporting active, independent and
engaged participation in leisure and life. However, one of the barriers preventing
the widespread use of BCIs is their accessibility outside of the research environment. To this end, a program that facilitates access to BCI at home and in the
clinic can bridge the gap between research and clinical practice.
Through collaboration with children with disabilities and their families, a BCI
clinic can support the well-being and quality of life of the pediatric population
on an ethically sustainable research foundation, ultimately contributing to the
advancement of BCI technology and further benefit for its users (Mietola et al.,
2017). Besides, such a program can also facilitate an environment of fun, function,
fitness, family, friendship and play that forms the foundation of sustained skill
development and a holistic perspective to healthcare (Rosenbaum and Gorter,
2012). As one of the founding partners of BCI Canada collaborative network (BCICAN), Holland Bloorview Kids Rehabilitation Hospital has taken on this mission
through its BCI clinic, which introduces children with severe disabilities, and their
families to BCIs (Kinney-Lang et al., 2020).
One of the factors that dictate the success of the BCI clinic is the accessibility
of BCIs to its users. Considering that readily available hardware and software
is more likely to reach a larger number of potential users, the Emotiv EPOCx
headset was chosen for the BCI clinic since it is a commercially available, wireless
BCI headset based on electroencephalography (EEG) technology. With 14 salinebased electrodes that eliminate sticky gel’s inconvenience, the headset is easy to
set up and is therefore ideal for use in home and clinical applications. Using the
Emotiv EPOC+ headset (previous iteration of Emotiv EPOCx ), Zhang et al.
determined that typically developing children between the ages of 6 and 18 “can
quickly achieve control and execute multiple tasks using simple EEG-based BCI
systems” mandating exploration for children with disabilities and complex medical
needs (Zhang et al., 2019).
Another essential component of the BCI clinic is a software system that supports interactions between the hardware, the user interface, and other applications.
The Emotiv system supports toolboxes such as NodeRed that allow users to interface Emotiv with external applications for BCI integration. However, for users
who do not know how to program, it may be challenging to create and maintain
such an interface.
In this paper, we present EmoconLite1 - a free BCI software system developed
for the BCI clinic that can be used with the Emotiv hardware. The EmoconLite
application provides a simple interface that allows users to access media. It also
allows users to play BCI-compatible games, both locally and online. In section
2, we explain EmoconLite’s software architecture and functionality. We discuss
1

http://hollandbloorview.ca/emocon

Emoconlite

3

User
Activities
EmoconLite

–
–
–
–

YouTube
HelpKidzLearn
Brain Joust
Steam

Cortex API

Emotiv headset

Fig. 1 EmoconLite architecture

the role of EmoconLite within the Holland Bloorview BCI clinic in section 3, and
conclude our paper in section 4.

2 Application Architecture

EmoconLite is a software application designed to bridge the gap between the
EmotivBCI system and other computer programs (see Figure 1). The application
is implemented in Python 3.7 (Python 3.7.0) using PySide2 (PySide2). The app is
cross-platform and can be run on Windows, Linux and macOS with small adjustments. However, since EmotivBCI is only compatible with Windows and macOS,
we mainly focused on these operating systems. The EmoconLite graphical user
interface (GUI) is divided into five sections based on the user workflow: Setup and
training, Activity, Accuracy Sensitivity, Controls, and Status.

2.1 User Workflow
The workflow of EmoconLite is depicted in Figure 2.
2.1.1 Setup and training

The Setup and training section allows users to train the EmotivBCI system (EmotivBCI) to recognize different mental states. In addition to the neutral mental
state, there are 13 mental tasks users can configure, allowing up to 13 different inputs to be provided. The current version of EmoconLite accepts binary tasks (e.g.
neutral vs any mental task), and translates them into “on” and “off” commands.
However, a future iteration of the application will handle multiple tasks and map
them to arrow keys to provide more degrees of control. In this section, users can
create a new profile, train the BCI model to recognize their chosen mental tasks,
and configure the profile to link mental tasks to different commands.
2.1.2 Activity

In the Activity section, the configured profiles can be used for a list of four activities: to launch a YouTube video clip and toggle the play and pause functions,

4

Javad Rahimipour Anaraki, Chelsea Anne Rauh, Jason Leung, Tom Chau

Launch EmoconLite

Configure user profile

Send keystrokes
to target activity
|positive| >= threshold

Adjust accuracy sensitivity threshold

Press Start to initiate
connection to Cortex API

Received class labels

Check class
labels for the
last 10 samples

|positive| < threshold

Choose an activity

No keystrokes sent

Press Stop to
end connection

Fig. 2 User workflow diagram, where |positive| is the number of positive labels, and threshold
is the chosen value for the sensitivity

to play HelpKidzLearn games (HelpKidzLearn), to play the Brain Joust game
(Brain Joust), or to play Steam games (Steam) with their friends. Clicking on
the YouTube button will open up a new browser window, where users can select
their desired YouTube video clip. The user can then perform a mental task (i.e.
any task other than neutral) to play or pause the video clip. Users can also access HelpKidsLearn, an online learning platform for children of all abilities with
accessible games and activities. Another activity available to users is Brain Joust
- an accessible video game developed by BCI Games (BCI Games). Finally, EmoconLite also supports a variety of games available on the video game distribution
service, Steam. By leveraging Steam’s Remote Play functionality, users can play
online and multiplayer games with their friends over the internet.

2.1.3 Accuracy Sensitivity

Users can toggle an interactive slider to adjust the accuracy sensitivity threshold
of EmoconLite’s classification algorithm, which uses Emotiv’s internal classifier
model to classify EEG samples as neutral or as one of the configured mental tasks.
Using a moving window approach, the class of the current sample is determined
based on the classification results of a window of samples. For instance, a window
of the 10 last classification results is used, corresponding to approximately the last
second of the EEG signal. If the number of samples classified as a particular class
within the window is higher than the sensitivity threshold, the current sample is
considered that class. Users can increase the sensitivity threshold if there are too
many false activations and decrease the sensitivity threshold if there are too many
missed activations.

Emoconlite

5

2.1.4 Controls

When the user wants to use EmoconLite to send commands to their chosen activity,
they can press the Start button. Emocon will then initiate a background thread
to communicate with the Emotiv headset through a WebSocket using the Emotiv
Application Programming Interface (API) called Cortex API (Cortex API). After
making sure the headset is connected and the proper user profile is selected, the
thread will start a session to receive a stream of classification labels from the
Cortex API and simulate a keystroke press to the selected application. When the
user is done with the activity, they can press the Stop button to disconnect the
Emotiv to stop it from providing further input.
2.1.5 Status bar

All the messages related to the initiation and execution of commands are shown
in the status bar. If any error occurs while connecting to the Emotiv headset and
Cortex API, a corresponding message will appear in the status bar to help users
troubleshoot the problem. During an activity, the number of positive (i.e. mental
task) and negative (i.e. neutral) class labels over the last 10 samples will also be
shown in the status bar. This makes it easier for the user to adjust the accuracy
sensitivity threshold.

2.2 Data structure
Data streamed to and from the Cortex API are in the JSON format. The user’s
mental tasks can be accessed by subscribing to the Cortex API. EmoconLite continuously parses the JSON output object from the Cortex API and checks if the
desired mental task is performed or not, based on the model created for each user
internally in the EmotivBCI application. The appropriate keystroke simulation
will be sent to the target activity based on this output.

2.3 Screenshot
Figure 3 shows the GUI of EmoconLite. The GUI layout follows each step in the
user workflow to make it more intuitive.

2.4 Documentation
A quick guide documentation2 has been created to walk users through the stepby-step process to download and setup EmoconLite, along with the supported
activities such as Brain Joust and Steam. This setup prepares EmoconLite to
communicate with EmotivBCI on the computer. The quick guide is an essential
reference for family and clinicians to provide set up and training for children.
The quick guide is made available in Arabic, Dutch, French, Chinese, Persian,
Portuguese, and Spanish to reduce language barriers.
2

http://hollandbloorview.ca/emocon

6

Javad Rahimipour Anaraki, Chelsea Anne Rauh, Jason Leung, Tom Chau

Fig. 3 EmoconLite app

3 Discussion

The inherent nature of a child is to play and have fun. This instinctive ability and
human right to play allows for childhood discovery by observation and exploration
of the world around them, supporting growth, learning, and development. Active,
engaged and independent play participation within leisure and recreation experiences has many benefits to childhood development. Based on clinical observation
and evidence-based practice, there is an identified need to support children with
severe disabilities and/or medical complexities in their active and independent
engagement in a Therapeutic Recreation BCI program via assisted technology
(Ramella et al., 2009). Rather than focusing on switches that require physical
movement that may remain elusive, a BCI focuses on its user’s internal capacity,
utilizing their brain signals to mobilize their capabilities to engage and self-initiate
participation actively. BCI, as an access method, activates the users’ strengths and
abilities, to enhance capabilities.
Wise described capability as “the freedom to choose from a set of opportunities related to what one wants to do and be” (Wise, 2018). The real freedom to
pursue, achieve and participate within activities of life that are deeply valued. A
capability- and strength-based approach is imperative to support the human dignity of children with disabilities and is essential to their well-being (Sayer, 2011;
Wise, 2018; Mietola et al., 2017; Hood and Carruthers, 2016). A BCI approach requires co-creation and collaboration between clients, families, clinicians, and their
supporting partners to support dignity, capabilities, health, and the well-being of
children with disabilities. All of these stakeholders will require access to the technology, training with the technology, co-creation of participatory experience, and
participatory action research and action sensitive research within a psychologically
safe environment.
As Huber and colleagues proposed, health is the “ability to adapt and self
manage in the face of social, physical, and emotional challenges” (Huber et al.,

Emoconlite

7

2011). Children with severe disabilities and/or medical complexities may require
adaptations to support active, engaged and independent participation due to congenital or acquired conditions. Adaptations that consider BCI may support health
and well-being, reducing leisure barriers in the short term, and building skills for
future communication applications in the long term. The EmoconLite software and
Emotiv headset are assistive technology adaptations that serve this purpose. At
Holland Bloorview Kids Rehabilitation Hospital and partnering BCI clinics across
Canada, children with disabilities, along with their families and clinicians have access to this adaptation strategy through the BCI clinic (Kinney-Lang et al., 2020).
This will support childhood development through play and leisure pursuits both
independently and with peers in a social environment to reduce leisure barriers
and increase active, independent and engaged play participation.
The Emotiv headset paired with the EmoconLite creates a new access method
to engage in leisure and recreation pursuits, which can help empower choice, control
and self-initiated engagement by the user (King et al., 2014). These are essential
building blocks for intrinsic feelings of autonomy and agency for the growing and
developing child, which influence intrinsic motivation (Steinert et al., 2019). During
play, the results of the activation of the effector device, such as seeing a character
move in a video game or hearing their favourite music play within a YouTube video,
influences extrinsic motivation to participate. Intrinsic and extrinsic motivation
through play-based experience may support the sustainable use of BCI technology,
reducing device abandonment.
Through interactions with the environment, as well as communication with
friends, family and the community, children develop to learn, grow, share, empathize and understand (Wise, 2018). This kind of agentic engagement sets a
foundation for learning. When a child with severe disabilities and/or medical complexities is supported through adaptations to have an opportunity to create an
action with a particular effect, their world will open up with growth. The Emotiv
headset paired with the EmoconLite supports childhood development by creating agentic opportunities using brain signals. This adapted strategy supports the
child’s strengths.
Social opportunities are a necessity for growth, learning and development; and
ultimately health and well-being. Sexton looked at social factors to improve BCI’s
effectiveness and noted that “BCIs are not just about brains but also about brains
in interaction with other brains” (Sexton, 2015). Humans are inherently social
creatures that require interaction, reciprocity, communication partners to effectively function, learn, grow, develop and have a meaningful life. Therefore, aside
from the much needed interdisciplinary training programs, to determine whether
this technology adaptation is a good fit, the BCI clinic will also focus on individualized co-created goals and life skills within leisure and recreation (Jessup et al.,
2007; Pritchard et al., 2020). Social opportunities, facilitated within Therapeutic Recreation programs, will support clients in practicing and having fun while
aiming to reach their goals, and encourage the sustained use of the technology.
With the creation of the EmoconLite application, Emotiv technology becomes
more practically accessible. In its application within the BCI clinic, EmoconLite
can better support play and skill development for children with severe disabilities
and/or medical complexities during leisure. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the first effort to design, implement and provide a free application to the users

8

Javad Rahimipour Anaraki, Chelsea Anne Rauh, Jason Leung, Tom Chau

who are interested in utilizing Emotiv headsets to perform a task within an interdisciplinary training environment and a Therapeutic Recreation BCI program.
Due to the world’s current status, the pandemic has created unique challenges
requiring creative solutions to healthcare. As the world has moved to online formats, such as Zoom and Ontario Telemedicine Network, so has the BCI clinic. A
BCI-at-home virtual program is the devised strategy across the BCI-CAN Network
to support client and family continued access and engagement during the current
COVID-19 pandemic (Kinney-Lang et al., 2020). One of the BCI clinic’s aims is
to ensure the integration of the BCI systems within the community, especially at
home where experiences can be shared with family and friends. These experiences
can also encourage the user, further motivating continued engagement.
One of the notable limitations of EmoconLite is the number of mental tasks
it supports. Since the current version of the software only supports binary classification to distinguish between the neutral state and mental tasks, this limits
the number of inputs users can provide to external applications. Another limitation of EmoconLite is that it builds upon the internal classification algorithm of
the EmotivBCI software. Since this is a proprietary algorithm, the lack of transparency makes it difficult to understand the underlying classification approach or
to potentially extend it. Future iterations of the application would expand the
support for more mental tasks to give users more degrees of control and implement open-source classification algorithms to allow developers to improve on the
classification performance. It would also be beneficial to expand the repository
of supported activities and incorporate accessibility features in the GUI of the
EmoconLite application. In addition, future works will also look into extending
EmoconLite to control a variety of effector devices, such as Bluetooth toys and
devices. This will make EmoconLite even more functional and versatile.
BCI systems have a lot of potential as an alternative access method and as an
augmentative and alternative communication method for children with severe disabilities and/or medical complexities (Kinney-Lang et al., 2020; Brumberg et al.,
2018). EmoconLite will support leisure experience for children with severe disabilities and/or medical complexities, giving them the opportunity to choose to initiate
an activity and engage actively and independently through assistive technology. As
such, continued development of BCIs for recreation, leisure and life pursuits will be
essential in the well-being of these children. Through co-created participatory action research and action sensitive research, the interdisciplinary training program
and the Therapeutic Recreation BCI Program at Holland Bloorview Kids Rehabilitation Hospital will support further iterations of the development of EmoconLite
to meet client and family needs.
Additionally, communication is a huge aspect of social experience as well as cocreated leisure and recreation experience. Leisure interests, preferences, and choice
can be determined through connectivity and communication. These are essential
components for participation, the development of leisure and life goals, and agency.
Children acquiring BCI skills through leisure and play will become trained in
BCI, and these skills may be applicable to potential communication-based BCIs
in the future. Development of the hardware and software, considerations of how
BCIs can support recreation and leisure engagement, environmental controls, and
communication are all areas that require co-created exploration to inform usercentred design.

Emoconlite

9

4 Conclusion

This paper introduced a new free software application called EmoconLite, which
is an end-to-end solution that brings BCI applications to users with no programming experience. Building upon the Emotiv hardware and software system, users
can control external computer programs such as YouTube, HelpKidzLearn, Brain
Joust, and Steam in real-time using their EEG signals. When integrated into Holland Bloorview’s BCI clinic, EmoconLite can support children with disabilities
and/or medical complexities by enabling access to BCI technologies to help them
adapt, benefiting their well-being and improving their quality of life. Strategies on
maintaining, motivating, mitigating frustration, and reducing device abandonment
while meeting clients’ needs to develop, learn and grow will need to be considered
along with continued collaboration across the board.
In the future, we will be extending the support for recognizing more mental
tasks, while expanding the repository of games and effector devices, connecting
to Bluetooth toys and devices to provide extra functionalities to the users. These
improvements will be followed by making the next iteration of EmoconLite targetagnostic to control various applications. By expanding functionalities, a variety of
activities will become available, opening up additional avenues for exploration.
Consultation with and inclusion of clients, families and clinicians involved in the
BCI programs will inform new iterations of EmoconLite to meet client interests
and needs. Through the BCI clinic, play and leisure is transformed. Children with
severe disabilities and their families will have an opportunity to adapt and cope
with their congenital and acquired conditions through their brain signals, and
explore their potential, leading to resilience in the face of challenges while reducing
barriers to leisure participation.
Acknowledgements This work was supported partially by Mitacs through the Mitacs Elevate program and Holland Bloorview Kids Rehabilitation Hospital Foundation. We want to
thank Sarah House and Leslie Mumford at PRISM Lab, Heather Keating, Stephanie Hicks,
Rachel Arsenault and Kendra Abbey at Holland Bloorview Kids Rehabilitation Hospital, Dr.
Maureen Connolly at Brock University, and all members of the BCI-CAN network for their
constructive feedback and suggestions.

Conflict of interest

The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.

References

BCI Games. https://www.bci.games/, 2019. Accessed: 2020-12-11.
Brain Joust. https://www.bci.games/games/brain-joust, 2020. Accessed: 202012-11.
J. S. Brumberg, K. M. Pitt, A. Mantie-Kozlowski, and J. D. Burnison. Brain–
computer interfaces for augmentative and alternative communication: A tutorial. American journal of speech-language pathology, 27(1):1–12, 2018.
Cortex API. https://emotiv.gitbook.io/cortex-api/, 2019. Accessed: 2020-1211.

10

Javad Rahimipour Anaraki, Chelsea Anne Rauh, Jason Leung, Tom Chau

EmotivBCI. https://www.emotiv.com/emotiv-bci/, 2018. Accessed: 2020-12-11.
HelpKidzLearn. https://www.helpkidzlearn.com/, 2016. Accessed: 2020-12-11.
C. D. Hood and C. P. Carruthers. Strengths-based tr program development using
the leisure and well-being model: Translating theory into practice. Therapeutic
Recreation Journal, 50(1), 2016.
M. Huber, J. A. Knottnerus, L. Green, H. van der Horst, A. R. Jadad,
D. Kromhout, B. Leonard, K. Lorig, M. I. Loureiro, J. W. van der Meer, et al.
How should we define health? Bmj, 343, 2011.
R. L. Jessup et al. Interdisciplinary versus multidisciplinary care teams: do we
understand the difference? Australian Health Review, 31(3):330, 2007.
G. King, B. E. Gibson, B. Mistry, M. Pinto, F. Goh, G. Teachman, and L. Thompson. An integrated methods study of the experiences of youth with severe disabilities in leisure activity settings: the importance of belonging, fun, and control
and choice. Disability and Rehabilitation, 36(19):1626–1635, 2014.
E. Kinney-Lang, D. Kelly, E. D. Floreani, Z. Jadavji, D. Rowley, E. T. Zewdie,
J. R. Anaraki, H. Bahari, K. Beckers, K. Castelane, et al. Advancing brain
computer interface applications for severely disabled children through a multidisciplinary national network: Summary of the inaugural pediatric bci canada
meeting. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 14:530, 2020.
J. N. Mak and J. R. Wolpaw. Clinical applications of brain-computer interfaces:
current state and future prospects. IEEE reviews in biomedical engineering, 2:
187–199, 2009.
R. Mietola, S. Miettinen, and S. Vehmas. Voiceless subjects? research ethics and
persons with profound intellectual disabilities. International Journal of Social
Research Methodology, 20(3):263–274, 2017.
L. Pritchard, S. Phelan, A. McKillop, and J. Andersen. Child, parent, and clinician
experiences with a child-driven goal setting approach in paediatric rehabilitation. Disability and Rehabilitation, pages 1–8, 2020.
PySide2. https://pypi.org/project/PySide2/, 2018. Accessed: 2020-12-11.
Python 3.7.0. https://www.python.org/downloads/release/python-370/, 2018.
Accessed: 2020-12-11.
K. Ramella, B. Tennis, and C. Yoshioka. Making leisure choices using enabling
switches. Annual in Therapeutic Recreation, 17:17–82, 2009.
P. Rosenbaum and J. Gorter. The ‘f-words’ in childhood disability: I swear this is
how we should think! Child: care, health and development, 38(4):457–463, 2012.
A. Sayer. Why things matter to people: Social science, values and ethical life. Cambridge University Press, 2011.
C. A. Sexton. The overlooked potential for social factors to improve effectiveness
of brain-computer interfaces. Frontiers in systems neuroscience, 9:70, 2015.
Steam. https://store.steampowered.com/, 2003. Accessed: 2020-12-11.
S. Steinert, C. Bublitz, R. Jox, and O. Friedrich. Doing things with thoughts:
Brain-computer interfaces and disembodied agency. Philosophy & Technology, 32
(3):457–482, 2019.
J. B. Wise. Integrating leisure, human flourishing, and the capabilities approach:
Implications for therapeutic recreation. Therapeutic Recreation Journal, 52(3):
254–268, 2018.
J. Zhang, Z. Jadavji, E. Zewdie, and A. Kirton. Evaluating if children can use
simple brain computer interfaces. Frontiers in human neuroscience, 13:24, 2019.

