1

ACTA: A Mobile-Health Solution for Integrated
Nudge-Neurofeedback Training for Senior Citizens

arXiv:2102.08692v1 [cs.CY] 17 Feb 2021

Giulia Cisotto, Andrea Trentini, Italo Zoppis, Alessio Zanga, Sara Manzoni,
Giada Pietrabissa, Anna Guerrini Usubini, and Gianluca Castelnuovo

Abstract
As the worldwide population gets increasingly aged, in-home tele-medicine and mobile-health solutions represent promising services to promote active and independent aging and to contribute to a paradigm shift towards a
patient-centric healthcare. In this work, we present ACTA (Advanced Cognitive Training for Aging), a prototypal
mobile-health solution to provide advanced cognitive training for senior citizens with mild cognitive impairments,
We disclose here the conceptualization of ACTA as the integration of two promising rehabilitation strategies: the
"Nudge theory", from the cognitive domain, and the neurofeedback, from the neuroscience domain. Moreover, in
ACTA we exploit the most advanced machine learning techniques to deliver customized and fully adaptive support
to the elderly, while training in an ecological environment. ACTA represents the next-step beyond SENIOR, an
earlier mobile-health project for cognitive training based on Nudge theory, currently ongoing in Lombardy Region.
Beyond SENIOR, ACTA represents a highly-usable, accessible, low-cost, new-generation mobile-health solution to
promote independent aging and effective motor-cognitive training support, while empowering the elderly in their
own aging.
Index Terms
Brain networks; ecological environment; explainable machine learning; machine learning; mobile health; rehabilitation; wearables; wireless EEG.

I. I NTRODUCTION
As the worldwide population gets increasingly aged, tele-medicine and mobile-health solutions are
becoming key services to promote active and independent aging, and to contribute to a paradigm shift
towards a patient-centric healthcare. In many countries, especially Italy, Portugal in Europe, and Japan
in Asia, average population age is rapidly increasing and projections indicate 79% of it will be over 60
by 2050, according to the 2017 report of the United Nations [1]. Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is
rapidly becoming one of the most common clinical manifestations affecting the elderly. It is characterized
by deterioration of memory, attention, and cognitive function that is beyond what is expected based on
age and educational level. MCI does not interfere significantly with individuals’ daily activities. It can
act as a transitional level towards dementia with a range of conversion of 10%-15% per year. It is crucial
G. Cisotto is with the Department of Information Engineering, University of Padova, Padova, Italy, the National Centre for
Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan, and the National Inter-University Consortium for Telecommunications (CNIT), Italy
(email: giulia.cisotto.1@unipd.it); A. Trentini is with the Department of Computer Science, University of Milan, Italy (email:
andrea.trentini@unimi.it). I. Zoppis, A. Zanga, and S. Manzoni are with the Department of Computer Science, University
of Milano-Bicocca, Milano, Italy (emails: italo.zoppis@unimib.it; a.zanga3@campus.unimib.it, sara.manzoni@unimib.it). G.
Pietrabissa, A. Guerrini Usubini, and G. Castelnuovo are with the Istituto Auxologico Italiano IRCCS, Psychology Research
Laboratory, Ospedale San Giuseppe, Verbania, Italy and the Department of Psychology, Catholic University of Milan, Milan,
Italy (emails: {gianluca.castelnuovo, giada.pietrabissa, anna.guerriniusubini}@unicatt.it).

2

to protect older people against MCI and developing dementia. As originally conceived, Petersen defined
MCI by the following criteria: (1) a subjective complaint of a memory disturbance (preferably supported
by an informant); (2) objective evidence of a memory deficit; (3) generally preserved cognitive functions;
(4) intact activities of daily living; and (5) the absence of dementia [2].
Preventive interventions, e.g., mental activity, physical exercises and social engagement, may help
decrease the risk of further cognitive decline [3, 4, 5]. To this aim, "SENIOR - SystEm of Nudge
theory based ICT applications for OldeR citizen" (ID 2018-NAZ-0129, rif. 2018-0826), a three-year
project funded by CARIPLO Fundation in 2018, currently ongoing at the University of Milano-Bicocca
and I.R.C.C.S. San Giuseppe Auxologico of Milan, is developing a new "Nudge theory"-based ICT coach
system for monitoring and empowering elderly with MCI [6]: it aims to collect physiological, psychological
and behavioral data in order to provide them personalized advices, suggestions for social engagement and
overall wellness, according to the well-known "Nudge theory". "Nudge Theory” [7] refers to an extensive
sociological framework for helping people to take decisions in a smooth way. Through proactive and
positive suggestions (i.e., the nudges), "Nudge theory" based cognitive training can help the patients
in remembering or focusing attention onto specific tasks. In SENIOR, nudges are conveyed via texts,
speeches, or acoustic reminders. A dedicated app has been developed to correctly performing the training.
More recently, degeneration in MCI has been also addressed by neurofeedback (NFB) interventions
[8, 9, 10, 11]. NFB is a strategy to obtain a self-regulation of specific neural substrates which, in turn,
produces improvements of specific cognitive and motor functions [12]. The target neural activity (assumed
to be pathological) is associated with an automatic output (e.g., a cursor moving on a computer screen),
the patient is instructed to control the output and a positive reinforcement can be provided him/her to help
them reach their goal: in fact, after some trials-and-errors, the patient learns to control the output. NFB
is enabled by the basic principles of "operant learning" and "brain plasticity" [13, 14]. Operant learning
is employed to create an association between brain activity and (cognitive) behaviour in real-time, and
facilitates the learning process via reinforcement strategy. Brain plasticity, instead, is the key ability of
the brain to adapt its own functionalities to finally control the output. While criticisms still persist on the
mechanisms through which NFB may produce benefits to specific patients, an increasing bulk of evidence
has proved it as effective to improve motor and cognitive (e.g., attention deficits, memory, cognitive
flexibility, reaction time, and executive functions) functionalities in a variety of pathologies [12, 15, 16,
17], including MCI [18, 19, 20, 21].
The abovementioned studies used Electroencephalography (EEG), a non-invasive electrophysiological
technique that allows to acquire the individual’s brain activity with a very high time resolution (i.e.,
milliseconds), making it ideal to deliver timely NFB reinforcing stimuli [22, 23, 24, 25, 26]. EEGbased NFB is typically operated by Brain-Computer Interface (BCI), i.e., "closed-loop" human-machine
systems that process EEG through several steps of pre-processing, feature extraction and classification,
and transform the classifier’s output in a command for an external device, e.g., a cursor on a computer
or a robotic device navigating a room. During training, the machine refines its model of the user’s brain
activity and, at the same time, the human learns how to modulate his/her own brain activity to control
the machine’s output [14, 15]. Interestingly, [18], the authors showed that central alpha EEG NFB was
able to improve memory performance in MCI patients, and this outcome has been maintained at 30-day
follow-up. Beta band EEG NFB was also reported to produce significant improvements to MCI patients
in domains such as attention, memory, cognitive flexibility, reaction time, and executive functions [10].
More recently, theta EEG NFB, with EEG recorded over the sensorimotor brain areas, was effective to

3

reduce cognitive deficits in elderly patients with MCI, as well as stroke patients [19, 27].
At the state-of-the-art (SENIOR project), "Nudge theory"-based cognitive training can be administered
by specialized therapists only, the training level is defined by high-level cognitive assessments (e.g.,
Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and reaction time tests) at the beginning of the intervention
and updated on a regular base. Also, the timing for delivering the nudges, as well as their relevance, is
based on the subjective therapist’s expertise. On the other hand, NFB training is completely customized
and timely adapted to match the user’s mental state conditions, via continuous brain monitoring. Also,
in the BCI community, an increasing effort to bring the promising results of NFB out-of-the-lab is being
ongoing since a long time [28, 29, 30, 31, 32]. However, the research on the best strategies for improving
learning in BCI remains a vivid field of investigation. Thus, SENIOR application of "Nudge theory"
could represent a complimentary solution to improve learning in BCI research. Also, NFB could provide
contingent intervention that could increase the effectiveness of "Nudge theory"-based cognitive training.
ACTA (Advanced Cognitive Training for Aging) aims to integrate two different domains, the "Nudge
theory" and the NFB domains, and to get the best from each of them: in fact, ACTA aims to close the loop
of a "Nudge theory"-based cognitive training, with introducing an automatic and fully-personalized NFB
reinforcement based on the instantaneous patient’s mental condition. In particular, ACTA will expand
the methodologies of "SENIOR - SystEm of Nudge theory based ICT applications for OldeR citizen"
(CARIPLO funded project ID 2018-NAZ-0129, rif. 2018-0826) project, currently ongoing at the University
of Milano-Bicocca [6]. Going far beyond SENIOR, ACTA aims to design and test an integrated NudgeNFB cognitive training by introducing a closed-loop assistance based on BCI and real-time quantitative
assessments of the patient’s conditions and attention level [9, 33]. Moreover, ACTA targets a new lowcost and wireless setup which could be used in less-controlled environments, i.e., in the patient’s home,
without the need of a clinical caregiver. At the same time, ACTA will provide the clinical caregiver with
quantitative outcomes from the patient’s behaviour and physiological conditions all throughout the course
of the cognitive training. Thus, ACTA will provide a proof-of-concept that could be, later, easily extended
to other use cases (i.e., motor disturbances in Parkinson’s disease patients) or cognitive training programs
(by adjusting the timings and the complexity of the implemented tasks) [17, 34, 31, 4].
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: SectionII we present the methodologies to implement ACTA, in Section III we disclose the conceptualization of ACTA and the operative choices made in
the development of the system and of the experimental protocol. In Section IV we discuss the potentialities,
the limitations and the future perspective that ACTA could open for the new generation of tele-medicine
and mobile-health. Finally, Section V concludes the paper.
II. M ATERIALS AND M ETHODS
A. Participants
Forty senior citizens with MCI from the cohort involved in the SENIOR project will take part in ACTA
and will be enrolled via the same clinical and neuropsychological evaluation. Particularly, body mass
index, smartwatch-based physical activity and energy expediture measure, sleep quality, MMSE score,
functional-executive test scores will be obtained for each of them.
The eligibility criteria and the exclusion criteria for ACTA will be the same as in SENIOR, and are
recalled here for convenience. Individuals will be enrolled in ACTA if: (1) they are 65-85 years old, (2)
they are diagnosed of MCI as measured via a standard battery of neuropsychological tests (e.g., MMSE,
(3) they demonstrate an entry level in informatics. Exclusion criteria are as follows: (1) diagnosis of severe

4

psychiatric disturbances, (2) severe medical conditions that lead to continuous medical assistance, (3) lack
of independence in daily activities, (4) motor impairments.
The experimental phases will be conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. All experimental protocols and procedures for the first experimental phase are currently under ethics approval by
the IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano Ethical Committee. An additional approval will be requested to a
Research Ethics Committee for the second experimental phase, which involves the use of neurofeedback
via BCI. However, fully non invasive methodologies are employed (i.e., EEG) and the proposed NFB
approach derives from standard BCI protocols. In fact, this kind of research has been previously approved
in many different countries and many different pathologies [15, 20], including MCI [34, 21, 3]. The eligible
participants will be fully informed about the purpose, the experimental procedures, the data protection
and treatment, the potential benefits and risks of taking part in this experiments. Then, they will be asked
to sign a written and informed consent to take actual part in the project.
B. System architecture
Fig. 1 shows the overall architecture that is being deployed for ACTA. The latter implements the
typical three-tier Internet-of-Things for healthcare (IoT-Health) architecture [5, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39] with
the first tier including a wireless body area network (WBAN) for multi-modal sensing [40, 41] to collect
physiogical data and vitals from the user (e.g., the heart rate via smartwatch’s optical sensor, the brain
activity via EEG), as well as the GPS position and the individual’s movement (via accelerometer and
gyroscope sensors). All data collected are sent through short-range wireless protocols, e.g., Bluetooth, to
the smartphone that acts as a local gateway to access the Internet. At the second tier, the data are aggregated
and further process before to reach the cloud. Here, mobile communications, e.g., 3G or 4G, or wi-fi are
employed. The cloud, where data are stored and processed via advanced machine learning to identify
individuals’ profiles, represents the third tier of the IoT-Health architecture. Finally, the information about
profiling are sent back, through the Internet, towards the local gateway to deliver nudges and neurofeedback
stimuli, when needed. From a software point of view, at the front-end, we will extend the SENIOR app
to integrate the new functionalities of ACTA (i.e., EEG acquisition, NFB delivery) and the user can run
the app on his/her smartphone. At the backend, a Data Base Management System (DBMS) will store and
analyze data on the cloud.
C. Multi-modal wearable sensing design
ACTA will be used by senior citizens, which are typically less familiar to technology compared to
other population segments. Therefore, sensing device, data visualization on smartphone and feedback
delivery have to be properly chosen. In case of senior citizens affected by MCI, these requirements must
be carefully met.
In fact, in ACTA, usability and accessibility, i.e., easy human-machine interaction and minimal intrusiveness [5, 42], are ensured by adopting a fully wearable sensing system, from the heart rate measurement
to the brain activity acquisition.
Thus, we adopted the following criteria:
• to minimize the sensing intrusiveness;
• to minimize the visual modality (except for the delivery of the nudges);
• to prefer audio or haptic feedback, such as vibration;
• fully wearability, i.e., nnothing to handle with hands.

5

Fig. 1: ACTA architecture (modified from [6]).
Since we need to get body parameters, i.e., the heart rate, oxygen saturation, and other vitals, a
smartwatch is a suitable wearable. Usually, smartwatches come with proprietary software (e.g., Fitbit,
Apple) or semi-open software (i.e., Android). To promote inter-operability and reproducibility, we adopted
an Android-based smartwatch both in SENIOR as in ACTA.
From the computational point of view, smartwatches are today autonomous computing devices: indeed,
they have an operating system, sensors, memory, storage, and connectivity. However, their limited size
constrains also the size of RAM and flashdisk, the CPU power and, above all, the battery capacity. For
example, a smartwatch has battery capacity in the range of 100mAh. On the other hand, the GPS consumes
about 30mA. Therefore, the battery may last about 3h. Moreover, adding the consumption for the display,
the CPU and the connectivity, the device’s lifespan could be reduced to less than an hour.
Thus, to increase the system usability and its reliability for longer usages, ACTA system (and SENIOR
as well) include both a smartwatch (running Wear OS, a reduction of Android OS) and a smartphone.
The smartwatch is solely used for basic sensing of vitals (i.e., heart rate), while the full fledged Android
smartphone is employed:
•
•
•
•

to
to
to
to

act as a local gateway to access the Internet
synchronize different sensing modalities, including the EEG recordings
perform basic preliminary computations, before to send the data to the cloud
host the SENIOR app

6

to track the individual’s position via GPS communications
• to deliver nudges and audio feedback
Compared to the earlier deployment of SENIOR project, in ACTA the sensing setup is being extended
to a low-cost wireless EEG with a limited number of sensors (distributed over the scalp) and the humanmachine interaction is being enriched with a real-time neuro-feedback delivery channel.
•

D. Data collection
The participants will be evaluated at relevant periodic times (at baseline and at different follow-up
phases) to assess the effects of the training on their brain activity, motor and functional-executive abilities,
as well as to collect information on the usability of the mobile-health system itself.
We will evaluate and collect several behavioral and kinematic measurements: we will exploit GPS-based
continuous tracking to decide when to provide a nudge or a NFB stimulus (i.e., automatically delivered
based on GPS position compared to the next landmark). Also, we will measure the path efficiency, i.e., the
maximal deviation from the expected ideal path, the peak speed, the reaction time after a new stimulus,
the number of steps, and the completion rate, i.e., how many landmarks are successfully reached (similarly
to the assessment adopted by [15]). Then, the sensing technologies of the smartphone and the smartwatch
allow to collect physiological information, e.g., heart rate, respiration rate, to correlate with behavioural
performance.
Also, EEG changes in the brain activity can be investigated through brain network analysis [43, 44].
Particularly, network topology (e.g., modularity), communication efficiency (e.g., small-world), and other
graph theory metrics will be extracted from brain networks in real-time (i.e., based on dynamic graph
theory) [45, 46].
Finally, in line with SENIOR, we will derive a complete evaluation of ACTA usability by administering
online questionnaries, available at SENIOR website, about patient engagement, empowerment and quality
of experience (e.g., by means of the "Telemedicine Satisfaction Quesitonnnaire" and "Patient Activation
Measure and the Patient Health engegnement scale").
E. Tasks
The participants will be asked to perform two different training tasks, which combine the use of both
motor and cognitive abilities in outdoor path navigation.
In task 1, i.e., memory task, the patients will be required to achieve a predetermined place (e.g., street,
square), within 3 km distance, and asked to repeatedly walk it (in one-way) to memorize it. The path
is defined as a pre-determined track from a start point to a final destination, including a number of
intermediate reference locations, namely the landmarks (e.g., identified by an incremental index from 1 to
4 in Fig. 2), and a number of other non-relevant places (e.g., represented by red cones in Fig. 2). Along
the path, appropriate nudges are automatically delivered.
In a first session, consisting of a number of repetitions of the same path, a nudge will be delivered for
each landmark (as in the left-most panel of Fig. 2). In the following sessions, the nudges will vanish (in line
with the vanishing cue strategy), letting the patient finding their own way to reach the expected landmarks
(intermediate panels of Fig. 2). Particularly, as the patient’s performance increases, the occurrence of
nudges will be decreased (or additional support will be provided to complete the path). At the very last
session, no intermediate landmarks will be announced using nudges (as in the right-most panel of Fig.
2). This will strengthen and consolidate memory [7, 6].

7

Fig. 2: SENIOR implementation of "Nudge theory"-based cognitive training.
In task 2, i.e., attentional shift task, while repeating task 1, the patients will experience an additional
disturbance (e.g., auditory stimulus asking for answering a question on the smartphone) that will likely
provoke an attentional shift. This will train their attention and memory to reach the landmark, despite of
the disturbance [4].
It is worth mentioning that the timing and the complexity of the path (task 1), as well as the entity of
the disturbance (task 2), can be monitored and adjusted to avoid excessive cognitive load or gait fatigue.
III. R ESULTS
A. Preliminary data
Preliminary data are availble from an earlier project carried out by some of the authors of this
work at the I.R.C.C.S. Istituto Auxologico Italiano in the framework of the "TEChNology for OBesity"
(TECNOB) project (funded by the Compagnia di San Paolo Foundation and supported by technological
partners TELBIOS [47] and METEDA [48]. TECNOB was a comprehensive two-phase stepped down
program enhanced by tele-medicine for the medium-term treatment of obese and diabetic people seeking
intervention for weight loss [49, 50]. Seventy-two obese patients with type 2 diabetes have been recruited
and randomly allocated to the TECNOB program (n=37) or to a control condition (n=39). The TECNOB
web-platform supported several functions and delivered many utilities, such as questionnaires, an animated
food record diary, an agenda and a videoconference virtual room. All patients received a multi-sensory
armband (SenseWear Pro3 Armband provided by BodyMedia), an electronic tool that enabled automatic
monitoring of total energy expenditure (calories burned), active energy expenditure, physical activity
duration and levels. They were instructed to wear the device on the back of their upper arm and to
record data for 36 hours every two weeks in a free-living context. Also, the patients could ask for a teleconsultation with the clinical psychologist, to improve self-esteem and self-efficacy, to support motivation,
to prevent relapse and to provide problem- solving. Within-group analysis showed a significant reduction
of the initial weight at all time-points. The median percentage of the initial weight loss for the whole
sample was −5, 1 kg (range from −6, 6 to −3, 7) at discharge from the hospital.
B. Low-cost EEG integration
One contribution of this work is the systematic comparison among the most common portable low-cost
EEG devices. We operated a selection that is in line with the recent survey presented in [51]; however, we
focused on portable and low-cost systems, only. A summary of their characteristics is reported in Tab. I.

8

TABLE I: Comparison among commercial low-cost portable EEG devices.
Brand - Product

ANT Neuro mini-serie [52]

Open BCI [53]
mBrainTrain [54]
Unicorn EEG [55]
Wearable Sensing [56]
Emotiv EPOC-X [57]
Bitbrain Hero [58]
Brain Live Amp [59]
Neurosky - MindWave [60]

Wireless
(Yes/No)

Sampling
Number of
frequency [Hz]
channels

No

Noise
reduction

Price [USD]

quote
needed

1000

< 2048

8

active shielding
technology for
reduction of
environmental
interference

n.a.

Yes
(BLE/WiFi)
Yes
(BT-EDR)
Yes
(BT)

250

8/16/21

250/500

24

250

8

Yes (BT)

300

7 − 24

Yes
(BLE)
Yes
(BT 2.1+EDR)

128 − 256

14

250

9

Yes
Yes

≤ 1000
512

8 − 32
1

high SNR
claimed
high SNR
claimed

n.a.

66750
1200
n.a.

notch
filter
active
shielding

quote
needed

n.a.
n.a.

18200
180

850

In [61], a list of brands and products is provided, with further details.
We can notice that all of them are characterized by a low-to-medium sampling frequency (less than
1000 Hz), a limited number of channels (21 max), and a low-to-average price. Additionally, most of them
are wireless, but do not have special noise reduction technologies, thus reducing the SNR (i.e., the quality)
of the acquired signals. Bluetooth is the most common communications technology used to send the EEG
samples to the smartphone or the computer wirelessly. Finally, it is worth mentioning for the most of them
the EEG sensors are placed in compliance with the International 10-20 System or its extended version,
i.e., the 10-10 system [62].
C. Integration between Nudge and neurofeedback
The main and most original contribution of this work is the conceptualization of the integration between
"Nudge theory" and NFB.
One of the most popular paradigms to train a BCI system for cognitive training is the oddball paradigm,
where a sequence of stimuli, with different levels of saliency, are presented to the subject which is required
to focus his/her attention to the most salient ones [63]. A well-established body of literature reported that
the brain reacts to the oddball paradigm producing a specific kind of activity: the so-called event-related
potentials (ERPs) [64], where different components can be identified as associated to salient (i.e., target)
events, or stimuli, and another to non-salient (i.e., non-target) events [65]. The target events are those
which the subject is typically instructed to pay attention to, while the others can be regarded as distractors
and used as a baseline to identify the attention-related brain patterns.
In SENIOR, the MCI patient is asked to learn a pedestrian path, walking from one landmark and
the next, until destination. The nudges are delivered by cognitive therapists to help the patient reaching
out each landmark. Meanwhile, the patient passes by other places, on their way between two consecutive

9

landmarks. Thus, "Nudge theory"-based cognitive training (as implemented in SENIOR) can be interpreted
as an extension of the standard oddball paradigm with application to a more ecological environment:
visiting a landmark can be interpreted as a target event, while passing by any other non-relevant place as
a non-target event.
Therefore, based on state-of-the-art (as reported in Section II), it is fair to hypothesize that closing
the loop of SENIOR protocol, i.e., designing a BCI based on the integration of "Nudge theory" and
NFB, could improve the beneficial effects of the (open-loop) SENIOR cognitive training protocol. In the
development of such "closed-loop", an "open-loop" training phase has to be planned for allowing the
patient learn to control the machine (of the BCI system), and for the machine to optimize its model of
the patient’s brain activity. Therefore, ACTA aims to operate on the two following phases, as shown in
Fig. 3.

Fig. 3: An example of outdoor path navigation with presence of nudges and NFB.
During the first phase, ACTA aims to create a rich training set of EEG data (time series or graph metrics)
associated with the nudges: in fact, we could extract as many EEG data as many nudges are delivered in
the repetitions of the path. Particularly, if we assume that brain attention can be detected in the proximity
of each landmark (as in standard oddball cognitive paradigms), we could label the corresponding EEG
data with a positive tag [9, 66]. Similarly, if we assume that no attentional state is required during the
journey between two consecutive landmarks (i.e., passing by the non-relevant places), then a negative
label can be associated to the corresponding EEG data. Thus, we could exploit advanced supervised ML
methods to train a binary classifier that could accurately classify the EEG data either as attention-related
or non-attention related samples [67, 68, 69, 70, 71]. At this stage, several deep architectures can be used
to identify the brain networks features which are related to the individual’s attentional state. Moreover, by
designing and implementating specific "attentional mechanisms", we could weight those pieces of EEG
information that mostly impact on determining the classification of the individual’s attentional level [67,
68].
In the second phase, the same two tasks of the first phase are scheduled (with the patients asked to walk a
path of similar complexity as in the previous phase). As sketched in Fig. 4, when the GPS tracking system
detects the patients nearby a landmark, either a nudge or a NFB stimulus could be sent him/her through
the SENIOR app. In a first session, a nudgeis delivered for each landmark. In the following sessions, the

10

nudges vanish, while the NFB is - possibly - delivered every time a nudge is absent. In fact, when a nudge
is absent, NFB is provided - if and only if - the associated BCI system could identify an "attention-related"
EEG activity (as explained at the beginning of this section). At the very last session, pure NFB-assistance
is offered to the patient. As previously, when achieved the expected location, a "reward" will be sent to
the patient. In task 2, the patients repeats task 1 with the presence of disturbances.

Fig. 4: Integration between Nudge and neurofeedback.
From the analytical point of view, the experimental phase with only nudges (described in Section II-E)
will represent the training phase to collect samples to train the deep learning models used in the second
phase [66, 72].
Here, the candidate deep model identified during the first phase, and preliminarly trained, subject-wise,
over the training set is used to provide the NFB. Also, we assume that the patients are already familiar
with the path, thus we expect to classify the EEG activity as "attention", when the patient is nearby a
landmark, and as "non-attention", elsewhere [66]. Here, we validate the model by employing it to deliver
a NFB with the following strategy: (a) whenever the subject walks nearby a landmark and produces EEG
activity that is classified as "attention", we encourage her/him to reach the landmark itself. (b) whenever the
subject walks nearby a non-relevant place and produces EEG activity that is classified as "non-attention",
we might provide a positive reinforcement to encourage her/him to carry on her/his own way [11]. (c)
otherwise, i.e., when the classifier’s output mismatches the actual patient’s location, we might decide to
intervene, or not. When (a) is verified, a positive reward is sent to the patients via the SENIOR app,
running on the smartphone. Labels associated with cases (a) and (b) could be used to update the training
set, in line with other recent semi-supervised learning strategies.
IV. D ISCUSSION
ACTA represents a new m-health solution that implements an advanced cognitive and motor training
based on the integration of the "Nudge theory" and the "neurofeedback theory". Both of them have been
previously, and separately, shown to be effective to improve or support the mild cognitive and motor
deficits of senior citizens. Beyond SENIOR, ACTA features a number of new technological strategies
that will increase the customization of the therapy, now based on the real-time neural signature of the
individual’s attention, and the quantitative monitoring of attention and memory abilities all throughout the
course of the rehabilitation program. Moreover, ACTA will provide answers to the relationship between
such an advanced cognitive and motor training and the brain networks changes [66, 73]. This will open
up the way to further optimize the training strategies (both in the "Nudge theory" and in the NFB).

11

A. Technological Usability and trustworthiness
To promote usability and sustainability, we will adapt the software from SENIOR app to acquire data
from new sensing modalities (e.g., the EEG) and to run NFB (i.e., to deliver additional audio or visual
stimuli, beyond the nudges). We keep our sensing devices minimally intrusive, fully wearable, and easy to
use [5, 74, 75, 76]. Also, we prefer tactile, audio, vibrating feedback (for nudges and NFB). To prolong the
battery life in wearables, we decided to use them for basic sensing (i.e., heart rate) and to display stimuli
when needed, while the full fledged Android smartphone (running Android OS) is used to access the
Internet, synchronize the acquisition from different devices, store data in the cloud, run the SENIOR app,
track the individual’s position using GPS, provide feedback (as well as distractors of the task 2), as well
as phone calls for emergency situations. Inter-operability is guaranteed by the use of semi-open Android
smartwatches, in line with the choice made for SENIOR [5, 6]. This way we could take advantage of the
full range of available Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) in the Android OS (e.g., Firebase cloud
sync, Maps API, Text-to-speech API, Phone calls in emergency situations, etc.). Finally, trustworthiness is
ensured as data privacy and protection are designed by fully comply with the GDPR and Italian Legislative
Decree no. 196 dated 30/06/2003, across the entire ACTA architecture [5, 77].
B. Self-managed therapy and independent aging
There is an urgent need to understand how technology can be applied in addressing the burden on the
healthcare system. In this regards, it should be noted that, the demand for self-management approaches
and technologies supporting chronic conditions, e.g., MCI in senior citizens, is of fundamental relevance.
ACTA aims to contribute to this paradigm shift, by supporting autonomy and independence in elderly with
MCI, via accessible, effective, and easy-to-use ICT platform. First, we use a low-cost technology to make
ACTA accessible to everyone, outside of the advanced research laboratories [78, 41, 32, 31]. Second, we
apply a new rehabilitative approach, based on two different but complimentary training strategies, i.e., the
nudges and the NFB. They are implemented in ACTA to be fully customized and automatically adapted,
in real-time, to the individual’s attentional conditions. ACTA is expected to strengthen the individual’s
decision-making capabilities (via nudge-based training), and to gradually introduce the self-treatment
(based on NFB) for the long-term maintenance of his/her cognitive and motor condition. These choices will
allow the elderly to benefit of this kind of cognitive and motor training on a daily basis (i.e., a more intense
rehabilitation program can be offered), and to be able to access it in a more ecological environment (e.g.,
in-home, or outdoor, not necessarily in specialized hospitals only). On the other hand, ACTA provides the
clinicians, who are in charge of the senior citizens using the system, a highly explainable data visualization
module to analyze the physiological data of their patients, all throughout the training. This allows the
therapist to eventually adjust the program, or to consult with the patients, if needed.
ACTA imposes as a m-health system that can contribute to significantly reduce the cost for the national
(i.e., regional) healthcare service, as well as the time spent by patients visiting the hospitals.
C. Toward objective and personalized rehabilitation programs
Patient-tailored rehabilitation protocols in mental disorders, including MCI, have become more broadly
accepted with the launch of the Research Domain Criteria project in 2008 [79], which was coordinated by
the National Institute of Mental Health. The definition of the protocol and the evaluation of its effectiveness
is typically based on the standard classification of mental health given by the Diagnostic and Statistical

12

Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-V) [80], published by the American Psychiatric Association in 2000.
However, this categorization has been obtained through questionnaires and by expert observation of the
symptoms. In both cases, a high degree of subjectivity could have affected the classification.
Furthermore, a whole spectrum of mental disorders is being demonstrated, i.e., ranging from autism, to
schizophrenia and Alzheimer disease. Despite their differences, they could also share similar symptoms.
This creates a rather complex and heterogeneous scenario that requires new objective and comprehensive
evaluations (i.e., of many aspects of the individual’s life and habits) and advanced data analytics competences and tools. To this regard, ACTA aims to contribute by measuring, in real-time and in a quantitative
(yet objective) way the most relevant individual’s neuro-physiological features and by adapting the training,
accordingly. Indeed, as discussed in Section III-C, ACTA exploits advanced machine learning (ML) to
create a mutual learning between the predictive model of the machine and the user who is performing
the training. Thus, ACTA is expected to reduce the variability in the BCI output due to the intra-subject
variations, as well as to favour the re-use of the system for other individuals. On the other hand, the twophase protocol of ACTA (nudges, first, and NFB later) is expected to cope with the inter-subject variability
and to facilitate the re-use of the system by different users, i.e., producing different brain patterns.
D. Enhancing the understanding of dynamical brain connectivity
The mathematical and computational tools to characterize the organization and changes of the brain
networks (both task-dependent and resting-state) can provide insights into the principles underlying the
structure and functioning of the brain (both during tasks and rest). Also, they can help identifying
the differences between healthy and pathological individuals [66]. However, understanding the causal
relationship between a specific neurological disorders and the brain network alterations is still poorly
understood. ACTA aims to contribute to unravel some new insights on the effect mechanisms of human
learning by considering advanced ML techniques, including some degree of explainability, that allow to
explain the association of temporal brain network changes during the training, e.g., learning of a new path
[10, 11].
These new knowledge could be exploited to further optimize the nudge, or NFB, stimulation in order
to enhance and speed up the cognitive or motor recovery of patients suffering mental or motor disorders
[81]. This will, in turn, shed some light on how to predict the results of a specific intervention in order to
optimize its clinical effectiveness, and to modulate its intensity and target brain regions towards a healthy
brain functioning [82]).
E. Limitations and future perspectives
To provide fully accessibility to the ACTA mobile-health solution, we included a low-cost commercial
EEG device. This kind of systems typically features a low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), can be affected by
gait-related artefacts and has a limited number of sensors (less than 20, as reported in Tab. I). Unfortunately,
signal quality could be critical to ensure an effective training in the framework of ACTA. In this work, we
assume that such EEG can provide an SNR high enough to extract attention-related features (as claimed
by the vendors). However, in the future, a systematic comparison with research-grade EEG would be
useful to validate ACTA [83].
Also, at present, ACTA exploits cloud computing to run and update the ML models that identify the
individuals’ profiles. In fact, training an advanced ML model on a smartphone could be not feasible
(especially if the user does not have a very recent smartphone with sufficient computational power).

13

However, real-time processing is needed to run NFB applications, such as ACTA. This is a delay-sensitive
healthcare application that could benefit from the presence of an artificial intelligence (AI) engine closer to
the final user (that uses the service), in order to minimize the delay between ACTA sensing and feedback
phases [35, 84]. Mobile edge computing and fog computing are seeing increasing popularity as they can
lead to minimize network latency and ensure real-time clinical feedback [84, 85, 38]. Finally, network
slicing enabled by the new communications generation (5G) could allow to prioritize data transmission
of mobile health systems over other delay-insensitive data traffic types [35, 38].
Finally, profiling is implemented in ACTA using advanced ML techniques which guarantee high classification accuracies, but which often lack a high degree of explainability of the classification decisions.
However, in mobile-health and in healthcare, explainability and interpretability are highly desirable to
provide suitable data visualization and interpretation to clinicians (e.g., to optimize training complexity
and rewards), as well as to patients to increase their motivation in the rehabilitation program [37]. In the
last few years, a strong effort is being put in the so-called explainable AI (XAI), which provides strategies
and tools to explain the behaviour and the decisions of efficient ML models [86, 87, 88].
V. C ONCLUSIONS
M-health solutions are seeing an extraordinary development and adoption in a variety of contexts
and applications, as a consequence of the ever increasing digitalization of medicine, and a more recent
acceleration due to the SARS-CoV-2 pandemics. This works discloses the conceptualization of ACTA,
a new mobile-health solution to support cognitive and motor training in a self-administered way for
senior citizens. Featuring a fully wearable, low-cost, commercial and easy-to-use setup, ACTA represents
a promising, fully accessible and highly usable m-health solution for cognitive and motor training or
rehabilitation of senior citizens, either in healthy conditions or suffering from mild cognitive or motor
impairments.
ACTA has been designed as a minimally intrusive system, promoting a natural human-machine interaction in an ecological environment. Its training program (i.e., the outdoor path navigation tasks) is scalable
for the easy administration of new tasks with different complexity, thus representing a valuable tool for
clinical psychologists and therapists to support their work. It will also provide a user-friendly interface
to interact with the senior citizens and make them aware of their progresses during the training program.
Also, ACTA is easy generalized to support different cognitive or motor training for other patients, who
might need different training tasks. In fact, ACTA features a data processing module and an advanced
ML engine that could be adapted to new scenarios. In this case, a new training phase is required for the
system to learn the users’ profiles and adapt the nudges, and neurofeedback, responses to optimize the
training outcomes.
In this way, ACTA pushes forward the recent effort towards a user-centric healthcare, or healthcare 4.0,
and imposes as an active aging support for clinicians and senior citizens with mild impairments.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by "SENIOR - SystEm of Nudge theory based ICT applications for OldeR
citizen" (ID 2018-NAZ-0129, rif. 2018-0826), a three-year project funded by CARIPLO Fundation in
2018. G.C. was scientific consultant for SENIOR project. A.Z. was granted a scholarship by SENIOR.
G.C. was also partially supported by MIUR (Ministry of University and Research) under the initiative
Departments of Excellence (Law 232/2016).

14

R EFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]

[5]
[6]

[7]
[8]
[9]

[10]
[11]

[12]
[13]

[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]

Department of Economic United Nations and Population Division Social Affairs. “World Population
Ageing 2017 - Highlights”. In: (ST/ESA/SER.A/397) ().
Ronald C Petersen et al. “Mild cognitive impairment: clinical characterization and outcome”. In:
Archives of neurology 56.3 (1999), pp. 303–308.
Nuria Mendoza Laiz et al. “Potential benefits of a cognitive training program in mild cognitive
impairment (MCI)”. In: Restorative neurology and neuroscience 36.2 (2018), pp. 207–213.
Dalin Yang et al. “Evaluation of neural degeneration biomarkers in the prefrontal cortex for early
identification of patients with mild cognitive impairment: an fNIRS study”. In: Frontiers in human
neuroscience 13 (2019), p. 317.
Andrea Zanella et al. “Internet of Things for Elderly and Fragile People”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:2006.05709 (2020).
Giada Pietrabissa et al. “System of Nudge Theory-Based ICT Applications for Older Citizens: The
SENIOR Project”. In: International Symposium on Pervasive Computing Paradigms for Mental
Health. Springer. 2019, pp. 29–42.
Muhammad Bilal Amin et al. “On curating multimodal sensory data for health and wellness
platforms”. In: Sensors 16.7 (2016), p. 980.
Xin Li et al. “Neurofeedback Training for Brain Functional Connectivity Improvement in Mild
Cognitive Impairment”. In: Journal of Medical and Biological Engineering 40 (2020), pp. 484–495.
Suwicha Jirayucharoensak et al. “A game-based neurofeedback training system to enhance cognitive
performance in healthy elderly subjects and in patients with amnestic mild cognitive impairment”.
In: Clinical interventions in aging 14 (2019), p. 347.
Yang Jiang, Reza Abiri, and Xiaopeng Zhao. “Tuning up the old brain with new tricks: attention
training via neurofeedback”. In: Frontiers in aging neuroscience 9 (2017), p. 52.
Lucia Schiatti et al. “Human in the loop of robot learning: Eeg-based reward signal for target identification and reaching task”. In: 2018 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA). IEEE. 2018, pp. 4473–4480.
Joel F Lubar. “Neurofeedback for the management of attention deficit disorders”. In: (2003).
Giulia Cisotto et al. “An EEG-based BCI platform to improve arm reaching ability of chronic stroke
patients by means of an operant learning training with a contingent force feedback”. In: International
Journal of E-Health and Medical Communications (IJEHMC) 5.1 (2014), pp. 114–134.
Stefano Silvoni et al. “Brain-computer interface in stroke: a review of progress”. In: Clinical EEG
and Neuroscience 42.4 (2011), pp. 245–252.
Stefano Silvoni et al. “Kinematic and neurophysiological consequences of an assisted-force-feedback
brain-machine interface training: a case study”. In: Frontiers in neurology 4 (2013), p. 173.
Yunsick Sung, Kyungeun Cho, and Kyhyun Um. “A development architecture for serious games
using BCI (brain computer interface) sensors”. In: Sensors 12.11 (2012), pp. 15671–15688.
Abdelkader Nasreddine Belkacem et al. “Brain computer interfaces for improving the quality of
life of older adults and elderly patients”. In: Frontiers in Neuroscience 14 (2020).
Yotam Lavy et al. “Neurofeedback improves memory and peak alpha frequency in individuals with
mild cognitive impairment”. In: Applied psychophysiology and biofeedback 44.1 (2019), pp. 41–49.

15

[19]

[20]
[21]
[22]
[23]
[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]
[28]
[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]
[34]

Fabienne Marlats et al. “SMR/Theta Neurofeedback Training Improves Cognitive Performance and
EEG Activity in Elderly With Mild Cognitive Impairment: A Pilot Study”. In: Frontiers in Aging
Neuroscience 12 (2020).
Alfonso Monaco et al. “The PERSON project: a serious brain-computer interface game for treatment
in cognitive impairment”. In: Health and Technology 9.2 (2019), pp. 123–133.
Leandro da Silva-Sauer et al. “New perspectives for cognitive rehabilitation: Could brain-computer
interface systems benefit people with dementia?” In: Psychology & Neuroscience 12.1 (2019), p. 25.
Silvano Pupolin, Giulia Cisotto, and Francesco Piccione. EEG signal processing for post-stroke
motor rehabilitation. Vol. 40. River Publishers (L.P. Ligthart and R. Prasad, Eds.), 2014, pp. 71–89.
Giulia Cisotto and Silvano Pupolin. “An Integrated Perspective for Future Widespread Integration
of Neuro-motor Rehabilitation”. In: Neuro-Rehabilitation with Brain Interface 40 (2015), p. 89.
Giulia Cisotto et al. “An application of Brain Computer Interface in chronic stroke to improve arm
reaching function exploiting operant learning strategy and brain plasticity”. In: 2013 IEEE 15th
International Conference on e-Health Networking, Applications and Services (Healthcom 2013).
IEEE. 2013, pp. 280–282.
Giulia Cisotto, Silvano Pupolin, and Francesco Piccione. “Comparison about EEG signals processing
in BCI applications”. In: 2014 4th International Conference on Wireless Communications, Vehicular
Technology, Information Theory and Aerospace & Electronic Systems (VITAE). IEEE. 2014, pp. 1–5.
Giulia Cisotto et al. “An application of Brain Computer Interface in chronic stroke to improve arm
reaching function exploiting operant learning strategy and brain plasticity”. In: 2013 IEEE 15th
International Conference on e-Health Networking, Applications and Services (Healthcom 2013).
IEEE. 2013, pp. 280–282.
Ravikiran Mane, Tushar Chouhan, and Cuntai Guan. “BCI for stroke rehabilitation: motor and
beyond”. In: Journal of Neural Engineering 17.4 (2020), p. 041001.
Yu-Te Wang, Yijun Wang, and Tzyy-Ping Jung. “A cell-phone-based brain–computer interface for
communication in daily life”. In: Journal of neural engineering 8.2 (2011), p. 025018.
Arkadiusz Stopczynski et al. “A smartphone interface for a wireless EEG headset with real-time 3D
reconstruction”. In: International Conference on Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction.
Springer. 2011, pp. 317–318.
Carlos P Amaral et al. “A novel Brain Computer Interface for classification of social joint attention
in autism and comparison of 3 experimental setups: a feasibility study”. In: Journal of neuroscience
methods 290 (2017), pp. 105–115.
Alaa Eddin Alchalcabi, Amer Nour Eddin, and Shervin Shirmohammadi. “More attention, less
deficit: Wearable EEG-based serious game for focus improvement”. In: 2017 IEEE 5th international
conference on serious games and applications for health (SeGAH). IEEE. 2017, pp. 1–8.
Gabriel Alves Mendes Vasiljevic and Leonardo Cunha de Miranda. “Brain–computer interface
games based on consumer-grade EEG Devices: A systematic literature review”. In: International
Journal of Human–Computer Interaction 36.2 (2020), pp. 105–142.
Manuel Alegre et al. “Alpha and beta oscillatory changes during stimulus-induced movement
paradigms: effect of stimulus predictability”. In: Neuroreport 14.3 (2003), pp. 381–385.
Si Ning Yeo et al. “Effectiveness of a personalized brain-computer interface system for cognitive
training in healthy elderly: A randomized controlled trial”. In: Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease 66.1
(2018), pp. 127–138.

16

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]

[39]
[40]
[41]

[42]

[43]
[44]
[45]
[46]
[47]
[48]
[49]

[50]

[51]
[52]
[53]
[54]

Giulia Cisotto, Edoardo Casarin, and Stefano Tomasin. “Requirements and Enablers of Advanced
Healthcare Services over Future Cellular Systems”. In: IEEE Communications Magazine 58.3
(2020), pp. 76–81.
Saurabh Shukla et al. “A 3-tier architecture for network latency reduction in healthcare internet-ofthings using fog computing and machine learning”. In: Proceedings of the 2019 8th International
Conference on Software and Computer Applications. 2019, pp. 522–528.
Ernst Richard Fanfan, Adriane Randolph, and Kun Suo. “Design of a Healthcare Monitoring and
Communication System for Locked-In Patients Using Machine Learning, IOTs, and Brain-Computer
Interface Technologies”. In: (2020).
Sergio Martiradonna et al. “Cascaded WLAN-FWA Networking and Computing Architecture for
Pervasive In-Home Healthcare”. In: (to be published on IEEE Wireless Communications) (2020).
Also available at arXivpreprintarXiv:2010.03805.
Giulia Cisotto and Silvano Pupolin. “Evolution of ICT for the improvement of quality of life”. In:
IEEE Aerospace and Electronic Systems Magazine 33.5-6 (2018), pp. 6–12.
Md Robiul Alam Robel et al. “IoT Driven Healthcare Monitoring System”. In: Fog, Edge, and
Pervasive Computing in Intelligent IoT Driven Applications (2020), pp. 161–176.
Naghmeh Niknejad et al. “A comprehensive overview of smart wearables: The state of the art literature, recent advances, and future challenges”. In: Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
90 (2020), p. 103529.
Argyro Mavrogiorgou, Athanasios Kiourtis, and Dimosthenis Kyriazis. “A plug ‘n’play approach
for dynamic data acquisition from heterogeneous IoT medical devices of unknown nature”. In:
Evolving Systems 11.2 (2020), pp. 269–289.
Olaf Sporns. “Graph theory methods: applications in brain networks”. In: Dialogues in clinical
neuroscience 20.2 (2018), p. 111.
Christopher W Lynn and Danielle S Bassett. “The physics of brain network structure, function and
control”. In: Nature Reviews Physics 1.5 (2019), p. 318.
Riccardo Dondi et al. “Covering a graph with clubs”. In: Journal of Graph Algorithms and Applications 23.2 (2019).
Riccardo Dondi, Giancarlo Mauri, and Italo Zoppis. “On the tractability of finding disjoint clubs
in a network”. In: Theoretical Computer Science 777 (2019), pp. 243–251.
TELBIOS. http://www.telbios.it.
METEDA. http://www.meteda.it.
Gianluca Castelnuovo et al. “TECNOB: study design of a randomized controlled trial of a multidisciplinary telecare intervention for obese patients with type-2 diabetes”. In: BMC public health
10.1 (2010), pp. 1–8.
Gianluca Castelnuovo et al. “TECNOB study: ad interim results of a randomized controlled trial
of a multidisciplinary telecare intervention for obese patients with type-2 diabetes”. In: Clinical
practice and epidemiology in mental health: CP & EMH 7 (2011), p. 44.
Mahsa Soufineyestani, Dale Dowling, and Arshia Khan. “Electroencephalography (EEG) Technology Applications and Available Devices”. In: Applied Sciences 10.21 (2020), p. 7453.
ANT Neuro mini-serie. https://www.ant-neuro.com/products/eego_mini_series.
OpenBCI. https://openbci.com/.
Smarting mobi - mBrainTrain. https://mbraintrain.com/smarting-mobi/.

17

[55]
[56]
[57]
[58]
[59]
[60]
[61]
[62]

[63]

[64]

[65]
[66]
[67]
[68]
[69]

[70]
[71]
[72]

[73]

[74]

Unicorn Hybrid. https://www.unicorn-bi.com/product/unicorn-hybrid-black/.
Wearable Sensing. https://wearablesensing.com/.
Emotiv EPOC. https://www.emotiv.com/epoc-x/.
Bitbrain Hero. https://www.bitbrain.com/neurotechnology-products/dry-eeg/hero.
Brain Live Amp. https://brainproducts.it/prodotti/liveamp/.
Mind Wave. https://thinktechuk.wordpress.com/tag/nokia-brain-scanner/.
Bryn Farnsworth. Comparison of different EEG products. 2019. URL: https://imotions.com/blog/eegheadset-prices/.
GE Chatrian, E Lettich, and PL Nelson. “Ten percent electrode system for topographic studies of
spontaneous and evoked EEG activities”. In: American Journal of EEG technology 25.2 (1985),
pp. 83–92.
Mateusz Rusiniak et al. “A modified oddball paradigm for investigation of neural correlates of
attention: a simultaneous ERP–fMRI study”. In: Magnetic Resonance Materials in Physics, Biology
and Medicine 26.6 (2013), pp. 511–526.
Lihua Gu et al. “Cognitive reserve modulates attention processes in healthy elderly and amnestic
mild cognitive impairment: an event-related potential study”. In: Clinical neurophysiology 129.1
(2018), pp. 198–207.
Heather M Gray et al. “P300 as an index of attention to self-relevant stimuli”. In: Journal of
experimental social psychology 40.2 (2004), pp. 216–224.
Yu Zhang et al. “Hybrid high-order functional connectivity networks using resting-state functional
MRI for mild cognitive impairment diagnosis”. In: Scientific reports 7.1 (2017), pp. 1–15.
Italo Zoppis et al. “An Attention-based Architecture for EEG Classification.” In: BIOSIGNALS.
2020, pp. 214–219.
Giulia Cisotto et al. “Comparison of Attention-based Deep Learning Models for EEG Classification”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.01074 (2020).
Matteo Gadaleta et al. “Deep Learning Techniques for Improving Digital Gait Segmentation”. In:
2019 41st Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology
Society (EMBC). IEEE. 2019, pp. 1834–1837.
Giulia Bressan, Selina C Wriessnegger, and Giulia Cisotto. “Deep learning-based classification of
fine hand movements from low frequency EEG”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.06791 (2020).
Krzysztof Kotowski, Katarzyna Stapor, and Jeremi Ochab. “Deep Learning Methods in Electroencephalography”. In: Machine Learning Paradigms. Springer, 2020, pp. 191–212.
Francesco Carlo Morabito et al. “Deep learning representation from electroencephalography of
early-stage Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and features for differentiation from rapidly progressive dementia”. In: International journal of neural systems 27.02 (2017), p. 1650039.
Hui-Ling Yang et al. “Construction and evaluation of multidomain attention training to improve
alertness attention, sustained attention, and visual-spatial attention in older adults with mild cognitive
impairment: A randomized controlled trial”. In: International journal of geriatric psychiatry 35.5
(2020), pp. 537–546.
Giulia Cisotto et al. “Classification of grasping tasks based on EEG-EMG coherence”. In: 2018 IEEE
20th International Conference on e-Health Networking, Applications and Services (Healthcom).
IEEE. 2018, pp. 1–6.

18

[75]
[76]
[77]

[78]

[79]
[80]
[81]
[82]

[83]

[84]

[85]

[86]
[87]

[88]

Giulia Cisotto et al. “Joint Compression of EEG and EMG Signals for Wireless Biometrics”. In:
2018 IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM). IEEE. 2018, pp. 1–6.
Giulia Cisotto et al. “Feature selection for gesture recognition in Internet-of-Things for healthcare”.
In: ICC 2020-2020 IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC). IEEE. 2020, pp. 1–6.
Giulia Cisotto and Leonardo Badia. “Cyber security of smart grids modeled through epidemic
models in cellular automata”. In: 2016 ieee 17th international symposium on a world of wireless,
mobile and multimedia networks (wowmom). IEEE. 2016, pp. 1–6.
Giulia Cisotto, Giulio Rosati, and Alessandro Paccagnella. “A simple and accessible inkjet platform
for ultra-short concept-to-prototype sEMG electrodes production”. In: 2019 41st Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC). IEEE. 2019,
pp. 5765–5768.
Thomas Insel et al. Research domain criteria (RDoC): toward a new classification framework for
research on mental disorders. 2010.
Jill Fain Lehman. “The diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders”. In: (2000).
Sarah Feldt Muldoon et al. “Stimulation-based control of dynamic brain networks”. In: PLoS
computational biology 12.9 (2016), e1005076.
Fabio Pasqualetti, Sandro Zampieri, and Francesco Bullo. “Controllability metrics, limitations and
algorithms for complex networks”. In: IEEE Transactions on Control of Network Systems 1.1 (2014),
pp. 40–52.
Jože Tavčar, Jože Duhovnik, and Imre Horváth. “From Validation of Medical Devices towards
Validation of Adaptive Cyber-Physical Systems”. In: Journal of Integrated Design and Process
Science Preprint (2020), pp. 1–23.
Hoa Hong Nguyen et al. “A review on IoT healthcare monitoring applications and a vision for transforming sensor data into real-time clinical feedback”. In: 2017 IEEE 21st International Conference
on Computer Supported Cooperative Work in Design (CSCWD). IEEE. 2017, pp. 257–262.
Seham Alnefaie, Asma Cherif, and Suhair Alshehri. “Towards a Distributed Access Control Model
for IoT in Healthcare”. In: 2019 2nd International Conference on Computer Applications & Information Security (ICCAIS). IEEE. 2019, pp. 1–6.
Scott Lundberg and Su-In Lee. “A unified approach to interpreting model predictions”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1705.07874 (2017).
Dandi Trianta Barus, Fikhri Masri, and Achmad Rizal. “NGBoost Interpretation Using LIME for
Alcoholic EEG Signal Based on GLDM Feature Extraction”. In: Proceedings of the Computational
Methods in Systems and Software. Springer. 2020, pp. 894–904.
Erico Tjoa and Cuntai Guan. “A survey on explainable artificial intelligence (xai): Toward medical
xai”. In: IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems (2020).

