Available Online at www.e-iph.co.uk
Indexed in Clarivate Analytics WoS, and ScienceOPEN

Lisbon – Malacca Port Cities Twin Conferences 2019 / 2020

AicQoL2020Malacca

ASLI (Annual Serial Landmark International) Conferences on QoL2020
https://www.amerabra.org; https://fspu.uitm.edu.my/cebs; https://www.emasemasresources.com/

8th AMER International Conference on Quality of Life
Mahkota Hotel Melaka, Malacca, Malaysia, 18-19 Mar 2020

.
“Architecting” Emotions by “Architecting” Spaces:
A pilot study
Ammar Ayman Zaino, Mohamed Yusoff Abbas
Centre of Studies, Architecture, Faculty of Architecture, Planning & Surveying,
Universiti Teknologi MARA, Puncak Alam, Malaysia
ammar_zaino@hotmail.com, myusoff801@uitm.edu.my
Tel.: 009665900740019
Abstract

The belief that the environment shapes human behaviour is not new, as acknowledged by many researchers.
Recent studies show that the most significant illness by 2030 is depression, as most of our time spent inside the
buildings. Hence, the importance of “re-connecting architecture with emotions and brain” is an essential solution
to improve the quality of life. This pilot study aimed to investigate the relationship between neural underpinnings
of the human brain and the environments. Data collected was based on the Electroencephalography tests.
Findings showed a significant contrast between different water elements and environmental settings, each with its
unique effect on human emotions.
Keywords: Depression; Neural underpinnings; Water-bodies environment; Cognitive architecture; Quality of Life.

1.0 Introduction
With modern science gaining momentum, people began to believe less about the human spiritual dimension. It influenced
many engineers, architects, and developers to adopt a new paradigm in the way they view life and most importantly, designing
buildings. The aesthetic awareness culture began to lose its value, oppositely, believing in, tangibles and materialism
increased. Engineers always argue architects saying” there is no scientific evidence for the need of having a big window”. It
became all about money (Bica, 2016).
With the evolution of science, scientists and researchers started to understand the effect of design on human wellbeing,
depression, and spiritual dimension. Recent studies by the World Federation for Mental Health (2016) reveals the most
significant illness in 2030 is going to be the mental disorder of “depression” according to statistics, most of our time spent
inside buildings, and buildings are designed by Architects. Hence, the importance of “re-connecting architecture with emotions
and brain” is an essential solution to improve the quality of life for future generations; However, contemporary architecture
has started to receive more accusations of emotional coldness, restrictive aesthetics, distanced from human and life
(Pallasmaa, 2015). "Architecting” human’s emotions of positivity mean designing environments of happiness, excitement,
creativity, empathy, and performance-boosting, to improve human’s ultimate performance and behaviour for a better quality
of life. The fight is never about grapes or lettuce. It is always about people (Chavez, 1990, p.17).

eISSN: 2398-4287 © 2019. The Authors. Published for AMER ABRA cE-Bs by e-International Publishing House, Ltd., UK. This is an open access article
under the CC BYNC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/). Peer–review under responsibility of AMER (Association of Malaysian
Environment-Behaviour Researchers), ABRA (Association of Behavioural Researchers on Asians) and cE-Bs (Centre for Environment-Behaviour Studies),
Faculty of Architecture, Planning & Surveying, Universiti Teknologi MARA, Malaysia.

Author’s Surname, Initials / 8th AicQoL2020Malacca, Mahkota Hotel Melaka, Malacca, Malaysia, 18-19 Mar 2020 / E-BPJ, 5(13), Mar 2020 (p. )

How much is a good building design worth? (Day, 2015) suggests that it increases the value of the land by 15%, but monetary
cost and soul benefits are incomparable. When staff moved to NMB Bank headquarters designed by Albert and Max Van
Huut, absenteeism declined and increasing of productivity around 15%. Another study on patients found that improved
environments of hospitals have reduced treatments by 21% and reduced the uses of Anglistics by 59%, (Ulrich, 1984) did a
study to correlate this on the impact of view on patients and recovery time. However, patients spent shorter stays after
surgeries, had a smoother recovery according to nurses, lower use of painkillers and slightly lower frequency of minor postsurgical complications. According to (Day, 2015) children behaved differently in a different environment, even mature adults
think, feel and act differently as the environment changes.
The objectives of the study were first, to identify the extent of effectiveness of the environmental and design elements upon
human subjectivity and feelings; and secondly to identify the variations upon human’s feeling of the various water-bodies
environment.
2.0 Literature Review
2.1 Types of emotions.
Psychologists have long explored and studied emotions, there are some different interpretations of the theory, but principally,
they all categorize emotions, either positive emotions or negative emotions. One of the most cited and well-known
psychologist Dr.Plutchik designed the famous Plutchik’s model of emotions consisting of eight primary emotions, anger, fear,
joy, trust, anticipation, surprise, sadness and disgust. Look at Figure 1
.

Figure 1 Plutchik’s model of emotions consists of eight primary emotions,
source: https://www.6seconds.org.

2.2 How emotions are made?
Emotions have many definitions; if we look at the Oxford dictionary definition, it is a feeling in which results from one’s mood,
circumstances (Oxford, 2019). If we make it a step further and look at emotions from a medical point of view, according to
(Friedman, 2010), it is a complex state of feelings results in a physiological change, which influences thoughts and behaviour.
Another more recent definition by (Dr.Linda Davidoff, 2018) defines emotion as a state of feeling which is expressed through
physiological functions such as, facial expressions, quicker heartbeat, and behaviours such as aggression, crying, or covering
the face with hands. By studying all the definitions, they all agree that emotions influence human behaviour, and it is an
intricate and complex. The reason for this complexity is influenced by many factors such as, environment or genetics, which
makes it challenging to scientifically explain precisely how emotions are formed (Dr.Linda Davidoff, 2018).

2

Author’s Surname, Initials / 8th AicQoL2020Malacca, Mahkota Hotel Melaka, Malacca, Malaysia, 18-19 Mar 2020 / E-BPJ, 5(13), Mar 2020 (p. )

2.3 The bio-psycho-social model of emotional construction.
The biopsychosocial model is one of the most recognized ways of understanding overall human wellness including emotions
and behaviour; the model is an interdisciplinary model that looks at the interconnection between biology, psychology, and
socio-environmental impacts of one's wellness. The model examines explicitly how these aspects play a role in topics ranging
from health and disease models to human development. (George L. Engel in 1977) developed this model and is the first of
its kind to employ this type of multifaceted way of thinking. The Biopsychosocial Model has received criticism about its
limitations but continues to carry influence in the fields of psychology, health, and human development. Refer to Figure 2
Overall Human spiritual wellness is a combination of a complex process of these interconnected factors to shape one’s
welfare. As shown in the model, the factors that may affect the emotional state could be either genetic or sociological;
simultaneously the environmental aspect plays a significant role in impacting human emotions and reflecting it on our
biological and social being. The environment shapes human behaviour and vice versa. Refer to Figure 2

Figure 2 Bio-psycho-social model, by George L. Engel in 1977, source:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov.

2.4 Human between good design and money.
A survey was conducted by (World Business Council for Sustainable Development) found that most of the respondents on
average believed that green features added 17% to the overall cost of a building, whereas a study has been done of 146
green buildings show a result of an actual marginal cost of less than 2%. Studies have shown that certified green buildings
command significantly higher rents. A University of California–Berkeley study analyzed 694 certified green buildings and
compared them with 7,489 other office buildings, each located within a quarter-mile of a green building in the sample. The
researchers found that, on average, certified green office buildings rented for 2% more than comparable nearby buildings
after adjusting for occupancy level.
2.5 Savanna principle as an answer to the argument of “beauty and good are subjective”.
A test was described as, Savanna Principle, it is supporting "Evolutionary behavioural Sciences", was carried with the help
of that principle answering people who argue saying, beauty is subjective, it has become possible, and there is no one
particular good thing for all, but the result of savanna principle test tells us a different story, the experiment was carried by
(Kanazawa, 2019) where they brought kids from all around the world, and showed them pictures of various landscapes, the
kids were asked to pick the view which they like, 80% of the kids chose the scene of savannah landscape, the Savanna
principle concludes that, no matter how subjective beauty is, there are always good things for all human (Behling, 2016)

3

Author’s Surname, Initials / 8th AicQoL2020Malacca, Mahkota Hotel Melaka, Malacca, Malaysia, 18-19 Mar 2020 / E-BPJ, 5(13), Mar 2020 (p. )

2.6 Emotional experience from theory to science.
The study of emotions has always been theoretical; by means, there is no scientific test that is measured. However, recently
when neuroscience has developed a device called Electroencephalography (EEG) device and measuring emotions has
become a scientific process, the possibility of studying the impact of a big window on human emotions and behaviour has
become scientifically measurable. And emotions are no longer a theoretical science.
2.7 Designing spaces to provoke emotions of positivity.
The diagram below is a collected study of psychological, neuroscientific and medical backgrounds, which explain the main
principles of designing spaces that evokes positive emotions. The positive environment we live in can be understood by
understanding these nature and design elements, from and geometry and its integration with the natural environment is the
primary key to understand a positive emotional design.

Figure 3 A collected study of psychological, neuroscientific and medical
backgrounds, which explain the main principles of designing spaces to
evoke positive emotions, source of diagram: author.

The essential elements in designing spaces to evoke positive emotions:
(1) Integration of water element. Presence of sound, colour and the touch of water, all those elements are healers
to human emotions. (2) Visual force of building form; curvy, rigid, squarish or linear, every form brings a different
experience on human’s emotions. (3) Materiality: natural, e.g. wood and stone. (4) Quality of natural lighting:
providing an optimized lux level or figuring out the perfect level, for the targeted space. That brings a significant
difference in the emotion of space. (5) Psychology of colours: every colour evokes different emotions, (6) Noise
level: it has a significant impact on the user’s emotional comfort. (7) Green element; one of the most essential aspects
to be considered to create a space of positive emotions. (8) Creating alive spaces: the overall integration of birds
singing, natural lighting, buffering of trees, all the natural features that make a space comes alive without the need for
other things to bring the space alive like, televisions, music or people.

4

Author’s Surname, Initials / 8th AicQoL2020Malacca, Mahkota Hotel Melaka, Malacca, Malaysia, 18-19 Mar 2020 / E-BPJ, 5(13), Mar 2020 (p. )

It is essential first to understand the emotions of one’s self. First, emotions are feelings affected by complex development of
biology, environment, and sociology according to (Engel, 1977), according to (Plutchik, 2001) it is categorized as two, either
positive or negative emotions. According to many doctors, the environment we inhabit, it influences our feelings, and in
return, our feelings change our behaviour. Thus, it is critical to consider the environment we stay in as behaviour influencer.
Design matters, it affects our emotions because the design allows natural lighting or prevent it, building design can provide
natural air, green view, etc..., and many other elements. Studies indicate that aesthetic qualities of architecture have an
impact on our mood, cognitive functioning, behaviour, and even mental health (Adams, 2014; Cooper, Burton, & Cooper,
2014; Hartig, 2008; Joye, 2007). Design can cause: development of anxiety, Insomnia, depression, weakened the immune
system, muscle pain, heart diseases, and high blood pressure.
Emotional design and environmental design has always been perceived as an expensive building, based on a survey, 70%
of people believed it is more costly than standard building with 27%. In contrast, a study was done of 146 green buildings,
show a result of an actual marginal cost of less than 2%, A University of California–Berkeley study analysed 694 certified
green buildings and compared them with 7,489 other office buildings, each located within a quarter-mile of a green building
in the sample. The researchers found that, on average, certified green office buildings rented for 2% more than comparable
nearby buildings after adjusting for occupancy level.
People who argue that beauty is subjective has become possible, and there is no one particular good thing for all, but the
result of savanna principle test tells us a different story, the experiment was carried by (Kanazawa, 2019) where they brought
kids from all around the world, and showed them pictures of different landscapes, the kids were asked to pick the view which
they like, 80% of the kids chose the landscape of savannah landscape, the Savanna principle concludes that no matter how
subjective beauty is, there are always good things for all human.
3.0 Methodology
3.1 Electroencephalography (EEG) test.
The Electroencephalography (EEG) test evaluates the electrical activity of the brain. EEG scans are performed by placing
EEG sensors – small metal discs also called EEG electrodes – on your scalp. These electrodes pick up and record the
electrical activity in your brain. The collected EEG signals are amplified, digitized, and then sent to a computer or mobile
device for storage and data processing. Refer to Figure 8 and Figure 7.
The meaning of each colour.
The different colours represent the behaviour of the different waves, and each wave represents a feeling, the lower the
wavenumber, the higher the feeling of relaxation and positivism, vice versa. Look at Figure 4 and Figure 5 below, it
demonstrates each colour's meaning and what does it render.
Types of waves;
i) Delta wave – (1 – 3 Hz).
ii) Theta wave – (4 – 7 Hz).
iii ) Alpha wave – (7 – 15 Hz).
iv) Beta wave – (15 – 30 Hz).
v) Gamma wave – (>30 Hz)

Figure 4 Samples of some results during
experiments, source: author.

Figure 5 Figure 3.2 Brainwaves and colour meaning,
source: www.quantumleapmindtraining.com.

5

Author’s Surname, Initials / 8th AicQoL2020Malacca, Mahkota Hotel Melaka, Malacca, Malaysia, 18-19 Mar 2020 / E-BPJ, 5(13), Mar 2020 (p. )

Figure 7 EEG Headset, source: www.emotive.com.

Figure 8 Photo during experiments taken by:( Ammar Zaino, 2019).

Figure 6 EEG with 12 sensors, source:
www.emotive.com.

3.2 Selection of setting.
Selection of setting based on the third objective of the research. This is the summary of proposed settings by the researcher,
and psychologists, for improving the emotional experience of users, researches selected the following settings.

Water
element
Trees /
greenery

Proportion

Using EEG, Testing
The Emotional
Response Impacted
by :
- Enviornmental
Elements.
- Design elements.

Color

Material

Natural
lighting

Noise

Smell

Figure 9 Summary of experiments done, source: author.

6

Red colour indicates experiments were not
done.

Author’s Surname, Initials / 8th AicQoL2020Malacca, Mahkota Hotel Melaka, Malacca, Malaysia, 18-19 Mar 2020 / E-BPJ, 5(13), Mar 2020 (p. )

3.3 Procedures for conducting experiments.

Select field of experiment

Prepare EEQ device for use.

Look into selected view

Wear EEQ headset

Connect to mobile app/BCI.

Signal will be digitalized into the
computer/mobile

Feature extraction through
computer application

Classifications of information
through computer

Presenting information of emotions
and brain waves as an infographic

Final results of experiments
Figure 10 The strategy used, source: author.

7

Author’s Surname, Initials / 8th AicQoL2020Malacca, Mahkota Hotel Melaka, Malacca, Malaysia, 18-19 Mar 2020 / E-BPJ, 5(13), Mar 2020 (p. )

4.0 Findings
4.1 Experiment 1 – Water (open view – sea view)
Experiment Description

The experiment was carried with an open water view
(the sea) Figure 13, to understand the impact of open
view water compared to the enclosed view of water
such as lake on the brain and emotions. Figure 11,
Figure 12.

a. Location: Pantai Remis, Selangor, Malaysia
b. Type of view: Sea-open view.
c. Methodology: EEG Device.
d. Lighting level: 1000 lux.
e. Noise level: 40db.
f. Temperature: 30c.
g. Time: 5:00pm
h. Participator: 1 male.
i. Time spent: 10mins.
Figure 11 (BCI) looking into the view
below, source: (EEG) device.

Figure 12 Results from (BCI) by (EEG) with a mobile app, source: (EEG) device.

Figure 13 Pantai Remis, Selangor, Malaysia. Source: Ammar Zaino.

8

Author’s Surname, Initials / 8th AicQoL2020Malacca, Mahkota Hotel Melaka, Malacca, Malaysia, 18-19 Mar 2020 / E-BPJ, 5(13), Mar 2020 (p. )

4.2 Experiment 2 – Water - (Non-open view – lake view)

Experiment Description

The experiment was carried with a nonopen water view setting (lake). Error!
Reference source not found..
To
understand the impact of the view
compared to the open view of water on the
brain and emotions, Figure 14, Figure 16.

a. Location: UiTM Puncak Alam,Selangor.
b. Type of view: Non-open view.
c. Methodology: EEG Device.
d. Lighting level: 800lux.
e. Noise level: 50db.
f. Temperature: 34c.
g. Time: 5:00pm.
h. Participator: 1 male.
i. Time spent: 15mins.
Figure 14 (BCI) looking into the view below,
source: (EEG) device.

Figure 16 Results from (BCI) by (EEG) with a mobile app. Source: author.

Figure 15 UiTM Puncak Alam, Selangor. Source: author.

9

Author’s Surname, Initials / 8th AicQoL2020Malacca, Mahkota Hotel Melaka, Malacca, Malaysia, 18-19 Mar 2020 / E-BPJ, 5(13), Mar 2020 (p. )

5.0 Discussion
5.1 Why water element with an “enclosed view” had the highest record of evoking relaxation?
It is very uncertain to answer that results due to the many aspects that play a role in impacting emotions, but perhaps there
is a possibility of speculating what these reasons may be.
a) The potent healing effect and energy of water element compare to other elements.
b) It also had a higher record compared to water element with an open view and a possible answer for that is, the scale and
proportion of space, the enclosed view had a smaller, and more intimacy compared to big ample space that is out of human
scale. According to (Vartanian et al., 2015), Height and enclosure play an essential role in human emotional response.
5.2 Why “water element” with an enclosed view had the highest record of evoking focus?
It is very uncertain to answer that results due to the many aspects that play a role in impacting emotions, but perhaps there
is a possibility of guessing the reason.
a) The potent healing effect and energy of water element compare to other elements.
5.3 Why “water element” with an open view had the highest record of evoking interests?
According to (Vartanian et al., 2015) enclosure plays a vital role in human emotional response therefor the big scale of the
sea might bring a sense of awe and wonder as and that might result in evoking a higher interest in responding to this wonder.
6.0 Conclusion & Recommendations
6.1 The importance of design upon human emotions and wellbeing
The awareness of human-centred architecture; and aesthetic nourishment in design is an essential element for improving the
quality of life, on a spiritual, emotional and biological level. Contemporary architecture has received an enormous number of
accusations of emotional coldness and restrictive aesthetics as wells as its distance from humans and life (Pallasmaa, 2015).
The present research aimed to improve the understanding of the neural underpinnings of an individual, which influences the
emotional state and behaviour of a user impacted by the environment. By identifying the humans' emotional response
impacted by different environmental and design elements. Using an EEG device to detect emotional response and provide a
better understanding of how to design better spiritual spaces. With the help of neuroscience, the research uses scientific
equipment (EEG) as a methodology to measure the emotions of a human. The findings of this study could provide architects,
researchers, and engineers scientific evidence for the importance of "emotional design", and fill the knowledge gap of
understanding "emotional design".
Nevertheless, there are no studies that show the contrast between different water elements like the sea versus a lake, with
an unobstructed view versus a small enclosed one. Both have a disparate impact on human emotions, similarly, other
elements like greenery. There is an open view vs enclosed. Hence these gaps area covered in the study shows the differences
between these different characteristics.
Design matters, it affects our emotions because the design allows natural lighting or prevent it, building design can provide
natural air, green view, etc. and many other elements. Studies indicate that aesthetic qualities of architecture have an impact
on our mood, cognitive functioning, behaviour, and mental health (Adams, 2014; Cooper, Burton, & Cooper, 2014; Hartig,
2008; Joye, 2007). Design can cause: development of anxiety, Insomnia, depression, weakened the immune system, muscle
pain, heart diseases, and high blood pressure.
Emotional design and environmental design has always been perceived as an expensive building. Based on a survey, 70%
of people believed it is more costly than standard building with 27%. In contrast, a study was done of 146 green buildings,
show a result of an actual marginal cost of less than 2%, A University of California–Berkeley study analysed 694 certified
green buildings and compared them with 7,489 other office buildings, each located within a quarter-mile of a green building
in the sample. The researchers found that, on average, certified green office buildings rented for 2% more than nearby
buildings after adjusting for occupancy level.
People who argue that beauty is subjective has become possible, and there is no one particular good thing for all, but the
result of savanna principle test tells us a different story, the experiment was carried by (Kanazawa, 2019) where they brought
kids from all around the world, and showed them pictures of different landscapes, the kids were asked to pick the view which
they like, 80% of the kids chose the landscape of savannah landscape, the Savanna principle concludes that no matter how
subjective beauty is, there are always good things for all human.

10

Author’s Surname, Initials / 8th AicQoL2020Malacca, Mahkota Hotel Melaka, Malacca, Malaysia, 18-19 Mar 2020 / E-BPJ, 5(13), Mar 2020 (p. )

6.2 The essential elements in designing spaces to evoke positive emotions are:
(1) Integration of water element. Presence of sound, colour and the touch of water, all those elements are healers to human
emotions. (2) Visual force of building form; curvy, rigid, squarish or linear, every form brings a different experience on
human emotions. (3) Materiality: natural, e.g. wood and stone. (4) Quality of natural lighting: providing an optimized lux
level or figuring out the perfect level, for the targeted space. That brings a significant difference in the emotion of space. (5)
Psychology of colours: every colour evokes different emotions, (6) Noise level: it has a significant impact on the user’s
emotional comfort. (7) Green element; one of the most important elements to be considered to create space of positive
emotions. (8) Creating alive spaces: the overall integration of birds singing, natural lighting, buffering of trees, all the natural
features that make a space comes alive without the need for other things to bring the space alive like, television, music or
people.
6.3 The ability to measure emotions impacted by architectural spaces.
For the past years, our understanding of human emotion has always been limited and uncertain until technology got advanced
and offered us the device electroencephalogram (EEG). However, the technology was not introduced to be used for architects
but mostly to understand kids’ emotions, this paper concludes by presenting the possibility of using this device to allow human
to expand their understanding of architectural spaces and environment as the papers offer an understanding of humans
“change of emotions” by the change of environment/ interior spaces.
6.4 Top vital elements in designing spaces that arouse positive emotions.
The papers conclude a study that shows the elements which evoke positive emotion in space. However, the impact of those
tested elements is compared to find out which element had the highest level in evoking positive emotions of:
a) Relaxation and tranquillity: In evoking emotions of relaxation, it was a water view with a limited/enclosed view, which feel
cosier and more intimate.
b) Focus and attention: Based on the research paper, the element that evoked the highest state of focus was water view
with a limited enclosed view.
c) Excitement: In evoking emotions of excitement, it was natural lighting with a 450lux level.
d) Engagement: “water element” with an open view had the highest record of evoking engagement.
e) Interest: “water element” with an open view had the highest record of evoking the emotion of interest.
f) Stress: “natural lighting” with a 450lux had the highest record of evoking stress.

 Things to ponder about the research paper:
Usage of better (EEG) equipment.
This research tested using a Low EMOTIV Insight 5 Channel Mobile EEG, which is less accurate than EMOTIV EPOC+ 14
Channel Mobile EEG device, however, if someone seeks more accurate results, he shall use EMOTIVE EPOC+ which is
slightly more expensive.
The number of participators for an experiment.
Due to the short time, the research was tested on one participator only, to gain more accurate results, it should be tested on
many people, as much as possible to get an accurate average result.
Comparing with people from different cultures and regions.
According to the Bio-psycho-social model, by George L. Engel in 1977, human emotions are formed based on environment,
genetics and old experience; therefore, it would be much more accurate to compare people with different experience and
regions, that would permit us to extract results, which than can be generalized on all human being.

11

Author’s Surname, Initials / 8th AicQoL2020Malacca, Mahkota Hotel Melaka, Malacca, Malaysia, 18-19 Mar 2020 / E-BPJ, 5(13), Mar 2020 (p. )

Emotion of relaxation

Emotion of Focus

Experminent 6c - Color…

Experminent 6c - Color…

Experminent 6a - Color…

Experminent 6a - Color…

Experiment 5a - Smell…

Experiment 5a - Smell…

Experiment 4a- Noise…

Experiment 4a- Noise…

Experiment 3a- Natural…

Experiment 3a- Natural…

Experiment 2a -Greenery…

Experiment 2a -Greenery…

Experiment 1a -water…

Experiment 1a -water…

0

20

40

60

80

0

Relaxation

Experminent 6c - Color…

Experminent 6a - Color…

Experminent 6a - Color…

Experiment 5a - Smell…

Experiment 5a - Smell…

Experiment 4a- Noise…

Experiment 4a- Noise…

Experiment 3a- Natural…

Experiment 3a- Natural…

Experiment 2a -Greenery…

Experiment 2a -Greenery…

Experiment 1a -water…

Experiment 1a -water…
40

60

80

0

Emotions of engagement

40

60

80

60

80

Emotions of stress

Experminent 6c - Color…

Experminent 6c - Color…

Experminent 6a - Color…

Experminent 6a - Color…

Experiment 5a - Smell…

Experiment 5a - Smell…

Experiment 4a- Noise…

Experiment 4a- Noise…

Experiment 3a- Natural…

Experiment 3a- Natural…

Experiment 2a -Greenery…

Experiment 2a -Greenery…

Experiment 1a -water…

Experiment 1a -water…
30

40

Figure 18 Emotion of engagement,
source; author
Engagment

12

20

Figure 19 Emotion of intrests, source; author

Figure 20 Emotion of excitment, source; author

20

50

Interest

Excitment

10

40

Emotions of intrests

Experminent 6c - Color…

0

30

Figure 22 Emotion of focus, source; author

Emotions of Excitment

20

20

Focus

Figure 21. Emotion of relaxation, source; author.

0

10

50

60

0

20

40

Figure 17 Emotion of stess, source;
Stress author

Author’s Surname, Initials / 8th AicQoL2020Malacca, Mahkota Hotel Melaka, Malacca, Malaysia, 18-19 Mar 2020 / E-BPJ, 5(13), Mar 2020 (p. )

Summary of experiments compared to each
other
Experminent 6c - Color (Green)

Experminent 6b - Color (Blue)

Experminent 6a - Color (White)

Experiment 5b - Smell (normal air)

Experiment 5a - Smell (Fragrance)

Experiment 4b- Noise (450db)

Experiment 4a- Noise (650db)

Experiment 3b- Natural lighting (350lux)

Experiment 3a- Natural lighting (450lux)

Experiment 2b-Greenery (Enclosed view)

Experiment 2a -Greenery (Open view)

Experiment 1b -water element (closed view water)

Experiment 1a -water element (Open view water)

0
Stress

Engagment

Interest

10

20
Excitment

30

40

Focus

50

60

70

80

Relaxation

13

Author’s Surname, Initials / 8th AicQoL2020Malacca, Mahkota Hotel Melaka, Malacca, Malaysia, 18-19 Mar 2020 / E-BPJ, 5(13), Mar 2020 (p. )

Acknowledgement
I want to thank my dear respected lecturer Prof. Dr Mohamed Yussof bin Abbas for his positive presence and excellent
teaching. It is an honour for me to be supervised by him. I have always wished to be taught with a lecturer like Dr Mohamed
Yussof bin Abbas.
I would also like to thank the psychologists & researchers that I have cited my research from and express my deep respect
and appreciation for the countless hours they spent in finding and learning the truth of things.
May Allah grant me the honesty to make factual, unbiased findings.

14

Author’s Surname, Initials / 8th AicQoL2020Malacca, Mahkota Hotel Melaka, Malacca, Malaysia, 18-19 Mar 2020 / E-BPJ, 5(13), Mar 2020 (p. )

References.
Behling, S. (2016). (115) Architecture and the Science of the Senses | Stefan Behling | TEDxGoodenoughCollege YouTube. Retrieved October 24, 2019,
from;https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FbfPWalO_ss&list=LL9TemQLh74NHvnzqH91C7IA&index=8&t=304s
Bermudez, J. (2015). Transcending architecture. Washington DC.
Borrell-Carrió, F., Suchman, A. L., & Epstein, R. M. (2014). The biopsychosocial model 25 years later: principles, practice,
and scientific inquiry. Annals of Family Medicine, 2(6), 576–582. https://doi.org/10.1370/afm.245
Christopher Day. (2015). Places of the soul. US, Burlington.
Dr.Linda Davidoff. (2018). Emotion. Retrieved October 8, 2019, from science daily website:
https://www.sciencedaily.com/terms/emotion.htm
Cesar Chavez. (1990). Cesar Chavez - The fight is never about grapes or lettuce. Retrieved October 8, 2019, from
https://www.brainyquote.com/quotes/cesar_chavez_381157
Friedman, B. H. (2010). Feelings and the body: The Jamesian perspective on autonomic specificity of emotion. Biological
Psychology, 84(3), 383–393. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsycho.2009.10.006
Health, W. F. for M. (2016). World Federation for Mental Health. Retrieved from
https://www.who.int/mental_health/management/depression/wfmh_paper_depression_wmhd_2012.pdf
Kanazawa, S. (2019). The bad science of Satoshi Kanazawa - Big Think. Retrieved October 24, 2019, from
https://bigthink.com/neurobonkers/the-bad-science-of-satoshi-kanazawa
Keedwell, P. (2017). Headspace. UK, London: Great Britain.
National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, M. H. (2017). Mental Health: Keeping Your Emotional Health familydoctor.org. Retrieved October 14, 2019, from American Academy of Family Physicians website:
https://familydoctor.org/mental-health-keeping-your-emotional-health/
Oxford. (2019). Architecture | Definition of Architecture by Lexico. Retrieved October 8, 2019, from Oxford website:
https://www.lexico.com/en/definition/architecture
Pallasmaa, J. (2015). Architecture and empathy. Finland.
Plutchik, R. (2001). The nature of emotions: Human emotions have deep evolutionary roots. American Scientist, 89(4), 344–
350. https://doi.org/10.1511/2001.4.344
REBECCA A. CLAY. (2001). Green is good for you. Retrieved October 8, 2019, from https://www.apa.org/monitor/apr01/gre
Adams ood?fbclid=IwAR1p9vZlQcep8yvSdE049g9sHzJeqo-duWlQL_j_NASFnV6GBiWxAr_79pU
Ryn, S., & Allen, F. (2013). Design for an Empathic World. In Design for an Empathic World. https://doi.org/10.5822/978-161091-505-2

15

