Journal of Theoretical and Applied Information Technology
30th June 2016. Vol.88. No.3

© 2005 - 2016 JATIT & LLS. All rights reserved.

ISSN: 1992-8645

www.jatit.org

E-ISSN: 1817-3195

COMPARING WINDOWING METHODS ON FINITE
IMPULSE RESPONSE (FIR) FILTER ALGORITHM IN
ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHY (EEG) DATA PROCESSING
1

NOVA EKA DIANA, 2UMI KALSUM, 3AHMAD SABIQ, 4WISNU JATMIKO, 5PETRUS
MURSANTO
1,2,3
E-Health Research Center, Faculty of Information Technology, YARSI University, Indonesia
4,5

Faculty of Computer Science, University of Indonesia
E-mail: 1nova.diana@yarsi.ac.id
ABSTRACT

Electroencephalography (EEG) data contains electric signal activities on a cerebral cortex to record brain
electrical activities. EEG signal has some characteristics such as non-periodic, non-standardized pattern,
and small voltage amplitude. Hence, it is lightly heaped up to noise and difficult to recognize and extract
meaningful information from EEG data. Finite Impulse Response (FIR) with various windowing methods
has been widely used to mitigate noise and distortions. This paper compares and analyzes the windowing
techniques in resulting the most optimal results in EEG filtration process. The experiment results show that
Blackman Window gives the best result in term of the most negative value in stop-band attenuation, the
widest transition bandwidth, and the highest cutoff frequency compares to Rectangular Window, Hamming
Window, and Hann Window.
Keywords: Electroencephalography (EEG), Finite Impulse Response, Windowing Methods, Signal
Filtering, Blackman Window
1.

INTRODUCTION

Electroencephalography (EEG) data signal
consists of electric signal activities on a cerebral
cortex with some characteristics, such as nonperiodic, non-standardized pattern, and small
voltage amplitude. These attributes evoke EEG
signal to be swiftly mixed up with noise and
difficult to recognize [1]. Many factors can generate
noise and distortions, e.g. room exposure, energetic
radiation, heart, muscles, and eyes movement.
Noise and other parameters such as a sudden
change in signal phase and loss of signal amplitude
can briefly stimulate distortion in the signal [2].
Data filtering is used to mitigate noise or
distortions in EEG data. Many techniques have
been proposed to process data signal filtering, such
as Finite Impulse Response (FIR) digital filter. In
many cases, a bad filter design can induce signal
distortions to occur. Windowing methods are
usually employed to extract and repair impulse
responses in FIR filter. Many researchers had
proposed different windowing methods, but only
some can give a good result in filtering EEG data.
This paper focuses on comparing four windowing

methods to get the best outcome in EEG signal
filtering process.
We organized this article as follow: Section II
discusses literature reviews, Section III explains the
methods used in this research, and Section IV
provides results and discussion. Finally, Section V
presented the conclusion and future works.
2.

MOTIVATION

Electroencephalographic
(EEG)
is
a
measurement procedure using electro-medical
equipment to record electrical activities of the brain
and its interpretation. Neurons in the cerebral
cortex issue electric waves with a minimum voltage
(mV) which then passed through an EEG machine
to do an amplification process. After it is amplified,
the recorded EEG size will be enough to be
captured by the reader's eyes as an alpha, beta, and
theta wave [3]. EEG signal is used to diagnose
diseases related to brain and psyche, such as
epilepsy, brain tumors, detect the position or
location of the injured brain and diagnose mental
disorders.
Many researchers have proposed various
methods to filter EEG data. Surface Laplacian (SL)

558

Journal of Theoretical and Applied Information Technology
30th June 2016. Vol.88. No.3

© 2005 - 2016 JATIT & LLS. All rights reserved.

ISSN: 1992-8645

www.jatit.org

filter is used to emphasize the electrical activities
that are spatially located near the electrode which
currently being recorded, and to sift out signals that
may come from outside of the skull. SL filter also
muffles EEG activities which are common to
dedicated channels hence increasing the spatial
resolution of the recorded signal [4]. However, SL
filter can only be applied to EEG data with the
number of 64 electrodes or more [5].
Another researcher, Guerrero-Mosquera and
Vazquez used Independent Component Analysis
(ICA) and Recursive Least Squares (RLS) method
to eliminate the eye movement artifacts in EEG
data. The method uses separate electrodes that
tightly localized to the eyes, in which register to
vertical and horizontal eye movements for
extracting a reference signal. This procedure
projects each reference input into ICA domain, and
then RLS algorithm estimates the interference that
may occur in this data. This proposed method
efficiently rejected artifacts produced by eyes
movements by relying on ICA and RLS adaptive
filtering [6]. Miyazaki et al. also utilized Infinite
Impulse Response (IIR) filter to eliminate the
artifacts from EEG data. Their research results
showed that the IIR filter can remove artifacts in
EEG data quite well. However, IIR has poles that
lead the filter to be unstable [7].
Different with the aforementioned methods, FIR
filter does not require many electrodes and not only
focus on the noise of eye movements. Hence, FIR is
more stable than other filters above. In this
research, we utilize FIR filter to process EEG data
that is captured using Emotiv EPOC device with 14
electrodes.
3.

METHODOLOGY

3.1 Finite Impulse Response (FIR)
Finite Impulse Response (FIR) has a finite
response and no poles compare with IIR filter. FIR
is more stable than other digital filter and
preferably used by researchers. In general, the
output of FIR filter y[k] can be expressed
mathematically as Equation 1.

y[k ] 

M 1

 h[n]x[k  n]

(1)

n 0

where M is the filter length, h[n] is the impulse
response’s coefficient, x[n] is the input filter and
y[k] is the output filter.
The transfer function of FIR filter is
approximately ideal following the increasing of
filter order. Equation 2 expressed this process,

E-ISSN: 1817-3195

where m is the order of the filter, ΔF is the
transition width normalization, Δf is the transition
width, and fs is the sampling frequency. Some
windowing types to implement FIR filter are
Blackman, Hamming, Hann, and Rectangular
window. Each windowing type has a different value
of normalized transition width (ΔF), as depicted in
Table 1.

m

F
f fs

(2)

Table 1: Normalization of Transition Width.

Window Type
Blackman Window
Hamming Window
Hann Window
Rectangular Window

Transition Width
Normalization ΔF
5.5/M
3.3/M
3.1/M
0.9/M

FIR filter is usually employed to process the
digital signal, e.g. sound and digital image, to find a
clear message without any disruptions. Puspasari et
al. implemented FIR filter for pedestrians' location
monitoring system captured by Global Positioning
System (GPS). When an unstable GPS received the
signal, FIR filter would remove the noises which
may occur, such as multipath effect. Before
applying FIR filter, the coordinate points of the
pedestrian are scattered because of the noise. But,
after being processed by FIR, only one coordinate
point was obtained from these distributed data [8].
FIR also can be utilized for digital signal
processing in Field Programmable Arrays (FPGA)
equipment. FPGA has an ability to handle heavy
loads of works in parallel mode. FIR
implementation in FPGA can generate an output
which suitable for the specification of 20 KHz
cutoff frequency. For sinusoidal input within
frequency range 20-22000Hz, FIR filter will
suppress the signal above 20,000Hz [9].
3.2 Windowing Method
In EEG data processing, we should consider the
impulse response of the data. Finite impulse
response may generate an excessive ripple in the
pass-band and create low stop-band attenuation.
Windowing techniques could overcome this
problem during a filtering process. Given a window
function (w[n]) and an impulse response of the
ideal filter (hd[n]), then the impulse response of the
actual filter can be expressed in Equation 3.

559

h[n]  hd [n] * w[n]

(3)

Journal of Theoretical and Applied Information Technology
30th June 2016. Vol.88. No.3

© 2005 - 2016 JATIT & LLS. All rights reserved.

ISSN: 1992-8645

www.jatit.org

Windowing methods employed with FIR filter
to mitigate disruptions during filtration process are
Rectangular, Hamming, Hann and Blackman
Window.
1. Rectangular Window
Researchers rarely employed the rectangular
window due to its low stop-band attenuation result.
The first lobe of this window has an attenuation of
13dB and the narrowest transition region among all
window methods. Hence, a filter designed using
this window should have minimum stop-band
attenuation of 21 dB. Coefficient of Rectangular
Window is defined as follows:

1, 0  n  M  1
w(n)  
0, other


(4)

2. Hamming Window
Hamming window is one of the most popular
windowing methods. A filter designed with the
Hamming window has minimum stop-band
attenuation of 53dB, which is sufficient for most
implementations of digital filters. Unlike minimum
stop-band attenuation, transition region can be
changed by altering the filter order. The transition
area will become narrow and minimum stop-band
attenuation remains unchanged as the filter order
increases. Coefficient of Hamming Window is
defined as follows:

E-ISSN: 1817-3195

Relatively high attenuation value makes this
window is very convenient for almost all
applications. The first side of a lobe in the
frequency domain of this filter has 51dB of
attenuation value, and the designed filter has stopband attenuation up to 75dB. Coefficient of
Blackman Window is defined as follows:

 2n 
0.42  0.5 cos M  1  



w(n)  
 4n 
0.08 cos
, 0  n  M  1

 M 1


0, other

(7)

3.3 Characteristics of a Good Filter
A transition bandwidth, stop-band attenuation,
and cutoff frequency determine the quality of a
good filter. Figure 1 illustrates the magnitude
response for these parameters in the domain
spectrum.


 2n 
0.54  0.46 cos
, 0  n  M  1 (5)
w(n)  
 M 1

0, other

3. Hann Window
Researchers usually use Hann window to lessen
ill effects on frequency characteristic produced by
the final samples of a signal. The first side of a lobe
in the frequency domain of this window has 31dB
of attenuation value, whereas it amounts up to 44dB
in the designed filter. The advantage of this window
is its ability to increase the stop-band attenuation of
the posterior lobes swiftly. Coefficient of Hann
Window is defined as follows:
 
 2n 
0.5 1  cos
, 0  n  M  1
w(n)   
 M  1 

0, other


(6)

4. Blackman Window
Blackman window is considered as the most
popular window technique for data signal filtering.

Figure 1: Magnitude response in domain frequency [11]

1. Transition Bandwidth
Transition band is an area that lies between
stopband and passband. Narrow transition bands
lead to a steep filter roll-off and wide transition
bands allow a shallow roll-off. Filter roll-off is a
function of filter order (number of filter
coefficients/filter length minus one), more
accurately the effective impulse response duration.
Filters with a steep roll-off can better separate
signal and noise components in adjacent frequency
bands than filters with a shallow roll-off. But, it
makes the filter has a longer impulse response than
filters with a wide transition bands or shallow rolloff. Sharper and more extended filters produce

560

Journal of Theoretical and Applied Information Technology
30th June 2016. Vol.88. No.3

© 2005 - 2016 JATIT & LLS. All rights reserved.

ISSN: 1992-8645

www.jatit.org

stronger signal distortions and broader temporal
smearing of distortions and ringing artifacts [10].
Therefore, to reduce or attenuate signal distortion, it
is more advisable to choose a filter that has a broad
transition band.
2. Stop-band Attenuation
Stopband attenuation is the highest gain value
(in dB) in stopband area. Theoretically, smaller or
more negative stopband attenuation may generate a
better filtering result because the unwanted
frequencies can be eliminated or attenuated [11].
Equation 8 express stopband attenuation:

As  20 log10

2
1  1

(8)

where As is stopband attenuation, δ1 is passband
ripple tolerance and δ2 is stopband attenuation
tolerance.
3. Cutoff Frequency
The cutoff frequency is the midpoint of
transition bandwidth. The cutoff frequency of less
than 0.1 Hz should be avoided because it may
generate a very long filter length. Therefore, the
selection of cutoff frequency determines how fast
the filtered signal centered at zero value following
the signal deflection. Higher cutoff frequency, then
faster the signal centered at zero value because of
the low-frequency attenuation [10].
4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
4.1 Data Collection
EEG data of three respondents with the age
range between 19-21 years old are recorded using
Emotiv EPOC device. Emotiv EPOC headset has
14 EEG channels and two references that offering a
position for accurate spatial resolution. This device
operates with 14 bits resolution or 16* per channel
with a frequency response between 0.16 – 43 Hz.
Each of participants is given an instruction to watch
a video with duration about 3-5 minutes long. The
purpose of the given instruction is to assess the
EEG data that represent the emotion state of
participants during/after watching the video.
EEG data recorded using Emotiv EPOC consists
of 36 columns with 14 columns are EEG channels.
Those channels are AF3, F7, F3, FC5, T7, P7, O1,
O2, P8, T8, FC6, F4, F8, and AF4. These channels
represent electrical activities of the brain. The rest
of EPOC columns give information about status or
mounting accuracy indicator of electrodes on the
scalp. Here, instead of using all the channel data,

E-ISSN: 1817-3195

we focus only on F3 and F4 channel which located
on the frontal lobe. These two channels are the
most influential in determining emotional changes
occur in human brain [12].
4.2 Filter Design
In this research, we utilized EEGLAB to do
filtering process. Figure 2 depicts the architecture
design of this research approach. There are two
primary processes: data preparation and filtering
process.
In the data preparation, EDF file of EEG data
captured by Emotiv EPOC is loaded to EEGLAB.
We selected only two channels: F3 and F4, because
these channels responsible for regulating human
emotions. And for the sampling rate, we assigned
128 Hz/s value as the default setting from EPOC
headset.
The filtering process is the essential task in our
research architecture. There are three steps involved
in filtering process: (1) digital filter set up (2)
filtering execution and (3) quality parameters
computation. The first step, we need to decide the
type and the specification of the digital filter. We
choose band-pass filter following the characteristics
of the data signal. According to the literature study,
the band-pass filter is the most recommended filter
type to eliminate noise in EEG data. In this step, we
also need to specify the frequency band, the filter
length, and the windowing method to mitigate noise
with FIR filter. The second phase, the already
prepared EEG data is filtered using the designed
digital filter. The last step, we calculate three
parameters to determine the best windowing
method in mitigating noise in EEG data signal.
Table 2 shows the parameter configuration in the
filtering process.
Table 2: Parameters Configuration

Parameter

EEG channels
Sampling rate
Frequency band
Filter length
Windowing method

Value

F3, F4
128 Hz/s
0.16 Hz
2481, 2641, 4401, 8801,
17601
Rectangular, Hamming,
Hann, Blackman

4.3 Experiments
The aim of this research is to find the best
windowing method for eliminating noises of EEG
signal using FIR filter. We conducted five
experiments with a different filter length of each, as
depicted in Table 2. Each experiment follows the
same scenario as below:

561

Journal of Theoretical and Applied Information Technology
30th June 2016. Vol.88. No.3

© 2005 - 2016 JATIT & LLS. All rights reserved.

ISSN: 1992-8645

a.
b.

c.

www.jatit.org

Choose
a
windowing
method
(Rectangular, Hamming, Hann, and
Blackman method).
Repeat five procedures for each
windowing method with a different filter
length (2481, 2641, 4401, 8801, and
17601).
Calculate the stop-band attenuation, the
transition bandwidth and the cutoff
frequency for each method.

Figure 2: Design Architecture

Figure 3, 4, 5 and 6 shows the filtering result of
EEG signal using Rectangular, Hamming, Hann,
and Blackman window, in the domain frequency.
We examine ripples appearance in either pass-band
or stop-band attenuation. Ripples appearance
determine the quality of windowing method in term
of transition bandwidth, stop-band attenuation, and
cutoff frequency. These parameters can be used to
decide which windowing method gives the best
filtering result.
Based on those figures, the rectangular window
creates a high number of ripples either on passband or stop-band. At a glance, we can deduce that
Rectangular window will give the worst result in
EEG signal filtering. Otherwise, the Blackman
window may give the best result because it has a
small number of ripples and narrow transition

E-ISSN: 1817-3195

bandwidth. Discussion section will explore more
about the filtering result analysis.
4.4 Discussion
Based on the characteristics of a good filter,
we compare the value of stop-band attenuation,
transition bandwidth, and the cutoff frequency of
the filtering results using four windowing methods.
Figure 7, 8, and 9 illustrate the average yield of
EEG data obtained from three participants.
Figure 7 compares the stop-band attenuation
value of Rectangular, Hamming, Hann, and
Blackman window method. In three experiments
with a different filter length for each, Hann window
generates the most negative stop-band attenuation
value when the filter length value is 2641, 4401,
and 8801. The smaller stop-band attenuation value,
then the more unwanted frequencies can be
eliminated. Hence, it can generate a better filtering
result.
Figure 8 illustrates the comparison of the
transition bandwidth characteristic for each
windowing method. As mentioned in section 3.4, it
is advisable to have a wide transition bandwidth to
get an ideal filter with little as possible distortions.
From this figure, we can see that Blackman window
has the largest transition bandwidth in all
experiments. Hence, we can conclude that
Blackman window is the best method for
attenuating noise and distortions compare to the
others windowing methods.
Figure 9 shows the cutoff frequency results of
five filter lengths’ experiment over three
participants EEG data. Higher cutoff frequency
value, then faster the signal centered at zero
because of the low-frequency attenuation. Analysis
results indicate that Blackman window method
gives the constant highest cutoff frequency value
for all tests. Hence, the digital filter which
employed with Blackman window will enormously
make EEG signals to be centered on zero value.
Table 3: Windowing Method Comparison

Criteria
Stop-band attenuation
Transition bandwidth
Cutoff frequency

Windowing method
1st
2nd

Hann
Blackman
Blackman

Blackman
Hann
Hann

Table 3 summarizes the comparison between
Rectangular, Hamming, Hann, and Blackman
window based on three criteria: stop-band
attenuation, transition bandwidth, and cutoff
frequency. From all experiments, the Blackman
window excels in term of transition bandwidth and

562

Journal of Theoretical and Applied Information Technology
30th June 2016. Vol.88. No.3

© 2005 - 2016 JATIT & LLS. All rights reserved.

ISSN: 1992-8645

www.jatit.org

cutoff frequency. And it also comes second to
having the most negative stop-band attenuation.
Therefore, we can conclude that the best
windowing method which provided the most
optimal result in EEG data filtering is Blackman
Window.
5.

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS

5.1 Conclusion Discussion
FIR digital filter was employed to process EEG
data signal which recorded using Emotiv EPOC
device. Poles absence characteristics made FIR
filter more stable in processing data signal. A bandpass filter is recommended to process signal data in
electrophysiology, e.g. EEG data. FIR filter needs
to employ windowing techniques to repair the
impulse responses resulted from filtering process.
Four windowing methods can be utilized to process
data filtering; Rectangular, Hamming, Hann, and
Blackman window method.
Experiments were conducted to find the best
windowing method that provides the optimal
filtering results. The results show that Blackman
window gives the most optimal outcome in EEG
data filtering based on stop-band attenuation,
transition bandwidth, and cutoff frequency
measurements. Blackman window provides the
second most negative value of stop-band
attenuation, the widest transition bandwidth, and
the highest cutoff frequency. Hence, we conclude
that to better process EEG data with 14 electrodes,
it is advisable to employ FIR filter equipped with
Blackman window technique to eliminate noise and
distortions during the filtering process.
5.2 Future Works
In the future, windowing techniques comparison
can be further developed to find the optimal value
of transition bandwidth in EEG data filtration.
Great design of filtering method can generate an
optimal output of data signal filtering. Thus, it can
contribute to process the next steps in EEG data
processing, such as to extract and classify data
efficiently and also to simply gather the meaningful
information in EEG data.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This research was funded by PEKERTI grant
from Directorate General of Higher Education
(DIKTI) of Indonesian Ministry of Education and
Culture number 105/K3/KM/2015.

E-ISSN: 1817-3195

REFRENCES:
[1] Kemalasari, M. H. P, R. W, and N. S, “Pengolahan
sinyal elektroensephalogram (EEG) sistim
peletakan 8 elektrode dengan metode wavelet,”
Proceeding of Industrial Electronic, Surabaya,
2003.
[2] Repovš G., “Dealing with noise in EEG recording
and data analysis,” Informatica Medica Slovenica,
vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 18-25, 2010.
[3] Murugappan M., Ramachandran N., and Sazali Y.,
“Classification of human emotion from EEG using
discrete wavelet transform,” J. Biomed. Sci. Eng.,
vol. 03, no. 04, pp. 390–396, 2010.
[4] Cohen M. X., “Analyzing neural time series data:
theory and practice,” Illustrate. MIT Press, p. 600,
2014.
[5] Guerrero-mosquera C. and Vazquez A. N.,
“Automatic removal of ocular artifacts from eeg
data using adaptive filtering and independent
component analysis,” 17th Eur. Signal Process.
Conf. (EUSIPCO 2009), no. Eusipco, pp. 2317–
2321, 2009.
[6] Miyazaki R., Ohshiro M., Nishimura T., and
Tsubai M., “A novel neural network with NonRecursive IIR Filters on EEG Artifacts
Elimination,” Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. 2005, pp.
2048–2051, 2005.
[7] Sakato M., “Alat pengukur gelombang otak,”
2014.
[Online].
Available:
http://sentramedis.com/?sentramedis=newsdetail&id=292. [Accessed: 17-Jan2015].
[8] Puspasari B. D., Setiawan I., and Darjat,
“Penerapan low pass filter dan finite impulse
response menggunakan GPS,” Transient, vol. 2,
no. 3, 2013.
[9] Putra R. J., Rif’an M., and Setyawan R. A.,
“Implementasi filter digital FIR (Finite Impulse
Response) pada Field Programmable Gate Arrays
(FPGA),” Jurnal Mahasiswa TEUB, vol.1, no. 4,
2013.
[10]
Widmann A., Schröger E., and Maess B.,
“Digital filter design for electrophysiological data
– a practical a p- proach,” J. Neurosci. Methods,
pp. 1–16, 2014.
[11]
Mooniarsih N. T., “Desain dan simulasi filter
FIR menggunakan metode windowing,” J.
ELKHA, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 41–47, 2010.
[12]
Othman M., Wahab A., Karim I., Dzulkifli M.
A., and I. F. T. Alshaikli, “EEG emotion
recognition based on the dimensional models of
emotions,” Procedia - Soc. Behav. Sci., vol. 97,
pp. 30–37, Nov. 2013.

563

Journal of Theoretical and Applied Information Technology
30th June 2016. Vol.88. No.3

© 2005 - 2016 JATIT & LLS. All rights reserved.

ISSN: 1992-8645

www.jatit.org

Figure 3: Bandpass Filter Result For Rectangular Window

Figure 4: Bandpass Filter Result For Hamming Window

564

E-ISSN: 1817-3195

Journal of Theoretical and Applied Information Technology
30th June 2016. Vol.88. No.3

© 2005 - 2016 JATIT & LLS. All rights reserved.

ISSN: 1992-8645

www.jatit.org

Figure 5: Bandpass Filter Result For Hann Window

Figure 6: Bandpass Filter Result For Blackman Window

565

E-ISSN: 1817-3195

Journal of Theoretical and Applied Information Technology
30th June 2016. Vol.88. No.3

© 2005 - 2016 JATIT & LLS. All rights reserved.

ISSN: 1992-8645

www.jatit.org

Figure 7: Comparison Of Stopbaand Attenuation

Figure 8: Comparison Of Transition Bandwith

566

E-ISSN: 1817-3195

Journal of Theoretical and Applied Information Technology
30th June 2016. Vol.88. No.3

© 2005 - 2016 JATIT & LLS. All rights reserved.

ISSN: 1992-8645

www.jatit.org

Figure 9: Comparison Of Cutoff Frequency

567

E-ISSN: 1817-3195

