Indian J Physiol Pharmacol 2003; 47 (3) : 247–269

REVIEW ARTICLE
NEUROPHYSIOLOGY OF PAIN : INSIGHT TO OROFACIAL PAIN
O. P. TANDON* † , V. MALHOTRA*, S. TANDON** AND I. D’SILVA
* Department of Physiology,
University College of Medical Sciences & Guru Teg Bahadur Hospital,
Dilshad Garden, Delhi – 110 095
and
* *Department of Periodontia,
Nair Hospital Dental College,
Mumbai – 400 008
( Received on January 22, 2003 )
Abstract : This is a very exciting time in the field of pain research. Major
advances are made at every level of analysis from development to neural
plasticity in the adult and from the transduction of a noxious stimulus in
a primary afferent neuron to the impact of this stimulus on cortical circuitry.
The molecular identity of nociceptors, their stimulus transduction processes
and the ion channels involved in the generation, modulation and
propagation of action potentials along the axons in which these nociceptors
are present are being vigorously perused. Similarly tremendous progress
has occurred in the identification of the receptors, transmitters, second
messenger systems, transcription factors, and signaling molecules
underlying the neural plasticity observed in the spinal cord and brainstem
after tissue or nerve injury. With recent insight into the pharmacology of
different neural circuits, the importance of descending modulatory systems
in the response of the nervous system to persistent pain after injury is
being reevaluated. Finally, imaging studies revealed that information about
tissue damage is distributed at multiple forebrain sites involved in
attentional, motivational, and cognitive aspects of the pain experience.
Key words : pain
orofacial pain

pathways
evaluation
evoked potentials

INTRODUCTION
Pain : the International perspective

A Committee of the International
†

Corresponding Author

pain relief
TSEPs

Association for the study of pain has defined
pain as an unpleasant sensory and emotional
experience associated with actual or potential
tissue damage (1). It is mostly accompanied
by the desire to stop and to avoid stimuli

248

Tandon et

al

causing it. It is linked with a feeling of
aversion (2). Throughout most of recorded
h i s t o r y, p a i n w a s c h a r a c t e r i s e d a s a n
effective feeling state rather than a
sensation (3). Emotions play a key role in
painful experience. Aristotle described pain
as a “passion of soul”, distinct from the
classic five senses (4).

Indian J Physiol Pharmacol 2003; 47(3)

Melzack and Wall (5) and Melzack and
Casey (6) developed a model of pain in which
tissue damage concurrently activates
sensory, discriminative, cognitive-evaluative
and affective-motivational components of
pain.
Substrates
pathways

of

pain:

neuroanatomy

of

pain

Receptors of pain
Sensory receptors for pain, nociceptors,
are naked nerve endings that terminate in
the skin and most other tissues of the body.
However, their distribution is not uniform
throughout organs of the body. As a general
rule, deep visceral organs of the body are
not well supplied with nociceptors. These
receptors are generally classified according
to the type to which they respond:
1. Mechanosensitive pain receptors respond
to mechanical damage.
2. Thermosensitive pain receptors respond
to respond to temperature extremes.
3. Chemosensitive pain receptors respond to
chemicals that occur with damaged
tissues example hypertonic saline,
potassium chloride, acetylcholine,
5-Hydroxytryptamine,
histamine,
bradykinin and substance P. Vasoactive
amines are released just after injury by
the basophils, platelets and mast cells.

Fig. 1 :

Pathway by which Fast Pain is conveyed to
the Central Nervous.
I–VI : Laminae of the Dorsal Horn of the
Spinal Cord.

As these receptors signal either actual
or potential damage to tissues, pain has
survival value to the organism. Consequently
pain receptors generally do not adapt to

Indian J Physiol Pharmacol 2003; 47(3)

THALAMUS

Neurophysiology of Pain : Insight of Orofacial Pain 249

evidence for the existence of cutaneous
myelinated Aδ and unmyelinated C fibers
was provided by Zottermann (8-10), who
interpreted his observations as strong
support for Bell’s and Mullers theory of
specificity (11,12). It is known that noxious
stimulation exciting somatic and dental Aδ
afferents may exert a masking or inhibitory
effect on C-fiber related sensations. Tables
I to III describe the peripheral mechanism
and recent developments in ion channels,
neural transmission and transduction for
pain sensation.
Molecules involved in pain transmission

The role of trophic factors and cytokines
in the development and maintenance of pain
in response to various forms of tissue injury
is an area of research that has virtually
exploded in the last several years.

Fig. 2 :

Pathway by which slow pain is conveyed to
the Central Nervous System.

prolonged stimulation. In fact pain sensation
may intensify as pain thresholds become
lowered through continued stimulation (7).
From the peripheral receptor to the
cerebral cortex, specialised neural pathways
termed the nociceptive system process
noxious stimuli. Peripherally, noxious
stimuli activate specific receptors
(nociceptors) of thinly myelinated Aδ and
unmyelinated C fibers terminating in the
spinal cord dorsal horn. Neurophysiological

In addition to its role in development,
NGF and other growth factors, and cytokines
have been shown to mediate pain and
hyperalgesia associated with tissue injury.
Lorne Mendell (20) the first to describe
the link between NGF mechanisms
underlying the initial hyperalgesic response
to NGF. The initial hyperalgesia in response
to systemic or peripherally administered
NGF depends on indirect mechanisms,
specifically mast cell degranulation.
Linda Watkins (21) described additional
pathways through which activation of the
immune system results in changes in
multiple sites throughout the nervous
system. Watkins described the molecules
involved in the signaling pathways as well

250

Tandon et

al

Indian J Physiol Pharmacol 2003; 47(3)
TABLE I :

Characteristics of fast and slow fibers (7).

Fast (Diagram 1)

Slow (Diagram 2)

Carried by Aδ
Sharp, pricking sensation
Easily localised
Occurs first
Occurs on stimulation of mechanical and thermal receptors

By C fibers
Dull, aching, burning
Poorly localised
Occurs second; persist for longer time, more unpleasant
Occurs on stimulation of polymodal receptors

TABLE II :

Recent developments on Ion channels & nociception in the peripheral nerve.

S.No.

Scientist/Researcher

Work

1.

Steve Waxman (13)

Indicated Dynamic changes of expression of TTX-sensitive sodium
channel contributing to hyperexcitable nociceptors after injury

2.

Michael Gold (14)

3.

Daniel Weinrech (15)

Role of Modulation of TTX-resistant sodium currents by PGE , 5HT,
2
and adenosine modifies mechanical induced hyperalgesia during
inflammation.
++
+
Role of Ca
dependent K current in controlling excitability of vagal
afferents.

4.

Peter McNaughton (16)

Presented evidence implicating activation of Protein Kinase heat
activated channel by bradykinin

Note: These mechanisms explain the ionic basis of increase in hyperexcitability in presence of nociception.

TABLE III :

Transduction transmission and modulation of nociceptive information.

S.No.

Scientist/Researcher

1.

Amy Mac Dermott

2.

Edwin McCleskey (17)

Using Electrophysiology, single-cell PCR and reverse transcription
PCR reactions determined the number of mRNA copies encoding the
µ-opiod receptor in a single cell. Their results explained perplexing
aspects of opiod analgesia.

3.

Michael Salter

Provided evidence-supporting development of long-term potentiation
in the hippocampus and by analogy, central sensitisation of spinal
cord dorsal horn neurons after tissue injury.

4.

Edward Perl (19)

(18)

Work
(17)

Experiments on the role of presynaptic non-NMDA & kainate receptors
in dorsal root ganglion neurons. Activation of these receptors appears
to influence glutamate release from the sensory neuron & therefore
activation of dorsal horn neurons.

Pointed changes in α-adrenergic receptors present in sensory neurons
after injury. Expression of the receptors involved in transmission of
nociceptive stimuli contributes pathophysiology of pain.

Note: Researchers on receptors involving the transduction, transmission, and modulation of nociceptive
information is clearly one of the most exciting and rapidly advancing involved in the transmission of
nociceptive stimuli as well as the cellular elements necessary for synaptic transmission. Researchers
have begun to collect together the essential elements for the first steps ultimately leading to the
perception of pain.

Indian J Physiol Pharmacol 2003; 47(3)

as how activation of this system results in
changes in behavior.
Steve McMohan (22) summarised the
growing body of data implicating a critical
role for brain derived neurotrophic factor in
the altered nociceptive processing observed
in the presence of inflammation.
Brain derived neurotrophic factor appears
to function as a neurotransmitter/
Neuromodulator in the dorsal horn of the
spinal cord, where it is released from the
central terminals of small-caliber afferents
and increases the excitability of dorsal horn
neurons.
Spinal integrating mechanism of pain

From the pain receptors, pain impulses
are carried to the CNS by two fiber systems:
the large myelinated fibres (A-delta) conduct
impulses rapidly (15.25 m/sec), the small
unmyelinated fibres (C-fibres) conduct at a
slower rate (<1 m/sec). Both types of fibres
occur in peripheral nerves and connect pain
receptors to the spinal cord. Within the cord,
these fibres synapse in the dorsal gray
matter and the substantial gelatinosa (SG).
The SG cells are thought to serve as an
integration centre and relay system for pain
sensations, although their exact role in pain
process is not known. However, this area of
spinal cord has many interconnections with
other gray matter neurons and it has a large
number of opiate receptors and an abundance
of substance P. Substance P is a
neurotransmitter that is apparently unique
to pain fibers of spinal cord. Cells of the
cordal gray matter send axons across the
midline to ascend in the lateral

Neurophysiology of Pain : Insight of Orofacial Pain 251

spinothalamic fibres synapse with relay
neurons of the thalamus, which project
upwards to the postcentral gyrus of the
cortex to complete pain pathways.
Besides, spinal integrating mechanism,
diencephalic and brainstem, analgesicdescending influences impinge upon SG to
integrate pain sensation at the cord level.
Gate-control theory for pain relief

This theory proposes a physiological basis
for reduction of perceived pain by gentle
tactile stimulation over the affected site (e.g.
abdominal pain is subjectively reduced by
lightly stroking the skin over the abdomen).
A network of “t-cells” (cells propagating pain
from slow fibres) and interneurons that can
inhibit the t-cells is postulated to form a
gate within the dorsal horn spinal cord. The
faster propagated fibres that carry
information about light touch, thus inhibiting
“t-cells” and decreasing the transmission of
pain impulse actuate the interneurons.
Although the exact site of gate network is
not known the principles of the theory have
been accepted and applied clinically. Tactile
stimulation that is used to “close the gate”
can be replaced by electrical stimulation of
the pathways of light touch through
electrodes placed on the skin, as is done in
Trancutaneous electrical nerve stimulation
TENS or electroacupuncture.
Natural
endogenous
mechanism (Fig. 3)

algesic

and

analgesic

Opium was determined to be “ God’s own
medicine” for pain. Not only does opium
produce definite analgesic effects, but it also

252

Tandon et

al

eliminated fear, anxiety and suffering. The
opiate receptors are part of the naturally
occurring or endogenous, analgesic
mechanism within the human nervous
system. Analgesics relieve pain and the most
potent analgesic is the morphine. It
complexes with opiate receptors associated
with synaptic terminals of the substantial
gelatinosa and the gray matter that
surrounds the third ventricle of the brain
stem (periaqueductal gray). Morphine when
complexed with opiate receptors, reduces or
eliminates pain.
With discovery of opiate receptors,
came a search for their natural function.

Fig. 3 :

Endogenous Pain Relief System.

Indian J Physiol Pharmacol 2003; 47(3)

Consequently,
naturally
occurring
(Endogenous) opiate compounds were found.
These compounds are collectively called as
Endorphins. Three-endorphin compoundsmet (methionine) enkephaline, leu (leucine)
encephalin and beta endorphins are known
to play a role in natural pain suppressing
mechanisms. These are produced at different
levels of CNS as a result of painful
stimulation. They serve to raise pain
threshold and reduce pain.
Phantom limb and plasticity

Amputation of limb is often followed by
the feeling that limb is still present. This
phenomenon is termed as phantom limb and
enhances our understanding of pain
pathways. The phantom area gradually
shrinks and may completely disappear. But
in 5 to 10% amputees; there is a persistent
and severe pain apparently from the absent
region. The pain is thought to be of central
origin. On sectioning of contralateral
spinothalamic tracts pain may be relieved
for long periods by a prolonged or severe
stimulus to the stump; although in others
the stump may be reamputated or
anaesthetised without any relief.
“Fooling the brain” may relieve pain. A
mirror is applied in between the amputated
limb and the normal limb. The patient is
asked to look in the mirror and move his
normal limb. Visual stimuli of movement of
normal limb make the individual feel as if
his amputated limb is moving. This brings
back a surge of plasticity changes in the
cortex, which are linked to surge of
emotional changes that relieve the limb from
its “locked” position at the time of
amputation (7).

Indian J Physiol Pharmacol 2003; 47(3)

Marie Fitzgerald (23) reported changes
in the neonatal spinal cord that are
incomplete versions of what occurs in the
adult. Central sensitisation occurs in the
response to electrical stimulation of A β
fibers whereas activity – induced plasticity
in the adult spinal cord takes place only in
response to C fiber strength stimulating
unless the dorsal horn is primed by previous
peripheral injury. NMDA receptors are
distributed in higher density in the neonatal
cord.
Clifford Woolf (24) provided an
outstanding, concise and up to date review
of activity-induced and signal induced
plasticity in sensory neurons after tissue
injury.
Referred pain: Its significance

The pain originating from viscera is
generally of slow, aching type, which is
difficult to localise. Frequently visceral pain
may be referred to other parts of the body
supplied by the same spinal nerve (the
dermatomal rule) known as referred pain.
When pain is referred to another part of the
body, the site of referral is usually a part of
the body that develops from the same
embryological segment or dermatome, as the
affected source of the pain. The same
peripheral nerves supply these common
regions of the body. For example, the heart
and arm are derived from the same
dermatome, and the kidney, ureter and
testes are all derived from another common
dermatome.
Clinical significance of classical referred
pain lies in diagnosis. Usually visceral pain
of the abdomen may cause overlying,
abdominal muscles to contract. This

Neurophysiology of Pain : Insight of Orofacial Pain 253

increased rigidity “guarding” helps in
localising the possible source of pain in
particular viscera. Gall bladder pain is
referred to right shoulder tip and cardiac
pain to left shoulder and upper arm. Such
referred pain thus helps in making correct
diagnosis of the diseased viscera.
Subcortical

mechanisms

Pituitary mechanisms
Melzack R. postulated the existence of a
pain neuromatrix in which the experience of
pain is produced by multiple influences and
comprises of a widely distributed neural
network with input from the body’s stressregulation systems, including Hypothalamic
Pituitary axis (HPA) and opioid systems.
Facial pain itself may act, on the other hand
as a strong activator of the HPA. (25)
Cerebral

cortical

mechanisms

The current knowledge of pain perception
is quite fragmentary. The role played by the
cerebral cortex in pain is not clearly
understood. If the post central gyrus
(somatosensory area) is electrically
stimulated, very few patients report a
sensation of pain. The cortex is thought to
aid in the appreciation of pain, but the
responses to painful stimuli persist even
when the cortex is surgically removed. A
great deal of evidence implicates the
thalamus in the perception of pain.
Newer

concepts

of

understanding

cortical

mechanisms

A considerable amount of evidence
suggest that Primary Somatosensory cortex

254

Tandon et

al

Indian J Physiol Pharmacol 2003; 47(3)

(SI) has a pivotal role in sensory
discriminative aspects of pain such as spatial
discrimination (26) and intensity coding (27).

occurs in the Anterior cingulate cortex
(ACC). Pain affect (i.e. unpleasantness of
pain) is encoded in the ACC.

Cognitive factors can alter the perceived
intensity of pain and accordingly, can
modulate SI activity in functional imaging
studies. Physiologically, inhibition of
nociceptive neurons and neurons with
non sensory discriminative response
characteristics may be involved in this
cognitive modulation and in interaction of
pain and touch in SI area.

By using hypnosis, Rainville et al (36)
selectively altered unpleasantness of noxious
thermal stimuli without changing the
perceived pain intensity.

Neurophysiologic and functional imaging
data clearly indicate participation of SII
in human pain processing. Preserved,
direct thalamic access of nociceptive
information to SII, supported by anatomic
thalamocortical connections and by parallel
activation of somatosensory cortices,
suggests a particular relevance of this area
in pain processing.

Analysis of cerebral activation pattern as
measured by PET revealed that the
modulation of pain affect was paralleled by
activation changes in the ACC but not in
the other brain tissues.
Along with these and other studies the
proximity of the nociceptive, motor and
cognitive regions of the ACC suggests
possible local interconnections that may
allow the output of the ACC pain area to
command immediate behavioral reactions
(37-40)
Grading/Evaluation of pain

Functionally, SII may be involved in
recognition, learning and memory of painful
events (26,28-32)
Numerous functional imaging studies
indicate participation of anterior insular
cortex in human pain processing. Recent
findings indicate a dedicated pain and
temperature pathway to the insula need to
be integrated with functional imaging data.
Functionally the insula may be involved in
automatic reactions to noxious stimuli and
in pain-related memory and learning (33-35).
Clinical reports that patients with
cingulotomies sometimes still feel pain but
report it as less distressing along with
findings that high level of opioid binding

Pain is a complex physiologicalbehavioral puzzle that requires assessment
on different levels.
At the same time the measures of pain
should be reliable and valid, other wise they
will be of little use to clinicians or
researchers (41). An ideal pain measure (42)
should provide sensitive measurement free
of bias, provide immediate information about
accuracy and reliability. The measurement
should also separate the sensorydiscriminative aspects of pain from its
hedonic qualities assess experimental and
clinical pain with the same scale and provide
absolute scales that allow assessment of pain
between groups and within groups over time.

Indian J Physiol Pharmacol 2003; 47(3)

Neurophysiology of Pain : Insight of Orofacial Pain 255

The pain threshold can be determined
by the classical methods. Simple category
scales such As four-point “none, mild,
moderate and severe” (verbal categorical
scale) or 1-10 numerical scale can be scored
in several ways. The simplest, the method
of equal appearing intervals assigns
successive integers to verbal categories
directly (43). The three most frequently
considered aspects of pain are the subjective
(Measured by self-report), the behavioral
(measured by sampling of physiological or
electric potentials and assaying body fluids
or other biological responses.) Self-report
measures, when they can be obtained, should
be regarded as the “ Gold standard”. Indeed,
the International Association for the study
of pain emphasises that pain is always
subjective.

The subject is required to place a mark
on the 10-cm line at a point, which
corresponds to the level of pain intensity
the subject presently feels. The distance in
cm from the lower end of the VAS to the
patients mark is used as a numerical index
of the severity of pain. (45,46)

Fortunately, techniques for the
psychological assessment of the pain patients
have improved to the extent that emotional
stress such as anxiety, depression and
defensive personality styles can now be
identified. People experiencing pain are able
to report separately on the sensory and
affective dimensions and emotional qualities
differ dramatically across different forms of
clinical pain and within individuals over
time (44). Currently evidence indicates
that pharmaceutical and psychological
interventions have different effects on ether
sensory, affective or both qualities of the
experience.

The traditional view that the cerebral
cortex is not involved in pain processing has
been abandoned during the past decade based
on anatomic and physiologic studies, lesional
studies, functional neuroimaging and
neurophysiologic studies in humans.

Subjective pain assessment

A Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) is a simple
measure of subjective pain. It consists of a
10-cm horizontal or vertical line with two
end points labeled “no pain” and “worst pain
ever”.

The VAS is sensitive to pharmacological
and non-pharmacological procedures that
alter the experience of pain (47) and
correlates highly with pain measured on
verbal and numerical rating scales (48,49).
The ease of administration and scoring has
contributed to the popularity of this method.
A major advantage of the VAS as a measure
of sensory pain intensity is its ratio scale
properties (50), minimal intrusiveness and
conceptual simplicity (51).

The use of techniques such as microrecordings of the unitary or multiunitary
activity of the nerves or nuclei, intracranial
evoked potentials, nociceptive evoked
potentials, reflexology, polysomnography and
topography together with techniques such as
percutaneous objective localisation of deep
nerves, allows quantitative evaluation preintra and postoperatively (52).
Evoked

Potentials

Specific stimulation at periphery causes
nerve impulses to be conveyed to the brain
sensory areas producing at the cerebral

256

Tandon et

al

cortex an electrical potential change called
the Cortical Evoked Response. This potential
change cannot be recorded as a single
response because it is too small to show up
against the normal variability of the
electroencephalogram (EEG). However, if a
considerable number (say 50 or more) of
evoked responses are produced and the EEG
tracings are analysed by a suitable computer,
the average response becomes apparent after
due amplification.
Evoked potentials are a complex
summation of graded potentials along
afferent pathways and at the cortex by
peripheral volleys. (53)
It is tempting to regard this evoked
potential response as an indicator that the
neural impulses initiated by the stimulus
have reached consciousness, and that it is a
physical indicator of perception, but two
factors are not necessarily coincident. (54)
Pain and cognition

Event Related Potentials (ERP) are
valuable and useful parameters for assessing
a variety of cognitive abilities (55) and
psychological processes including expectancy,
attention, search, discrimination, decision –
making and memory. P 300 is a valuable
tool and our preliminary work have shown
that it can evaluate the cognitive and
affective components of pain (56-59)
A significant increase in P 300 latency
in patents suffering from pain as compared
to age and sex matched controls. Our finding
suggest that there are cognitive changes in
chronic pain states. This cognitive blunting

Indian J Physiol Pharmacol 2003; 47(3)

is reversible with analgesic intervention.
(60). Contingent Negative Variation (CNV)
is a surface –negative slow potential
recorded from human subjects during a fixed
foreperiod of a warned reaction time task.
(61).
The electrical phenomenon of the brain,
has drawn the interest of many
psychophysiologists because it reflects some
psychological processes such as expectancy,
motivate attention and arousal. The CNV
waveform depends primarily on psychological
and to a lesser extent on physical proportion
of the stimulus.
CNV can be used to evaluate the
affective-emotional components of pain. It is
still unclear how brain processes emotionality
and pain, and what are the interaction
mechanisms of emotion and pain.
Slow brain potentials in the contingent
negative variation (CNV) are found to be
larger in the pain condition than that of the
control (62-64). When patients with chronic
pain were studied in The CNV paradigm, the
appearance of CNV response was more
marked. It was concluded that slow evoked
potentials are sensitive to anxiety level and
to pain perception. Rizzo (65) have shown
the usefulness of this measure in the
investigation of pain as a complex sensation.
A number of recent studies have assessed
the influence of baseline or induced mood
on subjective and psychological responses to
experimental stimulation. Baseline (66) and
induced (67) anxiety have been shown to
increase pain ratings to thermal or pressure
pain ratings, while an experimentally
induced depressive mood (induced by

Indian J Physiol Pharmacol 2003; 47(3)

presentation of text with depressive themes)
decreased tolerance to cold pressor pain (68).
Pain memory processes have been
investigated using experimental painful
stimulation (69). These studies provide
experimental examples of how the experience
of chronic pain can exert subtle influence
on cognitive processes and mood. Pain itself
can also impair cognitive and psychomotor
performance.
Pain evoked potentials

Evoked Potentials (EPs) are stimulus or
event related electrical signals of brain
activity that may be recorded from the scalp
when precisely controlled discrete stimuli
are delivered.
Significant correlation exists between late
EP components by experimental pain stimuli
and the induced pain sensation.
EPs can serve as indicators of perception
at multiple levels. Pain related brain
evoked potentials are recognised as an
objective and quantitative test for evaluation
of peripheral and central spinothalamic tract,
thalamocortical projections and corticocortical circuit for pain processing.

Neurophysiology of Pain : Insight of Orofacial Pain 257

stimulus intensity and painfulness and
initiation of motor movements.
Further analysis by Chen et al (70) on
the consistency and reliability of the painrelated sources revealed that two pain
related components are consistently found a
negativity at 145 msec. and a positivity at
225 msec. The initial components correlate
with stimulus intensity and appear to code
information about intensity of the external
stimulation. The latter components are
closely related to the subjective estimation
of pain intensity and seem to reflect
association processes involved in evaluation
of noxious stimulus.
Chen et al findings suggest that the late
components of the EP waveform may reflect
the cognitive aspects of dental pain
perception in laboratory models.
When analgesic interventions are
introduced subjective reports of pain
intensity is reduced and EP components
diminish accordingly.
Zelansky et al (71) suggested that the
pain–EP reflects the emotional-motivational
response to pain rather than the sensorydiscriminative components.

Chen et al (70) identified the current
source dipoles in noxious information
processing.

Somatosensory

The pain related components late and
ultra late are distributed bilaterally in both
hemispheres exhibit maximum amplitude in
the vertex. Th late components are assumed
to reflect secondary mechanisms of
information processing, such as stimulus
recognition, localisation, estimation of

Following stimulation of sensory receptors,
a series of electrical events ensues in the
afferent pathway and in the brain, and this
activity may be measured non-invasively
from sites on the body surface. The
waveform is known a Somatosensory Evoked
Potential.

evoked

potentials

258

Tandon et

al

The evaluation of somatosensory evoked
potentials is mainly related to assessment
of a particular nerve to central nervous
system pathway.
Results in our studies have demonstrated
that there is a change in the absolute peak
latency of N19 in patients with chronic pain.
Imaging: MRI and SPECT

During the last decade, advances in
functional brain imaging techniques have led
to identification of neuroanatomic substrates
of pain perception. Human lesion studies
using computer tomography and MRI,
and functional neuroimaging studies
using Single-Photon Emission Computed
Tomography (SPECT), positron emission
tomography (PET) and functionally (fMRI).
Ken Casey (72) described the role of for
brain mechanisms of pain in imaging in
humans and reviewed convincing evidence
that the perceived intensity of unilateral pain
evoked by different input as correlates with
increases in regional cerebral blood flow in
primarily five structures. Bilaterally in the
thalamus, the contralateral insula, the
bilateral premotor cortex, the contralateral
anterior cingulate and cerebral vermis.

Indian J Physiol Pharmacol 2003; 47(3)

human pain processing involves a variety of
subcortical and cortical regions. More
recently, topographic aspects of pain
representations in the cerebral cortex have
been extended to the temporal domain by
results of neurophysiologic studies using
whole scalp magnetoencephlography (MEG)
and EEG (73).
Thus it may be concluded that pain is a
personal, subjective experience influenced by
cultural learning, the meaning of the
situation, attention and other psychological
variables. Approaches to measurement of
pain include verbal and numeric self-rating
scales, behavioral observation scales and
physiological responses. The complex nature
of the experience of pain suggests that
measurements from these domains may not
always show high concordance. Further
development and refinement of pain
measurement techniques will be able to meet
the challenge and lead to increasingly
accurate tools with greater predictive powers.
Orofacial and dental pain

Introduction to dental pain

The combined use of psychosocial
dimension and imaging in humans should
help reveal the functional role of different
forebrain structures that have direct
corticofugal projections to the thalamus,
brain stem, and spinal cord, and thereby
modulate the pain experience at those levels.

Face is considered as a mirror of mindInward events, emotions, behaviors are
reflected on facial expressions. The cortex
is also a mirror image to the body. It
reflects the body image and perceives what
the body experiences. The cortical
homunculus of the body has wider
representation for orofacial area as compared
to other parts. This is elucidated below in
detail along with the clinical significance.

These studies non-invasively demonstrated
involvement of distributed cerebral areas in

When a patient comes to the dentist and
complains of pain, the dentist is not dealing

Indian J Physiol Pharmacol 2003; 47(3)

with a simple sensory phenomenon involving
the peripheral neural events elicited by
painful stimuli. Pain in dentistry has a
sensory –discriminative dimension. It
provides information about the noxious
stimuli-characterised by quality, intensity,
location and duration, pain from other
regions may not reflect that, where
Pain has multidimensional emphasis,
involves affective, motivational and cognitive
components. In orofacial pain for example
the patient’s last visit to the dentist, and
ongoing sensory experiences of stress and
anxiety during the current visit may
modulate the pain experience. (73,74).
Sensory disturbances of the face and oral
cavity can occur in number of situations that
are of particular interest to the oral and
maxillofacial surgeon. These include nerve
lesions during removal of mandibular cysts,
third molars, osteotomies of the facial
skeleton and maxillofacial trauma.
Temporo Mandibular Disorders (TMD)
comprise by far the most common cause of
chronic facial pain conditions with a higher
prevalence in women as compared to men
(75). TMD are a complex heterogeneous
group of conditions, involving masticatory
muscles and/ or temporomandibular joints,
charaterised by chronic facial pain and
representing cause of physical and
psychological debility in a large segment of
population.
Accompaniments

of

pain

Sensory-discriminative system (76)
Under ordinary conditions, a noxious
stimulus can quickly be localised in time and

Neurophysiology of Pain : Insight of Orofacial Pain 259

place. Somatosensory and dorsolateral
spinal cord are so organised that this
spatiotemporal information is rapidly
transmitted. The dorsal column nucleus is
topographically organised so that cells
responding to stimulation from a small
area of the body are clustered together
and are physically adjacent to the
neurons that receive input from contiguous
areas of the body. This system allows
identification of pain duration and its exact
location.
A secondary input into the posterolateral
and ventral posterolateral thalamic nuclei
is from direct spinothalamic tract input by
means of fibres that ascend in the
ventrolateral spinal cord-the classic pain
pathway. These rapidly conducting neurons
form an alternate pathway for discriminative
somatosensory functions.
Motivational-affective system (76)

The paleo spinothalamic system consists of
fibers of the ventrolateral system that
synapse in the reticular formation of the
brain stem, where neurons form a complex
network with extensive connections to
ascending and descending systems.
This complex system may provide the
neural pathways for the aversivemotivational component of pain-the suffering
aspects often associated with painful
experiences. In addition to interactions with
the limbic system and the hypothalamus, the
system projects to periaqueductal gray
matter, where it interacts with descending
impulses that ultimately aid in the
modulation of impulse transmission within
the spinal cord.

260

Tandon et

al

Many drugs, particularly narcotic
analgesics, can alter the aversivemotivational aspects of the pain experience.
That is, these agents reduce fear and anxiety
and can eliminate the suffering aspects
associated with pain. Indifference to noxious
stimulus is brought about in this manner.
Patients may state that the pain has not
decreased in intensity but they are no longer
bothered by it. Drugs create this indifference
to pain.
Activation of motor mechanisms (76)

Motor mechanisms that are responsible for
many of the overt reactions to pain are
interrelated with spatio-temporal analysis
and affective aspects of the experience of
pain. Once integrated within the central
nervous system, the impulse triggers a
sequence of responses characterised in the
individual by:
1) Startle response
2) Flexion response
3) Postural readjustment
4) Vocalisation
5) Orientation of the head and eyes to
examine the damaged area,
6) Evocation of past experience in similar
situations,
7) Prediction of the consequence of the
stimulation, and
8) Many other patterns of behavior aimed
at diminishing the sensory and affective
components of the entire experience.
Facial grimacing, clenching the teeth,
crying and other manifestations of the

Indian J Physiol Pharmacol 2003; 47(3)

experience may occur. Change in vital
signs may also occur. Sympathetic nervous
system function is generally enhanced as
well.
Thus the pain center, as postulated by
the specificity theory, has been replaced by
the encompassing global concept of an action
system. The system is not only responsible
for identification, appreciation, recognition,
and reaction to the unpleasantness impulses
arriving from the periphery, but it is also
intimately involved with the modulation of
impulse transmission at spinal cord (or
trigeminal nucleus) levels.
How

different

is

this

pain

from

general

pain? : peculiarities of dental pain

The tooth pulp has many attractive
features for the study of peripheral pain
mechanisms because of its rich innervation,
its unique distribution of nerve fibers and
its general disposition to give rise to pain
upon stimulation (76-84). In the last century,
three theories explaining the exact
mechanism of sensitivity of dentin, this
seemingly inert structure has been
elucidated:
1. Pain is a direct result of stimulation of
sensory nerve endings in the dentin. The
most sensitive area of the tissue is near
the dentoenamel junction.
2. Odontoblasts are sensory cells. They
receive and transfer stimuli to nerve
endings in the pulp.
3. Hydrodynamic theory: Dental sensitivity
is a result of mechanical stimulation of
free endings in the pulp caused by rapid

Indian J Physiol Pharmacol 2003; 47(3)

fluid flow in the dental tubules where
the dentin is stimulated.
Orofacial pain can be as severe as any
pain experienced and includes cases of
intractable pain as well as acute pain.
Moreover personal, family and social cost of
this is enormous, not just in terms of
financial loss and cost of treatment but also
in the risk of drug addiction, multiple
operations and even suicide. These features
are peculiar to orofacial pain. The most
frequent source of orofacial pain is dental
disorders and it has been estimated that
toothache is suffered for upto five million
days, and one million nights sleep lost as a
result of it, in one year, in Britain alone
(85). This article helps the reader develop
his understanding of orofacial pain in
particular, with an object of exploring the
newer techniques and procedures that
improve his diagnostic ability for better
treatment.
Psychology of dental pain

Perhaps the most important factor
affecting reaction to pain is basic emotion of
fear. A pain in the leg might well elicit less
of a reaction than a pain of equal intensity
in the chest because the latter might appear
to the sufferer to signify heart disease. Pain
in the head (including the face) are also
regarded with greater apprehension since
they might appear to threaten the innermost
being including mind and thought processing
in the cortex. Pain distorts this normal inner
image causing a feeling of revulsion. The
clinician attempts to see this picture to
determine its attributes, characteristics. This
article in further is a step in this direction
analysing newer methods of electrophysiology

Neurophysiology of Pain : Insight of Orofacial Pain 261

to understand this “blurred” image in order
to improve the diagnostic ability and
treatment.
Pathways

of

orofacial

pain:

neuroanatomy

(Diagram 4)

Sensory input from peripheral receptors
is carried along the trigeminal pathway to
the somatic sensory areas of the cerebral
cortex via a 3-neurone chain. The cell bodies
from the Trigeminal (Gasserian) Ganglion
and this main nerve bundle then enter the
brainstem at the level of the pons. These
fibers synapse for the first time at the main
th
nerve
sensory nucleus of the V
(discriminative tactile senses, light touch and
pressure) or alternatively at descending
spinal tract nuclei, the N. caudalis (pain,
temperature and crude touch), N. oralis
(cutaneous sensation of oral mucosa) and N.
interpolaris (tooth pulp pain). Second order
fibers arising from these sites then cross
the midline and ascend to synapse at the
thalamus, from which thalamocortical
projections then pass to those cortical areas
concerned with oro-facial sensation and its
appreciation. (86-89)
Neurophysiological
orofacial

techniques

for

recording

pain

Somatosensory evoked potentials (SEP)

The trigeminal SEP (TSEP) waveform :
The essential features of TSEP are the
following sequence of waves. N13, P20 and
N27. Some studies have also observed much
earlier events, denoting N5 and P9 (90-92).
The peak event at 20 ms has been noted as
the most consistently obtained and the most

262

Tandon et

al

clinically used (93,94). The P20 wave is the
first consistent sign of concerted cortical
activation. Beyond 30 ms the Evoked
potential, is subject to other influences such
as efferent and limbic activity and memory
recall, making the behavior and morphology
of the wave form more complex to interpret.
These studies have shown that TSEP can
be recorded by stimulation of peripheral
branches of the trigeminal nerve. The site
of stimulation is usually the oral cavity. The
most favored being the lips or gums because
of their relatively large sensory receptor
representation in the cortex. The infraorbital
nerve at the infraorbital foramen or the
mentalis nerve as it emerges from the
mandibular foramen is the other sites. These

Indian J Physiol Pharmacol 2003; 47(3)

however may show muscle artifacts on
stimulation and may require the nerve to be
pierced by a needle. Certain areas of scalp,
which overlie the central gyrus, have
been shown to be good recording sites
for detecting TSEP. Reference electrodes
are placed in the mid frontal position
(Fpz). Positions C and C that overlie
5
6
the facial area of somatosensory cortex are
the most popular sites for active electrode
(95).
Pain induced changes in TSEP could be
observed on stimulation of tooth pulp. These
pain-induced changes could further be
studied in different diseased conditions,
metabolic disorders in patients.
Clinical applications of TSEP

There is still much to be elucidated
about some features of the trigeminal
somatosensory evoked potentials (TSEP),
particularly the early events. However,
there are a number of instances where they
have proved to be valuable in the assessment
of certain conditions. Their use and further
exploration is advocated in these conditions
(96-98)
For example a significant increase in the
latency of the P20 event has been taken to
indicate a compressive lesion in trigeminal
neuralgia, and this feature distinguishes
those patients most likely to benefit from
surgical correction. (99).

Fig. 4 :

Summary of the central connections of
the Trigeminal Nerve.

The abolition of peaks N5 and P9 and
the normalisation of the latency of the N13
peak has been taken to indicate the success
of the treatment by thermocoagulation of the
trigeminal ganglion. (100).

Indian J Physiol Pharmacol 2003; 47(3)

Neurophysiology of Pain : Insight of Orofacial Pain 263

Similarly, preservation and improvement
of tactile sensibility following surgical
procedures may be monitored using TSEP.
Impairment of sensibility may be indicated
by reduction in amplitude, latency delays and
even abolition of the response (101).

5) U s i n g p s y c h o s o m a t i c m e t h o d s e . g .
hypnosis, faith healing.

A condition in which a patient
experiences an exaggerated response to
noxious stimuli is termed as Anaesthesia
dolorosa (AD). It usually occurs postdental
surgeries, in trigeminal tumors and postherpetic neuralgias. Increased amplitudes of
TSEP beyond 50ms in AD is a diagnostic
indicator.

Previous/old

This is an example where the subjective
pain sensation may be objectively assessed
by the dental clinician using TSEPs.
Physiological
applications

basis

of

pain

relief:

clinical

Control of pain
One of the most important aspects of practice
of dentistry is the control or elimination of
pain. Pain has been so closely associated
with dentistry that pain and dentistry have
become almost synonymous. (76)
Following are the methods of pain
control:
1) Removing the cause
2) Blocking the pathway of painful impulses
e.g. Local anaesthetics
3) Raising the pain threshold e.g. aspirin
and other pharmacological agents.
4) Preventing pain reaction by cortical
depression e.g. general anaesthesia

The first two methods affect pain
perception, the last two affect pain reaction,
the third affects both.
techniques

Across studies results suggested that
acupuncture, biofeedback and relaxation
were comparable to conservative treatment
(for example an intraoral appliance) and
warranted further study. There were no
studies found that conducted randomised
clinical trials that tested the effects of
homeopathy, naturopathy, chiropractic,
massage, meditation, yoga or herbal
medicines for chronic facial pain. Significant
gaps in the scientific basis limit the accuracy
with which dental professionals can guide
their patients regarding Complementary
alternative medicine approaches used to
treat chronic facial pain (101).
Acupuncture

In Classical Chinese Medicine it is
postulated that a vital force or life energy
(chi) flows through the body in channels or
meridians.
Disease is associated with disturbance of
this flow, but fortunately, the fault can be
corrected by inserting one or more needles
into the meridians concerned.
Scientific basis: mechanisms of Acupuncture

Electropuncture has been found to
produce analgesia in various chronic pain
syndromes of musculoskeletal origin (102).

264

Tandon et

al

This effect is due to activation of the
peri-aqueductal matter which is connected
to the descending inhibitory pathways of the
lower brainstem. (103)
This activation of the per-aqueductal grey
matter releases endogenous opiod peptides
on their binding sites, resulting in an
inhibition of the inhibitory neurons and a
subsequent disinhibition of the output
neurons to the nucleus raphe magnus
and nucleus raphe dorsalis. From
these raphe nuclei of the lower pons and
medulla, one pathway spreads down to the
dorsal horn of the spinal cord where
incoming pain signals are inhibited and
another spreads upwards and releases 5-HT
in forebrain structures. Thus., with
electropuncture both descending and
ascending inhibitory pathways are involved
in pain control (104)
In the study group for electropuncture,
sterilised acupuncture needles are
introduced into the points selected according
to traditional Chinese channels and
collaterals. (105,106)
Acute pain is sometimes proportional to
the extent of injury, but the contribution of
psychological factors reveal complex
relationships that are profoundly influenced
by fear, anxiety, cultural background and the
meaning of the situation to the person (107).
Various workers using evoked potential have
reported electrophysiological correlates of
acupuncture (41). These analgesia studies
suggest interaction of other sensory afferents
with specific pain pathways in brain,
relieving pain.

Indian J Physiol Pharmacol 2003; 47(3)
Recent

developments

Some workers have reported that the
application of electrical stimulation to the
pituitary gland (PG) has produced dramatic
relief of intractable pain caused by advanced
cancer (108,109). Electrical stimulation of the
pituitary gland was followed by suppression
of tooth pulp evoked potentials (110). The
Pituitary Inhibitory system is an entirely
new picture of the mechanism by which
electrical stimulation of the PG results in
pain relief and consists of rendering the
hypophyseal system hyperactive, which in
turn antidromically exerts an inhibitory
influence on the pain pathway in the brain
(111).
Pharmacology

and

pharmacotherapeutics

The narcotic Fentanyl reduces the
sensory intensity but not the unpleasantness
of painful pulp sensation (112). In contrast,
anxiolytics such as Diazepam reduces
affective discomfort rather than sensoryintensity qualities of the experience.
Similarly placebo medication has an impact
on unpleasantness rather than on sensory
qualities of painful events.
There is also sufficient evidence of
efficacy of carbamazepine in trigeminal
neuralgia, also for baclofen and lamotrigine.
In Temporomandibular disorders (TMD),
there is evidence of a moderate effect of
muscle relaxants/ tranquilisers (113).
Recent advances in knowledge of the
neural processes underlying pain in the face
and mouth reveal a remarkable degree of

Indian J Physiol Pharmacol 2003; 47(3)

Neurophysiology of Pain : Insight of Orofacial Pain 265

plasticity following injury or inflammation
of craniofacial tissue. Insights into
mechanisms involved in the transmission and
modulation of nociceptive signals in the
brainstem hold promise of the development
of new or improved therapeutic procedures
for the relief of pain (114).
Future
trends
directions

and

future

therapeutic

A promising approach is the use
of corticotrophin-releasing hormone
antagonists. This is based on several
undergoing trials on chronic facial pain
patients with antidepressants (115,116). It has
been postulated that hyperactivity of the
HPA axis in-patients with fibromyalgia
correlates with depression.
This leads us on to the hypothesis that
perhaps facial pain occurs in susceptible
individuals who have an underlying
abnormality of stress hormone response
resulting in higher cortisol levels. Recent
data indicate very high anytime cortisol
levels in patients with facial pain indicating
pathology in the hypothalamic Pituitary axis
(HPA) (117).
As yet, there are no data available on

whether high cortisol levels persist in facial
pain patients treated with antidepressants
and the mechanism of antidepressants to
modulate the Hypothalamic Pituitary axis
activity and increase glucorticoid is still
unknown. (118)
Tackling pain at the source : new ideas
nociceptors

about

P2X receptors are a family of ligand gated
ion channels responsive to ATP, and seen
subtypes that form homometric or
heterometric channels have been identified
(119).
In the spinal cord ATP acts
presynaptically to regulate transmitter
release and involves NMDA receptor
mechanism. (120-123)
Recent studies have provided evidence of
P2X mechanisms influencing nociceptive
transmission in the trigeminal system.
(119,124). These research studies indicate
application of selective antagonist
for example TNP-ATP (2′-(or 3′-) Otrinitrophenyl-ATP) may reversibly attenuate
the perception of nociceptive stimuli to the
tooth pulp. On application there is a decrease
in neuronal mechanoreceptor field and
responses to innocuous and noxious
mechanical stimuli (120,125).

REFERENCES
1.

Mersky H. Pain terms: a list with definitions
and notes on usage. Pain 1979; 6:381–418.

2.

Swamy Dayananda’s Satyartha Prakash (in
English with Comments) Spotlight on Truth
Vandematharam Ramachandra Rao. Chapter 1X
On Vidya, Avidya and Release from Bondage
pg. 30.

3.

Dallebbach KM. Pain: History and present status.
Am Jr. of Psychol 1939; 52: 331–347.

4.

Craig KD. Emotional aspects of pain. In: Wall
PD and Mezlack R. (Eds). Textbook of pain.
Churchill Livingstone, 1994; pg. 261.

5.

Melzack R, Wall PD. Pain mechanisms: a new
theory, Science 1965; 150:971–979.

6.

Melzack R, Casey KL. Sensory, motivational and
ce n tra l co n tro l d e te rmi n a n ts o f p a i n : a n e w
conceptual model. In: Kenshalo D (ed.). The skin

266

Tandon et

al

Indian J Physiol Pharmacol 2003; 47(3)

senses. C.C. Thomas, Springfield, Illinos, 1968,
p 423-443.

hyperalgesia. Proc Natl Acad Sci 1999; 14: 7693–
7696.

7.

Tandon OP. Synopsis of Human Physiology (Basic
and Applied) Part 1: pg. 120-122. Jaypee
Publishers.

21. Watkins LR, Maier SF. Implications of immuneto-brain communication for sickness and pain.
Proc Natl Acad Sci 1999; 14: 7710–7713.

8.

Zotterman Y. Studies in the peripheral nervous
mechanisms of pain. Acta Med Scand 1933; 80:
185-242.

9.

Zotterman Y. Touch, pain and tickling an
electrophysiological investigation on cutaneous
sensory nerves. J Physiol (London) 1939; 95: 128.

22. T h o m p s o n S W N , B e n n e t t D L H , K e r r B J ,
Bradbury EJ, McMahon SB. Brain derived
neurotrophic factor is an endogeneous modulator
of nociceptive responses in the spinal cord.
Review Proc Natl Acad Sci 1999; 14: 7714–7718.

10. Zotterman Y, How it started: a personal review.
In: Kenshalo D.R. (Ed.). Sensory Functions of
the Skin of Humans, Plenum, New York, 1978,
5–22.
11. Bell C. The nervous system of the Human Body,
Longmans, London 1830.
12. M u l l e r J . H a n d b u c h d e r P h y s i o l o g i c d e s
Menschen. Vol J Holscher, Koblenz, 1840, 249–
503
13. Waxman SG, Dib-Hajj S, Cummins TR, Black
JA. Sodium channels and Pain. Proc Natl Acad
Sci 1996; 14: 7635–7639.
+
14. G o l d
MS.
Tetradotoxin-resistant
Na
currentsand inflammatory hyperalgesia. Proc
Natl Acad Sci 1999; 14: 7645–7649.
15. C o r d o b a - R o d r i g u e z R , M o o r e K A , K a o J P Y ,
Weinreich D. Calcium regulation of a slow postspike hyperpolarisation in vagal afferent
neurons. Proc Natl Acad Sci 1999;14: 7650–
7657.
16. Cesare P, Moriondo A, Vellani V, Mc Naughton
PA. Ion channels gated by heat. Proc Natl Acad
Sci 1999;14: 7658–7663.
17. Dubner Ronald, Gold Michael. The neurobiology
of pain. Colloquium Paper. PNAS-Dubner and
Gold, July 6 1999. Vol 96, Issue 14, 7627-7630.
The National Academy of Sciences colloquium.
Dec 11-13,1998, Arnold and Mabel Beckman
Center in Irvine, CA.

23. F i t z g e r a l d M , J e n n i n g s E . T h e p o s t n a t a l
development of spinal sensory processing.
Review Proc Natl Acad Sci 1999; 14: 7719–7722.
24. W o o l f C J , C o s t i g a n M . T r a n s c r i p t i o n a l a n d
posttanscriptional plasticity and the generation
of inflammatory pain. Review Proc Natl Acad
Sci 1999; 14: 7723–7730.
25. Melzack R. From gate to neurotransmitter. Pain
Suppl 1999, 6: S121–6.
26. Coghill RC, Sang CN, Maisog JM, Iadarola MJ.
Pain intensity processing within the human
brain: a bilateral distributed mechanism.
J Neurophysiol 1999; 82: 1934–43.
27. Davis KD, Kwan CL, Crawley AP, Mikuli SD.
Functional MRI study of thalamic and cortical
activators evoked by cutaneous heat, cold and
tactile stimuli. J Neurophysiol 1998: 80: 1533–
1546.
28. Gelnar PA, Krauss BR, Sheehe PR, Szevereny
NM, Apkarian AV. A comparative f MRI study of
cortical representations for thermal painful,
vibrotactile and motor performance tasks.
Neuroimage 1999: 10: 460–482.
29. Ploner M, Schmitz F, Freund HJ, Schitzier A.
Parallel activation of primary and secondary
somatosensory cortices in human pain
processing. J Neurophysiol 1996, 81: 3100–3104.
30. Ploner M, Schmitz F, Freund HJ, Schnitzler A.
Diffrential organisation of touch and pain
in human primary somatosensory \cortex.
J Neurophysiol 2000; 83:1770–1776.

Salter MW. Src, a molecular switch
gain contrl of synaptic transmission
by N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors.
Acad Sci 1999; 14: 7697–7704.

31. Lenz FA, Rios M, ZivhA, Chan D, Krauss G,
Lesser RP. Painful stimuli evoke potentials
recorded over the human anterior cingulate
gyrus. J Neurophysiol 1998; 79:2231–2234.

19. P e r l E R . C a u s a l g i a , p a t h o l o g i c p a i n , a n d
adrenergic receptors. Proc Natl Acad Sci 1999;
14: 7664–7667.

32. A n d e r s s o n J L , L i l j a A , H a r t v i g P e t a l .
Somatotopic organisation along central sulcus,
for pain localisation in humans, as revealed by
Positron Emission tomography. Exp Brain Res
1997: 117 192–199.

18. Yu X.-M,
governing
mediated
Proc Natl

20. S h u X . - Q , M e n d e l l L M . N e u r o t r o p h i n s a n d

Indian J Physiol Pharmacol 2003; 47(3)
33. Iadorola MJ, Berman KF, Zeffiro TA et al. Neural
activation during acute capsaicin-evoked pain
and allodynia assessed with PET. Brain
1998:121:931–947.
34. Binkofshi F, Schnitzler A, Enck P. et al. Somatic
and limbic cortex activation in esophageal
distention: a functional magnetic resonance
imaging study. Ann Neurol 1998,44:84–85.
35. S h i C J , C a s e l l M D . C o r t i c a l , t h a l a m i c a n d
amygdaloid connections of the anterior and
posterior insular cortices. J Comp Neurol 1998b:
399:440–468.
36. Rainville P, Duncan GH, Price DD, Carrier B,
Bushnell MC. Pain affect encoded in human
anterior cingulate but not somatosensory cortex.
Science 1997; 277:968–971.
37. Jones AK, Qi LY, Fujirawa T et al. In vivo
distribution of opioid receptors in man in relation
to the cortical projections of the medial and
lateral pain systems measured with: Positron
emission tomography. Neurosci Lett 1999b;
126:25–28.
38. V o g t B A , D e r b y s h i r e S , J o n e s A K . P a i n
processing in four regions of human cingulate
cortex localised with co-registered PET and MR
imaging. Eur J Neurosci 1996:8:1461–1473.
39. Derbyshire SW, Vogt BA, Jones AK: Pain and
stroop interference tasks activate separate
processing modules in ACC Exp. Brain Res 1998;
118: 52–60.
40. T o l l e T R , K a u f m a n n T , S i e s s m e i e r T , e t a l .
Region specific encoding of sensory and affective
components of pain in the human brain: a
positron emission tomography correlation
analysis. Ann Neurol 1999; 45:40–47.
41. Kumar A, Tandon OP, Bhattacharya A, Gupta
RK, Dhar D. Somatosensory evoked potential
changes following electro-puncture therapy in
chronic pain patients. Anaesthesia 1995; 50: 411–
414.
42. G r a c e l y R H . P a i n l a n g u a g e a n d i d e a l p a i n
assessment. In: Mezlack R (ed.). Pain
measurement and assessment. Raven Press, New
York, 1983
43. Engen T. Psychophysics II: Scaling methods. In:
Kling JW, Riggs W (Eds). Experimental
r
Psychology, 3 Edn. Holt, New York, 1971.
44. P r i n c e D D , H a r k i n s S W , B a k e r C . S e n s o r y affective relationship among different type of
clinical and experimental pain. Pain 1987; 28:

Neurophysiology of Pain : Insight of Orofacial Pain 267
297–308.
45. H u s k i s s o n E C . V i s u a l a n a l o g u e s c a l e s . I n :
Melzack R (ed.). Pain measurement and
assessment. Raven Press, New York, 1983; p33–
37.
46. Sriwatanakul K, Kelvie W, Lasagna L, Calimlim
JF, Weis OF, Mehta G. Studies with different
type of visual analogue scales for measurement
of pain. Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics
1983; 34:234–239.
47. Choinere M, Melzack R, Girard N, RondeanJ,
Paquin MJ. Comparisons between patients and
nurses assessments of pain and medication
efficacy in sever burn injuries. Pain 1990; 40;
143–152.
48. Ohnhaus EE, Adler R. Methadologic problems
in the measurement of pain: a comparison
between the verbal rating scale and the visual
analogue scale. Pain 1975;1:374–384.
49. E k b l o m A , H a n s s o n P . P a i n i n t e n s i t y
measurement with acute pain receiving afferent
stimulation. J Neurol Neurosurg and Psychiatry
1988; 51:481–486.
50. Price DD, Mc Grath PA, Rafii A, Buckingham B.
the validation of visual analogue scale as ratio
scale measure for chronic and experimental pain.
Pain 1983.17:45–46.
51. Melzack R. The McGill Pain Questionnaire: major
properties and scoring methods. Pain 1975,
1:277–299.
52. F e r n a n d e z - G o n z a l e z F , S e i j o F , V a l l e s
C,
Fernadez-AlonsoR.
Neurophysiological
monitoring in the treatment of pain. Rex Neurol
2000 Mar 16–31, 30 (6): 567–76.
53. Goff WR, Allison T, Vaughan HG. The functional
neuroanatomy of event related potentials. In:
Event-related brain potentials in man. Academic
Press, New York 1979:1–91.
54. Tandon OP. Electroencephalogram and Evoked
Potentials. In Sircar S. Medical Physiology
Volume II: Chapter 11.16: pg 989–996.
55. Mc Carthy G, Wood CC, William PP, Spencer
DD. Tak dependent field potentials in human
hippocampal formation. J Neuro Sci 1989;9:
4253–4268
56. Kumar S, Tandon OP. Cognitive functions in
chronic pain patients-Electrophysiological study.
Indian Journal Physiol Pharmacol 1992; 36: No
5-Supplement.

268

Tandon et

al

57. Kumar S, Tandon OP. Event related cerebral
potentials in chronic pain. ISPRAT Publications,
International Conference on Pain Oct 8–10,
1993;A87.
58. Tandon OP, Saxena A, Kumar S. P3 event related
cognitive evoked potential in chronic pain.
Society of Neuroscience A b s t r a c t b o o k , 1 1 Th
Annual Scientific Meeting of American Pain
Society. Oct 1992. San Diego;1993;Code-NS-764.
59. Tandon OP, Kumar S. CNV in chronic pain.
Abstract Book. IBRO World Congress of Neurosc ,
July 1995, Japan.
60. Tandon OP, Kumar A, Dhar D, Bhattacharya A.
Event related evoked potential responses (P300)
following epidural Methyprednisolone therapy in
chronic low back pain patients. Anaesthesia
1997;52 (12): 1173–1176.
61. Walter WG, Cooper R, Aldridge VJ, Mc Callum
WC, Winter A Contingent negative variation: an
electric sign of sensori-motor association and
expectancy in the human brain. Nature (Lond)
1964; 203, 380–384.
62. Kumar S, Mathur R, Rao PS, Dureja GP, Nayar
U. Contingent Negative Variation response to
increasing strength of electric imperative stimuli.
Abstract Book, 6th International Evoked
Potential Symposium, March 1998, Okaki,
Japan, pg 176.
63. Kumar S, Mathur R, Rao PS, Dureja GP. A
simple method for measuring acute experimental
pain in humans. Abstract book, International
Conference on Pain , Feb 2000, Dharan, Nepal.
64. T a n d o n O P , K u m a r S . C o n t i n g e n t n e g a t i v e
variation response in chronic pain patients.
Indian J. Physiol. Pharmacol 1996; 40n(3): 257–
261.

Indian J Physiol Pharmacol 2003; 47(3)
69. Seltzer SF, Yarczower M. Selecting encoding and
retrieval of affective words during exposure to
aversive stimulation. Pain 1991; 47:47–51.
70. Chen CAN, Dworkin SF, Hang J, Gehring J.
Human responsivity in a tonic pain model:
psychological determinants. Pain 1989:37:143–
160.
71. Zalansky R, Sprecher E, Katz Y, Rozenberg B,
Hemli JA, Yarnitsky D. Pain evoked potentials
what do they rally measure? Electroencephalgr.
Clin Neurophysiol 1996; Sep;100 (5):384–391.
72. Casey KL. Forebrain mechanisms of nociception
and pain analysis through imaging. Proc Natl
Acad Sci 1999; 14: 7668–7674.
73. Schnitzler A, Ploner M. Neurophysiology and
Functional Neuroanatomy of Pain Perception.
Journal of Clinical Neurophysiology 2000: 17(6):
592–603. Dubner R, Sersie BJ, Stony AT: The
neural basis of oral and facial Function.
Newyork. Blemnn 1978. Pg83.
74. Wall PD, Melzack R. Textbook of Pain. New
York, Churchill-Livingstone, 1984.
75. Le Resche L. Epidemiology of orofacial pain. In:
Lund JP, Lavigne GJ, Dubner R, Sesle BJ, eds.
Orofacial
Pain,
Chapter
2.
Chicago,
Quintessence Publications 2001.
76. Bennett CR. Monheim’s Local Anaesthesia and
Pain Control in Dental Practice. In: “Pain” Chap.
I, First Indian Edn. 1990. p 1-24. CBS Publishers
& Distributors.
77. Brannstorm M, Johnson G. Movements of the
dentine and pulp liquids on application of thermal
stimuli. An in-vitro study. Acta Odontol Scand
1970: 28: 59–70.

65. Rizzo PA. Pain anxiety and CNV variation: a
clinical and pharmacological study. Bio Psychiat
1985;20:197–1302

78. Brannstrom M, Astrom A. The hydrodynamics
of the dentine, its possible relationships
to dentinal pain. Int Dent J 1972: 22:219–
227.

66. Gaughan AM, Gracely RH. A somatostatin model
of repressed negative emotions: defensiveness
increases affective rating of thermal pain
sensations. Society of Behavioral Medicine
Abstracts 1989.

79. Fow UG, Ahlquist MA, Skagerwall RA, Edward
LG, Hagerstam GAT. Realtion between
intradental nerve activity and estimated pain in
man-a mathematical analysis. Pain 1984
(18):397–408.

67. C o r n w a l l A , D o n d e r i D C . T h e e f f e c t o f
experimentally induced anxiety on the experience
of pressure pain. Pain 1988; 35:105–113.

80. Franzeni O, Berkley M. Apparent contrast as
function of modulation depth and spatial
frequency comparison between perceptual and
electrophysiological measures. Vision Res 1975:
15: 655–680.

68. Zelman DC, Howland EW, Nicholas SV, Cleeland
CS. The effects of induced mood on laboratory
pain. Pain 1991; 46: 105–111.

81. A h l q u i s t

ML,

EdwallLE,

Franzen

OG,

Indian J Physiol Pharmacol 2003; 47(3)

Neurophysiology of Pain : Insight of Orofacial Pain 269

Haegerstam GAT. Perception of pulpal pain as a
function of intradental nerve activity, Pain 1984:
19: 353–366.

Somatosensory evoked potentials following
trigeminal neuralgia. Ann Neurol 1981; 9: 63–
66.

82. Cohen S. Diagnostic procedures. In S. Cohen
rd
and RC Burns (Eds.), Pathways of the Pulp, 3
edition, Mosby St. Lois, Mo, USA, 1984, p31.

94. S t o h r M , P e t r u c h F . S o m a t o s e n s o r y e v o k e d
potentials following stimulation of the trigeminal
nerve in man. J Neurol 1979; 220: 95–98.

83. Ahlquist ML, Franzen OG, Edwall LE, Foss UG,
Haegerstam GAT. Quality of pain sensations
following local application of algogenic agents
on the exposed human tooth pulp: a
psychophysical and electrophysiological study: In
H.L. Fields, Dubner R., and F Cervero (Eds.).
Advances in Pain Research and Therapy, Vol9,
Raven, New York, 1985, pp 351–359.

95. Bennett AJ, Wastell DG, Backer GR, Blackwurn
CW, Rood JP. Trigeminal somatosensory evoked
potentials. Int J Oral Maxillofacial Surg 1987;
16: 408–415.

84. Ahlquist ML, Franzen OG, Edwall LE, Foss UG,
Haegerstam GAT. The relation between
intradental nerve activity and pulpal pain after
heat stimulation, Acta Physiol Scand 1986, 127,
1–7.
85. M u m f o r d J M . O r o f a c i a l P a i n . A e t i o l o g y ,
Diagnosis and Treatment. 3rd Edn. 1982
Churchill Livingstone.
86. Greenwood LF, Sesle BJ. Inputs to trigeminal
brain stem neurons from facial, oral, tooth-pulp
and pharyngolaryngeal tissues:II Role of
trigeminal N. caudalis in modulating responses
to innocuous and noxious stimuli. Brain Res
1976: 117: 24–238.
87. K r u g e r L . F u n c t i o n a l s u b d i v i s i o n s o f t h e
brainstem sensory trigeminal nuclear complex.
Adv Pain Res Ther 1979:3:197–209.
88. Kruger L, Young RF. Specialised features of
trigeminal nerve and its central connections. In
Samii M, Jannetta PJ. (eds.): The cranial nerves.
1981, pp 273-301.
89. M o s s o J A , K r u g e r L . R e c e p t o r c a t e g o r i e s
represented in spinal trigeminal nucleus
caudalis. J Neurophysiol 1973:36:472–488.
90. Drechsler F. Short and long latency cortical
potentials following trigeminal nerve stimulation
in man. In: BarberC. (ed): Evoked potentials.
MTP Press, 1980, pp 415–422.
91. Findler G, Feinsod M. Sensory evoked response
to electrical stimulation of trigeminal nerve in
humans. J Neurosurg 1982: 56:545–549.
92. Sing N, Sachdev KK, Brisman R. Trigeminal
stimulation: short latency somatosensory evoked
potentials. Neurol 1982: 32:97–101.
93. S t o h r

M,

Pertruch

E,

Scheglmann

K.

96. B u e t t n e r U W , P e t r u c h F , S c h e g l m a n n K ,
Stohr H. Diagnostic significance of cortical
somatosensory evoked potential following
trigeminal nerve stimulation. In Corrion J.,
Manguiera F., Revol. M. (eds): Advances in
neurology 31. Raven Press, New York 1982, 339345.
97. Findler G, Feinsod M. Trigeminal somatosensory
responses in patients with facial anaesthesia
dolorosa. Acta Neurochir 1982:66: 165–172.
98. F i n d l e r G , F e i n s o d M , S a h a r A . T r i g e m i n a l
neurinoma with unusual presentation, report a
case with trigeminal somatosensory evoked
responses. Surg Neurol 1983:19:351–353.
99. S w e e t W H , W e p s i e J G . C o n t r o l l e d t h e r m o coagulation of trigeminal ganglion and rootlets
for differential destruction of pain fibres
I-Trigeminal Neuralgia. J. Neurisurg. 1974:
40:143-156.
100. Salar G., Mingrino S, Iob T. Alterations of
facial sensations induced by percutaneous
thermoregulation of trigeminal neuralgia. Surg.
Neurol. 1983:19:126-130.
101. Myers CD, White BA, Heft MW. A review of
complementary and alternative medicine use
for treating chronic facial pain..J. Am. Dent.
Assoc 2002 Sep; 133 (9):1189-96; quiz 1259-60.
102. Melzack R. Acupuncture and related forms of
folk medicine. In: Wall PD, Melzack R, eds.
st
Textbook of Pain, I
edn. Edinburg: Churchill
Livingstone, 1984:691-700.
103. Lianfang HE. Involvement of endogenous opiod
peptides in acupuncture analgesia. Pain
1987;31: 99-121.
104. Kumar A, Tandon OP, Dam S, Bhattacharya
A, Tyagi KK. Brain stem auditory evoked
response changes following electropuncture
therapy in chronic pain patients. Anaesthesia
1994;49:387-90.

