Indian J.Sci.Res. 15 (2): 20-24, 2017

ISSN: 2250-0138 (Online)

ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPH (EEG) BASED BRAIN COMPUTER INTERFACE
(BCI) FOR CONTROLLING REAL TIME ROBOT ARM
E. MADHUSUDAN RAJUa1, L. SIVA RAMA KRISHNAb, SAJID ALIc AND V. NAGESWARA
RAOd
abcd

Department of Mechanical Engineering, University College of Engineering, Osmania University, Hyderabad – 500 007, India

ABSTRACT
In this paper, development of non-invasive neural signals to drive a 2R robotic arm is presented. A brain computer
interface based on steady state visual evoked potentials (SSVEP) is used. For stimulation stimuli arrow with different
colours (red, black and violet) is used that flicker with different frequencies of 6.5 and 8.2 Hz respectively. PYTHON is
used for online signal acquisition and MATLAB signal processing and analysis tool is used to analyse signals. Emotiv
EPOC and Arduino are used as hardware devices to receive and transmit signals respectively. At last, signals are given as a
commands through Arduino to a hardware experimental setup. The goal of our study is to control navigation of robot
“turn right”, “turn left” through neural signals acquired by EEG database.

KEYWORDS: Emotiv EPOC- A Brain Computer Interface, Python, MATLAB, ARDUINO, 2R Robotic Arm
The advancement of technologies in this era
has great impacts on human life. Now, people are able
to travel faster and communicate in a more convenient
way than in the past. Assistive computers and
machines provide conventional input devices such as a
keyboard, a mouse, or a joystick to be operated by the
users. These devices are, however, difficult to be used
by elderly or disabled individuals. For this reason,
special interfaces such as sip-and-puff systems, single
switches, and eye-tracking systems have been
proposed [1]. Nevertheless, these specials interfaces do
not work for people suffering from severe
neuromuscular diseases who cannot convey their
intentions or operations to computers or machines with
these interfaces. Consequently, even autonomous
electric wheelchairs are unable to transport disabled
people to their desired locations. Hence, there exists a
growing demand and necessity for developing an
alternative interface that can be used by the severely
disabled population for communication with
autonomous systems.
Brain-computer interface (BCI) system has
been developed to address this challenge. BCIs are
systems that can bypass conventional channels of
communication, i.e. muscles and speech, to provide
direct communication and control between the human
brain and physical devices by translating different
patterns of brain activity into commands in real-time
[2].
A brain-computer interface (BCI) is a
software and hardware system for establishing direct
communication between human and computer, which
enables people to send commands to the external world
through brain activities, without depending on brain’s

1

Corresponding author

normal output pathway of peripheral nerves and
muscles activities [3].

LITERATURE REVIEW
Hovagim Bakardjian, et al. [4]’s work aimed
to address directly the above problems by presenting
and optimizing two new multi-command BCI designs
based on Steady-State Visual Evoked Potential
(SSVEP) brain responses. Hamzah S. Alzu’bi, et al.
[8]’s thesis develops a set of prepossessing, feature
extraction and classification methods that were
implemented to help support and validate the proposed
system and to benchmark it against the latest
developed systems in BCI literature. Ruen Shan Leow,
et al. [10]’s paper presents the development of the realtime brain computer interface (BCI) system based on
the detection of steady-state visual evoked potential
(SSVEP).R. Singla, A. Khosla, R. Jha, et al. [25] in
their study of four different flickering frequencies in
low frequency region were used to elicit the SSVEPs
and were displayed on a Liquid Crystal Display (LCD)
monitor using Lab- VIEW. Four stimuli colors, green,
red, blue and violet were used to investigate the color
influence in SSVEPs.

PROBLEM DEFINITION
This paper aims to develop a real-time
SSVEP-based BCI system for command and control of
a Robot Arm. For effective SSVEP response, which is
dependent on colour and size of flickers and distance
(form observer to subject), the dominating one of these
is colour. three different colours like red, violet and
black are used to check for the optimal colour which
gave approximate frequency equal to the frequency of
flickers. The scope of the work described in this paper
includes:

RAJU ET. AL.: ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPH (EEG) BASED BRAIN COMPUTER INTERFACE (BCI) FOR
FOR…

 Development of visual stimuli that give the best
SSVEP response by using high timing precision
software such as Psychophysics Toolbox from
MATLAB
 Development and implementation of feature
extraction and classification algorithms for realtime EEG signals processing and command
recognition
 Development of a hardware interface between host
laptop and the targeted Robot Arm
time evaluation on the constructed
 Perform real-time
system

SSVEP Stimuli and Display
The visual stimuli consist of four arrows
occupying a black background with one red fixation
cross at the centre as shown in Fig. 3 The four arrows
point to four different directions which represents the
commands that subjects can generate to control the
Robot Arm.

RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
Overview

Figure 3: SSVEP visual stimuli generated by using
Psychophysics Toolbox in MATLAB
Import Data in Matlab
After opening Matlab, import icon will
appear on toolbar. Click on it, select the file to be
imported, and then click on import selection button,
which will import the file.
Figure 1: Conceptual block diagram of the
proposed SSVEP-based Robot Arm control system
EEG Recording System
In this work,, the acquisition of EEG signal is
performed by using a 16-channel
channel Emotiv EPOC EEG
recording system with sintered Ag/AgCl active
electrodes. This amplifier relies on the novel concept
that high impedance provides stable and noisenoise
insensitive signals. While it is supported by the 10
10-20
international electrode system, highest standard of
EEG signal quality is always guaranteed.

Figure 2: The 16-channel Emotiv EPOC EEG
layout and the device

Figure 4: Shows import icon with blue circle
Bandpass Filtering of Raw EEG Signals
The isolation of raw EEG signals is to
remove the unwanted artefact
fact components. In this
work, frequencies which do not fall within the alpha
and beta bands are eliminated because they do not
reflect visual processing in occipital region. This is
achieved by constructing a 4th order Butterworth
Infinite-Impulse Responsee (IIR) bandpass filter with a
passband of 12 Hz to 30 Hz using the Signal
Processing Toolbox in MATLAB.
The transfer function of IIR filters includes
both numerator and denominator terms and are
returned by the routine butter as row vectors ‘b’ and

RAJU ET. AL.: ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPH (EEG) BASED BRAIN COMPUTER INTERFACE (BCI) FOR
FOR…

‘a’ in the length of n+1, where n is the order of the
filter, in descending powers of s, derived from this
transfer function:
Hs 

B s b1s
b2s  ⋯ bn 1

As
s
a2s  ⋯ an 1

Figure 6: Frequency Analysis using FFT
Data Classification

Figure 5: shows raw and filtered signal
Spectral Analysis and Feature Extraction Using
Fourier Transform

FFT plot between frequency on x-axis
x
and
magnitude on y-axis. The thing here is, unwanted
frequency components which are below 6 Hz, that’s
why set the threshold to 0.6 percentage of the
magnitude, which altered the lower frequency.

To transform the discrete EEG data from
time domain into frequency domain, the basic Fourier
Transform routine fft(x,n) in MATLAB is
implemented. The fft routine returns the discrete
Fourier Transform (DFT) of any input vector x and
computed with a high-speed
speed Fourier Transform
algorithm. In fact, DFT is applicable to windowed
signal segments to perform a direct examination of
information encoded in the frequency, phase, and
amplitude of the component sinusoids. For n sample
transform,, the fft routine is implemented according to
the formula:





Xk   xne


k  1,2
2,3, … , N

where xn is the sample data at time index
of n, Xk is the vector of N values at frequency index
of k corresponding to the magnitude of the sine waves
ass resulting from the decomposition of the time
indexed signal.

Figure 7: Classification by setting the Threshold
Frequency
Hardware Implementation
Experimental setup is represented in the
below figure. Two servo motors
rs are used, motor 1 and
motor 2 as indicated two joints of RR Manipulator.

RAJU ET. AL.: ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPH (EEG) BASED BRAIN COMPUTER INTERFACE (BCI) FOR…

It is clear from the above table that the violet
colour is giving nearly exact frequency to that of
visual stimulus flickering. Violet colour with 6.5 Hz,
and for four different samples, giving an average of
6.68125 Hz which is 0.18125 Hz greater than the
flickering frequency. Violet colour with 8.2 Hz and
for four different samples, giving an average of 7.9
Hz which is 0.3 Hz lesser than the flickering
frequency.

CONCLUSION
Figure 8: Experimental setup

 This paper provides an overview of the background
theories on EEG-based BCI system. The
explanations give an idea on the generation and
transportation of electrical signals within the neural
networks in the brain. Different cortical functions
are mapped to different regions of the cerebral
cortex. This enables us to correctly and effectively
extract the information of interest for analysis
purposes.
 Results of our work, have found Violet Colour is
the efficient which gives the approximate frequency
to the RVS, for 6.5 Hz, obtained 6.681 Hz and for
8.2 Hz, obtained 7.9 Hz which is far better than the
other 2 colours.

Figure 9: Time of actual flipping interval

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

REFERENCES

Fig 9 shows the time course of actual
flipping interval for one of the flickering arrows (10
Hz) presented. Notice that one complete cycle to flick
the arrow from white to black and back to white again
consumes an average time of 0.097315 s, which
approximately equals to 10.2759 Hz.

Luzheng Bi, Xin-An Fan, and Yili Liu, 2013. “EEGBased Brain-Controlled Mobile Robots: A
Survey”, IEEE Trans. Human-Machine Syst.,
43(2):161-176.

Table 1: Comparing of three colour and Average
value
Freq
uenc
y in
Hz

Sl
.
N
o.
1.

Red

3.

6.62
5
6.87
5
6.5

4.
1.

7.25
7.5

2.

7.62
5
8.75

6.5
2.

Colour
Blac Viol
k
et
6.75
6.8
6.62
5
6.75
12

8.2

3.
4.

7.37
5

7.5
9.92
5
7.62
5

6.62
5
6.5

Red

6.81
25

Average
Black
Violet

6.731
25

6.6812
5

6.8
6.8
7.62
5
7.75
8.5
7.72
5

Indian J.Sci.Res. 15 (2): 20-24, 2017

7.81
25

9.262
5

7.9

Millan J.D.R., Rupp R., Muller-Putz G.R., MurraySmith R., Giugliemma C., Tangermann M.,
Vidaurre C., Cincotti F., Kubler A., Leeb R.,
Neuper C., Muller K.R. and Mattia D., 2010.
“Combining brain-computer interfaces and
assistive technologies state-of-the-art and
challengers”, Frontiers Neurosci., 4:1-15.
Nikolay C., Nikolay V.M., Marijn van V., Arne R.,
Adrien C. and Marc M.V.H., 2013. “SteadyState Visual Evoked Potential-Based
Computer Gaming on a Consumer-Grade
EEG Device”, IEEE Trans. Computational
Intelligence and AI in Games, 5(2):100-110.
Hovagim B., 2010. “Optimization of Steady-State
Visual Responses for Robust BrainComputer Interfaces”, Ph.D. dissertation,
Dept. Electron. and Inform. Eng., Tokyo
Univ. of Agriculture and Technology.
Khan M.H. and Laique T., 2011. “An evaluation of
Gaze and EEG-based control of a mobile
robot”, Master Thesis, School of Computing,
Blekinge
Institute
of
Technology,
Karlskrona, Sweden.

RAJU ET. AL.: ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPH (EEG) BASED BRAIN COMPUTER INTERFACE (BCI) FOR…

Nicolas-Alonso L.F. and Gomez-Gil J., 2012. “Brain
Computer Interfaces, a Review”, Sensors,
12(2):1211-1279.
Laureys S., Boly M. and Tononi G., 2009.
“Functional
Neuroimaging”,
In
The
Neurology of Consciousness, Steven, L.,
Giulio, T., Eds., Academic Press: New York,
NY, USA, pp. 31–42.
Alzu’bi H.S., 2011. “Prepocessing and feature
extraction for asynchronous multi-class
noninvasive brain-computer interface based
on EEG signal”, Master Thesis, Masdar
Institute of Science and Technology.

Indian J.Sci.Res. 15 (2): 20-24, 2017

Setare A., Ahmed R., Leila A. and Reza F.-R., 2013.
“A Review of P300, SSVEP, and Hybrid
P300/SSVEP Brain-Computer Interface
Systems, Brain-Computer Interface Systems
- Recent Progress and Future Prospects”, Dr.
Reza Fazel-Rezai (Ed.), ISBN: 978-953-511134-4, In Tech, DOI: 10.5772/56135.
Leow R.S., Moghavvemi M. and Ibrahim F., 2010.
“An efficient low-cost real-time brain
computer interface system based on SSVEP”,
IEICE Electronics Express, 7(5):326-331.

