International Journal of Bioscience, Biochemistry and Bioinformatics, Vol. 3, No. 6, November 2013

Hardware Simulator for Seizure, Preseizure and Normal
Mode Signal Generation in LabVIEW Environment for
Research
Uvais Qidwai, Aamir Saeed Malik, Mohamed Shakir, and Nidal Kamel


Abstract—Currently numerous theories and model have
been developed to associate various findings or in relating EEG
patterns to develop a software simulator. Here we develop a
hardware simulator of the EEG model or to simulator any
EEG data set in either .edf or .tdmsot .txtformat from any
patient or database depository. The proposed hardware
simulator will enhance researchers and hardware validators to
simulate, validate and test their detection algorithms forehand,
before actual testing the algorithm in the actual standalone
hardware. This system make use of signal generator block and
then pass this data to the external hardware data acquisition
system like the NI-DAQ with an external option to transfer the
data wirelessly(Bluetooth, Zigbee, Wi-Fi) or wired (analog port,
serial bus etc). This simulator can simulate or generate seizure,
pre-seizure and normal EEG waveform. The paired cost
effective Arduino microcontroller (in case of wireless system)
will be having the algorithm in built in order to classify the
type of signal received. This can help in developing wearable
EEG Seizure monitoring system(WBAN-HL7). Thispaper will
enhance the purpose of developing a system which can alert
locally in a form of wearable gadget, whenever a pre-seizure
occurs. This can help the epileptic patient or the user to take
precautionary action to save themselves from accidents or
injury, just before the occurrence of the seizure. Useable of this
embedded wearable version can ensure a better everyday
activities and the psychological stress can be reduces to
leverage the social interaction.
Index Terms—Bio-signal, simulator, embedded system,
Bluetooth, EEG, seizure, pre-seizure.

I. INTRODUCTION
The EEG bio-signal hardware simulator is intended for
designing, to develop algorithms, signal processing as a
portable system [1], [2], by utilizing the power of LabVIEW
and to implement it into an embedded Data Acquisition
System (DAQ). The user can view the signal and transmit
the EEG data to a remote microcontroller system for inhouse data processing and identification, this can be used for
validating wearable bio signal system before implementing
the actual wearable epilepsy detection system, moreover this
simulator can be used as a virtual environment simulator
[3]for generating EEG signals and can be used for fine
tuning the and rehearse theproduct (wearable system).This
can also be built on the approach of dataflow in graphical
form, with the integration of hardware signal output. Thisas
a platformenables us to focus on the system design, even if

II. METHOD AND DESIGN
When it comes to designing algorithms for low power
platforms, which is constrained by memory and
computational limitations [6], simulators play an important
role in optimization.First, a dedicated systemforthisintension
isbuilttoimprove with respect to the current system
limitations, associated to approach of hefty processing, realtime healthcare facility accessibility andproperanalysis.In
the simulator, the peak positions are not invariable, but may
change from one region to another [7]. This paper presents
the procedure to simulate the EEG signal in LabVIEW
environment and to detect the presence of healthy EEGvs.
Pre-seizure/Seizure signal, here then to be detected by the
cost effective microcontroller. Since there is no much realtime data on EEG patients, the selection of EEG zones are
simulated with respect to the alarm priority and
threestatesare alsoselectedfor the testing and execution in

Manuscript received May 10, 2013; revised July 12, 2013.
Uvais Qidwai is with the Computer Engineering Department, Qatar
University, Qatar.
Aamir Saeed Malik, Mohamed Shaki, and Nidal Kamel are with the
Neuro-Signal Processing Group, Centre for Intelligent Signal and Imaging
Research, Universiti Teknologi PETRONAS, Tronoh, Perak, Malaysia.

DOI: 10.7763/IJBBB.2013.V3.282

lots of other languages for programming are accessible for
constructing or generating the analog EEG signals and the
specific part of the signal. The control of a rapid transition
from a one psycho-physicalstate to another [4] is easily
attainable with an EEG simulator, In LabVIEW, basically
the biomedical tool kit provides applications which are
Ready-to-run. They in cooperate File Format Converter
Player, Biosignal Datalogger, Biosignal Generator, File
Viewer, Blood Pressure (BP) Analyzer, Image
Reconstruction of image in 3D, Feature Extractor for ECG,
Variability Analyzer for the heartbeat rate. All the common
file types’ conversions are possible like the TDMS
extension
(National
Instruments
Technical
Data
Management Streaming), including ACQ, iWorx,
Biopac, .edf, .mat, .txt and HL7. This tool kit is also
capable of implementing algorithms for the signal
processing on EEG and ECG bio signals. It also enables
signal simulation of the signal, analysis of coherence and bispectral EEG, extraction of specific feature of the ECG, and
power analysis of the EMG waveform, predefined virtual
simulators for electroencephalography (EEG) and
electrocardiogram (ECG). This system helps for the system
which can be implemented and for the investigations of tiny,
one-channel electroencephalogram systems in an
ambulatory setting [5]. We will be using a part of this tool
kit only just to validate the LabVIEW program build
specifically to test the program data flow and its
functionality to generate the Seizure signal via a DAQ and
to transmit to a in range microcontroller. The
microcontroller reads the data from either the serial SPP port
or via the inline analog to digital convertor port.

588

International Journal of Bioscience, Biochemistry and Bioinformatics, Vol. 3, No. 6, November 2013

the initial prototype of the whole system. Here the program
is used to simulate the abnormal EEG morphology [8], this
program in the LabVIEWhas two mode of operation: 1) read
the existing files recordings from a database or from the
patient offline with contains normal, pre-seizure and seizure
waveforms and 2) simulate a simple EEG model , when can
simulate normal, pre-seizure and seizure waveform.
In Fig. 1, the system demonstrates a general setup for the
experimentation and functioning flow. Here, the EEG signal
waveform is fed from the LabVIEW to a NI-DAQ, which is
available from commercially or for freely available data
base which contains normal, pre-seizure and seizure datasets.
Any abnormal data reflects that there are abnormal activities
in the EEG signal [9] and the program should be set to
activate an alarm with respect to a set point in the program.

Fig. 2. Overall functional system.

III. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
Byusing the LabVIEW Data Flow program, the spike
wave and the multi-spike wave of the EEG morphology are
reconstructed [10] from the text file. In NI X Series from
National Instrumentsis aUSB compatible device for
acquisition of data. This multifunctional device have high
performance digital I/O, control channels, counter/timers
and analog measurement onto the portable wireless
microcontroller (ArduinoLilypad in this test bench case). By
using this device, we can extend the applications from
multiple
microcontroller
data-logging
applications,
measurement and portable test. This device has four analog
outputs, thirty two analog inputs, four counters and forty
eight I/O digital lines.It also has Analog input which is
multiplexed simultaneous sampling up to 2 Mega Samples
per second per channel. This device supported with
flowchart type graphical programming with LabVIEW. In
case of real time EEG acquisition of data, we can directly
wire the channel signal to the analog input for post
processing including classification and identification of
seizure types. This device also supports more accurate
triggering, advanced timing, synchronization and high speed
bidirectional real time streaming of signal and data by using
NI-STC3 protocol technology. This protocol supports
dedicated digital Input-Output and analog subsystems with
independent timing engines for parallel digital I/O and
analog to execution at different frequency synchronization
with the help of 32-bit counters. This counter can also be
used for encoders pulse width modulation(PWM). This
device can also be used for recording and analyzing
transient time.
The only disadvantage with this DAQ is that if we want to
record and analyze more than 4 channels of EEG signals of
the real time patients, then we have to use Analog-Digital
MUX. So an additional 16 channels can be added. Digital to

Analog convertor. If we wanted to transmit more than four
channels by reading from the EEG database to the
microcontroller via NI-DAQ, then we have to use parallel
8/16/32 bit Digital to Analog Convertor (DAC). This
depends on the number of available digital I/O pins. In this
workbench, we have 32 I/O pins; therefore we can create an
additional four more ADC ports with a resolution of 8/10/12
bits per channel (in case of 8-bit parallel DAC we use
AD5330 from analog devices).
In the subset of the program, the abnormal EEG dataset
indicates central nervous system abnormality [11], cognitive
states such as alertness and arousal [12]. This system also
have the option to acquire in real time via EEG headsets like
128 channel headset or 16 channel head set like the Emotiv,
and then transmit to the microcontroller for validation of the
algorithm developed in order to identify by classification the
state of pre-seizure in order to eliminate false prediction as
much as possible. Once the algorithms have identified the
pre-seizure, immediately the alarm is invoked in order to
take precautionary acts to save the patient/user from more
injury or accidents. By using a simulator we can optimize
the electrode position in the patient when it comes to
implementation of standalone microcontroller system to
sense the EEG signal directly from the patient. The lesser
number of ADCs input to the microcontroller, the faster the
response to invoke the alarm. This also helps in simplify the
computational algorithms, moreover frees temporary
memory inside the microcontroller.

Fig. 2. NI-DAQ –X series signal genration unit for EEG simulation.

The Bluetooth module used with the DAQ and
microcontroller is the Bluetooth Mate Gold modem. The
data is transmitted and received by the serial (RX/TX) pipe
pins. This Bluetooth device can transmit and stream data
from 2400 bits per second (bps) to 115200bps to the
microcontroller, with a maximum range of 300 feet distance,
which will be more than sufficient for the connectivity with
the DAQ or the patient carrying the microcontroller with
them.Here the data from the DAQ is transferred to the
microcontroller in a packetized serial data. If there is to send
more than one channel data, the following packet format is
followed to ensure no data have lost in the microcontroller
side:

*adc_channel1;adc_channel2;…adc_channeln#

The microcontroller used in this setup is the mainboard
ArduinoLilypad. This PCB consists of an ATmega328,
589

International Journal of Bioscience, Biochemistry and Bioinformatics, Vol. 3, No. 6, November 2013

which can be operated from 2Volts till 5.5 Volts. This
microcontroller has a surface mount crystal oscillator
clocking at maximum of 8MHz. Atmega328P from Atmel
has fourteen I/0 pin in which , seven of them are ADC, six
PWM pins, one serial Tx/Rx bus,16KB of flash memory,
1KB of SRAM and 512 bytes of EEPROM. This type of
microcontroller has a special type of design in which it can
be used with e-textile wearable technology.
This module can be stitched with cloths.In the wearable
end (user notification point), equipped with we have a local
alarm with vibration in the microcontroller or the mobile
user console to notify the patient/user the occurrence of PreSeizure state in the body of the patient.

when processed by the microcontroller. In the
microcontroller part, the statistical parameters like the
energy, variance, kurtosis, Skewness etc. will be calculated
on individual channel depending upon the user. This enables
selectivity by the microcontroller.
IV. GENERATION OF EEG SIGNAL
The generation of signal from the EEG dataset is
dependent of a number of variables [13]. This dataset
changes from subject to subject and this simulator can
generate any type of EEG signal. The seizure start points
and end points have been clearly described in the database
given by the CHB-MIT database. Before sending the test
signal to the NI-DAQ hardware, the signal should be
checked in the graph to select the start point of the seizure
occurrence, manually by entering the values or parsing from
a text file which contains an array of the file name, time (ms)
and the waveform data. With respect to this, we calculate
pre-seizure, seizure and normal EEG. We have arbitrary
selected pre-seizure as ten seconds before the incidence of
seizure, as per definedfrom the database. Twenty seconds
before the seizure, isthe start point of the normal EEG.

Fig. 3. Schematic of arduino lilypad mega328p used for algorithm.

Fig. 4. Lilypad arduino microcontroller with bluetooth-mate serial modem.
Fig. 6. Sample signal from the EEG data base in labVIEW graph: (a)nonseizure, (b) preseizure and, ( c) paritial seizure.

Fig. 5. Breakout board :(a)Parallel 8-Bit DAC , (b)analog/digital MUX.

In mode one (to simulate and experiment external EEG
database), the EEG signal with pre-seizure and seizure
patients, into the hardware DAQ, the EEG scalp data is used
from CHB-MIT database. This EEG depository consists of
dataset of twenty three patients (129 datasets with more than
one seizure in .edf file format). The database of the EEG
signal is provided by Boston children-hospital. The signals
are sampledat the rate of 256 samples per second, with
sixteen bits of resolution.
Since the hardware simulator emulates the patient for the
microcontroller, we can specifically select the channel to be
transmitted to implement the algorithm on the individual
channel to find out the individual response of the channel

Fig. 7. EEG Simulator module; Arduino BT and Lilypad microcontroller
with bluetooth receiver.

In the case of mode two : we will be simulating an
artificial EEG signal raw signal with respect to a simple
EEG signal model roughly by adding virtual channel mode.
Here this is not imitating any of the patients EEG data.
There this mode can be used in cases where there is no
590

International Journal of Bioscience, Biochemistry and Bioinformatics, Vol. 3, No. 6, November 2013

before transmitting to the microcontroller for classification.
In this mode we can also create customized signal equations
with respect the approximation model of EEG signal and
generate the signal in the LabVIEW user interface program.
Here in the Fig. 7, to Read the EEG signal from the database
then normalize pass it to Alpha and Beta filter and calculate
the statistical variables of the particular waveform and save
it in .txt file for reference. Once the algorithm is finalized in
the microcontroller by using the signals from the EEG
simulator workbench, it can replaced with the real patient
EEG data probe in real time on the fly. In this mode of
operation, the arduino microcontroller will pre-process the
input EEG signal from the human subject and look for a
presizure state. After analysis and classification, if a
preseizure state occurs, the microcontroller will alert locally
and with the Bluetooth link to the mobile device. In future,
we can add additional connectivity to the hospital database
to transfer the time stamp of the occurrence of
seizure/preseizure, location of occurrence and the EEG
signal waveform itself at that time. This will help the
medical doctor to look into more details about the EEG
characteristics of the signal and the subject itself for further
analysis by heuristics data. This software and the hardware
provide support for the education and research of
electrophysiology [14].

access to the real EEG data for simulation. In this mode the
disadvantage is that it is repetitive after each cycle is
executed.
In Fig. 7, the ADC of the ArduinoBT microcontroller
connected to the National Instruments DAQ ADC, which
helps in transferrin the EEG waveform to the Lilypad
microcontroller Bluetooth. The advantage is that it provides
flexibility to the user to design our with EEG signal by using
the Signal Simulator from the signal processing toolbox or
toolkit. We can add noise; add standard signals (sine, sawtooth, triangular etc.) filter before sending it to the external
DAQ.

Fig. 8. Bio signal viewer : front panel-shown all the channel waveform
together (normal case).

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a strategy is presented in order to modify an
existing Data Acquisition/Generation module to function as
an EEG simulator. Such a simulator will be very helpful in
EEG related research since all the initial algorithms can be
tuned to the controlled data first before going to the actual
human subjects. Unlike the commercial ECG simulators, to
the best of our knowledge, there is no such commercially
available system that can be used for such research tasks.
The use of NI device and LabVIEW environment makes it
very user friendly for anyone to develop a device tailored to
their requirements. The data we have used is from actual
patients and the system converts the text files for the data
values into electrical voltages similar to what would be
measured by the EEG probes. Further work is being done in
producing more simulated data based on empirical models
of the real waveforms. With controlled data types,
Healthy/Normal, Seizure, and Pre-Seizure classes, the user
can select the type and work on tuning their algorithms for
detection and classification applications.

Fig. 9. Bio Signal read configuration settings panel: here only the first
channel is selected with a graph window of 10.01 seconds.

REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]
Fig. 10. A functional blockdiagram of the program in LabVIEW for
filtering and saving.

[4]

We can change the frequency, and design filter if needed
591

X. Fan, L. Bi, and Z. Wang, “Detecting emergency situations by
monitoring drivers' states from EEG,” Complex Medical Engineering
(CME), 2012 ICME International Conference, pp. 245-248, 1-4 July
2012.
Z. Khaliliardali, R. Chavarriaga, L. A. Gheorghe, and J. R. del Millan,
“Detection of anticipatory brain potentials during car driving,”
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), 2012 Annual
International Conference of the IEEE, pp. 3829-3832, Aug. 28, 2012Sept. 1, 2012.
N. Katayama, K. Hidaka, A. Karashima, and M. Nakao,
“Development of an immersive virtual reality system for mice,” SICE
Annual Conference (SICE), pp. 791-794, 20-23 Aug. 2012.
A. Borgul, A. Margun, K. Zimenko, A. Kremlev, and A. Krasnov,
“Intuitive control for robotic rehabilitation devices by human-machine
interface with EMG and EEG signals,” Methods and Models in
Automation and Robotics (MMAR), pp. 308-311, 27-30 Aug. 2012.

International Journal of Bioscience, Biochemistry and Bioinformatics, Vol. 3, No. 6, November 2013
[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

J. Duun-Henriksen, R. E. Madsen, L. S. Remvig, C. E. Thomsen, H.
B. D. Sorensen, and T. W. Kjaer, “Automatic Detection of Childhood
Absence Epilepsy Seizures: Toward a Monitoring Device,” Pediatric
Neurology, vol. 46, issue 5, pp. 287-292, May 2012.
S. Ravindran and R. Cole, “Heart rate and epileptic seizure detection
algorithms for low-power platforms,”Biomedical Signal Processing
and Control, vol. 7, issue 3, May 2012.
Z. Ma, W. Zhou, Q. Yuan, and S. Geng, “Simulation of ictal EEG
with a neuronal population model,” Bioelectronics and Bioinformatics
(ISBB), pp. 103-106, 3-5 Nov. 2011.
W. Zhe, M. Hui, Ge. Manling, and G. Dong, “A Simulation of the
Abnormal EEG Morphology by the 3-D Finite Element Method,”
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, IEEE-EMBS, pp. 36203623, 17-18 Jan. 2006.
H. Meng, Z. Wang, M. Ge, X. Jiang, T. Zhang, J. Guo, and G. Dong,
“An Understanding for the Abnormal Spikes of the EEG Simulation
in a 2-D Neural Network,” Engineering in Medicine and Biology
Society, IEEE-EMBS, pp. 3008-3011, Jan. 2006.
M. Ge, G. Dong, H. Meng, L. Wang, S. Yang, B. Wang, and C. Zhao,
“An Abnormal EEG Simulation Based on The Chay Model of An
Excitable Neuron,” Neural Engineering, Conference, pp. 45-47, 1619 March 2005
L. Rankine, H. Hassanpour, M. Mesbah, and B. Boashash, “Newborn
EEG simulation from nonlinear analysis,” in Proc. The Eighth
International Symposium Signal Processing and Its Applications, pp.
191-194, August 28-31, 2005.
R. C. Wu, C. T. Lin, S. F. Liang, T. Y. Huang, Y. C. Chen, and T. P.
Jung, “Estimating driving performance based on EEG spectrum and
fuzzy neural network,” in Proc. Neural Networks, 29 July 2004.
C. Janeczko and H. S. Lopes, “A genetic approach to ARMA filter
synthesis for EEG signal simulation,” Evolutionary Computation, pp.
373-378, vol. 1, 2000.
M. J. Quist, F. Zanow, and P. J. M. Cluitmans, “Design of
physiological source analysis software for educational purposes,” in
Proc. The 19th Annual International Conference of the IEEE
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, vol. 3, pp. 1044-1047,
vol. 3, 30 Oct. 1997.

Malaysia, and Pakistan, and has published over 95 papers in reputable
journals and conference proceedings.
Aamir Saeed Malik has a BS in electrical engineering
from University of Engineering & Technology, Lahore,
Pakistan, MS in Nuclear Engineering from Quaid-iAzam University, Islamabad, Pakistan, another MS in
Information & Communication and PhD in Information
& Mechatronics from Gwangju Institute of Science &
Technology, Gwangju, Republic of Korea. He has more
than 10 years of research experience and has worked for GoP, IBM, and
Hamdard University in Pakistan, and Yeungnam and Hanyang Universities
in South Korea. He is currently working at Universiti Teknologi Petronas
as Associate Professor in Malaysia. He holds the responsibility as a
Director at UTP-MOR (Mission Oriented Research) - Biomedical
Technology. He is Senior Member of IEEE. His research interests include
image processing, 3D shape recovery, medical imaging, Health
informatics, EEG signal processing and content based image retrieval
(CBIR).

Mohamed Shakir received the B.Tech degree in
Applied Electronics and Instrumentation from MES
College of Engineering, Calicut University, India, in
2005 and the M.S. degree in Electrical Engineering
from Washington International University, USA in
2011. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in
Electrical Engineering at Univeristi Teknologi
Petronas, Malaysia. From 2011 to 2014, he was a
Research Assistant with the Computer Engineering Department, Qatar
University, Qatar. His research interest includes Robotics, Assistive
Technology, Interfacing, Bio-Signal processing of biological/medical
systems.

Nidal Kamel received the PhD degree (Hons) from
the Technical University of Gdansk, Poland, in 1993.
His PhD work was focused on subspace-based array
signal processing for direction of-arrival estimation.
Since 1993 he has been involved in research projects
related to estimation theory, noise reduction, optimal
filtering, and pattern recognition. He developed SNR
estimator for antenna diversity combining, singletrial subspace-based technique for EEG extraction form brain background
noise, and introduced a subspace-based data glove system for online
signature verification. His present research interest is in brain signal
processing, image enhancement, and pattern recognition. Currently, he is
Associate Professor at the PETRONAS University of Technology. He is
IEEE senior member.

Uvais Qidwai received his Ph.D(EE). from the
University of Massachusetts–Dartmouth USA in
2001, MS(EE) in 1997 from KFUPM Saudi Arabia,
and BS(EE) in 1994 from NED University of
Engineering & Technology, Karachi, Pakistan. He
taught in the Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science Department, Tulane University, in New
Orleans as Assistant Professor, and was in-charge of
the Robotics lab as well as a research member of Missile Defence Centre,
during June 2001 to June 2005. He joined the Computer Science and
Engineering Department, Qatar University, in FALL of 2005 where he is
currently working as Associate Professor. Dr. Qidwai’s present research
interests include Robotics, Signal and Image Processing, Expert Systems
design for Industrial Applications, and Intelligent Algorithms for medical
informatics. He has participated in several government- and industryfunded projects in the United States, Saudi Arabia, Qatar, UAE, Singapore,

592

