Proceedings of the Federated Conference on
DOI: 10.15439/2018F296
Computer Science and Information Systems pp. 913–917 ISSN 2300-5963 ACSIS, Vol. 15

An Analysis of Game-Related Emotions Using EMOTIV EPOC
Jerzy Kosiński, Krzysztof Szklanny

Alicja Wieczorkowska

Marcin Wichrowski

Polish-Japanese Academy of Information
Technology ul. Koszykowa 86, 02-008
Warsaw, Poland
Email: {s9347, kszklanny}@pjwstk.edu.pl}

Polish-Japanese Academy of
Information ul. Koszykowa 86,
02-008 Warsaw, Poland
Email: alicja@poljap.edu.pl

Polish-Japanese Academy of
Information Technology ul.
Koszykowa 86, 02-008 Warsaw,
Poland. Email:
mati@pjwstk.edu.pl

Abstract— Computer games represent a very popular form of
entertainment. Therefore, playing games became an object of
interest for researchers. The research on the brain activity of
players when playing a game is an experimental contribution to
the neurophysiology of the central nervous system, and it also
supports marketing research.
Devices that register electromagnetic waves generated by the
brain, e.g. EEG (Electroencephalography) can be used by
psychologists studying the impact of games on users when the
game. Our goal was to analyze emotion changes while playing
video games, based on EEG signal registered with EMOTIV
EPOC headset, and identify the strongest emotions
accompanying the game. We also wanted to link emotions to
particular elements of the game. Game developers, especially
educational and therapeutic, can use the outcomes of this work
in the practical implementation of the brain-computer
interfaces in their products, in order to create better and more
engaging games.

I. INTRODUCTION

II. CONSUMER EEG DEVICES

E

LECTROENCELOGRAPHY (EEG) is a noninvasive
examination of brain function, using electrodes attached
to the scalp. These electrodes record the electric field
(electric potential) generated by the brain. Analysis of EEG
records provides information on the activity of specific areas
of the brain. EEG examinations are performed routinely as
part of neurological diagnostics of the central nervous
system. An important medical application of EEG is the
diagnosis of coma and of brain death. EEG is also used as a
tool in neurophysiological and psychoneurological tests, for
example during the examination of the level of anesthesia, in
the study of sleep disorders [1], and the analysis of the
effects of drugs on the central nervous system. EEG is also
used in neurophysiological research, including studies of
cognitive and emotional processes. The emergence of
instruments enabling low-cost registration of EEG signals
contributes to the increase of interest in the use of such
measurements in various fields of study.
The possibility of registering brain activity is also
attractive in areas far from medicine. Unlike routine medical
This work was partially supported by the Research Center of PJAIT,
supported by the Ministry of Science and Higher Education in Poland

IEEE Catalog Number: CFP1885N-ART c 2018, PTI

procedures, the research on brain activity does not focus on
detecting anomalies that may indicate pathological changes,
but on linking the recorded activity of the brain with
received stimuli, cognitive activities, progress in training
various skills [2], degree of relaxation, etc.
As a non-invasive method, and also more widely available
recently, EEG is a natural candidate for use in the work on
the brain-computer interfaces (BCI). In this work we will
discuss some of the results of research in this area.
Game developers, especially educational and therapeutic,
are particularly interested in the practical implementation of
BCI in their products. EEG registering the reaction of
players and the emotions accompanying the game is an
interesting source of information for game designers, striving
to create a game model that is satisfying for each user. EEG
tests are also used by psychologists in studies on the impact
of games on users.

913

Standard EEG measurements are performed using a
stationary device, in an outpatient or laboratory setting. At
present, various solutions are available on the market that
allow recording EEG signals using portable devices [3], [4],
[5]. Since these devices are inexpensive and easy to use, they
can be applied in many areas, including using them as BCI
interfaces in consumer applications. The usability of
commercial EEG devices was tested in [6].
The EMOTIV EPOC+ wireless headset provides 14
channel EEG, plus 2 reference channels. Saline based wet
sensors allow avoiding sticky gels. The headset is quite
flexible, but its plastic structure limits the ability to adapt
the device to untypical sizes or the shapes of the head. The
signal is sent through Bluetooth or proprietary wireless
communication. Battery life is up to 12 hours when using
proprietary wireless, and up to 6 hours when using
Bluetooth.
III. EMOTIV EPOC IN APPLICATIONS AND RESEARCH
The EMOTIV hardware and software evoked great
interest. The authors in [7] compared EPOC with the
research EEG system (Neuroscan Synamps) for measuring

914

PROCEEDINGS OF THE FEDCSIS. POZNAŃ, 2018

auditory event-related potentials. Their findings suggest that
EPOC compare well with Synamps in such tests, and EPOC
is easier to use because of its quick and clean set-up. On the
other hand, EPOC may perform significantly worse than a
medical device, as shown in [8]. The authors of [8] tested the
ANT medical grade system and EPOC on P300 responses.
P300 is an involuntary positive potential that is evoked about
300 ms after the user has perceived a relevant and rare
stimulus. EPOC indicated lower SNR (signal-to-noise ratio),
so the authors suggested choosing EPOC only for noncritical applications such as games, as it is not reliable
enough for medical purposes such as prosthesis control.
IV. EXPERIMENT DESIGN
The aim of the experiment was to register EEG of players
while playing computer games, and analyze emotions,
depending on the type of game. During testing, EEG of 15
males aged 23-28 were registered. Persons who often play
computer games were selected for our experiments.
Two computers were used in the experiments. The
EMOTIV headset was connected to one of them and EEG
data were recorded. Only the experimenter had access to this
computer. The second computer was used for gaming, and
this computer was used by the players. Three games with
different gameplay characteristics have been selected for
these experiments.
At the beginning of each experiment session, the
experimenter puts the EPOC headset on the player’s head.
Next, the experiment adjusts the headset while checking the
readings from EPOC, to assure the best possible quality of
the signal. Afterwards, the experiment session is performed.
The session consists of 7 parts. The player is informed
before each part what he is expected to do, and how long it
will take. These 7 parts (stages) of the experiment session
are listed below:
1. Initial EEG measurements - the tested player closes his
eyes, tries to relax, and not think about anything. The
purpose of this stage of the experiment is to register
EEG readings from the resting-state of the brain, for
comparison with reading acquired in the next stages of
the experiment.
2. Square game - the player plays the Square game, which is
a team based game. His activity is monotonous, neither
requiring mental effort nor psychically engaging. The
registered EEG are to reflect moderate brain activity,
typical of normal computer use.
3. Rocket League played with bots - the test player plays a 5
minute match with a computer-controlled player (bot).
4. Rocket League played online – the player plays a 5 minute
match with other players (persons) over the Internet.
5. Watching high level game – the player watches a 5 minute
match of the Rocket League, played by advanced
players.
6. Super Bomberman game against bots – the player plays 3
matches of the Super Bomberman game against bots.

7. Super Bomberman game with another player – the test
player plays a match of the Super Bomberman game
with another player (person) against 2 bots.
As mentioned before, we selected 3 games of different
characteristics. EEG readings were acquired using two
methods. In the first method, each 0.5 the average power of
theta, alpha, beta, and gamma waves was acquired (for beta
waves, separately for low and high subbands). The wave
ranges are as follows: theta 4–8 Hz, alpha 8–13 Hz, beta 1330 (low 13–20 Hz, high 21–30 Hz), gamma 30–80 Hz.
The second method consisted in collecting emotion data
using Emotiv software, for the following emotions: boredom,
meditation, frustration, instantaneous excitement, and longterm excitement, scaled from 0 to 1. The Emotiv software is
needed to acquire emotion data, facial expressions, and
access mental commands.
After the preliminary analysis of the collected emotion
data in the first round of tests, we decided to reject boredom
and meditation, because of very low level of the obtained
signals.
We also experienced technical problems with the EPOC
headset we used, as 2 electrodes, A3 and AF3, did not work
properly (and the readings from these electrodes had to be
discarded, as they represented noise only). Therefore, we had
to replace this headset with another one. This shows that this
equipment is delicate and prone to failures. Accessories for
EPOC are available, but it takes time to obtain these
accessories.
V.

RESULTS

In our research, we describe emotions in 2-dimensional
valence/arousal plane [9]. Based on the readings from the
EPOC electrodes, we can calculated valence values,
indicating positive or negative emotional states, and estimate
arousal levels. Since beta to alpha ratio is a reasonable
indicator of arousal state [10], we estimate arousal index EA,
as the indicator of arousal state, according to the following
formula:

EA =

E
E

,

(1)

E  - average beta power, E - average alpha power.
The valence index can be calculated for a particular
electrode, or brain regions. Typically, this index is calculated
for frontal (F) and antero-frontal (AF) electrodes, as beta and
alpha waves are most pronounced and can be most easily
measured in the frontal and the middle part of the brain [11].
Therefore, data from A and AF electrodes are the best choice
when estimating valence [12].
It is suggested that greater left frontal activity is associated
with positive affect and/or approach motivation, and that
greater right frontal activity is associated with negative affect
and/or withdrawal motivation, although in [13] the author
found that the frontal asymmetry is responsive to

JERZY KOSIŃSKI ET AL.: AN ANALYSIS OF GAME-RELATED EMOTIONS USING EMOTIV EPOC

motivational direction and not affective valence. Still, since
we had symmetrically placed electrodes at our disposal, we
decided to use the following measure of valence

EV ,

calculated by comparing the alpha power and beta power
between the right and left hemispheres [10]:

Er El
EV = r − l ,
E E

(2)

r – right hemisphere,
l – left hemisphere.

EV was calculated for the readings of symmetrically
placed electrodes, or for averaged power calculated over
selected brain parts. Positive

EV values indicate positive

emotions, and negative values indicate negative emotions.
In the presented graphs we illustrate outcomes for the data
collected in the 3rd stage of experiment, i.e. when playing
Rocket League with bots:
•

EV for readings from electrodes F3, AF3 and also T7 for
El and El , and readings from electrodes F4, AF4 and
also T8 for

Er and Er

• Instantaneous Excitement calculated using Emotiv
software
• arousal index EA for readings calculated for frontal parts
of the brain
Stimulus
1
2
3

Avg.
Ex.
0.541
0.549
0.564

Ex.
var.
0.153
0.207
0.244

Avg.Fr.

Fr.
var.
0.09
0.127
0.186

TE

TF

Meditation
0.541
12% 3%
Squares
0.5
16% 4%
„Rocket
0.526
21% 10%
League”, bots
4 „Rocket
0.504 0.228 0.512
0.168 14% 8%
League”,
persons
5 Watching
0.518 0.266 0.483
0.153 20% 3%
„Rocket
League”
6 „Super
0.621 0.2
0.568
0.144 22% 7%
Bomberman”,
bots
7 „Super
0.579 0.224 0.537
0.153 23% 7%
Bomberman”,
persons
Avg. Ex - Average Excitation; Ex. var. - Excitation variance; Avg. Fr. Average Frustration Fr. var.- Frustration variance; TE - % time with
excitation > 0.8; TF - % time with frustration > 0.8

We chose F3 and F4 as suggested in [10], and we
additionally chose another symmetrically placed pair, AF3
and AF4, located close to F3 and F4. Additionally,
electrodes T7 and T8 (temporal part of the brain) were
chosen, as suggested in [14], where the authors indicate that
information from the temporal part of the brain is significant
in emotion classification.
The comparison of EV values for various pairs of
electrodes, i.e. F3 and F4, AF3 and AF4, T7 and T8, shows

915

differences in brain activity for frontal and temporal parts of
the brain.
Instantaneous Excitement calculated using Emotiv
software shows large variability, and the results are directly
related to game events.
The valence measure

EV and the arousal index EA for

frontal electrodes are not related directly to particular game
events. The calculated values do not indicate stimulate from
the game.
Therefore, we decided to use Emotiv software in further
investigations. Instantaneous Excitement for the game and
Long-Term Excitement for meditation show, that Excitement
is related to game events.
The assessment of the emotion readings was done on the
basis of average Instantaneous Excitement and Frustration,
as well as Meditation and Boredom, calculated using Emotiv
software. Average values and variance, as well as the
percentage of time when Frustration or Excitation level was
high (above 0.8) are shown in Tab. I. Initially, we also
calculated these values for the Emotiv headset with damaged
electrodes, but the results were inconsistent, so we decided
to use another headset.
The values were averaged over all test participants,
separately for each stage of the experiment.
As we can see, our experiment consisted of non-engaging
(mentally, technically) as well as of highly engaging parts.
Meditation, playing Square, or watching a game was rather
non-engaging, whereas active playing games requiring high
mental and motoric involvement (Rocket League, Super
Bomberman) was highly demanding.
Excitement results show that average Excitation and the
time of high Excitement when playing with other persons are
greater than when playing with bots. For less engaging
activities, the test results are similar, but variance is lower.
Frustration remained approximately constant during
engaging activities, but variance increases when playing
Rocket League with other persons, compared to playing with
bots. Frustration results for non-engaging activities are a bit
surprising; this is in line with results obtained in other
investigations.
The highest meditation level was obtained for mentally
non-engaging activities, but the difference in meditation
level is small.
The highest boredom level was obtained when watching
Rocket League match. This agrees with the relations of the
tested players, as they emphasized their boredom during this
part of the experiment.
Emotion levels when playing Rocket League match and
EV values calculated for various electrodes are shown in Fig.
1. Unfortunately, the results from Emotive software are not
perfect neither, as some exciting parts of the match are not
reflected with the Excitement graph. For instance, only slight
emotion changes can be observed between 180th and 230th
second of the match, and rapid change can be seen during the
scored goal only, whereas during this part of the match the
ball was very close to the goal, and the player shot several
times. After the 320th second of the match the excitement

916

PROCEEDINGS OF THE FEDCSIS. POZNAŃ, 2018

suddenly drops almost to zero, whereas it is not reflected in
the game, as the player was constantly defending goal during
this part of the match. Frustration graph shows similar
changes, but frustrating actions like loosing goal do not
evoke frustration in this graph. In the final part of the match
both scoring and defending goal correspond to surprisingly
high frustration in this graph. The meditation and boredom
levels also do not correspond to the gameplay.
The comparison of meditation and boredom levels
registered in various experiments shows that these values are
averaged over long runs. Therefore, such results are not very
useful for estimating emotions while playing computer
games.
VI. DISCUSSION
Our experiments confirm that playing a game causes brain
activity changes, and these changes can be associated with
strong emotions evoked by some parts of the gameplay.
Similar observations were made in [16], with the focus on
the changes of brainwaves power during high intensity and
low intensity game events.
The analysis of the acquired data shows that the
equipment and software are not sufficient to identify gameevoked emotions.
The literature we analyzed suggests that satisfactory
results might be achieved only after complicated analysis and
processing of the EEG data [17][18][19]. The use of neural
networks is suggested. Deep neural networks are very often
used recently, but since neural nets require large amount of
data, are data are not sufficient for such analysis.
VII. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
The Emotiv software quite successfully detects excitement
and frustration. Still, it is difficult to assure if the readings

were accurate enough. The analysis of video recordings of
the experiments is necessary to assess which parts of the
gameplay correspond to the observed changes of emotions,
and how to interpret these changes.
The algorithms implemented in the Emotiv software are
not publicly available. Therefore, we cannot verify directly
how various emotions are processed by these algorithms and
what readings are reported for particular emotions. The
values returned by these algorithms as meditation level
(Meditation) and boredom level (Boredom) do not show
large variability. The returned levels of excitement and
frustration present larger variability, related to the gameplay
as expected, but for each of these readings we can find parts
of the play when these readings do not reflected emotions
associated with playing the game. Since we cannot access
these algorithms, nor formulas for calculating the readings,
we are not able to assess whether the obtained values are
correct or random. Similar problem was described by
Harrison in [20].
The analysis of literature on emotion identification shows
problems which must be addressed in order to achieve
efficient detection and identification of emotions while
playing computer games, based on EEG data. One of the
issues to solve is to objectively identify game-related
emotions. Various persons subjected to similar stimuli may
experience different emotions. In the case of computer
games, the player preferences may influence the experienced
emotions. In the literature in the psychology domain [9]
difficulties in the objective classification of emotions were
reported, as the subjects may attribute various meaning to the
same labels of emotional states, so the reported emotions
may be ambiguous.
The method of evoking emotions and the emotion time
should also be taken into account, no matter what emotion

Fig.1. Emotions during the Rocket League match, calculated using Emotiv software

JERZY KOSIŃSKI ET AL.: AN ANALYSIS OF GAME-RELATED EMOTIONS USING EMOTIV EPOC

classification method was applied.
Depending on the type of stimulus and other experiment
conditions, the registered EEG may represent emotional
states of various intensity, duration, and co-occurrence of
motor or cognitive activity. Even successful classification of
emotional states, based on EEG data, can be less accurate for
other stimuli or experiment conditions.
Computer games represent quite a specific type of stimuli,
evoking emotions. Various types of gameplay may evoke
different emotions in various players; the intensity of these
emotions may also vary between players. In the case of
typical computer games, intensive cognitive activity
accompanies the playing, and at least medium motor activity.
The player has to understand the gameplay, and actively
control the game by means of the appropriate controller (at
least until BCI interfaces are not efficiently and broadly
implemented as game controllers). In typical games, there
are numerous unforeseen events, to avoid experiencing
boredom. Therefore, intensive emotions are expected, and
they must quickly change in time.
As mentioned above, we cannot rely on the emotions
reported by players when we want to analyze their emotions
experienced while playing a computer game. This was
reported by Salminen and Ravaja in [15], as well as
McMahan et al. in [16]. Also, negative emotions experienced
while playing, e.g. fear or frustration, cause experiencing
positive emotion of satisfaction at the end of the game,
which is specificity of computer games. The player is aware
of the game convention and he or she is distanced to the
experienced emotion, so the player subjectively assesses
emotions as less intense. Without further investigations it is
difficult to answer the question whether these differences can
be seen in EEG.
Depending on the type and dynamics of the game, and
also on the type of emotions to be analyzed, the analysis
should be performed on shorter or longer time segments. The
analysis of the power of brainwaves assumes averaging of
the registered potentials, both over time and over frequency.
In our experiment, we registered 2 readings of the Emotiv
EPOC headset per second. Therefore, we can perform the
analysis of psycho-neurological phenomena of medium
duration. In the literature, short time EEG readings are also
reported, i.e. of order of hundreds of readings per second,
also in investigations on emotion detection. The Emotiv
EPOC headset can also provide such data, when using
appropriate software library [7], [8]. However, such analysis
requires much more complicated experiment planning, as
precise synchronization of the EEG readings with stimuli is
necessary [19]. Additionally, in order to obtain high signal to
noise ratio, numerous repetitions of stimuli are necessary. On
the other hand, quick repetition of similar stimuli should be
avoided. Therefore, such experiments are behind the topic of
this work for now.

917

REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]
[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

E. Weaver, M. Gradisar, H. Dohnt, N. Lovato, and P. Douglas, “The
effect of presleep video-game playing on adolescent sleep,” Journal
of Clinical Sleep Medicine, vol. 6, 2010, pp. 184–189.
S. Wolf, E. Brölz, D. Scholz, A. Ramos-Murguialday, P. Keune, M.
Hautzinger, N. Birbaumer, and U. Strehl, „Winning the game: brain
processes in expert, young elite and amateur table tennis players”,
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience, vol. 8, 2014, pp. 11–12.
T. B. Cedro, and A. Grzanka, “CeDeROM Brain Computer
Interface”, Information Technologies in Biomedicine.
Springer
LNCS 7339, 2012, pp. 219-231.
W. D. Hairston, K. W. Whitaker, A. J. Ries, J. M. Vettel, J. C.
Bradford, and S. E. Kerick, K. McDowell, “Usability of four
commercially-oriented EEG systems,” Journal of Neural
Engineering, vol. 11, 2014, pp. 1-14.
T. S. Grummett, R. E. Leibbrandt, T. W. Lewis, D. DeLosAngeles, D.
M. W. Powers, J. O. Willoughby, K. J. Pope, and S. P. Fitzgibbon,
“Measurement of neural signals from inexpensive, wireless and dry
EEG systems,” Physiological Measurement, vol. 36, 2015, pp. 14691484.
W. D. Hairston, K. W. Whitaker, A. J Ries, J. M. Vettel, J. C.
Bradford, S. E. Kerick, and K. McDowell, J. Neural Eng., vol. 11
046018, 2014.
N. A. Badcock, P. Mousikou, Y. Mahajan, P. de Lissa, J. Thie, and G.
McArthur, “Validation of the Emotiv EPOC EEG gaming system for
measuring research quality auditory ERPs”, PeerJ 1:e38, 2013
M. Duvinage, T. Castermans, M. Petieau, T. Hoellinger, G. Cheron,
and T. Dutoit, “Performance of the Emotiv Epoc headset for P300based applications”, BioMedical Engineering OnLine, vol. 12, no. 56,
2013.
J. A. Russell, “A circumplex model of affect,” J. Pers. Soc. Psychol.,
vol. 39, no. 6, pp. 1161–1178, 1980.
R. Ramirez and Z. Vamvakousis, “Detecting emotion from EEG
signals using the Emotive Epoc device,” in Brain Informatics, LNCS
vol. 7670 LNAI, 2012, pp. 175–184.
T. Matlovič, "Emotion Detection using EPOC EEG device", in IIT
SRC
2016,
available
at
https://www.pewe.sk/wpcontent/uploads/2016/01/20_iitsrc_matlovic.pdf
Y. Liu and O. Sourina, “Real-time subject-dependent EEG-based
emotion recognition algorithm,” in Lecture Notes in Computer
Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence
and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics), 2014, vol. 8490, pp. 199–223.
E. Harmon-Jones, “Clarifying the emotive functions of asymmetrical
frontal cortical activity”, Psychophysiology, vol. 40, pp. 838–848,
2003.
W. L. Zheng and B. L. Lu, “Investigating Critical Frequency Bands
and Channels for EEG-Based Emotion Recognition with Deep Neural
Networks,” IEEE Trans. Auton. Ment. Dev., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 162–
175, 2015
M. Salminen and N. Ravaja, “Increased oscillatory theta activation
evoked by violent digital game events,” Neurosci. Lett., vol. 435, no.
1, pp. 69–72, 2008.
T. McMahan, I. Parberry , and T. D. Parsons, “Modality specific
assessment of video game player’s experience using the Emotiv,”
Entertainment Computing, vol. 7, pp. 1-6, 2015.
N. A. Badcock, P. Mousikou, Y. Mahajan, P. de Lissa, J. Thie, and G.
McArthur, “Validation of the Emotiv EPOC ® EEG gaming system
for measuring research quality auditory ERPs,” PeerJ, vol. 1, p. e38,
2013.
M. Duvinage, T. Castermans, M. Petieau, T. Hoellinger, G. Cheron,
and T. Dutoit, “Performance of the Emotiv Epoc headset for P300based applications,” Biomed. Eng. Online, vol. 12, no. 1, 2013.
A. Sivanathan, T. Lim, S. Louchart, and J. Ritchie, “Temporal
multimodal data synchronisation for the analysis of a game driving
task using EEG,” Entertain. Comput., vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 323–334,
2014.
T. Harrison, The Emotiv mind: Investigating the accuracy of the
Emotiv EPOC in identifying emotions and its use in an Intelligent
Tutoring System. Department of Computer Science and Software
Engineering, University of Canterbury 2013

