Transimage 2018
Proceedings of the 5th Biennial Transdisciplinary Imaging Conference 2018

Imagining Thought in Digital Space: 3D Printed Thoughts
Kellyann Geurts kellyann.geurts@rmit.edu.au
Monash University and RMIT University, Melbourne, Australia

Collective Focus: Kellyann Geurts, 2017

Geurts, K. 2018. Imagining Thought in Digital Space: 3D Printed Thoughts. In: Proceedings of the 5th Biennial Transdisciplinary Imaging
Conference, TI2018, 18-20 April 2018, Edinburgh, UK. DOI: 10.6084/m9.figshare.6104690
81

Imagining Thought in Digital Space:
3D Printed Thoughts
Kellyann Geurts

Abstract

Monash University and RMIT University,

In this paper, I explore the history of Thought as a
theoretical domain that has been, and still is, expressed
through images. I survey the scientific legacy of
photography and brain–computer interface (BCI) as it
has been expressed through culture in images, art and
science fiction. The scientific framework scaffolds the
practice-based research in which I aim to represent
thoughts as data into a three-dimensional (3D) digital
space, culminating in the major body of work
Thoughtforms: 3D printed thoughts.

Melbourne, Australia
kellyann.geurts@rmit.edu.au

The aim of the project is to visually represent and
characterise forms of thought by recording brainwave
data captured from a mobile electroencephalograph
(EEG) device. I show how thoughts, as units of
information, are coded and decoded, and interpreted
through digital imaging and 3D printing. Through this
project, I was able to collect a dataset of over 200
digital thought forms which enabled me to identify and
classify “shapes” of thoughts corresponding to
representations of mental states.
My practice is positioned within a technology-driven
society saturated with information networks, consumer
data-tracking devices and biometrics profiling systems
and the untiring determination of art and science
continuing to explore the unknown.
82

Author Keywords
Thought; thought-forms; thought photography;
thoughtography; brain–computer interface; mind–
machine interface; neuroimaging; mobile EEG; data
visualisation; data physicalisation; digital imaging; 3D
printing.

for example, Koichi Kawakami from Japan’s National
Institute of Genetics forecasts that in the future we will
be able to ‘interpret an animal’s behaviour, including
learning and memory, fear, joy, or anger, based on the
activity of particular combinations of neurons […] we
can make the invisible visible’ (Kawakami 2013 in Grant
2013).

Introduction
In 2013 scientists from Japan captured “thoughts in
action” from the brain of a zebrafish. Using fluorescent
microscopy to detect neuronal activity, the scientists
‘trace[d] the cascade of calcium ion signals traversing
the nerve fibres in [the fish] brains’ (Grant 2013) whilst
they hunted their prey. In this process, the scientists
recorded the pulsating electrical currents in the brain of
the fish enabling the scientists to visualise in real-time
the neural activity of zebrafish. This scientific milestone
has, at least for some scientists, been the catalyst to
hypothesise on the capacity to record and visualise the
neural activity of the human brain with scientists
observing that ‘our brains and fish brains work
according to many of the same basic principles’
(Considine 2013).

Whilst this endeavour to capture and record images of
neural activity reflects recent breakthroughs in
neuroscientific imaging, the overall enterprise to
“capture” an image of thought is not new. Questions
about what a thought is have been asked by scientists,
philosophers and artists for centuries. However, unlike
the neuron-activated thought images from the brain of
a zebrafish, “thoughts” in the early nineteenth century
were considered an ethereal “vital force”, akin to
mental energy or soul, influenced by Descartes’
philosophy of the human mind. In this context,
thoughts referred to the qualities, forms and essences
emanating but distinct from the physical brain – the
residue of which might be imprinted on a photographic
plate or expressed through drawing or painting.

The zebrafish experiment provides a neuroscientific
twenty-first century picture of “thinking” as an activity
that occurs in the brain. Fundamental to neuroscience
today is ‘to understand how the brain perceives the
external world [and in order to do this] it is desirable to
observe neuronal activity in the brain in real time
during perception’ (Muto et al. 2013, 307). The
technology available to science today allows
researchers to directly observe, trace or map activity in
the brain. The research findings shape what we know of
and understand about thoughts. The findings also
enable researchers to speculate on future possibilities;

Knowledge of human thought has not remained static.
The Cartesian model of the mind as distinct from the
body has been questioned by neuroscientists and their
understanding of cognition. Although the dualistic view
of the brain and mind persists in the general
population, Cartesian dualism has been overridden in
philosophy and science by a monistic view – that the
universe consists only of matter and that matter
integrates the mind and brain. Whilst my research does
not address or take any position on the complexity of
the mind–brain problem, the research does reflect the
cultural shift in perspectives over the last two
83

centuries, from nineteenth century Cartesian dualism to
twenty-first century monistic views, through pictorial
representations of thoughts.
To contextualise my research project, I explore how
thought was rendered manifest into the scientific
community and into a particular cultural imagination
between the mid-nineteenth and early twentieth
century. I draw on histories of thought imagining –
what a thought might “look like” and how it is
characterised through various modalities – to establish
my practice within art and scientific discourses. I
explore the visual grammar of thought imaging using
an array of tools and techniques and build conceptual
prototypes in preparation for my final studio project:
Thoughtforms.
The collaborative project1 explores contemporary
neuroimaging practices and computational
interpretations of neural data that are translated into
visualisations or “thought forms”. The thought data is
materialised through digital media into discrete forms,
later to be decoded via a systematic process of
classification. To do this, I used a consumer-grade offthe-shelf BCI mobile EEG device, Emotiv Insight, to
capture raw brainwave data. In this process, I explore
the relationships between the prehistory of
materialising thoughts into pictorial representation with
that of scientific imagination and early photography.

Historical background:
Imaging thoughts, expression and emotion
The early nineteenth century was a pivotal period when
imaging thought was driven by a cultural desire to
make the invisible visible, and capturing images of
thought was enabled by the invention of optical
technologies such as photography. Photography was an
important apparatus for scientific observation, creating
new possibilities between seeing and knowing –
photography’s ability to visually capture what the naked
eye could not see. Science practitioners and
experimental photographers such as Dr Hippolyte
Baraduc and Louis Darget attempted to record and
document vital forces on photographic plates. The
terrain these practitioners explored was known as
“thought photography” and “thoughtography”. Baraduc
describes the technical and theoretical aspects of the
iconography of human thought as an internal force
strong enough to affect the materials of silver salts and
gelatin and create an impression on the photographic
plate:
If thought is simply fixed in an image,
this image of light, the luminous clothing
of our idea, will have a sufficiently
powerful photochemical action to imprint
the gelatinous film, either directly or
mediated through glass, and in a
manner invisible to the human eye;
these are what I have called psychicons,
luminous, living images of thought.
(Baraduc 1896 in Chéroux 2004, 117)

1

With technical expertise offered by Dr In Dae Hwang from the
Faculty of Art, Design and Architecture, Monash University.

Working alongside Baraduc was photographer Louis
Darget. Both practitioners focused on scientific
84

measures of vibrational forces of thought with similar
practices in their collaborative work. In one image,
Darget touches the plate with his fingers and declares,
‘In the interest of science, I want this plate to receive
an impression.’ The key focus for Darget was to capture
the vibrations from the brain, thought vibrations, or
brainwaves that extend out into the ether (Knowles
1869 & Houston 1892 in Enns 2013, 179), or as Darget
writes, ‘when the human soul produces a thought, it
sends vibrations through the brain, the phosphorus it
contains starts radiating, and the rays are projected
out’ (Darget 1911 in Ramesh 2014, 76).
Whilst thought photographers such as Baraduc and
Darget made attempts to photograph internal vital
forces emanating from the body, in medical science,
anthropologists and physicians used photography as a
means to document external signs of emotion – by
photographing a subject’s facial muscles as they
experienced emotion (Duchenne 1990, 3). The process
of recording and collecting fleeting facial expressions
allowed practitioners to propose, measure and classify
the biological systems that lie behind each expression –
as seen in the collection of visual representations of
different “types” of emotion published in Charles
Darwin’s The Expression of Emotion in Man and Animals
(1872) and neurologist Jean Martin Charcot’s studies on
psychiatric patients at the Salpêtrière Hospital in Paris
from 1878, both photographic collections contributing
to a new ‘taxonomy of expression and emotions’
(Barker & Munster 2016, 115). The collections of
photographs assumed a dual role, acting as empirical
data through which scientists were able to measure and
analyse mental states, and as experiments in their own
right, ‘[T]they became more than mere pictures – they
became data’ (Prodger 2011, xxiii).

Contemporaneous to the activities of the scientists and
photographers documenting representations of
thoughts and emotions were the activities of their peers
who employed more traditional art processes, such as
drawing and painting, to visually express thoughts. The
symbolic manifestations of thoughts through traditional
mediums allowed artists to express and interpret
psychic energy, feelings, emotions or psychological
states of the mind with colour, line, shape and form,
and by doing so, develop a visual language for thought.
A good example is the collection of 57 forms of thought
published in Thought-forms (1901) by Annie Besant, a
theosophist and writer, and CW Leadbeater, a
clairvoyant. The collection evidenced a systematic
method of obtaining thought impressions.
We have often heard it said that
thoughts are things, and there are many
among us who are persuaded of the
truth of this statement. Yet very few of
us have any clear idea as to what kind of
thing a thought is, and the object of this
little book is to help us to conceive this.
(Besant & Leadbeater, 1901, 16)
Each discrete form in the collection of thought-forms
represents a specific emotion, problem or concept,
forming the basis for classification of types of thoughts.
The forms developed as a set of symbols to transfer
messages, to act as a form of language to
communicate, and not merely to provide a document of
mental energy as thought photography had done. The
manifestations of emotions, feelings or ‘inner
vibrations’ (Enns 2013, 20) depicted through drawing
facilitated communication between internal and

85

external worlds, translating inner states from the artist
to resonate with the observer. The abstract visual
forms of thought in Thought-forms were an influential
precursor to the abstraction movement in the early
twentieth century (Alderton 2011; Chéroux 2004; Enns
2013).

Contemporary context:
Neuroimaging and thought models
The Surrealist Manifesto in 1924 coincided with the first
recording of human brainwaves via Hans Berger’s
invention of the electroencephalograph (EEG). The EEG
device recorded the brain’s electrical activity via
electrodes attached to the scalp. The electrodes
connected to a signal processing unit that converted
neural oscillations or brainwave data to physical motion
and transcribed the analogue signals for analysis. The
patterns displayed included variations in frequency, and
wave patterns. These patterns were mapped to an
array of emotional and physical states; from excitation
and arousal to low activation and sleep. The EEG
provided evidence, in the form of graphic
representations of real-time brain activity, which had
an impact on how thoughts were depicted in different
aspects of culture including art, science and science
fiction. The encounter between disciplines on the
subject of thought imaging continues in today’s
contemporary art practice and have shaped, and
continue to give shape to, how we “think about
thoughts”. According to cognitive scientist Steven
Pinker, thoughts (desires and beliefs) are information:
‘colorless, odorless and tasteless’ (Pinker 1997, 25). I
argue that what scientists record are representations of
brain activity. In other words, they record neural
signals and provide evidence of the activity in the form
of “neuroimages”, or graphic representations,

measured and recorded through brain–computer
interface (BCI) technology. A main focus of my
research is the output of neuroimaging, and the way
images are appropriated and used in art practice.
Current neuroimaging techniques measure structural
and functional brain activity including precise recording
of neuronal impulses, spatial maps of the brain (using
blood supply to active localised regions) and whole
brain connectivity. High-end scanners assist scientists
in localising functionality, while studying specific
regions in the brain matches “cognitive parts” with
“brain parts” (Hubbard 2003, 23). Techniques from this
domain are used to examine and determine the neural
correlates for mental functions, such as emotions,
spatial awareness and dreaming. The collected data
provides scientists with empirical evidence to ask
questions about the “physicallness” of thoughts,
supporting decades of research in related fields about
questions of consciousness, unconscious activity,
memory and emotion – plausible research based on
reliable data enabling new ways to ‘investigate the
neural correlates of human thought and cognition’
(Baars & Gage 2010, 111).
Since 1950, cognitive science has approached the
subject of brain functioning from many perspectives.
For example, the conjoined computational theories
from artificial neural networks (in computer science)
and representational mental and emotional models (in
psychology) create the conditions for researchers to
analyse thinking processes and how the brain and mind
interact to produce thoughts. To simplify and
communicate the complexity of the subject, cognitive
scientists have developed frameworks, models and
representational systems. Researchers in this
86

multidisciplinary field continue to model the brain in
terms of information processing systems (Baars & Gage
2010; Thagard 2005; Pinker 1997) and model the mind
upon representational systems (Rescorla 2017;
Thagard 2005) where ‘thinking is computation’
(Thagard 2005, 4).
For the Thoughtforms project, I draw attention to the
various mental models, techniques of testing,
representing, organising, classifying and visualising
data obtained through this process of interpreting
mental states from neural activity. I adapt psychologist
James A. Russell’s Circumplex Model of Affect (1979),
which offers a multidimensional structure for mapping
interrelated emotions (Russell 1980, 1165). The circular
model visualises emotions as not isolated or discrete
but ‘overlapping and ambiguous’ (Posner et al. 2005,
719). The dimensions in this model are used as a
framework in neuroscience when measuring neural
correlates for affect through neuroimaging and offer
‘consistent[cy] with findings from behavioural, cognitive
science, neuroimaging and developmental studies of
affect’ (Posner et al. 2005, 715). The theoretical
frameworks and emotional models help to construct,
shape, decode and systematise a visual language for
digital thoughts.

In digital space
The register and analysis of information, called neurodata, has, for almost one hundred years, been situated
within specialist clinical and research labs using
increasingly sophisticated brain-imaging technologies
and techniques, with various forms of neuro-data
output from EEG to fibre-tracking imagery. However, in
the last decade, mobile EEG devices such as Emotiv
and Neurosky have become available for use in the

domestic consumer market. Mirroring recent trends in
the health industries to market specialist medical
equipment to domestic consumers, such as the
wearable biosensor Fitbit, contemporary culture is now
saturated with consumer data-tracking devices and
biometrics profiling systems used to track, “optimise”,
“control” and “improve” a range of bio systems.
The impact of these developments is twofold. Firstly,
the flow-on effect of practices in neuro-technologies is
palpable as it transitions from the scientific domain to
the cultural imagination, now expressed in the
intersection of art and science, but that was ‘once the
fodder of science fiction’ (Anwar 2011). Neuroscientific
research is reaching the public via provocative
headlines such as The mechanics of mind reading: Can
a brain scanner decode your inner thoughts? (Bor
2009); Thoughts, in a brain, captured on video for the
first time (Hewitt 2013) and Scientists use brain
imaging to reveal the movies in our mind (Anwar
2011). These articles, published in popular magazines
(masked as science magazines), appeal to a cultural
fascination to re-imagine the potential of future science
and how the application of neuroware technologies may
translate into everyday life. Like scientific photography
reaching into the public sphere at the turn of the
twentieth century, this plays on the notions of what is
possible – recording dreams, seeing thoughts and
reading minds. Emotiv technology one of many tracking
devices making questionable promises to ‘increase
personal and professional productivity and wellness’
(Emotiv 2015). I use the Emotiv technology to
“capture” thought, as I’m lured by the performance
promises and by my own implicit desire to improve,
order and “control” thoughts.

87

Digital apparatus and tools – including scanners, mobile
devices, biometric sensors, neuroware and other
wearable devices – that track, monitor and promote a
sense of control over physical and mental states are
now ‘the very fabric of contemporary subjective life’
(Krzych 2013, 57). Data gathering through digital tools
is a means to quantify and ‘change our sense of self in
the world’ (Wolf 2010); for example, online social
networks provide a platform to collaborate, share and
become ‘mirrors’ for ‘self-knowledge through numbers’
(Wolf 2010), or as philosopher Vilém Flusser refers to,
‘thinking expressed through numbers’ (1983, 31).
Apparatus were invented to simulate
specific thought processes. Only now

interpreted through science and art, or digital imaging
in science and art. Each apparatus offers unique ways
to abstract the world “out there” for us to decode.
My interest in these mobile EEG devices is fueled by a
futuristic fantasy; that is, possibilities of what may soon
be a reality. What begins as simple measurements of
minute electrical activity in the brain passes through
and is distorted by all types of cultural and
technological filters (Rettberg 2014, 19) and measures
identifying mental states signpost the possibilities of
alternative means of communication. For Professor of
Digital Culture Jill Walker Rettberg, consumer digital
technologies appeal to a ‘fantasy of knowing’ (Ibid., 63)
what is hidden from the naked eye.

(following the invention of the
computer), and as it were with

Thoughtforms: 3D printed thoughts

hindsight, is it becoming clear what kind

My studio research explores thinking expressed through
numbers by recording electrical activity in the brain in
response to a participant’s recall of mood, emotions,
object or place. The recorded brain signals are
processed and visualised via a BCI then 3D printed into
unique abstract forms. The primary goal of the research
project is to represent and characterise shapes of
thought. Following a long tradition of artists and
scientists capturing and classifying thoughts,
expressions and emotions, I developed a framework to
create a thought form collection. This framework
enabled me to map emotion into a particular type of
model; an arousal-valence model of affect. Using this
model I’m able to plot various combinations of arousalvalence to arrange thought forms in a systematic
fashion. It is then via the combination of the arousalvalence dimensions that I’m able to map and classify
different categories of thoughts.

of thought processes we are dealing with
in the case of all apparatuses. That is,
thinking expressed in numbers … The
camera (like all apparatus that followed
it) is computational thinking flowing into
hardware. (Ibid., 31)
According to Flusser, an apparatus, like a camera or a
computer, produces a technical image. The technical
image communicates thought processes and a language
develops, with various levels of abstraction for
deciphering. Technical images are abstract in the ‘third
order’ (Ibid., 14), meaning images that are abstracted
from text can represent other images or be coded in
digital language, or numbers. All technical images are
encoded by the mechanics or inner workings of each
apparatus, whether early photographic processes

88

Performance
Thoughtforms has been “performed” – exhibited – at
three public events in Melbourne during 2016, over
which time I recorded and created more than 200 userdefined labelled thought forms. The “thought-forming
station” (see Fig. 1) was installed and performed at
each event. The clinical theme of “thought-forming
station” reflects early medical and scientific
experimental practices using photographic apparatus
and situates the performance in a biomedical context.
The BCI system (see Fig. 2) includes the mobile EEG
device for brain signal acquisition, signal processing to
translate the signals or data into meaningful shapes on
the output device or computer screen, a remote control
to pause a shape on screen to create a file, tie-on tags
to document thoughts and file number, and a 3D
printer to produce a thought form.

Figure 1: The “thought-forming station”, 2016. Source:
Andrew Morley.

Figure 2: Brain–computer or mind–machine interface system
for Thoughtforms project.

At each performance, voluntary participants were
required to wear the EEG headset and asked to think of
a “thing”, that is, a memory, emotion or recall of an
event. By instructing users to think of a thing they
desired rather than set parameters for obtaining
“types” of thoughts, I obtained fragments of what
people considered important on that particular time and
day. The brain signal data that was parsed through the
EEG headset was translated by the system to create 3D
shapes that were displayed on a screen. The shapes
were generated in real time, which meant that users
could watch the shapes modulate as their brain signal
changed. In this process, a participant could see on the
screen how patterns activated by electrical signals in
the brain are visualised in real time and affect the
shape on the screen with their thoughts. To record a
thought-shape on screen to send it to a 3D printer,
users could save their thought form with a remotecontrol button and were asked to name and describe
89

their thought form on the tags provided. The thought
could then be printed as a 3D object and tagged.

with associated mental states. Measuring and mapping
thought “types” with Emotiv Insight provides
systematic endorsement for decoding brain signals.
Signal processing and forms for thoughts
When the user establishes a quality connection, EEG
readings flow to the interface, which visually translates
the electrical signals from the user’s brain into an
abstract form on the screen. The user’s documented,
self-directed thought stimulates the electrical signals.
Each of the thought forms represent a thought that is
particular to the user’s brain at the time of the thought
recording.

Figure 3: A sample collection of thought forms on display,
2016.

Signal acquisition
The Emotiv Insight is a five-channel EEG device that
measures and records electrical signals from five
corresponding locations on the brain using dry sensors
to measure and map brain signals from different
regions across the brain’s cortex. Emotiv claims:
Emotiv Insight is the only device on the
market that covers all key regions of the
cerebral cortex […] the Insight’s five
sensors, paired with our robust and
scientifically validated algorithms, enable
us to reconstruct a source model of all
important brain regions and to see their
interplay. (Emotiv 2015)
Mapping the brain function in this way provides a
consistent way of reading and decoding brain activity

The brainwave data recorded by Emotiv Insight
translate into the abstract forms on the screen via a
complex number of steps. Firstly, TouchDesigner, a
data visualisation platform, allowed us to create
connections between EEG signals and 2D and 3D
interactive shapes generated by the signals. Each
sensor on the headset is mapped to its basic brain
function and assigned a specific value in
TouchDesigner, which then visualises the abstract
thought form on the computer screen in real time.
The shape changes to represent a range of mental
states such as calm, interest, excitement, anxiety and
focus. The algorithms are designed to deform a core
shape, the sphere, (Fig. 4) (deformed Fig. 5). The core
shape is gray or cyan when viewed on the user
interface (Fig. 6). All variations of shapes generated by
users’ thoughts are determined by the basic sphere.
The system is designed so that incoming biosignals
change the shape of the sphere through pushing and
pulling at the spherical form. As seen in the results, the
shape responds to the neural data input and the
90

thought form will distend the sphere in any number of
User interface

Figure 4: Core sphere, 2015.

The Thoughtforms interface design draws on many
components from my research but the visual
component is mostly influenced by neuroimaging
technologies, specifically magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI). Following a personal MRI scan procedure in
2015, I decided to simulate the format with focus in the
centre of the screen framed by what informs it. In the
centre of the interface design is a cyan sphere which
can be seen by the user to be modulating until it
receives EEG signals, in which case it then begins to
form a shape based on the electrical signals from the
Emotiv Insight. The thought form responds in real time,
that is, when the EEG apparatus is in position to detect
electrical signals. The interface (Fig. 6) is modelled
from several important components from my research
that frame the digital thought form. For example, I use
the format of MRI with white text on black background;
reference to a thought description from Besant and
Leadbeater (1901); a summary of what the Emotiv
Insight channels may detect; and EEG performance
metrics, converting brain signals to waves and
numbers.

Figure 6: Kellyann Geurts and In Dae Hwang, Final interface,
2015.

Data physicalisation: 3D printing
When a user decides on a particular thought to
“capture” they are able to pause the shape visualised
onscreen via a wireless remote-control device. Upon
selection, a message appears across the interface
indicating ‘Saving your thought form for 3D printing’.
The thought form file is saved and awaiting command
to print. The main consideration in materialising the
thoughts via a 3D printer was that the forms needed to
be printed at high speed for users to be able to collect
their thought form shortly after the recording.

Figure 5: Thought form:
prototype #1, 2015.

91

Figure 7: Kellyann Geurts and In Dae Hwang, Reprinted
thought form prototype #2 with identification tag, 2015.

Data documentation and classification
The 3D printed thought forms were assigned a file
number and named, tagged and catalogued (Fig. 7).
The identification tag included file number, thought
form description, source and date. The file number was
used for an electronic data filing system. The source
identifies the user (either through name, initials or an
alias). The thought form description allowed the user to
describe the thought at the time of recording and
saving file for 3D printing. The description also guided
the systematic mapping onto the Circumplex Model of
Affect (Fig. 8). The model ‘proposes that all affective
states arise from two fundamental neurophysiological
systems, one related to arousal, or alertness’ (Russell
1980 in Posner et al. 2005, 716) with a strong neural
activation or high frequency of brainwaves, and the
other axis related to valence (a pleasure–displeasure
continuum) and at the low activation or low frequency
of brainwaves. This model provided the framework that
enabled me to characterise the shapes of thoughts.

Figure 8: Circumplex Model of Affect (adapted: Russell 1979).

Figure 9 displays a sample of the collection of 3D
thought files, positioned in chronological order (top left
to bottom right) of recording thoughts at the three
events. Arranging the forms in this way allows me to
study, order and classify the discrete forms. Together,
the discrete units of thought on the digital print make
up the entire data set for the Thoughtforms project.
The structured presentation of thoughts on file provides
a visual snapshot of the research data gathered to
consider relationships of thought forms. Like biological
specimens awaiting classification, the random
fragments depicting mental states are arranged in this
image in order to observe and interpret.
92

visualisation graph (Fig. 10) shows the correlation
between user thought form descriptions and affect
value as well as the concentration and distribution of
the types of thoughts across each of the three events.

Figure 9: Kellyann Geurts, (Section detail) Collection of
thought form files in order of capture, 2017.

Classification
To ascertain any correlation between the thought
description and the shape of the form, the labelled 3D
printed thought forms are interpreted within
dimensions of arousal and valence via the Circumplex
Model of Affect. The affect model assisted me to
visually document and map the range of user-reported
thought descriptions and the thought data captured by
the mobile EEG headset. I determined the arousalvalence value of each thought form description, plotted
the data onto the affect model, with arousal on the
vertical axis and valence the horizontal axis. Valence
measures from pleasant to unpleasant, and arousal
measures from high to low arousal (focus). The data

This systematic approach in visualising the thought
data and assigning arousal and valence values for each
tagged thought description was first determined by
positioning the most unambiguous descriptions, such as
positively valenced emotions like love, calm, holidays
and music. These rated high on the pleasant
continuum, while thoughts reflecting anxiety, confusion
and anger were given an unpleasant value. Problems
arose when mapping thought descriptions with more
ambiguous titles relating to objects such as
“pineapple”, animals such as “turtle” or concepts like
“green”, “thinking of the world in 20 years’ time” and
“about today”. Although I was unable to confidently
assign a valence value for these descriptions, I was
able to make a subjective interpretation of the arousal
level based on the shape of the thought when
compared to similar thought shapes. In what seems to
be an arbitrary decision to assign values, I have
referenced scientific use of technologies and systematic
processes to visually interpret the data.

93

Through mapping the thought descriptions onto the
adapted model, I was able to show how emotions
through shapes might be conceptualised and
characterise what the parameter shape of thought
might be. I was then able to analyse the corresponding
shape of the thought form, and represent neural
correlates for each shape of thought (or emotion).
The tagged thought shapes were analysed in relation to
how I assessed each individual description and then
catalogued in one of three general categories: arousal,
mid-arousal and focus (low arousal). When there is low
activation of biosignals, users’ thoughts are calm and
focused and the data will have little influence on the
sphere. Thought forms of this “nature” will be softer,
more rounded. When there is high activation of
biosignals – that is, when users are excited or aroused
– the shape will deform accordingly and the form will
distend the sphere in any number of directions.

Figure 10: Kellyann Geurts, Thought form descriptions
mapped onto Circumplex Model of Affect. Average of Valence
value vs average of Arousal value. Colour shows details about
Event. Size shows details about Thought grouping. Details are
shown for file number and user description, 2017.

Thought shapes
A thought form shape represents the neural activity
recorded when the user elicits their thoughts. An
“aroused” thought is a result of strong activation or
high frequency of neurosignals and a “focused” thought
is low activation or low frequency of neurosignals. The
affect model assists me to classify the thought form
description to characterise the shape of thought.

“Focused” (or low-arousal) thoughts are often
spherical, softer in line and tone and generally smaller
than other shapes. Focused thought forms are the
closest in form to the core sphere: smooth, rounded,
with little sense of movement in this shape. Forms
identified in this category include Focused and
Concentrated (see Fig. 11); Thinking about Thinking;
Comfortably Numb; Nothingness; and After Thought
and Still.
“Mid-aroused” thoughts measure pleasantness or
unpleasantness. Thought forms in this category tend to
be softer in shape with no particular direction. The
more pleasant thought forms identified in this category
include Happiness (Fig. 12); Loving Kindness; Warm

94

Passion; Family; Calm; Relaxing with my Boyfriend;
and The Thought of Joy.

Figure 11: 16_9_27_14118Focused and concentrated.obj,
2016.

“Aroused” thoughts included descriptions of excitement,
stress and stimulation and are depicted as elongated,
angular forms with narrow lengths. Lines are more
defined, with definite direction and change of direction
in line, and often form a loop. The forms tend to have a
stronger sense of movement than other forms. Forms
identified in this category include Surprise & Wonder;
Depression and Anxiety; Nervous Laughing; Flames
Elements; Pain Surprise Shock; Stress of getting a
good final year score (Fig. 13); Confusion; and
Distraction. The aroused category also included musical
references and creative pursuits such as Beethoven
Pathetique First Movement (Fig. 14); House Music;
Thinking of a Concert in Whitby UK; and Playing the
Guitar.
The process of classifying and cataloguing the thought
data came first by identifying thought form descriptions
and assigning an arousal and valence dimension. In
doing this, I was able to identify a set of recognisable
thought shapes correlating with mental states. Echoing
one of the principles in determining thought forms, that
‘nature of thought determines form’ (Bessant &
Leadbeater 1901), the same principle can be applied in
this project: that nature of thought is revealed through
identifying user descriptions of thought with the
correlating shapes of the 3D thought forms.

Figure 12: 16_9_27_145224Happiness.obj, 2016.

and form visually connects my work to a long history of
recording thoughts.
Correlation
In this project, the thought data collected from a range
of subjects is random and spontaneous. In positioning
the shapes together to find patterns, I have created an
ordered structure for observation and analysis. The
collection of random shapes represents the collection of
unique thoughts and, positioned together in a
sequence, the irregularity transforms into order. The
large dataset of digital thought forms is arranged in
patterns and shapes of the thought forms in order from
arousal to focus. Ordering the sculptural forms allows
me to exercise my inherent desire to order the
collection of random shapes and exercise some level of
control in arrangement from aroused descending to
representations of focus (section detail - Fig. 15). The
Circumplex Model of Affect – the framework to ‘explore
the neural basis of emotion’ (arousal and valence)
(Posner et al. 2005, 717) – enabled me to arrange the
entire collection of thought forms by shape.

In describing the form, and assigning each a category,
patterns, shapes and meaning emerge not unlike
representations of thought from previous experimental
projects. The practices of the late-nineteenth century
that aimed to capture representations of thought
through photographic practices or line, shape, colour

95

a correlation between the types of thought and shapes
of thought.

Figure 13: 16_8_7_134816Stress of getting a good final year
score.obj, 2016.

Figure 15: Kellyann Geurts, (Section detail) Collection of
thought form files descending from arousal to focus, 2017.

Figure 14: 16_5_4_1543Beethoven Pathetique First
Movement.obj, 2016.

Figure 16: Kellyann Geurts, Collective Arousal, 2017.

In the final visual analysis of the thought-data captured
for this research, I created a set of abstracted thought
form images titled Collective Arousal (Fig. 16),
Collective Mid-arousal (Fig. 17) and Collective Focus
(Fig. 18). The images visually summarise the project
aims – that is, to characterise the neural correlates for
materialised shapes of thought.
The digital images are constructed by compositing
thought form images from the same classification of
either arousal, mid-arousal or focus mental states. The
digital composites of collective thought shapes illustrate

96

Conclusion
The project investigated the conceptual terrain
underpinning a process to generate 3D-printed forms
using neural activity to produce signals using
accessible, low-cost neuroware. The methodology
shows how I generate representations of cognitive
states – or thoughts – from the brainwave data to
explore the parameters of thought forms; create a
design for the Thoughtforms mind–machine interface
(MMI); and develop a system to translate the EEG data
into a format suitable for 3D printing. In this research
practice, user emotion is determined by the description
of the form, and the shape of the form is plotted on an
arousal-valence model of emotions. This account
provides a framework for imagining and representing
thoughts in 3D form in a digital space.
Figure 17: Kellyann Geurts, Collective Mid-arousal, 2017.

Acknowledgements
Firstly, thanks to my PhD supervisor Dr Mark
Guglielmetti, whose guidance, feedback and
encouragement made this project possible. I gratefully
acknowledge the collaborative project work with Dr In
Dae Hwang. Thanks also to support from sensiLab
Director Professor Jon McCormack; and also Elliot
Wilson and Dr Matthew Butler, who generously offered
their time and expertise in 3D printing. I am especially
appreciative of the research and professional support
granted by Professor Andrea Chester, Dr Helen McLean
and Clare Renner, College of Design and Social
Context, RMIT University. Finally, a very special thanks
to all the willing participants who allowed me to record
their very valuable and unique thoughts, which
contributed to the success of the final project.

Figure 18: Kellyann Geurts, Collective Focus, 2017.
97

References
1.

2.

Alderton, Zoe. “Colour, shape, and music: The
presence of thought forms in abstract art”.
Literature & Aesthetics 21, no. 1 (June 2011).

Interaction, 225–41. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1990.
10. Enns, A. and S. Trower. Vibratory Modernism.
Palgrave Macmillan UK, 2013.

Anwar, Y. “Scientists use brain imaging to reveal
the movies in our mind”. Berkeley News (Sept 22
2011).
http://newscenter.berkeley.edu/2011/09/22/brainmovies/.

11. Emotiv, Website. Accessed 23 May 2015.
https://emotiv.com/.

3.

Baars, Bernard J. and Nicole M. Gage. Cognition,
Brain and Consciousness: Introduction to Cognitive
Neuroscience. 2nd edn. UK; USA: Elsevier, 2010.

4.

Barker, M. and A. Munster. “The Mutable Face”. In
Imaging Identity: Media, Memory and Portraiture in
the Digital Age, ed. Melinda Hinkson, 101–16. ACT:
ANU Press, 2016.

13. Grant, B. “A window into the mind”. The Scientist
(2013). http://www.thescientist.com/?articles.view/articleNo/34251/title/A
-Window-into-the-Mind/.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

Besant, Annie and Charles W. Leadbeater.
Thought-Forms, Project Gutenberg, 1901. Accessed
July, 2005.
http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/16269.
Bor, Daniel. “The mechanics of mind reading: Can
a brain scanner decode your inner thoughts?”.
Scientific American, 2009.
https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/themechanics-of-mind-rea/.
Chéroux, Clément, Andres Fischer, Pierre Apraxine,
Denis Canguilhem, and Sophie Schmit. The Perfect
Medium: Photography and the Occult. Edited by
The Metropolitan Museum of Art. New Haven: Yale
University Press, 2004.
Considine, Austin. “This is what thoughts look like”.
Motherboard (31 January 2013).
https://motherboard.vice.com/en_us/article/bmmk
x3/this-is-what-thoughts-look-like.
Cuthbertson, R. Andrew. “The highly original Dr.
Duchenne”. In The Mechanism of Human Facial
Expression, ed. G. B. Duchenne de Boulogne and R.
Andrew Cuthbertson, Studies in Emotion and Social

12. Flusser, V. Towards a Philosophy of Photography.
UK: Reaktion Books, 1983.

14. Hewitt, John. “Thoughts, in a brain, captured on
video for the first time”. ExtremeTech.com, 2013.
15. Hubbard, E. M. “A discussion and review of Uttal”.
Cognitive Science Online 1, no. 1 (2003 2001): 22–
33. http://cogsci-online.ucsd.edu/.
16. Krzych, Scott. “Introduction to Special Section on
the Digital Subject”. Psychoanalysis, Culture &
Society 18, no. 1 (2013): 56–62.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1057/pcs.2012.53.
17. Muto, Akira, Masamichi Ohkura, Gembu Abe,
Junichi Nakai, and Koichi Kawakami. “Real-time
visualization of neuronal activity during
perception”. Current Biology 23, no. 4 (2013):
307–11. Accessed 2017/06/30.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2012.12.040.
18. Pinker, Steven. How the Mind Works. Softback
Preview edn. Great Britain: Allen Lane, The Penguin
Press, 1997.
19. Posner, Jonathan, James A. Russell, and Bradley S.
Peterson. “The Circumplex Model of Affect: An
integrative approach to affective neuroscience,
cognitive development, and psychopathology”.
Development and Psychopathology 17, no. 3
(2005): 715–34.

98

20. Prodger, Philip. Darwin’s Camera: Art and
Photography in the Theory of Evolution. New York:
Oxford University Press, 2011.
21. Ramesh, C. Thought-Forms and Hallucinations:
Some Curious Effects of the Holographic Mind
Process. Notion Press, 2014.
22. Rescorla, Michael. “The Computational Theory of
Mind”. In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
(Spring 2017 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.),
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2017/entrie
s/computational-mind/>.
23. Rettberg, Jill W. Seeing Ourselves through
Technology: How We Use Selfies, Blogs and
Wearable Devices to See and Shape Ourselves.
Available at SSRN:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=2922572: Palgrave
Macmillan, 2014.
24. Russell, James A. “A circumplex model of affect”.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 39, no.
6 (1980): 1161-1178.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/h0077714.
25. Thagard, P. Mind: Introduction to Cognitive
Science. Bradford, 2005.
26. Wolf, Gary. “The Quantified Self”. TED@Cannes.
https://www.ted.com/talks/gary_wolf_the_quantifi
ed_self: TED, 2010.

99

