Enhancing the autonomy of disabled persons:
Assistive technologies directed by user feedback
ESIGELEC - IRSEEM
Technopôle du Madrillet, Avenue Galilée
76801 Saint Etienne du Rouvray, France
Email: prenom.nom@esigelec.fr

O. Labbani-Igbida

A-M. Kokosy

N Ragot, F Bouzbouz, R Khemmar, JY Ertaud

UPJV, Lab. MIS
ISEN - LILLE
33 rue Saint Leu
41 Boulevard Vauban
80039 Amiens Cedex 1, France
59800 Lille, France
Email: annemarie.kokosy@isen-lille.fr Email: ouiddad.labbani@u-picardie.fr

P. Sajous, E. Niyonsaba, D. Reguer

H. Hu, K. McDonald-Maier

UMR IDEES, Lab. Cirtai Université du Havre
25 rue Philippe Lebon
76600 Le Havre, France
Email: patricia.sajous@univ-lehavre.fr, niyemma75@yahoo.fr

School of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering
University of Essex, Wivenhoe Park
Colchester, CO4 3SQ, United Kingdom
Email: hhu@essex.ac.uk, kdm@essex.ac.uk

K. Sirlantzis, G. Howells

M. Pepper, M. Sakel

School of Engineering and Digital Arts
University of Kent, Jennison Building
Canterbury, Kent, CT2 7NT, United Kingdom
Email: K.Sirlantzis@kent.ac.uk, W.G.J.Howells@kent.ac.uk

East Kent Hospitals University NHS Foundation Trust
Kent and Canterbury Hospital, Ethelbert Road
Canterbury, Kent, CT1 3NG, United Kingdom
Email: matthew.pepper@nhs.net, msakel@nhs.net

Abstract—Europe faces a major and growing healthcare problem due to increase in population, increasing longevity and an
aging population with disability. Such dependent, elderly, disabled
and vulnerable persons, are concerned since they wish to live at
home as long as possible. This aspiration is also shared by national
policies and communities across EU. To ensure the optimum
care of dependent people, innovative solutions are encouraged to
maintain independent life style. This paper outlines two projects,
SYSIASS and COALAS, which aim to develop a set of technology
based solutions to meet the needs and empower these people by
enhancing mobility and communication.

Governments and healthcare services are under pressure, facing an important challenge: offering to the users solutions to
their needs. Nowadays, innovative solutions emerge through
the use of assistive technology which allows the user to
enhance his independence, increase his access to societal
role and his quality of life [3]. Within this framework, the
SYSIASS and COALAS projects bring solutions to these
issues by designing and developing innovative systems to
assist the user in his everyday life. The projects are based
on a close relation between social and technical sciences, so
that the users needs are taken into account upstream of the
developments. Therefore, social sciences are no longer limited
only to investigations of social reception but are an integral part
of the development of specifications via exploratory surveys
that will identify user expectations and consider the relevance
to the scale at which technologies should be implemented.
This paper is organized as follows : section II gives a general
overview of the projects and details the key actions. Section
III presents the results obtained in terms of social surveys and
technological developments. A conclusion and perspectives are
given in section IV.

I.

I NTRODUCTION

The European countries are facing major socio-economic
challenges due to:
•

Increased life expectancy and disability along with a
shortage of caregivers [1], is leading to an increase in
demand for social care both from family and from the
welfare states of EU;

•

A prevalence of chronic neuro-disability which is
steadily increasing. Approximately 10 million people
in UK have disabilities with a neurological diagnosis.
The cost of caring for neuro-disabled persons in
Europe has been estimated as 795 Billion Euro [2];

•

II.

SYSIASS AND COALAS PROJECTS

A. Project overview
The SYSIASS project, December 2010 until June 2014,
is supported by the INTERREG IVA 2 Seas programme and
aims to design and implement new devices for a powered
wheelchair. These devices need to be adapted, customised
and personalized to the users and their carers needs. Those
need to ahave the ability to interface with any commercially
available powered wheelchair. They allow the users to easily

A prevalence of wheelchair users which is increasing
in Western countries, estimated in the last decade
at 60-200 per 10,000. The numbers of such users
are expected to increase with improved survival from
neurological conditions e.g. 80% of people with spinal
cord injury are expected to depend on a wheelchair for
the rest of their lives.
71

navigate and communicate within indoor spaces (eg: home,
hospital or company) and increase their autonomy. Three
types of devices are proposed: navigation assistance, secure
communication and multi-modal hands-free human-machine
interfaces (cf. figure 1). The development of all devices is
realized in collaboration with users.. Through translational
clinical trials, such devices will be evaluated for efficacy
performances, efficiency, usability and acceptability of new
technologies. The COALAS project, November 2012 until
June 2015, is supported by European cross-border programme
INTERREG IVA France (Channel) England and focuses
on creating an autonomous cognitive platform, combining an
intelligent wheelchair coupled with the assistive capabilities
of a humanoid robot (specifically NAO robots). SYSIASS
and COALAS projects complement each other. In particular,
the developments related to the powered wheelchair through
the SYSIASS project should prefigure those made COALAS.
Moreover, COALAS project should also open up new technological fields related to humanoid robotics as the cognitive
platform should integrate with a robot (eg: NAO).

Fig. 1.

Intelligent powered wheelchair proposed by SYSIASS project

B. Key actions
1) Social survey: The social survey focussed on the role
of technologies in the social life of dependent people. It
assessed the needs of the client and their carers. The social
survey was organized around qualitative interviews (30: family,
home helper, nursing auxiliary, nurse, doctor, etc.), conducted
around three ”situations”: someone in a wheelchair (electric
or manual), someone walking with difficulty using a walker
or support bars, Alzheimer patient or related, requiring regular
monitoring (of disease).
2) Guidance assistance device: Several intelligent
wheelchairs have been proposed in the literature [4], [5].
Their development or use have not progressed due to economic
reasons or because the developments do not adequatly answer
the needs of the users. On the basis of these observations,
the SYSIASS project proposes three different versions of
guidance. The first one only guarantees collision avoidance
but does not help the user to avoid obstacles by correcting
the wheelchairs trajectory. In the second, the device corrects
the wheelchairs trajectory if the user is not able to do so it
itself. In the third version, the device ensures an autonomous

navigation for the wheelchair. Through the COALAS project,
vision sensors will be integrated on the wheelchair and used
to ensure autonomous navigation in complex indoor and
outdoor environments. They will also be used for recognition
tasks by using biometrics recognition and automatic tracking
of people. According to the requirements, needs and services
for robotic assistive technologies, different scenarios with
variable levels of autonomy are considered, in order to
adapt to the physical functions and disability of the patient :
obstacle avoidance, autonomous localization and navigation
for target tracking and path following in crowded indoor and
outdoor environments, ability to move and navigate in large
environments without requiring human assistance.
3) Secure communication devices: A further major strand
of the project SYSIASS and COALAS is to develop means
of ensuring that secure communications can be initiated and
maintained between the powered chair and other medical
devices present within the system. To achieve this, the project
has adapted a technology developed by the partners to derive
digital signatures and encryptions keys directly from the operating characteristics of the devices themselves, a technology
termed ICmetrics due to its analogy with human biometrics.
ICMetrics represents a process of eliminating the need to
store an encryption key on a system, by employing properties
from which to generate an encryption key from the hardware
characteristics of the powered chair together with the software
executing upon it. Again analogously with a biometric system,
a number of samples are taken from the device. The primary
purpose of the research is to detect evesdropping or tapering
with the system via malware, the presence of which would
cause a generated digital signature to be modified.
4) HMI: The current electric powered wheelchairs (EPWs)
are mostly joy stick driven and require specialised controls in
order to be used by disabled and elderly people whose autonomy is seriously affected by spinal cord injuries, tetraplegia
or amputation, as well as aging. Therefore, it is necessary to
develop a novel human machine interface (HMI) for hands-free
control of EPWs. Up to now, a number of hands-free HMIs
have been developed for disabled and elderly people to control
EPWs by using voice, gesture, tongue movements, eye tracking
and facial expressions etc. [6]. One aim of the SYSIASS
and COALAS projects will deal with the development of the
hands-free control of an EPW using facial expressions which
generate three control models, depending on the ability of
the user in performing facial expressions (description given in
section III-C): C-Mode 1 (2 facial expressions), C-Mode 2 (3
facial expressions) and C-Mode 3 (4 facial expressions). These
expressions are detected by using the ”cognitiv suite” of the
Emotiv sensor with good accuracy. The Emotiv EPOC headset
is used in the bio-signal HMI to detect facial expressions and
generate three control modes. It is a device that measures EEG
activity from 14 saline electrodes (Figure 2). Consequently, the
”cognitive suite” is employed for training the facial expressions
that would be used for the control commands.
5) Humanoid Robot: In the recent years, the humanoid
robotics has emerged around the topic of disability and dependancy. Therefore, the COALAS project is part of this area of
innovation by aiming to develop the assistive capabilities of a
humanoid robot (NAO robot for instance). The use of these autonomous intelligent systems may reduce significantly the cost

•

In the sample, nobody wants to substitute the care
helper (family, friends and professional caregivers) by
assistive systems. Sometimes, there is reluctance to
accept assistive systems when it appears that they are
being introduced for those reasons.

•

Nevertheless, assistive systems seem like an attractive
option to provide some solutions when the disabled
person is alone. They can be seen not as a substitute
for human help, but as a valued assistant. An intelligent system could detect some technical anomalies
and correct them automatically. At home, assistive
systems would bring complementary support to the
helper. Thus, the helper should spend more time for
dialogue and exchange with the disabled person. That
means, assistive systems will not have the same knowhow as the care helper but their missions can focus
on bringing various types of help when the disabled
person is alone.

Fig. 2. Proposed hardware architecture for the intelligent powered wheelchair

of providing remote care-services by reducing or eliminating
the need for human caregivers when not required by the user.
This solution can provide objective monitoring capabilities and
round the clock supervision, being easily scalable and having
the possibility of centralisation (i.e. in-home systems with a
remote central unit of supervision, such as a hospital). The
system can provide the option for remote communication with
health-care specialists for online consultations and diagnoses,
and routine check-ups. By reducing the need to travel to
specific locations, it allows users any-time contact with the
care-service providers from the comfort of their own home.
Also, by using a centralised communication infrastructure such
systems improve the efficiency of the health-care services.
III.

R ESULTS

The results presented in section are part of the works
made in the SYSIASS and COALAS projects for the social
survey. Regarding the techological developments, only results
obtained through the SYSIASS project are presented, as no
technological implementations are done yet in COALAS.

B. Guidance assistance device
The first prototype of the guidance assistance device has
been tested by 27 users at Hospital of Garches (France) divided
into 3 groups: 9 healthy volunteers who have never driven
an electric wheelchair, 9 experienced electric wheelchair users
and 9 users who did not pass the electric wheelchair drivers
licence. They evaluated it in a created circuit (see Figure
3) which simulates a real life indoor environment (doors,
walls, obstacles). The evaluation criteria were the number of
collisions during the test and the time necessary for the user to
finish the test. The device used information from 9 US and 2

A. Social survey
Initial interviews shed light into the social context of the
users. That context determines the need, acceptability of the
assistive systems (wheelchair and the humanoid robot) and
improvement of which is the ultimate aim of health and social
care.
•

The people with disablility tend to have less outdoor
mobility which is often the need for full participation
in life roles including occupational activities and pastime which often are similar to people who live in
institutions.

•

Different factors of motor disabilities are mentioned:
chronic diseases, accidents (falls), decrease of physical
capacities. These factors could be added in some
cases.

•

Mobility disabilities could stem from a multitudes of
impairments eg muscle weakness of upper and lower
limbs, poor balance and lack of confidence due to fear
of falls or wheelchair accidents.

•

Two types of motor disabilities should be considered:
disabilities associated with gross motor skill that prevent to move the body, and disabilities in the hands.

Secondly, interviews provide the first reactions about technical
propositions of assistive systems.

Fig. 3.

Circuit of evaluation at the Hospital of Garches (France)

IR sensors to detect the presence of obstacles in the path of the
wheelchair and then slowed down or stopped the wheelchair
depending on the distance from the obstacle. The system
implemented in an electrical wheelchair manufactured by a
French company, DupontMedical. The users found this device
useful for the reversing. However, they asked to have more
help from the intelligent device, for example by correcting
the wheelchairs trajectory when they are not able to do so
themselves. So, to reach the users needs, a second version of
the device is under development. This will be implemented
in an electrical wheelchair manufactured by Invacare. It uses
the same sensors to help the user to correct the wheelchair
trajectory to avoid obstacles. This second prototype will be
tested at the East Kent Hospitals at Canterbury (UK). The users
who will evaluate it are assumed to be able to drive a powered
chair using a joystick in most environments. Moreover, they
know which room they are in, and where the doorways are.
Therefore they are able to plan their path to do the door.

C. Human machine interface
Two healthy subjects (a female and a male) have operated
the wheelchair employing three and two different control
modes, respectively. Five experiments were carried out by each
control mode. In each experiment, the subject has to follow the
route shown in figure 4 without hitting obstacles. All modes
were tested at a slow speed of 15 cm per second for safety.
Nine facial expressions were employed in the experiments:
BEC, closing both eyes and doing one deep breath - FB,
furrowing the brows without closing eyes - LEC, closing left
eye only; LS, pulling the left side of the lip to the left - PJ,
pulling and exerting force on the muscles of the jaw - RB,
pulling the right side of the lip to the right - REC, closing
right eye only - RS, pulling the right side of the lip to the
right - S, doing a big smile.

C-Mode 2 with REC, BEC and RB. But, if only the minimum
travel times of the C-Mode 1 are considered, Subject B had
the smallest one, being of 140 seconds. It is clear that the
proposed bio-signal based HMI has the characteristic of being
flexible, allowing the user to train and record his desired facial
expressions, as well as select the number of them that wants
to employ. Additionally, in all control modes the user does not
have to maintain the facial expression for a long time in order
to keep running the control command, therefore becoming
more comfortable. After experiments, it can be concluded that
the ”cognitiv suite” of Emotiv EPOC is reliable for training
facial expressions; moreover, it is clear that C-Mode 1 and
C-Mode 2 are reliable for controlling the wheelchair using
different facial expressions. The future work will be focused
on the implementation of an extended hybrid HMI in which the
user can choose the manner of providing the control command
either using facial expressions or head movements.
IV.

Fig. 4.

The route specified for the bio-control of the wheelchair

C ONCLUSION

This paper outlined two distinct projects, SYSIASS and
COALAS, within the scope of developing innovative technologies for improving the autonomy of disable persons while
taking into account the needs of the users via a social survey.
The prototypes of these novel assistive devices and HMI will
be evaluated through formal clinical trial in the East Kent
University Foundation Hospitals Trust by June 2014 involving
people with neuro-disability. Regarding the COALAS project,
working groups have emerged in response to social survey,
which should allow the developments of innovative technologies for the cognitive platform.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
These research works have been implemented within the
frame of the SYSIASS and COALAS projects which are
part-funded by the European Union (ERDF) via the Interreg
IVA 2 Seas programme and Franco-British programme. Also,
the SYSIASS project would like to thank the medical staffs
from Hospital of Garches and especially Bruno Guillon and
Professor Frédéric Lofaso, who have been done the clinical
trials and the Fondation of Garches who funded them.
R EFERENCES
[1]

Fig. 5. Travel times of Subjects A and B at different control modes with
different facial expressions

The wheelchair travel times and trajectories were recorded.
Means and standard deviations of the travel times were calculated. The position of the wheelchair was obtained by a
motion tracking system, VICON, which tracks the five markers
attached to the wheelchair. To achieve a good performance
of the control modes, the Emotiv sensor has to be attached
properly to the users head, for this reason a head band was
used. In all control modes the electrodes have to be deployed.
Figure 5 shows the box plots of the travel times of both
subjects in the different control modes using several facial
expressions. Considering minimum and maximum travel times
between both subjects, the smallest of the minimum times was
of 121 seconds, achieved by Subject A using C-Mode 2 with
FB, LS, and RS, whereas the largest of the maximum times
was of 215 seconds, corresponding to Subject A employing

[2]

[3]
[4]

[5]

[6]

E. Torta, J. Oberzaucher, F. Werner, R. H. Cuijpers, and J. F. Juola, “Attitudes towards socially assistive robots in intelligent homes: Results from
laboratory studies and field trials,” Journal of Human-Robot Interaction,
vol. 1(2), pp. 76–99, 2012.
A. Gustavsson, M. Svensson, and F. Jacobi, “Cost of disorders of the
brain in europe 2010,” European neuropsychopharmacology : the journal
of the European College of Neuropsychopharmacology, vol. 21, pp. 718–
779, 2011.
“Medical rehabilitation in 2011 and beyond. report of a working party,”
Royal College of Physicians, Tech. Rep., 2011.
D. Vanhooydonck, E. Demeester, A. Hntemann, J.Philips, G. Vanacker,
H. V. Brussel, and M. Nuttin, “Adaptable navigational assistance for
intelligent wheelchairs by means of an implicit personalized user model,”
Robotics and Autonomous Systems, vol. 58, pp. 963–977, 2010.
M. R. M. Tomari, Y. Kobayashi, and Y. Kuno, “Development of smart
wheelchair system for a user with severe motor impairment,” in International Symposium on Robotics and Intelligent Sensors 2012, vol. 41,
2012, pp. 538–546.
E. Rechy-Ramirez, H. Hu, and K. McDonald-Maier, “Head movements
based control of an intelligent wheelchair in an indoor environment,” in
IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics and Biomimetics, 2012.

