西南交通大学学报
第 54 卷 第 4 期

JOURNAL OF SOUTHWEST JIAOTONG UNIVERSITY

2019 年 8 月

ISSN - 0258-2724

Vol.54 No.4
Aug. 2019

DOI：10.35741/issn.0258-2724.54.4.3

Research Article
Engineering

THE ANALYSIS OF MOTOR IMAGERY AND SSVEPS FOR THE BCI
APPLICATION
Raymond Sutjiadia,*, Timothy John Pattiasinab, Andreas Handojoc, Resmana Limd
Informatics Department, Faculty of Information Technology, Institut Informatika Indonesia
Jl. Pattimura No. 3, Surabaya, Indonesia, raymond@ikado.ac.id
b
Information System Department, Faculty of Information Technology, Institut Informatika Indonesia
Jl. Pattimura No. 3, Surabaya, Indonesia, temmy@ikado.ac.id
c
Informatics Department, Faculty of Industrial Technology, Petra Christian University
Jl. Siwalankerto 121-131, Surabaya, Indonesia, handojo@petra.ac.id
d
Electrical Engineering Department, Faculty of Industrial Technology, Petra Christian University
Jl. Siwalankerto 121-131, Surabaya, Indonesia, resmana@petra.ac.id
a

Abstract
Many studies have shown that the electrical and magnetic fields generated during brain activities can
produce certain signals. Some of these signals can be captured using electroencephalography, a detection
tool involving mobile brainwave sensors whose use has matured and become affordable. The braincomputer interface (BCI) provides an alternative form of communication between the human and a
system (computer or actuator) without any physical contact between them. There are many ways to evoke
brain signals for translation into computer tasks, but the most popular are motor imagery and steady-state
visual evoked potentials (SSVEPs). In this research, an offline analysis of motor imagery and SSVEPs
based on BCI experiments that use electroencephalography (EEG) is reported. The results show that
SSVEPs are more accurate and convenient than motor imagery, with errors of 15 percent and 35 percent,
respectively.
Keywords: brain-computer interface, brain signal, electroencephalogram, motor imagery, steady-state visual evoked
potential.

摘要 : 许多研究表明，大脑活动期间产生的电场和磁场可以产生某些信号。 其中一些信号可以使用脑电图
捕获，这是一种涉及移动脑波传感器的检测工具，其使用已经成熟并且价格合理。 脑 - 计算机接口（BCI）
提供了人与系统（计算机或致动器）之间的另一种通信形式，它们之间没有任何物理接触。 有许多方法可
以唤起大脑信号转化为计算机任务，但最常见的是运动想象和稳态视觉诱发电位（SSVEP）。 在这项研究
中，报道了基于使用脑电图（EEG）的 BCI 实验的运动想象和 SSVEP 的离线分析。 结果表明，SSVEPs 比
运动图像更准确，更方便，误差分别为 15％和 35％。

2

Raymond Sutjiadi et al. / Journal of Southwest Jiaotong University/ Vol.54 No.4 Aug. 2019

关键词: 脑 - 机接口，脑信号，脑电图，运动想象，稳态视觉诱发电位。

I. INTRODUCTION
The brain is a vital internal organ that is
located within the skull. All human activities are
controlled via some parts of the brain. Nerve
signals are transmitted from the brain to motor
muscles all the time as are impulses toward other
body parts, facilitating engagement in some
activities.
From the neuroscience point of view, the
peripheral nervous system is divided into 2: the
autonomic nervous system (ANS) and the
somatic nervous system (SoNS). The ANS is the
part of the nervous system that controls visceral
function below the conscious level, while the
SoNS is the part of the nervous system that is
associated with the voluntary control of body
movements through skeletal muscles [1].
In some conditions, the impairment in
communication between brain and motoric
muscles can be happened because of an accident,
disease or congenital disablement. For example,
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) disease
causes disability in controlling body movement
although there is no functional problem with the
brain itself as the central command.
In this research, SoNS will be examined in
thorough detail by reading brain signal patterns
obtained by using an Electroencephalogram
(EEG) as shown in Figure 1. EEG is a device that
is able to capture brain signals by placing
electrodes on the scalp (non-invasive method).
Besides this non-invasive method, there is
another method to acquire brain signals by
placing electrodes directly on the brain surface
(invasive method) called Electrocorticography
(ECoG), or Intracranial Electroencephalography
(iEEG). For the sake of simplicity, non-invasive
methods are usually preferable to invasive. The
accuracy of EEG readings is not vastly different
between these methods [2]. However, the
invasive method is more accurate because the
electrodes are positioned nearer to the brain,
which is better than the external method at
eliminating noise signals that can disturb the
readings of the brain signal patterns.
Using brain signal patterns, a computer
application can be developed to help people who
are paralyzed or have a motoric disability to use
and control a computer, as well as type on a
keyboard.

Figure 1.Components of a typical BCI system
II.

RESEARCH METHOD

A. EEG and Brain Signals
As the central command for the human body,
the brain has complex activities that generate
many signals. The accuracy of brain signal
acquisition depends on many factors, including
whether external or internal methods are used.
For external factors, the reading of brain signals
relies on the sensitivity of the EEG electrodes
and the number of channels. Each EEG electrode
has a sensitive sensor to capture certain ranges of
brain signals, measured in cycle per second or
Hertz (frequency) [5]. There is a correlation
between sensor sensitivity and accuracy. The
more sensitive, the more frequency ranges can be
identified. Of course, the term frequency here is
not only referring to signal frequency, but also
noise frequency. The noise frequency could be
minimized later by signal processing and
filtering, from simply applying gel to each
electrode to minimize impedance, to more
complex digital filtering methods [6].
The number of channels is also important,
since more EEG channels will acquire more
signals from many parts of the brain. EEG
devices are divided into several classes, from the
cheapest low-density EEG, which consists of an
EEG sensor array with only two channels (left
and right side), to more expensive high-density
EEGs which consist of an EEG sensor array of up
to 256 channels. An experiment conducted by
Lau et al. showed that a 35-channel EEG is
sufficient to classify two dominant electrocortical
sources [7]. For a multi-class classifier, the use of
more channels would improve the results [8]. In
this research, a 12-channel EEG could be used as
an alternative in an empirical approach to gain
average accuracy when using a cheaper device.

Raymond Sutjiadi et al. / Journal of Southwest Jiaotong University/ Vol.54 No.4 Aug. 2019
On the other hand, there are internal factors
that could influence the readings of EEG patterns
as well. These internal factors could arise from
the activity of the brain itself. In a normal active
condition, Beta β) signal which resides around
16–31 Hz. A beta (β) signal will be more active
in a stressful condition or when trying to speak
out loud, which causes the release of cortisol. In a
rest or sleep condition, the dominant human
brain signal is an alpha (α) signal (8–15 Hz) and
a theta (θ) signal (4–7 Hz), respectively, as
shown in Figure 2-4. These frequencies are
emitted when people are relaxed, in a good mood,
or sleeping, causing the release of serotonin.
However, an α block occurs when an α signal
disappears when a person is thinking, blinking, or
stimulated in a different way, such as audio and
visual stimulation. Physiological signals are
spontaneous and less controllable. With the
growing interest in Brain-Computer Interface
(BCI) and Electroencephalogram (EEG) users
have also been considered [9]. Therefore, for a
BCI application, a β signal is the main frequency
that should be examined because people need to
focus and concentrate when interacting with a
computer.

Figure 2. Beta (β) signal

Figure 3. Alpha (α) signal

Figure 4. Theta (θ) signal

In addition to the internal factors mentioned
above, one more factor could affect the readings
of brain signals. The movement of the head, eyes,
eyelid, face muscles, or any other body parts
could cause some frequency fluctuation in brain
signals [10]. In the present research study, the
brain signal pattern will be classified into specific
activities needed to control the computer, for
example to move an object on the monitor or to
move the cursor. To ensure good and precise
classification, the brain signal will be induced by
stimuli. By using stimulation, the expected brain
signal pattern could be more accurately classified
in relation to a specific computer task. Motor
Imagery and Steady-State Visually Evoked

Potential (SSVEP) are the most common
methods used to stimulate a brain signal pattern
in a BCI application.
B. Motor Imagery
Motor Imagery is a popular and simple
method that is used to trigger a brain signal
pattern by visualizing the movement of some
body parts. Practicing Motor Imagery refers to
engaging in a mental practice for how to do a
physical task using one’s imagination, not an
actual physical movement.
Based on research, the Motor Imagery method
has been widely used to mentally engage in
skilled tasks, such as sports, dance, music, and
even surgery. Utilizing Motor Imagery would
have nearly the same effect as doing an actual
physical practice. This is because the brain
activity that is triggered in Motor Imagery and
physical activity is similar. However, Blankertz
et al. [11] concluded that one of the challenges in
Motor Imagery for BCI is the significant intersubject variability with respect to the
characteristics of the brain signals.
Moreover, people with a motor disability or
who are paralyzed cannot move their body limbs.
However, because their central nervous system is
still functioning well, they can use this Motor
Imagery method to control the machine or
computer, not by using their hands or other body
parts, but by using the brain signal patterns
captured by an EEG device and translated into a
specific task in the form of digital data.
For example, visualizing a right-hand
movement will stimulate a specific brain signal
pattern to be classified into a particular computer
task, such as moving the cursor to the right, and
vice versa. Again, imagining walking forward
will stimulate a specific brain signal pattern to be
classified into a particular machine task, such as
moving the wheelchair forward.
The advantage of Motor Imagery lies in its
simplicity. There is no need to add any auxiliary
devices for the brain signal stimulation process.
However, the drawback of this method is the
need for adaptability. Not all people find it easy
to engage in Motor Imagery the first time they try
it; this is especially true for people that do not
have a physical disability and who often engage
in physical and logical activities instead of
visualization. Lack of focus and an inability to
visualize an activity smoothly could deteriorate
the performance of the brain signal feature
extraction. Intensive focus and great effort are
needed to do a long consecutive Motor Imagery,
which can result in dizziness, nausea, and fatigue.

4

Raymond Sutjiadi et al. / Journal of Southwest Jiaotong University/ Vol.54 No.4 Aug. 2019

C. Steady State Visually Evoked Potentials
(SSVEP)
SSVEP is another brain signal stimulation
method that uses visually-evoked stimuli. SSVEP
is a popular paradigm for a BCI due to its robust
presence in EEG signals. This method uses a
person’s eyes as the receptors of stimuli, in the
form of moving animation or screen flickering.
Unlike Motor Imagery, SSVEP uses a monitor as
an external medium to trigger the brain signal
pattern. SSVEP is evoked when a visual
stimulation is repeated and the reaction to a
subsequent stimulus occurs before the effect of
the previous stimulus has subsided [12]. Among
the various BCI paradigms, SSVEP has been
shown to be very useful for many applications as
well as cognitive and clinical research studies
(e.g., visual attention, working memory, epilepsy,
and brain rhythms) [13].
For some users, SSVEP is easier than Motor
Imagery because SSVEP uses external stimuli to
build the brain signal pattern. SSVEP is suitable
for people whose eyes are still good enough to
serve as the receptors of the visual stimuli. In a
SSVEP-based BCI, the first problem faced is
selecting the type of stimulator to use. Many
types of stimulators can be used to evoke SSVEP,
including a cathode ray tube (CRT) monitor, a
liquid crystal display (LCD) monitor, or a lightemitting diode (LED) array. Because of the
different lighting mechanisms, these stimulators
can be used in BCI systems with different
complexities [14]. The drawback of this method
is that it requires an auxiliary monitor device
with an adequate screen size and a proper
distance between the screen and the user. A
screen that is too small or too large will distract
the focal point of the users and deteriorate the
accuracy of the classifier. The distance between
the screen monitor and the user could also affect
the accuracy of the classifier [15].
In an SSVEP, the monitor is used to show the
moving animation; for example, a left arrow
moving from right to left. The user focuses on
this animation and, consequently, the brain emits
a specific signal pattern to be classified into a
specific computer task. The monitor is also used
to show some flickering objects in specific
frequencies, usually in low frequency, for
example four flickering objects in 5, 6, 7, and 8
Hertz (Hz), respectively. Then, the user focuses
on one flickering object at a time. Thus, the brain
will emit a frequency that is similar to the
frequency emitted by the flickering object.

III. RESULT AND DISCUSSION
This study’s goal was to determine the better
method of motor control to be used in braincontrolled interface (BCI) systems. The two
motor control methods tested were Motor
Imagery and steady state visually evoked
potentials (SSVEP). These motor control
methods were tested using the software,
OpenVibe 2.0.1. OpenVibe is an open source
software platform used for BCI and real-time
neurosciences. An electroencephalogram (EEG)
device was tested using EmotivEpoc+, which
features fourteen EEG channels plus two
reference channels. The software Emotiv SDK
Premium Edition v3.3.3 was used to develop
communication between the EmotivEpoc+ device
and OpenVibe Software.
In order to get objective results, both
experiments used the same scenario for feature
extraction and classifier algorithm. Common
Spatial Pattern (CSP) was used as the feature
extraction algorithm and Support Vector Machine
(SVM) was used as the classifier algorithm.
Figure 5 shows a block diagram of the BCI
system.

Figure 5. Block diagram of the BCI system

When testing Motor Imagery, users were
asked to imagine left-hand movement as a
command to move the cursor to the left side and
also to imagine right-hand movement as a
command to move the cursor to the right side.
Brain signal pattern was acquired by the EEG
device, then filtered by band-pass filter to
minimize the frequencies caused by noise. Once
the brain signal patter was filtered, the signal
entered a windowing process to tag the time
periods when stimulation events occurred.
Further, the tagged signals were processed by
feature-extraction to optimize the distinction
between both signal patterns before being
classified by a trained SVM classifier into
respective cursor movement.
When testing the SSVEP system, the same
scenario was used. The only difference was the
use of visual stimuli. This test used two flickering
objects shown on a monitor, at the frequencies of
7 Hz and 12 Hz. These were used as brain signal

Raymond Sutjiadi et al. / Journal of Southwest Jiaotong University/ Vol.54 No.4 Aug. 2019
stimulation for cursor movement command to the
left and right side, respectively. To elicit an
SSVEP, a Repetitive Visual Stimulus (RVS)
must be presented to the user. The RVS can be
rendered on a computer screen by alternating
graphic patterns, or with external light sources
able to emit modulated light. Table 1 shows the
results of the testing from twenty-sequence
commands, with a two-second resting state
between each sequence.
Table 1.
The result of Motor Imagery and SSVEP experiment
Sequence

Command

1
Neutral
2
Left
3
Right
4
Neutral
5
Left
6
Neutral
7
Right
8
Left
9
Neutral
10
Left
11
Right
12
Neutral
13
Left
14
Neutral
15
Right
16
Neutral
17
Left
18
Right
19
Left
20
Neutral
Error Percentage

Motor
Imagery
Neutral
Left
Left
Neutral
Left
Right
Right
Left
Neutral
Left
Left
Neutral
Left
Left
Left
Right
Left
Left
Left
Neutral
35%

SSVEP
Neutral
Left
Right
Neutral
Left
Left
Right
Left
Neutral
Left
Left
Neutral
Left
Neutral
Right
Neutral
Left
Left
Left
Neutral
15%

Based on the results shown in Table 1,
SSVEP is shown to be a more accurate method of
brain-signal stimulation with a fifteen percent
error rate, compared with Motor Imagery, which
has a thirty-five percent error rate. Both methods
are shown to be less accurate when there were
two or more consecutive commands, as seen with
sequences six, eleven, and eighteen. The results
also show that the two-second resting state
between sequences is insufficient time to allow
the brain signal to neutralize before the next
command. A longer resting state could improve
the accuracy, but it will increase delay time to
send a command. The accuracy could also be
improved by tuning the parameter of CSP as
feature extraction and SVM as classifier.

very susceptible to many factors, both from
internal and external, that can affect the accuracy
of brain signal pattern recognition. Signal
filtering and processing could be done to remove
noise signal and improve detected signal. CSP
and SVM as feature extraction and classifier to
classify brain signal pattern into computer task.
In order to evoke brain signal, there are 2
most common method to be used in BCI
application, i.e. Motor Imagery and SSVEP
method. In designing this type of BCI, the
aspects involved should be taken into
consideration systematically. For example, a very
complex method may conduct a very good
accuracy, but it is time-consuming, which makes
the system un-timely. In this situation, we should
select a suitable accuracy and speed to make a
better system [16]. Motor Imagery is the simpler
one since this method does not need auxiliary
device and use user’s imagination to generate
brain signal pattern. Even this is the simpler
method, not all people are easy to implement this
method.
SSVEP is a response of the vision to a light
stimulus, the electric activity focuses at the vision
cortex, mainly at the primary vision cortex,
which locates at the occipital area. SSVEP uses
flickered screen monitor to evoke the brain signal
with the same frequency. Indeed, this method is
not as simple as motor imagery because the need
of screen monitor with proper screen size and
distance. But this method is easier to be
implemented because the stimuli are assisted
with external device. As the result, the accuracy
of SSVEP (15 percent of error) as brain signal
stimulation is more accurate than Motor Imagery
(35 percent of error).

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors are thankful to the grant provided
by Directorate of Research and Community
Service, the Ministry of Research, Technology,
and Higher Education, Republic of Indonesia.

REFERENCES
[1]

IV. CONCLUSION
BCI is a solution for people with motoric
disability to interact with computer through brain
signal as a command. One of challenging works
in BCI is how to interpret brain signal into
particular computer task. Whilst brain signal is

[2]

WESTFALL, T.C. & WESTFALL,
D.P. (2006). Neurotransmission: The
Autonomic and Somatic Motor Nervous
Systems. In: BRUNTON, L.L., LAZO,
J.S. & PARKER, K.L. Goodman and
Gilman's: The Pharmacological Basis
of Therapeutics, 11th ed., Chapter 6.
New York, NY: McGraw Hill.
WALDERT, S. (2016). Invasive vs.
Non-Invasive Neuronal Signals for
Brain-Machine Interfaces: Will One

6

Raymond Sutjiadi et al. / Journal of Southwest Jiaotong University/ Vol.54 No.4 Aug. 2019

Prevail? Frontiers in Neuroscience,
10(295), pp; 1-4.
[3] MAK, J.N. & WOLPAW, J.R. (2009)
Clinical Applications of BrainComputer Interfaces: Current State and
Future Prospects. IEEE Rev Biomed
Eng, 2, pp. 187-199.
[4] SHASTRAKAR, S. & BAWANE,
N.G. (2016) BCI Based Systems to
Control Cursor Movement using
Various Techniques: Survey Report.
International Journal of Engineering
Science and Computing (IJESC), 6(11),
pp. 3434 -3440.
[5] MANCHALA, V., REDKAR, S. &
SUGAR, T. (2015). Using Deep
Learning for Human Computer
Interface via Electroencephalography.
International Journal of Robotics and
Automation (IJRA), 4(4), pp. 292-310.
[6] THULASIDAS, M., GUAN, C., &
WU, J. (2006). Robust Classification of
EEG Signal for Brain-Computer
Interface. IEEE Transactions on
Neural Systems and Rehabilitation
Engineering, 14(1), pp. 24-29.
[7] LAU, T.M., GWIN, J.T. & FERRIS,
D.P. (2012) How Many Electrodes are
Really Needed for EEG-Based Mobile
Brain Imaging? Journal of Behavioral
and Brain Science, 2, pp. 387-393.
[8] WANG, D., MIAO, D. & BLOHM, G.
(2012). Multi-Class Motor Imagery
EEG Decoding for Brain-Computer
Interfaces. Frontiers in Neuroscience,
6, 151.
[9] KHALILI, Z. & MORADI, M.H.
(2008). Emotion Detection Using Brain
and
Peripheral
Signals.
IEEE
Proceedings of Cairo International on
Biomedical Engineering Conference,
CIBEC, pp. 1-4.
[10] ARZAK, M.I., SUNARYA, U. &
HADIYOSO, S. (2016). Design and
Implementation
of
Wheelchair
Controller
Based
Electroencephalogram Signal using
Microcontroller. International Journal
of
Electrical
and
Computer
Engineering (IJECE), 6(6), pp. 28782886.

[11] BLANKERTZ, B., DORNHEGE, G.,
KRAULEDAT, M., MUELLER, K.R.
& CURIO, G. (2007). The NonInvasive
Berlin
Brain-Computer
Interface: Fast Acquisition of Effective
Performance in Untrained Subjects.
NeuroImage, 37(2), pp. 539-550.
[12] KAUR, N., SINGH, E.B. & SINGH,
E.J. (2017). Mouse Cursor Control
System Based on SSVEP. International
Journal of Advanced Research in
Computer Science, 8(7), pp. 162-167.
[13] Ellis, K.A., Silberstein, R.B. & Nathan,
P.J. (2006). Exploring the Temporal
Dynamics of the Spatial Working
Memory n-back Task Using Steady
State Visual Evoked Potentials
(SSVEP). NeuroImage, 31(4), pp.
1741-1751.
[14] Wu, Z.H. & Yao, D.Z. (2008). The
Stimulator Selection in SSVEP-Based
BCI. Medical Engineering & Physics,
30(8), pp. 1079-1088.
[15] Kwak, N.S., Won, D.O., Kim, K.T.,
Park, H.J. & Lee, S.W. (2016).
Analysis of Steady State Visual
Evoked Potentials based on Viewing
Distance Changes for Brain-Machine
Interface Speller. IEEE International
Conference on Systems, Man, and
Cybernetics (SMC), pp. 001502001505.
[16] Wu, Z.H. & Yao, D.Z. (2009). A Study
on SSVEP-Based BCI. Journal of
Electronic Science and Technology of
China, 7(1), pp. 7-11.
参考文:
[1] WESTFALL, T.C. & WESTFALL,
D.P. (2006). 神经传递：自主神经和
体 细 胞 运 动 神 经 系 统 。 在 . In:
BRUNTON, L.L., LAZO, J.S. &
PARKER, K.L. Goodman 和 Gilman's:
治疗学的药理学基础, 第11版，第6
章。纽约，纽约：McGraw Hill.
[2]

WALDERT, S. (2016). 用于脑机接口
的侵入性与非侵入性神经元信号：

Raymond Sutjiadi et al. / Journal of Southwest Jiaotong University/ Vol.54 No.4 Aug. 2019

一种是否会流行？神经科学前沿，,
[3]

10(295), 第1-4页.
MAK, J.N. & WOLPAW, J.R. (2009)
脑 - 计算机接口的临床应用：现状和
未来展望。. IEEE Rev Biomed Eng, 2,

[4]

第 187-199页.
SHASTRAKAR, S. & BAWANE,
N.G. (2016) 基于BCI的系统使用各种
技术控制光标移动：调查报告。国
际 工 程 科 学 与 计 算 杂 志 (IJESC),

[5]

6(11), 第 3434-3440页.
MANCHALA, V., REDKAR, S. &
SUGAR, T. (2015). 通过脑电图使用
深度学习进行人机界面。国际机器
人与自动化杂志(IJRA), 4(4), 第 292-

[6]

310页.
THULASIDAS, M., GUAN, C., &
WU, J. (2006). 脑 - 机接口脑电信号
的鲁棒分类。 IEEE神经系统与康复

[7]

[8]

[9]

工程学报, 14(1), 第 24-29页.
LAU, T.M., GWIN, J.T. & FERRIS,

[11] BLANKERTZ, B., DORNHEGE, G.,
KRAULEDAT, M., MUELLER, K.R.
& CURIO, G. (2007). 非侵入式柏林
脑 - 计算机接口：快速获取未经训练
的科目的有效表现。神经成像, 37(2),
第 539-550页.
[12] KAUR, N., SINGH, E.B. & SINGH,
E.J. (2017). 基于SSVEP的鼠标光标控
制系统。国际计算机科学高级研究
期刊，8(7), 第162-167页.
[13] Ellis, K.A., Silberstein, R.B. & Nathan,
P.J. (2006). 利用稳态视觉诱发电位（
SSVEP）探索空间工作记忆n-back任
务的时间动态.神经成像, 31(4), 第
1741-1751页.
[14] Wu, Z.H. & Yao, D.Z. (2008). 基于
SSVEP的BCI中的刺激器选择。医学
工程与物理, 30(8), 第 1079-1088页.
[15] Kwak, N.S., Won, D.O., Kim, K.T.,
Park, H.J. & Lee, S.W. (2016). 基于观
察距离变化的脑 - 机界面拼写器稳态

D.P. (2012) 基于脑电图的移动脑成像

视觉诱发电位分析。 IEEE国际系统

真正需要多少个电极？ 行为与脑科

，人与控制论会议(SMC), 第 001502-

学杂志, 2, 第 387-393页.
WANG, D., MIAO, D. & BLOHM, G.

001505页.
[16] Wu, Z.H. & Yao, D.Z. (2009). 基于

(2012). 用于脑机接口的多类电机图

SSVEP的BCI研究。电子科技大学学

像脑电图解码。神经科学的前沿, 6,
151.
KHALILI, Z. & MORADI, M.H.
(2008). 使用脑和外围信号进行情绪
检测。 IEEE IEEE开罗国际生物医学

工程会议论文集, CIBEC, 第1-4页.
[10] ARZAK, M.I., SUNARYA, U. &
HADIYOSO, S. (2016). 基于单片机的
轮椅控制器脑电信号的设计与实现
。国际电气和计算机工程杂志
(IJECE), 6(6), 第 2878-2886页.

报, 7(1), 第 7-11页.

