IJoDR

Abstracts of the 33th Annual Conference of the
International Association for the Study of Dreams
June 24 - June 28, 2016
Kerkrade, The Netherlands
Content
This supplement of the International Journal of Dream Research includes the abstracts of presenters who gave consent
to the publishing. The abstracts are categorized into thematic groups and within the category sorted according to the last
name of the first presenter. Affiliations are included only for the first author. A name register at the end is also provided.

Contents:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

Keynotes
Morning Dream Groups
Workshops
Clinical Topics
Religion/Spiritual/Culture/Arts
Education/Other Topics
PSI Dreaming
Lucid Dreaming
Research/Theory
Posters/Hot-off-the Press

1. Keynotes
Visionary Dreams and the Great Challenge of Our
Times
Anne Baring
Winchester, England
What is the great challenge of our times? It is to move to a
new level of consciousness, realizing we are an inseparable
part of the world around us and the wider universe. It is to
create a new Cosmology, offering our children a different
story which will give meaning and value to their lives. It is
to become whole by reconnecting matter with spirit. We live
in a radically unbalanced culture structured by beliefs and
habits of behaviour which are now obsolete and are showing increasing signs of collapse. The old story is fading and
a new one is being born. We are in the midst of The Great
Awakening: awakening to our true nature as cosmic beings
temporarily incarnated on this planet. Dreams are messengers between two dimensions of reality. Visionary dreams

can be our guides in this stupendous process of birthing
a new civilization, free from the indescribable cruelties and
power struggles which have polluted the past and still desecrate the present. In ancient Egypt and Greece, in China
and South America, in Sumer, Persia and Babylon and in
Hebrew culture, this visionary guidance was welcomed and
honoured. In contemporary indigenous cultures it still is and
they have much to teach us. The message of the visionary
dream is to bring the human community into harmonious relationship with the hidden laws governing the cosmos. Our
culture has become disconnected from the invisible dimension of reality, ignoring the presence of these hidden laws.
Consequently, it has become impoverished and ailing, like
the Old King of Alchemy.
Fortunately, in the last century, there was a great Dreamer,
a psychiatrist called C.G. Jung who reconnected us with
the deeper dimension of Soul which had been neglected
for centuries. His understanding of the role of the dream is
carried in these words: “Everywhere, at all times, in all cultures and races of which we have record, when the greatest
meaning, the highest value of life that man called gods or
God needed renewal and increase, the process of renewal
began through a dream...”
In this talk I will share a visionary dream I had 40 years
ago which changed the course of my life and helped me
to understand what we have to do if we are to survive as a
species and create a better world for our children. All I have
understood is contained in my book, The Dream of the Cosmos: a Quest for the Soul.

Playing the Dream: On Dream and Narrative in
Modern-day Digital Games
Frank G. Bosman
Vlijmen, the Netherlands
Dreams and dream-like phenomena play an interesting part
in modern-day video games narratives. The narratological
functions of these phenomena in video games tell us how
we, as a society, think of the very nature of dreams themselves: breaking the boundaries of what is, humanly speaking, possible.

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

S1

IJoDR
In this lecture, video games will be identified as ‘digital (interactive) playable (narrative) texts, combining insights from
both ludological (the game as ludus, play) and narratological
(the game as narrative, story) approaches of game study
research.’ Especially, the narrative nature of video games is
important: as narratives, video games communicate meaning, intentionally by the designer and spontaneously by the
gamer himself.
In this framework, ‘dreams’ and dream-like phenomena
in best-selling video games like The Elder’s Scroll: Skyrim,
Far Cry 3, Fallout 3 and 4, and DMC: Devil May Cry can be
narratologically interpreted. While self-identified as ‘dreams’
in the games themselves, they consist of various phenomena such as classic dreams, psychosis, relived memories,
visions, hypnosis and near-death-experience. Important for
a classification of these phenomena is the question of how
the ‘dream’ is induced: naturally or artificially (mechanically,
pharmaceutically, magically, religiously and/or psychologically).
Another important topic in the narratological examination
of dreams in video games is the result of studies of the interconnection between gaming and dreaming. Gamers report
that the dreams they have in their sleep resemble the scenery and narratives of the games they have played. Besides
this, there appears to be a correlation between gaming and
lucidity in dreaming.
The narratological functions of dreams in video games are,
broadly speaking, to make possible what is humanly speaking impossible. Or, to put it more technically, to escape the
laws of causality, and of place and time; to convey messages otherwise inconceivable; perform tasks, otherwise
impossible; and to gain knowledge otherwise unreachable.
But there is more to be said. Some dream sequences in
video games, however, immobilize (at least partially) the
freedom of the avatar (and therefore of the controlling player), forcing an uncomfortable passivity (directly contrary to
the interactive nature of video games themselves), creating
some sort of semi-lucidity.

The Dream as a Meaningful Experience in a Developing Dialogical Self

the interactional dynamics of this interface. In its successive appearances, the developing dream shows the twoway communication between dream content and waking
concerns: waking concerns have an input on the changing
content of the dream and, the other way around, the dream
provides metaphors that assist the person in articulating
and understanding changes in waking life. In this case, I
analyze, inspired by Foulkes’ (1978) continuity hypothesis,
the successive manifestations of a developing dream of a
psychotherapy client. Following this client over a period of
18 months I will show how an initially traumatic dream provided her with metaphors referring to problems in her disrupted marriage and, moreover, was helpful for her to cope
with these problems.
The developing dream is more than just a recurrent or repetitive dream. While a recurrent dream may have a content
that remains essentially the same over time (e.g., being unprepared for an examination), the content of the developing
dream changes, in its successive manifestations, as the result of input from waking experiences. From a methodological perspective, I will present a Self-Confrontation method
that can be used for the study of the content and (re)organization of one’s personal meaning system.
Second, I will present and discuss the effect when, in Jungian terms, the interpretation of a dream changed from the
object level to the subject level. The example is from a client
who in his dream was confronted with a murderer. During
the discussion of this dream together with the psychotherapist, the client discovered that the murderer was not simply
a purely external figure (interpretation on the object level)
but part of his own self (interpretation on the subject level). I
will analyze the meaning of this dream from the perspective
of Dialogical Self Theory (Hermans & Hermans-Konopka,
2010), with special attention to the client’s response to the
discovery of unrecognized aggression in his own self.
My purpose in this presentation is to show two methods
(self-confrontation and internal dialogue) for the study of
dreams in close connection with developments in waking
life and to illustrate them with changes in the lives of clients
in psychotherapy. In order to place these procedures and
illustrations in a broader context, I will refer to trends in the
scientific dream literature, where similar phenomena in nonclient groups were found.

Hubert Hermans

References

Nijmegen, The Netherlands

Foulkes, D. (1978). A Grammar of Dreams. Sussex, England: Harvester
Press.
Hermans, H.J.M., & Hermans-Konopka, A. (2010). Dialogical Self Theory: Positioning and Counter-Positioning in a Globalizing Society. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

The focus of this presentation is on the relation between
the meaning of dreams and significant waking concerns.
More specifically, the question is posed of how the content
of dreams changes and develops in close connection with
meaningful changes in waking life.
I will present two case studies which demonstrate how
paying attention to dreams has an impact on the waking
concerns of clients in psychotherapy. One regards a socalled ‘developing dream,’ the other shows the effect of
moving the interpretation of a dream from the object level
to the subject level in the Jungian sense of the term. Alongside, I will present some theoretical and methodological devices which are helpful in the study of the meaning of the
two types of dreams.
First, I will focus on the phenomenon of the so called
‘developing dream.’ This finds its meaning on the interface
between dream and waking life and changes as a result of

S2

Dreaming as Consciousness: From Philosophy to
Testable Theories in Dream Science
Antti Revonsuo
Turku, Finland
There has been a long-lasting controversy about the fundamental nature of dreaming, both in philosophy and in the
empirical studies of dreams. Some philosophers, such as
Daniel Dennett, have put forward the controversial suggestion that dreams are not conscious experiences at all. By
contrast, dream researchers have taken it for granted that

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

IJoDR
dreams are experiences, but disagreed about the characteristics and definition of dreaming as an empirical phenomenon. Recent theoretical advances that integrate dreaming
and consciousness seem to offer a fruitful solution to the old
controversial questions by defining dreaming as a special
form of consciousness. Dreaming consists of phenomenal
consciousness in a pure form, stripped from online causal
relationships to sensory inputs and motor outputs. Dreaming feels like “being in a world” – thus, dreaming, in its most
basic and universal form, can be defined as a virtual reality
or a world-simulation in the brain. The definition of dreaming as an internal simulated world has, subsequently, led to
more detailed simulation theories of the function of dreaming. If dreaming in general is a simulation of waking reality,
then the function of dreaming may be to simulate particularly important aspects or events of the waking world, in
order to prepare the dreaming organism to deal with corresponding real situations more efficiently. The main ideas
of current simulation theories of dreaming will be presented
here, paying particular attention to their empirical testability.
Overall, the new simulation theories of dreaming could lead
to significant theoretical and empirical progress in dream
science that unifies theories of dreaming with theories of
consciousness. Moreover, the idea of dreaming as an internal, conscious world-simulation in the brain poses a challenge to many current philosophical theories of consciousness.

2. Morning Dream Groups

discussion; drawing; guided imagery exercises to enhance
dream incubation and recall. Presenters will share their experience and examples in the use of these dream practices.
In line with the Seth material, interpretation of all dreams is
by the dreamer and not by the presenters.
It is not necessary for dream group participants to be familiar with the Seth Material. The dream group will be experiential and not didactic. The purpose of this morning dream
group is to (1) acquaint attendees with specific exercises,
derived from the Seth material, that will be useful for future
use; (2) expand attendees’ view of how dreams assist us
in creating our personal reality; (3) provide an experiential
platform for attendees who are familiar with the Seth material to further explore and share their own experiences as
related to dreams. It will be suitable for beginning, intermediate, and advanced level attendees. The Seth Material consists of 30 books plus additional transcripts of sessions that
describe the nature of physical and metaphysical reality.
Translated into many languages, over eight million copies
have sold worldwide. It arose from the combined efforts of
Jane Roberts, a writer and poet, her husband, Robert Butts,
an artist, and Seth, who described himself as an entity no
longer focused in physical reality. Jane Roberts utilized a
trance state during which Seth could speak through her. The
Seth material has been widely considered as a cornerstone
for transpersonal development and understanding, and also
for gaining skills to manifest desired outcomes. Seth’s approach to dreams contains many ways to encourage their
integration into our daily lives.

Ullman Dream Appreciation Morning Dream Group
Mark Blagrove

Dream Group: Dreams and the Seth Material

Swansea, United Kingdom

Virginia Bennett and David Cielak
Oakland, California, USA
This Dream Group is based on the Seth/Jane Roberts material. We will engage in dream “play” to explore how dreams
may reflect lived, inter-dimensional experiences during
sleep, and how they assist us in creating our own reality and
finding value fulfillment in dreaming and waking life. This
Dream Group will focus on ways to explore and enhance
dreaming based on the Seth material (see below). The working premise is that dreams reflect actual lived experience
while we sleep, during which we engage with other dimensions and aspects of ourselves. At the same time, dreams
reflect the beliefs which shape our current lives. “We create
our own reality” while waking and sleeping. By looking at
our dreams, our sense of selfhood can expand beyond our
limited, physically-based identity. Dream “play” can invigorate the ways we find value fulfillment in both our “inner”
and “outer” lives. In this Dream Group we will examine both
spontaneous and incubated dreams regarding: health and
well-being; “True Dreams from the Gates of Horn” – an ancient technique for guidance and direction; neuropsychological aspects of dreaming; ways to create a desired event;
exploring possible counterparts and simultaneous/reincarnational selves; and dream states such as lucid dreaming.
We may use any or all of the following techniques: telling
dreams and group discussion; dream re-entry (a guided
imagery process); role play and enactment; writing; dyad

In the session I will: 1. Describe the stages of the group
dream appreciation method of Montague Ullman, following
his (2006) book Appreciating Dreams: a Group Approach. 2.
Conduct an Ullman Dream Appreciation session adhering
closely to the stages of the technique as described by Ullman, and following his requirements for safety and curiosity
in the group. The IASD ethics statement will be followed at
all times. The dreamer is the ultimate authority on the personal meaning of any dream. Reference: Ullman, M. (2006).
Appreciating Dreams: a Group Approach. Cosimo Books.

Sound Alchemy in Dream-work
Sven Doehner
Prado Sur, México
Dream images present us in unexpected ways with invisible
aspects of our lives, plots that are difficult for our “ego” to
see and take into account. This is also true of the sounds
that emerge unexpectedly from our being. Furthermore, actual experience shows that there is an intimate, dynamic,
and transformative relationship between the vocal sound
and the images in our dreams (and lives) ... that can be
made conscious and become transformative by giving outer
form to inner movements through a sound emission. In addition to developing and honing hearing skills, the invitation

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

S3

IJoDR
is to experience learning to listen for – and to – the images
that come with the sounds that appear with a dream and
the telling of it. We will work with a sound awareness of our
dream images that promises to awaken physical, emotional,
mental and spiritual movements in our lives, as well as using vocal expression as a medium for our images to take on
new forms and significance. We will share a way of working with dreams that is innovative, unexpected, surprisingly
practical and deeply moving.

Exploring the Heart of the Dream
Robert P Gongloff
Asheville, NC, USA
Themes reflect the major issues going on in one’s life. A
theme is the important message, idea, or perception that
a dream is attempting to bring to your conscious mind.
Specific methods or techniques to be utilized: In the dream
group, the leader will present a quick overview of dream
group ethics, then will explain what themes are and how to
determine them. Generally, the method involves addressing some key questions about the dream, such as: What
is the basic activity going on in the dream? What are the
main characters doing in the dream? What is the major issue concerning the characters? What is the apparent or
presumed motivation of the characters that causes them
to act this way? Theme statements are best determined
when they are personalized, stated in the present tense,
and don’t just restate the words or actions from the dream.
Activities in which attendees will be encouraged to participate: Each group member wishing to explore a dream will
present the dream to the group, without interruption. Group
members will be given time to ask the dreamer for clarification on points in the dream. They will then offer suggestions
on possible themes based on their versions of the dream,
incorporating the techniques described above. The dreamer
will then be invited to share group insights. In many cases,
determining the theme alone has been found to be sufficient
for providing a good “aha” for the dreamer. Due to time constraints, the intention is not to go any farther into the dream
than the theme itself. Participants will be invited to share
whether any of the suggested themes relate to waking life
issues, but will be encouraged to go deeper into the dream
(symbology, art work, etc.) at a later time. Participants in
dream study groups using these theme-oriented techniques
have realized several benefits: (1) The dreamer gets to the
core issues presented by the dream quickly; (2) The dream
group tends to relate more to the dream rather than to the
dreamer, thus providing more safety for the dreamer; and
(3) The theme provides a context or framework within which
the dream symbols can be explored.

Developing the Intuition in Group Dreamwork
Curtiss Hoffman
Ashland, MA, USA
Jung once wrote that he found it useful to approach each
dream of his analysands with absolutely no preconceived
idea of what the dream might mean. This discipline helps

S4

to eliminate the interference of the conscious mind in the
dreamworking process and allows for the entry of intuitive
wisdom. Anyone who has done dreamwork for long enough
is likely to have had many of what Jeremy Taylor calls “ahas”
– intuitive insights which help not only the dreamer, not only
the person commenting on their dream, but the entire group
which is working the dream. By using the Ullman method
of group dreamwork as modified by Taylor, which involves
assuming that the dreamer knows better than anyone else
what his/her dream means, and then attempting to elicit the
multiple meanings by a question-and-answer methodology
without imposing the dreamworker’s views in an authoritative way, these intuitive sparks can be nurtured and the capacity to recognize them can be enhanced.
This is especially likely to occur in a group setting, as
the group works together over an extended period (in this
case, 4 days) to generate bonds and interaction patterns
that resonate with one another, and their dreams also weave
together in mutual patterns. As a way of augmenting this yet
further, dreams will be explored beyond the personal dimension with reference to the archetypal ideas emerging from
the collective unconscious, using the method Jung referred
to as “amplification”, which draws historical, mythological,
and literary material into the orbit of the dreamwork, again in
a non-authoritative manner, using the “If It Were My Dream”
approach developed by Ullman.

Dreaming Together: Experiencing the Big You
Marja Moors
Heemstede, The Netherlands
Sharing dreams is as old as humanity. It’s only recently that
there is a big emphasis on the individual and the meaning
of his life and his dreams. Many old tribes still live from the
‘we’ perspective. In these times the narrow perspective of
an individual self is cracking, we need a broader view. The
Dreaming Together group is inspired by the work of Gordon
Lawrence. In 1982 he started his Social Dreaming experiments at the Tavistock Institute. Social Dreaming concentrates on the dream and not the dreamer. In a group one
associates with a recent dream fragment (or for example
with a picture from a movie) to a dream fragment of another
dreamer. This dream sharing happens quickly. After an hour
of free associating this way, a group dream is born in which
pictures of our collective future are visible. The dreams of
Jewish citizens recorded in Charlotte Beradt’s Third Reich
of Dreams (1968) showed how Jewish people during WWII
dreamt the fate that was to befall them. While in daily life
they could resist, their dreams told them otherwise. Dreaming can voice concerns of a social nature. Anjali Hazarika
describes in Daring to Dream (1997) how dreamwork was
used in oil industry organisations in India. It effectively demonstrates the application of dreamwork for cultivating corporate creativity. Free associating is the most subversive
of activities and disrupts the consensual, rational and finite
reality which most people subscribe. It is always expanding
the space of the possible. Participating in a Dreaming Together group is like floating in space without knowing where
the collective dream is moving to. There has to be a willingness to not know and to get lost. Several experiments in the
Netherlands with members of the Dutch Dream Association
showed the power of Dreaming Together. As a participant it

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

IJoDR
gives a strong feeling of freedom not to focus on the meaning of the personal dream. Making space for that which is
connecting all of us gives a profound sense of peace and
fulfillment.

Listening to the Dreamer
Michael Schredl
Mannheim, Germany
This approach is based on the client-centered therapy developed by Carl Rogers. Interpretations in any form are discouraged because the interpretations reveal more about the
interpreter than about the dreamer. Even the dreamer herself/himself is not encouraged to use interpretative methods. The group will learn to ask open-ended questions to
stimulate the dreamer to think about the links between the
dream (emotions, cognitive patterns, and the way the dream
ego acts) and current waking life issues. After working with
the dream, group members can share their own thoughts
and feelings connected to the dream’s topics.

Searching the Soul: Dreams, Spirituality, Meditation

how participants experience the archetype: is it an emotion,
a physical feeling, certain ideas, or a specific theme? Are
there any symbols and themes that keep emerging? Are we
free or are our actions determined? Are free and being authentic related? Do spirituality, authenticity, and Self interrelate? The group meditation will be to incubate a dream of
our authentic Self.
On the fourth morning we will discuss the previous night’s
dreams. Then we will discuss gender. Is god male, female,
both, or other? What has our gender meant for the sense of
spirituality we have. We will explore the characteristics of
different female and male archetypes of divinity. Are such
characteristics present in our dreams? We will conclude with
a meditation to seek an image that represents our soul.
In our last session we will look at Carl Jung’s search for
the Soul as described in the Red Book: images of terror,
descent, integration of mind and body, and integration of
the animus and anima. What is the relationship of Self, Soul,
and Spirituality? Have such themes been reflected in our
dreams? The group will close the week with participants
sketching their own souls on paper and briefly telling the
group about their experience.

3. Workshops

Susanne van Doorn and Christian Gerike
Breda, The Netherlands

Regression Therapy for Dream Work
Kiran Anumalasetty

Through discussion and daily meditative dream incubations,
this morning dream group will seek deeper understanding of
spirituality in dreams. Attendees will be limited to a maximum of 10 in order to have a circle in which everyone’s spiritual experiences can readily be shared. We recognize and
honor the dreamer as the decision maker about a dream’s
significance. A dreamer’s decision to share or discontinue
sharing a dream will always be respected. Everybody is welcome, from beginning dreamers to the very experienced.
Each morning begins with a 15- to 20-minute discussion of
the spiritual dream concept for that day. We will then explore
personal experiences and dreams using the title, theme, affect, and question (TTQA) method as described by Robert
Gongloff in Dream Exploration: A New Approach. A group
meditation will be held during the last 20 minutes to incubate a dream for the next day’s specific spiritual topic.
On the first morning the TTQA method will be explained
and our spiritual backgrounds and dreams will be discussed.
The next day’s theme of the Shadow and spirituality will be
introduced: Is descent into the dark an aspect of spirituality? Are nightmares spiritual? The myth of Innana’s descent
will be presented as a guide for our own descent. Identifying
a Shadow aspect in dreams will be the group meditation
theme.
On the second morning we will discuss the Shadow using a Jungian approach. Dreams will be shared and we will
look at dreams using the TTQA approach. The themes that
emerge will be discussed, as will archetypes as symbols of
gods. Meeting a specific Archetype will be the theme for the
joint mediation.
On the third morning we will discuss Archetypes people
may have experienced in last night’s dreams, or previously,
that contribute to their sense of spirituality. We will discuss

Hyderabad, Telangana, India
Regression Therapy is a powerful therapeutic tool that is
firmly grounded in the understanding of the Law of Karma.
It works by helping the clients gain a bigger picture of who
they are and how they create their own Reality. Regression therapy traces the current problems to their roots in
the past memories stored in the subconscious mind. The
events in the past, especially traumatic memories, create
karmic complexes with undischarged emotions and rigid
beliefs. These complexes are carried in the subtle bodies
from past lives to the womb, into childhood and throughout the current life time. They cause one to repeat similar
patterns unless and until these complexes are dissolved.
Dreams can be seen as doorways to the subconscious
mind. When one is regressed into a recurring or traumatic
or most recent dream memory, the process can open up
the deeper layers of the subconscious mind. The dream by
itself may not necessarily represent a past memory, though
sometimes it does. However, the dream by its rich language
of symbols and metaphors can point to the subconscious
complexes which are not completely processed and understood. When such complexes are revisited, the client is
given a chance to relive the underlying emotions and make
connections between the subconscious material and the
present life situation. Regression Therapy focuses on gaining understanding and self-awareness so that one is empowered to look beyond the trauma, emotional complexes,
and rigid beliefs that are carried into the present from the
past. It facilitates a powerful shift and transformation of current life situations through conscious choice. In a regression
therapy setup, dream memory can be used as a “Bridge”

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

S5

IJoDR
to enter the subconscious complexes and work on them.
The method presented is based on clinical work as a regression therapist. It evolved while working with clients on
their dream memories in a regression setup. The method is
gentle and the approach is non-directive in interpreting the
meaning of a dream. The method constitutes the following
aspects: a) How to use dream memory as a bridge; b) How
to facilitate decoding the dream memory using principles
of regression therapy : identification, dis-identification and
transformation; c) How to facilitate relating the dream symbols to the subconscious emotions; d) How to process the
subconscious emotions underlying the dream symbols; e)
Relating the dream language to the real life situations; f)
Shifting the limiting beliefs and exercising conscious choice.
The methods are best suited for applying in a therapy setup
as well as designed to be used for self-work. A third of the
total time will be spent discussing the principles behind the
method. The rest of the time will be spent on the practical
work using the method.

non-judgmental Critical Response descriptors. Dreamer will
be the “ultimate authority” on dream interpretation.
Activities: 1) overview of selected images from illuminated
manuscripts, Jung’s Red Book, & contemporary practices in
art and writer’s journals (20 min); 2) show & tell of presenter’s
dream pages & process (10 min); 3) tips for glue, drawing,
pop-ups (5 min); 4) studio art-making/writing time (45 min);
5) sharing with partners (10 min); 6) extended art-making
or writing from prompt (15 min); 7) sharing of ideas and final work in circle (15 min). Materials: paper, colored pencils,
watercolor pencils, watercolor, sharpies, scissors, origami
papers, tissue papers, glue sticks, etc. Approx. time for didactic portion: 35 minutes. Experiential phases: 70 minutes,
Final group reflection: 15 minutes. Audience: for all. Aim:
to bring to life and deepen exploration of a dream through
visual /verbal “illumination” of a written dream report.

Inner Self Work: Focusing, Imagery, Dreamwork
Deborah Armstrong, Pauline Dolan, and Colleen Jones

Illuminated Dream Pages – Illuminating a Dream
Report with Words and Images
Susan Armington
Minneapolis, MN, USA
This workshop offers a hands-on approach to creating “illuminated” dream pages inspired by illuminated manuscripts
of the past and contemporary practices in artists’ and writers’ journals. Participants illuminate their own dream report
by enhancing key passages, adding embellishments and
images, or employing other visual/verbal elements. The aim
of the workshop is to animate the dream and explore it more
deeply. It is appropriate for a clinical, group, or personal
setting. Though we often think of “illuminated manuscripts”
as decorated in gold or silver leaf, the term can refer to any
decorated or illustrated manuscript. Medieval illuminators
added borders, images, fancy initials, etc. to decorate the
text, but also “to mark important passages, or to enhance
or comment on the meaning of the text.” (British Library,
online.) Jung clearly drew on this tradition in the Red Book.
Like Jung, we will draw inspiration from past illuminators,
but extend our reach to contemporary book artists; adding pockets, pop-ups, maps, altered pages, freewrites, etc.
Participants will consider questions such as: What are the
key passages? Where is the emotion? What creatures or
objects are present? Who is the “I”? How can I see from another point of view? What is the setting? Questions are explored explicitly or implicitly through design decisions. Participants work for 45 minutes, then share their page(s) with a
partner, using non-judgmental descriptors. They then work
another 15 minutes, using an additional prompt. Finally, participants gather in a circle, view each other’s dream pages,
and reflect on the process and their experiences. How does
the process of creating these pages raise questions about
the dream? What new ways of seeing emerge? Participants
will leave with their own illuminated dream page(s) and a
deeper experience of their dream.
Specific Methods: a) teaching through examples; b) techniques for adhering, adding color and line, attachments, etc.;
c) introspective process questions; d) using Liz Lerman-style

S6

Greenville, South Carolina, USA
This workshop will introduce participants to the processes
of Focusing, Imagery, and Dream-gardening to grow awareness of the Inner Self, as the concept is used within the
Seth Material. The workshop will be principally experiential,
though some didactic materials will be discussed. Focusing is a process that originated from the research and insights of Eugene Gendlin and involves an exploration of
one’s inner experiences within the embodied self. Imagery
of course arises as one dives into these felt senses, and
Dream-gardening is a term that refers to expressive and embodied practices that are intended to grow our awareness
of and engagement with our dreams. The Inner Self, as the
Seth Materials suggests, consists of the entire self, a gestalt
consisting of the inner self, various selves that the entity
has assumed through past existences (physical and nonphysical), plus all the currently incarnated selves, and all of
their probable counterparts. The workshop will begin with a
discussion of these concepts and processes, accompanied
by a brief overview of recent developments in research that
support the value of growing awareness of the Inner Self
through practices that are embodied and expressive ... and
very importantly, how dreams may hold a special function in
these practices. Following this discussion, participants will
be engaged in Focusing, Imagery, and Dream-gardening
practices to experience the richness of these landscapes
personally.

The Joys of Dreamwork in a Present Body
Ingrid Baart
Deventer, Overijssel, Netherlands
In this experiential workshop we use Authentic Movement
as an entrance to exploring our dream and its content. The
Authentic Movement method enables a direct and vivid
connection to the depths of our unconscious. It assumes
that the spontaneously moving body conveys a wisdom and
expresses a richness of symbolic layers of meanings. It is
founded on C.G. Jung’s concepts of active imagination and

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

IJoDR
the collective unconscious (Chodorow 1997, Pallaro 2000).
Pioneered in the 1950’s by dancer Mary Whitehouse (Whitehouse in Pallaro 2000, Frieder in Pallaro, 2007), it became
further evolved by dance therapist Janet Adler and dance
therapist/Jungian Analyst Joan Chodorow (Pallaro 2000,
2007). The basis is simple: a mover moves with eyes closed
in the presence of an attentive witness. As a mover, your
movement may begin as an impulse, thought, sensation,
image or memory. It may start with images of a dream you
are curious about, or you may recall your dream once you
feel comfortable enough and ready to explore. You follow
the thread of the impulses as they arise, bringing awareness to inner sensations that are felt in connection with your
body or your movement. Spontaneity and deep inner listening may bring you into contact with your full presence and
enhance the embodiment of images and sensations of your
dream. The clear attention and non-judgmental presence of
the witness provides a space for support and safe exploration with a receptive quality to the mover. As a witness you
listen with the whole body and notice what arises in you as
you see the mover. Your intention is to see the mover, as
he or she is, mindful of your own interpretation or meaning.
Afterwards, experiences will be thought about and shared,
during which the witness has a containing function to support the mover in developing a reflective function based on
the mentalization of somatic experiences (Wyman-McGinty
in Pallaro 2007) that are revealed by the dream. In a 2-hour
workshop, we begin in a circle for an introduction, after
which you will be guided toward moving comfortably and
spontaneously with clear instructions and musical warm
up exercises to prepare both body and mind, and to meet
each other in a playful way. Stepwise the form of Authentic
Movement is introduced with a focus on dream work. This is
usually done without music to listen attentively to inner impulses. You will work in pairs with the opportunity to speak
about your experiences as well as creatively exchange your
findings in images and words on paper. We come back into
the larger circle for the closure that includes discussion of
the experiences. In all cases you are your own expert, and it
is your personal insights that are of great value and will lead
you to the meaning of the symbolic embodiment of your
dreams. The workshop will be bi-lingual (Dutch- English),
and is open to all levels with a curiosity about the conscious
body and the embodied mind in dream work.

possibilities. Dreams and dream-like experiences seem to
help prepare dying people for encountering the unknown
by altering and expanding their definitions of identity and
reality. Such dreams often include paradoxical experiences of both resistance (where the unknown is perceived as
threatening), and transcendence (where the unknown can
be liberating). Dreams similar to those of dying people regularly occur at turning points in our inner or outer lives. In
this workshop, we will explore such dreams using various
non-interpretive approaches, with an emphasis on increasing our flexibility and openness in the face of the unknown.
We will share dreams and dream-like memories, first inviting direct experience of the remembered dream (senses,
emotions), then viewing this experience metaphorically and
mythically (applying a projective dreamwork protocol based
on Jeremy Taylor’s model), and also considering them from
a shamanic perspective as reflecting real worlds and energies other than those we are familiar with in “ordinary” waking life. The dreamer will always be the final authority on
his or her dream, though “authority” will not be emphasized
since we’ll be inquiring into the limited and open-ended nature of our understanding.
The workshop will begin with a guided visualization that
offers a gentle experience of letting go into the unknown.
Then there will be a didactic overview of some themes and
images associated with the dreams of those who are dying
or experiencing major life transitions. Examples will be offered and opened up for discussion. Together, we will consider how approaching death or significant change makes
us aware of the fluidity of the boundary between waking
and dreaming, and calls into question our certainties about
ourselves and our world.
During this conversation, we will be “approaching the unknown” ourselves, as participants are invited to search their
dreams and memories for thresholds and passages similar
to those experienced by dying people. We will reflect on our
personal associations and projections connected with the
images in the dream examples.
Finally, there will be a journaling exercise, using the theme
of “journey into the unknown” (a common theme of death
dreams): participants will write about a childhood memory of a journey as if it were a dream, and some of these
“dreams” will be shared with the group and unfolded using
the approaches mentioned above, as time allows.

Approaching the Unknown: How Dreams Help Us
Change

Mandala Drawing Technique

Kirsten Backstrom

Drammen, The Netherlands

Ann Bengtsson

Portland, Oregon, USA
This workshop will give participants an opportunity to explore dream themes and images often associated with the
dying process, and discover how such dreams can open our
hearts and minds, helping to prepare us for turning points in
our lives and for our own eventual deaths. Through dream
sharing, discussion, and guided visualization, we will practice experiencing the fluidity of identity and reality that can
occur on the threshold of deep change.
When we are faced with actual physical death, our dreams
rarely describe final endings, but continue to reflect spiritual
transformation and positive movement toward unknown

Mandala drawing technique is a creative method of opening an energy-laden powerful dream-symbol to get a deeper
understanding of the symbol. We will begin the workshop
by having a brief introduction to Mandalas. For thousands
of years the Mandala has been used all over the world to focus awareness. Jung used the Mandala drawing technique
to come closer to the Self revealing itself. This workshop
gives you a method of uncovering the meaning of your most
energy-laden dream symbols in a creative way. First you reproduce the original dream-symbol within a circle. The circle
can be understood as a window towards the Self. You color
the result and then you reproduce the essential symbols of
the first drawing in a new circle and change the picture as

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

S7

IJoDR
you feel free to associate. You keep working like this and
through the transformation-process the deeper meaning of
the symbol shows itself after a shorter or longer series of
drawings. When you reach the end product you will know.
The transformation-process makes it possible to understand obstacles or qualities and in this way awareness can
open. At the end of the workshop small groups share the
transformation-processes and finally a few examples will
be shown in plenum. The workshop will be limited to approximately 20 people. The technique requires no specific
creative skills, just a wish to express oneself. I am familiar
with the ethic statements of the IASD. I am responsible for
the whole workshop and leadership and will explain how
to share the painting results together in a proper way using
dream interpretation showing respect to the painter.

Breathing Life into Dream Symbols
Walter Berry
Los Angeles, California, USA
Words are great, and we hear a lot of them here at the conference, but sometimes dreams just scream out to be seen,
not just heard. Part of dreamwork is working with symbols,
and by actually representing the symbols and the story of
the dream in a physical way, on a large piece of paper, it
brings the symbols and the narrative into the sacred space
that is created in the group setting. This allows the symbols themselves to have a voice in the process of unpacking
these beautiful, soulful experiences we call dreams. Our
goal here is to experience the dream, to find a way to invite
the dream into the room with us and see how it affects us.
In this experimental workshop, we will explore dreams
chosen from the group by making a Dream Map, which is a
simple drawing that represents the dream (no artistic abilities necessary). The Dream Map depicts elements of the
dream. Sometimes symbolic, and sometimes poetic, these
drawings will be the centerpiece of working the dream and
we will use that depiction to further our understanding of
the dream. We will then open up the dream and its symbols
using Walter Berry’s Dream Map Method, which includes
Archetypal Projective dreamwork (Ullman/Taylor) and other
methodologies such as Gestalt and Dream Theater. (Sometimes a dream cries out for a bit of theater). We will spend
about 20 minutes or less to introduce the work and then
plunge in. Using a Dream Map gives focus to elements of
the dream that are often overlooked or never seen at all
without this added visual, and often haunting, element. In
the process of drawing the dream, quite often very surprising things appear.
Having conducted this process many times, I find that the
map or depiction of the dream becomes an added member
to the group and really keeps the focus on the dream instead
of just the projections that always fly about the room when
doing group dream work. The dreamer is the final authority
in this work, and we will ask four questions of the dreamer at
the end of the work: 1.Why this dream, and why this dream
now? 2. I am thankful for this dream because…? 3. Is there
anything new that I realize now that we have worked this
dream? 4. Is there anything I can do to honor this dream in
waking life?

S8

Creative Dreaming Through Dream Writing
Jean Campbell and Clare R. Johnson
Portsmouth, Virginia, USA
Dream images are often endowed with emotional meaning
and linked to memories or associations. As such, they invite
deeper discovery through writing and provide rich material
for the creation of fiction (Epel 1994).Participants will be introduced to a variety of techniques for working with dream
imagery to inspire creative writing, such as breathing techniques to relax the body; visualization methods for recalling
powerful dream images; and flow-writing. They will practice Johnson’s transformative technique for working with
dream imagery in a relaxed, meditative state: ‘Lucid Writing’ (Johnson, 2005), and Campbell’s techniques for writing
from dreams (Campbell, 1980). Additionally, participants will
practice transforming dream characters into fictional ones,
as well as teasing out the story kernel from their own dream
images. The workshop is highly experiential and will involve
plenty of dream writing, with group feedback after each exercise. Participants will have the opportunity to share dream
imagery and creative writing if desired. Through the different techniques and group interaction, they will discover that
creative writing in the writer’s trance can become a kind of
‘waking lucid dreaming’; a safe space in which dream and
nightmare images can be imaginatively explored and transformed, providing an endless source of inspiration.

Inside Out: Exploring Dreams and Dream State
David Cielak
Shelley, Western Australia, Australia
This workshop will present and facilitate experiences with
consciousness and dreams based on concepts and exercises from the Seth material. The Seth material is a collection of 30 books (8,100 pages and over 3.9 million words)
selling over eight million copies with a significant focus on
dreams and the dream state. It contains 310 exercises and
100 recommendations. They provide a cosmology of consciousness and human existence, describing, in depth, how
we create our own reality with significant emphasis on the
dreams as a pillar. Notables including Chopra, Hay, Friedman, and others have endorsed the materials. Seth describes himself as an “energy personality essence.” The
concepts communicated were given with the cooperation
of Jane Roberts, through whom he spoke. Today, this would
be referred to as “channeling.” Unfortunately however, that
term may cause some to criticise the importance, validity,
and functional practicality of this material. No matter how
the concepts and information came into existence, it deserves exploration and review. Covering wide topics, Seth
provides concepts and information about the dream state,
going further than traditional scientific, psychological, and
religious views.
His premise is that not only are we communicating within
the dream state, we are involved in training within the dream
state and learning that we “create our own reality”, and
learning to awaken, to some extent, within the dream state.
Seth posits we are multi-dimensional beings and what we
call “dreams” represent other realities during which, in real

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

IJoDR
time, we are expressing other parts of our being. Dreams
(many varieties) serve many functions and are forums where
we experience and choose probable events that are then
experienced in waking reality. These experiences are then
“downloaded” according to the beliefs, thoughts, emotions
and needs of the waking consciousness and egoic self.
Seth makes numerous suggestions and provides exercises
and techniques to explore and understand the dream state
and our multi-dimensionality.
The workshop is one third didactic and combined with
guided internal and/or experiential exercises, derived from
the Seth materials. The focus is to explore and expand the
workshop participants dream experience. Sharing of dreams/
experiences may be via a large group or a dyad. However,
no interpretation will be imposed, since “only the dreamer
knows the meaning of the dream.” For those participants
unfamiliar with the Seth material, the information and concepts will be presented in an understandable format, with
additional in-depth material offered for those already familiar with the concepts. It is a workshop for all levels of participants. Topics: Multi-Dimensional being (Pyramid exercise),
purposes and functions of the dream state, Lucid and Out of
Body dreaming (bring your waking consciousness with you
exercise); practical ways to expand and explore the dream
state (Dream Snapshot, Expanding Space, Expanding Time
exercises; incubating Dreams and Health; how dreams help
us create our own realities (dream creation exercise), with
specific examples from the presenter’s life and possibly the
audience. Ample discussion time provided. The workshop
is not intended as a dogmatic or lecture presentation of the
Seth material.

dreamer himself is the ultimate authority on the personal
meaning of any dream interpretation. The workshop presenter facilitates his inquiry process.
1. Participants identify stressful thoughts about a (human,
animal, material) dream element by filling in a worksheet
with 6 questions about their dream situation.
1. What about this dream angers, confuses, or disappoints you and why? I am (emotion) at (dream element)
because it …………
2. How do you want it to change? I want it to
……………………………………………………………
3. What advice would you offer to it? It should or
shouldn’t………………………………………………
4. In order for you to be happy in this situation, what do
you need it to think, say, feel or do?
I need it to………………………
5. What do you think of the dream element in this situation? Make a list. This is……………………………
6. What is it in or about this dream situation that you don’t
ever want to experience again?
I don’t ever want it to………
I don’t ever want me to
………………………………………………
2. Try-out of the 4 questions as a guide to meditate on the
identified stressful thoughts: [1. Is it true? 2. Can you absolutely know that it’s true? 3. How do you react when you
believe that thought? 4. Who would you be without that
thought?]
3. Turnaround of the stressful thoughts in three different
ways by the dreamer [to yourself; to the other; to the opposite] and search for specific examples to recognize his
projections in the dream.

Dream Inquiry Using the Work of Byron Katie
Monique Dankers - van der Spek
Vorden, Gelderland, Netherlands
‘The Work’ is a meditative process with 3 steps that guides
the participant from his rational mind towards the right cerebral hemisphere where he is able to understand the dream
language. During this process forgotten dream segments
tend to come back and the dream is completed in a healing
way. In 1986 when she was very depressed, Byron Katie
Mitchell (Loving what is; 2002) discovered that she suffered
when she believed her thoughts. That suffering stopped
when she questioned her stressful beliefs and discovered
what was really true. She called this inquiry process: ‘The
Work’. This inquiry fits precisely with current research into
the biology of mind, for instance that from Antonio Damasio
(1999, p. 187) or Michael Gazzaninga (1998, p. 26). The selfquestioning Katie discovered uses a different, less known
capacity of the mind to find a way out of its self-made trap.
After doing The Work, many people report an immediate
sense of release and freedom from thoughts that were making them miserable. Although most of the time The Work
is applied to stressful situations in waking life, Katie also
mentioned its value for dream life. Experiences with my own
dreams and those of clients showed: The Work enables the
dreamer to understand the language of his dream. During
this process forgotten dream segments tend to come back
and the dream is completed in a healing way. The best way
to understand The Work on dreams is to experience it; in
this introductory workshop theory is less than 20%. The

SOUND ALCHEMY: Dream-work with Images and
Sounds.
Sven Doehner
Prado Sur, México
In this workshop we will provide ways of working with
dreams that are imaginative: a proposal will be made of how
to resonate with our dream images transformatively, by developing a sensitivity to the sounds that they awaken in us.
Participants will first learn a vocabulary to expand possibilities for consciousness, then develop and hone hearing
skills: learning to listen for – and into – the new images that
come with the sounds that appear with a dream, with the
telling of it, and then with emitting the sounds of the feelings
that appear when we work to develop a sound sensitivity
and imagination.
We will use vocal expression to give outer form to inner
movements, in order to be able to hear ourselves from unexpected perspectives, or different states of consciousness.
Our exploration of the intimate and dynamic relationship
that exists between images and sounds will show us ways
to nurture the dialogue between the inner and outer dimensions of the dream experience. Joining sounds to images
will lead to the images taking on new forms and significance.
While emitting the sound of the feelings awakened in and by
our dream images, we will experience how something that
is stuck suddenly begins to flow – at the same time that we
unexpectedly find vital issues that were diffuse begin to take

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

S9

IJoDR
form. These movements, happening simultaneously, make
for a surprisingly moving way of working with dreams.

Dreamasana: A Mindful Approach to Dreams
Tzivia Gover
Northampton, Massachusetts, USA

Resolving Personal Conflict through “Theme”
Work
Robert P Gongloff
Asheville , NC, USA
When we look at the dream as a story and attempt to determine the basic activity displayed by the characters, we can
see themes emerge. The theme is the underlying motivation or issue being dealt with by the primary players in the
drama. It often represents a pattern of behavior that may be
represented by the dreamer in waking life. This workshop is
based on the premise that all story plots stem from conflict.
Conflict is the emotional impact of the opposing impulses,
desires, or tendencies we face internally each day. These
opposing forces form the subject matter of our conflicts.
These forces are the themes we live out in our dream lives
and waking lives. Gongloff considers our conflicts and their
inherent polarities to be gifts that motivate us to continually
seek harmony and balance. We live in a world of polarities
– love/hate, optimism/pessimism, safety/vulnerability. We
normally don’t have to face the extremes of these conflicts,
but in therapy situations we may see clients who only see
the extremes – “my world is coming to an end because ‘my
spouse left me’ or ‘I lost my job,’ or … (fill in the blank).”
It is the job of the therapist or counselor to help the client see that the extremes are not the only possibilities, but
that there are ways to achieve balance in one’s life. Helping
someone achieve harmony and balance in life is a primary
function of the therapist or counselor – and can be seen as a
major function of our dreams. In this workshop, participants
will learn how to determine the themes in dreams and will be
given a method for using those themes to take positive action to resolve the conflicts they face in waking life. Activities:
In the workshop, the leader will present a quick overview of
dream group ethics, then go into detail about what themes
are and how to determine them. Following an explanation
of the process with examples, the group will collectively explore a dream offered by a group member. Then the group
members will be encouraged to explore individual dreams
with a partner or small group. After all the participants have
determined dream themes, the leader will present specifics
on a method for taking positive action in their waking lives
to deal with the issues – expressed as conflicts or polarities
– raised in their dreams. Approximately 35- 40% of the time
will be spent on didactic instruction and 60-65% on experiential work, including individual and group exploration and
discussion of dreams and suggested themes. Audience: for
all audiences. Aim: to provide a supplemental technique for
use by psychotherapists, therapy practitioners, clinicians,
and graduate students, as well as for personal growth of
dreamworkers.

S10

While most people think of yoga as a series of physical
exercises, yoga is actually a philosophy and a way of life
geared toward deepening consciousness and promoting
overall health and well-being. Dreamwork, too, can be practiced for improved health, healing and overall well-being.
In Dreamasana we draw from ancient teachings from the
yogic traditions of mindfulness, and proper breathing and
alignment, and apply those principles to the development
of a daily dreamwork practice. Entering sleep and dreaming consciously is enhanced by meditation and in turn can
bring us into deep states of consciousness and unification
with the true Self. In addition we will look to wisdom from
traditions including mindfulness, yoga, Tibetan Dream Yoga,
and Jungian psychology to help create a mindful approach
to dreaming and dreamwork. In this workshop principles
from these traditions will be synthesized and incorporated
into various exercises and practices to help participants
establish a path for daily self-reflection, self-observation,
and self-study. The workshop will begin with a presentation about the parallels between dreamwork and yoga. Then
participants will have a chance to learn and practice simple
activities such as journaling and use of active imagination
to help to integrate dreamwork into daily life. In addition,
meditations and breathing techniques for entering sleep
consciously, and for inviting clear and powerful dreams, will
be offered. By incorporating ideas and techniques from the
practice of yoga into our dreamwork practice, participants
will learn to bring more mental flexibility, clarity, and ease
to their lives. This workshop is open to people of all physical abilities and all orientations toward dreamwork. The focus here is to create a healthy relationship with sleep and
dreams; no physical postures will be taught. This workshop
will adhere to IASD ethics, and at all times the dreamer will
be considered the expert on his or her own dream.

Dreambody and the Path of Soul
Zelda Hall
Amsterdam, Netherlands
Arnold Mindell introduced the term ‘dreambody’ to express
the unity between mind and body and to get beyond duality. With a background as a physicist, Mindell trained as a
Jungian analyst in Zurich and in his work with the dreams
of his clients, discovered a meaningful connection between
the symbols of their dreams and the experiences they were
having in their bodies in the form of symptoms. For instance
a woman who suffers from migraine headaches dreams of
her head being caught in a vice. He first published his ideas
in 1984 with his first book, Dreambody: The Body’s Role in
Revealing the Self. Dreambody work as developed by Mindell explores a sensory grounded and subjective experience
of dreams and physical symptoms. Imaginative, experiential
and bodywork approaches help to reveal the dreaming wisdom of the body.
Further exploration takes Jung’s teleological paradigm all
the way into the body, revealing the links between chronic

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

IJoDR
symptoms, childhood dreams and ‘life myth’ (the unique
pattern that underlies individual self development over
time). The presenter’s own work draws a parallel between
the ‘life myth’ and the ‘soul contract’ or that which we came
to do on the planet this time around. This is the belief that,
before birth, our souls agree to learn specific lessons in our
upcoming lifetime.
This workshop will include an informative and theoretical
introduction to the concept of the dreambody. Circumstances and the presence of a willing volunteer permitting, there
will be demonstration of working with a symptom. Participants will be invited to explore the relevance of their own
early childhood dreams, chronic illness, and other symptoms using written and experiential exercises and guided
visualisation. There will be no ‘interpretation’ as such. The
meaning of a particular dream or symptom can be known
only by the person who experiences it.

Applying a Waking Dream Process to Lucid/
Dreamwork
Nigel Hamilton and Melinda Ziemer
London, United Kingdom
This workshop focuses on the potential effectiveness of
tracking the dream narrative through the dreamer’s body,
whilst exploring the dream in the waking state, i.e. the Waking Dream Technique (Hamilton, 2006). When applied over a
series of dreams, the client experiences a significant awakening to a deeper, subtler sense of self and healing. This
is the Waking Dream Process. A short talk discussing the
significance and therapeutic use of the Waking Dream Process in relation to dreamwork will be followed by a practical
demonstration, working with a participant’s dream. There
will be time for questions regarding the demonstration.
Guidelines for clinicians in using this technique will also be
discussed. In the second half of the workshop, Melinda Ziemer will explore the Waking Dream Process as a therapeutic
tool for developing reflective awareness in waking life and
in dreams. Participants will have the opportunity to identify moments in dream-entry that can open up the dreamer
to a deeper level of feeling, attentiveness, and awareness.
Participants will also be invited to work in pairs to consider
what aspects of a sample dream they would focus on in
Waking Dreamwork. Dreams will not be interpreted but rather facilitated and experienced. The dreamer will then have
the opportunity to apply the waking dream experience to
their own lives. Approximately one third of the time will be
used didactically and two thirds will provide workshop participants with the opportunity to experience and apply the
teaching material.
Waking Dream Techniques: Brief Description: 1. Dreamer
tells dreams to guide. Dreamer comments on how they see
the dream and whether it relates to anything in their life, past
or present. 2. Guide comments on notable (in their view) aspects of the dream. 3. If dreamer is happy, then they close
their eyes and guide guides them through the dream, stopping to find out where the different dream images seem to
be held in their body along with associated sensations/feelings. 4. This can take up to half an hour. At the end of the
dreamwork, the guide sums up their (own) experience of the
dream and shares their insights with the dreamer. The aim is

to see what is helpful to the dreamer in terms of understanding their dream and realising what it could possibly mean.
Usually by this point, the dreamer realises personally what
the dream means to them.

Transformational Dreamwork: As the Dreaming
Mind Does It
Robert Hoss
Cave Creek, Arizona, USA
Many great luminaries, as well as contemporary psychologists and many researchers, have observed and theorized
that the dreaming mind works, not only to restore us and
help us adapt to waking life, but to transform us as individuals – to bring about a transition to a new state of being
characterized by new insights and a new attitude. Dreamwork, if applied in a way that follows the natural processes
of the dreaming mind, might therefore help bring about that
transformation. This workshop combines the observations
and theories of Carl Jung, Fritz Perls, contemporaries such
as Ernest Hartmann, plus some of the latest neurological
research, into a 3 part dreamworking protocol designed to
follow the transformational processes observed in dreams.
Carl Jung (founder of Analytical Psychology) observed
that dreams contain a “transcendent function” which brings
about a transition from our existing state to a new state
characterized by a new attitude. Ernest Hartmann stated
that dreams make new connections that help to establish
our emotional sense of self and reveal new insights. Recent
waking and REM state neurological studies suggest that
brain centers active in REM have the capacity for: recognizing that a problem exists; developing and testing creative
“what-if” resolution scenarios; and emotionally reinforcing
(thus adaptively learning) from those that work as anticipated. Dreams therefore may reveal a natural transformative
process which, if followed and extended into our dreamwork (the dream to waking continuum as Hartmann put it),
can guide the dreamer on a more natural path to mental and
spiritual balance than might be determined by rational, dialog driven approaches alone. The dreamworking approach
in this workshop therefore extends beyond simply understanding the dream, by presenting a protocol designed to
work with the dream in a similar manner as the dreaming
brain appears to do.
The workshop begins with a 30 minute discussion of the
supporting theory and research, illustrated by the procedure using case examples. Participants are then invited to
practice the dreamworking protocol using one of their own
dreams. The protocol contains three parts: exploration,
discovery and closure. The exploration phase focuses on
the narrative that pictures the existing state and any hyperconnected memory associations. The discovery phase employs a unique scripted role-play technique (developed from
Gestalt Therapy technique), to reveal the emotional content
and conflicts pictured by a dream image (Perls, Hartmann).
The closure phase combines Jung’s theory of the “transcendent function” with supporting observation from neurological research, to explore cues within the dream that might aid
resolution and closure. Where the dream is too short or unresolved, an optional active imagination approach, similar to
Imagery Rehearsal Treatment (Krakow) uses the dream end-

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

S11

IJoDR
ing as a platform for developing a potential resolution metaphor. The approach is aligned with the IASD Ethics Policy
since all meaning from the dream comes from the dreamer.

Explore DreamSynergy™ to Resolve Client Issues
Justina Lasley
Mt. Pleasant, SC, USA
Dreams have value and the ability to move you and your
clients toward the authentic full-functioning Self. This workshop is created for psychologists, mental health or health
care professionals, whether a novice or advanced practitioner. l will move you from theory to application. It is one
thing to believe in dreams and another to reap and share
the rewards that are offered to each of us every night. I will
focus on Emotions, Character Study and Beliefs and share
specific exercises and creative techniques you can use to
open up the meaning and wisdom of your own or your clients’ dreams. All work will be done in confidentiality and
the dreamer will be the “ultimate authority” on the personal
meaning of any dream “interpretation.” For over 25 years, I
have been privileged to guide, participate and witness transformation in my dream groups and individual clients, and to
certify therapists to work in the field of dreams. Out of my
experience in the field of dreams, I created DreamSynergy™, an innovative process of working with dreams that incorporates my own and other respected theories and techniques such as Jungian and Gestalt work. This all-inclusive
process simplifies the practice of finding meaning and using
that meaning to facilitate change in your life, as well as in the
lives of your clients. Applying the DreamSynergy™ process
facilitates change in areas such as mental and physical wellbeing (Illness, Hospice Care, and PTSD), relationships, finances, career, and creativity. During our workshop, you will
learn to apply the step-by-step DreamSynergy™ process to
enhance lives, yours and/or your clients. This method introduces and expands many techniques of dreamwork so that
you and your clients will have a tested, result-oriented, and
sustainable approach to finding value from dreamwork.

Experiencing Holy Dreams
Angèle Nederlof
Vlissingen, The Nederlands
The main objective of this workshop is to experience the
significance of a so called Holy Dream. No interpretation
whatsoever will be given by an outsider. Furthermore, the
core-element of this approach to Dreamwork is to enhance
a deeper state of knowledge characterized by a direct knowing which differs from verbal or discursive interpretation.
How do we define a Holy Dream? In accordance with my
experience-based approach, Holy Dreams differ from the
average dream regarding the intensity of the dream-experience. Holy Dreams bring forth an atmosphere of reverence,
peace and an unearthly tranquility. Another core feature of
these dreams is the emergence of elements representing
the sacred. This can be in the form of a personal representative, like well-known religious figures such as Mother Mary,

S12

Krishna or Moses. However, other forms can also function as representatives of the Holy. In this workshop I will
first explain the Phyllis Kristal method of using imagination
to develop contact with what she refers to as ‘the Higher
Consciousness.’ This can be described as a deeper state
of knowledge which differs from verbal or discursive interpretation. In the first exercise I will use a guided imagination
aimed at making contact with this Higher Consciousness.
Directly after this the participants will be guided towards
meeting their personal representative of the Holy. After
this, we will (at a group level) discuss the various personal
dream-figures and the experience they bring forth. The next
exercises are guided imaginations in which each participant
recalls a Holy Dream experience. In case of a lack of these
dream-memories the exercise can be used to construct a
personal symbolization of a sacred atmosphere. At the end
of this workshop I will discuss personal features of Holy
Dreams and also the way the Phyllis Krystal method uses
a symbolization of the Higher Consciousness to activate an
intuitive understanding of dream-experiences.
We will work only with group exercises.

Tarotpy, Alchemy and Embodied Imagination
Lauren Z. Schneider
Oak Park, California, USA
This workshop, intended for all levels, presents Tarotpy
re-visioned through the lens of alchemy and Embodied
Imagination. Tarotpy is interwoven with Robert Bosnak’s
writings in Tracks in the Wilderness of Dreaming and Embodiment: Creative Imagination in Medicine, Art and Travel,
and Alchemy lectures to explore the notion that dreams
and imagination are autonomous and influence the physical world. Alchemical practices, such as Tarotpy and Embodied Imagination, enhance and accelerate the natural
desire within the material, within each of us, for evolution
and refinement. Our dreams are populated with a multitude
of intelligent beings with whom we interact and in doing so,
both are transformed. Are we similarly living in an interactive
universe, intelligently organized to evolve the material that
inhabits it?
By way of synchronicity, Tarotpy allows us to access the
dream world with eyes wide open. Synchronicity is like a
glitch in the matrix, an alchemical phenomenon in which
the dream realm intersects the physical world. By observing
synchronicity we can experience this powerful undercurrent of the imaginal (dream) world influencing our lives. The
closer we are to the imaginal realm – working with dreams,
Embodied Imagination or contemplative tools such as
Tarotpy – the more transparent we are to its intelligence, and
the less attached to personal or collective ego constructs.
There is a reciprocal relationship: psycho-spiritual focus of
attention begins to heat up the image, which in turn inspires
active imagination, which then enlivens the spirit within the
image. In this shared state of inspiration between active
imagination and the “living image”, a communication materializes. Despite profound insights and significant shifts with
Tarotpy, I observe repeatedly that trauma lives in the cells
and neuropathways; like a rubber band, the client’s wounded self-image snaps back into habitual and rigid postures.
I am acutely aware of the need to actively embody dreams
and Tarotpy images. The technique of Embodied Imagina-

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

IJoDR
tion, pioneered by Jungian Analyst Robert Bosnak, uses the
phenomenon of dreaming as a paradigm for all work with
memories, symptoms, and images. From the perspective of
dreaming, the image is a place, an environment in which
we find ourselves. Based on this notion, the dreamer can
re-enter the landscape of the dream and flash back into its
images to experience them more fully. Embodied imagination is based on neuroscience and on the phenomenological work of C.G. Jung, especially his work on alchemy, and
the archetypal psychologist, James Hillman, who focused
on soul as a multiplicity of embodied states. These states
can be experienced simultaneously as a network of embodiments, creating profound therapeutic effects.
Following the didactic portion, including interactive participation (40 minutes), participants will be guided to apply
Embodied Imagination techniques to the Tarotpy method.
When we focus on an image – whether it is from a dream
or a card – and describe in detail its specific characteristics, we can sense its embodied presence. “Mirror neurons”
in the brain mimic the image-presence so that we feel it in
our own bodies. Participants will practice holding in conscious awareness different feeling states of a composite of
images.

Listening to Dreams of the Dying and their Loved
Ones
Monique Séguin
Pincourt, Québec, Canada
In this workshop, the presenter will describe various approaches to encourage a patient to discuss his/her dreams.
It is important to point out that this workshop will not teach
a participant to analyze a dream but rather will demonstrate
how the scenarios could be used as a therapeutic tool to
guide the care and to better communicate with a patient.
Though we will minimize interpretation, universal dream
symbols may be discussed for the purpose of explaining
the dreamer’s feeling.
Feelings evoked from the dream in the dreamer are important and can provide insight to the palliative care team
in understanding how the patient is responding in his own
‘’here & now.’’ Understanding may help the dreamer in a
grieving process. The dream reaches deeply into a patient’s
feeling and doesn’t lie! Respectfully listening to the dream
scenario can offer the care provider a tool to better assist
the patient in communicating more freely. The presenter has
collected many dream scenarios from dying patients while
giving the care to them and their families. She has published
a number of these dreams in collaboration with Nicole Gratton in a book in French, Les rêves en fin de vie. She has
found that the dream scenarios seem to mirror what the
patient is experiencing while dying. Participants attending
this workshop will gain an awareness of the importance and
advantages of listening to the dream.

Working with Dream Metaphor from the Standpoint of Co-Creative Dream Theory
Gregory Scott Sparrow
McAllen, TX, USA
Co-creative dream theory posits that the dream is co-created through the reciprocal interplay between the dream ego
and the emergent content, and unfolds in real time as a process that is indeterminate from the outset. The dream report
can, therefore, be seen as one of many possible outcomes
based on the dreamer’s range of possible reactions through
the course of the dream. From this dynamic relational view
of the dream, the visual imagery can be regarded as the
mutable interface between the dreamer and the dream,
or the moment-to-moment vectoring of the encounter between two somewhat autonomous structures. While Freud
believed that the dream was “strictly determined,” and that
dream images bear a direct relationship with objects from
the waking life, dream imagery is now viewed by dream
theorists and analysts such as Hartmann and Ullman as
broadly metaphorical, rather than specifically representing
a single person, object, or situation in the waking person’s
life. This is true in Hartmann’s theory which focuses on the
contextualizing function of dream imagery. Ullman, too, has
focused on how the metaphorical nature of dream imagery
maps onto a person’s waking life in his Dream Appreciation
method. However, neither Hartmann nor Ullman addresses
the dream as an interactive process, nor treats the imagery
as malleable and evolving in real time as a reaction to the
dreamer’s response set, which is a fundamental feature of
co-creative dream theory. Indeed, co-creative dream theory
requires that we view imagery as malleable and unfolding, and the metaphorical function of imagery as dynamic
through time. The didactic portion of the workshop will be
based on a paper (that will facilitate a condensed presentation in a workshop format), in which I will endeavor to review
our understanding of metaphor in literature, linguistics, and
dream analysis, and then show how the construction and
function of metaphor changes when viewed as an evolving
or regressing interface between the emergent dream content and the dream ego’s response to it. Then I will involve
the audience in a way of working practically with dream imagery using a method of inquiry that respects the unfolding, mutable nature of metaphor within co-creative dream
analysis.

Dreams Unzipped: Love/Sex/Relationship Dreams
Kelly Sullivan Walden
Topanga, CA, USA
In this workshop we will “pull back the covers” on the vital
role our dreams play in our ability to mate and relate in a
more soulful way in our waking lives. We will explore approaches for working with sexual dreams to for the purpose
of creating more satisfying romantic relationships.
Our dominant daytime thoughts, questions, and unfinished business are passed on to our dreams, which, in turn,
give us clues to effectively navigate the treacherous yet
rewarding terrain of love, and our most nagging romantic
questions, such as:

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

S13

IJoDR
How might I attract my soul mate?
Will I ever meet the man or woman of my dreams?
Once I find the love of my life, how do I keep him or her from
leaving?
What should I do with an overpowering sexual attraction?
Why am I so afraid my partner will cheat on me, leave me,
or stop loving me?
Why am I afraid to make a commitment?
How can I reassure my partner that I’ll be faithful when I’m
attracted to nearly everyone with a pulse?
How can I fully express my true self and still be held in the
embrace of a relationship?
To gain more insight about what your nighttime dreams
mean for you and how they can add rocket fuel to your
greatest dreams/desires for your love life we will discuss 10
of the most commonly remembered sexual dreams:
Cheating on a significant other, With an Ex, An orgasm
that feels real, With the boss, With a celebrity, In an adventurous place, With someone of the same sex, With a family
member or close platonic friend, With a friend’s significant
other, Sexual problems (inability to perform or sexual deformity)
We will also explore such topics as “Exes and Ohs”—
Why do we dream about our ex lovers? How common is it
for people to have sexual dreams? Why do we have sexual
dreams? Why are sexual dreams the ultimate “Hall Pass”?
Do men and women dream differently? How can your
dreams help you revive an ailing relationship? What are the
best ways to share dreams with a lover?
The presenter will share a related dream and a few
thoughts/reflections about the subject matter, then act as
facilitator, taking the dreamers through the following process to discover the gold in their dreams:
• Call to mind, draw, and briefly journal a dream that is “tugging” to be acknowledged – including the dreams *title,
*sub-title, and *primary emotion (in the dream)
• Journal a current “relationship-oriented” question, and
then how the dream might be providing insight, guidance
or a solution
• Share any insights with a partner or to the group as a
whole if willing
• Group participation, with a willing participant who has
either had an “aha” or is feeling stuck, using the Ullman
derived “If it were my dream” approach
• As the sharing continues, we may add gestalt work, dream
theatre, or amplification, depending upon what feels called
for by the dream and the dreamer
• To conclude, participants will be asked to identify how they
will honor their dream’s wisdom/guidance (i.e. action they
will take to amplify and activate the energy of the dream)

Staircase to Heaven: Adapting Dreamwork to
Dream Energy
Mirjam Tirion-Ietswaart and Nanske Kuiken
The Hague, The Netherlands
Each type of dream deserves its own approach. According
to old traditions (e.g. mystical Jewish), and supported by
decennia of dreamwork experience within ITIP, our dreams
can be viewed as expressions of visits to different areas
during the night. The dream can tell about a visit to:

S14

•The psychological realm, showing hidden aspects of yourself, making you aware of the way you move through your
life on a daily basis.
•The realm of the soul, of deep knowing: It shows you the
long term questions you are dealing with. It makes clear
what life the soul longs you to live.
•The spiritual realm: the transpersonal world behind the
world of manifestations – premonitions, guides, angels,
the deceased, or a strong image can show you a wider
perspective on existence.
These dreams give a sense of meaning, renew hope, offer consolation. In this 2 hour workshop we’ll work with
participants’dreams, and show the different approaches
for each of these three types of dreams. We’ll be using the
method of physical awareness, a method widely used by the
dreamworkers within ITIP. It is founded on the work of Reich
and further developed in 45 years of dreamwork within ITIP.
The method of physical awareness makes it possible
• to use non- analytical, non-rational signals, opening up
new, often unexpected insights;
• to use the dream experience as a starting point for further,
deep, non-verbal inquiry in areas of personal and spiritual
growth;
•to anchor the dream experience deeply in daily consciousness so that the insight gained from dreamwork translates
to development in everyday life.
The workshop will consist of a 2 hour program in which participants can choose to work with their dreams. After a short
introduction we will work with three dreams, one from each
type. We will do this in three rounds, with a short meditation between each. The last 20-30 minutes will be for questions and answers. All participants will be actively involved
in working with physical awareness, and where applicable,
in supporting the dreamwork.

The Healing Power of Shamanic Dances and
Dreaming
Paricia Elizabeth Torres Villanueva
Anzanillo, Colima, Mexico
The central objective will advance your understanding of
conscious movement to discover within yourself the hidden
realms and how to enter nonordinary states. You will begin
to truly walk the path of Higher Energy and not be tied to
what your ego is pushing you towards, but instead to what
gives you true meaning and well being emotionally, physically, mentally, and creatively.
We will practice a circle dance to focus our attention,
concentration and observation, and to be able to imitate
and repeat, thus developing our consciousness and awareness. Our innermost feelings of fear, sadness, and anger will
emerge, but we will learn to express our feelings in a healthy
and creative way – leading to joy and love, self contentment,
and sharing. Repetitive rhythms slowly inspire us to recognize our moods, thus interpersonal relations are established
in a different atmosphere of respect, finding our will power,
self esteem, decision making, discipline and persistence, all
of which are necessary to step into beautiful new possibilities in your life. The repetition of the steps in this ancestral
ritual dance ensure that our brain receives and processes
electric messages which are transmitted to the neuro-en-

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

IJoDR
docrine axis, hypothalamus, thyroid and adrenals to bring
into balance whatever hormones are askew. It is especially
important when working in psychotherapy. Workshop: Two
Hours; Didactic Presentation: half an hour; Circle dance
practice: one hour; Group discussion and closing: half an
hour.

4. Clinical Topics
Using Dreams to Tap Into Inner Healing Resources
Bhaskar Banerji
Berkeley, California, USA
This Powerpoint presentation will be an overview of the results of my doctoral study on Dreams & Chronic Illness, to
be conducted in January/February of 2016. How might a
dreamer tap their inner unconscious healing resources to influence their health via the process of dream incubation and
what are some of the challenges they are likely to encounter
along the way? Essentially, can the ancient art of Dream Incubation Healing (DIH) be adapted for modern times? Over
the centuries within the context of medicine, dreams have
been used in a number of important capacities – to predict
the onset of illness, to provide prescriptions for healing and
treatment of disease, to elicit complete remission or healing
through the dream state itself, to diagnose medical conditions, and lastly to determine the outcome of disease. All
these different types of medically oriented dreams suggest
that there is an “inner physician” that can warn a person of
impending physical crises, as well as help steer them towards
health and wholeness (Garfield, 1992; Kasatkin, 1967; Kellogg, 2007; Moss, 1996; Sabini, 1981; Van de Castle, 1994).
Furthermore, a number of researchers have demonstrated
that dreams are reactive to biological functioning (HeatherGreener, 1996; King, 2007; Smith, 1984). My exploratory
online study involves a mixed methods approach, examining some of the key challenges and possibilities of using a
Dream Incubation Healing (DIH) protocol developed by the
author to tap into the alleged wisdom and guidance of one’s
self-healing capacities, often called “the inner physician.”
The qualitative portion of the study involves performing a
thematic analysis on the dreams submitted by participants
over a 6-week period in search of health- related themes.
The quantitative portion will use a repeated measures design to compare two versions of the DIH protocol, one involving ordinary non-lucid dreaming (ODH) and the other
lucid dreaming (LDH). The main instrument for testing will
be the SF-36v2®, a self-report health questionnaire consisting of 36 questions used to calculate a series of sub-scales
that measure characteristics such as Bodily Pain, Energy/
Fatigue Levels, and Physical Functioning.
Additionally, the Hall and Van de Castle content analysis
scoring system (HVC) will be utilized to evaluate the dream
reports in search of health and medically related themes.
The primary objective of the study is to determine whether
there are any significant correlations between those individuals whose dreams revealed high levels of health-related
content and actual improvement/regression in health due to
either of the interventions as measured by the SF-36v2®

subscale scores. In the first half of the presentation I will
begin with an overview of how DIH was practiced in ancient times, particularly during the classical Greek era, and
then I will provide a brief overview of my research questions,
methodology and procedure. The remainder of the presentation will focus on a discussion of the preliminary results
from the study. All levels are welcome to attend.

Transformation Dreams; 7 Stages of Consciousness
Ann Bengtsson
Drammen, The Netherlands
Mystics from many cultures and times have described their
spiritual development and experiences. In this talk I will
explain the transformation-process and different stages of
consciousness. The starting point will be the description of
the “Interior Cast le” by Theresa of Avila; and the Tibetan
Dzogchen tradition, explaining the 7 stages of consciousness. The subtle anatomy of man and Jung’s terminology
will also be used to illustrate transformation, looking at
specific dream symbols related to the transformation in the
chakras. Initiation dreams will be included as well as dreams
beyond the self, ending up with non-duality. Jes Bertelsen
will be a reference here.

Awakening of the Spirit: Heeding the Inner Calling
Sheila Benjamin
Tulsa, OK, USA
Mother Teresa received a message from God stating she was
to leave the convent and help the poor while living amongst
them. Buddha’s mother received a nighttime dream that she
was going to be the mother of a child who would be a pure
and wise being. Martin Luther King Jr. had a daytime dream
that one day this country would live the meaning of the
creed “we hold these truths to be self-evident; that all men
are created equal.” We are all spirit, a supernatural force that
science has attempted to access and understand. Within
each of us is a plan, a blueprint of whom we are and what
we are to accomplish, contribute, and learn in our lifetime.
Some may say this plan is our calling, our purpose and it is
what gives meaning to our existence. When we deviate from
that plan, our lives often appear to be hard, unfulfilling, and
sometimes filled with negativity. It is my desire to explore
a variety of dreams that reflect those that have lived a life
of purpose, those that have been given a second chance,
and those that are given the vision of their calling. The research for this paper will explore individuals from a variety
of cultures, religious backgrounds, and age groups. This research will be received through interviews spiritual leaders
from varying backgrounds as well as researching historical
events. We will conclude with a guided Intuitive Heart experience, giving each of the participants an opportunity to
receive a vision of their calling. There will be an opportunity
to share in smaller groups.

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

S15

IJoDR
Dreams and Holistic Wellbeing: Method and Findings
David Billington
London, United Kingdom
This presentation will recap the methodology and findings
from a pilot study discussed at the 2015 IASD conference.
That study was qualitative research examining the experiences of people who have explored their dreams using the
Waking Dream Process (Hamilton, 2014) in the context of
transpersonal psychotherapy. The Waking Dream Process
is a method of revisiting dreams by engaging the body
and imagination to facilitate psychological integration and
personal development. Twelve participants took part in
semi-structured interviews and completed scales measuring changes in mental well-being and attitudes towards
dreams.
Thematic Content Analysis (TCA; Anderson, 2007) drew
out themes from the interview transcripts. The pilot study
found that the Waking Dream Process (Hamilton, 2014) supported positive changes in mental well-being and attitudes
towards dreams (Billington, 2014). The current research extends the study to a wider group of participants. The methodology and preliminary findings will be presented, and the
refinement of the methodologies used in the pilot study
will be discussed. The Dream Scale (Billington, 2014), a research tool for exploring psycho-spiritual well-being with regard to dreams, has been modified based on feedback from
the pilot study. New developments and applications will be
discussed. This presentation is intended for all, particularly
those interested in research, the transpersonal, and those
interested in dreamwork in psychotherapy.

A Blind Text Analysis of a Woman’s 2,250 Dreams
Kelly Bulkeley and Deirdre Barrett
Portland, OR, USA
This presentation demonstrates the use of a digital word
search method to study 2,250 dreams from an adult female,
gathered in a personal journal over 32 years. A “blind” analysis, using only word usage frequencies without any prior
information about the dreamer, will be employed to make
predictions about the participant’s waking life, including
important people, emotions, and social interactions, based
on the continuity hypothesis of dreaming. The word search
method described in this presentation has been applied to
several other dream series with predominantly accurate results. The advantage of quantitative content analysis is that
it provides objective statistical results that other researchers
can verify. However, the disadvantages of traditional methods of content analysis are considerable – they are slow, labor-intensive, hard to learn, and vulnerable to problems with
inter-coder reliability. Particularly when the coding systems
being used are untested or idiosyncratic, the results can be
disappointing. Digital word search methods can provide a
better alternative – they are fast, easy to use, and reliably
consistent in their results.
The presentation will start with a brief overview of traditional methods of content analysis in dream research, and
the need for better alternatives. Then the “Kay” series will

S16

be introduced. The source of her 32-years of dreams will
be described (they were conveyed to Bulkeley by Deirdre
Barrett, who served as the research intermediary between
Bulkeley and Kay), as will the logistical steps involved in
a word search study of her dreams. The text analysis results will be presented along with Kay’s responses to them.
These results will be discussed with special focus on several areas of her waking life that were reflected especially
clearly in the word usage patterns of her dreams. The findings on these topics will be of interest to anyone who wants
empirical evidence of the psychological and cultural significance of dream content. If some of these blind inferences
are mistaken or incomplete, the possible reasons (such as
metaphorical thinking and representation) will also be discussed. This may suggest new pragmatic principles to apply in future cases of blind analysis. The presentation will
be aimed at researchers and students, providing a practical
demonstration of how digital word search tools can be used
in the scientific study of dreams.

Psychotic Patients’ Dreams and Music Therapy
Manlio Caporali and co-authors Marco Zanasi, Enzo Fortuna, Giorgio Di Lorenzo, Tiziana Corteccioni, Alice Tiralongo, Laura Bianchini, Michelangelo Lupone, and Alberto
Siracusano
Rome, Italy
Music therapy is a valuable and effective treatment for individuals with impaired psychological, affective, cognitive and
communication skills. Results of the research and clinical
evidence would seem to attest the validity of music therapy
even in patients who have shown resistance to other therapeutic approaches. The sample of our study consists of four
outpatients, selected in May 2014 from the day hospital at
the psychiatric clinic of the University of Rome “Tor Vergata.” The subjects recruited (three men and a woman) were
aged between 30 and 45 years (mean age of 38.25 years).
They had a diagnosis of schizophrenia residual type. The
patients interacted for fifteen minutes with the “Feed Drum”,
an interactive musical instrument provided by the research
team of CRM (Centre of Music Research). During the interactive musical experience we recorded an electroencephalogram (EEG) and after we collected dream material. From
the analysis of EEG, taken before and immediately after the
intervention of the interactive musical experience conducted with the “Feed Drum”, we found the following results:
a greater activation of the entire right cerebral hemisphere,
particularly the temporal lobe, frontal insula and the parietal
lobe. Statistically significant differences (p <0.05) were in
two frequency bands: delta and gamma. After the intervention of the interactive musical experience, in the delta band
we found an increase in the activity of the right frontal lobe,
in particular in the structures of the upper and middle frontal
gyrus corresponding to Brodmann areas 9 and 10. In the
gamma band we noticed a diffuse increase in the activity of
all the right hemisphere, in particular, in order of activation,
in structures as temporal lobe, frontal lobe, parietal lobe. In
addition the patients dreamed about the interactive musical
experience in the nights after. They dreamed about angels
and babies expressing emotions like calm and serenity. In
this preliminary study the interactive musical experience
would seem to activate areas involved in brain functions

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

IJoDR
such as planning, organizing, speech production, language
comprehension, memory, auditory perception, processing
of emotion and stimulation of mirror neurons system. The
study would show the potential effectiveness of a single
session of music therapy, conducted with “Feed drum,” in
improving brain areas that are impaired in schizophrenia
stimulating the production of dream material. Thanks to this
rehabilitation program the patients could start a relationship
with reality no longer mediated by symptoms of psychosis.

Dream Sharing with “Strangers”
Laurel Clark
Maryland Heights, MO, USA
When people find IASD they often describe the feeling of
“coming home” and “finding one’s tribe.” I often wonder
how many people are out in the world, still wandering and
wondering how to find compatible dreamers. I have met
people in dream groups at IASD Conferences who say
they feel all alone in their home communities, that they do
not know anyone else interested in dreams. Yet, everyone
dreams, so it seems like there may be more dreamers wanting to find like-minded souls than there are people who discount dreams. This presentation describes some common
and not-so-common ways of introducing “dream talk” to
people you meet. Whether you bring dreams up in everyday
social situations or set up dream circles or lectures to draw
interested people, you can find ways to let people know that
you pay attention to dreams and they are not crazy for wanting to talk about theirs. Laurel Clark has kept a dream journal since 1977 and spreads the word about dreams every
way she can, from public speaking to writing articles and
books, to bringing up the topic in everyday conversation.
She shares with you some ways she has found for opening
the door to those who are curious to explore their dreams.
You will learn in this presentation how to listen to people and
how dreams may be a response to their interests and needs.
You will receive ideas about how to bring up the subject
of dreams in conversations, based on research into dream
inventions, inspiration, and creativity. You will hear some examples of famous dreams and everyday dreams, including
some of the presenter’s healing message dreams that may
be used to initiate communication about dreams. You will
also be introduced to resources you can use to share dream
information and spark people’s interest. You will receive a
brief description of ways to set up dream discussion groups.
Hopefully we can all have the courage to shine our light and
meet those who need us so that we can bring about a world
in which everyone shares their dreams!

from our personal experiences. Some dreams are easier to
remember: those with strong emotions, universal archetypes, presence of light or guides, etc. What about dreams
of our ordinary life? Despite their good intentions, why do
many people (including the presenter) awaken themselves
with empty hands about their dreams, with only the vague
feeling that something happened? Or when they do remember their dreams, these ones seem so dull or so intricate
that they don’t know what to do with them. The experience
of the presenter is that there are some beliefs and attitudes
that can help us to increase motivation and have a richer
dream life. In her book Dream Incubation, Nicole Gratton
says:
« The great sages of history have all passed down a similar message of wisdom: “Know thyself.” Each night, in our
dreams, an information session is graciously offered to us
regarding this self we need to know and understand. This
introspective process is possible thanks to informative
dreams, which can be compared to the news bulletins that
are presented at regular intervals during the day. These daily
information sessions open the door to a better understanding of the self. Our nature is multidimensional... According
to its origin, a dream will inform us about an emotional, intellectual, or spiritual matter to be taken into consideration. »
And Mark Thurston in his book Dreams, Tonight’s Answers for Tomorrow’s Questions says that according to Edgar Cayce, we must respect two essential characteristics
of dream interpretation: personal responsibility and application. According to him, any dream well interpreted will be
able to influence our way of thinking, acting and feeling in
any practical situation of life. And if we keep in mind that
our dreams are almost always related to subjects that preoccupy us during day time, it will be easier for us to give
them a better interpretation. So one of the challenges for
the dreamer, if he wants to increase his motivation in dream
recall and interpretation, is to convince himself to discover
the link between his dreams and his daily life, and see the
precious help that they give him at any level of his being.
The dreamer has to discover what the presenter calls the «
genius of the dream» and develop this feeling of wonder in
front of the structure or the message of the dream. In doing
so, he is on his way to become the pearl fisher in his dream
world.
The presentation is made in three parts: 1) The challenge
of maintaining motivation and discipline in dream recording;
2) Which beliefs and attitudes promote dream recall; and 3)
Presentation of some examples of Trivial dreams, significant
messages.

Dreaming Autoimmunity
Fulvio D’Acquisto

Trivial Dreams, Significant Messages
Claude Couture
Quebec, Quebec, Canada
The motivation to remember our dreams and the action of
writing them, each night, are two key factors at the basis
of success of the active dreamer. We can benefit from the
dreams of others, but without dreams of our own that we
can recall in the morning, it is difficult to analyse something

London, England, UK
Patients suffering from autoimmune diseases have long
been known to go through a significant emotional and psychological distress during the development of their disease.
Although not properly documented, evidence suggests that
autoimmune patients often experience vivid dreams but seldom share this highly charged emotional material with the
others (including their GP or clinicians).
Professor D’Acquisto will present the methods and preliminary findings from his study into the dreams of people

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

S17

IJoDR
suffering from autoimmune diseases and the effectiveness of dreamwork, particularly the Waking Dream Process
(Hamilton, 2014), on their quality of life.
The aim of this study is to explore these dreams in dedicated sessions and to provide emotional and psychological
support to these patients. This is being done in two stages.
During the first stage, consisting of six one-to-one sessions,
patients experience techniques such as dream association
technique and the Waking Dream Process (e.g. a revisitation
of the dream in a waking state). During the second stage,
patients have the option to continue their dream exploration work in groups with other patients. The ultimate goal
of this project is to improve the quality of life of these patients by giving them the opportunity to share and explore
their dreams. The emotional and psychological benefits of
the projects are being measured using the Mental Health
Recovery Star form currently used in several NHS services. Professor D’Acquisto will discuss the reasons for using
these methods in the context of a research project within
the transpersonal paradigm.

by active imagination. IRT is attracting growing interest and
in many cases is an effective tool in dealing with frequently
occurring nightmares.
In this presentation I examine when using IRT is effective,
and when it does not make sense. Points of interest are: • To
what extent do the recurring dream themes correspond to
reality? • To what extent is the underlying emotion or trauma
of the dream theme processed? If IRT is used, it is always
in combination with other therapeutic tools, especially relaxation and insight-oriented therapy. I will present the four
nightmare sufferers to you and give a brief description of
their living conditions, the causes of their nightmare, and
the therapeutic approach. In all cases, the therapy resulted
in a virtually complete cessation of nightmares. This proved
to be stabilized in a follow-up.

Dreaming for the Second Half of Life
Claude Desloges
Cowansville, QC, Canada

Case Studies of Frequent Nightmare-sufferers
Ada de Boer
Groningen, Netherlands
This paper is a presentation of the treatment of four cases
of frequently occurring nightmares with mutually different
causes. In all cases there were one or two recurring nightmare themes. In this presentation I examine - based on two
considerations - when using IRT is useful, and when it does
not make sense. In all cases, the therapy resulted in an almost complete cessation of nightmares. This proved to be
stabilized in a follow-up. The causes of the nightmares and
circumstances of these four clients are diverse: 1. The nightmares started at the birth of the first child and continued
later on. The son of this pregnancy had the diagnosis ADHD
and this fact had strong emotional impact for the parents.
This certainly contributed to the persistence of the nightmares, occurring about once a week. Even after a successful EMDR treatment regarding the emotions surrounding the
behavior of the client’s son, the nightmares continued. 2.
The nightmares started after a divorce. The emotions surrounding the divorce were not sufficiently processed. The
occurrence of nightmares was about three times a week.
3. The nightmares started after the very sudden death of
the partner some years earlier. Client lived fairly isolated.
She dreamed about twice a week about the death of her
deceased partner. 4. The nightmares arose after abuse by a
lover-boy in combination with a fragile personality structure.
Successful treatment in a specialized clinic took place, but
the nightmares persisted, about twice a week. In all cases
there were one or two recurring nightmare themes.
Therapeutic Approach: After answering a questionnaire
about nightmares and living conditions, a therapeutic program was compiled in close consultation with the client.
The client consented to active participation in this program. Interventions which were used are: relaxation, bedroom decor, precepts, and Imagery Rescripting Therapy,
system configuration according to the method of Hellinger,
bereavement and compassionate therapy. Imagery and Rescripting Therapy is rewriting a recurring nightmare theme
with a positive ending. The new dream script is then trained

S18

In her book La chaleur du coeur empêche nos corps de
rouiller, (Robert Laffont, 2008), French psychologist and
author Marie de Hennezel advocates the development of a
new art of aging underlining the need to accept growing old
without becoming old along the way. Jung himself considered the second half of life not as a period of inexorable decline but rather as a time for progressive refinement of what
is essential, a time to turn one’s attention towards interiority
and spirituality. Referring to the original version of “Métamorphoses de l’âme et ses symboles”, written in 1911 when
he was thirty-six years old, Jung notes: “This is a critical moment because it marks the beginning of the second half of
life, soften signalled by a “metanoïa,” a shift in meaning.” In
the Foreword to Jung and Aging; Possibilities and Potentials
for the Second Half of Life (Spring Journal Books, 2014),
Dr Aryeh Maidenbaum suggests that “The years beyond
midlife have the potential for being one of the most productive and satisfying periods of our lives. Although these years
hold many challenges, including health concerns and physical aging, perhaps the most important challenge we face
is finding or continuing to find meaning in our lives.” The
presenter started dream journaling in 1979. Thirty-six years
ago! Now, at 71, a curious elder wonders if and how his own
dreams reflect his journey through this second half of life.
The presentation will be but a brief exploration of dreaming
in the second half of his life. It will highlight the potential of
dreams to provide orientation, meaning and guidance.
A few significant dreams will serve as beacons for this
excursion, as follows:”Follow me!” Dreams that herald the
second half of life. Thirty-six years of dreaming: 1% «big»
dreams, 99% «common» dreams. A vision for the journey,
an eye on the next step. The Angel and Gollum. The bright
and somber faces of guidance. The need to make peace
with the past. Crossroad in Africa: The Luggage or the Jerry
Cans. About choices and letting go. The dreamer changes
along the way. So does his dreaming. And so should his
“rapport” with his dreams. Silence, let the dream speak. The
Non-Road Ahead. Walking is the road.”By the time I thought
I had found all the answers, all the questions had changed”
(Paolo Coello).

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

IJoDR
Earth Calling: Dreaming Our Way into Sanity?
Rosemary Gosselin
Thornbury, Ontario, Canada
Our collective unconscious is a living storehouse of tribal
memories. Dreams tap into this rich reservoir to promote our
evolution as a species. We are being called now to reconnect to our roots and re-view our dreams through a broader
cultural lens. As environmentalists are moved to speak for
nature, dreamers are being called to speak for the Earth’s
soul. The work of Carl Jung, Meredith Sabini, Anthony
Stevens, Marion Woodman, Stephen Aizenstat and others
point to the role of dreams as “first responders” to Nature’s
urgent appeal. Our relationship to the Nature Archetype is
illustrated by dreams from my Jungian-oriented groups in
rural Ontario. This presentation on cultural dreaming is inspired by Meredith Sabini, who has spoken so movingly of
feeling in her body the devastation of our boreal forests: she
is not alone. I underscore the need to pay close attention to
the images calling from a wounded world. The Earth Has a
Soul, a collection of Jung’s writings edited by Sabini, and
the work of ethnologist and Jungian analyst Anthony Stevens on the evolutionary thrust of dreams are key in providing background. I hope to encourage other dreamworkers
to attune to cultural messages coming through. Often we
get caught up in the personal, and neglect the cultural implications. I propose that cultural dreaming is on a spectrum
– from Earth Calling dreams that tug on our hearts, to community dreams that tap us on the shoulder with practical
advice. Stephen Foster’s concept of the Nature Archetype
will be discussed, and Jerome Bernstein’s theory of “the
borderland” – a resurgence of a felt connection to the web
of all things. This dovetails with Marion Woodman’s work in
restoring relationship to our instinctual depths. As Stephen
Aisenstat contends, “The DNA of our individual and planetary evolution is coded in the images of dreams.” In his
Dream of the Earth, Thomas Berry calls for a deep, cultural
therapy to heal our addiction to industrial civilization. Imagine if....we could envision millions of dream groups worldwide as cells of the Earth’s body, agents of that urgently
needed cultural therapy, working together to restore us to
sanity? Audience: For All. Aim: To expand our conception of
cultural dreaming and to encourage eco-dream activism.

Dream Incubation: How to Program Your Dreams
Nicole Gratton

effective ways to take advantage of the multiple benefits of
creative sleep. To induce a dream, simply formulate an affirmation or a dream intention about some concern of the
day. The intention takes the form of a positive phrase. For
example, if my professional life does not meet my expectations, I would choose the following intention: “Tonight I will
know what can make me happier at work.” Another possibility would be: “Tonight, I will find out a way to improve my
happiness at work.” To increase the chances of obtaining
a significant dream, I will write the chosen intentions in my
dream journal. This act of writing recruits the capabilities of
the right brain, which visually retains the requests in order
to find a solution through intuition and global vision. Also,
by writing down our request, we focus better on the point to
be clarified. This has the effect of encouraging the success
of an induced dream. Working on your dreams can become
a very enjoyable game. Take the dare, have this adventure!
With this approach to your exploration, you have the chance
to verify the benefits of studying your dreams. You can proceed at your own pace, find a better understanding of the
self, and discover your infinite potential for growth.

How Dreams Have Guided Me All Along my Life
Nicole Gratton
Montreal , QC, Canada
Dreams have guided me all through my life. In three different
periods they were especially helpful. At 15, after the death
of my mother, her telepathic dreams helped me go through
the sadness of her departure and cope with changes in my
family. She gave me much advice concerning my education.
At the age of twenty-eight, I started a dream journal and
since then, my dreams have guided me through the challenges of life. My dream journal became the inner mirror of
my emotions in order to know myself better. My dreams also
provided a special laboratory for me to experiment with new
attitudes or behaviour to face virtual situations in the safe
environment of my inner world. Then, at forty, my dreams
informed me that it was time for a career change. After being a technologist for more than 24 years with financial security it was not easy to consider the possibility of a new
career. But my dreams showed me the future ahead. They
inspired me to write my first book and develop workshops
on dream practices. As a dream worker since 1992, I have
taught hundreds of people eager to learn how to use their
dreams to live better.

Montreal , QC, Canada
Dream incubation is an active way to enter into relationship
with our dreams. This practice dates to antiquity. In ancient
Greece, it was used in temples dedicated to Asclepius, the
Greek god of medicine and doctors, to obtain guidance, resolve a problem, or even to heal various illnesses. In our
day, it is also possible to practice dream incubation on your
own thanks to autosuggestion, nourished by a sincere desire and a noble intention. The goal of dream incubation is
to help you obtain the maximum benefit from your sleep
that provides inspirations and solutions. You can then compose your own requests in order to obtain results adapted
to your needs. By inducing dreams in this way, you can find

Dreams and the Study of Human Transformation
Nigel Hamilton
London, United Kingdom
This study of fifteen hundred dreams of fourteen people
who underwent a silent, solo spiritual retreat shows that
dreams can be used to monitor the stages of a psychospiritual transformation process. They can also be used to
monitor and mirror the differing degrees of altered states
of consciousness that are encountered in such a transformation process. Both qualitative and quantitative analyses,
which were used independently of each other, arrived at the

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

S19

IJoDR
same conclusions. The results of the retreat dreams study
were then compared, using the same qualitative and quantitative methods of analysis, with over a thousand dreams
of a subject who did not undergo a spiritual retreat but who
experienced a profound psycho-spiritual transformation
over a period of two years. This person’s dreams showed
three distinct cycles of transformation, each of which developed exponentially from cycle to cycle. A second comparison was made with a clinical case study taken from the
collected works of C. G. Jung, which described two cycles
of dreams, during a similar psycho-spiritual transformation
process. The model of transformation derived from the retreat dreams study showed very similar patterns to those
found in both long-term, single case studies.
Four main conclusions were drawn from this study. Firstly,
dreams seem to originate from the interaction between the
worldly impressions of everyday life and the innate archetypal dimensions of consciousness that lie within the human
psyche. Secondly, people who undergo a psycho-spiritual
transformation do so in a four stage process during which
they also encounter, according to their spiritual capacity, six
subtle levels of consciousness. The levels of consciousness
and the stages of the process are encountered in a specific sequence or order. Thirdly, that dreams which include
a spiritual or sacred dimension impact the dreamer in a way
that facilitates their psycho-spiritual transformation. The
fourth and most important point is that this thesis extends
the pioneering work of Carl Jung by not only acknowledging the spiritual experiences in the psychological process of
individuation, but also revealing and describing an inherent
order of subtle spiritual steps or leaps of consciousness that
the subject passes through during this process. As such
the research makes a significant contribution to bridging
the gulf between the traditional Eastern or spiritual views
and the modem Western psychological views of the role of
dreams during the process of human transformation. The
result is that transformation is seen as both psychological
and spiritual, or psycho-spiritual. Finally it is suggested that
this model of transformation is applicable to the psychotherapeutic context. It could well serve as a basis for a new
theory of dreams.

Bionian Dream Theory: A Paradigm Shift
Marc Hebbrecht
Tongeren, Belgium
Based on the study of Winfred Bion’s publications (Bion was
a Kleinian psychoanalyst, 1879-1979) and my own experience as a psychiatrist and psychoanalyst working in clinical practice for more than 30 years, an overview is given of
how understanding of dreams has changed in psychoanalytic practice. In contrast to Freud’s theory in which he argues that dream-work is necessary to disguise unconscious
wishes, Bion considers dreaming as a filter that sorts, categorizes, and prioritizes emotional facts that are stimulated
by incoming sensory stimuli. First, emotional experiences
have to be made dreamable. Bion equates dreaming with
unconscious waking thought and with reverie. Psychotics
are not able to dream; they have visual experiences during sleep, nightmares and nocturnal hallucinations which
are of a different character. Bion conceives a dream as a
special mode of thinking as well as a specific stage in the

S20

development of thought. A dream is an ephemeral conjunction of elements, only existing for a short time and rapidly
disintegrating into loose elements. It is also the result of a
series of transformation processes. After 1970, Bion advocates a new technique of dream interpretation: the analyst
must dream the clinical situation. In this model the analysis
of countertransference dreams is equally important as the
analysis of the patient’s dreams. The way in which Bion’s
dream theory inspires contemporary psychoanalytic practice will be illustrated with clinical material.

Active Imagination: Atlas Transformed in the
Dreamworld of the Psyche
Michael P. Jenkins
New York, New York, USA
I will present a brief overview of the basic differences between Freudian dream interpretation (wish fulfillment and
unearthing traumatic memory), and Jungian dream work
(the unconscious compensating for what the ego/identity is
lacking). I will focus on the techniques of active imagination and amplification and give direct examples of using this
technique in my psychoanalytic, working with the dream images of a young man. I do not see this type of work as being
separate from how any person can listen to and work with
dreams. I believe it enhances the way we listen and privileges and respects the meaning of the images to the dreamer.
I will introduce creative ways that active imagination can be
utilized with any person at any level. I will introduce the idea
of amplification as a means of combating extreme psychic
isolation. These techniques can be used by any individual in
opening up a rich dialogue with their own dream images. I
utilize my own painting to enrich my understanding of dream
images and will accompany the presentation with images I
have painted of Atlas and Sisyphus, as well as utilize other
images to engage the audience.
Sequence: 0-5 minutes: Introduction and open with an
excerpt from the movie, “Jimmy P., Psychotherapy of a
Plains Indian,” pending permission from distributor. 5-15
minutes: Introduction of Freudian and Jungian approaches
to dreams. Concepts of how we relate to the unconscious.
Examples of how we discuss and enter the dream work
respectfully.10-20 minutes: Examples of images: Art describes standing still with a boulder on his shoulders, unable to move and weighed down in excruciating pain. He
grimaces as he speaks, and his whole, more-than-six- feet
tall self seems to shrink into the floor. For months we revisited this image, his feeling stuck with the weight of the
world on his shoulders; no hope of movement and the pain
of visibly standing still, exposed, ridiculed, forever stuck. We
explore what the image means to him, how it is related to
both his present and past; as well as how he might want to
shift the weight for his future. As his life and analysis begin
to move, he feels less weighted in his past. He brings in another image. He is now rolling a huge boulder up a hill, only
to have it roll back down again and again. He feels smashed
and ashamed at his weakness, in his inability to move the
rock forward, or to hold it from receding. Although these
images appear connected to the mythic fable Sisyphus, Art
tells these stories as if they are new. They are! For him this
story is unique and unfolding with surprise. It is his story and

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

IJoDR
he becomes connected to living in and telling his own narrative. 20-30 minutes: Questions and Discussion.

Announcing Dreams
Kimberly R. Mascaro
Oakland, CA, USA

Dreams as Life Review
Robert H. King
Green Mountain Falls, Colorado, USA
I will talk about four extraordinary, profoundly archetypal
dreams that came to me in a single night, but played out
over many years, showing how they provided the basis for
a life review that was both illuminating and transforming.
My presentation will look at some of the ways dreams can
contribute to life review, concluding with suggestions for
working with dreams in the later years. This talk is based on
my personal experience, informed by extensive reading in
Jungian literature on dreams and current research on aging.
It is intended to raise questions and invite discussion.
The talk begins with a brief description of the setting of the
dreams. I’m on a spiritual pilgrimage and have just returned
from three days on an island that is one of the most famous,
but least accessible “thin places” in northern Wales. In the
middle of the night I’m presented with four dreams that
come all at once and point to identifiable periods in my life
where there are unresolved issues that I wasn’t aware of. All
four dreams are archetypal. In the first one, my sister tells
me “Mother is evil,” followed by an image of the two of them
lying peacefully together. It seems to allude to a preverbal
time in my life. The second dream refers to a specific event
in late adolescence when I was interviewed on national radio, but includes a little boy clamoring for my attention. The
third dream features an out-of-control car and the appearance of my father. It clearly refers to a time in mid-life when
my wife was suffering from a psychotic breakdown and my
career was stalled. The fourth dream shows me moving out
of a house that does not belong to me, recalling a time in
my early 60s when I was recently divorced and preparing
for retirement.
As I worked with these dreams over the next ten years,
other dreams came along that added to my understanding
and contributed to the healing process. Like most dreams,
life review dreams disturb our habitual ways of thinking.
They recall earlier situations, but present them in ways that
challenge our settled ideas about them. While they may uncover deeply buried wounds and unresolved inner conflicts,
they can also carry seeds of healing and renewal. They are
not just about the past, but speak to our current situation.
These dreams are meant to do more than provide information; they are meant to change us. Jung thought that the
last half of life was a propitious time for inner work. Life review dreams, when recognized as such, can contribute significantly to that work. The later years are sometimes seen
exclusively as a period of decline, when our capabilities are
diminished and we have little to look forward to, yet these
years can also be, as Eric Erickson has shown, a time of
integration and generativity. Dreams, especially life review
dreams, offer hope for a better and more productive life into
old age.

Introductory Statement: Announcing dreams take place not
only in the lives of expectant men and pregnant women, but
occur in the dream-lives of family and community members.
Historical accounts, the presenter’s research, and interdisciplinary anecdotes are the focus of this presentation. Attendees will gain knowledge about pregnancy dreams, extraordinary dreams, and the impact of the announcing dreams
experience.
Expanded Description of Presentation: While dream literature is extensive, including extraordinary dreams and
pregnancy dreams, the convergence of the two is limited.
Announcing dreams are one type of extraordinary dream –
reported by pregnant women, expectant men, family and
community members – that are not well understood. This
specific type of dream has been reported across time and
place. The focus of this presentation, Announcing Dreams,
describes how announcing dreams affect pregnant women
and expectant men, and highlights Dr. Mascaro’s findings
from her research, as well as historical, interdisciplinary,
and cross-cultural accounts of the phenomenon. Several
themes emerged from analysis, including, but not limited to,
confidence and affirmation, bonding and connection, birth,
lucidity, decision-making regarding the pregnancy, and prediction of sex. These themes will be discussed. For those
who serve, or work with, pregnant families, acknowledging
and attending to their inner world, including dream experiences, can support both men and women to be present to
their whole selves.

Organic and Art-based Inquiry into Dreams
Judy Pascoe
Cheltenham, UK
Judy’s heuristic research led to the development of her
workshop “Drawing from the Night” in which participants
create art from dreams. In 2013-14 she performed a qualitative study employing methodologies of Organic Inquiry
(Clements, 1998, 2004, 2011) and Art-based Inquiry (McNiff,
1998, 2008, 2013), researching the transformative experience of drawing and painting dream images.
In the first phase of this exploratory study, images that appeared in dreams as artwork guided the art making process.
These were dreams where images were framed as art work
or dreams where artwork was being made or in the process
of being created. During the next stage of the work, dialoguing techniques (McNiff, 1992) were used to engage with the
images that had been created from these dreams as well as
the drawings being explored throughout the research in art
psychotherapy sessions. Thematic Content Analysis (Anderson, 2004) and Organic methodologies of data analysis
(Clements, 2011) were used to analyse the data.
Judy will discuss the methods she used, why she chose
them, their benefits and limitations, and how the methods
relate to her findings. Her findings will be briefly presented
using the five stages of animus development (Young-Eisendrath, 1984), identifying alchemical operations indicating

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

S21

IJoDR
phases of individuation (Edinger, 1985) and the evolving
experience of transformation defined by Farrelly-Hansen
(2001).This presentation is for all, especially those interested in creative research methods for investigating dreams
from a transpersonal perspective.

An Encrypted Garden: Wordplay in Dream Formation
Chris Pike

The Use of Dreams in Jungian Psychoanalysis

Canterbury, Kent, United Kingdom

Vanessa Prins-Goodman

This paper reports how the uncovering of multi-layered,
multilingual wordplay in a dream-riddle led the author on
a journey of self-understanding and research – from study
of a painting by Paul Klee to analysis of Hebrew poetry in
the Song of Songs – that elucidates the role of language
in dream formation. Wordplay has been a key element in
dream interpretation across time and culture. In calling for a
dream theory that assumes a fundamental role for language,
Kilroe (2001; 2013) usefully categorises oneiric linguistic
phenomena under four headings: (i) dream speech – where
language use is part of the overt dream content (including
disembodied voices, and languages unfamiliar to dreamer);
(ii) tropes – including metaphor, punning, inner speech, and
other forms of wordplay, both general and idiosyncratic; (iii)
displacement – where reference is made to spatiotemporally
remote events (past, present, future), and; (iv) mental experience – where reference is made to unobservable mental
states of the dreamer and/or other dream characters.
While including examples of all four categories, this paper focuses on an intriguing case of category (ii) comprising
a ‘cryptic crossword clue’-like dream-riddle subsequently
found to incorporate multi-levelled anagrammatic and
cryptonymic (Abraham and Torok, 1986) wordplay in English and Latin, the latter language and its referents unfamiliar
to the dreamer at the time of dreaming. The paper charts
the unfolding interpretation and linguistic ‘decoding’ of the
dream-riddle in dialogue with the presenter’s waking life and
research, and explores the relationship between wordplay
and imagery in the original dream and subsequent dreams
over ten years apart. It elucidates the dream content’s close
connection with the thematic wordplay-imagery of Klee’s
painting Insula dulcamara, and how the later uncovering
of multiple, mutually compatible layers of wordplay in the
dream-riddle unexpectedly linked the dream to the biblical
Song of Songs. It shows how this in turn led to discovery of
parallels between linguistic-imagistic aspects of the riddle
and Hebrew/Latin wordplay in the biblical text, the language
and thematic content of which were unknown to the dreamer at the time of dreaming, but which were key to understanding the dream’s overall meaning and resolution.
The paper shows how the eventual ‘solution’ to the
dream-riddle anticipates and describes the process of arriving at the solution itself and its transformative effect upon
the dreamer, highlighting the role of intention as an organising principle, and discusses how the morphology of ancient
language systems, the principle of self-reflexivity, and Klee’s
investigations of morphogenesis and signification in art (including wordplay), throw light on the origins and activity of
linguistic imagination in dreaming.

S22

References
Abraham, N., Torok, M. (1986). The Wolf Man’s Magic Word: A Cryptonomy. Minneapolis; University of Minnesota Press
Kilroe, P. (2001). Verbal Aspects of Dreaming: A Preliminary Classification. Dreaming, 11(3), 105-113.
Kilroe, P. (2013). Inner Speech in Dreaming: A Dialogic Perspective.
Dreaming, 23(4), 233-244.
Pike, C. (2014). Signing Off: Paul Klee’s Insula Dulcamara. Word & Image: A Journal of Verbal/Visual Enquiry, 30(2), 117-130.

Bussum, The Netherlands
Jung’s groundbreaking understanding of dreams will be
reflected upon using his late article, “The importance of
dreams” (Man and His Symbols, 1968). Concepts such as
compensation, anticipatory function of dreams, and dream
symbols will be explored. Contemporary Jungian analysts,
such as M. Stein or Warren Colman have built upon Jung’s
ideas and have included dream analysis as an important
aspect of their clinical work. When working with dreams,
the context of the dream, the personal associations, as well
as the larger cultural and archetypal meaning, need to be
addressed. Dreams can also be further worked on through
painting, drawing, or psychodrama. Special attention will
be devoted to the prospective function of dreams and to
how the use of dreams can further what Jung called the
individuation process. The presentation will end with a brief
example from clinical practice.

Eleogenetics and Dreams in Clinical Practice
Massimo Schinco
Cervasca, CN, Italy
The presentation takes its cue from theoretical reflections on
a clinical basis, with consequent technical applications. The
target audience is intermediate and advanced. The study of
dreams, especially when aimed to enrich clinical practices
in the field of psychotherapy and social work, makes evident the recurring tension between continuity and discontinuity. In respect to the narrative typical of diurnal life, the
narrative of dreaming features as progressively increasing
in discontinuity.
While dreaming, the continuity in time, space, meanings
and causal bonds gets more and more flimsy and inconsistent. It seems that the apex of this discontinuity is reached
with nightmares, where the contents of the dreams threaten
the dreamer as if they were concrete, coming from outside
and out of any control. Traditionally this kind of discontinuity
has been a favorite subjects both for the scholars studying
dreams and for the practitioners, since it provides valuable
clues to detect traumas, denied emotions and desires, feelings of guilt, and all the elements requiring the attention of
a psychotherapist. In the theoretical framework of the continuity of the states of consciousness, the Author claims
that dreams also feature another different kind of discontinuity. Paradoxically, this second one will lead the mind of
the dreamer to a continuity of higher order, to be reached
especially in daily life and in relational contexts. In this case

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

IJoDR
also, discontinuity appears as if it would come “from outside”, but not through disrupting sensorial experiences and
relationships. Rather, it is as if something original and new,
endowed with its own amount of energy, provides senses,
feelings and relationships – no matter if old or new – with
new qualities and new meanings. Although the first effect
of the uprising of these discontinuities is probably to create
some bewilderment, it will lead to an increase in peace of
mind and in the capacity of reprocessing memories and experiences, including traumatic ones, with the aim of healing
and especially of future development.
Considering and working with dreams in the frame
sketched above is part of the so called “eleogenetic approach”, which strongly enhances the focus on the future.
“Eleogenetics” (Schinco, 2015) study the processes giving
rise to mercy. In this context, “Mercy” means in particular
the capacity, in a human system, of retrieving experiences
involved in pathogenesis and transforming them into elements generating health and growth. This is possible thanks
to the “emergence” (“epiphany”) of new and vital elements
in the life of a person. Both in and out of a therapeutic context, processes of this kind require an upsurge of relationships and practices to facilitate and foster them.
The presentation will consist of
• an introduction aimed to clarify the professional context in
which the observations presented originated
• the rationale of the presentation
• some short clinical examples, including dream reports
• short theoretical references
• technical implications in an “eleogenetic” key
• conclusions and issues open to future studies and indepth analysis

Those Two Dreams that Influenced my Life
Monique Séguin
Pincourt, Québec, Canada
The dream that influenced my career came to me as a gift.
I had been working as a psychiatric nurse for more than
twenty years, was attending training sessions on nursing
and death, without really knowing why, and was only marginally interested in dreams. Then the dream came to me, so
detailed, so clear, so bright. It gave me the necessary confidence to face death, and I knew at that moment I would
work in palliative care, one day, to help for the ‘’Crossing
Over’’. In the dream, I kept saying: “We have to help them
cross over”. I wish I could have painted that dream, but it
would have been a very poor reproduction. Then the opportunity to work in palliative care was offered to me and
I just knew I had to accept, feeling confident even though
it meant giving up the security of working in a governmental institution. That dream also improved my approach with
the patients and those loved ones surrounding them. Since
then, I started asking my patients about their dreams. They
shared their dreams, and I realized with amazement that the
dream was often reflecting what the patient felt in that very
special period of his life. Knowing their emotions helped me
a lot to accompany them and improve communications.
Since then, I have co-authored a book about dreams at the
end of life, and given numerous conferences with different
associations in palliative care. My goal is to promote the
importance of taking care of listening to the dream of a dy-

ing person or family – such a beautiful tool to help with the
‘’crossing over.’’
My second dream helped me with the frustration, even anger in a very special period in my life. I thought I was happily
married until I discovered that he was having an affair with
someone I knew. I was in shock, as if someone had pulled
the carpet out from under my feet, with mixed feelings oscillating between deception, fear, sadness – and of course,
frustration and anger. Throughout this period, I was writing
down my dreams very carefully. I could have up to seven
dreams on certain nights. I was writing every scenario with
all the details I could remember and always noted the emotions. Eventually I could see the process, like a map. There
was a progression. A healing process was taking place. I
was feeling better able to integrate these emotions, except
for that anger that was still occupying a large place in my
life. That «beautiful» dream was also a gift where I could feel
the anger and release it right away. The scenario was so unreal that I woke up laughing loud with a total sense of relief.
That dream was so powerful! It led me through a complete
healing process.

Born Again: Alchemy and Dreams of the Other
Dwight Turner
London, UK
Be it because of our sexuality, gender, or culture, at various points in our life we will all experience being the other.
An exploration of this unconscious experience through our
dreams presents an interesting alchemical perspective that
is also a route towards psychological reintegration.
As a black British man, whose parents arrived in Europe
from the Caribbean at the end of the British Empire, every
day in the news I witness the difficult experiences of the
outsider via the media, be they the immigrant from war torn
countries, from a different gender, or from a different religion. Whilst in the Global North the other is often denigrated
and abused and made to be an outsider, from a more Afrocentric perspective how we experience the other is often
seen as being a reflection of how well we know our self, an
idea for example which sits central to African philosophy of
Ubuntu (Oppenheim 2012). But what is it like to be the other,
and how can accessing our internalised other through our
dreams help us to understand ourselves and others around
us?
“Born Again” is part of my wider PhD research project to
understand the unconscious experience of being the other. As part of this research a 6 month heuristic study was
undertaken where along with dream entries, visualisations
and sand play work, my dreams were also recorded. These
dreams were analysed using the incubation and explication stages of Moustakas’ (1990) research methodology to
ascertain the themes apparent within, a process which revealed that working with these dreams, and seeing them
through an alchemical lens, is a means ‘of understanding
the process of human transformation as it reveals itself
through dreams’ (Hamilton, 2014).
The presentation will begin with a brief introduction to the
background to my research and continue with an exploration of the six themes uncovered in this research, including ‘recognising the authentic/inauthentic split’ where the
dreams talk of the suppressed anger towards oneself which

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

S23

IJoDR
must be maintained in order to fit in with the majority; ‘engaging with the shadow’, where the internalised other literally fights to be seen striking out at an egoic sense of self
that in turn has to die before any growth can occur; to ‘the
union of opposites’ where the shadow has been worked
through enough for the contrasexual other to be embraced
and reintegrated.
In conclusion, these strands will be tied together to address the importance for the other in acknowledging the
painful conscious and unconscious impact of prejudice, racism, stereotyping, etc. Being the other is a difficult unconscious process as well as a conscious one. When one engages with one’s sense of otherness, the alchemical dreams
presented by the experience hold the power for transformation. This presentation will highlight the growing necessity
of a cross cultural approach to alchemy, where a symbolic
understanding of alchemy and its symbols embraces symbolic metaphors from cultures relevant for the other.

Dream Sharing Group Therapy with Adolescents
with Co-occurring Disorders
Mary C. Walsh
Vallejo, CA, USA
This presentation draws on three case studies which describe the use of dream sharing groups in an ongoing
school-based program treating traumatized adolescents
with co-occurring disorders in early recovery from substance abuse or dependency. The dream group format
is drawn from the works of Clara Hill (2013), Jeremy Taylor (2009), Montague Ullman and Nan Zimmerman (1985).
Group therapy has been a treatment of choice in clinical
work with substance abuse and dependency (Substance
Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, US;
2005), as it has been found to facilitate recovery by instilling
hope, providing social skills training, support, and encouragement necessary for recovery from substance abuse and
addiction (Yalom, 2010). The use of dream sharing groups
with this population is a promising area of research as both
dream recall and dream content are correlated with relapse
resistance and improved treatment outcome (Reid and Simeon, 2001). Both the expectations of the participants and
encouraging comments have been found to increase dream
recall frequency (Schredl, 2007). Further, Hill hypothesizes
that dream interpretation can reverse the dream formation
process, so that the dream becomes a mechanism to explore relevant schemata (Hill, 1996; 2013), a critical concern
in trauma recovery.
Describing the role of group dream sharing in the recovery of three young people, this presentation explores how
dream sharing in a group context impacts dream recall,
dream content, and dream interpretation in these three
cases. Group interactions are described as they facilitate
understanding of the group process. In addition, case studies describe changes in the severity of distress of Post-traumatic stress symptoms (measured on three subscales using
the Impact of Event Scale-Revised) as these correlate with
changes in dream content. Dream content is analyzed using the DreamSAT and SDDb Word Search Tool. These case
studies explore how dream-sharing in a peer group format
facilitates recovery in the lives of three young dreamers.

S24

Concerns about the use of a dream group with this vulnerable population are addressed.

Dreams as a Window into the Experience of Historical Trauma
Mary C. Walsh
Vallejo, CA, USA
The theory of Historical Trauma, the intergenerational transmission of trauma experience (Brave Heart and Debruyn,
1998, 2000; Sotero, 2006), has been proposed as a framework for understanding chronic problems in populations
who have experienced multi-generational trauma (populations studied, among others, include Native Americans,
African Americans, and Jews). This presentation describes
dreams from a research project in progress, which analyzes
dream content associated by the dreamer with their experience of Historical Trauma. Dreams presented include two
recurring dreams from two college students, who shared
these dreams when asked if they had any dreams they associated with Historical Trauma. The third dream comes
from a Native American mother in her thirties who had the
dream while recovering from domestic violence.
In addition to collecting dreams associated by dreamers with Historical Trauma, data is collected regarding the
subject’s personal experience (if any) of a traumatic event.
Subjects with personal experience of traumatic events were
asked if the dreams they associated with Historical Trauma
occurred pre- (occurring before), peri- (occurring during) or
post- (occurring after) the traumatic event. The results of
an analysis (using the SDDb Word Search Tool) of collected
dreams and subjects’ own interpretation of these dreams
are discussed. Possible ways in which dream analysis might
support (or negate) the theory of Historical Trauma, might
provide insight into the experience of Historical Trauma, and
inform clinical and pastoral work are explored.

5. Religion/Spiritual/Culture/Arts
Film Dream Scenes: A Neuropsychological View
Deirdre Barrett
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA
Some directors use dream scenes mainly as a plot device.
Others employ smoke machines and kaleidoscopic lenses
to signal a dream. A rare few have identified specifics that
are highly evocative of the dream experience. This presentation will examine a few notable film dreams from a neuropsychological perspective.

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

IJoDR
Dreaming it Up
Fiona Bell
Derry. Ireland
The presentation is based on a series of dreams and synchronicities that prompted the presenter to begin some creative work with children, to promote peace at home and in
the community. This practical story will describe the process
of honoring dreams, as it informed and guided the unfurling process. It will show how group dreaming can become
a catalyst for peaceful initiatives in the waking world. The
story is an adventure towards peace; sparked and inspired
by shared dreams.

Specific methods or techniques to be utilised: My approach is phenomenological and emphasises narrative and
intuitive inquiry. It emphasises working with dreams as personal, social and collective carriers of meaning. Through
the setting of an intention and a visualisation process, participants are invited to evoke an image or to remember a
dream. Participants are encouraged to individually work
with the dream through a focusing process. Intuitive insights are elicited and supported through art and energy
drawing. Feeling and embodying the energy of the dream
is also explored through working with the language of the
dream: Condensing; making thematic connections; extracting essence; finding the gems through metaphor and symbol; feeling the gestalt. A collective dream group narrative is
constructed and reflections invited on personal, social and
archetypal dimensions.

Living on the Shaky Edge of the Pacific Rim
Susannah Benson
Sydney, NSW, Australia
In the broadest sense we are nature expressing itself. C.G.
Jung wrote at length about natural instincts, and the hubris of our times that negates the force of natural processes
and over-values the rational to the detriment of the intuitive
and imagination. Jung recognized, as have many scholars
as well as indigenous people, that Western civilisation has
been marked by a deep split with nature which has resulted
in a commodification of resources, people, animals and environment, and to a misuse of power as power over mentality rather than power with. With the rise of postmodernism in
the later part of the 20th century we have seen the growing
rise of a number of counter positions to this prevailing cultural/historical perspective.
Some of the current thought leaders in a variety of fields
have spear-headed initiatives that focus on the awareness
of the universe—not as dead matter but as a living, selfdirected, self-generating organism. From Maturana and Varela in biology, we hear the term, Autopoesis; from scientist
James Lovelock, the Gaia theory. These counter perspectives posit that not only do we live in a cosmos, but we
are part of a continuing creative evolutionary cosmogenesis
which has structure and coherence, and is based on mutualism and cooperation, not separation and mere survival.
Fritjof Capra, speaks of the ‘web of life’, Thich Nat Hahn of
‘interbeing’ and Ervin Laslo, of ‘interconnectivity.’
Cultural Historian Thomas Berry spoke of our times as the
new Egozoic era, and that we are poised at a great turning point, ‘the dream drives the action. In the larger cultural
complex, the dream becomes the myth and both guides and
drives the action’. In times of change and transition dreams
can provide insight; give rise to novel, creative emergent
awareness; problem-solve; and can be anticipatory, as well
as prophetic.
In this general audience workshop participants will consider in what ways can our dreams (1) help us to contemplate our relationships to nature, (2) show us the role that
dreams have in guiding and informing us about issues of
ecological sustainability, and (3) look at how an engagement
with dreams and image can help contribute to our sense of
belonging and connection. We will explore these questions
using personal narratives, dream reports, guided visualisation, pair/group work and writing processes.

Understanding the Dreams of Monnica from the
Perspective of Augustine
Kitty Bouwman
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
In ancient times dreams had a significant meaning. Each
is told again that men and women had dreams that foretell
their life and legitimize it. This we find in early Christian writers. One of them is Augustine. In the Confessions he gives
to the dreams of his mother Monnica a special function.
Given the autobiographical character of the Confessions, it
would be obvious that he was dreaming about his life. But
it is Monnica, who received the dreams about his future, in
which would be a major turn. These dreams she received as
a divine revelation, a gift of God.
Her dreams legitimize the turn of events that took place
in his life. Augustine assigns Monnica a mystagogical function. There was a correlation between motherhood and mystagogy with her. In the literature on mystagogy, the understanding of dreams is usually ascribed to the disciple who
has to develop a conscious symbolic. Monnica received her
dreams not as a disciple but as a mediator. She had a prophetic mission. To fulfill this mission she had to learn how to
understand the dreams from God’s perspective. According
to the narratives of her dreams, we will look for the spiritual
development which Monnica experienced in understanding
her dreams. We will see that there is an understanding of
the symbolic function of her dreams, a tropological meaning
is lighting up, and a change of perspective in acting with
God as other will appear centrally (anagogical understanding) in place of her own meaning. In following this dynamic
development we will see that her mediation has yielded
fruits: Augustine said goodbye to Manichaeism and turned
to the Christian faith. In this paper we investigate the above
mentioned ways of understanding dreams for contemporary
practices of spiritual guidance.

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

S25

IJoDR
Dreams and Afghan Refugees in Tehran
Ghazaal Bozorgmehr
Tehran, Iran
Dreams shared in the international World Dream Peace
Bridge group have been sources of inspiration for many activities to improve peace in the different parts of the world.
This presentation will explore one instance in which the presenter was assisted by the Peace Bridge to find ways to
help Afghan refugees in Iran. The presenter will first give a
short introduction on how the Peace Bridge has previously
helped her in various ways through dreams and inspirations.
Then she will present a particular case of an Afghan boy
who was helped to pass through the border from Iran to
Afghanistan and joined up with a volunteer group in Kabul.

tance today. Overall, it is hoped that the review will reveal
that within this fluid conception of existence lies expanded
possibilities for creative re-dreaming and re-structuring of
our lives as individuals and communities. The presentation
is informed by the author’s own identification as a Jew, as
well as over ten years’ experience studying with two Jewish
teachers of Kabbalah, the esoteric arm of Judaism, including specifically the study of a 13th century Kabbalistic lineage of dream work. This author’s professional work is that
of teaching this dreaming approach to Judaism, Kabbalah,
and working with dreams as means of personal development.

Transforming Nightmares via a Kabbalistic Approach
Bonnie Buckner

The Jewish Dreaming Cornerstone of Western
Culture
Bonnie Buckner
Saint Genies de Malgoires, France
Jewish religious history is a foundation stone of modern
western culture and spirituality. Many of its stories are found
in two other of the world’s great religions, Christianity and
Islam. Every great story of the Jewish people begins with a
dream.
Through dreams, major biblical figures experience revelation and move themselves and the Jewish people into
new chapters of development. This presentation reviews
the philosophy of dreaming put forth by the ancient Jewish
people and its continued echo and relevance to the western world today. Two ancient philosophies underlie western
culture: the linear, logic-based philosophy of the Greeks,
and the holistic or vertical, dreaming-based philosophy of
the Jews. Whereas the Greeks accepted a fixed view of a
fate-ruled existence, personified by the separation between
deities and mankind, the Jews conceive a fluid existence
composed of inner revelation and dreaming, shown through
an intimate and interactive relationship with God that is often played out in the dream world. Reviewing the presence
of dreaming and inner revelation through the Jewish bible,
which is the history of the Jewish people and culture, one
meets a point of view of personal development that is anchored in the act of inner-gazing and dreaming. It is a point
of view advocating the subjective experience, the individual
journey of grappling with imperfection in an imperfect world,
and the infinite possibility of transformation. This subjective,
individual journey led by dreaming then forms the basis
for the development of the entire Jewish culture as a community. As is stipulated by the great dreamer Joseph, his
“bones”, the structure of dreaming, must accompany the
Jews in their building of themselves into a cohesive nation.
This presentation will review the dreaming and inner experience of the 3 key figures whose stories anchor the Jewish experience – Abraham, Isaac, Jacob – and the resulting
product of individual dreaming personified in Joseph, who
brings the individual dream to the level of the communal. It
is the aim of this review to provide a new perspective of the
importance of dreaming in the development of western culture in history and to elevate it to a place of greater impor-

S26

Saint Genies de Malgoires, France
There exist 2 categories of dreams: Resolved and Unresolved. Unresolved dreams, which include nightmares, are a
signal of an unbalance in the body or life experience. Using
a Kabbalistic Waking Dream approach one can identify the
necessity of these dreams, and then re-enter and respond
to their necessities in order to bring about resolution and
restore balance.
A Kabbalistic approach to dreaming that dates to the 13th
century teaches that dreams fall into one of two categories: resolved or unresolved. Resolved dreams include Great
Dreams and revelation. Unresolved dreams include nightmares and busy dreams. Every unresolved dream contains
a necessity; each dream is a call to respond and restore the
person to a place of balance in their body and life. Learning how to identify the necessity of these dreams is the
first step. Once identified, the necessity can be addressed
through a Waking Dream approach.
The Waking Dream approach includes a simple re-entering of the dream while awake using a method of closing
the eyes, counting backwards from 3 to 1 at each exhale,
and then using the imaginal eye to re-enter the dream. Once
in the dream one can use the tools of the imagination to
both protect oneself and bring about transformation. The
approach is quick: each Waking Dream takes no longer than
a minute.
The Waking Dream puts the dreamer into direct response
with her/his own images. Each necessity is addressed
through images, staying with the image-based language of
dreaming. Once addressed, the images change and interact. The dreamer knows when the dream has transformed
by a dispelling of the negative emotions of the dream and a
return to a feeling of resolution.
This workshop will begin with a brief introduction of the
specific Kabbalistic and Waking Dream approach used by
the author. Included will be working definitions and descriptions of the categorization of dreams, necessity of dreams,
and transformation of dreams. The majority of the workshop
(two-thirds) will then be participatory. Through active discussion and experiential exercises the audience will: learn
what is meant by the “necessity” of the dream; identify necessities using real examples; and practice several Waking
Dream exercises to address necessities and bring about
their resolution.

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

IJoDR
The presentation is informed by the author’s over 10 years’
experience studying a 13th century Kabbalistic lineage of
dream work as taught by the School of Images in New York
City. This author’s professional work is that of teaching this
dreaming approach to creative and business professionals, organizations, and businesses, working with dreams as
means of personal development.

The Future of Digitally Enhanced Dream Studies
Kelly Bulkeley
Portland, OR, USA
This presentation will consider the current state of using
digital methods to analyze and interpret dreams. Then it
will consider future potentials for improving these methods,
boosting their power and precision, and making them more
widely accessible. A research-based approach to digitally enhanced dream interpretation will be described that
draws on the resources of the Sleep and Dream Database
(SDDb). Discussion will include factors of waking-dreaming
continuity, principles of database design, recognizing metaphors and discontinuities, attention to ethical concerns, and
practical applications in areas like therapy, coaching, art,
spirituality, and lucid dreaming. Some of the best illustrations of the future benefits and dangers of dream-enhancing
technology come in science fiction and fantasy stories, and
excerpts from several of these cultural works of speculative
fiction will accompany the research findings.

How to Use Our Dreams for Spiritual Growth
Claude Couture
Quebec, Quebec, Canada
Elsie Sechrist in her book Dreams, Your Magic Mirror says:
« According to Edgar Cayce, unless an individual is seeking
to improve his spiritual life by asking for help in terms of
prayer, his dreams will primarily be a meaningless jumble.
If, however, he is unselfishly seeking God’s will for him, then
the higher consciousness will monitor his dreams and give
him a clearer sense of direction in his daily life. There is little
therapy or value in simply learning the meaning of a dream,
especially if it is related to an aspect of behavior, unless an
individual wants to change or improve himself. » In a lecture
given at the 2013 IASD Conference, Tenzin Wangyal Rimpoche said: « If you want to have better dreams, you have
to be aware, to be more conscious… Dream practice is also
a wake practice. » These two ideas are key components
and can be seen as the spinal column of this talk. In order to
cultivate spiritual dreams, our waking life must be oriented
by spiritual values and coherent behavior. The presentation
is made in four parts: 1)The challenge of maintaining the
highest level of consciousness available during day time; 2)
Presentation of four dream experiences that illustrate how
dreams can uplift our spiritual life; 3) What kind of experiences can we expect from spiritual dreaming? – some illustrations; 4)Presentation of a methodology utilized by the
lecturer to cultivate spiritual dreaming: a. Control of attitude
and attention; b. Spiritual exercises; c. Dream incubation; d.
Dream recovery and understanding; e. Honoring the message of the dream.

Dreams and the Children of Baghdad
Jean Campbell
Portsmouth, Virginia ,USA

Can Cultural Memory from Ancient Civilizations be
Passed down through Dreams?
Alaya A. Dannu

Since the Peace Bridge began in 2001, over $30,000 has
been raised to aid children and their families affected by
war. In that context, The Crystal Birds Dream Program, an
eight-week dream program, was created for the children of
Baghdad, Iraq. This program will soon be shared with many
others. This presentation is for all, and will explain how
working with dreams has been proven to help young people
move through trauma (Campbell, 2006).

Dreams about Mystics, Saints and Yogis
Daniel R. Condron
Windyville, MO, USA
This presentation will offer the idea that dreams may be understood as symbolical and at times, they may also be seen
to be an actual experience with a person or persons. Consideration will be given to the concept that dreams may be
understood or interpreted as aspects of the dreamer, and
at times, while lucid dreaming one may encounter other beings, people or entities. The presenter will offer examples
from his own personal experience as well as his response
to these dreams.

London, United Kingdom
“Knowledge about the past acquires the properties and
functions of memory if it is related to a concept of identity.”
– Jan Assman
Archaeology operates on an object-based theoretical approach, the discoveries interpreted and evaluated based on
Eurocentric perceptions and assumptions. What if there was
an approach that enhanced the piecing together of humanity’s ancient past that was not limited to this approach? One
that explores the origins of a culture through its mythology
in conjunction to dreamwork? Ancient cultures and indigenous wisdom embrace dreams and their nature in a way
that is not always congruent with contemporary thought
and lifestyle. The contemporary conversations about the
nature of dreams and their purpose are plenty and varied,
yet much appears to remain unknown. If in the past dreams
provided the material to a community that created identities
and forged destinies, could this phenomenon still exist in
the present, even though such practices are not part of the
mainstream culture? Do dreams have a way of operating in
a way that allows them to provide cultural memory through
the ages? Just as trauma can be passed down through generations via DNA, there is a possibility that cultural memory
can also be transmitted. However, the presenter proposes

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

S27

IJoDR
that the transmission of cultural memory can be attained
through dreams. The presenter will share and explore three
dreams to demonstrate how it is possible to augment research with dream work that transcends contemporary
thought, ties dream material to historical events, and sheds
light on the process of how balance is maintained between
the revelatory nature of dreams, processing, and wish fulfillment.
Reference
Astrid Erll, Ansgar Nünning (Hg.), Cultural Memory Studies. An International and Interdisciplinary Handbook, Berlin, New York 2008, S. 109118

Dream Poetry Reading with Open Mic
Betsy Davids
Berkeley, CA, USA
The special relationship between dreams and poetry deserves further attention. In contemporary poetry, dreams are
a recognized source of inspiration and content. Many poets
could point to at least one of their poems that is dreamrelated, and a significant number of poets have called upon
their dream lives again and again, among them Elizabeth Alexander, Margaret Atwood, Robert Bly, Frank Bidart, André
Breton, Robert Desnos, Paul Éluard, Allen Ginsberg, Louise
Glück, Denise Levertov, Muriel Rukeyser, Leslie Scalapino,
Anne Sexton, Diane Wakoski, and Al Young. Writing a dream
poem can be a form of dreamwork, as Richard Russo has
pointed out (Dreaming, 13). This session aims to focus on
dream poetry through the direct experience of reading poems aloud and hearing them read by others. Poetry readings are a preferred presentation mode for many poets, a
crucial supplement to the printed page and a link to poetry’s oral roots. Reading aloud gives access to the basic
auditory element of poetry, and the presence of in-person
readers and live audiences builds a community of interest.
This dream poetry reading event will gather conference attendees who are open to poetry for an experience and exchange of dream poems, drawing upon the knowledge and
understanding of many. The presenter will begin by reading
a selection of half a dozen dream poems. Introductions and
commentary will be brief; the emphasis will be on reading
and listening. An “open mic” session will follow. Participants
are encouraged to select one or two dream poems to read
to the group, and to bring copies if feasible. Poems may
be the reader’s own or by other poets. Poems in languages
other than English may be read in the original language, but
participants are asked to bring a translation or paraphrase in
English. Reading is voluntary; conferees who wish to listen
but not read are welcome.

whether the same is true of Islamic State (IS). Using evidence from social media and IS publications, I review night
dream accounts by IS members and supporters, seeking
to assess the prominence, main themes, and reception of
such accounts. Dreams appear to be at least as important
to IS as to previous jihadi groups. Like other jihadis, IS activists consider dreams a potential window into the future
and use them to make sense of the world, justify decisions,
and claim authority. In at least one case (that of Garland,
Texas attacker Elton Simpson), a dream may have informed
the decision to take violent action. Several studies over the
last decade have shown that militant Islamists such as alQaida and the Taliban make extensive use of reported night
dreams to inspire, announce, and validate violent jihad (Edgar 2007; 2011). In this paper I ask whether dreams play a
similar role in Islamic State (IS). Using evidence from social
media and IS publications, I review night dream accounts
by IS members and supporters and the discussions they
generate. This is the first academic study of the significance
of dreams in Islamic State ideology. As we shall see, IS
members and sympathisers appear to attach considerable
importance to dreams. Just as in other jihadi groups, dream
accounts and discussions proliferate, and activists express
belief in the predictive potential of night dreams. Dreams
may also feature in decision-making processes at different levels in the organization, from Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi’s
decision to withdraw forces from Mosul in late 2014 to IS
sympathizer Elton Simpson’s May 2015 attack in Garland,
Texas.
The paper has three parts. First I summarize what we
know about the significance of dreams in Muslim societies
generally and in jihadi groups specifically. I then describe a
sample of IS-related night dream accounts, before briefly
discussing the connection between dreams and action.
Dreams seen as true by the believer can transform perceptions of earthly defeat into the will of God and the call
to greater righteous. Dreams can augur victory, legitimize
defeat, and inspire or demoralise armies. Dreams and their
interpretations are strategic military goods, and may be
manipulated strategically; dreams confirm and legitimate
radical group membership, the path of holy jihad and the
destined entry to paradise, with all sins forgiven. Dreams
are a form of metaphysical currency to be shared and reflected upon and redeemed in action. IS/Daesh follows in
this tradition and resembles al-Qaida and Taliban in their ascribing importance to the Islamic dreamland. The examples
presented here reflect the traditional Islamic separation of
dreams into clear message dreams and metaphorical ones,
and the tendency to see some dreams as offering information about future paradisical realms. Dreams may even be
critical tipping points to the move from contemplating jihad
to killing people as in the case of Elton Simpson.

The Dreams of Islamic State/Daesh

Records of Dream Encounters with the Dead in
Premodern Korea (15th-19th ct.)

Iain R. Edgar

Marion Eggert

Durham, UK

Bochum, Germany

Previous research has shown that jihadis attach great importance to dreams, to the point of taking them into account
in personal and strategic decision-making. This paper asks

A sample of pre-modern Korean texts dealing with grief/bereavement and mentioning dreams about the dead are analyzed to see how personhood is constructed in view of and

S28

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

IJoDR
beyond the life-death barrier. Dreams about deceased loved
ones belong among the most noteworthy of “significant” or
“memorable” dreams (Domhoff, 2015). They have long been
understood to be able to impact the dreamer at an existential
level. Both as “existential dreams” (Kuiken and Sikora ,1993)
and as dreams intensely engaged with a significant social
relationship, such dreams (or, more correctly, the ways they
are told) are rich in information about conceptualizations of
personhood and the individual self. A look at pre-modern
Korean accounts of dreams about deceased loved ones can
thus be valuable material for re-evaluating the assumption
that Sinic (i.e., Chinese and strongly China-oriented) culture
puts constraints on the development of individual self-hood,
especially since this assumption regularly equates “culture”
with “philosophical and religious traditions,” which again
strongly inform dream theories and thus can be expected to
also inform dream records.
For this purpose, this paper uses a sample of texts dating
from the 15th - 19th centuries that are drawn from a large
full-text data-base assembling more than a thousand Collected Works written by members of the educated elite in Literary Chinese. (Note that all written philosophical discourse
and most of high-brow literary production in pre-modern
Korea was conducted in Literary Chinese; there is very little
prose ego-documentation written in the vernacular before
the late 19th century.) The sample of roughly 100 texts was
produced by searching for texts that a) deal with bereavement and b) mention dreaming about the deceased; it thus
contains not only accounts of “actual“ dream encounters
but also expressions of unfulfilled longing for such dreams.
First, the sample texts are sorted according to following parameters: dream personages and their social relationships,
bereavement situation (e.g., time lapsed since death), and
nature of dream experience (longed-for/actual, induced or
not, lucid or not).
Next, records of “actual“ dream encounters are analyzed
for the nature of the encounter, the (development of) the relationship between dreamer and dreamee as depicted in the
dream record, and the effects of the dream encounter on the
dreamer’s dealing with/overcoming grief as far as recounted
in the text. The results are then compared to those of the
“classical” study by D. Barrett (1992) on dreams about the
dead, firstly for possibilities of matching the dreams with
stages of resolving grief, secondly for implied conceptions
of self and personhood. It is shown that, while Confucian
theories of the composite nature of the soul and its gradual
decomposition after death inform reflections on the dream
encounters found in the texts, the dream records themselves
reveal assumptions about personal integrity beyond the lifedeath barrier (and thus beyond the social roles that can no
longer be fulfilled) that are hardly distinguishable from those
of US students of the 1990s.

interpret, and eventually (partly) forget these experiences.
Following these “Black Box” activities, sometimes surprisingly new imagery may show up from that same mind. This
may eventually result, in the case of artists, in an entirely
new representation: an embryonic artwork is born!
Dreams are an interesting area of study, because it allows
us to take a look into that “Black Box” through a very small
door that is slightly ajar. In this contribution Willem will share
some examples of dream drawings, and investigates how
they might have come into existence. The central theme in
this presentation is the process of transformation of past
experiences into new, coherent images, based on the analysis of dreams.

Gaming Allows Expression of Archetypes
Jayne Gackenbach
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
CNN has instituted a program devoted to everyday heroes,
and Dancing with the Stars has regularly featured real heroes in their dance competition. Carl Jung of course spoke
about the hero archetype as one of several that are primary
to the individuation process. Gackenbach and Hunt (2014)
recently discussed how video game play can satisfy this
need for the experience of the hero. The presenter will review this discussion and speculate upon how the increasing
acceptance and participation in gaming is an expression of
seeking various archetypal experiences. She will consider
the implications of increases in both incidence and prevalence of gaming, as well as improvements in hardware and
software, upon the users’ individuation process and by implication upon their nighttime dreams.

Perceiving the World through Art
Uta Gobel-Gross
Herzogenrath, Germany
Uta paints, draws, and explores various cultures. She works
with pencil and brush, with earth and pigments and experiences the multiple levels of being a human. Her work shows
the inner images of the outer world and dream-images that
talk about her perception of the world.

Dream Writing in the ESL/EFL Classroom
Loren Goodman
Seoul, South Korea

From Chaos to Coherence: The Creation of a New,
Embryonic Artwork
Willem Fermont
Nuth, The Netherlands
All people collect daily impressions. These impressions are
not a priori organized or recognized as ready-made experiences. The mind works day and night to collect, organize,

This presentation, which is open to all, explores dream writing as a pedagogical framework for developing writing skills
in both prose and verse in classrooms comprised of students with a wide spectrum of English language ability. It
draws primarily from a variety of dream writing exercises and
dream texts produced over a three-year period by university
students in Seoul, South Korea. Such dream texts range
from those generated from specific types of dreams such as
taemong (birth dreams) and episodes of dream paralysis to

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

S29

IJoDR
a variety of precognitive, prodromic and recurrent dreams.
Some special attention will be given to different approaches
to transcribing and inscribing taemong by both Korean and
non-Korean students. Group dream experiments include
lucid dream meetings, healing through collective incubation, collaboration with dream-writers of the distant past,
reciprocal illumination and clinical interpretation. While the
therapeutic benefits of dream practice are emphasized, the
primary goal is to encourage and enable students to approach their dreams as a rich source for artistic discovery,
inspiration and expression: plainly stated, to produce literary art out of dreams. As all students are encouraged to
focus on accuracy and detail in the daily documentation of
their dreams, important questions regarding the mechanical and stylistic elements of expression arise. Are there certain elements of style and expression that are particular to
the writing of dreams? What might we learn from certain
typical errors and oddities of written expression that tend to
emerge in the recording of dreams, but not waking life? The
answers, made even more apparent through close reading
and analysis of the dream texts produced by students with
such diverse cultural-linguistic backgrounds, may be applied to all forms of writing, artistic and expository. Some of
the issues for discussion include: clarity versus ambiguity;
tense as a vehicle for immediacy of expression; and the balancing of abstraction and concretion in evocatively rendering dream-like imagery.

finds himself writing this edge of his world stuff in a group
context. He intends to explore the dreams of the group with
a view to identifying approaches to this possible universal
influence, the better to facilitate the groups stated aims, and
to identify avenues for further research. At this stage, and
perhaps forever, they will only have their own stories to tell,
as humans would appear to be both individual and universal. The ultimate story, as exemplified in the story of Christ,
is a human one.

Painting Your Dreams Awake
Julie Hoyle
Freeport, Grand Bahama Island, Bahamas
In this workshop, Julie will guide participants through doodling and painting activities. These simple and interactive
steps will lead to the creation of an authentic composition
drawn from dream images and intuition. With a focus on
letting go of the inner critic, exploring creatively and being
open to new ideas, Julie will share techniques to create expressive paintings using acrylics, collage and pastels. This
workshop is open to everyone! Drawing and painting experience is not necessary. All that is required is a willingness to
play and be open to new, creative discoveries.

Superconscious Individual and Collective Dreams

Dreaming about the Clergy in the Passio Perpetua

Tony Hawkins

Bart J. Koet

London, UK

Heiloo, The Netherlands

After more than fifty years experience of precognitive dreaming and synchronistic events the author isn’t concerned as
to whether such things happen but how we understand
them. The more we pay attention to our dreams the more
these events either happen or are recorded. Anecdotally
such events become more frequent both for individuals
and groups. Peace Bridge dreamers seem often to dream
in themes, not just newsy themes but ones which would
seem to have no common source among them. In recent
weeks there have been squares, boxes, threes (of horses,
foxes, women) and triangles, none of which has anything
obvious to do with the groups stated aim, world peace,
but might be natural results of influences from the larger
universe. The smaller group could be a holographic chip
of a larger, perhaps multi-dimensioned universal group far
more extended in its field of operation than the time-bound
point consciousness of human waking lives. So elements
of the groups dreaming could be expressions of that universal. (The threes could express a Trinity, the squares and
boxes some other communication concerning the geometry
of the spirit. All of it naturally expressing the groups stated
aim, world peace. One might imagine a universal body being in a state of cosmic homeostasis – which must include
ourselves – and not be at deadly war with itself. Thus the
puzzling elements of the group dreaming may be far more
relevant to the group’s aims than they realise. In a sense all
human dreaming takes place within this context.) Within this
larger context the group is not a fixed number of people.
The author is recently back after an absence of two years
due to frustrations over dream evaluation in the group and

The combination dungeon, dreams and cruel death is an
intriguing one, and for some people even an attractive one.
One can find these elements in the early third-century Passio sanctarum Perpetuae et Felicitatis, which is a report
of the martyrdom of a certain Perpetua Vibia, her servant
Felicitas and their companions. These texts describe Perpetua’s experiences in the prison. What makes the passio
Perpetuae even more exceptional is that in the diary part,
Perpetua tells extensively of her four dreams and as such
it is one of the oldest “dream journals” in the world. The
philosopher Jeremy Barris aptly typifies dreams as metaconceptual. This meta-conceptual identity of dreams has as
a consequence that in dreams we meet daily experience
as well as unexpected realities. For our research about the
passio Perpetuae this means that we can also find in them
the reality of Carthage in these days as the distortion of this
reality. In this presentation we will discuss one of the most
spectacular dreams in the passio. In her dream Perpetua
goes to the arena to fight. She is in the company of a deacon, one of the leaders of the community. In her fight she
encounters – in the dream – a trainer. From the images of
the dream it is clear that there is a connection between the
deacon and the trainer. While most of the historical literature
about these martyr acts focus on historical and theological
issues, I will try to look for the dream language, which is
meta-conceptual, but the dream language can tell us something about the life of the community in those days, and as
such it is a window into that society. Looking at the dream
language reveals sentiments not seen until now, because
dreams in old texts are seldom treated as what they are:

S30

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

IJoDR
dreams. I will first present first briefly the passio perpetuae
and after that I will present in detail the dream of Perpetua
and show how the images of the dream reveal to us the
sentiments of the dreamer about the clergy in her world.
Although a text from centuries ago is not common for most
of the IASD members, I will try to sketch the context of such
a text briefly in a hand-out and later I will present the text via
internet and digital texts. I think that even people with less
historical knowledge can understand the dream from centuries ago. The presentation will be given by the presenter
with a good chance to have some interaction.

Dreams as Perky Transgressors: Four Interfaces of
the Religiosity of Clients and their Dreams
Barbara Koning

an essential way these long term effects and shifts within
the personality of the client can be experienced as religious
in their own way; like being healed, being transformed, being reconciled. The concern here is that these mystical experiences are in a way autonomous and happen independently from participation in outer religious structures. The
competency involved is that the spiritual director recognizes
and acknowledges and affirms this as a realm of profound
religious experiencing and checks the fruits of the changes
in real life situations.

Beyond the Selfie, How Sharing a Photo Can
Transform Ourselves and the World
Jason Kravitz
Brussels, Belgium

Bussum, The Netherlands
Based on years of working with dreams in counselling and
spiritual direction, Koning (2015) has developed a working model that identifies four possible interfaces of the
religious frame of reference of a client and that person’s
nightly dreams. Bringing those two types of sources of giving meaning together contributes to the wholeness of the
psyche. The four interfaces are prototypically labelled as
‘Content,’ ‘Orientation,’ ‘Application,’ and ‘Process.’ This
model will be explained and discussed. It will be illustrated
with casuistic examples. All of the interfaces demand some
distinctive professional competencies and communication
strategies. And in each a characteristic concern can be
identified which asks for a sound methodical approach.
‘Content’ deals with elements of religiosity that can come
up a within a single dream; one can dream about a member of congregation, a church, or an angel. The competency
asked for is the ability to explore this dream content fruitfully and to not mistake the imagery for pre-defined religious
knowledge. The concern is whether the content needs to be
taken literally or symbolically.
‘Orientation’ puts emphasis on the fact that certain types
of religious ideation and related practices can exercise an
influence on the attitude and sensibilities of the clients with
respect to dreams in general. Some clients can find their
dreams to be divinely inspired. If the main assumptions of
the spiritual director and directee differ with respect to how
they are oriented towards dreams, the complex competency involved is how to bridge these views and how to stay
congruent, respectful and sensible in both directions at the
same time. The concern here is that it is easily overlooked
by western counsellors that dreamwork can be seen by a
client as a part of prayer life (when allowing active receptivity for inner imagery to be part of the prayer praxis).
‘Application’ deals with the possibility that the interpretation given to a specific single dream can exert considerable
influence on parts of the client’s religious ideas, experiences
and practices. The competency involved is how to become
concrete with regard to these possible consequences of a
dream interpretation. The concern here is where the primary
locus of authority is to be placed: in the regular religious
teachings or in personal authenticity?
‘Process’ deals with the possibility that doing dreamwork over a longer period of time can bring about profound
changes in the inner psychological dynamics of a client. In

Much of the western world carries a camera in their pocket
everywhere they go, but what are they photographing and
why? In this discussion we will explore how photographs,
like a dream, can be divined for personal awareness, as well
as the collective transformative potential to unite us globally through shared experiences, diversity, and multi-cultural
exchange. We will demonstrate how individually, a photograph, capturing a moment in time, can be seen as a type of
waking dream, encapsulating our personal mythos and rich
in the language of our own symbols. Whether created with
conscious intent, or unconscious reflection, each image can
be a cache of potential awareness. As dreams are shared in
groups and circles, photographs are also shared en masse
with friends, family, and social networks. Dreams can begin
from within as a source of personal awareness, and move
towards quantity as they are decoded and expressed in our
waking world. The sharing of images, particularly in today’s
social media, is often quantity driven, with the intention of
garnering views, likes, and followers. Still, in highest form,
authentic sharing of images and feedback can inspire new
understanding and insights for both photographer and viewer. We will see how collectively, photography has the ability
to transport others, convey a unique place or culture, relate
stories of humanity, and invite the embodiment of awareness, consciousness or something larger than ourselves. In
times of tragedy and uncertainty, as in the case of recent
terror attacks, global conflict, and natural disasters, images
can help us to express emotions and make sense of difficult
experiences. As each of us seeks to connect, can we find a
deeper understanding of each other through photography,
or possibly a deeper understanding of ourselves? To what
degree are social media photographs reflections of collective consciousness? Perhaps somewhere between personal
expression and unity consciousness is an opportunity for
greater realization of self in the world, cultivating positive
transformation by weaving together the unique voices and
moments of collective world experience. This introductory
talk is suitable for those who already utilize art or photography for personal expression, as well as anyone interested
in how technologies such as photography, social media,
and online communities can be used for greater self awareness.

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

S31

IJoDR
Singing your Dreams
Jeannette Lambert
Montreal , Quebec, Canada
As improvising jazz musicians, Michel and I are actively engaged in the creative process. Improvising is a very spiritual
form of music-making and relies on spontaneous forms of
expression. At a young age I was instructed by avant-garde
musicians to « sing anything, just sing what comes into your
head! ». I was never very interested in singing other people’s
songs and stories so I soon discovered dreaming to be an
ideal source for my own lyrics and songs. Initially this happened spontaneously but now I incorporate dreaming consciously into my musical compositions. What are the consequences of working with dreams this way, bringing them
out of dreamtime and into one’s waking life? I set to work
by taking dreams from my dream journal and turning them
into haiku poems, synthesizing them down to a few quick
phrases, or longer poems more like haibun, until the dream
imagery becomes like visual brushstrokes. In this way the
dream is transformed into language and rhythm. In doing
this I discovered fragments of my family history, Dutch, Indonesian and German ancestral stories, contained within
my dreams.
While working with my dreams I was invited to sing in Indonesia and given a choice of various events in different
locations. Using Robert Moss’ technique of incubating a
dream to answer a question, my resulting dream led me to
I choose one festival in particular. I then focused my energy
on getting there. This involved a lot of waking life organization, applying for grants, asking my brother to come along,
all kinds of practical details. However, before long I found
myself high in the mountains of Toraja in Sulawesi, not only
discussing dreams with locals and other visiting artists, but
also singing my dream songs in the country of so much conflict between my ancestors. This entire experience gave me
great peace and inspires me to share my techniques with
others. Perhaps in this way we can heal ancestral trauma.
Sharing the details and songs of this journey with the participants of the IASD conference seems an ideal starting point.
After this introduction and story (approximately 30 min.), we
will invite the participants to consider a dream or two of their
own and to write short haiku poems from the imagery. Then
we will gather the poems and create a musical piece from
them, with Michel Lambert accompanying us on drums
while many of us sing long tones or clap along, and various
participants take turns singing their dreams. This interactive
portion of the workshop, (haiku writing, the dreaming jam
session, and a short discussion) will take 60 min. Will this
technique inspire others to bring their dreams into waking
life, like contemporary bards? Besides creating a wonderful musical experience, it will be interesting to see how the
energy awakens among the group.

Writing the Dream Time
Kelly Lydick
Phoenix, AZ, USA
Writing the Dream Time will engage participants in a deep
look at the symbolism of their dreams. Attendees will learn

S32

how to deconstruct their dreams to understand the structure of story and narrative that inherently lives within each of
us, and from this deep well, create new written work. Each
attendee should be prepared to discuss at least one dream
in order to be able to participate. Within a safe workshop
space, each participant will examine the symbolism of their
personal dream landscape and use this information to compose written work. An analysis of symbolism, color, character
structure, and narrative voice will inform the ways in which
rich dream material can be used to develop meaningful new
writing. Drawing from theorists Carl Jung, Erich Fromm, and
Joseph Campbell, as well as the works of Janet Burroway
(Writing Fiction: A Guide to the Narrative Craft), Christopher
Vogler (The Writer’s Journey: Mythic Structure for Writers),
and Mark Doty (The Art of Description), the workshop will
begin with a discussion of core narrative components and
possible dream landscapes.
Looking first at the entirety of their dreams, participants
will discover the “plot” and “storyline” of their dream. Next,
a look at color and dream components will reveal setting,
theme, and the emotional content of the dream. Then, each
participant will recall, identify, and write about important
dream components. The use of Jung’s amplification technique will provide an expanded look at the dream’s components. Then, a written exercise about the emotional content
of the dream will allow dreamers to discover their own personal dream meanings. An additional free-write specifically
focused on the colors and individual components will create the “setting” of the new written work. Finally, a look at
archetypes and character structure will provide a foundation
for the narrative voice to be used in the final written work.
Small breakout groups will provide an opportunity to share
with others and collect feedback on the different characteristics of archetypes. The culminating written exercise will
guide dreamers to compose a brief fiction, nonfiction, or poetic work based on the discoveries made during the drafting
process. At the conclusion of the workshop, each will have
knowledge of how dream symbols can inspire a platform for
written work across fiction, nonfiction, and poetry genres.
Writing the Dream Time allows attendees to determine
their own dream meanings and interpretations, while creating new written work in the genre, form, and style of their
choice. The didactic portion of this workshop will comprise
approximately 25% of all content.

Dream Poetry: An Authentic, Multimedia Performance
Katie Mason
Denver, CO, USA
I propose for the IASD conference, a special event, multimedia dream performance. I combine a personal narrative
of therapeutic self-discovery explored through dreams, with
the rhyme and rhythm of “slam poetry,” against a backdrop
of illustrative and interpretative visual images – brought together to celebrate the power of our dream voice. My presentation, anchored in a poetic expression, honors the artistic risk necessary to animate and integrate our dreams
into daily life.
Poignant personal vulnerability, eased with humorous snippets, warmly draws the audience into the discovery and ac-

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

IJoDR
ceptance of the transformative power of dreams. In this acceptance, I strive to have the audience discover their unique
“dream voice” as I have found mine. For in discovering and
then sharing our “dream truths” we enrich our lives.
Despite years of intensive study of Jungian psychology,
shamanic dreaming traditions, and facilitating dream work
in my private practice as a dream therapist, I felt estranged
and alienated. My practice with my clients remained very
meaningful but my world seemed to be shrinking and my
essential spirit seemed constrained. Something was missing. Seeking to break those chains, I engaged in a quest
as a dream therapist, as I so often had told my clients, to
find my own creative voice to express my dreams. I set the
stage, literally, for the vulnerability, authenticity and freedom
of expression of my “dream truths.”
Casting aside conventions, I developed “talks” to perform
on stage for Ignite Denver, an international format comprised
of a 5 minute presentation with 20 slides automatically advancing every 15 seconds. When I shared with the audience
my first dream image of cuddling with a cockroach, followed
by a later dream image of a velvet-covered potato chip, my
missing voice leaped forth and danced, liberating my spirit
and casting my estrangement into the shadows behind the
curtain. Energized and exhilarated by the audience and their
enthusiastic reception of my dream voice and willingness to
share their dream images with me after the performance, I
embraced the power of my dreams freed by artistic poetic
expression. I now continue to perform my dreams at various
artistic venues in Denver, Colorado. Ultimately, my goal for
the conference is to inspire us all to find a creative, vulnerable and poetic outlet for our dreams. The audience for the
IASD conference will not be the 25-year-old beer drinking
urban youth (who knew little about dreams) in attendance
at Ignite Denver. So my performance at IASD will be more
refined in language and content, focusing more on the slide
images in symbiosis with dream images, and my personal
dream discovery with emphasis on the poetic expression of
the dream voice. However, please view the attached links
(from Ignite Denver) as a small sample of my work. I believe
all the attendees at the IASD conference will be inspired – as
were the Ignite audience – to become authentically expressive with their dreams.
Cuddling
with
Cockroaches:
The
Transformative Power of Dreamwork: https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=jMJImPuNlrA
Velvet Covered Pringles: The
Gift of Dreamtime Absurdity: https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=bmL2Uf hh_gw

Guru dreams: the Archetype of the Spiritual Master in Dreams

I experienced Naropa, a Dutch spiritual teacher who has
realised the Light within. And although as a scientist I was
doubting, as a heart I joined his sangha. I had seen the corruption in the Osho community in the early eighties, learned
about the Jonestown massacre in Guyana, the recent scientology scandals and the unmasking of Andrew Cohen as a
guru. How to trust my master? For 30 years I have lived with
my dreams and trust them for their honesty and wisdom.
What a great mirror to have in this delicate matter.
This presentation will show how the evolving process of
the guru-devotee relation is manifested in dreams. Tony
Crisp’s dream dictionary tells us that ‘The guru in dreams
will usually guide you towards greater self understanding,
deeper relationships with him/her, and instruct you in any
necessary disciplines of mind and body.’ Is that always
true? Naropa gave permission to interview various sangha
members about their dreams. Together with the dreams of
Naropa about the relationship with his guru Shanti mayi,
my own dreams, dreams from members from other spiritual
communities around a guru and research of dreams from
literature, a rich and inspiring pallet of guru dreams and
their impact will appear. Questions that will be addressed
are: can dreams help to go deeper into the surrender to the
guru? Can dreams warn when the relationship is deteriorating towards dependency? The guru teaches about the
illusion of the idea of being a separate individual and yet
the process of letting go of the ego has a different personal
flavour that is visible in the individual dreams. On the other
hand, sometimes when special dreams like kissing or lying
in bed with the guru dreams are shared in satsang meetings, they appear to be not so special when other sangha
members confess they had this special dream encounter
that night too…..

The Collage Process
Julie Nauman-Mikulski
Homewood, IL, USA
Using visual examples and presentation of collages based
on memories, mythology and dreams, Julie will demonstrate the pieced together resemblances to life lived – sharing examples of written text as well as the dream collages
themselves that take shape of their own momentum. Using
mixed media, Julie creates collage vignettes based on written accounts of her dreams. She sees the collage process
and product as an accurate metaphor for the pieced-together messiness of lived life. Its fragmented recollections,
imaginings, and dreams will be presented, shared and discussed.

Marja Moors
Heemstede, The Netherlands

Dreaming in Church

In 1974 Karlfried Dürkheim describes in ‘Der Ruf nach dem
Meister’ (the Call for the Master) how in these times the archetype of the spiritual master is arising. In the process of
the evolving relationship with the guru, the mind has many
objections. Jung said of this matter: “I avoided these Indian
sages because I had to find my own truth.” In 1979 at the
age of 18, I met Bhagwan (later Osho) in Pune. I didn’t take
sannyas. Later I met other spiritual teachers but never trusted the guru principle enough. In 2013, during a satsang,

Geoff Nelson
Whittier, California, USA
This workshop will be in two parts, with a presentation on
the topic of using dreams in church settings, followed by an
actual dream group demonstrating ways that dreams and
dream work can be adapted to church settings. Four elements of using dreams in one’s spiritual life will be explored

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

S33

IJoDR
briefly, showing benefits that can come to one’s spiritual life
from working with dreams. These elements are the emotional honesty of dreams, the way dreams help prioritize our
lives, the connection between dream work and the practice of prayer, and the way dream work can help people understand the Bible better and be more comfortable with its
symbols and images. Emotional honesty can be difficult for
us as dreams are not always “polite,” but emotional honesty
is an important step in spiritual growth. Dreams can help us
decide what is most important for us, whether it is in our
family, at our jobs or school, or in other areas of our life.
Paying attention to one’s dreams can lead to helpful, even
remarkable, experiences of the sense of guidance or presence of the divine in our lives, similar to testimony of those
who pray but may not pay attention to their dreams. The
commonalities can provide a bridge between dream work
and prayer. Some modern Christians struggle with some of
the images and symbols of the Bible. Dreams and parts of
the Bible use language of symbol and image, and familiarity
with dreams can lead to more comfort with a wider range of
the Biblical material.
Dreams can help the Christian Church in its need for spiritual renewal. This workshop will demonstrate how dreams
can aid that renewal. Christianity has a rich heritage from
the Bible and in parts of our Christian history that have valued dreams. For much of the past several centuries, dreams
have not often had a valued place in the faith practices of
many Christians. Dream work as a spiritual practice will be
compared to several other spiritual practices currently used
among Christians. The second part of the workshop will
be a “demonstration dream group” that will not only work
dreams, but also discuss the ways to adapt dream work to
church settings. Issues of resistance to dreams, conflicting
attitudes of Biblical authority, hints for developing a dream
group in churches, etc. will be part of the dream work portion of this workshop. Though focused on dream work as a
Christian practice, the workshop will benefit anyone interested in dreams and dream work as a spiritual practice, and
how that practice is informed by whatever the participant
considers scripture or sacred writings.

Dreams and Spiritual Growth
Geoff Nelson
Whittier, California, USA
Dreams and dream work are very helpful in the practice
of spiritual direction and they provide great advantages to
small groups in churches. Four elements of using dreams in
one’s spiritual life will be explored in the light of both spiritual
direction and parish dream groups. These elements are the
emotional honesty of dreams, the way dreams help prioritize our lives, the connection between dream work and the
practice of prayer, and the way dream work can help people
understand the Bible better. Emotional honesty can be difficult for us, depending upon the culture we were raised in or
the cultural constraints we live in currently. Dreams are not
always “polite.” Dreams can help us decide what is most
important for us to be concentrating upon, whether it is in
our family, at our jobs or school, or in other areas of our
social life. As a result, we can prioritize the use of our time
and energy. Paying attention to one’s dreams can lead to
some helpful, even remarkable, experiences of the sense

S34

of guidance or presence of the divine in our lives. Similar
experiences are found among those who pray. The common
experiences here can provide a bridge between dream work
and prayer. Some modern Christians struggle with images
and symbols of the Bible. The language that both dreams
and some parts of the Bible use is that of symbol and image. Familiarity with one’s dreams can help the Christian
be more comfortable with a wider range of the Biblical material. The difference between the individual relationship of
spiritual direction and the dynamics in a dream group will
be explored as they relate to these four elements. The level
of intimacy developed in a dream group will be described,
focusing on the enhancement to intimacy that dream work
provides. The spiritual growth that takes place in a parish
dream group will be described.

Firebird, an Interdisciplinary, Interactive Dance
Joanne Oussoren
Rotterdam, The Netherlands
Together with Dance for Health and the Dutch Opera and
Ballet, Droomtheater organizes a dance performance by
MS-patients combined with shadow theater. Dancers are
MS-patients and during weekly training sessions that lasted
a year they have created this interdisciplinary performance.
The audience will be invited to participate in the dance.
Three years ago, Andrew Greenwood started up Dance for
Health with Parkinson patients. From 2015 he has worked
with MS Patients. Frans Hakkemars has been working with
puppetry for Joanne Oussoren’s Droomtheater for ten
years. We all have the ambition to work with professional
partners and continue our learning opportunities by performing and teaching. The weekly dance training improves
health, stimulates the inner imagination and creates new
perspectives. Participants feel healthier, get a new direction
in life and are less focused on their illness. Dance creates
togetherness. By working with MS patients we train muscles, mind, imagination and coordination of body and mind.
After one year’s practice together with hospital researchers
and artists we all can perform professionally and show that
our perspectives have become better. We demonstrate how
to deal with the illness and are better related to one of the
greatest values in life: happiness. The presentation combines words in English, movements in dance and images by
shadow puppets. During the performance the audience will
be invited to participate and identify the same qualities.
Dancers and audience identify with dance creation instead of being ill or being patients. The performance shows
the audience the function of the dancing. The MS dancers
demonstrate new possibilities by performing the Firebird,
and create new possibilities, connections and images during the training process and performance.

Drawing in the Night: Creating Art from Dreams
Judy Pascoe
Cheltenham, UK
This workshop enables participants to begin to discover a
method for creating artwork from dreams. The goal is to find

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

IJoDR
a personal approach that connects the participant to the
deep source of visual inspiration offered by dreams. This
engagement also addresses creative blocks, and the fear
and anxiety that can accompany the creative process. The
approach has grown out of a research MA (2012-2014) in
Transpersonal Psychotherapy completed at the Centre for
Counselling and Psychotherapy Education, London, and
employs methodologies of Organic Inquiry (Clements, 2004,
2011) and Art-based Inquiry (McNiff, 1998, 2008, 2013) to
study the transformational potential of drawing dream images.
This workshop is a further development of “Drawing in the
Night: creating art from dreams”, offered with the support
of the CCPE’s Dream Research Institute in October 2015 to
explore the transformational potential of expressing dream
imagery as art. Initially, the participants will be invited to
draw an image from a dream. (It will be stressed that the aim
of this exercise is not artistic merit). There will be 20 minutes
dedicated to this section of the workshop. In the next 50
minutes participants will be given the opportunity to share
their image in the larger group. Depending on the group size,
this 50 minute period may be broken down into a 30 minute
section for some participants to share their image in the collective group, then 20 minutes for the remaining participants
to pair up and explore their dream images. The goal of this
exploration is not to place any interpretation on the imagery,
but to allow the participant the space to explore the content
of the dream image. This will be demonstrated with the larger group, who will gather behind the participant presenting
their imagery so the work can be “taken in” from the point
of view of the creator of the image. The role of the presenter
and the group is that of reflective witnesses.
Any interpretation or themes and associations that emerge
will be the creation of the dreamer. At the end of this exploration, the presenter will ask the participant to consider the
main themes of the dream image. The participant will be
invited to reflect on how this theme may relate to their current situation. It will be the choice of the participant whether
they share these insights or take away these themes to reflect on privately. The approach to this “investigation” of the
image is based on phenomenological-existential processes,
so the dreamer remains in control of the meaning of the image (Moon, B L ,2011).To ground the experiential nature
of the workshop, in the final 20 minutes the presenter will
share her findings (some via personal imagery provided in
a handout), describing the transformational experience of
drawing dream imagery; highlighting links to alchemical theory, intuition, the collective unconscious, metaphor and the
mandala. The workshop is ideal for health care professional
and psychotherapists as well as people who in general find
themselves enabling others in their creative endeavours but
neglecting their own creative work.

How the Dreams of the World Dreams Peace
Bridge Prepared Me to Welcome Refugees
Ralf Penderak
Badendorf, Germany
The author will present one of his dreams belonging to
the World Dreams Peace Bridge and how it prepared him
to welcome and care for the refugees arriving in Germany,
both generally, and specifically in the village where he lives.

Basis: Practice of group dreaming and peace activism.
The presenter will focus on one of his own dreams, its connections with the group, and its peaceful intentions and actions. He will then go into how the group process deepened
his empathy, especially for persons from other cultures.

Dreaming Paradise in Early Christian Cemeteries
Stephen Potthoff
Wilmington, Ohio, USA
The pagan and early Christian cemeteries of Rome and
Carthage (modern Tunisia) abound with the imagery of paradise captured in catacomb frescoes, multicolor tomb mosaics, and sculpted marble sarcophagi. Trees, flowers, birds
and fountains evoke the primeval Eden, while scenes of
Dionysus, the Good Shepherd, and lively banquets hold out
the promise of eternal bliss and reunion with loved ones in
the postmortem realm. Dream and visionary accounts from
the Hellenistic, Roman, and early Christian periods are similarly rich in their descriptions of paradisiacal realms. This
presentation will examine the relationship between dream
and cemetery imagery as co-creative expressions of the
archetypal, imaginal paradise, focusing on how visionary
experience inspired and informed the construction of the
postmortem realm in the cemetery.

Dreaming Peace from the Other Side
Sherry Puricelli
Madison, CT, USA
When the World Dreams Peace Bridge set intentions to
dream for peace, some were surprised to dream of people who have crossed over. This presentation will examine
dreams depicting the deceased and how those dreams
help(ed) facilitate peace. The presenter will begin by providing examples of dreams of the departed that have been
shared on the Bridge. Be prepared for twists and turns as
some individual dreams suddenly overlap to become part
of something more comprehensive. How do the deceased
help us dream up peace? Stay tuned to learn how some
individuals have been aided by dreams with deceased loved
ones. Common benefits of dreams of the departed will be
described as well as recommended calls to action. Participants will be invited to examine their own experiences with
dreams from the other side, both individually, and within
groups.

The Language of Dreams: Poetry of the Soul
Victoria Rabinowe
Santa Fe , NM, USA
Our dreams are the muses that come in the night. Those
of us who have fallen under the spell of writing mythic reinventions of our dreams have become enchanted by the
world of mystery and paradox. For those who care to look,
the subtle underbelly of a dream is lyrical, harmonious and

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

S35

IJoDR
sublime. Balanced in perfect proportion, polished with
a sure eye, the organization and genius of each dream is
stunning. Dreams are dagger sharp, ever on target, never
off key. Once opened through creative writing, each dream
reveals its perfect pitch. Our nightly dreams are the repository of our deepest memories and feelings. They call to us
from the innermost center of our being. They touch us in our
most tender places. They make us aware of the depth of our
longing, our joys and our sorrows. They enchant us with euphoria, they arouse our passions, they frighten us, they inspire us, they fill us with wonder. Yet, the dreams of the night
are not easy to decipher. In order to transmit their complex messages, dreams speak to us in metaphors, symbols,
paradoxes, and shifting shapes. Consequently, we must
learn to translate the language of dream images with our
imaginations, not with rational systems of logic. When we
reenter the dream landscape through literary adaptations,
we are meeting Psyche in her own language. Through the
practice of writing of poems, we can learn to decrypt codes
and unravel riddles. Wild stories of the night invite us into a
world where we have permission to give voice to indefinable
yearnings, inexpressible anguish, indescribable beauty and
ineffable ecstasy. To step across the threshold of a dream
with a pen in hand is to enter a world of enchantment. Intuitive, reflective writing offers us a chance to experience inner
vision with the wonder of a child and the sophistication of a
master. The power of dream poetry helps us to transcend
the primeval fear of the unknown. It can be painful work,
but it produces a strong, vibrant portrait of our souls. Our
dreams bring stories of blood as well as inspiration, death
as well as life. Dreams are often about our dark forces, having very little to do with beauty. Yet, the despair that stems
from the struggle of the soul colors our dreamwork with
gut-wrenching authenticity. The expressive arts provide a
looking glass reflection of the shadowy realms with all their
treasures. What we have kept inside is invited to come out.
By creatively releasing our emotions, overwhelming feelings
can be purged in a healing and wholesome way. Creative
dreamwork gives us permission to feel what it might be like
to be free from impurities and cleansed in spirit. We can
flush our wounds with words. Writing with humor and pathos can shift our perspective. Freed from the restraint of
holding back, we can emerge restored, renewed and revitalized.

An Investigation into the Archetype of the Angel
through the Use of the Language Known as Enochian
Michael Reith
Glasgow , Scotland/United Kingdom
Enochian, known as an angelic language, was received by
Dr John Dee and Sir Edward Kelley in the late 16th century.
The use of this language has been left purely to the hands
of “practicing magicians.” Given the nature of the way this
language was arduously received over several years from
Dee and Kelley, can we use it in the lucid dream state to
meet with the Angelic archetypes effortlessly, and expand
our consciousness and knowledge from the experience appropriately? Before angels were understood to be “messengers of god” they were more looked on as reflections of the

S36

“energetic essences” of the universe. If we have a language
that we can use to speak directly with these energies, does
the lucid dreamer then step into someone in direct communion with a universe that is alive and aware? Speaking
directly to various facets of the energy that moves the stars
and keeps our feet planted on earth? Our understanding
and application of Enochian is purely theoretical, there is no
documented work that discusses the use of this language
in the lucid dream state – so the presenter is experimenting
and exploring the language and its affects (if any) on the
lucid dreaming experience.
I plan to present in sequence: a brief explanation of the
history of Enochian, how it was discovered and where it
came from, alongside a brief discussion on the historical
use of the “Obsidian Mirror” from the Aztec/Mexhica tradition and, if possible, a brief description of brainwave recordings that were taken recently from the university of Turin with
practitioner Sergio Magana, to deepen our understanding
of how the altered state of Consciousness Dee and Kelley
were entering relates to the brainwave patterns we have recorded from both the lucid and other various dream states.
After this I will recount my experiences of working with the
language in the lucid dream state, and what sort of results
were experienced. I will be documenting, in as much detail
as I can, how the various words and calls in Enochian affect
the Lucid Dream state, as well as gathering information from
any dream figures that I may meet who would respond to the
various names of the angels. Also, if possible, I will attempt
to collect and collate other lucid dreamers’ experiences of
using this language, with the specific aim of looking for similarities in those dreams. The presenter views Enochian as
a possible language that could potentially be adopted by
anyone in the lucid dreaming state to access “spirit” beings
and thus catalogue, for the benefit of all, methods that we
could use to speak to these beings with ease.

The Fictions of Dreams: Dreams and Literature
Otto M Rheinschmiedt
Trowbridge, Wiltshire, United Kingdom
Dreams are autobiographical fictions which employ the
same narrative devices we can find in world literature, such
as the memorial mode, multi-temporality, poeisis, historical
consciousness, and infinite connectivity. The dream makes
fictions out of the psycho-social material of our lives, in the
same way that world literature recreates interiority and historicity from dream-like states of mind. Literature is a dream
gone solid. And the process of fiction writing duplicates the
dream’s inherent narrative facility. The basis for my presentation lies in over thirty years of clinical experience working analytically with dreams; having completed a book on
dreams, The Fictions of Dreams, to be published by Karna;
and being a critical reader of world literature. Theories employed are psychoanalysis, literary criticism (Lionel Trilling),
the dream theory of fiction writing (Jonathan Franzen), and
the theory of dreaming and historical consciousness by historian Charles Stewart. The origin of my thinking goes back
to Freud’s foundation myth, which is closely linked with his
father’s death and a subsequent flurry of dreams which led
him into self-analysis, prolific writing, and a life-long love of
words, winning the prestigious Goethe prize for literature on
the way. By dreaming himself and the discipline of psycho-

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

IJoDR
analysis into existence, he had set the tone for understanding the psyche as a poetry-making organ and the close link
between dreams and literature.
Presentation sequence: Writerly devices employed in
world literature are a reflection of the narrative nature of
dreams because of the close relationship between the creative writer and dreaming. Patrick Modiano, in his memorial
mode of writing, takes us into broken memory at the time of
the French Occupation, in a reflection of a dreamer recovering from traumatisation. Gabriel Garcia Marquez employs
the method of multi-temporality which is the simultaneous
occurrence of past, present, and future, a feature which
gives credence to the non-chronological, cyclical nature of
dreams. Kafka, the poet of his own disorder, writing directly
from dreams, gave expression to human alienation. His writing style comes close to the notion of obscure lucidity of
dreams and their poetic nature. Irene Némirowsky, writing
in the midst of France’s Nazi Occupation, became a writer
steeped in historical consciousness which is also a dream
concept. Australian author Patrick White’s notion of writing,
‘infinite connectivity’, is duplicated in the dream’s capacity to dismantle ego identity, and by doing so is reaching
into the notion of inter-relatedness of all beings or we-consciousness, the spiritual dimension of dreaming.

Selfhood in Dreams of Death and the Deceased in
ancient Chinese Literature
Heiner Roetz
Bochum, Germany
The paper discusses the role of dreams about the dead or
death for the emergence of self-awareness in ancient (Zhou
period) Chinese texts. It is argued that the crossing of the
life-death barrier in dreams is part of a formal shift towards
transcendence that characterizes Chinese “axial age” literature. The paper discusses the role of the dream about
the dead or death for the emergence of self-awareness in
ancient Chinese texts. It is argued that the crossing of the
life-death barrier in dreams is part of a formal shift towards
transcendence that characterizes Chinese “axial age” literature. The emergence of reflected selfhood in China is closely
linked to the existential crisis of ancient Chinese civilisation
in the course of the downfall of the Zhou dynasty (11th-3rd Century BCE). Together with the breakdown of the old
feudal political order, and economic and social upheavals
in the course of China’s entry into the iron age, the embeddedness of the individual in the community is shattered and
its relationship to the handed-down ethos becomes problematic. The shift is reflected in different genres of literature,
among them historiography and poetry, and in new philosophies like Confucianism, Daoism and Legalism which try to
reformulate the position of the human being in the world
without direct recourse to tradition. In Karl Jaspers’s terminology, China enters into the “axial age”, with the discovery
of the individual and the overcoming of the closedness of
life by reflection and transcendence. Up to now, the role of
the dream in these developments has to my knowledge not
been thematized in Western and Chinese literature (the only
exception is M. Eggert, Rede vom Traum, Stuttgart 1993),
and it will be the topic of the planned paper. While in earlier Chinese documents – starting with the oracle bone in-

scriptions of the Shang dynasty (late 2nd millennium BC) –
dreams are mainly if not exclusively explanatory with regard
to past events or prognostic with regard to future events;
there is a shift from mantic to proto-philosophical and philosophical contents in “axial age” texts. Dreams now begin to
express the situation of the detached individual standing in
a tension with his/her time and with society. The paper will
in particular focus on dreams about death and the dead by
which the individual transcends his/her life-world, establishes a connection to other temporal and spatial realms and,
dialectically, discovers his/her own selfhood. Thus, dreams
are an integral part of the newly emerging “post-conventional” consciousness.

Writing Your Dreams
Asha Sahni
Bristol, UK
Introductory Statement. Using creative writing exercises to
explore our dreams can yield rich results. Writing can be
a valuable tool for self development and understanding,
and creative writing can unlock new ways for working with
dreams. In this workshop we will use creative writing exercises to explore a dream or dreams from different perspectives.
Description of Presentation. Creative writing can be a
powerful tool for self discovery. Writing does not have to
be “good/literary” to help us move forward. The focus of
this workshop is on playing with different writing exercises
based on our dreams to see what works and what emerges.
Sharing writing with one or more people often offers new
insights, just as sharing dreams in a group can help give
us different perspectives on the journeys we take at night.
You may choose to share what you have written. You may
choose to share your learning from the process of a writing
exercise. You may choose to share nothing. Whatever you
decide is fine. Creative Writing for Therapeutic Purposes is
a growing and emerging field; this workshop will draw on
current theory and research in this field, linking these developments to dreamwork.
The workshop will commence with an introductory round
and a short presentation on writing and dreamwork (10 minutes maximum for the latter). Workshop participants will be
asked to identify and share a dream/dreams they would like
to work on with one or two other people in the group. If the
group is small they may choose to do a group dream-share.
Participants will take part in three writing exercises related
to their dream/dreams and be given time to explore and
share their writing with one or more people in the group with
timings and instructions for sharing and feedback. A closing round will offer participants the chance to share writing
and/or learning and identify steps for further work on writing
and dreams. The dreamer is always the owner of the dream
and owns their own interpretation informed by the exercises
in the workshop. Each dreamer is the ultimate authority on
their own dream. Workshop participants may help inform
their thinking but it is up to the dreamer what they choose
to take on, integrate, think about or discard. Workshop participants will be encouraged to offer questions and personal
observations rather than interpretation.

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

S37

IJoDR
To Live Beyond the Image: Gregory the Great,
Dream Theory, and Spiritual Guidance

Dreamer, Poet, Prophet: Transforming the Dream
Experience into Visionary Poetry

Arnold Smeets

Susan Turner Gabrielle

Utrecht, The Netherlands

Penn Valley, CA, USA

In two instances in his oeuvre, Gregory the Great (pope between 540-604), explains the causes of dreams, warning his
audience that one should be careful, for Scripture teaches
that in many cases dreams turn out to be mere illusions or
illusions wrapped in the disguise of revelation. On the positive side: Mary was warned ’by the Angel in a dream to take
the Child and to fly into Egypt’ (Morals on Job 8.42).
Gregory is not a dream-worker. In his spiritualitity the
dream vision is used as a metaphor for the hidden and sacramental significance of God’s words in Scripture. This significance is ‘seen’ with the eyes of the mind: a seeing as in
a dream.
One might say that where the natural eyes see the letters
of the text, the eyes of the mind are able to see in an image
its allegorical and moral significance. This seeing leads the
reader deeper into the understanding of the mystery of God
and God’s will and intention.
For Gregory the Great, the praxis of reading Scripture is
a dynamics of contemplation (directed towards God), pulsing into a dynamics of action (directed to one’s neighbor).
While reading, the reader will be led (ductus) into a realm
of divine significance, providing a sacramental perspective
on life, offering insight and a sense of urgency and guidance. Other than perhaps in dreamwork, Gregory’s pastoral care acknowledges a strong intentionality of the images
seen while reading Scripture, for it is God who speaks and
reveals the history of salvation. What is seen will install a
program of action which man is invited to follow and act out.
Gregory takes the lead in this, stirring up the soul and guiding it to take the cue of the significance seen for both one’s
personal life and the duties and responsibilities in public life.
He is vigilant to ensure that the certainty of the deeper understanding of Scripture is balanced by the core value of
humility.

The influence of dreams on poetic expression has a long
and documented history. This presentation will explore how
poets have used dreams to construct poetical works, ranging from the Roman poet Statius, to Chinese poetry of the
Ming-Qing period, 1930s British Surrealists, to modern poets Elizabeth Bishop and Paula Meehan. Both then and now,
such writing has the potential to act as a visionary agent for
change in the larger world. Dream research has explored
how transformation and healing can be offered to the individual by providing knowledge of the self the dreamer may
not otherwise have access to in waking consciousness. In
addition, dreamers are given the capacity to connect to the
larger world, where dreams provide new material to be considered alongside prevailing beliefs and emotional attitudes.
The poet Samuel Taylor Coleridge felt that dreams not only
embraced the power of the imagination, but that they could
also be used as means of literary inspiration and even as
messengers of cultural shifts. He was not alone; many poets
have been moved to incorporate their dreams into metaphorical language. Modern Irish poet Paula Meehan noted
that signs and symbols, including prophetic dreams, were
crucial to how she and her women ancestors related to the
world, comparing those experiences to the societal whole
of her time, as well as giving voice to a body of knowledge
that might otherwise be lost. Poetical expression—in particular that which comes out of the uncensored dream world—
works as a powerful communal act and has the ability to
provide vision, transformation, and healing.

Sharing Dreams Expands Awareness and Moves
Us in New Directions for Peace
Martha Taylor
Floyd, VA, USA
The presenter will share how the interaction of the Dream
group led her to teach a class about dreams to children in
her small town, and to write a chapter about it for an upcoming book on dreams for children. Links and thoughts
that are given by group members have not only provided
insight into the dreams themselves, but have also led to
insights and growth for the presenter personally. She will
share how one link to the work of Dean Radin affected her
with deeper understanding of the intention the dream group
shares when they dream together. She will also share a few
ideas about Radin’s work, as he is committed to bringing
to light the significance of intention and consciousness and
its role in change. Since he mentions a role for meditation,
some ideas about that will be included.

S38

Children’s Adventureland: From Dream to Reality
Hein van Elteren
Beek-Berg en Dal, The Netherlands
One single dream inspired me to write a series of novels,
cocreated with groups of HSP-children, and to facilitate
various creative and spiritual activities for already hundreds
of kids and parents, in a unique ongoing and expanding process in the Netherlands and abroad. On Sunday, November 17, 1991, I dreamt of two children: “Jenny and Ralf live
in totally different families. When they meet in the street,
suddenly they see colors surrounding each other, feel each
other’s pain, share thoughts over a distance, and remember
another life when they were sister and brother; nowadays
they feel just like that. Through a series of adventures they
learn to handle their powers, what is scary about them and
what is fun. They make friends with others, both children
and adults, sharing similar experiences. During a wonderful
summer holiday in France, at full moon, they meet a group
of natural beings, who ask the children for help to make the
Earth beautiful and whole again.”
This dream told me to write a novel. Within seven weeks
Colors in the Sky emerged. It was published in 1993, sold out
(2300 copies in Dutch), and republished in 2014. I thought it
was ‘just’ a beautiful story, but in 1995 a 7-year young boy
wrote to me that he felt like Ralf and Jenny, and was curious

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

IJoDR
about how their story continues. He inspired me to invent
a way of facilitating groups of kids to write books together.
I organized a series of creative meetings. Together we invented exciting adventures in which we all could play our
favorite characters, including Jenny, Ralf and their dream
friends. The first sequel to Colors in the Sky appeared in
1998, called The Great Game of Colors. It contains playful suggestions to help you develop your power and realize
your dreams, e.g. blank spaces to draw your own pictures.
With a new group of kids I created another sequel, Dreaming of the Time-Cave (2001), about past lives and healing.
The creation of volume 4, The Journey to Children’s Adventureland, began in 2004. We started organizing meetings for
families longing for community, a place where sensitive kids
and parents live together happily and develop their powers in harmony with nature. I gave many presentations and
creative children’s workshops about this ideal; in schools,
at festivals etc, in the Netherlands, Belgium, Germany and
Austria (Colors in the Sky was translated into German). I also
networked a lot to make a permanent Children’s Adventureland possible, involving permaculture, homeschooling, collective dreamwork, theater and much more. And, last but
not least, we organized adventurous summer holiday camps
in France. Thousands of kids and parents have already participated in these activities and/or read the books... and I
feel this is just the beginning. So I can truly say: “Everything
starts with a dream.” In my presentation, meant for all, I will
relate chronologically how this special dream becomes ever
more reality. I will also explain the techniques I invented to
cocreate novels with groups of people.

A Dream Art Process
Kim Vergil
Baie d’Urfe, Que, Canada
Artist’s Statement: Mine is an adventure into night dreams,
which has led me to an artistic process that takes me deeper
into an understanding of the world on the other side of our
sleep. As an artist member of the International Association
for the Study of Dreams since 2007, I have come to better
understand the roles of our dreams and the varied interpretations and meanings possible when working with them. If
we live to 85 years old, we have dreamt the equivalent of 20
years. Whether we remember or pay attention to them or
not, our dreams play an important role in our lives.
My current work of Dream Abstractions comes from the
synthesized essence of night dreams. Needing to create
meaning within the chaos of the world around me has led to
a creative process similar to the way we construct our night
dreams. Using this process allows me to tap into an inner
source both personal and universal, and always original and
unique; which is sometimes dark, sometimes playful, other
times finding beauty, the result of which is that these seemingly abstract works are full of imagery and story, open to
interpretation and discovery. By using this process, the finished works themselves become dreams. Working to find
imagery within abstraction is about problem solving and
engaging the imagination. “Paintography” superimposes
photography and painting, it echoes the way I understand
we seamlessly attach seemingly random images and emotions together to create night dreams. Using a process that
mirrors the way we create our night dreams, I photograph

the world around me as we do in our daily lives with our
minds eye. I store my photos on the computer hard drive
similar to the way our brains stores files for later reference.
These collaged images become a backdrop of symbols.
Next the paint applied over the photos creates the emotional energy needed to create the story; the combination
creates the scenes that become the Dream Abstractions.
My understanding of night dreams and how dreams are created has led me to grasp the similarities with my creative
process, and better understand the meaning within both my
night dreams and the dream abstractions that appear on the
canvases. The finished works add another potential starting
point for dream work.

Dream Dance Circle
Craig Webb
Montreal, Qc, Canada
You are warmly welcomed to an interactive community
song/dance circle blending cultural traditions, and celebrating life and dreams through movement and music. Enjoy
friendly faces and charge up your physical and dream bodies with lots of lucid dream energy! Absolutely no previous
experience required (so please ignore your inner critic!)

Dream-Inspired Music: Shamans, Classical Composers, Popular Artists and Inventions
Craig Webb
Montreal, Qc, Canada
This audio-visual presentation explores dreams that include
sound and/or music. It will include research about sound
and music in dreams, as well as ways that various indigenous cultures use dream songs. A key element will be
case-studies of well-known composers in various genres
whose work is directly dream-inspired, as well as different
melodies and soundscapes that have come to the presenter
in dreams, since he is fortunate enough to dream of sounds
and/or music a few times a week or more.

Coming to a Theater Near You: Your Dreaming
Mind
Bernard Welt
Takoma Park, MD, USA
Since the earliest days of cinema, audiences and film scholars alike have subscribed to a paradigm of realism: What
we see onscreen is taken to be a representation of an external reality, and films are judged according to their verisimilitude, or faithfulness in recreating a recognizable reality, with artfulness and insight. But there has always been a
counter-tradition of fantasy and wonder, and even the most
avowedly realist directors have found ways to show their
characters’ thoughts and dreams onscreen—even the simplest point-of-view shot takes us into a character’s mind,
and of course dream sequences and fantasies often emerge

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

S39

IJoDR
from the foundation of realistic depiction in popular films. A
few films, however, especially in fantasy, horror, and a hardto-classify generic niche that might be called metaphysical
fantasy, set out not only to show us what goes on in a character’s mind but also to give an account of their processes
of thinking, feeling, and learning from experience. In this
presentation, we examine some key features of such films
as Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind, The Science of
Sleep, A Nightmare on Elm Street, Monsters, Inc and the
extraordinary Pixar animated feature Inside Out, as indications of a colloquial philosophy of mind, each film offering
an account of the dreaming mind to its audience.

6. Education/Other Topics
Dreaming the 3 R’s: An Anecdotal Account
Curtiss Hoffman
Ashland, MA, USA
In several articles, as well as in his final book, The Nature
and Function of Dreaming, the late Ernest Hartmann claimed
that, “we do not dream of the 3 R’s”: reading, writing, or
arithmetic. He later qualified this rather absolute statement
to suggest that, at least, we do not dream of these things
very often – he estimated that only 1 – 2% of dreams would
include any of these three activities. He felt that the reason
for this was rooted in brain architecture: that the cognitive
portions of the brain are shut off during sleep and dreaming
and not accessible to the dreaming mind. Instead, the emotional centers of the brain are active in dreaming, and his lifelong quest was to explore the emotional core of the dream,
the “Central Image.” While I do not dispute the premise that
dreams, especially REM sleep dreams, are usually highly
charged with emotion, I find that in my own dreaming, at
least, the “3 R” activities are represented at a much higher
frequency than Hartmann predicted – around 5% each for
reading and writing, somewhat less for calculating. This is
based upon my extensive database of over 12,000 dreams
recorded over a 23-year period. Some of the dreams incorporating these elements were what C. G. Jung would have
called “big” dreams, which involved important, life-changing scenarios. I will present this anecdotal evidence, giving both specific examples and general trends across the
sample. This will include both qualitative and quantitative
evidence. At the end, I will propose some thoughts about
why this might be the case for me, in particular, and perhaps
for other dreamers as well.

The Science & Psychology of Dreaming: An Introduction
Robert Hoss

there is still much unknown and/or controversial about what
we think we know of dreaming, and much more than can
be presented in an hour, this talk is an attempt to present
a snapshot of information in a tutorial manner, cited from
research and theoretical literature. It will address the process and possible “functions” of dreaming, from a scientific,
neurological and psychological perspective. The lecture will
present basic information on: sleep and dream states; a
neurological look at the dreaming brain and how it might
contribute to the dream experience and potential “function”;
understanding the extraordinary dream experience (nightmares, lucid, PSI); plus some of the contemporary thinking
and theories on the possible “functions” of dreaming. An
outline of the proposed content is as follows:
1) The Basics Of Dreaming: a) When Do We Dream?:
“Typical” Sleep Cycle, REM characteristics, NREM characteristics; b) Why Can’t We Recall Our Dreams (research):
Sleep habits; Psychological; Brain related; Tips to aid Recall; c) REM Dream Content (research): the Dream experience, Gender and Age Differences,.
2) The Dreaming Brain in REM: A visual trip (based on
neuroimaging research): PET/fMRI information and effect
that the unique mixture of active and inactive brain centers might have on dream content (Hobson, Dang-Vu ,et.al.
Pace-Schott, others).
3) The Psychology of REM State Dreaming: a) Imagery
theories: associative and right parietal cortex; association
and metaphor (Domhoff, Hartmann, others); b) Emotion and
Memory processing theories: Limbic regions and emotion/
memory processing, imagery content (Seligman & Yellen,
Hobson & McCarley Hatmann, Perls), color to emotional
association (Van deCastle, Hoss); c) Adaptive Learning
and Goal Oriented Problem Resolution: Creative Problem
Solving research (Barrett); Adaptive and Threat Rehearsal
(Revonsuo); Learning (various); Neurological (Matt Wilson);
examples -content observations; d) Psychological Transformation theories: function of frontal and para-limbic regions;
Jung’s theories on transformation; “counterfactual” studies
(McNamara); Hartmann’s theories; memory re-consolidation
research (LeDoux, Ecker); examples -content observations.
4) Nightmares (Hartmann, Barrett, Siegel): definition; occurrence; potential causes; therapeutic approaches; examples: PTSD (Krippner, Krakow); healing function of nightmares; lucid nightmares and facing our fears.
5) Lucid Dreaming: a) Research - Lab and neurological
(various studies); b) The Experience - degrees of lucidity:
knowing you are dreaming; false awakenings; controlling
your actions; attempts to control the dream; dialogue with
dream characters; “Wisdom behind the dream”; extrasensory; c) Theory and Research with Lucid Dream Characters:
Consistency with Psychological Theories of Transformation
(Jung, Waggoner observations); Research with Dream Characters (German research); d) Illustrative examples.
6) Extrasensory Dreaming: a) The experience - Precognitive, Telepathic, Clairvoyant, Visitation, OOBE; b) Brief Research statistics (Maimonides, Duke Univ., Krippner studies,
others); replication example; c) Big Dream Statistics – database results from IASD Book and Chicken Soup; d) Considerations:- literal versus metaphor interpretation – example.

Cave Creek, Arizona, USA
The session is a brief educational tutorial, particularly useful for beginners or anyone interested in some of the recent
thinking on our basic understanding of dreaming. Although

S40

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

IJoDR
Photographic Guidance: My Year in Images
Bonnie Mitsch
Walker, MN, USA
Three years ago, I wanted to combine my two interests of
photography and dream work and to present a workshop at
the dream conference. At the time, I pulled a Tarot card after meditation asking for guidance on some issue in my life.
I wondered if instead of a Tarot card, I would go outside, see
what image attracted me and photograph it. I would then
look at my image as I would a Tarot card or dream image.
The first time I did this, I asked if I should make a proposal
to present at the conference. I then took a walk. Just when
I thought it wouldn’t work (no image seemed to grab my attention), I looked up and saw a broken- off branch on a tree
that to me looked like a wolf. After playing with the image
and looking in a book on the symbology of wolves, I came
up with the meaning that spoke to me. It was the wolf as
the great teacher. To me this was the confirmation I needed.
From then on, I have been practicing my Photographic Guidance and have presented my workshop five times, twice at
the dream conference. My practice has evolved from asking
for guidance, photographing an image and then discovering
the symbolic meaning for me, to trying out different “techniques” both for refining my question and for gaining insight.
In my presentation, I am showing images from this past year
and the different ways I have expanded on my original idea.
I have been influenced by different books such as Dreaming While Awake by Arnold Mindell, Braiding Sweetgrass
by Robin Wall Kimmerer, and Sidewalk Oracles by Robert
Moss. These books have gotten me to view my “subjects”
in different ways. I have also been influenced by Nick Brink’s
book, Ecstatic Postures, and The Inquiry Method by Geneen Roth. They have given me ways to deepen my inquiry;
to help me arrive at the “deeper question.”
One approach I use is when I am attracted to an image, I
stop, take some deep breaths, get grounded and then ask
the image my question. I wait and see what the response
is. The response can be very direct. “Gratitude” is what an
old stump told me in response to the question, “How do I
let it go and not take it personally when things don’t go my
way?” I then ask for permission to take a photograph and
thank the image. One participant in my workshop said that
he felt he was in a lucid dream when he went out to find his
image. I also feel this way. My Photographic Guidance has
become a spiritual practice for me which helps me become
more conscious in my waking life.

The Three Stages of Imagery
Jan Taal
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Imagining is the core function of the psyche. The inner world
of our imagination is the central arena within which we become who we are and where we can explore our possibilities. Every action, each new step in our behavior, is generated by our image of it.
A distinguishing feature of imagery is that it can take us
into a deeper state of consciousness. As we become more
involved in our inner imagery, we can enter a kind of natural

trance-like state, in very much the way that when we are
gripped by a film, a book or a piece of music we can completely enter into it and lose all sense of time. As we make
full contact with an image, it’s as if it becomes pregnant.
The image unfolds and reveals the energy contained within
it, much as a window opens on our computer screen when
we click on it.
Imagery opens us up to a dimension where time and space
appear to be relative, and where in principle, everything is
possible. It is in this fifth dimension that we can be fully free
and creative. It is, however, a dimension which has its own
pitfalls, particularly if we do not have the necessary strength
to cope with the immeasurable forces which dwell here.
The defining features of the fifth dimension are:
- intense consciousness;
- a trance-like, dream-like state; visions;
- the experience of timelessness and a dissolving of spatial
boundaries;
- images which are charged with symbolic psychic energy;
- experience of a subtle body or energy field;
- contact with sources of revitalizing energy as well as with
unassimilated elements in de psyche.
The process of imagery begins with the discovery that inner
images have great impact. Becoming aware of this influence
can be a huge and often confronting revelation.
In the next stage we discover that we can exert influence
upon our images, and that within this inner world of images we can take action, make adjustments and even effect
transformation. This is the area in which most therapy and
coaching work is done.
That we are quite possibly the creators of our own inner
world and thereby of our own feelings, our own behaviour
and our own lives is a well-kept secret.
In this third stage we come to the realization that ‘our inner
world’ of feelings, convictions, complexes and self-images,
in fact determines our experience of the world ‘out there.’
In becoming conscious of this, we can become capable of
owning all aspects of our psyche, energies, emotions and
tendencies, which we find within us. We learn to cope with
them and we discover the creative capacity by which our life
in all its many facets is brought into being. The third stage
may culminate in a state of consciousness in which ‘owner’
and ‘creator’ become one, in which the inner and the outer
world spring from the same source, and where the barriers
of time and space prove to be an illusion.
* An extensive article on the Three Stages of Imagery has
been published in Psychosynthesis Quarterly: http://aappsychosynthesis.org/wp-content/uploads/Psychosynthesis-Quarterly-March-2016.pdf.

Dream and Mental Imagery
Susanne Van Doorn
Breda, The Netherlands
Is mental imagery the same as dreaming? Both in visualization while awake as in dreaming you have images you relate to – images that tell you something about you and your
state of well being. What do the three main modern theories
say about mental imagery? What techniques can be used
to work with dream images in the waking state? Does lucid
dreaming have a key function in all of this? Susanne van
Doorn will give a sketch of the three most dominant theories

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

S41

IJoDR
of dreaming today: the psychodynamic theory as presented
by Mark Solms, the Activation Input Modulation Model (AIM)
of Allan Hobson, and the Neurocognitive theory as proposed by Domhoff. How do they differ in their conception of
mental imagery and dreaming? Can lucid dreaming play a
key role in defining the relationship between mental imagery
and dreaming? Can mental imagery play a role in dreaming
and healing? What techniques can you use to incorporate
mental imagery in your daily life and how might you benefit
from them?

Memory and Imagination: The Stuff of Dreams?
Antonio Zadra
Montreal, QC, Canada
Many clinicians, theorists and researcher have long considered dreams as reflecting a process of constructive imagination (i.e., the capacity to generate novel representations that
go beyond one’s immediate experiences). Others, however,
have argued that dreams are best understood as a complex
cognitive process essentially based on memory and learning. Moreover, people in both camps have viewed dreams
as special form of perception. In this presentation, attendees will be encouraged to take part in a thought experiment
revealing key differences between waking imagination (including daydreaming) and imagination within dreams. Next,
the results of a recent study on imaginative capacities within
lucid dreams are presented. In this study, four proficient lucid dreamers were asked to perform a series of tasks in their
lucid dreams, including imagination-based exercises. Much
like the thought experiment, the results reveal important
ways in which imagination in dreams can be shown to differ from imagination in waking life. The implication of these
findings for our conceptualization of dreams and our understanding of the imaginational capacities of the dream ego
will be discussed.

7. PSI Dreaming
Obtaining Messages from the ‘Unconscious’
Keith Hearne
London, Surrey, England
This talk will describe three procedures for obtaining communicated information from the ‘unconscious.’ Hearne conducted the world’s first sleep-laboratory research into lucid
dreaming for his PhD (1975-78) at Liverpool University, England. He devised the ocular signalling procedure, enabling
communication from within the lucid dream state. Here, he
describes the momentous occasion and how it opened a
portal to the inner universe of the dream. The date of that
discovery (12th April) has now become international ‘lucid
dreaming day’. He also invented the first ‘dream machine’
for lucidity induction.
The second method, devised by Hearne, of revealing unconscious material in dreams, is a way of externalising the in-

S42

ternal imagery of dreams using a hypnotic tracing technique
(‘hypno-oneirography’). Interesting consistencies have been
observed between subjects. Examples will be displayed,
especially a noticeable, consistent, scene-change effect
which indicates that dreams do not progress freely and randomly, but advance by a limiting process of ‘re-arrangement
of the pixels’, as if by a law of least effort. Hearne believes
the ‘freeze-framed’ image sequences provide significant insight into the construction and flow of dreams.
Another way of obtaining useful, insightful, messages from
within dreams is via the ‘alphabet-code’ method, devised
by Hearne’s late colleague David Melbourne. Each letter has
been assigned a specific, fixed, message. In this remarkable procedure, the unconscious displays a dream in which
several items begin with the same initial letter. Moreover, the
unconscious appears to deliberately awaken the dreamer
immediately after the display so that the dreamer is made
aware of the letter and its relevant message. An instructional
leaflet (with the alphabetic dream code) will be provided for
attendees, so that they can try out the method.
More information is available at: www.keithhearne.com.

Psi Dreams and Mass Media from 1883 to 2014
Katy Price
London, UK
Dreamworkers and cultural critics share concerns about the
effects of mass media on our imagination, dream life, communities and well-being. Yet this presentation will argue that
psi dreams and mass media have been inseparable since
the beginnings of psychic research in the 1880s, and this
may give us pause to consider the relationship between
media and activity of the mind in a more positive light. We
will review examples of the close relationship between mass
media and psi dreaming from the past 130 years, including
the uses of media to collect and verify telepathic and precognitive dream testimonies, the foreseeing of media content by dreamers, and attempts to make sense of psi experience through analogies between the dreaming mind and
media technologies. We conclude by considering whether
there are benefits to viewing dreams themselves as a media
form.
The presentation is based on archival research and existing
historical accounts of parapsychology and dream research.
We begin with British Society for Psychical Research who
placed classified adverts in The Times in 1883, appealing
for members of the public to send in examples of ‘thoughtreading, clairvoyance, presentiments and dreams’, and the
SPR’s use of newspapers to verify the thousands of reports
they received. We note J.W. Dunne’s influential account of
his precognitive dreams of newspaper headlines, presented
in An Experiment with Time (1927). We then move on to the
use of radio and television in dream harvesting, from SPR
President Dame Edith Lyttelton calling for premonitions on
BBC Radio in 1934, to British playwright J.B. Priestley conducting a similar appeal on BBC television in 1963. Where
Lyttelton used newspapers, radio and cinema to verify the
time, date, and content of dreamed events unfolding in waking life, Priestley was less concerned with verification and
sought to rescue his audience from a mechanised existence
in thrall to linear time.

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

IJoDR
The letters to Priestley reveal that this rescue project was
intimately involved with experiences of media consumption
in which radio, cinema and television helped audience members to connect with alternatives to the dominant rationalist
models of dream, self and time. Coming up to the present
day we find that even in the internet era, the newspaper
still has a role to play, exemplified in the National Dream
Center’s Project August, inviting dreamers to foresee news
headlines for August 2014.
YouTube clips and Google Maps are also routinely used
in laboratory experiments to test for precognition and other
psi phenomena. In conclusion, I suggest that we accept the
long lasting intimacy between psi dreams and mass media,
and consider whether there is anything to be gained by considering dreams themselves as a form of media.

Dream Telepathy Contest

istence of precognitive dreaming. Dreams may be slipping
though extra dimensions in space to bring us information
that seems to come from the world of the future. I will give
specific examples of personal and global dreams that demonstrate striking examples of precognition. I will also offer
accessible techniques to facilitate an increase in the occurrence of precognitive dreams as well as helpful tips for their
analysis. Precognitive dream material can act as a guide, a
warning, or as a valuable resource of information to reduce
the negative impact of natural disasters, accidents, or illness. The material gleaned from a precognitive dream can
be a preemptive informant that reduces the all too common
misunderstandings, misconceptions, and projections experienced in daily life. Those of us who study dreams and believe in their value are not surprised by these new findings.
We must be patient while the scientific world catches up to
what we already know – that dreams are an extraordinary
natural resource built directly into our DNA.

Cynthia Pearson, Sherry Puricelli, and Robert Waggoner
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Try your Psi! Test your dreaming mind’s ability to tune into a
visual target image that will be broadcast telepathically during the night by a designated “sender.” Loosely patterned
on the cutting-edge experiments in dream telepathy conducted at Maimonides Dream Laboratory by Drs. Stanley
Krippner and Montague Ullman, the annual IASD contest offers a playful way to test your dream telepathy skills. Come
and learn the rules and join in the serious fun.

Dreaming the Future: An Exploration of Precognitive Dreams and Quantum Physics
Susan Reintjes
Chapel Hill, NC, USA
This lecture describes breakthroughs in quantum physics
that support the phenomenon of precognitive dreaming. I
will give specific examples of global and personal precognitive dreams, and offer techniques to increase the likelihood of psi dreaming and ways to analyze and utilize the
dreams in everyday life. How can dreams predict the future?
This lecture sheds light on this controversial question. I will
discuss how precognitive dreams bring evidence of a human delivery system that is not dependent on the spacetime continuum. Unconscious material arrives in a dream, is
recorded, and then manifests in the reality of the dreamer.
New groundbreaking quantum theory experiments at Delft
University in the Netherlands are showing that Einstein’s
‘spooky action at a distance’ is indeed a reality and the results may overthrow his ruling theory of relativity. I will briefly
explain quantum physics theories that support the phenomenon of precognitive dreaming. Entanglement theory, string
theory, and informed systems theory reveal supporting evidence of the workings behind premonitory dreams.
Atmanspacher and Filk have evolved a theory of temporally nonlocal correlations involving operators that do not
commute but exist in a “window of nowness.” (Filk & von
Muller, 2009; Poppel ,1997.) The study of nonlocality and
noncausality are introducing concepts into the scientific
world that may prove to the left and logical brain the ex-

Holographic Dreaming and the Transcendent
Function
Deon van Zyl
Dainfern Johannesburg, Gauteng, South Africa
This presentation is a follow-up and expansion of my presentation at the IASD Chicago Conference of 2009 entitled
“Holographic Dreaming”, which was also published in the
winter 2010 edition of Dreamtime Magazine. The notion that
in some dreams every single image, person and activity
contains one central theme, and does so with images that
depict a current dilemma or polarity of opposites from the
dreamer’s life, will be advanced with further clinical examples and practical processing suggestions. The idea that the
dream as a whole is like a holographic plate wherein each
part of the plate contains the picture of the whole, will be
developed to identify the dominant emotion in the dream.
This emotion can be employed by the dreamer as a vehicle
to reveal a vital polarity of opposites that requires awareness
and balanced management from the dreamer. A handout will
be provided that lists some primary dream emotions with
their possible corresponding dilemmas, expressed as polar opposites. However, the processing should always take
place in a non-directive setting with the dreamer as the ultimate authority. Once the opposites have been constellated
through the dominant emotion, they can then be processed
further through Carl Jung’s concept of the “Transcendent
Function.” Through experiencing and embracing the conflict of opposites, the dreamer “dreams the dream forward”
(Singer, Bosnak), but in such a way that a new position or
perspective, a “metaphorical third” (Miller) image emerges,
that acts as a living symbol of reconciled contradictories,
with a new synthesis. The dreamer can take this new image
forward and utilize it appropriately in a variety of situations,
and for personal challenges where equanimity is required.
This process will be illustrated with clinical case examples.
The central thesis of the presentation is that dreams can
act as beacons on the individuation path through providing
moments of wholeness and inner unity from the diversity of
dream images and their built-in opposites.

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

S43

IJoDR

8. Lucid Dreaming
Student Initiative “Sleep and Dream” Osnabrück
Kristoffer Appel
Osnabrück, Germany
In 2012, students from Osnabrück University (Germany) established a so called student initiative. This group of approximately 25 Bachelor, Master and PhD students is interested
in everything related to the topics of sleep and dreaming.
In my talk I will describe and illustrate our student initiative
and the various things we do, such as our regular meetings, our excursions to professional sleep laboratories, our
movie nights, our reading club, and our own professionally
equipped sleep laboratory.
Moreover, I will talk about our first own scientific experiment in our sleep laboratory, which investigates how to
induce lucid dreams in a sleep laboratory setting, and will
discuss its (preliminary) results.

Luminescent Colours in Lucid Dreams and Visions
Nigel Hamilton
London, United Kingdom
This presentation will focus on the significance of the increasing appearance of luminescent colours, and in particular, luminescent green, in our dreams, lucid dreams and visions. One consequence of this phenomenon is that dreams
soon become lucid, and then the lucid dreams become
waking visions, showing the gradual emergence of a ‘resurrected’ inner world, alive with living beings, luminescent
landscapes, sacred places and luminescent buildings in the
landscapes. Voice messages and ‘text’ messages also initiate the beginnings of a new inner dialogue with the source
of the dream, our spirit. References will be made to the classical Sufi texts that describe this inner world of ‘Hurgalya.’
Such experiences change our view of dreaming reality and
of how physical and psychic healing takes place outside of
the medical model. Applications to therapeutic Dreamwork
will be discussed.

prove our relationships, overcome fear and anxiety, and heal
ourselves.
Dr Keith Hearne, founder of the European College of Hypnotherapy, and the scientist who proved the existence of
lucid dreaming in 1975, will share his practical experience
and tips for guiding mental imagery to healing conclusions.
He will introduce straightforward imagery techniques for attendees to try out. These will include: a symbolic-imagery
way to encourage confidence, wellness, and happiness; a
stepwise method for altering a negative image/thought to a
positive one; a pain-jumping method to change the location
of pain even ‘outside’ the body; statue anaesthesia; and a
way of experiencing imaginal events for non-visualizers.
Dr Clare Johnson, creator of the therapeutic Lucid Writing technique and author of two lucid dream-inspired novels
(Jay 2009, 2010), will share practical dreamplay techniques
such as rewriting the dream, interviewing dream figures,
and the Gestalt method of speaking from the perspective
of different dream figures (Perls, 1951). She will also help
participants to identify the healing energy, image or symbol in their dreams and nightmares, and show how this can
be integrated into visualisations and meditations to enable
progression towards greater health and wholeness (Lyons,
2012) and change entrenched behavioural patterns.
The main focus will be on practical dreamwork techniques
that participants can try out for themselves in the session.
However, Johnson will also cover examples of PTSD nightmares and Imagery Rehearsal Therapy (Krakow, 2001), how
dreams and visualisations can help in the healing of physical illness (Barasch, 2000), and the healing potential of lucid states such as bodiless lucid dreams (Johnson 2013,
2016). Hearne will briefly describe his informational method
for dealing with nightmares by changing the person’s attitude so that they actually welcome its approach, because
it provides a special instant portal into the universe of lucid
dreaming. There will be no “dream interpretation.” Dreams
are worked with respectfully and the ultimate authority on
any dreams shared in the session is the dreamer. This is a
highly practical workshop, with both presenters briefly sharing personal examples of dream healing at each stage of the
workshop before guiding participants into their own healing
dreamplay.

Signals from Inner Space: Lucid Dream Science
Keith Hearne
London, Surrey, England

Healing Dreams and Lucid Dreamplay
Keith Hearne and Clare Johnson
London, Surrey, England
In dreams, we come face to face with our deepest unconscious images. By connecting with dreams and working
with the vivid mental imagery they create, we can guide our
waking life towards greater health and happiness. Dreaming consolidates memory, establishes neural pathways,
and regenerates mind and body. A large body of anecdotal
evidence shows that dreams can also forewarn physical illness, integrate trauma, and solve emotional problems (Ullman & Zimmerman1979). Through practical dreamplay and
lucid dreaming – where we know that we are dreaming while
we are dreaming – this workshop explores how we can im-

S44

This presentation will describe Hearne’s contribution to lucidity research, which includes his 1975 devising of the ocular signalling technique during his PhD research at Hull and
Liverpool Universities, England, and the many discoveries
that he made as a result of that breakthrough.
The problem he faced was to find a way for the lucid
dreamer, in that paradoxical state of consciousness with
critical faculties within the dream, to communicate in some
manner to the outside world. However, if those unusual
dreams were a feature of REM (dreaming) sleep, then the
known accompanying physiological effect of profound bodily paralysis would apply and block the subject’s attempts to
communicate by physical actions.
Hearne will describe how at Hull University, after several
failed attempts to establish a signalling technique, he made

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

IJoDR
the fortunate discovery that it was in fact possible by making ocular (eye) movements. The signals acted as reliable
event markers in the dream. It was then possible to identify reported experiences in the chart-record. The signalling procedure could clearly mark the Stage of sleep, and
specific information could be conveyed directly by a simple
pre-arranged code. Some of Hearne’s main findings were:
The lucid dreams were genuine dreams occurring in Stage
REM sleep; they happened in real-time; they had a duration
of several minutes and usually happened towards the end
of the sleep period—on average some 24 minutes after the
start of a REM period; a pre-lucid REM burst, averaging 22
seconds, invariably preceded lucidity—indicating, perhaps,
prior cortical stimulation; the quality of sleep on lucid dream
nights was no different from control nights; the emotional
level in the dream might be predetermined; the reported
events corresponded closely with information signalled
from within the dream.
Further items of research conducted at that time included
a simulating control study—in which subjects attempted
(unsuccessfully) to produce similar eye signals by cheating;
questionnaire data; personality and intellectual capacity in
relation to lucid dreaming. The inefficiency of the first research led Hearne to consider whether it might be feasible
to artificially induce lucidity by introducing an anomaly into
the dream. After much trial and error work, he found that
small electrical pulses to the wrist could, during dreaming
sleep (which was detected by its increased breathing rate),
cause an alerting response in some people, leading to the
awareness of dreaming. This resulted in the world’s first
Dream Machine.
Hearne reveals that at the start of his work, with psychology just escaping from the limiting doctrine of Behaviourism,
the attitude of some academics was negative and unbelieving that such dreams could exist. However, the wide media
publicity, scientific papers and articles brought the reality of
lucid dreaming to general attention and acceptance.

Lucidity Now! Lucid Dreaming and Reality Creation
Clare R. Johnson
Stuttgart , Germany
What can we learn from current lucid dream research? This
presentation explores how new insights into the lucid dream
state can help us to improve skills, gain self-confidence,
liberate ourselves from the past and expand our potential.
When we wake up in dreams, we wake up in life and can
practise the art of reality creation by consciously guiding our
lives in happier directions. Even ten years ago there was still
plenty of resistance towards lucid dreaming, yet in recent
years there has been an explosion of fascinating experiments and studies into the possibilities of lucid dreaming. In
2014, a team led by Ursula Voss in Germany demonstrated
that lucid dreaming can be triggered in the sleep lab when
electrical impulses at around 40Hz are applied to subjects
in REM sleep. Researchers have shown that lucid dreaming
can help with nightmare treatment (Spoormaker & van den
Bout, 2006), improve sports skills (Schädlich) and motor
skills (Erlacher et al, 2015), boost creativity (Johnson, 2005),
and potentially help with PTSD-related nightmares (Mota-

Rolim, 2013). Philosophers are investigating what lucid
dreaming could teach us about the ultimate nature of reality
(Windt, Metzinger, 2007). The presenter will discuss these
new research directions and ask the question: How can
such research findings help us to improve our own dreamlife and waking life? These studies often provide a map that
shows us how to draw on the lucid dream state to enhance
various skills, because they include examples of successful and unsuccessful attempts made by lucid dreamers.
Through varied examples, Johnson will show how current
research can directly impact our own lives as we grasp the
transformative and learning potential of lucid dreaming.
We don’t have to wait passively for the results of the latest lucid dream studies in order to discover the potential
of lucid dreaming. Part of the beauty of this state of consciousness is that we can all be researchers: pioneers of
our own inner journey. After sharing some key techniques
for becoming lucid in a dream, the presenter will describe
her personal research and experimentations within the lucid
dream state in the areas of meditation, bodiless lucid experiences and creative inspiration (Johnson, 2014 and 2016).
Current lucid dream research highlights the deep potential
of lucid dreaming for transforming not only our dream life,
but our waking life. Let’s get lucid now!

Use of Brain-Computer-Interface during a Lucid
Dream: Pilot Study and Future Directions
Remington Mallett
Saint Louis, Missouri, USA
Lucid dreaming provides a unique opportunity for dream
research. With the ability of volitional action, a lucid dreaming study participant can actively perform mental dream
tasks assigned by the researcher. Historically, communication from the lucid dreamer to the researcher during a
lucid dream was introduced via left-right eye movements.
Recent advances in biomedical equipment—particularly
brain-computer-interfaces (BCIs)—have resulted in headsets equipped with brain state ‘mapping’ technologies that
translate mental imagery into computer commands. In light
of neuroscientific evidence suggesting the state of lucid
dreaming involves similar regional brain activity as waking, I
considered the possibility that the same mental commands
could be collected and translated from a lucid dream as
from waking. In this exploratory study with proof-of- concept intent, three participants were asked to use an Emotiv
EPOC+ headset and companion software to map a mental
motor command (pushing a block) with a resulting computer action (graphic of block moving). After waking training,
participants attempted to induce a lucid dream while wearing the headset, and upon lucidity perform the same mental
command (push the block). Two participants subjectively
reported lucid dream task completion, and these reports
were correlated with video footage of resulting computer
commands (graphic of block moving). Aside from offering
further evidence that lucid dreamers are in fact lucid, these
preliminary results suggest that advances in BCI technology
may offer utilization in dream research. For example, the opportunity to extend dream-to-researcher communication is
discussed, and other future possibilities speculated.

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

S45

IJoDR
Lucid Acceptance in Encountering the Unknown
Ave Minajeva
Kehra, Harjumaa, Estonia
In this dreamwork practice, three dreams associated with
the expectation of the dreamer (author) to encounter the unknown in their dream are studied. The criterion of selection
of these dreams for the analysis is primarily the expectation
to encounter the unknown beyond the dream. The dreams
are presented in the order from most fearful to almost fearless, according to a subjective scale of intensity and the
forms or settings reported by the dreamer. Level of lucidity is defined as a state of the dreamer being aware she is
dreaming.
(1)In the first dream I am waking up in a house where I am
feeling the presence of my mother. I leave the house and
step outside into the dimness. I am expecting somebody to
approach me from this dusk which seems to me “as if a figure of a woman.” But I actually do not see any clear dream
figure at all. Instead, with my increasing fear I am hurrying
back into the comfort of the house, locking the door behind
me. I see my hands and the lock and I am able to think that
this lock is merely symbolic and therefore unable to protect
me from any real danger but no full lucidity is achieved before waking up.
2) In another dream I am walking down the main street
of my hometown, thinking about the acceptance of special
features of my physical outlook; I say loudly to the dream
that I love myself just as I am. At the end of the street I am
making an effort to become sub-lucid, telling myself consciously to stay without fear while encountering the light appearing high above in the dusky sky I raise my right hand
towards it. This too strenuous inner struggle wakes me up.
(3) In the third dream I see unusual strange traffic on a
forest road and become fully lucid. I recall my task and have
an idea in mind to encounter what cannot really be put into
words. I call out to be shown what I need to know, feeling
almost no fear at the time. The sky looks broad but neither
light nor black, and from above an immense sense of peace
and serenity is spreading all over me.
The chronological sequence of these recorded dreams is
2-3-1, in the waxing moons of three consecutive months.
From this analysis we learn that no continuous progression
to the fearless state on a monthly basis could be observed.
Instead, the setting and emotions of the dream largely depend on the lucidity, acceptance and expectations of the
dreamer at a particular moment of dreaming. Comparison
reveals that in a state of greatest fear in a non-lucid state the
unknown was sensed as a pre-form of something possibly
to appear, whereas gaining the fully lucid state first enabled
peaceful acceptance and was actually followed by a feeling
of peace. In the sub-lucid state acceptance of the unknown
can be associated with strong inner struggles.

Open Forum for Lucid Dreamers
Robert Waggoner and Line Salvesen
Ames, IA, USA
Since lucid dreaming can seem a very private and solitary
experience, this lucid dreaming forum provides an opportu-

S46

nity to meet other lucid dreamers from many nations and exchange ideas, experiences, and lucid dreaming techniques.
Experienced lucid dreamers, Line Salvesen and Robert
Waggoner, will co-host this event. Audience members will
have time to discuss their interesting lucid dreams, asks
questions of experienced lucid dreamers and exchange lucid dreaming tips and techniques. Besides the induction of
lucid dreams, we will consider practical aspects of maintaining the lucid dream state and realizing your intent. We
intend to discuss dealing constructively with dream figures,
the variety of dream figures, and how to handle “independent agents” while lucid dreaming. Moving and manipulating the dream objects and landscape will also be covered.
Additionally, we will consider the practical and extraordinary
uses of lucid dreams to seek out creativity, personal healing, subconscious information and spiritual insight. Finally
we will conclude with an open discussion on the future of
lucid dreaming and its implications for psychology and society. Audience members will be given numerous opportunities to share their personal experiences, questions and observations. So if you are an experienced or beginning lucid
dreamer, please come and meet other lucid dreamers at the
conference.

Experiencing Light in Lucid Dreams
Robert Waggoner
Ames, IA, USA
Experienced lucid dreamers worldwide frequently report
fascinating encounters with ‘light.’ In these encounters, the
light might exist as a profound visual expression or symbol
for the lucid dreamer to simply observe. On other occasions,
the light might act as the specific source of communication
with the lucid dreamer, offering profound teachings or advice. Sometimes the light might function to heal the lucid
dreamer’s emotional, spiritual or physical self.
Many such encounters occur unexpectedly, as if beyond
the lucid dreamer’s influence, expectations or mental models. Sometimes the encounter with ‘light’ exists on numerous levels simultaneously (e.g., educational, healing, symbolic), suggesting a multi-layered expression of numinous
awareness. This lucid dream example shows the unexpected nature of ‘light.’
“I found myself sitting at a kitchen table in the South with
a farm wife cooking beans on the stove. As the farm wife
put beans on my plate, I instantly realized the improbability
of this, and became lucidly aware. Sensing someone behind me in Jung’s shadow position, I turned around to see
a young black woman looking at me intently. Lucidly aware,
I picked her up and placed her directly in front of me, then
demanded to know, “Who are you? Who are you?” She
looked me in the eye and replied, “I am a discarded aspect
of yourself.” I felt a bit shocked by this and lucidly wondered how to respond to a discarded aspect of one’s self!
Suddenly it hit me. I must completely accept her with compassion. As I began to open my heart with true acceptance
to this “discarded aspect,” her image began to compress
towards the central point, then suddenly became wisps of
colored light that headed directly for my chest. As the light
entered me, I could feel its powerful energy and woke. In
the morning, I felt different. After a week, I realized that each
day I thought to myself, ‘I should try again to write a book on

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

IJoDR
lucid dreaming,’ but I had discarded that project two years
earlier. Suddenly I understood the lucid dream: I had accepted the discarded aspect or discarded energy from my
earlier book-writing attempt.”
Newly energized, I went forward and wrote my first book,
Lucid Dreaming: Gateway to the Inner Self. A simple example like this suggests the following: 1) Some dream figures
exist as projected mental energy; 2) When accepted by the
lucid dreamer, the dream figure projection collapses back to
a more fundamental state of mental energy often expressed
as light; 3) Once projected mental energy gets accepted,
it returns to its source, that is, the projector (i.e., the lucid
dreamer); 4) The resolution of mental energy to its natural
state allows the lucid dreamer to access it in their waking
life. In this presentation, a number of fascinating lucid dream
encounters with ‘light’ will help illuminate the breadth, depth
and variety of experiences. Moreover, these instances will
serve to point to the fundamental nature of ‘light’ as an energetic expression of conscious awareness.

The Future of Lucid Dreaming?
Robert Waggoner

cessible within a lucid dream to heal the physical body (of
which considerable anecdotal evidence already exists), and
also the possibility of accessing prescriptive or diagnostic
information within the lucid dream state, as suggested by
Ed Kellogg, PhD.; 3) Investigating the non-visible awareness
within the lucid dream state which often responds to a lucid dreamer’s questions and requests, and whether it might
represent an inner ‘second psychic system’ as Carl Jung
posited, and what this might mean for the science of consciousness studies; 4) Investigating the depth and breadth
of information, knowledge and creativity accessible within a
lucid dream, which sometimes seems significantly beyond
the ego conscious level of the waking self; and 5) Using
these insights to develop new models of the subconscious
and its functions.
Lucid dreaming seems a special opportunity to scientifically investigate many unique foundational questions
surrounding consciousness. Like van Leeuwenhoek’s perfecting of the microscope to see the microscopic world
more clearly, the revolutionary psychological tool of lucid
dreaming may serve to open new fields of study – not only
in dreaming, but also the inner world of the unconscious.
Lucid dreaming may ultimately prove to be one of psychology’s most profound discoveries.

Ames, IA, USA
Forty years ago, the first ‘eye signal verification’ of lucid
awareness occurred in a University of Hull sleep lab. Since
that initial evidence, lucid dreaming has received considerable attention of varying depth, insight and validity. In this
speculative presentation, the presenter will suggest what the
future might hold for lucid dreaming induction techniques,
scientific research, and inner explorations.
The science and practice of lucid dream induction techniques has focused on three primary paths to lucid dream
awareness; namely, the use of mental techniques, biochemical supplements and/or electromagnetic devices. While a
number of mental lucid dream induction techniques exist,
the scientific data on their relative efficacy has been modest. Similarly, popular forums for lucid dreaming discuss a
variety of herbal and biochemical supplements, although
only one supplement (galantamine) has received formal
studies for enhancing lucid dream activation. Not surprisingly, only a few electromagnetic devices have been widely
considered, and most prompt lucidity through light or verbal
cues.
Popular interest in lucid dream induction appears quite
strong, as evidenced by a Kickstarter campaign for the REMee (a light flashing sleep headset), which initially sought
$35,000 in pledges. In less than a year, the organizers received more than $500,000 in advance orders for the device. Although some felt the device did little to increase their
likelihood of lucid dreaming, the onrush of interest shows
the deep interest in lucid dream induction, which augurs
well for the creation of new devices or supplements that
result in more lucid dreams.
The future of scientific research into lucid dreaming has
many avenues to explore, such as the following: 1) Broadening the investigation of lucid dreaming’s therapeutic use
beyond nightmares to new areas where anecdotal evidence
already exists, like the resolution of phobias, reduction of
anxiety, elimination of non-constructive habits and possible
mitigation of obsessive compulsive disorders; 2) Establishing medical research on the mind-body interaction ac-

Luminosity within Black Light in Dreams
Melinda Ziemer
London, UK
“Darkness within Darkness, the gateway to all
understanding”—these enigmatic words of Carl Jung suggest the mysterious nature of the luminosity within the Black
Light of dreams. His words also bring to mind the negative cultural and spiritual associations with “blackness” that
block us from seeing the “light” within the darkness. This
presentation explores and revisions the revelatory development and character of the “colour” black in a series of
dreams.
The presenter will track the development of not only seeing but also relating to luminous darkness in a short series
of dreams spread over a twenty year period. The selected dreams demonstrate how the relationship between the
dreamer and the emergent luminosity affects the dreamer’s
inner world and waking life.
In this sequence of dreams, the form and qualities revealed by the Black Light develop in tandem with the
dreamer’s capacity to relate to the blackness with a more
integrated sense of self. The revelatory nature of the luminous blackness can then be more deeply apprehended by
the dreamer. The presentation will provide the framework
of the dreamer’s life context to highlight the impact of the
dream on the dreamer’s waking physical reality. Throughout
the presentation, references to alchemical, yogic, Christian,
Sufi, and Jewish Wisdom Traditions will be used to complement and amplify the psychological models applied. In general, this presentation is for anyone who is interested in the
connection between the colour black, the dreamer’s inner
development, and manifestation in waking life.

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

S47

IJoDR

9. Research/Theory

[3] Barcaro, U., Paoli, M. (2015). Dreaming and Neuroaesthetics.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 9: article 348. doi: 10.3389/
fnhum.2015.00348

A Protocol for the Recognition and Analysis of Link
Patterns among Episodic Dream Sources
Umberto Barcaro and co-authors Anna Delogu, Marco Righi,
Alessandra Virgillito, and Maria Chiara Carboncini
Pisa, Italy
Introductory statement: A method is described that allows
the dreamer to provide associations, and consequently to
recognize episodic dream sources and links among them,
according to a well-defined protocol. Detailed examples of
the application of the proposed method are given; specific
phenomena evidenced by the recognized link patterns are
described and analyzed.
Expanded description of the presentation: The sources of
dreams are generally related to episodes, both recent and
remote, of the dreamer’s life, or to present concerns. These
sources are connected by a complex pattern of links: indeed,
a basic property of dreams is that of establishing connections (see, e.g., Hartmann, 2010). Given a dream, the study
of the links among its sources can lead to a plausible explanation for their existence; in turn, this explanation can lead
to interesting hypotheses about the possible significance
of the dream. Barcaro et al. (2005) proposed a method for
the recognition of links among sources by means of textual
analysis of the dreamer’s associations with the dream, and
for the graphical representation of the recognized links. The
following phenomena can often be evidenced by applying
this kind of analysis: existence of conceptual relationships
between pairs of links; context changes that imply a reduction, or even a reverse to a positive value, of negative issues
in the dreamer’s life; actual realization of context changes in
the dream experience; existence of a second present concern in addition the one first provided by the dreamer. A major role is played by links (called “pervasive”) that connect
more than two sources and for this reason play a basic role
in the dream experience. Our research aimed to propose a
simple and well-defined protocol for obtaining associations
and for recognizing dream sources and links among them.
According to this protocol, the dreamer was asked: (a) to
write the report of a recent dream; (b) to select four or five
significant words from the report; (c) to concisely associate
episodes of his or her life with each of the selected words;
(d) to concisely advance hypotheses about possible connections between the indicated episodes. By analyzing the
written text provided by the dreamer, the above indicated
phenomena could be recognized.
Detailed examples of the application of the proposed
method will be given in the presentation, which will focus
on the recognition of pervasive links and on the analysis of
phenomena evidenced by link patterns. Examples will also
be given of recognition of latent similar phenomena in artistic masterpieces (Barcaro and Paoli, 2105).

Deirdre Barrett and co-authors James Lennon and Kirsten
Ziman
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA
Sleep-talking in childhood is a frequent behavior for 14%
of the population, and it is reported at least occasionally
for 22-60%. In adults, frequent talkers constitute 1-5% and
occasional ones 20-45%. Sleep-walking is described as
“often” for 2.4% of children and “sometimes” for 6.3%. By
adulthood, this drops to “sometimes” for 3.5%, and weekly
for only 0.4%. Approximately 20% of “somniloquies” occur
during REM sleep while 80% are associated with non-REM
– the latter breaking down to 45% for stage 2 and 15% for
slower wave sleep. Therefore sleep-talking approximately
matches the percentage of time spent in each sleep stage.
Many sleep-talkers speak exclusively from REM or from
non-REM, but a few speak from both. Utterances average
much longer from REM. Speech during sleep is most often
accompanied by alpha activity superimposed on a profile
otherwise typical for the stage of sleep that immediately
preceded the utterance.
There has not been much research on the content of sleeptalking. In a previous study by our group, we compared the
somniloquies of Dion McGregor, the most extensive sleep
talker ever recorded, with dream content from normative
male dreams on the Hall and van de Castle Content Scales
(HVC) and Hobson Bizarreness Scales. The somniloquies
contained more familiar characters and friends, but fewer
family members. There was less aggression, friendliness, or
sex in McGregor’s narratives, but much more self-negativity. There were a lower percentage of negative emotions,
good fortune, and success. The somniloquies were similar
to dreams on most of the bizarreness scales, but contained
slightly fewer incongruities of plot, and many fewer instances of incongruity or uncertainly of thought. These findings
were ambiguous as to whether detected differences were
due to dreams vs. somniloquies or to Mr. McGregor’s personal idiosyncrasies vs normative males of his time. In the
present study, we will compare sleep talk recordings with
dreams and also with several categories of waking texts.
Somniloquies will come from mp3 files posted to SleepTalkRecorder.com. They will be transcribed and then analyzed with Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count to compare
with previous data from HVC normative dreams, serious and
casual writing, and waking speech for differences in content
similar to HVC scales – cognition, sensation, and concerns
about work, achievement, home, religion, death, and also
differences in frequency of parts of speech.
References:

References:
[1] Hartmann, E. (2010). The Nature and Functions of Dreaming. New
York: Oxford University Press.
[2] Barcaro, U., Cavallero, C., and Navona, C. (2005). A method for
recognizing and describing the links among dream sources. Dreaming,
15, 271-187. doi: 10.1037/1053-0797.15.4.271

S48

Content of Sleep-talking Transcripts versus Dream
Accounts and Waking Language

Arkin, A.M. (1982) Sleep Talking: Psychology and Psychophysiology. NY:
Psychology Press.
Arkin ibid. Rechshaffen, A. Goodenough,D. and Shapiro, A. (1962) Patterns of sleep talking, Archives of General Psychiatry, 7, 418-426
Barrett, D., Grayson, M., Oh, A. & Sogolow, Z. (2014/2015) “A Content Analysis of Dion McGregor’s Sleep Talking Episodes.” Imagination,
Cognition, and Personality, in press for Vol. 33.

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

IJoDR
Pennebaker, R., Boyd, R., Jordan, K. & Blackburn, K. (2015) The Development of Psychometric Properties of the LIWC2015, https://repositories.lib.utexas.edu/handle/2152/31333, retrieved Nov. 20, 2015.

Rift Effects on Dreams: Replication and Extension
Akshya Boopalan and Elisa White
Edmonton, Canada

tAC Stimulation: A Method for Inducing Lucid
Dreams
Cloé Blanchette-Carrière and co-authors Michelle Carr, Tyna
Paquette, and Tore Nielsen
Mirabel, Quebec, Canada
Research has demonstrated both that lucid dreaming is a
successful nightmare treatment (Zadra & Pihl, 1997) and
that frontal transcranial alternating current (tAC) stimulation in REM sleep can trigger an increase in lucid dreamlike self-awareness (Voss et al., 2014). The objective of the
present study is to further validate tAC stimulation for inducing signal-verified lucid dreams with both experienced lucid dreamers and lucid dream naïve subjects. Many mental
disorders are accompanied by recurrent nightmares, e.g.,
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder and Nightmare Disorder.
According to our neurocognitive model of nightmare production, nightmares are provoked by a REM sleep-related
neurocognitive dysfunction implicating prefrontal and frontolimbic structures and inhibiting the associative integration
of fearful memories (Nielsen & Levin, 2007). Treatment studies have demonstrated that successful nightmare treatment
is accompanied by increased feelings of control over dream
content and that lucid dreaming—which often includes an
element of dream control—may be applied successfully to
treat nightmares (Spoormaker & van den Bout, 2006; Spoormaker et al., 2003; Zadra & Pihl, 1997). Voss and colleagues
(2014) demonstrated that fronto-temporal tAC stimulation
in REM sleep triggers an increase in lucid dream-like selfawareness among lucid dream naïve subjects, suggesting
that tAC stimulation could be an especially beneficial technique for treating people with recurrent nightmares. Therefore, our objective is to conceptually replicate the Voss et
al. findings in validating tAC stimulation for inducing signalverified lucid dreams with both experienced lucid dreamers
and lucid dream naïve subjects.
First we will briefly review the literature on nightmare
treatment with a focus on lucid dreaming therapy. Then,
we will present the Voss et al. (2014) study and describe
the methodology of our replication study. Our study implicates 40 healthy participants in 2 groups: 20 lucid dreamers
(LD) and 20 control (CTL) subjects who have not had lucid
dreams. Subjects sleep twice in the laboratory: one morning
nap with tAC current (stimulation) and one without (sham).
Subjects are instructed to signal occurrences of dream lucidity with pre-arranged eye movement sequences (e.g.,
LRLRLR). During the stimulation nap after 2 min of uninterrupted REM sleep, we apply frontal 40Hz tAC stimulation for
2.5 min. Subjects are awakened at the end of stimulation for
a dream report and to respond to questions about dream
lucidity. Third, our results will be presented.
Preliminary findings with 8 subjects suggest that the
stimulation nap is associated with more lucid dream recall
among the LD subjects (r=0.50, p=0.10, one-tailed). Finally,
we will discuss implications of the study. If tAC stimulation
proves effective in inducing lucid dreaming, we will proceed to development of a new method for treating recurrent
nightmares.

Avid gamers are known to have a greater sense of control
in their dreams and sometimes to report more lucid dreams.
Virtual Reality (VR) adds more dimensions of immersion and
presence, and as VR technology is gaining in popularity the
effects of the more immersive environment may have an
even greater effect on gamers awake and asleep. VR tech is
still in its early stages and research in how it affects our consciousness is minimal. We have been investigating gaming
and the recent VR gaming interfaces effects on presence
and dreams. In this our third study with VR headgear, our
hypothesis is that participants who play in the immersive
Oculus Rift VR will experience greater control and lucidity
in their dreams both after the laboratory session and in estimates of the lucidity of a dream while in the laboratory after
using the VR headgear. We used only female participants,
who either played with the oculus rift, or the same games
on a computer as control, and we asked for a recent dream
report either before or after game play, as well as the participant’s first dream after the lab session.
This methodology is different from our previous study in
that we controlled for time of dream collection in the laboratory reports. Our previous study showed some discrepancy
in self-reported degree of lucidity when comparing dreams
collected after the rift VR experience versus after the computer game play only experience. More lucidity was reported after a rift session than after a computer only session.
Having randomly assigned participants report their most
recent dreams either pre or post game should determine if
the previous results were spurious or due to exposure to the
VR environment.

A New Tool for Analysis of Dreams of People with
Borderline Personality Disorder
Cristina Bottoni and co-authors Alessia Carleschi, Marco
Zanasi, and Giuseppe Lago
Rome, Italy
This work presents “dream analysis” as narration in relation to characteristics of borderline personality disorder
(BPD), and in an extensive way of personality disorders
(PD), based on research findings, theoretical considerations
and on the Integrated Psychodynamic Psychotherapy-IPP
model (Lago, 2016 in press ). Even considering the disorder
as “disturbed boundaries of self and others”, in borderline
personality structure we often observe a pathology of “distance” in the meaning of “spatial and psychic difficulty in
reality processes always well represented in dreams of this
person.” The hypothesis is that persons with BPD can have
more disturbed dreams compared to healthy persons. In
BPD symptoms like dissociation, fantasy proneness, cognitive failures and sleep disturbances are correlated (van Heugten, van der Kloet et al., 2014a). Also, subjects with BPD
are more likely to experience dream-reality confusion (DRC)
compared to people in the non-clinical population; both dissociative symptoms and fantasy proneness are related to
DRC (Giesbrecht and Merckelbach, 2006). Dreams are more

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

S49

IJoDR
likely to be confused with reality, tend to be more realistic
and unpleasant, and are reflected in waking behavior (Rassin et al., 2001). Generally, individuals suffering from BPD
experience negative dreams, including nightmares, more
often than individuals who do not have any of the characteristic symptoms of this personality disorder (Schredl et al.,
2012). The dream’s content is usually negative, with high
levels of emotions and protomental (Lago, 2006).This problem sometimes assumes relevance even in psychotherapy
that thanks to dream’s analysis can direct to a transformation of experiential events gradually consolidated into
new functions and structures, leading persons with BPD
structures to a redefinition of temporo-spatial dimension of
dream. Thus, a borderline condition reveals structural weaknesses in empathic relationships, and in organization of the
ego system without cognitive and behavioral patterns sufficiently firm and inclusive. These levels can be highlighted in
dreams brought by patients whose narrative processes are
heavy loss. In order to analyse dreams according to Jungian
vision (which looks at a dream as a text produced by the
dreamer’s unconscious while he/she sleeps; Jung, 1945),
we used processing techniques deriving from textual analysis (Gigliozzi, 1997). We see dream as a text, considering
that it is reported verbally as a particular form of text which
transforms the oneiric experience into an objective product.
The dream while it is being dreamed is experience, not text.
Our memory of that experience, whether we report it or not,
is the text of a dream. Starting with these reflections, we
propose a pilot work to see if the clinical data encountered
support this theory.

Relationships between Adult Attachment Style
Ratings and Dreaming in a Non-Clinical Sample
Cristina Bottoni and co-authors Fulvia Adriano, Alessia Carleschi, Alina Paoletti, and Katia Bartoli
Rome, Italy
For Bowlby, attachment is a need present in all stages of an
individual’s life cycle, and its relationships experienced in
early childhood constitutes the prototype of following significant adult relations (Bowlby, 1969). In the field of studies
concerning adult attachment, increasingly researches propose a new concept of internal working models suggested
from the definition that Main provides about them, pointing
out the importance of interpersonal and intersubjective aspects in terms both of mental representations and procedural schemes (Main, Kaplan, Cassidy, 1985; Bucci, 2011;
Target, 2005). The internal processes and interactive ones
can therefore be considered in their interdependence because they help to build together intra-personal reality and
relationship itself (Beebe, Lachmann, 2002).It is possible to
observe today an increasing interest in a link between attachment styles, mental internal representations and dream
contents (McNamara, Andresen, Clark, Zborowski, Duffy,
2001; Mikulincer, Shaver, Avihou-Kanza, 2011; Selterman,
Apetroaia, Waters, 2012; Camelia Adams, McWilliams,
2015). This study can be part of this research field by analyzing the relationship between attachment styles and some
features of the dream such as the complexity of mental representations of Self and Others, emotional tone and intensity,
and salient aspects of dreams contents. In this presentation

S50

we propose the results of an exploration of dream material
in a sample of 50 healthy subjects, with a secure or insecure
attachment measured by self-report instruments, aged between 20 and 50 years, through the use of the SCORS protocol (Westen, 1990) applied to narrative report of dreams
and other measures of dream content.

Dreaming and the Autonomous Visionary Capacity
Kelly Bulkeley
Portland, OR, USA
This presentation will describe cognitive scientific research
on visual processing in sleep and show how the brain-mind
system has an innate ability to spontaneously generate extremely vivid and highly memorable visual sensations during dreaming. This research sheds new light on the role of
visionary dreams in religious history. Several lines of investigation contribute to the argument. One is the extensive
literature in the content analysis of dreams in which visual
perception is found to be the most frequently mentioned
sense by far. Studies in dream content analysis have made
it clear that visual perception is a common and widespread
feature of ordinary dreaming. Another source is the history and etymology of various languages and the way they
speak of dreaming, often referring to a process of seeing
something in sleep.
Additional evidence comes from studies of the dreams
of people who are blind or sight-impaired. With the help of
G. William Domhoff, I have been studying the dream series
(N=800) of a young sight-impaired woman, with results that
correspond to previous findings and extend them in important ways. Finally, support for the concept of an “autonomous visionary capacity” comes from neuropsychological
studies of the brain’s functions during sleep. Most important
in this regard is the pattern during REM sleep when the primary visual processing parts of the brain (such as V1) diminish in activity, while the parts of the brain responsible for
secondary visual processing (such as the medial temporal
lobe and fusiform gyrus) increase in activity. Taking this body
of research as a whole, it reveals intriguing new aspects of
the prevalence of dream-based visionary experience in the
history of religions. The presentation will discuss recurrent
themes in the content of mystical dream visions, along with
specialized practices and techniques that different cultures
and religious traditions have developed with the intention of
enhancing the visionary power of their dreams.

Implications of Differential Susceptibility for Frequent Nightmare Sufferers
Michelle Carr and co-author Tore Nielsen
Montreal, QC, Canada
Functional theories and empirical research regarding nightmares have largely focused on the nightmare experience
itself and corresponding negative symptomology. Specifically, the presence of maladaptive personality traits and a
history of adverse events suggests that nightmare sufferers may be victims of a diathesis-stress induced form of
psychopathology. However, complementary evidence ex-

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

IJoDR
ists that frequent nightmare sufferers are also often characterized as creative individuals, who may report vivid,
bizarre and even intensely positive dream and daydream
experiences. Though empirical research exploring this
positive symptomology is rare, such a paradoxical portrait
suggests that frequent nightmare sufferers may be better
framed within a differential-susceptibility model, asserting
that these individuals are in fact sensitive and responsive
to both negative and positive life experiences, which may
then be reflected in nightmares, as well as other intensified
and positive imagery experiences. Thus, an initial review will
demonstrate clinical and empirical findings that support a
diathesis-stress model, such as the presence of trait factors (e.g. alexithymia), stressors (e.g. history of trauma), and
negative symptoms (e.g. anxiety, depression) found in frequent nightmare sufferers. Contrasting findings will then be
presented, including recent research on boundary thinness
and mirror behaviors, which suggest that nightmare sufferers may be receptive to and affected by a wide range of
sensory and emotional experiences (not only stressors). Results from a recent study conducted in our laboratory will be
discussed, including our findings of elevated positive and
bizarre dream and daydream content, along with propensities for creative thinking, in a sample of frequent nightmare
sufferers. To summarize, differential-susceptibility proposes
that an increased sensitivity to both negative and positive
experiences underlies the unique symptoms and imaginative richness of nightmare sufferers. Though much research
remains to be done, the possibility that these individuals
may benefit especially from supportive environments, and
may have an adaptive edge with regard to creative expression and empathy, is particularly relevant when considering
prognosis and treatment approaches.

Gender Differences in the Dreams of Canadians:
Norms and Ontogenesis

groups (12-17, 18-24, 25-39, 40-64, 65-85), with the exception of only 31 men of 65 to 85 years, were used. Dream
reports were scored by two independent judges, with high
inter-rater reliability using the Hall and Van de Castle (1966)
method of content analysis. Cohen’s h statistic was used
to determine gender differences in young adulthood and a
two way analysis of variance was used to examine gender
differences from adolescence to old age.
Results: For dream gender differences in young adults,
males had a higher percentage of Male characters (h = +.23,
p<.001), Aggression/Friendliness (h = +.22, p = .004), Befriender (h = +.29, p = .019), and Physical aggression (h =
+.35, p <.001). Females had a higher percentage of Family
characters (h = -.12, p = .009), Indoor settings (h = -.15, p
= .040), Negative emotions (h = -.25, p = .002), and dreams
with at least one Friendliness (h = -.28, p =.001).Two way
analyses of variance with gender and age as factors were
used for examining the ontogenesis of gender differences.
For female characters, there was a significant main effect
for gender, females having more female characters. For total aggression, there was a significant main effect for both
gender and age groups. Overall, males had more total aggression and adolescents had more total aggression than
all other age groups. For total emotions, there was a main
effect for both gender and age group. Females had more
emotions and adolescents had more emotions than both
young adults (18-24) and older adults (40-64).
Conclusion: Previously observed gender differences, notably for aggression and emotions seem to be robust and
apply to Canadians. The very significant predominance of
aggression and emotions in adolescence compared to older
age groups is most interesting and requires more attention.
More refined analyses may reveal distinctive characteristics
in Canadian dreams.

The Cognitive Neuroscience of Lucid Dreaming

Allyson Dale and Joseph De Koninck and co-authors Monique Lortie-Lussier, Christina Wong, Raphaelle Robidoux,
and Alexandre Lafrenière

Martin Dresler

Ottawa, Ontario, Canada

In contrast to the metacognitive impairments of normal
dream mentation, lucid dreaming is characterized by full
awareness of the current state of mind, often leading to considerable volitional control over the dream narrative. Lucid
dreaming as a research topic has faced much skepticism
during most of the last century, but is experiencing increasing momentum in recent years.
Neuroimaging studies demonstrate that lucid dreaming
is associated with specific changes in neural activity when
compared to non-lucid dreaming. In particular lateral prefrontal, frontopolar and medial parietal activations are well in
line with the increased metacognitive capacity that defines
lucid dreaming. 40 Hz EEG gamma power over dorsolateral
prefrontal areas is increased during lucid dreaming, and 40
Hz transcranial alternating current stimulation of this region
increases lucid insight into the dream state. Anatomically,
frequent experience of lucid dreaming is associated with increased grey matter in frontopolar regions, which have been
related to metacognitive abilities also during wakefulness.
Lucid dreaming has a number of clinical and non-clinical
applications, among them therapy of recurrent nightmares.
Based on the view that dreaming can serve as a model for
psychosis, lucid dreaming might open up new avenues

Introduction: The present study was a first to establish normative data for Canadian dreams for the major Hall and Van
de Castle (1966) categories for a large sample. Gender dimensions in the young adult population have been investigated and compared internationally including Europe, the
United States, India, and Japan. These studies have noted
a predominance of aggression and a higher ratio of male
characters in male dreams. The purpose of this study was to
examine whether previously described gender differences
in American and other cultures apply to Canadians. Additionally, the ontogenetic pattern of gender differences from
adolescence to old age was investigated to determine the
evolution of gender differences across the lifespan.
Method: A thorough and detailed dream diary methodology was used and participants recorded the day’s events
and dreams for ten days or until two dreams were reported. For the first analysis, two dreams from 150 males and
150 females for a total of 600 dreams from young adults
ranging from 18 to 24 were used. For the second analysis,
one dream from 50 men and 50 women in each of five age

Nijmegen, The Netherlands

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

S51

IJoDR
in the therapy of metacognitive deficits in psychosis. Lucid dreaming is a rare skill, however it can be learned and
trained by a variety of induction strategies from autosuggestions to transcranial current stimulation. Also, sleep fragmentation appears to increase the probability of experiencing lucid dreams, as studies of patients with narcolepsy and
subjects under systematic sleep fragmentation protocols
demonstrate. However, more reliable induction methods are
needed to further explore the potential of lucid dreaming
and its scientific study.

into your dream of your unfinished conversation with your
informant and dialogue imaginatively with them and report
back to you.
I set up the exercise facilitating pair formation, answer
questions, and then gently drum the exercise for 10-15 minutes; participants will be offered the opportunity to make a
colour sketch of their imaginative dream experience before
talking about it with their partner/group. Dream interpretation responsibility, if exercised, is invested in the dreamer
aided by some facilitated partner/group suggestion. Approximate didactic portion of workshop is one quarter.

Dream Literacy Workshop for Social Scientists
Realisations during dream or daydream group
sessions following Ullman’s dream appreciation
procedure

Iain R. Edgar
Durham, UK
The genesis of this experiential workshop on dream literacy
for social science was the widespread encounter over the
last century of ethnographers finding that their fieldwork
contexts and informants often had radically different conceptions of the nature of reality and the dream. Indeed some
anthropologists, such as Guedon (1994:23), have found that
dream awareness and sharing was essential to an in-depth
study of the culture they studied. Dream literacy though has
been identified by Tedlock (1991) as a core skill in the study
of cultures with such significantly different notions of reality and dream compared to the west. However, there are
few, if any, dream theory sensitivity, practice and interpretive
training programs available in the world for social science
researchers. This workshop offers researchers the collaborative opportunity to experientially sensitise themselves to
indigenous dreamworlds, a variety of core dream interpretative traditions, and the role of their own dreams in fieldwork
and the reflexive dimension of their studies.
Workshop process: Following an introduction scanning
the domains and history of the reported significance of
night dreams in anthropological research, and reference to
the relationship between the experience of myth and dream,
a choice of exercises will be offered, with a light rhythmical
drumming accompaniment:
a) Experiential dream re-entry and amplification of either,
the researcher’s remembered, or the researched person’s
(respondent) reported, night dreams. Dream re-entry refers
to simply remembering the dream. Dream amplification refers to seeing if you can ‘take it forward’ in your imagination
with a prepared question. So, for example, if when you were
in your ethnographic ‘field’ you dreamt one night of talking
with an important informant but you were disturbed by bad
weather, you would in this workshop take 5-10 minutes remembering the dream, the dream setting and context, and
the question you have about the dream now. To take it ‘forward’ (amplification) might be ‘how would the conversation
have developed if the weather had stayed good’? You then
imaginatively journey via your memory of the dream asking
your question.
b) Experiential dream re-entry and amplification of a
workshop partner’s dream with the partner’s question(s)
concerning their original dream. Same processes as for a)
but in this exercise you share your remembered night dream
with your partner first and they do likewise; then together
you develop a question that your partner will take into their
imaginative recreation of your dream. They journey into your
dream! So, for example as in a) but your partner will go back

S52

Edwards, C., Blagrove, M., van Rijn, E., Reid, A., Malinowski, J.,Eichenlaub, J-B., McGee, S., Kennedy, A., Evans, K.,
Ruby, P., Bennett, P.
Swansea, West Glamorgan, Wales
Edwards et al. (2013; 2015) have previously shown that a
majority of participants experience insight as a result of discussing recent dreams following the Dream Appreciation
procedure of Ullman (1996). These findings were based on
participant’s responses to the “Exploration-Insight” subscale of the Gains from Dream Interpretation (Heaton et al.
1998) questionnaire. The present paper reports more qualitative findings from a further study in which 31 participants
were asked to write about any realisations they experienced
in REM dream, N2 dream or daydream discussions following the same procedure. 16 males and 15 females, who
described at least two dreams or a dream and a daydream
during an overnight stay in a sleep lab, took part in a small
group discussion about their dreams or daydreams using
Ullman’s (1996) procedure. Each group comprised one participant and two researchers and lasted around 40 minutes.
At the conclusion of each discussion, participants were
given the opportunity to write about any realisations they
had experienced about their self, other people, or their lives
during the preceding session.
Most participants indicated that they had experienced a
realisation during at least one of the discussion sessions in
which they took part. 17 participants described realisations
after discussing one of their N2 dreams, 23 participants
described realisations after discussing one of their REM
dreams and 18 participants described realisations after discussing their daydream. The results of a content analysis
of participant responses, conducted by four judges, will be
described. Most realisations were about the self, personal
change or goal setting, novel evaluations and connections
between dream or daydream and waking life. The implications of these findings will be discussed. This presentation
will be suitable for all.
References
Edwards, C., Ruby, P. , Malinowski, J., Bennett, P., and Blagrove, M.
(2013). Dreaming and insight. Front. Psychol. 4, 979. doi:10.3389/
fpsyg.2013.00979
Edwards CL, Malinowski J, Ruby PM, Bennett P, Mcgee SL and Blagrove
M(2015). Comparing personal insight gains due to consideration of a
recent dream and consideration of a recent event using the Ullman and
Schredl dream group methods. Front. Psychol. 6:831. doi:10.3389/
fpsyg.2015.00831

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

IJoDR
Heaton, K. J., Hill, C. E., Petersen, A., Rochlen, A. B., and Zack, J.
S. (1998b). A comparison of therapist-facilitated and self-guided
dream interpretation sessions. J. Couns. Psychol. 45, 115–122. doi:
10.1037/0022-0167.45.1.115
Ullman, M. (1996). Appreciating Dreams: A Group Approach. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.

Thematic analysis and case analysis of dream and
daydream discussion sessions
Edwards, C., Blagrove, M., Reid, A., van Rijn, E., Malinowski, J.,Eichenlaub, J-B., McGee, S., Kennedy, A., Evans, K.,
Ruby, P., Bennett, P.
Swansea, West Glamorgan, Wales
Edwards et al. (2013, 2015) found that most participants
declared that they had experienced insight in dream discussions following Ullman’s (2006) procedure. Pennebaker,
Colder & Sharpe (1990) found that expression of thoughts
and feelings about a particular experience produced insight
for most participants. In the present paper, we wish to address the issue of whether insight in the dream or event discussions sessions described by Edwards et al. (2015) was
due to expression about experience or occurred directly
because of Ullman’s procedure (1996). We will describe
thematic and case analyses which traced the development of participant insights during the discussions within
the study. Nine female and 2 male participants shared one
recent dream experience and a description of one recent
event in a small group setting. Each dream or event discussion group consisted of two researchers and one participant
and the dream or event discussions and would last around
45 minutes. In the aftermath of the dream or event discussions participants were asked to describe realisations about
themselves. 9 of the 11 participants described realisations
in dream or event discussions. We will report themes, related to insight, which were consistent across the dream
discussions, the event discussions and participant responses to post-study questions about realisations. Examples of
how insights developed within particular discussions will be
provided and explained. Evidence will be presented to support the argument that participants attained insight within
the dream and event discussions because of the Ullman
technique. This presentation is suitable for all.
References
Edwards, C. Ruby, P. Malinowski, J. Bennett, P., and Blagrove, M.
(2013). Dreaming and insight. Front Psychol. 4, 979. doi:10.3389/
fpsyg.2013.00979
Edwards, CL, Malinowski J, Ruby PM, Bennett P, Mcgee SL and Blagrove M(2015). Comparing personal insight gains due to consideration of a recent dream and consideration of a recent event using the
Ullman and Schredl dream group methods. Front. Psychol. 6:831.
doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00831
Pennebaker, J.W., Colder, M., Sharpe, L.K (1990). Accelerating the Coping Process. J. Person. & Soc. Psyc. 58, 3 528-537
doi./10.1037/0022-3514.58.3.528
Ullman, M. (1996). Appreciating Dreams: A Group Approach. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.

Déjà Vu Experiences and Dream Recall Frequency
Arthur T. Funkhouser
Bern, Switzerland
At the end of 2004 a questionnaire was put online in order
to ascertain the similarities and differences of two forms of
déjà vu experience: déjà vécu (already experienced) and
déjà visité (already visited). As of July, 2014, 3042 persons
had submitted filled out questionnaire forms. Subsequent
statistical analysis has now shown that we can be justified
in viewing these as two separate experiential entities. In this
talk, these two types of déjà experience will be explained
and some comparisons of their similarities and differences
will be presented. Also of interest are the relationships that
have appeared within the data. Among the questions, for
example, it was asked if the person had a theory to explain
the source of their experience and dreams was offered as
one possibility (i.e., déjà rêvé [already dreamed]). This explanation was favored by roughly 25% of those who filled out
the questionnaire and – as expected – their answers correlated positively with their reported dream recall frequency. It
is planned to leave time at the end of this talk so that those
who wish to can share “déjà experiences” they have had.

Contemplative Practice versus Gaming
Jayne Gackenbach and co-author Craig Guthrie
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
Based on previous research comparing gamers to those
who engage in a contemplative practice on attention and
dream variables (Gackenbach, Swanston & Stark, 2015),
this recently completed study is a replication and extension.
Three groups were prescreened for acceptable frequencies
of contemplative practice, video game play or neither, as a
control. The focus of the study was to compare the benefits
that both video game play and contemplative practice tend
to share, improved attention and increased dream lucidity.
All participants reported their results from three attention
tasks: change blindness, stroop effect and multiple object
tracking. We found in a preliminary analysis of this new data
that the gamers performed significantly better than the contemplatives or the controls on all three attention tasks. Following the attention tasks, which were conducted in groups
in computer laboratories, several online questionnaires were
administered. These included the Dream Intensity Inventory
and the Spiritual Dreams Scale which focused on dream
experiences, including various measures of dream content
as well as mystical elements in dreams. Based on our previous findings, we expect that the contemplatives will be
higher in dream lucidity and the gamers will be higher in
control of dreams. We also examined mindfulness with two
instruments, one generic and one specific to the group’s
specialized activity, i.e. gaming, contemplative practice, and
studying (non- gaming/non-contemplative practice). Previously Gackenbach and Bown (2011) reported gaming more
associated with a specific to activity mindfulness scale and
thus we expect this to be replicated. In addition, we expect
contemplatives to score higher in generic mindfulness with
the Kentucky Inventory of Mindfulness Skills.

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

S53

IJoDR
[Day] Dreaming Predicts Dart Throwing Performance
Caroline L. Horton
Lincoln, UK
Whilst a growing body of evidence is emerging to support
the role of sleep, and perhaps dreaming, in memory consolidation, a separate body of work emphasises “continuity” between sleep/dreaming and waking processing. The
present study sought to combine these two bodies of work,
by exploring the role of daydreaming in the consolidation of
procedural memory skills.
24 participants were recruited (14 university students; 10
University staff; mean age 27; 16 males and 8 females) to a
study exploring daydreaming and dart throwing. They had
three attempts to throw a dart using their non-dominant
hand at an unconventional target board, before taking away
a daydreaming diary to complete. Participants returned to
repeat the dart throwing task a week later. The day dreaming
diary included the “Daydreaming Frequency” and “Distractibility” scales of the Imaginal Processes Inventory (Singer
& Antrobus, 1972). In addition participants were asked to
carry the diary with them at all times and to record any daydream content either that concerned a success or a failure,
or that related to the task.
Researchers later scored the daydream content along a
host of dimensions exploring relevance, vividness of motor skills, similar motor representation, evidence of creativity and problem solving and perceived success or failure.
Participants recorded an average of 14 daydreams (range
3-31). All participants improved in the dart throwing task
from attempt 1 to attempt 2. Daydreaming frequency, as
measured by the questionnaire measures, did not affect dart
throwing improvement (p>.05). However correlations were
found between task relevance of daydreams, and similar
motor representation, and extent of improvement. Indeed
task relevance accounted for 14%, and motor representation accounted for 40%, of variance in scores. Whilst this
study relied on participants’ availability and conscientiousness in completing their daydreaming diaries, results tentatively suggest that some qualities of daydreaming could
relate to procedural learning by supporting memory consolidation. This will be discussed in relation to the continuity
of consciousness across sleep and wake, and by critiquing
the methods employed in sampling dreams, daydreams and
waking cognition more broadly.

Continuity of the “Self” in Dreams
Caroline L. Horton
Lincoln, UK
Whilst a number of studies have been identifying the specific characteristics of memories that have been incorporated
into dreams (e.g. van Rijn et al., 2015), broader explorations
of dream-wake continuity imply that we dream of emotional,
metaphorical (Malinowski & Horton, 2015) and non-current
aspects of our lives in a dynamic, hyperassociative way
(Horton & Malinowski, 2015). As such, our mental representations of these constructed life-stories can be illustrated by
models of Autobiographical Memory (e.g. Conway, 2011),

S54

which highlight the interplay between changing representations of life experiences as well as a cognitive sense of self.
Previous studies (Horton, Moulin & Conway, 2009) have explored the incorporation of current self-images into dreams
via the generation of “I am…” statements.
The present study sought to extend those findings by
identifying whether past or future statements also featured
in dreams. An online questionnaire method was employed
and the web-link circulated amongst University students
and staff. The questionnaire adopted the Most Recent
Dream method and also asked participants to generate 10
“I am…”, 10 “I was…” and 10 “I would like to be…” statements, as a measure of current, past and future self-images. 113 respondents completed the questionnaire, though
some data had not been provided in full, leaving N=86
with usable dream reports and completed self-statements.
Analyses focused on the extent to which the different selfimages featured in dreams. Additional dream characteristic
information was gathered also, e.g. pertaining to dream recall frequency. Initial analyses indicate that past and future
self-images feature in dreams to a comparable extent to
current self-images (no significant differences in frequencies). Whilst there is some overlap between the nature of
self-images in a student population (e.g. I am hardworking),
participants described themselves in abstract as well as
concrete terms (e.g. I am political as well as I am a woman).
Indeed, participants’ own self-images were incorporated
into their own dreams to a significantly greater extent than
the self-images of controls, reinforcing the finding (Horton,
Moulin & Conway, 2009) that individuals dream of their own
personal life stories, or autobiographies.
The implications of these findings are twofold. Firstly, that
past and future rather than just present self-images feature
within dreams. This will be discussed in relation to the memory-consolidation function of sleep and dreaming. Secondly,
that dream-wake continuity extends beyond mere experiences or memories, and includes cognitive conceptions of
the self. As such the self-memory system of autobiographical memory should be further explored in relation to dreaming.

Dreams are Functional
David Kahn
Cambridge, MA, USA
Dreams have meaning and are functional not only because
the specific content of a dream may prove useful, but rather because the emergent dream is a new creation. Before
emergence, individual memories, images and imagination
would remain unconnected. Before the dream emerged,
before memories coalesced into a dream, meaning resided
only in the individual memories and images. When emergence happens, meaning resides in the newly created story
of the emergent dream.
Emergence serves the function of tying individual memories and imagination into a story and experience. Functionality comes only after the disparate memories and imagination
emerge into a dream. This core functionality is independent
of the specific content of the dream. Even before specific
dream content is studied, the process of emergence makes
a dream functional because emergence implies qualitative
novelty in that the dream’s story transcends its individual

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

IJoDR
memories, images and imagination. A function of a dream
is to introduce novelty. Emergence does that. Emergence
of a dream is also irreducible to its components in that the
emergent dream cannot be reduced or explained solely by
the individual memories and images. Emergence, therefore,
leads to something entirely new transcending individual
memories and images. When a dream emerges the dreamer is provided with modified, new or unusual situations
consisting of people, animals’ feelings and actions that go
beyond the unconnected individual memories. These new,
modified and unusual situations of people and actions in the
form of a narrative can provide new ways to think about and
experience life. New meaning may emerge from the specific
content of these.
The emergent dream also implies mutual causality in that
the dreamer’s memories influence how the dream evolves,
while at the same time the emergent dream has causal impact in that it can change or modify the initial memories.
A function of an emergent product such as a dream is to
modify the individual memories that went into its creation.
Examples of emergence in nature help illustrate how emergence is functional. A termite nest emerges from the collective interaction of individual termites. The emergence of a
termite nest insures the survival of the termite colony; without the nest, the individual termites would die. The emergence of a bridge made by the collective action of ants insures the survival of the ant colony. Before the emergence
of the bridge made up of individual ant bodies, the ants
would have starved to death unable to reach a food source
on the other side of a body of water. The emergence of a
multi cellular organism, the slime mold from the collective
interaction of individual amoebae insures the survival of the
colony by allowing the mobile slime mold to swim to a food
source. The collective interaction of the amoeba results in
the emergence of an organism that can propel itself to find
a food source. There are countless examples that illustrate
how emergence is functional. As a product of emergence,
arising from the collective interaction of individual memories, feelings and images, dreams are, therefore, also functional.

The “Dissociative” Origins of Impactful Dreams in
the Aftermath of Loss and Trauma
Don Kuiken and Ruby Prinsen and co-author Ming-Ni Lee
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
Some dreams penetrate consciousness—often causing an
inexpressible realization that precedes active “interpretation.” However, the forms of distress (e.g., loss, trauma) that
precipitate nightmares, existential dreams, or transcendent
dreams remain obscure. Also obscure is the mode of postdream reflection that absorbs such an unexpected realization—and seems more nearly aesthetic than therapeutic
(Kuiken, Lee, Eng, & Singh, 2006; Kuiken, 2015). The following studies address these issues.
Study 1: In an initial study, 681 participants (275 of whom
had experienced a significant loss due to death, divorce,
etc., in the preceding 5 years) recorded their most significant dream during the last month and completed the Grief
Experience Questionnaire (Jacobs, Kasl, Ostfeld, Berkman,
& Charpentier, 1986), an instrument that assesses aspects

of grief described in attachment theory. Study 2: In a conceptual replication and extension, 158 participants (46 of
whom had experienced a significant loss and 57 of whom
had experienced a significant trauma in the preceding 7
years) monitored their dreams, recorded an impactful dream
online and completed the Loss/Trauma Questionnaire (LTQ;
Eng, Kuiken, Temme, & Sharma, 2005), an instrument that
assesses a broad range of reactions to either loss or trauma. Study 3: In a replication of Study 2, 229 participants
(81 of whom had experienced a significant loss and 60 of
whom had experienced a significant trauma in the preceding 7 years) monitored their dreams, recorded an impactful
dream online, and completed the LTQ.
Direct Effects. Consistently across all three studies, results indicated that loss and trauma directly influenced the
occurrence of existential dreams during the first 3 years after the precipitating event. Less consistently, results suggested that loss and trauma precipitated nightmares 0-6
months after and transcendent dreams 3-7 years after the
precipitating event.
Mediated Effects. Across all three studies, specific forms
of “dissociative” response to either loss or trauma (depressive derealisation, amnesic angst) predicted the occurrence
of existential dreams and, less consistently, nightmares—
but not transcendent dreams.
Aesthetic Dream After-effects. While Study 1 affirmed that
existential dreams are followed by reported self-perceptual
depth and transcendent dreams by reported spiritual transformation (see also Kuiken et al., 2006; Lee & Kuiken, 2015),
Studies 2 and 3 indicated that existential dreams were followed by sublime disquietude (a compound index of selfperceptual depth, inexpressible realizations, and perceived
discord) and that transcendent dreams were followed by
reports of sublime enthrallment (a compound index of selfperceptual depth, inexpressible realizations, and reverence).
As in prior studies, neither of these aftereffects was characteristic of nightmares.
Predicting Aesthetic Dream Aftereffects. Also, in Studies
2 and 3, depressive derealisation (plus convictions about
the finality of death) predicted sublime disquietude, while
amnesic angst (plus convictions about the finality of death)
predicted sublime enthrallment. Both depressive derealisation and amnesic angst include an attentional predisposition
to hyperarousal [startle] and the orienting response, respectively, and a dissociative component (affective numbness,
amnesic gaps, respectively). These compounds motivate
reconsideration of evidence (Carleton, Abrams, Asmundson,
2010) that discussions of “dissociation” must carefully distinguish metaphoric from literalizing imagination—including
metaphoric from literalizing post-dream “presence.”

Typical Dreams in the Life Cycle
Alfio Maggiolini
Milano, Italy
The majority of people experience many typical dreams, relatively steadily across time and cultures. Much research on
typical dreams has been carried out with the Typical Dreams
Questionnaire (Nielsen et al., 2003; Mathes, Schredl, Göritz,
2014), and the Dream Motif Scale (Yu, 2012). I will present
the results of research on dreams and waking narratives in
the life cycle, from childhood to the elderly, with the aim of

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

S55

IJoDR
finding out how frequent typical dreams are in dream texts,
which kind of content is typical of dreams compared to
waking narratives, and if the typical dreams change through
the life cycle. The sample is composed of 1546 subjects,
males and female, from 8 to 70 years. For each subject,
we collected a dream and a waking life episode according
to “the most recent dream” (Hartmann et al., 1991) and “a
recent episode” methodology (Maggiolini et al., 2010). The
analysis with the Typical Dreams Questionnaire shows that
55,8% of the dreams have one or more typical content,
while only 15,9% of waking narratives have one or more
typical content. Attack dreams (“Being physically attacked”,
“Being chased or pursued”, “Wild and violent beasts”, “Killing someone”, “Being killed”, “Insects or spider”) are more
frequent in children. Adults and older adults dream more often of “Trying something again and again” and of “A person
now dead as alive”, while on the contrary “A person now
alive as dead” is more frequent in children and preadolescents. “School, teachers and studying” is more frequent in
adolescents, while “Sexual experiences” is more common
in young adults and “Arriving too late” in older adults. “Falling” is more frequent in children and preadolescents, but
with an increase in older adults, after a decrease in the mid
part of life. “Flying or soaring through the air” and “Being
in the verge of falling” and “Losing control of vehicle” increase with age. Overall, the majority of dreams have one
or more typical content, and typical dreams as listed in the
TDQ are more frequent in dreams than in waking narratives.
Nevertheless, not all the items are equally widespread and
it would be useful to revise the TDQ items or build a list of
categories defined as feelings or actions instead of things,
characters or places. Our results show a certain stability of
the number of typical contents per dreams through the life
cycle, while changes in specific contents indicate that some
themes vary from childhood to the elderly, in continuity with
the characteristics of different periods of the life cycle.

Testing the Emotion Assimilation Theory of Sleep
and Dreaming
Josie E. Malinowski and Caroline L. Horton
London, Greater London, United Kingdom
Several studies have found that the emotional intensity, but
not the emotional valence, nor the stressfulness, of a waking-life experience influences whether or not it is likely to
subsequently appear in a dream. Studies have also shown
that dream content varies depending on what time of night
the dream is experienced. Based on these and other findings, we have proposed an emotional memory assimilation
function of dreaming (Malinowski & Horton, 2015), in which
we suggest that emotional waking-life experiences are preferentially incorporated into dreams, and then during sleep
and dreaming are transformed over the course of a night,
and across multiple nights, in order to assimilate those experiences into the wider memory system. We further suggest that this process can be perceived via measureable
elements of dream content, such as bizarreness, which may
be a marker for hyperassociative thinking during dreaming.
This presentation reports on the results of a Dream Science
Foundation-funded study that tested this theory. We hypothesised that we would replicate findings that waking- life

S56

events that were incorporated into dreams would be more
emotionally intense than those that were not, but that there
would be no effect of valence, nor of stressfulness. Further,
we expected that our novel variables “importance” and “future use” would illustrate a similar effect to emotionality,
such that incorporated events would be rated more important and more likely to be repeated in the future. We also
expected that dream content would vary depending on the
time of night, with more dreams towards the end of the night
being more bizarre and emotional, and those towards the
beginning being more relatable to waking life. Preliminary
analyses indicate that, as expected, there was an effect of
emotional intensity but not valence nor stressfulness, and
time of night differences were in the expected directions.
The full results, with implications for functional theories of
dreaming, will be discussed in the presentation.

Why Do Suppressed Thoughts Reappear in
Dreams?
Josie Malinowski
London, Greater London, United Kingdom
In 2004 Wegner and colleagues discovered the “dream
rebound effect”, the term used to describe the reappearance in dreams of thoughts that have been suppressed or
deliberately ignored in waking life. Subsequently a number
of studies have confirmed and expanded upon this finding,
illustrating, for example, that dream rebound can be seen
in hypnagogic dreams, occurs particularly for people who
generally try to suppress their waking-life thoughts, and is
impacted by cognitive load.
Wegner explained the findings via his ironic process theory, but it may be that they can also be explained by Jung’s
earlier theory of compensation. The presentation will first review experiments that have investigated the dream rebound
effect, illustrating what has been found so far. It will then
present the results from two new studies conducted by the
presenter, investigating which aspects of dreams are related
to trait thought suppression. Next it will discuss two potential explanations for the dream rebound effect, i.e. Wegner’s
ironic process theory and Jung’s theory of compensation.
Finally, the debate will be opened up to audience contribution.

Dreams of Auschwitz Concentration Camp Prisoners
Wojciech Owczarski
Gdansk, Poland
In 1973, psychiatrists of the Krakow Medical Academy sent
out a questionnaire about dreams to former prisoners of an
Auschwitz camp. 147 people replied. Their responses constitute immensely rich and diverse material, which inspires
multiple interpretations. The former Auschwitz inmates describe the dreams they had during the Nazi occupation, in
prisons, in the camp, after liberation, as well as later in life.
They report nightmares and enchanting visions. They write
about their attitude towards dreams. They give accounts of
the daily camp ritual of dream interpretation performed by

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

IJoDR
“professional” diviners. I will try to prove that many dreams
dreamt in the camp had a therapeutic effect. These dreams
had some kind of a positive influence on the dreamer: on his
or her mood, frame of mind, faith in the possibility of survival
and liberation, or even his or her health condition. I intend to
take a closer look at the different varieties of such dreams,
and to describe the mechanisms of their beneficial effect.
Certain nightmares that recurred for many years after liberation also had an adaptive effect: the intensity of negative
emotions decreased, with time the dreaming person coped
better with the threatening situation occurring in the dream,
and his or her mental state in waking life improved visibly. I
aim to establish the frequency of such dreams compared to
other nightmares, describe their effect, and draw the sociopsychological profile of the dreamers. For evidence of the
occurrence of a therapeutic effect of a dream, I take the
subjective impression of the dreamer: his or her conviction
that a given dream brought a particular benefit.
The prisoners’ accounts will be analyzed using the research procedure I developed when investigating the dreams
of Polish nursing home residents. First, the inmates’ dreams
will be analyzed quantitatively. In the quantitative analysis,
I will use the coding system developed by Calvin Hall and
Robert Van de Castle. Quantitative findings concerning the
dream content will be compared with Hall/Van de Castle’s
“norm” and with the results of other research projects where
this method was employed. Only such a broad comparative perspective will allow me to assess the extent to which
the dreams of Auschwitz inmates resemble dreams dreamt
by those who did not experience the Shoah. The prisoners’
accounts will then be analyzed qualitatively. My aim is to
place the descriptions of prisoners’ dreams in the context of
their life and social situation, and their assumptions and beliefs concerning dreams. I want to see whether the positive
effect of certain nightmares consists, as Ernest Hartmann
would have it, in “new material”, or rather in the mechanism
of “threat simulation”, as proposed by Antti Revonsuo.

Nightmares, Sleep Quality and Autonomic Function
Franc Paul and co-authors Michael Schredl and Georg W.
Alpers

sleep quality, and daytime sleepiness. It has not been well
documented whether this is reflected in objectively quantifiable psychophysiological indices of sleep quality and
autonomic function. There are only few polysomnographic
studies which evaluated sleep architecture their results are
conflicting: Some studies found objective differences in
frequent nightmare sufferers, others did not. Therefore, the
present study investigates nightmares in a natural sleep environment and assesses self-report and psychophysiological indicators of sleep disturbances as well as the autonomic
nervous system (ANS). The ambulatory design was adapted
because there are clearly disadvantages when dreams or
nightmares are investigated in laboratory settings: People
tend to dream about the laboratory environment and those
dreams are usually less emotional and shorter than at home.
In related disciplines, it has been well recognized that critical events related to psychopathology – such as panic attacks – require assessments outside of the laboratory, when
and where those events occur.
Methods: Questionnaires regarding subjective sleep quality and ambulatory polysomnographic recordings of objective sleep parameters and ANS indicators were collected
during three consecutive nights from 20 individuals with
frequent nightmares (NM) and 18 healthy control participants (HC). Activation of the ANS was measured by different
parameters such as heart rate (ECG) and heart rate variability, breathing frequency (respiration belt), electrodermal
response (EDR) and saliva cortisol. Most of the analysis on
ANS was done on the last five minutes of REM sleep prior
to awakening from dreams.
Results and Discussion: Eleven NM participants reported
13 nightmares. Moreover, they reported worse sleep quality, more waking problems and more severe insomnia compared to the HC group. However, sleep measures obtained
by ambulatory polysomnographic recordings revealed no
group differences in (a) overall sleep architecture, (b) sleep
cycle duration as well as REM density and REM duration
in each cycle and (c) sleep architecture when only nights
with nightmares were analyzed. Preliminary results regarding ANS suggest an enhanced sympathetic activation when
having nightmares. Further results will be presented and implications for both future research and psychotherapy will be
discussed. It would be interesting to extend these findings
by studies with larger samples in unselected populations.

Mannheim, Germany
Summary: Nightmares result in significant subjective impairment of sleep quality which is independent from sleep architecture measured by ambulatory polysomnographic recording. Further preliminary observations suggest a relationship
between nightmares and the activation of the autonomic
nervous system in sleep. Implications of these findings will
be discussed.
Background: Nightmares and bad dreams are a common
phenomenon that is most frequent in childhood and adolescence. At least 5% of all adults suffer from frequent nightmares. In populations of psychiatric patients, nightmares are
a concomitant feature that produces even more distress. For
example, nightmares are a core symptom in posttraumatic
stress disorder and about 50% of borderline personality disorder patients suffer from frequent nightmares. Independent
of mental disorders, nightmares are often associated with
sleep problems such as prolonged sleep latencies, poorer

Distractibility in High and Low Dream Recallers: An
EEG Study
Perrine Ruby and co-authors Benoit Chatard, Raphael Vallat, and Aurélie Bidet-Caulet
Bron Cedex, France
Evoked potentials associated with automatic attention orientation towards an unexpected sound are larger in high
dream recallers than in low dream recallers (Eichenlaub et
al., 2014), suggesting differences in distractibility between
these two groups. To test this hypothesis, we plan to use a
paradigm designed to investigate distractibility in the auditory modality (Bidet- Caulet et al. Brain Topography 2014),
in an EEG study in low and high dream recallers. Thirty six
participants will be recruited.

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

S57

IJoDR
This protocol enables the assessment of both evoked
potentials to distracting sounds, and the impact of these
sounds on subjects’ reaction times, providing behavioral
and brain measures of distractibility. Thus, this study will
allow us to determine if high dream recallers are more distractible than low dream recallers. This enhanced reactivity
to unexpected sounds could contribute to an increase in
awakenings during sleep, resulting in more opportunities to
memorize dreams.

Episodic Memory: Does Dreaming Help?
Perrine Ruby and co-authors Manon Villalba, Alain Nicolas,
and Jane Plailly
Bron Cedex, France
Numerous results argue in favor of a role of sleep in memory consolidation (e.g., Diekelmann & Born, 2010). These
results question the possible role of dreaming in memory
consolidation (Ruby 2011). Only one study so far has tested
at the experimental level whether dreaming of a new task
improves the memory of the task (Wamsley et al., 2010). To
address this issue we used a paradigm developed to investigate the memory of short multisensory life episodes (Saive
et al., 2013, 2014). Subjects were selected as high dream
recallers (more than 4 mornings in a week with a dream remembered at awakening) and were presented with images
and odors during 7 minutes for 3 consecutive days. (Images
and odors were different for each of the 3 times.) During
the 3 nights following the exploration of a new multisensory episode, subjects were asked to wear a wrist actimeter
(used to assess sleep time), and to wake up at 5am and
8am to record their dreams with a dictaphone if they could
recall one. On the 4th day, the memory for the multisensory
episodes was tested. We plan to include 40 participants.
We will compare the memory performance between the
subjects who have incorporated the multisensory episodes
into their dreams and the subjects who didn’t. According to
Wamsley’s team’s conclusion in their 2010 study, the subjects who incorporated the new experience in their dreams
should show better memory performance.

Nightmares and Well-being
Nils Sandman and co-authors Tiina Paunio, Erkki Kronholm,
and Katja Valli
Turku, Finland
Nightmares are intense dreams with negative emotional
tone. Occasional nightmares are common and harmless,
but frequent nightmares can pose a serious clinical problem. In this talk I will describe a series of studies investigating the prevalence, risk factors and consequences of
frequent nightmares among adults. The studies to be presented are based on data collected in the Finnish national
FINRISK study. FINRISK is a series of comprehensive health
surveys conducted every five years from 1972 to 2012.
Each survey is based on random cross-sectional population samples of Finnish adults aged 25-74, with a total number of 76,071 respondents for the whole series. FINRISK
includes subjective assessment of nightmare frequency as

S58

well as multiple items related to sleep, mental and physical health, medication, life style, life satisfaction and socioeconomic factors. Various statistical methods were used to
investigate the relationship between nightmares and these
items. Four studies about nightmares utilizing FINRISK data
will be discussed. In Study I, we investigated the prevalence
of frequent nightmares among adult population. Study II focused on risk factors for frequent nightmares and found that
insomnia, depression and nightmares often co-occur and
form a triad of problems. The aim of Study III was to investigate the connection between seasonal affective problems
and nightmares, and of Study IV to replicate the link between
nightmares and completed suicide that has been reported
in prior studies. The common denominator in all our studies
is the connection between nightmares and well-being – various problems of well-being are related to increased nightmare frequency. As such, dreaming and well-being have at
least a correctional connection.

Dreaming and its Associations with Cognitive
and Emotional Development among 4-8 Year-old
Children
Piroska Sándor and co-authors Sára Szakadát and Róbert
Bódizs
Budapest, Hungary
Introduction: REM sleep plays an important role in neural
development and together with dreaming is closely connected to daytime cognitive and emotional functioning. The
well cited (laboratory-based) developmental dream studies
consider dreaming a cognitive achievement, not taking into
consideration the recent neurocognitive dream conceptions which emphasize the emotional processing functions
of dreaming. Aim: The aim of this study is to describe the
development of dreaming and to explore connections between cognitive and emotional maturation and dream characteristics of 4 to 8 year old children.
Methods: Dreams of 40 children were collected upon
morning awakenings in their homes during a 6-week period. Dream interviews were tape recorded by pre-trained
parents. Content analysis was performed on the dream
narratives focusing on formal (recall frequency, length) and
content related (characters, activities, interactions, self-efficiency, cognitions, emotions, bizarreness) dream characteristics. Children’s intelligence was measured by subtests
of the Wechsler’s Intelligence Scale for Children. Executive
functioning functions and emotional processing were measured by a modified version of the Fruit Stroop and Emotional Stroop Test for Children and the child version of the
Attention Network Test.
Results: Contrary to previous findings, we found preschoolers to be already accomplished dreamers, exhibiting
kinematic imagery, self-representation, interactions, activities, cognitions, bizarreness and emotions in their dreams.
According to our findings, although age related developmental patterns are also obvious, dreams of 4 to 8 year old
children are in many ways comparable to those of adult
standards. We found that longer and more eventful dreams
(higher number of actions and interactions per dream) as
well as an active role of the dreamer’s self in the dream plot
(self-initiated actions and active self-representation) indicat-

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

IJoDR
ed a better attentional and frontal executive performance. In
association with both emotional and executive functioning,
specific categories of dream contents emerge as prominent
correlates such as self-agency, activities and emotional content. We suggest that these content categories are indices
of good emotional and cognitive functioning, and positive
behavioral adaptation.
Conclusions: Our results underline the importance of
methodology in developmental dream research, and might
set an example for well controlled home-based developmental dream studies in the future. We confirmed the relationship of various dream characteristics with waking
cognitive and emotional functioning, some of which are already established in the adult literature. It is an important
step towards bridging the gap between adult and developmental research and highlights the importance of dreaming in everyday emotional adaptation. The role of dreams in
emotional adaptation draws our attention to working with
dreams in child therapy – which is not a new idea, but similar research may inspire clinical practice.

rely on different elements of motor-action ability. This study
is intended to provide evidence from a four week long study,
and will compare scores on balance, hand eye coordination and reaction times, between lucid dreaming and motor
imagery practise conditions alongside a control comparison
group.
Summary of Presentation: First I shall begin with a brief
consideration of the nature of motor action, outlining a
simple explanation of simulation theory with regards to motor action. I shall then reflect upon earlier pilot studies in
this area, followed by a brief outline and a justification of
the methodology that I developed, supported by slides. I
will then move on to discuss, again with the support slides,
the experimental findings of the study, first addressing the
findings comparing the three groups improvements over
time for each of the three sensory modalities. This will be
followed by a reflection upon the potential implications of
the study’s findings for the current literature, and the longer term implications for the practical application of lucidity
within the realm of motor skill refinement.

A Comparison of Motor Imagery and Lucid Dreaming Practise on Motor-Task Performance Enhancement

Darts in Lucid Dreams: A Sleep Laboratory Study
Melanie Schädlich
Mannheim, Germany

David T. Saunders
Northampton, Northamptonshire, England
Introductory Statement: This upcoming study aims to build
on preliminary work in the area of lucid dreams (dreams
within which the dreamer is aware they are dreaming) and
their potential practical application, specifically within the
realm of motor skill acquisition and refinement. a) The idea
of lucid dreamed actions contributing towards performance
enhancement has been reported in anecdotal accounts
within the literature (Erlacher, 2007; LaBerge & Rheingold,
1990; Tholey, 1990). In an attempt to acquire quantitative
evidence, Erlacher & Schredl (2010) conducted a pilot study
where participants were requested to practice a simple motor task of successfully tossing a 10-cent coin into a cup
placed two metres away. Twenty lucid dreaming participants were further requested to attempt the task again during any lucid dreams they had that night. Seven succeeded
in becoming lucid that night and were retested on the task,
which was subsequently compared to a physical practise
condition (n = 10) and a control condition with no practise
(n =10). Results demonstrated that both practice conditions
significantly improved their performance from pre to posttest – although the lucid dreaming condition increases were
lower than those of physical practise, this was not significantly so. Stumbrys, Erlacher & Schredl (2015) attempted to
replicate these findings via a finger-tapping task, comparing the performance increases of lucid dreaming practice to
both mental and physical practice. All three practice conditions improved their performance from pre to post-test,
with lucid dreamers showing the greatest performance increase (20%), physical practise the second largest (17%),
and mental practise the smallest increase. No significant
improvements were observed for the control group. These
previous studies, while promising, were conducted over a
matter of only several days, and have not investigated the
technique’s impact on different motor skill modalities that

Nine individuals practiced darts in lucid dreams, compared
to physical practice and a control group. The lucid dreamers
who only experienced few distractions during lucid dream
practice (LDP) showed significant improvement compared
to those who were distracted more often.
Lucid dreams, dreams in which one is aware of dreaming, can be used to carry out actions deliberately. Anecdotal
accounts and a qualitative study show that sports can be
practiced in lucid dreams and that some athletes report a
positive effect on physical performance (cf. Erlacher, 2007).
LDP is a form of mental practice, which has been shown to
be effective (e.g. Driskell, Copper & Moran, 1994). A field
study using a coin-tossing task (Erlacher &Schredl, 2010)
as well as an online experiment applying a finger-tapping
task (Stumbrys, Erlacher & Schredl, 2015) found LDP to be
effective. So far no study has assessed the effectiveness of
LDP in a sleep laboratory setting. Using polysomnography
participants can mark dream events by specific eye movements while dreaming (e.g. Erlacher & Schredl, 2008), which
guarantees that the dream occurs in REM sleep. Furthermore, participants can be awakened directly after the dream
and asked for a dream report. The aim of this study was to
replicate the previous findings in a sleep laboratory setting.
Methods. Thirty-three participants spent one night at a
sleep laboratory with polysomnographic recording. During
pre-test and post-test all participants threw 21 darts with
the non-dominant hand at a dartboard with concentric rings
after nine warm-up throws. The score was the sum of all hits
(ranging from 10 for bull’s eye down to 1). Participants in the
physical practice (PP) group (n=9) practiced darts physically
at night. The control group (CG; n=9) did not practice.
Results and discussion. Out of 15 lucid dreamers nine
practiced the dart task within a lucid dream, marking that
event with predetermined eye signals. No practice effects
were found in any of the groups. However, from the dream
reports it became obvious that some lucid dreamers experienced more distractions during LDP than others, such as

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

S59

IJoDR
changes in the used devices or interfering dream characters. We found a significant negative correlation between
the number of distractions and the difference in the darts
score (morning – evening), meaning that less distractions
resulted in better morning performance (compared to evening). The LDP group was divided by median split into a
group with few distractions (n=4) and one with many distractions (n=5). A significant improvement for the less distracted group was found. It would be interesting to further
investigate the causes that lead to the varying experiences
during LDP. One influencing factor could be the motivation
to improve a motor skill. Therefore it would be interesting
to conduct a study with athletes who practice their sport in
lucid dreams. This study shows that in lucid dream research
next to quantitative measures the quality of experiences
should be taken into account. Qualitative studies could investigate how LDP can be used effectively and how problems can be overcome.

Music in Dreams: Empirical studies
Michael Schredl
Mannheim, Germany
Over the years, composers received inspirations from their
dreams, e.g., Paul McCartney dreamed of the melody of
‘Yesterday’. Except from a diary study in a small group of
musicians and non-musicians (Uga, Lemut, Zampi, Zilli, &
Salzarulo, 2006), empirical research in this area is scarce.
The aim of the present studies was to determine the frequency of music dreams in a large sample, and factors that
might affect this frequency. In addition, music students were
studied and a long dream series of a person occasionally
playing and singing in his leisure time.
Method. Overall, 2929 participants (1742 women, 1187
men; mean age: 45.88 ± 14.38 years) completed the online
questionnaire about music dream frequency. In the second
study, psychology students (N=52), music students (N=32),
choir members (N=49), and a rest group (N=11) completed a
questionnaire about music dreams. Lastly, the dream series
consisted of N = 10.398 dreams recorded over a period of
28 years.
Results and Discussion. Overall, the frequency of music
dreams was about 6% for the population-based sample
(Schredl, Berres, Klingauf, Schellhaas, & Göritz, 2015),
for psychology students, and for the dream series. As expected, and supporting the continuity hypothesis, the time
spent with music activities during the day and the emotional involvement are correlated with the frequency of music
dreams. Music dreams are also more positively toned – as
has been reported previously (Kern et al., 2014). It would be
interesting to complement these findings with larger diary
studies in unselected populations and composers.
References
Kern, S., Auer, A., Gutsche, M., Otto, A., Preuß, K., & Schredl, M. (2014).
Relation between waking politic, music and sports related tasks and
dream content in students of politics and psychology students. International Journal of Dream Research, 7, 80-84.
Schredl, M., Berres, S., Klingauf, A., Schellhaas, S., & Göritz, A. S.
(2015). Factors affecting the frequency of music dreams: An online
study. International Journal of Dream Research, 8(2), 139- 141.
Uga, V., Lemut, M. C., Zampi, C., Zilli, I., & Salzarulo, P. (2006). Music in
dreams. Consciousness and Cognition, 15, 351- 357.

S60

Methodological Issues in Measuring Dream Emotions
Pilleriin Sikka and co-authors Antti Revonsuo and Katja
Valli
Turku, Finland
Emotions are central in dreams, specifically in rapid eye
movement sleep dreams. Despite a wealth of research on
the emotional content of dreams, there is little consensus
about the overall emotionality and predominant valence
of dreams, or about the prevailing specific emotions in
dreams. Previous contradictory findings are arguably due
to unresolved methodological issues. However, studies that
have directly investigated these methodological issues are
scarce. In this presentation three studies that investigated
the effect of study methodology on the frequency, valence
and phenomenological content of dream emotions are discussed. The studies demonstrate that the use of different
methods for rating dream emotions (participants who experience the dream versus external judges who analysed the
respective dream report) and for collecting dream reports
(home vs laboratory setting) leads to very different results
and conclusions about the emotional content of dreams.
As such, these studies highlight the importance of carefully
considering study methodology when conducting and interpreting dream (emotional) content studies.

Dreams as social simulation
Jarno Tuominen and co-authors Antti Revonsuo, Tuula
Stenberg, and Katja Valli
Turku, Finland
Dream researchers have recently converged toward the
conceptualization of dreaming as a simulation of the waking world. Dreams have been characterized in terms such
as virtual reality, immersive spatiotemporal simulation, or
realistic and useful world simulation. As such, the conception of dreaming as a simulated world now unifies the definitions of the basic nature of dreaming within dream and
consciousness research. This paradigm has consequently
led to hypotheses about the possible adaptive functions of
dreams. In addition to the previously hypothethized threat
preparation, social interactions have gained interest as one
such function. Social content is a universal and abundant
feature of human dreams, and can best be characterized
as a simulation of human social reality; simulating the social
skills, bonds, interactions and networks that we engage in
during our waking lives. In this presentation we outline the
Social Simulation Theory (SST) of dreaming based on these
assumptions, and present results from empirical research.
We compare SST with other major competing theories of
the nature and function of dreaming, such as the Continuity Hypothesis (dreaming as continuation/repetition of daily
experiences) and the Threat Simulation Theory (dreaming
as adaptive simulation of threats). These three major theories of dreaming make differing predictions as to the quality
and quantity of social simulations in dreams. We compared
dream reports from a previous dream study with their corresponding waking samples using the Social Simulations
in Dreams Scale (SSDS). The hypotheses tested were: i)

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

IJoDR
there are more positive than negative social interactions in
dreams, and ii) there are more positive social interactions
in dream than in corresponding waking reports. In addition,
we were unable to replicate the finding that NREM dreams
include more positive, and REM dreams more negative, interactions. The effect of these results on dream theories is
discussed.

Sleep Inertia and Functional Connectivity between
Brain Regions at Awakening: An fMRI Study
Raphael Vallat and co-authors David Meunier, Alain Nicolas,
and Perrine Ruby
Lyon, France
Sleep inertia is a transitional state of lowered arousal occurring immediately after awakening from sleep (it generally lasts no more than 30 min) and producing a temporary
decrement in subsequent performances, including memory
performance (Tassi & Muzet 2000). Sleep inertia is thus a
good candidate to explain the differences in dream recall
frequency between high and low dream recallers. Only one
H2O-PET study has investigated this phenomenon at the
neurophysiological level so far (Balkin et al. 2002). In order
to progress in our understanding of sleep inertia we planned
a combined EEG-fMRI study to measure sleep inertia both
at the behavioral and at the neurophysiological level in high
and low dream recallers. Subjects were scanned during a
resting state before and after a nap (around 1.30 pm) in the
scanner. The behavioral tasked assessed both mental calculation and visuo-verbal memory. To ensure that participants would sleep in the scanner, they underwent a night of
partial sleep deprivation (they were allowed to sleep from 5
to 8 am) before the fMRI session. They were awakened in
slow-wave sleep and measures of sleep inertia / functional
connectivity were taken 5 minutes and 20 minutes after
awakening. We expect that measures of functional connectivity will correlate with behavioral measures of sleep inertia,
and that low dream recallers will show more sleep inertia
than high dream recallers.

General anesthesia is often defined as comprising pharmacologically induced unconsciousness (loss of the ability
to experience anything), amnesia (forgetfulness), analgesia
(lack of pain), and immobility (not moving in response to surgical stimulation). In the present study, the term “anesthesia” is used to describe pharmacologically induced loss of
responsiveness without muscle relaxants. All previous studies on dreaming and awareness during anesthesia, whether
conducted in a clinical setting in conjunction with surgical
general anesthesia or in a more controlled experimental
setting, suffer from one major methodological weakness: It
has been possible to interview the study subjects only after
ending the drug and waiting for recovery. Hence, it is not
possible to distinguish whether the reported experiences
occurred during the procedure or whether they originated
from the periods of anesthesia induction or the recovery
period when the effect of anesthetic drug was dissipating.
To achieve unresponsiveness, we administered two different anesthetic agents, either propofol or dexmedetomidine, randomly to forty-seven young healthy male subjects
(propofol n=24, dexmedetomidine n=23) in a nonsurgical
experimental setting. The dose was held sufficient to just
exceed the threshold of unresponsiveness. In order to establish whether they had subjective experiences during the
unresponsive period, we attempted to awaken the subjects
with loud voices and gentle physical stimulation and interviewed those who could be aroused one or two times during
the constant steady-state anesthetic infusion. To achieve a
certain loss of consciousness, we then briefly increased the
anesthetic dose to 1.5 times the dose needed for loss of
responsiveness, and interviewed our subjects after ending
the drug and a short spontaneous recovery period. These
interviews were then analyzed and categorized according
to a coding system designed for the content analysis of anesthesia reports.
In this presentation, we will discuss how frequently dreaming and awareness of the experimental environment are reported upon unresponsiveness induced with propofol and
dexmedetomidine, and what the specific contents of the
retrospective reports are. We compare the frequency and
content of reports between the drugs, and between those
collected during constant infusion to those reported after
recovery. Our paradigm allows a unique perspective into
subjective experiences during unresponsiveness.

Dreaming Under Experimental General Anesthesia
Katja Valli and co-authors L. Radek, M. Karvonen, R.E. Kallionpää, A. Scheinin, A. Maksimow, J. Långsjö, K. Kaisti, N.
Sandman, A. Revonsuo, and H. Scheinin

Incorporating Intense Emotional Events into
Dreams

Turku, Finland

Elaine van Rijn and co-authors Jean-Baptiste Eichenlaub
and Mark T Blagrove

The presence or absence of conscious experiences cannot necessarily be deduced from behavioral signs, such
as responsiveness. Retrospective reports remain the only
available method to give insight into possible conscious
experiences during a period of unresponsiveness. Similarly
to natural sleep, light general anesthesia produces a seemingly nonresponsive state, and according to retrospective
reports, dreaming can occasionally be experienced during
general anesthesia. Moreover, retrospective reports of anesthesia awareness, i.e., unintended intraoperative awareness with explicit recall of surgical events, indicate that it
is possible to be aware of the external environment during
general anesthesia.

Swansea, Wales, United Kingdom
This presentation will focus on current research findings
demonstrating that emotionally intense recent waking life
events are incorporated preferentially into dreams compared to less intense events, independent of their emotional valence. One of the main sources of dream content is
autobiographical memory. Specifically, most references to
waking life in dreams relate to recent events that took place
one or two days before the dream. Previous research demonstrates that waking life events that are incorporated into
dreams are more emotionally intense than events that are not

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

S61

IJoDR
incorporated, but do not differ in emotional tone (negative or
positive). In these studies, home dreams were recalled and
compared with waking life events recorded onto daily logs,
which were scored for emotional intensity and emotional
tone. The sleep stages in which these dreams occurred
were unknown due to the use of home dreams. The present
study expands on previous findings by using instrumental
awakenings conducted in the sleep laboratory to collect
dream reports. It was hypothesized that waking life events
that were incorporated into dreams were more emotionally
intense than items not incorporated, but that there was no
difference in emotional valence between incorporated and
non-incorporated items. Participants kept a daily log for 10
days, reporting major daily activities (activities that took up
most of their time), personally significant events (personally
important events) and major concerns (concerns that had
been on their mind). For each item reported, participants
stated any accompanying emotion (e.g., anger, anxiety,
sadness or joy) and rated the intensity of the emotion on
a scale from 1 (low) to 3 (high). On the last day of keeping the log participants slept a night in the sleep laboratory,
where dream reports were collected from both Rapid Eye
Movement (REM) sleep and Slow Wave Sleep (SWS). Correspondences between parts of the dream report and parts of
the daily log were then rated by the participants. The mean
emotional intensity and valence of the daily log items incorporated into dreams were compared with the mean emotional intensity and valence of daily log items that were not
incorporated into dreams. Items rated as more emotionally
intense were incorporated preferentially into dreams, but no
difference was found between the incorporation of positive
and negative emotions. Thus, it is intensity of emotion and
not valence that is related to the incorporation of a daily log
item into dream content. This finding was found for dreams
from REM sleep, as well as for dreams from SWS. These
findings provide new insight into a possible relationship
between dreaming and memory processing of recent emotional events that takes place during sleep.

Is There a Daydream-Lag Effect?
Elaine van Rijn and co-authors Alexander M Reid, Christopher L Edwards, Josie E Malinowski, Perrine M Ruby, JeanBaptiste Eichenlaub and Mark T Blagrove
Swansea, Wales, United Kingdom
This presentation will focus on current research findings
investigating the time course of the incorporation of waking life events into daydreams, Rapid Eye Movement (REM)
sleep dreams, and stage N2 dreams. Events from waking
life have been found to be incorporated into dreams. Specifically, details from events in dreams are highest 1-2 nights
following the event (day-residue effect), and then 5-7 nights
after the event took place (dream-lag effect). The dream-lag
effect has been found for dreams from REM sleep, but not
for dreams from N2 sleep or Slow Wave Sleep (SWS). Furthermore, previous research found that the dream-lag effect
holds for personally significant events (PSEs, personally important events), but not for major daily activities (MDAs, activities that took up most of the participant’s time) or major
concerns (MCs, concerns that had been on the participant’s
mind). It has been proposed that this delayed incorporation
of events into dreams reflects sleep-dependent memory

S62

consolidation or, alternatively, it might reflect the processing
of emotional events during sleep.
The present study aimed to expand on these findings by
collecting daydreams in the sleep laboratory, in addition to
dreams from REM sleep and N2 sleep. Thirty-three participants kept a daily logs for 10 days, reporting MDAs, PSEs
and MCs. On the last day of keeping the diary, they stayed
one night in the sleep laboratory, where dream reports were
collected. For reports from daydreams participants were
instructed to lay down with their eyes closed and let their
minds wander, without falling asleep. After 10 minutes,
participants reported what was going through their minds,
including any thoughts, images, people, places, scenes,
actions or feelings. Following the night in the sleep laboratory, participants rated correspondences between parts
of the daily logs and parts of the dream reports, including
the daydreams. Initial analyses of the daydreams of 23 participants indicated that the mean number of incorporations
of waking life events into daydreams was highest for the
day before and the day of the daydream report. Specifically, a day-residue effect was found for MCs, but not for
PSEs or MDAs. This indicates that these daydreams were
predominantly about recent major concerns. Results from
daydreams, REM sleep dreams and N2 sleep dreams will
be presented.

Nightmare Protection: Combat or Companionship?
Dylan Wijeyaratnam
Edmonton, AB, Canada
This research project is an extension of previous work conducted by Gackenbach and colleagues on video games and
their effects on dreams. Their research has found that individuals who participate in high combat-centric video games
respond to threats in dreams faster, logically, and fearlessly
(Gackenbach, Ellerman, & Hall, 2011). The combat experienced in games could then be seen as a type of preparation
for dealing with threat; specifically physical combat. The
present study also draws on previous research suggesting
that the level of fear perceived during horror stimuli could
be significantly increased or decreased with companionship
(Zilmann, Weaver, Munford, & Aust, 1986). Taking all this prior
research into account, the present study is interested in how
these two factors (companionship and combat) strengthen
or weaken the nightmare protection effect in dreams. Participants played a horror video game (Left 4 Dead 2) in a
computer laboratory with or without combat, and with or
without a companion. We have just finished the data collection, and we predict that companion playing conditions will
demonstrate the nightmare protection effect more strongly
than those individuals who play alone. Also, we would expect that individuals subjected to the combat condition will
demonstrate a stronger nightmare protection effect than
those who are not allowed to engage in combat.

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

IJoDR

10. Posters/Hot-off-the Press
Dream Recall and Political Ideology among American Adults
Kelly Bulkeley
Portland, OR, USA
This poster presentation continues a long-term project
studying the role of political ideology in dream recall among
American adults (Bulkeley 2012, 2008, 2002). The latest investigation focuses on three demographic surveys with a total sample size of more than 4000 participants. (The first two
surveys have already been conducted, with a total of 3300
participants. The third survey will be conducted in May 2016
with @1000 participants.) The surveys were administered by
YouGov, a professional opinion research firm that specializes in high-quality online polling. The participants were
asked several general questions (e.g., age, gender, race/
ethnicity, marital status, education level, annual income) in
addition to a question about political ideology, and also several questions involving sleep and dreaming (e.g., frequency
of insomnia, dream recall, visitation dreams, dreams of lucid
awareness). Although the final results will not be ready until
the beginning of June, the initial findings from the first two
surveys are supportive of earlier results from studies using
different methods and different groups of people. People on
the leftward side of the American political spectrum (who
identify themselves as “Liberal” or “Very Liberal”) tend to
have somewhat more insomnia, and somewhat more dream
recall, than people on the rightward side of the spectrum
(who identify themselves as “Conservative” or “Very Conservative”). The differences are not absolute—there are
people on the left with low insomnia and low dream recall,
and people on the right with high levels of both—but the
trend in these studies is consistently in the direction of a
more active and varied, though perhaps less restful, night
life for American liberals compared to conservatives. The
discussion section will consider possible explanations of
these findings, along with their implications for evaluating
American political culture. The discussion section will also
consider the pros and cons of scientific dream researchers
making their data available for public study.
References
Bulkeley, K. 2012. Dream Recall and Political Ideology: Results of a Demographic Survey. Dreaming 22(1): 1-9. Ibid. 2008.
American Dreamers: What Dreams Tell Us About the Political Psychology
of Conservatives, Liberals, and Everyone Else. Boston: Beacon Press.
Ibid. 2002.
Dream Content and Political Ideology. Dreaming 12(2): 61-78.

Ontogenetic Trends in Daytime and Oneiric
Threats
Allyson Dale and co-authors Alexandre Lafrenière, Raphaelle Robidoux, Karianne Lafrenière and Joseph De Koninck
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
Introductory Statement: According to the Threat Simulation
Theory (TST), the experience of threatening events during

wakefulness is associated with the incorporation of oneiric threats during dream episodes. The simulation of dream
threats relies on the activation of the threat simulation system, a cognitive system which might have been adaptively
crucial for human survival. We have tested this notion with
an ontogenetic perspective.
Introduction: Throughout life, the processing of emotionrelated stimuli undergoes several changes, which seem to
correlate with brain maturation. Due to immature prefrontal
circuits, adolescents tend to respond more emotionally than
adults to daily situations. Conversely, during senescence,
the limbic system shows decreased activity in response to
negative stimuli. The elderly also demonstrate better emotional control and are more attentive to positive information than their younger counterparts. These changes influence the way menacing situations are experienced across
the lifespan. According to the TST, it would be expected
that while the prevalence of daytime threats may be stable
across age, they would be processed in such a way that
fewer threats would appear in dreams with age; threat severity would also decrease.
Method: The study included five groups of participants
(12- 17; 18-24; 25-39; 40-64; 65-80 years old), with each
group comprising 52 participants (N = 260). One dream per
participant and the corresponding preceding day activities
were rated, with control for word count, for quantity, type
and severity of threats. Scoring was completed by two independent judges using a subset of the Dream Threat Scale.
Results: While there was no significant difference in the
quantity of daytime threats across ages, there were significant ontogenetic decreases in the quantity of oneiric threats
(F(1,259)= 49.18, p =.0001) including “mildly severe threats”
(F(1,259)= 9.03, p =.003), “moderately severe threats”
(F(1,259)= 24.99, p =.0001), and “highly severe threats”
(F(1,259)= 19.54, p =.0001). Inversely, dreams without
threats showed a significant ontogenetic increase with age
(F(1,259)= 26.13, p =.0001). Interestingly, male adolescents
reported significantly more oneiric threats (F(1,259)= 12.23,
p =.001), comprising “life-threatening events” (F(1,259)=
8.27, p=.006), “socially, psychologically or financially severe
threats” (F(1,259)= 5.29, p =.026),“minor threats” (F(1,259)=
4.45, p=.024) and “moderately severe threats” (F(1,259)=
9.27, p =.004) than female adolescents, who reported significantly more dreams without threats (F(1,259)= 4.16, p
=.047).
Conclusion: Consistent with TST and the Continuity Hypothesis, these results suggest that waking management
of threats reduces their severity and incorporation into
dreams.

Comparing and Contrasting the Current Theories
of Dreams
Derek Donnan
Waterloo, Ontario, Canada
Introductory Summary: The dream of science is to uncover
the secrets of nature and the universe at large. How successful has the dream of science been in uncovering the
science of dreams, in addressing the big questions posed
by the nature of dreaming? We will outline the numerous
and prevailing dream theories, examine ways to catego-

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

S63

IJoDR
rize and compare the different theories proposed to explain
dreams. Included are biological, physiological, psychological and phenomenological theories on dreams. The presentation will include a comparative analysis of these prevailing
dream theories and the strengths and weaknesses the different theories and approaches offer. Additionally, Integral
Science will be utilised to propose ways forward towards
greater coherence in theories to explain dreams.
Basis: Theory: Comparative analysis of existing dreams
theories and proposed approaches to move scientific understanding of dreaming forward.
Detailed Summary: Science has been quite successful in
uncovering the secrets of nature and has developed powerful tools and criteria to accomplish this objective. Science
has proposed answers to many of the big questions; how
the universe was created (the big-bang), the age of the universe, how to explain the microscopic world (quantum mechanics) and the world of the large (general relativity).
We define the tools and criteria science utilises to discern
the truth of nature. The scientific method uses evidence
gathered to generate possible theories, and additionally
which of these can predict further scenarios that are then
validated or not. Science uses both experiment and experience or direct apprehension. Additionally Science utilises
Occam’s razor and falsifiability to narrow down the list of
hypotheses to a shortlist of possible contenders. Many areas of Science use tools and evidence far beyond what is
present in the sensorimotor world such as mathematics and
logic to further this search for truth. How successful has the
dream of science been in uncovering the science of dreams,
and in addressing the big questions posed by the dreamstate; why do we dream, is there a meaning to dreams, how
can dreams be used, and many more? A descriptive outline of the numerous major prevailing dream theories will
be exhibited. We will compare and contrast all the prevailing dream theories, outlining their background, strengths,
weaknesses and opportunities they provide in furthering
dream research. Dream theories covered will include biological, physiological, psychological and phenomenological
based theories. Additionally, we will examine the various
dream theories using the principles of integral science. Integral science understands the importance of evidence from
the objective and subjective, the individual and collective
domains, in constructing valid hypotheses and solutions.
We will conclude with an examination of the two opposing
approaches that differing areas of science appear to use in
finding their way to the truth, the strengths and weaknesses
in these two approaches and synergies in order to progress
‘Science’ towards answering the big questions of why we
dream.

REM and Non-REM Sleep Electrophysiological
Correlates (Frontal Theta Power) of Post-Sleep
Insight
Chris Edwards, Mark Blagrove, and Elaine van Rijn, and
co-authors Jean-Baptiste Eichenlaub, Alex Reid, Josie Malinowski, Paul Bennett, and Perrine Ruby

ticipant spent 1 night in the sleep lab. There a daydream
(DD) was collected after wiring up and prior to sleeping,
and then a Rapid Eye Movement (REM) sleep dream and a
non-REM stage 2 (N2) dream, the order of awakenings for
the latter two sleep stages was counterbalanced. Each of
the participants’ three transcripts were then considered in
separate Ullman group sessions during the following week.
The length of time of each session, and the length of time
spent on each stage and substage of the Ullman method
(Ullman, 1996) was calculated so as to ensure that each
of the 3 conditions do not differ on these variables. At the
end of each discussion participants completed the 13 item
Gains from Dream Interpretation questionnaire (Heaton et
al., 1998), with (day) dream substituted for dream so that the
same questionnaire could be used for all three reports. The
questionnaire has an Exploration-Insight subscale, assessing insight resulting from the session, with questions such
as “I learned more about issues in my waking life from working with the dream.” Items are rated on a 1 – 9 scale, anchored as strongly disagree to strongly agree. In Eichenlaub
et al. (2014), the number of references in REM dream reports
to events from the previous 2 days (that had been recorded
in prospective diaries) is highly correlated with frontal EEG
theta power recorded during the REM period prior to awakening. This suggests that the consolidation of memory of
recent events during sleep is reflected in dream content.
This study investigated the relationship between the electrophysiology of the brain state at the time of producing the
dream (i.e., EEG theta power), recorded during sleep, and
the level of exploration-insight that occurs from considering
the dream using the Ullman technique when awake.
Acknowledgement: Funded by a Bial Foundation award
to M.Blagrove, P.Ruby, J-B. Eichenlaub and C.Edwards.
References
Edwards, C., Malinowski, J., McGee, S., Bennett, P., Ruby, P. & Blagrove, M. (2015). Comparing personal insight gains due to consideration of a recent dream and consideration of a recent event using the
Ullman and Schredl dream group methods. Frontiers in Psychology
6, 831.
Edwards, C.L., Ruby, P.M., Malinowski, J.E., Bennett, P.D., & Blagrove,
M.T. (2013). Dreaming and insight. Frontiers in Psychology, 4:979. doi:
10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00979.
Eichenlaub, J. van Rijn, E. Gaskell, G. Lewis, P. Maby, E. Walker, M. Boy,
F., & Blagrove, M. (2014b). The occurrence of references to recent
waking events in REM sleep dreams is correlated with frontal theta
(conference abstract). Presented at the Cognitive Neuroscience Society 21st Annual Meeting, Boston, April 2014. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 26 (supplement).
Heaton, K. J., Hill, C. E., Petersen, D. A., Rochlen, A. B., & Zack, J.
S. (1998). A comparison of therapist-facilitated and self-guided dream
interpretation sessions. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 45, 115–
122. doi: 10.1037/0022-0167.45.1.115
Ullman, M. (1996). Appreciating Dreams: A Group Approach. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.

The Recombination of Past Experiences in Dream
Image Drawings and Art Work
Willem Fermont
Nuth, The Netherlands

Swansea, West Glamorgan, Wales
We recruited 31 participants, aged 18 – 30, in good health,
who recall at least 3 dreams per week at home. Each par-

S64

Most of all dream research is executed via the analysis of
written dream reports, notwithstanding the fact that many
dream reports are based on imaginary experiences. Re-

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

IJoDR
cently there has been considerable progress (1) to connect
neural activity and imaginary experiences directly, by confronting subjects with images, and subsequent comparison of coded brain activity during waking time and during
sleep. Although in this experiment correlation was possible
to a certain degree, the assumption that complete images
of past experiences will re-appear in a recognizable way in
dreams, may be a simplification. What if dream images are
complex compositions of mixtures of experiences? And in
addition, there is a fundamental creativity question: If we
simply copy and paste former experiences how can we create new ideas?
In this study dream drawings were compared with past experiences, as recorded in a diary. This diary was constructed at hand of first associations with parts of the dreams.
As such, each of the dream drawings presented here is accompanied with a collection of written associations, written
down directly after the dream. Several artworks of the author were analyzed accordingly. It appears that many dream
drawings can be decomposed into partial constituents,
which are individually linked to different personal experiences in time and space. During the dream these elements
are amalgamated into entirely new images. As for dream
images, art works frequently show a similar construction:
Past experiences, separated in time and space, are glued
together and create new pieces of work. Although there are
striking similarities in the genesis of dream imaginary and
artwork, there are also obvious differences.
The similarities are: Both in dreams and art works, constituting experiences are time/place separated, experiences are or may be deformed, and there is in both cases an
infinite number of possible combinations of thoughts and
experiences. Differences are, for instance: Art works may
be far more complex, the dream process is predominantly
unidirectional whereas the artwork shows response feedback phenomena, there seems to be a broader source area
in time and place in artwork as compared to dreams. Furthermore, dream drawings are generated instantaneously,
in contrast to artworks that may last for many years. And
finally, art works may be related to descriptive texts over
a long period, whereas dream images and dream texts are
connected almost instantaneously. Both dream drawings
and artworks reflect parts of the creative process: through
mixing of past experiences in the broadest sense, entirely
new products may come into existence. The investigation of
dream imagery has not had that long tradition of statistical
research of dream texts.

meaning of the word svapna is sleep. Nidrā, śayana, svāpa,
svapna, and smaveśa are synonyms.
2. Three avasthas of the mind: Jagrath, Svapna and
Susupti Jāgrata (wakefulness), svapna (sleep or dream) and
susupti (deep sleep) are three states of the Atman (Self). Besides these three, the fourth – turiya – is acknowledged by
the Upanishads. Jagritaavastha is a waking consciousness:
you perceive, feel, think, know and you are conscious of the
external sense-universe. Svapna Avastha is the state when
we are sleeping and dreaming, where the soul is sunk in its
own light in the dream state, where it enjoys subtle things.
Sushuptiavastha is the sleeping state without any dreams;
where the dreamer has fallen into deep sleep and enjoys
mere bliss. Lastly Turiya, wherein the soul is called Atman: it
is the pure self conscious soul constituting the four dimensions of metaphysics and enjoys nothing but its own state
and is tranquil in its singleness.
3. Seven types of dreams: Acārya Caraka has categorised seven types of dreams namely, dṛṣṭa, śruta, anubhūta,
prārthita, kalpita, bhāvita and doṣaja, i.e: seen, heard, experienced, pictured for inner desires, created by the fancy, manifested and created by imbalance in the doses, respectively.
Dṛṣṭa is a dream of a thing seen previously in wakefulness.
Feelings in sleep, when experienced by any sense organ,
are termed anubhūta. Desiring any listened or experienced
thing which was earnestly desirable in wakefulness is called
prārthita or desired dreams. Sometimes an assumption of
things which are within the range of the senses happens in
the mind as imaginations. These imaginations in sleep create kalpita dreams, i.e., imagined dreams. Those dreams in
which what the person saw in sleep then actually happens
are called bhāvita or manifested dreams. Astrological science has given detailed description of bhāvitasvapna. According to it, dreams and signs are manifested on the palm
on the basis of past deeds and are indicators of the good
and bad dreams experienced in the vitiated state of vāta,
pitta and kapha are called doṣaja. The mind is the perceiver
and the mind itself is the perceived in the dream. The mind
creates the objects without the help of any external means.
It creates various curious, fantastic mixtures.

Refernces

Edmonton, Alberta, Canada

(1)T. Horikawa, M. Tamaki,1 Y. Miyawaki, Y. Kamitani.2013. Neural Decoding of Visual Imagery During Sleep. Science 340, 639.

Indian Concepts and Perspectives about Dreams
Art Funkhouser and co-author Boban Eranimos
Bern, Switzerland
1. Svpna Svapna is the dreaming state in which man enjoys
the five objects of senses while all the senses are at rest and
the mind (Manas) alone works. Mind itself is the subject and
the object. One such concept that has been shrouded with
myth and philosophy and has been rarely applied or evaluated on a scientific basis is ‘Svapna’ or dreams. The primary

Contemplative Practice versus Gaming in Mature
Adults: Attention, Transpersonal and Dream Comparisons
Jayne Gackenbach and co-author Cynthia Ma

In a replication and extension of a series of studies (Gackenbach & Bown, 2011; Gackenbach, Swanston, & Stark, 2016;
Gackenbach & Guthrie, 2016), participants complete three
attention tasks before filling out a series of questionnaires
on their contemplative practices, video game play habits,
and dream experiences. The previous studies found that
gamers out performed individuals who pray/meditate in attentional tasks. Additionally, gamers reported higher rates of
controlled dreaming, while the prayer/meditation group had
higher rates of lucid dreaming. The current study attempts
to replicate these findings with a more diverse participant
base who specialize in contemplative practice or gaming.
In furthering research that can improve external validity,
measures must be adapted for real world accessibility and

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

S65

IJoDR
application. Replicating the Gackenbach and Guthrie study
with the general public should further validate research previously done in a university lab.
Currently, the most expedient and cost-effective way to
gather diverse participants is with an Internet based survey service accessible to any person with a cell-phone or
computer. Using the web questionnaire website, Qualtrics.
com, the previously completed study was retooled for complete online participation in order to reach a larger participant base. However, converting an in-person study to a
completely self-administered survey had its challenges.
The flexibility of the online software service Qualtric made
this conversion possible. The participants were given class
credit for participation in the previous studies and in two
of them had the unlimited ability to ask questions of the
lab assistant at any time during the survey. The lab studies also included detailed picture and word instructions on
how to complete the three interactive activities. In order to
replicate these conditions as closely as possible, instructions on the new survey are exhaustive and infinitely clear
in their descriptions, so that any questions that come up
could be answered by following the on screen information
and prompts.
Another challenge arises with participant recruitment to
an online study. Without an incentive for those who complete the survey, it becomes much more difficult to solicit
participants. In response to this problem, social media,
online messaging systems, and community outreach were
all means of participant recruitment. The effectiveness of
these methods is directly proportional to the knowledge of
preferred participants. In this case, mature (i.e., past postsecondary age) meditators and individuals who use prayer
quite a lot as well as serious adult video game players are
being solicited. The study is currently in the process of data
collection.

Weight Influence on Dreams
Alain A. F. Gonfalone
Saint Marcellin les Vaisona, France
It is not yet clear why dreams happen. But a new theory is
presented which explains the timing of the appearance of
dreams.
Previous results from sleep scientists show that dreaming only occurs in certain conditions and in particular when
the body is in a position where the fear of falling or the fight
against weight has diminished. When we fall asleep, the
brain successively reduces its sensations to external stimuli, like light, sound, contact, odor and taste. But what is new
here is that the brain also reduces its control of the muscles,
which work against gravity to maintain our posture and our
equilibrium. A brief comparison with astronaut’s dreams, in
space and in weightlessness, shows that the assumption is
credible.

Evolutionary Stimuli in Dreams: An Investigation
Using Lucid Dreamers
Remington Mallett
Saint Louis, Missouri, USA
Participants completed a memory questionnaire of an experimental room. During a lucid dream, they ‘visited’ the
same experimental room. They actively investigated their
dream room and completed an identical questionnaire upon
awakening. Pre- and post-dream questionnaires were compared to investigate which experimental stimuli were present (they differed in evolutionary relevance). Participants
visited an experimental room with four stimuli categorized
as evolutionary relevant (e.g., a snake) and four stimuli categorized as non-evolutionary relevant (e.g., a clock). After
a distractor task, participants completed a questionnaire
investigating episodic memory of the contents of the room.
Participants then induced a lucid dream and employed their
intentional volition to ‘visit’ the same experimental room in
their dream. They were instructed to investigate the contents
of their dream room, and complete the same questionnaire
from before upon awakening. Pre-dream and post-dream
questionnaires were compared to investigate the presence
of evolutionary relevant versus non-evolutionary relevant
stimuli in dreams and the possibility of reminiscence resulting from visuals during the dream experience. Interpretation
of results is limited due to the low number of participants,
the evolutionary stimuli were more present in dreams than
the non-evolutionary stimuli. Also, the data suggest a possible effect of reminiscence for evolutionary stimuli. The particularly high level of lucid awareness of participants is also
discussed. Certain environmental stimuli guide our behavior
based on evolutionary needs and instincts. These stimuli—
typically considered emotional—have an extra draw on our
attention and are more easily remembered. Some dream
theories account for an evolutionary function, which leads
to the possibility that evolutionary relevant stimuli may have
a higher presence in dreams.
This exploratory study investigated this possibility by
presenting research participants to an experimental environment that included four evolutionary relevant items and
four non-evolutionary relevant items. Participants were lucid dreamers, which allowed them to intentionally ‘visit’ this
same experimental room in their dream and investigate the
contents. I analyzed results to interpret 1) level of presence
of evolutionary relevant items in the dream or ‘virtual’ room
and 2) the possibility that visual experience of the dream
room provided a memory enhancement or ‘recovery’ for
specific details of evolutionary relevant items.

Cultural Dreaming: Research from the Frontlines of
an Emerging Field
Paloma Pavel
Oakland, California, USA
“We are living in an historic moment. We are each called to
take part in a great transformation. Our survival as a species
is threatened by global warming, economic meltdown, and
an ever increasing gap between rich and poor. Yet these
threats offer an opportunity to awaken as an interconnect-

S66

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

IJoDR
ed and beloved community.” –Desmond Tutu, Foreword to
Random Kindness and Senseless Acts of Beauty (Pavel &
Herbert)
The historic moment in which we are living calls for leadership and the cultivation of a new dream. Psychological
dream discourse has most often focused on intrapsychic
and interpersonal dreaming (Taylor, Watkins, Downing).
This paper focuses on a third level of collective dream symbols. Cultural Dreaming (CD), in this paper, offers innovative strategies for social and environmental change. Our
methodology builds upon frameworks established by the
co-authors (Pavel and Anthony) and is informed by scholars
Jeremy Taylor, Joanna Macy, Mary Watkins, Thomas Berry,
and Chris Downing, to explore the possibilities that CD offers. The Breakthrough Communities model of community
change draws upon 2 decades of field-based research with
climate justice groups organizing for sustainability in 12
metropolitan regions in the United States.
This paper contains four parts, beginning with an overview of the global climate and migration crises that form
the contemporary framework for our research. Second,
we review historic references to cultural dreaming drawn
from social and environmental justice contexts; Martin Luther King Jr.’s historic “I Have a Dream” speech is one of
several examples referenced. Next, the co-authors review
Breakthrough Communities’ 5-step Compass for Community Change model and apply it to the case study of the
DREAMers, a social change movement comprised of young
Latino/a immigrants, activists and artists. Finally, we explain
the innovative possibilities of using cultural dreaming practices within our community change models and regional
climate justice organizing. We use CD techniques such as
active imagination and group process in communities to
transition from the industrial growth society to life-sustaining
models of change. This work has been documented in our
published volumes and we are now expanding it to include
active imagination, role play, dyads and artwork. The aim of
this poster session is to invite practitioners and researchers
in the field to become creative partners in this effort toward
a united, equitable future applying cultural dreaming practices to social and environmental change.

‘Dream Resolution’: The Impact of a Dream-Based
Intervention on Measures of Anxiety in Young
People
Adhip Rawal and co-authors Lisa Burroughes, Samantha
Lovell, Sofia Malik-Smith, and Robert Waggoner
Brighton, East Sussex, United Kingdom
Research has shown that the process of dreaming performs
a number of significant functions, such as memory consolidation, the development of new associations, and the processing of emotions (e.g., Cai et al., 2009; Cartwright et al.,
1998).
Examination of the neurobiology of sleep has added support to the view that dreams facilitate the resolution of emotional concerns (van der Helm & Walker, 2009), highlighting
the value of academic research that examines the effectiveness of the platform of dreaming in intervention studies
on emotional processing. Our poster will present research
that evaluates the potential of a dream-based intervention

for reducing anxiety levels in young people (i.e. high-school
students, where innovative approaches to aid emotional
processing are particularly relevant given continuing concerns over anxiety levels). The design of the study includes
a psychoeducation and a no-intervention control group as
active and passive comparison conditions for the dreambased intervention. High-school students complete a battery of anxiety-related outcomes before and after the twoweek intervention period, including self-report levels of
anxiety, indices of meta-cognition, and automatic emotional
processes (anxiety-related acoustic markers in speech
samples following a stress provocation challenge). We are
looking to recruit approximately 80 high-school students to
be part of this study.
Our poster will present information about the study interventions, the rationale underpinning the dream-based
condition, the choice of outcome measures underpinned
by emotion theory, and results of intervention impact on
changes in anxiety-related outcomes. Specifically, we will
show data to test the hypothesis that the dream-based
intervention will aid effective emotional processing (e.g.,
changes in anxiety-related acoustic markers) and lead to
reductions in anxiety levels over time, compared to psychoeducation and a no-intervention control condition. Results
will be discussed in the context of the study methodology
(e.g., limitations and future developments), the dreams and
emotional processing literature, and their relevance to further education or clinically-oriented evaluation. For example, if the dream resolution process results in a reduction
of anxiety, then it suggests the possibility that this process
may also be relevant to other emotional or psychological
disorders (e.g., generalised anxiety) and well-being more
generally. We feel this presentation is suitable to all audience levels at the IASD conference as the topic cuts across
key themes of the conference (e.g., ‘Research and Theory’;
‘Clinical Approaches’; ‘Dreams and Health’; ‘Lucid Dreaming’) and would be greatly enhanced by discussions with
other attendees.

Dream Content and Adult Styles of Attachment
Cristina Riva Crugnola and co-authors Elena Ierardi, Chiara
Zanchi, and Alfio Maggiolini
Milano, Italy
Introductory Summary. Adult styles of attachment are associated with different dream content. The aim of this study
is to examine the differences between a secure style and
insecure, anxious, and avoidant styles with respect to the
content expressed in dreams in an Italian sample of adult
subjects.
An Expanded Description of the Presentation. The content
of dreams, just like the ability to recall them (McNamara et
al. 2011), is associated with different styles of adult attachment. For example, subjects with anxious attachment describe dreams with negative representations of themselves,
while subjects with avoidant attachment describe dreams
with negative representations of other people (Mikulincer et
al., 2011). In subjects with secure attachment, dreams frequently contain themes relating to the secure base script,
indicating pursuit of intimacy/support (Selterman et al.,
2012).

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

S67

IJoDR
The aim of this study was to examine the relationship between the content of dreams and styles of attachment in
an Italian sample. The participants were 201 subjects with
ages ranging from 30 to 60 (136 women and 65 men) to
whom the Attachment Style Questionnaire (ASQ; Feeney,
et al., 1994) was administered in order to evaluate styles
of attachment (secure, anxious and avoidant). Examination
of the content of dreams was conducted using the Most
Recent Dream method (Domhoff, 1966); coding was carried out with the Hall /Van de Castle system (1966). ANOVA
and subsequent post-hoc tests were used to evaluate significant differences between styles of attachment and the
content of dreams. The results indicate that the distribution
of styles of attachment does not differ from that of the normative sample (Feeney et al., 1994). Concerning the content of dreams, those subjects classified as having an anxious attachment style in their dreams express significantly
more negative emotions, negative emotions of the dreamer,
friendly interaction and physical aggression compared with
avoidant and secure subjects. Secure subjects express
more positive themes such as success, friendship and luck
in their dreams than do avoidant subjects. In short, the quality of adult attachment is associated with the content of and
emotions expressed in dreams. An anxious style of attachment is correlated with more negative emotions both general and linked to the dreamer and his/her interactions, as
well as to a greater need for intimacy; a secure attachment
style is correlated with more positive dream content. The
study, the first to use the Hall/van Castle method to analyze
the relationship between dreams and attachment, shows
how the ways of expressing and regulating the emotions
which characterize the different styles of attachment (Riva
Crugnola et al., 2011; Mikulincer, Shaver, 2007) also inform
dream content.

Health Dreams, Health-Related Worries, and Being
Ill: A Questionnaire Study
Michael Schredl and co-authors Katharina Adam, Barbara
Beckmann, and Ivelina Petrova
Mannheim, Germany
Connecting dreams with somatic illness has a long tradition; e. g., physicians such as Hippocrates and Galen used
dreams for diagnosing and curing illnesses. The present
study investigated the relationship between illness, healthrelated worries, and health-related dreams in a sample of
178 persons. The findings indicate that having a minor illness and especially health-related worries increase the percentage of health-related dreams. Diary studies are needed
to support this preliminary finding. As the emotional tone
of dreams is also affected by health, it would be very interesting to see if working with dreams or Imagery Rehearsal
Therapy (in the case of nightmares) is beneficial for patients
suffering severe medical illnesses.

S68

Penelope’s Dreams and Real Life Neurological
Feature
Giuseppe Tropeano and Stefano Martellotti and co-author
Mariagrazia Capillo
Rome, Italy
In our study, we examined some of Penelope’s dreams under three different points of view: content, formal aspects,
and emotional issues, using Domhoff’s classification and
coding method of content analysis. The patient has been
accurately examined from both the immunological and neurological point of view. An EEG showed sharp waves and
other bioelectrical anomalies; an NMR brain scan showed
some leucoencephalopathy in “paragenicolare” in the right
area. Presently, we are trying to establish the relationship
between a brain lesion, EEG data, dreaming characteristics,
and physical state (autoimmune sickness?) Peculiarities
were: 1) An extremely high number of very vivid dreams, often represented by drawings; 2) Confusion between dreams
and waking events (twin boundaries); 3) A trend to several
degrees of dissociation; and 4) Suffering from a “sickness
syndrome” (fatigue, fibromyalgia, etc.) for which she was
widely analyzed by the appropriate specialist.

How Different/Similar Are Americans and Japanese Students in Dreams and Personal Narratives?
Misa Tsuruta and co-authors Joan G. Miller, and Marcel
Kinsbourne
Tokyo, Japan
Dreams may have been seen as a culturally universal phenomena since the time of the ancient Greeks and Chinese. In
modern times, there were psychological and scientific interests in dreams – for instance in Freud’s writings. In particular, the discovery of REM sleep was a pivotal point in dream
research. As psychology has become culturally wider, it also
has had to deal with the possibilities of cultural differences
in various psychological constructs and phenomena. This
research draws on dream study, psychology and anthropology to examine whether there are any cultural differences
and similarities in dreams. In doing so, the present study
does not solely rely in dreams as data but also uses waking
narratives (personal narratives) as data.
Data were collected from undergraduate and graduate students in the US and in Japan. They replied to a few
questionnaires, provided a writing on a recent personally
significant event, and kept a 2-week dream journal. The
waking narratives and dreams were then coded by 2 coders. The results indicated: a) Agreement of source of dreams
as internal was higher in Americans than in Japanese; b)
Americans had more lucid dreams than did Japanese; c)
Americans had lengthier dreams than did Japanese (the
first dream in the dream journal); d) Japanese mentioned
more groups in their dreams than did Americans; e) Americans mentioned more negative and total (sum of positive
and negative) emotions in their personal narratives than did
Japanese. However in other areas similarities across the
two cultures may be assumed. These areas were: dream
recall frequency, dream sharing frequency, agreement with

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

IJoDR
sources of dreams as being external, and nightmare frequency. Their differences/similarities may arise from cultural
differences in cognition, and development in areas such as
how to elaborate past experiences, and recognition and expression of emotions. For what is truly ‘different’ or ‘similar’
more research is awaited.

Virtual Reality Effects on Presence in Game Play
and Subsequent Dreams
Elisa White, Akshya Boopalan, and Jayne Gackenbach
Edmonton, AB, Canada
Virtual reality (VR) adds more dimensions of immersion and
presence, the felt sense of being there, to video game play.
As VR technology is gaining in popularity, the immersive
environment may have an even greater effect on gamers.
VR technology is still in its early stages and there is little
research looking into how VR affects consciousness. The
research that exists shows that there is an increased sense
of presence in VR worlds compared to PC worlds. This ties
into how we experience our own reality, especially differentiating our external from our internal world. Dreams give
us unique access to the experience of presence in an unconscious state. Previously Gackenbach and Rosie (2011)
reported a strong association between presence in gaming
and presence in follow-up dreams. In this study reports of
presence in a game and in the follow-up dream were examined as in the previous study (Gackenbach, Sinyard & Hakopdjanian, 2016). Our hypothesis is that participants who
play in the Oculus Rift VR condition will experience a greater
sense of presence while playing video games, and in their
subsequent dreams. Gackenbach et al. previously found
that type of game play (3D versus 2D) affected subsequent
reports of presence in dreams. With the methodological improvements in this study, we will see if this finding holds or,
if as originally hypothesized, there would be an improvement in presence in dreams as a function of higher presence
in waking (3D). As before, we used only female participants
who either played an Oculus Rift game (3D), or the same
game on a standard computer screen (2D) as control. Participants were asked to report a recent dream either before
or after game play, as well as their first dream after the lab
session. The benefits of having these conditions (3D vs 2D;
dream report before or after game play) will give researchers
a better understanding of how VR affects the felt sense of
presence within the gaming experience and in the follow-up
dream states.

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

S69

IJoDR

Index

Doehner S..................S3, S9
Dolan P..................S6
Donnan D..................S63
Dresler M..................S51

Adam K..................S68
Adriano F..................S50
Alpers GW..................S57
Appel K..................S43
Anumalasetty K..................S5
Armington S..................S6
Armstrong D..................S6

Edgar IR..................S28, S52
Edwards C..................S52, S53, S62, S63
Eggert M..................S28
Eichenlaub JB..................S52, S53, S61, S62, S63
Eranimos B..................S65
Evans K..................S52, S53

Baart I..................S6
Backstrom K..................S7
Banerji B..................S15
Barcaro U..................S48
Baring A..................S1
Barrett D..................S16, S24, S48
Bartoli K..................S50
Beckmann B..................S68
Bell F..................S25
Bengtsson A..................S7, S15
Benjamin S..................S15
Bennett P...................S52, S53, S63
Bennett V..................S3
Benson S..................S25
Berry W..................S8
Bianchini L..................S16
Bidet-Caulet A..................S57
Billington D..................S16
Blagrove M..................S3, S52, S53, S61, S62, S63
Blanchette-Carriere C..................S49
Bodisz R..................S58
Boopalan A..................S49, S69
Bosman FG..................S1
Bottoni C..................S49, S50
Bouwman K..................S25
Bozorgmehr G..................S26
Buckner B..................S26, S26
Bulkeley K..................S16, S27, S50, S63
Burroughes L..................S67
Campbell J..................S8, S27
Caporali M..................S16
Capillo M..................S68
Carboncini MC..................S48
Carleschi A..................S49, S50
Carr M..................S49, S50
Chatard B..................S57
Cielak D..................S3, S8
Clark L..................S17
Condron DR..................S27
Corteccione T..................S16
Couture C..................S17, S27
D’Acquisto F..................S17
Dale A..................S51, S63
Dankers-van der Spek M..................S9
Dannu AA..................S27
Davids B..................S28
de Boer A..................S18
De Koninck J..................S51, S63
Delugo A..................S48
Desloges C..................S18
Di Lorenzo G..................S16

S70

Fermont W..................S29, S64
Fortuna E..................S16
Funkhouser AT..................S53, S65
Gackenbach J..................S29, S53, S65, S69
Gerike C..................S5
Gobel-Gross U..................S29
Gongloff RP..................S4, S10
Gonfalone AAF..................S66
Goodman L..................S29
Gosselin R..................S19
Gover G..................S10
Gratton N..................S19, S19
Guthrie C..................S53
Hall Z..................S10
Hamilton N..................S11, S19, S44
Hawkins T..................S30
Hearne K..................S42, S44, S44
Hebbrecht M..................S20
Hermans H..................S2
Hoffman C..................S4, S40
Horton CL..................S54, S54, S56
Hoss R..................S11, S40
Hoyle J..................S30
Ierardi E..................S67
Jenkins MP..................S20
Johnson CR..................S8, S44, S45
Jones C..................S6
Kahn D..................S54
Kaisti K..................S61
Kallionpää RE..................S61
Karvonen M..................S61
Kennedy A..................S52, S53
King RH..................S21
Kinsbourne M..................S68
Koet BJ..................S30
Koning B..................S31
Kravitz J..................S31
Kronholm E..................S58
Kuiken D..................S55
Kuiken N..................S14
Lafreniere A..................S51, S63
Lafreniere K...................S63
Lago G..................S49
Lambert J..................S32
Langsjö J..................S61
Lasley J..................S12

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

IJoDR
Lennon J..................S48
Ling MN..................S55
Lortier-Lussier M..................S51
Lovell S..................S67
Lupone M..................S16
Lydick K..................S32
Ma C..................S65
Maggiolini A..................S55, S67
Maksimow A..................S61
Malik-Smith S..................S67
Malinowski J..................S52, S53, S56, S56, S62, S63
Mallett R..................S45, S66
Martellotti S..................S68
Mascaro KR..................S21
Mason K..................S32
McGee S..................S52, S53
Meunier D..................S61
Miller JG..................S68
Minajeva A..................S46
Mitsch B..................S41
Moors M..................S4, S33
Nauman-Mikulski J..................S33
Nederlof A..................S12
Nelson G..................S33, S34
Nicolas A..................S58, S61
Nielson T..................S49, S50
Oussoren J..................S34
Owczarski W..................S56
Paoletti A..................S50
Paquette T..................S49
Pascoe J..................S21, S34
Paul F..................S57
Paunio T..................S58
Pavel P..................S66
Pearson C..................S43
Penderak R..................S35
Petrova I..................S68
Pike C..................S22
Plailly J..................S58
Potthoff S..................S35
Price K..................S42
Prins-Goodman V..................S22
Prinsen R..................S55
Puricelli S..................S35, S43
Rabinowe V..................S35
Radek L..................S61
Rawal A..................S67
Reid A..................S52, S53, S62, S63
Reintjes S..................S43
Reith M..................S36
Revonsuo A..................S2, S60, S60, S61
Rheinschmiedt OM..................S36
Righi M..................S48
Riva Crugnola C..................S67
Robidoux R..................S51, S63
Roetz H..................S37
Ruby P..................S52, S53, S57, S58, S61, S62, S63

Salveson L..................S46
Sandman N..................S58, S61
Sandor P..................S58
Saunders DT..................S59
Schädlich M..................S59
Scheinin A..................S61
Scheinin H..................S61
Schinco M..................S22
Schneider LZ..................S12
Schredl M..................S5, S57, S60, S68
Seguin M..................S13, S23
Sikka P..................S60
Siracusano A..................S16
Smeets A..................S38
Sparrow GS..................S13
Stenberg T..................S60
Sullivan Walden K..................S13
Szakadat S..................S58
Taal J..................S41
Taylor M..................S38
Tiralongo A..................S16
Tirion-Ietswaart M..................S14
Torres Villanueva PE..................S14
Tropeano G..................S68
Tsuruta M..................S68
Tuominen J..................S60
Turner D..................S23
Turner Gabrielle S..................S38
Vallat R..................S57, S61
Valli K..................S58, S60, S60, S61
van Doorn S..................S5, S41
van Elteren H..................S38
van Rijn E..................S52, S53, S61, S62, S63
van Zyl D..................S43
Vergil K..................S39
Villalaba M..................S58
Virgillito A..................S48
Waggoner R..................S43, S46, S46, S47, S67
Walsh MC..................S24, S24
Webb C..................S39, S39
Welt B..................S39
White E..................S49, S69
Wijeyaratnam D..................S62
Wong C..................S51
Zadra A..................S42
Zanasi M..................S16, S49
Zanchi C..................S67
Ziemer M..................S11, S47
Ziman K..................S48

Sahni A..................S37

International Journal of Dream Research Volume 9, Supplement 1 (2016)

S71

