EEG Classification Analysis for Diagnosing
Autism Spectrum Disorder based on Emotions
Nur Fadzilah Harun, Nabilah Hamzah, Norliza Zaini, Maizura Mohd Sani,
Haryanti Norhazman and Ihsan Mohd Yassin
Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Universiti Teknologi MARA (UiTM), Shah Alam, Malaysia
nurfadzilahharun93@gmail.com

Abstract—This research sets out to propose another method
for the medical teams to diagnose Autism Spectrum Disorder
(ASD)
in
children
based
on
the
analysis
on
Electroencephalography (EEG). Its main intention is to provide
an effective and more time-saving method in diagnosing autism
in suspected autistic children and to choose the best technique
for classifying the EEG data to distinguish the Autistic traits
from the normal ones. This research paper comprises of EEG
data analysis on the brainwave activities of normal individuals
and autism subjects to learn and compare the difference
between their brain activity’s patterns. In addition,
classification and analysis were also done to distinguish the
different emotion projection of autistic and normal subjects and
how their characteristics differ from each other. The signal
processing techniques were performed on EEG data obtained
from chosen subjects and two of the most well-known machine
learning techniques which are Artificial Neural Network (ANN)
and Support Vector Machine (SVM) were utilized in classifying
the different classes of brainwave activities and signals. The
efficiency of the two classifiers was then compared. For ANN, an
experiment to determine the optimum value of hidden layers
was also executed. The results obtained from this research
provided classification accuracy that can be obtained from
normal and autistic data classification as well as the ability to
diagnose a new data using the trained ANN. Positive findings
were obtained from this EEG analysis especially in classifying
normal and Autistic patterns and also in classifying the different
emotions. This outcome can very much help in the process of
diagnosing ASD, where the whole process can be done in a more
time-efficient manner and more accurate diagnosis can be made.
Index Terms—Autism; Classification and Analysis;
Diagnosing; Electroencephalography; Emotions; Machine
Learning.

I. INTRODUCTION
Autism and Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) are the terms
used to define a group of complex disorders of brain
development. These disorders are characterized by varieties
and multiple levels of difficulties in social interaction, verbal
and nonverbal communication and repetitive behaviors [1].
Autism is apparently found to take place in early brain
development, where most signs and symptoms tend to emerge
between the ages of 2 to 3 years old. In this context, [2]
defines autistic children to be ones that are perceived to be
living in their own world.
ASD or autism can be associated with intellectual
disability, difficulties in motor movement abilities besides
short attention spans and physical health issues such as sleep
and gastrointestinal disturbances. These are a few common
characteristics of autistic children [2]. The autistic children
are often found to be having communication problem, where

they might refuse to engage in conversation, unable to use
proper language, repeating things that they hear and many of
them have a low lingual understanding. They also tend to
avoid social interaction. Most of them avoid making eye
contact with people and are lacking in the ability to receive
affection from people close to them as they usually prefer to
be alone.
They also have unique playing patterns. They are usually
absorbed in repetitive actions and can be over-possessive
over their toys and belongings. Their movements can be
peculiar to that of normal children. Some also have sensory
disruption. These disruptions can be auditory, visual, touch,
taste, vestibular and proprioceptive. These autistic children
can be hypersensitive or hyposensitive, where they can get
easily emotional. They sometimes have an unpredictable and
always-changing mood.
However, some people with autism are found to excel in
visual skills, music, math and art. Some of them also have a
good memory and even a high IQ. General studies done on
this topic have found out a few possible factors of autism.
These factors can be a genetic factor, medicinal intake during
pre and post-natal and maybe even polluted and toxic
environment. In other words, the variety of characteristics
and symptoms causes the process of diagnosing Autism
Spectrum Disorder (ASD) to be more challenging. This is
because there are many different signs and symptoms that are
needed to be identified when performing the behavioral tests
on the subjects.
A. Related Works
In this study, we explore and analyze the EEG signal of the
human brain obtained from ASD subjects to interpret the
different components distinguishing them from normal
brainwave. Electroencephalography (EEG) has been proven
to be an effective medium to study human brainwave in order
to perform data classification on the obtained signals. EEG
signal provides a non-invasive way to recognize the emotion
of disabled people through EEG headset electrodes placed on
their scalp [8]. A new study by researchers at Albert Einstein
College of Medicine of Yeshiva University suggests that
measuring how fast the brain responds to sights and sounds
could help in objectively classifying people on the autism
spectrum and may help diagnose the condition earlier [3, 6].
Currently, autism diagnosing in Malaysia still needs to be
performed by psychologist, psychiatrist, neurologist,
developmental paediatrician, or similarly qualified medical
professional. There are also no medical tests performed on the
subjects, the diagnosis is made based fully on the subjects’
history and symptoms. This comprehensive diagnosing
process, which consists of (i) observation of the subjects and

e-ISSN: 2289-8131 Vol. 10 No. 1-2

87

Journal of Telecommunication, Electronic and Computer Engineering

(ii) a thorough interview with the subjects’ parents or
caregivers, generally takes approximately 2 hours to
complete [7].
In this context of research, this study utilized and compared
the efficiency of two most common Machine Learning
Techniques which are Artificial Neural Network (ANN) and
Support Vector Machine (SVM). Artificial Neural Network
(ANN) is a proven effective machine learning technique for
data classification in many diseases diagnosing.
Based on the same purpose of disease diagnosis, ANN with
radial basis functions is used to diagnose patients with
multiple sclerosis [9, 11]. The diagnosis model of Smear
Negative Pulmonary Tuberculosis based on ANN was
constructed and the diagnosis efficiency was confirmed in
[10] and the results indicate that it could be used as a new
diagnosis method for the complex problem. Other related
studies include [12] that used SVM for Breast Cancer
Diagnosis using Screen Film Mammogram Data and [13] that
used SVM and Image Processing Technique for Lung Cancer
Diagnosis System.
B. Problem Statement
Based on the study done on related topics, there are a few
problem statements that can be derived regarding the
diagnosing processes of Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD).
Firstly, behavioral tests on ASD suspects are found to be
time-consuming. Presently, there are no medical tests that can
diagnose autism [1]. When parents notice that their child is
showing unusual behaviors such as the inability to make eye
contact, not responding to his or her name or playing with
toys in an unusual and repetitive ways, they will refer to their
nearest medical assistance. Because there are no medical tests
that can immediately identify autism traits in the subjects, the
diagnosing process is done by specially trained physicians
and psychologists who will administer autism-specific
behavioral evaluations. These manual diagnosing processes
require a lot of time in order to carefully observe the
characteristics and behaviors of the suspected autistic
children.
Another issue is that the Autism characteristics are widely
variant and it is hard to determine the autistic level in
suspected children. The Autism Spectral Disorder has a few
different levels. There are a few distinct characteristics that
can distinguish the autistic children from normal ones.
However, it is more complex to determine the different level
of the ASD itself. This is because not one autistic child is the
same to another. ASD has different levels and classifications.
For example, there are autistic children that can converse
well, and there are some that could not even talk. Some
autistic children are very affectionate, while some others are
very elusive in social interactions. Some autistic children
have high IQs, even higher than some normal people.
The point is, these autistic traits that these children possess
are different from one another. It is safe to say that some of
these autistic children are almost close to normal and some of
them have a wider range of disabilities of limited abilities.
In the context of EEG analysis, no study is found to identify
which analysis or classification method is the best option to
detect Autism characteristics and distinguish them from the
normal ones. In processing and classifying the EEG data
obtained from autistic children’s brainwave activities, there
are a few methods or techniques that can be used to
distinguish the EEG data whether the brainwave belongs to
an autistic kid or a normal one. Some of the most suitable

88

techniques that can be used for data classification are
Artificial Neural Network (ANN) and Support Vector
Machine (SVM) [14]. However, there has been no
comparison made to determine which one of the two
techniques is the best option to use to classify EEG data of
autistic children brainwave, in order to obtain more accurate
results.
C. Objectives
Hence, this research is done in order to propose another
convenient, accurate and time-efficient method for the
medical teams to diagnose autism in children based on the
analysis on Electroencephalography (EEG). Its main
intention is to provide an effective and more time-saving
method in diagnosing autism in suspected autistic children
and to choose the best technique for classifying the EEG data
to distinguish the Autistic traits from the normal ones. The
specific aims of this study are defined as follows:
i. To design an EEG analysis specially to diagnose the
occurrence of Autistic traits by differentiating the
brainwave patterns of autistic children from normal
brainwave.
ii. To apply the machine learning techniques to
determine and classify the different levels of Autism
Spectrum Disorder (ASD) in autistic children by
studying their emotions as compared to emotions of
normal subjects.
iii. To compare the different machine learning techniques,
i.e. between ANN (Artificial Neural Network) and
SVM (Support Vector Machine); and to decide which
of these techniques is the best to differentiate
brainwave signal of autistic children.
This study is scoped down to focus on the EEG analysis to
compare the autistic and normal brainwave activities. The
analysis was done on the emotion comparison between
normal and autistic subjects. Comparisons were also made to
compare the efficiency of the two machine learning
techniques used which are ANN and SVM. This research
focuses on experimenting with the optimum value of ANN
hidden layers for classifying autistic and normal EEG data.
The main mission of this study is to propose an EEG based
diagnosing tools for the purpose of automatic diagnosing
system development.
II. METHODOLOGY
This research project can be divided into three main parts;
i) Signal Acquiring and Processing Phase, ii) Signal
Classification Phase and iii) Data Analysis and Validation
Phase. The process methodology flowchart is shown in
Figure 1.
There are a few major stages that had to be undergone in
order to classify the EEG signals of the subjects of this
experiment. As shown in Figure 1, first, an experimental
procedure was performed in order to acquire raw EEG signals
from the chosen subjects. Then, the obtained signals went
through a signal pre-processing stage which consists of noise
and artefact removal, bandpass filter, frequency filtering.
After the pre-processing stage, the signal has undergone
feature extraction and normalization process before being
classified using the chosen machine learning techniques. The
final stage was the data validation stage, which was the
analysis of the classified data obtained from the classification
process performed.

e-ISSN: 2289-8131 Vol. 10 No. 1-2

EEG Classification Analysis for Diagnosing Autism Spectrum Disorder based on Emotions

music. This stimulation aimed to calm the subjects and help
them to relax and focus.
The subject is then asked to rest and then the process is
repeated for happy video stimulation and sad video
stimulation. The happy video stimulation shows images of
happy, smiling, and laughing children with upbeat
background music. The sad video stimulation is given extra
attention and care in the process of image selection as some
images can potentially be disturbing for the subjects. The
process flows for the experimental procedure to acquire EEG
data from the subjects are shown in Figure 3.

Figure 1: Process methodology flowchart

A. Experimental Procedure to Acquire Raw EEG Data
The EEG data were obtained from the selected subjects by
using the Emotiv device. Emotiv is an EEG reader that is
wirelessly connected to the computer/laptop while data were
being captured from the subjects. The EEG recording system
consists of electrodes with sensor pads, amplifiers with builtin filters and 16-bit analog to digital converter, the sampling
rate of 128 Hz and a computer. The EEG signal was recorded
using 14 channels monopolar connection grounded behind
both ears.
The EEG signals were recorded using the same device and
computer for all subjects to ensure consistency in the
analysis. Figure 2 shows the illustrations of EEG Emotiv
reader and its connections to the subject’s scalp.

Figure 3: Experimental Procedure to Acquire EEG Data

Figure 4 shows the setting for raw EEG data collection. The
EEG signals of each subject during all stimulations were then
recorded as shown in Figure 5. The overall time for data
collection was approximately 20 minutes per subject.

Figure 2: Emotiv Device

The subjects were chosen among children between the age
range of 4 to 12 years old for both autistic and normal
subjects. The autistic subjects were selected only from those
with an approval from their parents. The subjects’ genders
were also varied to obtain a more general data for both autistic
and normal subjects.
Before EEG data is recorded from the subjects, they were
introduced to the following procedures for data collection.
First, the Emotiv device is attached to the subject’s scalp. The
subject is then asked to close their eyes for 30 seconds and
then open them again. Then, they are shown a video on
neutral feeling simulation. The neutral feeling simulation
consisted of calm and emotionless slideshows of images and
videos such as animals and flowers with soothing background

Figure 4: EEG Data Collection from a Normal Subject

B. Signal Pre-Processing
The signal pre-processing stage was basically the removal
of noises and non-required signals from the obtained EEG
data of the subjects. This process is also known as noise and
artefacts removal. The obtained raw EEG data from Emotiv
software was in “.edf” file, which was then required to be
converted into “.csv” (Excel) type of file. The appropriate
tools provided by the Emotiv test bench software was used to
convert the “.edf” file into “.csv” file to enable data to be
imported into MATLAB software to be processed. In order to
obtain artefact-free EEG signal, the data had to be filtered

e-ISSN: 2289-8131 Vol. 10 No. 1-2

89

Journal of Telecommunication, Electronic and Computer Engineering

using band filters. The bandpass filter was selected using four
types of frequency bands which were alpha, beta, theta and
delta band, according to the specified frequency range of the
required data. The PSD (Power Spectral Density) mean
values were chosen based on the four frequency bands and
were used as the inputs to the classifiers. In other words, the
EEG features used for classification is the output from the
bandpass filtering process executed.

Figure 5: A sample of raw EEG data obtained from subjects

The greatest advantage of ANNs is their ability to be used
as an arbitrary function approximation mechanism that learns
from observed data. It is known as an effective technique for
data classification, including pattern and sequence
recognition, novelty detection and sequential decisionmaking. Hence, ANN is used in this study as one of the
machine learning techniques in classifying the EEG
brainwave data and classifying between the normal and the
autistic brainwave, which will help to develop an automated
diagnosing system for Autism.
Support Vector Machines (SVM) are supervised learning
models with associated learning algorithms that analyze data
used for classification and regression analysis. Given a set of
training examples, each marked as belonging to one or the
other of two categories, an SVM training algorithm builds a
model that assigns new examples to one category or the other,
making it a non-probabilistic binary linear classifier [9].
The distinctive characteristic of an SVM is the use of a
separating hyperplane. The operation of SVM algorithm is
based on finding the hyperplane that gives the largest
minimum distance to the training examples. This distance
receives the important name of margin within SVM’s theory.
Hence, the optimal separating hyperplane maximizes the
margin of the training data [7]. Figure 7 shows an example of
how the hyperplane is assigned for a set of data on a 2D
Cartesian plane.

C. Feature Extraction
After the signal pre-processing stage, the signals were now
artefact-free. However, the signal was not guaranteed to be
good enough for it to be efficiently processed by the
MATLAB classifiers. Hence, feature extraction process
needs to be performed on the data to help the MATLAB
classifier to efficiently classify the different tendency of the
brainwave characteristics based on the different patterns
captured in the EEG signal of the subjects.
D. Normalization Process
The normalization process is required to ensure that the
value of the data lies only in between the desired range. For
example, in Artificial Neural Network (ANN) machine
learning technique, the data has to be normalized before the
neural network is trained. The normalization technique will
be used to minimize the high value of power band ratio data.

E. Data Classification using Machine Learning
Techniques
Artificial Neural Network (ANN) is a machine learning
technique that consists of an interconnected group of nodes,
similar to the vast network of neurons in human brain [8].
Here, each circular node represents an artificial neuron and
an arrow represents a collection from the output of one neuron
to the input of another. Figure 6 shows the illustration of an
artificial neural network structure.

Figure 7: Hyperplane on a 2D Cartesian plane

The four different values (according to the ranges) of
Power Spectral Density (PSD) features obtained from the
signal pre-processing stage is used as the input for the ANN
and SVM classifiers. An answer scheme was set as to train
the classifiers to produce classification accuracy based on the
provided values of either 0 or 1 for the two different types of
input data.
Data Analysis and Validation: After the signal-features
values had been classified using the two machine learning
techniques, all the data obtained were analyzed and then
validated. Confusion matrixes were used to validate the data.
There are four terms used in a confusion matrix; True Positive
(TP), False Negative (FN), False Positive (FP) and True
Negative (TN).
The data analysis and validation phase were performed on
a few categories of data classification. The main goal of this
project is to analyze the difference between normal and ASD
subjects EEG signal and brainwave activities. The second
goal is to analyze the difference between the emotion
classification of normal subjects and autistic subjects, i.e.
Neutral vs Sad or Neutral vs Happy. This explains the
different emotion stimulation during the experimental
procedure when acquiring the raw EEG data.

Figure 6: Artificial Neural Network Architecture

90

e-ISSN: 2289-8131 Vol. 10 No. 1-2

EEG Classification Analysis for Diagnosing Autism Spectrum Disorder based on Emotions

Each of the procedures used in this project played their own
crucial roles respectively in achieving the goals of this
research. The experimental procedures were necessary in
order to obtain the EEG data that will be used as the input and
the training of the classifiers while signal processing stage is
crucial in making sure that the data was free from noises and
in the right range suitable for classification. The classification
process played a major role in classifying the input values and
generating new data. The data analysis and validation phase
were also crucial parts in translating all the results obtained
and making valid conclusions from them.
III. RESULT AND ANALYSIS
In this study, we had performed classification analysis
based on a few categories of data. This analysis includes the
Normal vs Autistic classification, Autistic Emotion
Classification and Normal Emotion Classification. In
addition, an analysis and comparison of the optimum hidden
layer (patternet) value of ANN classifier were also carried
out. The results and findings of each analysis are
demonstrated and discussed accordingly next.
A. Normal vs. Autism Classification
As explained in the earlier parts of this paper, the
classification process for normal and autistic EEG data was
executed using two different machine learning techniques,
which are ANN and SVM. The accuracy of the classifiers
using the same sets of input data are shown in Table 1.
Table 1
Normal vs. Autism Classification Using ANN and SVM
Machine Learning Techniques
Artificial Neural Network (ANN)
Support Vector Machine (SVM)

Accuracy
90.5%
88.1%

These classifications were performed using the EEG data
of the subjects’ neutral emotion for the use of autism
diagnosing. For ANN classifier, the pattern recognition tools,
i.e. ‘nprtool’ in the NN toolbox were utilized in training the
ANN classifier. There were two classes defined as the
variable used for the ANN classifier output neuron, which
was normal and autistic. The output for each sample target
was set as ‘0’ for normal and ‘1’ for autistic. The number of
hidden layer (patternet) used for all ANN classification was
55 as it was found and proven as the most optimum value of
hidden layers. This will be explained in another section of this
paper.
As shown in Table 1, the value of accuracy obtained from
ANN classifier is significantly higher than the accuracy value
of data classification obtained using SVM when using the
exact same data sets. Hence, it can be concluded that ANN is
the better classifier in classifying the EEG data sets. This can
be due to the fact that ANN has its hidden layers processing
mechanisms that can aid in making more accurate
predictions. As for SVM, the accuracy value is still good
enough for data classification but the error percentage is
considerably high when compared to ANN classifier’s
accuracy.
B. Emotions Classification for Normal and Autistic
Subjects
This part of research compares and classifies the different
emotions of both normal and autistic subjects. This is done

for the purpose of studying the autistic subjects’ different
emotions towards different feelings stimulation. It also aims
to compare the difference between autistic emotions to the
normal emotions and how they differ in terms of the abilities
to react and process information from the emotion stimulants.
The obtained results are summarized in Table 2.
Table 2
Emotion Classification for Normal and Autistic Subjects
Emotion
Classification
Normal Data:
Neutral vs Happy
Neutral vs Sad
Autistic Data:
Neutral vs Happy
Neutral vs Sad

Accuracy
ANN

SVM

90.5%
92.5%

71.4%
90.5%

83.3%
85.7%

66.7%
66.7%

By referring to Table 2, it can be observed that the accuracy
values for autistic emotions classifications are significantly
lower than that of the normal emotions when using both ANN
and SVM classifiers. The accuracy value of a classifier
mainly indicates how easy it is for the provided data to be
classified most probably due to the distinct differences in
patterns and characteristics between the two classes.
Hence, the lower accuracy value of the classifier indicates
that the data is more complex and therefore harder to classify
into two clear parts as the values of the data are inconsistent.
Therefore, it can be said that the autistic subjects have a more
complex emotion as compared to normal subjects. This fact
explains why autistic children are usually showing minimum
emotion when interacting with people or unable to
differentiate their own feelings towards something.
C. Optimum Hidden Layer Value for ANN
This study also included an experimentation of hidden
layer (patternet) values to determine the most optimum value
of the hidden layer to be used for ANN classification in
producing the highest accuracy.
A number of values ranging from 5 to 100 with the interval
of fives, e.g. 5, 10, 15,……..,100 were set and experimented
with different hidden layer values for ANN. For each value
of the hidden layers, the ANN classifier is executed ten times
using the same data sets, which is the data for Normal vs
Autistic (Neutral Emotion). The ten values of accuracy
obtained are averaged out and the hidden layer value with the
highest average accuracy is chosen as the hidden layer value
for ANN classifier.
From the performed hidden layer values testing, it was
shown that the hidden layer value of 55 provided the highest
average accuracy with 89.05%, while the hidden layer value
of 35 is in second place with 87.62% average accuracy. From
these findings, it can be concluded that the optimum value for
ANN hidden layer in classifying normal and autistic data
would be higher than the usual hidden layer values for
classifying other types of data.
D. New Data Classification for Autism Diagnosing
After all of the study and comparison made between the
two machine learning techniques, i.e. ANN and SVM, it was
concluded that ANN provided a higher accuracy in
classifying normal and autistic data. Hence, ANN will be
recommended as the primary method to diagnose a new data
in this research. This means that the trained ANN can be used
to classify a new data and determine whether the data belongs

e-ISSN: 2289-8131 Vol. 10 No. 1-2

91

Journal of Telecommunication, Electronic and Computer Engineering

to the normal or autistic group. This is in order to achieve the
primary goal of this project, which is to recommend a
diagnosing method for Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD).
Therefore, a sample program was constructed in order to
develop the basic idea of the intended diagnosing system. The
trained ANN is imported and then executed to ensure its
optimum accuracy value (this is because ANN classifier can
produce different values when executed numerous times) and
from the trained ANN, the highest threshold value was
chosen as the set point for the new data classification. This
was done to make sure that the classification of the new data
would be using the highest value of accuracy from the trained
ANN.
Figure 8 shows a sample of the confusion matrix obtained
as a reference before the new data classification was
executed. The accuracy obtained, as shown in the confusion
matrix was first made sure to be optimum before the trained
classifier was used to classify new data.

IV. CONCLUSION
In completing this study, a number of appropriate
Electroencephalography (EEG) classification analysis was
successfully carried out to differentiate the brainwave of
autistic children from normal children’s brainwave patterns.
This finding can be a stepping stone in helping to simplify the
time-consuming manual diagnosing processes using the
behavioral tests and observations. This classification analysis
can be employed as part of an ASD diagnosing system, where
a more accurate diagnosis can be determined. This analysis
can also help us to better understand the different traits of the
different levels of ASD. A comparison between different
machine learning techniques was also done to analyze their
performance in classifying the different emotions in autistic
and normal children. Another contribution of this research is
an experiment on the different values of ANN-classifier’s
hidden layers in determining the optimum value of hidden
layers, i.e. in producing the highest classification accuracy. In
addition, this research also concluded the comparison
between the two different techniques under machines
learning, which are Artificial Neural Network (ANN) and
Support Vector Machine (SVM) in terms of accuracy in
classifying the brainwave signals of the autistic children and
used the trained ANN to diagnose new data. The best
technique proposed for the ASD diagnosing process is ANN
due to its higher value of accuracy as compared to SVM
classifier.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to extend our acknowledgment to Universiti
Teknologi MARA (UiTM) and to those who have directly
and indirectly contributed to our project. This research is
funded by Ministry of Higher Education Malaysia via
Research
Acculturation
Grant
Scheme
(RAGS/2013/UITM/ICT06/1) and Fundamental Research
Grants Scheme Research (FRGS/1/2014/TK03/UiTM/
02/14).

Figure 8: Confusion Matrix for Normal and Autistic Data Classification

New data were then chosen randomly from one of the
normal subjects and one of the autistic subjects to be
classified into their expected categories. The classifications
of the new data provided manually from an excel file were
successful as the program produced the right output for the
respective normal and autistic data. Figure 9 shows the
correct output of the program for both normal and autistic
data classification.

REFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]
Figure 9: Normal and Autistic New Data Classification
[8]

[9]

92

Autism Speaks, Learn more about Autism Speaks [Online]. Retrieved
on 15th October 2016. Available: https://www.autismspeaks.org/.
Mohd Zuri Ghani and Aznan Che Ahmad, Pengantar Pendidikan Khas,
Penerbit Universiti Sains Malaysia, 2011.
A. B. Brandwein, J. J. Foxe, J. S. Butler, H. P. Frey, J. C. Bates, L.
Shulman, and S. Molholm, “Neurophysiological indices of atypical
auditory processing and multisensory integration are associated with
symptom severity in autism,” Journal of Autism and Developmental
Disorders, vol.45(1), pp. 230–244, 2015.
OpenCV, Introduction to Support Vector Machines [Online] Retrieved
on
13th
November
2016.
Available:
http://docs.opencv.org/2.4/doc/tutorials/ml/introduction_to_svm/intro
duction_to_svm.html.
Wikipedia, Support Vector Machine [Online]. Retrieved on 18th
October 2016. Available:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Support_vector_machine.
Susan Scutti, EEG Test for Autism May Soon Help Doctors Diagnose
Disorder at An Early Age [Online]. Retrieved on 15th October 2016.
Available: http://www.medicaldaily.com/eeg-test-autism-may-soonhelp-doctors-diagnose-disorder-early-age-304254.
Autism Malaysia, Diagnosing a Child with Autism [Online]. Retrieved
on
15th
October
2016,
Available:
http://www.autismmalaysia.com/diagnosing-a-child-with-autism.
Y. Gao, H. J. Lee and R. M. Mehmood, “Deep Learning of EEG Signals
for Emotion Recognition,” in IEEE International Conference on
Multimedia Expo Workshops (ICMEW) 2015, pp. 1-5.
Á. Gutiérrez, “Influence of Wavelets and Boundary Conditions on the
Diagnosis of Multiple Sclerosis Using Artificial Neural Networks,”, in

e-ISSN: 2289-8131 Vol. 10 No. 1-2

EEG Classification Analysis for Diagnosing Autism Spectrum Disorder based on Emotions
Annual Global Online Conference on Information and Computer
Technology (GOCICT) 2015, pp. 6-10.
[10] Z. Bin, Y. Benfu, S.Hongmei, S. Ye, L. Xiuhui, “Study on the artificial
neural network in the diagnosis of smear negative pulmonary
tuberculosis,” in WRI World Congress on Computer Science and
Information Engineering, 2009, pp. 584-588
[11] Á. Gutiérrez, “The PSO Algorithm and the Diagnosis of Multiple
Sclerosis Using Artificial Neural Networks.” in Annual Global Online
Conference on Information and Computer Technology, 2014, pp. 5-10.

[12] W. H. Land, L. Wong, D. McKee, M. Embrechts, R. Salih and F.
Anderson, “Applying Support Vector Machines to Breast Cancer
Diagnosis using Screen Film Mammogram Data,” in Proceedings. 17th
IEEE Symposium on Computer-Based Medical Systems, 2004, pp. 224228.
[13] K. Xia, G. Xu and N. Xu, “Lung Cancer Diagnosis System Based on
Support Vector Machines and Image Processing Technique,” in
International Conference on Intelligent Information Hiding and
Multimedia, 2006, pp. 143-146.

e-ISSN: 2289-8131 Vol. 10 No. 1-2

93

