IJBES
International Journal of Built Environment and Sustainability
Published by Penerbit UTM Press, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia
IJBES 6(3)/2019, 11-20

Probing Phenomenological Experiences Through
Electroencephalography
Brainwave
Signals
In
Neuroarchitecture Study
Vickram Thevar Vijayan
Faculty of Built Environment, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, 81310 UTM Johor Bahru, Johor, Malaysia
Email: vickramthevar@gmail.com
Mohamed Rashid Embi
Faculty of Built Environment, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, 81310 UTM Johor Bahru, Johor, Malaysia

Article History

ABSTRACT
Experiences are a part of our daily lives through our interactions with the environment
around us. We live life through the realm of experiences, be it playing or working. As
we encounter phenomena frequently, it is deduced that most of it comes from within
the built environment, considering how most of our time is spent indoors. Hence, it is
imperative that we understand the impact of the built environment on human
physiology especially within the context of religious spaces which is largely attributed
to phenomenological experiences. Despite the importance of understanding the impact
of the built environment on human physiology, phenomenological studies that
addresses this relationship are still lacking. This presents a gap which necessitates
evidence to be provided in the form of phenomenological studies. Hence, this study
attempts to address the gap by utilising evidential data with the utilisation of the
portable electroencephalography (EEG) device. In doing so, the brainwave readings
from four participants at the Tuanku Mizan Zainal Abidin Mosque were observed. Data
from the EEG device in the form of brainwave signals was analysed through the
performance metrics detection suite which focused on the possibility of analysing
brainwave data through three phases of habitation. The findings detected relaxation
performance metrics from the participants whilst being within the mosque prayer area,
whereas the phases prior to entering and after leaving the mosque appears to have
detected higher excitement and engagement levels. Thus, it could be deduced that the
interior prayer area of the mosque appears to have had a positive influence on the
participant's physiology. This study could contribute to the novel field of
neuroarchitecture in Malaysia, an area of study at the threshold of neuroscience and
architecture that could be significant in understanding the relationship between the
built environment and human physiology.

Received : 13 February 2019
Received in revised form : 29 April 2019
Accepted : 12 June 2019
Published Online : 31 August 2019
Keywords:
Architecture;
Electroencephalography;
Mosque;
Neuroarchitecture;
Phenomenological experiences
Corresponding Author Contact:
vickramthevar@gmail.com
DOI: 10.11113/ijbes.v6.n3. 360

© 2019 Penerbit UTM Press. All rights reserved

1.

Introduction

Experiences are a part of our daily lives. We live life through the
realm of experiences, be it eating, speaking, playing or working.
According to Edmund Husserl, a German philosopher who

founded the philosophy of phenomenology; ‘to live is to
experience’ (Bailey, 2013). Experience forms the basis of our
conscious understanding of the world through sensory
interactions. As stated by Pallasmaa (2009), human beings are
connected to the world through their sensory stimuli which are
not merely passive receptors but rather conscious modes of

6:3 (2019) 11–20 | ijbes.utm.my | eISSN 2289–8948|

12

Vickram Thevar & Mohamed Rashid - International Journal of Built Environment and Sustainability 6:3 (2019) 11–20

storing and structuring knowledge. Through direct interaction
with the world, human beings were able to learn from their
environment and study their experiences as a part of the
formation of their knowledge. This is further elucidated by
Pallasmaa (2014):

“The new sciences of bio-psychology and ecological psychology
actually study such evolutionary causalities in human instinctual
behaviour and cognition. It is evident that we are genetically and
culturally conditioned to seek or avoid certain types of situations
or atmospheres. Our shared pleasure in being in the shadow of
large trees looking onto a sun-lit open field, for instance, is
explained on the basis of such evolutionary programming – this
specific type of setting demonstrates the polar notions of ‘refuge’
and ‘prospect’, which have been applied to explain the pleasurable
pre-reflective feel of Frank Lloyd Wright’s houses, for instance”
(Juhani Pallasmaa, 2014).
This method of studying experiences is called phenomenology.
According to Bailey (2013), phenomenology is understood “as the
careful description of experiences in the manner in which they are
experienced by the subject, proposes to study, in Husserl’ s
words, the whole of our ‘life of consciousness’. In the Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy, phenomenology is defined as the
“study of structures of consciousness as experienced from the
first-person point of view”(Smith, 2013). As we encounter
phenomena frequently, it is deduced that a majority of it comes
from our interactions within the built environment, considering
how most of our time are spent indoors. According to Seamon
(2017) “on average in the Western world, people spend ninetenths of their lives inside buildings; about two-thirds of that
indoor time is spent at home”. Bearing in mind the amount of
time we spend indoors, it is imperative that we think about the
impact that architecture has on our physical health as well as
psyche; and the possibilities that could emerge from
understanding our patterns of behaviour and the reasoning behind
it.
In Holl's (1996) Intertwining book, he states that “architecture
can shape a lived and sensed intertwining of space and time; it can
change the way we live. Phenomenology concerns the study of
essences; architecture has the potential to put essences back into
existence. By weaving form, space and light, architecture can
elevate the experience of daily life through the various phenomena
that emerge from specific sites, programs, and architectures.” By
inducing various phenomena into architecture, an architect could
improve the occupants wellbeing or elevate their sensory
perception. Tadao Ando discussed his experience of sound
phenomena within architecture, stating that architectural space
becomes a phenomenon that we not only take in visually but
through our senses and whole bodies as well. Ando discusses his
experience in the interior of the Pantheon where a procession
came in and sang a hymn. Ando remarked that it was the sound of
space that affected him strongly (Shirazi, 2012).

However, despite all the potential of positives that could emerge
from the application of phenomenology into architecture, it is still
not a strongly observed, analysed or theorized method in the
context of architecture (Juhani Pallasmaa, 2014). There is a
difficulty in situating phenomenology amongst other schools of
thought in architecture, mostly owing to its unique position of
subjectivity. Many scholars on the other hand, from both
architecture and other disciplines, believes that phenomenology is
intersubjective . They believe that the aspect of shared
understanding is possible and not wholly subjective as claimed by
some theorists (Wang, 2013). Hence, it can be concurred that
more architects may consider using phenomenological methods if
its results can be substantiated.
This raises the possibility of using cross-disciplinary tools to
measure phenomenology as an outcome. There is current research
done in architecture in relation to clinical tools such as brainwave
(EEG), heart rate (HR) and blood pressure (BP) equipments. The
ongoing cross research between medicine, neuroscience and
architecture is promising and holds opportunities for architecture
as a discipline. As Pallasmaa; et al. (2013) states, “I believe that
neuroscience can give support to the mental objectives of design
and arts, which are in danger of being disregarded because of their
“uselessness” and apparent subjectivity.”
Thus, what if the interchange between neuroscience and
architecture could help us document and interpret the brain
activity of people within a specific location? Would this type of
mapping and recording open up the possibilities of documenting
and analysing architecture from the perspective of human
experience? Within the context of Malaysia, there is a collation of
opportunities for the study of phenomena in Malaysian
architecture.
In Malaysia, the majority of the population are Malay Muslims and
the established religion of the state is Islam (Embong, 2002). In
accordance to the religious beliefs of a Muslim and their day to
day lives, the mosque plays a central part of a Muslim’s life. A
mosque is seen not only as a place to pray but also to conduct
multipurpose activities for the community of Muslims (Baharudin
& Ismail, 2014). With so many possibilities of a mosque’s
function, there has been numerous reports and suggestions that
mosques positively impact the feelings and behaviour of its
occupants. According to Ardhiati (2013), “when a person enters a
mosque he or she would have left the hustle and bustle of the
material world and retreated into a calm shelter or sanctuary.”
The mosque is therefore also seen as an experiential phenomena
of calmness wherein the stresses of the world are left behind and
one enters a calmer state of mind.
Therefore, this study investigates the possibilities of clinical
analysis in relation to phenomenological experiences in Malaysian
mosques with the intention of substantiating evidence of
phenomenological experiences.
Does an occupant’s state of mind truly change when they enter a
mosque? How does one know this? Are the experiences positive
or negative? Which mosques contributes to a positive experience,

13

Vickram Thevar & Mohamed Rashid - International Journal of Built Environment and Sustainability 6:3 (2019) 11–20

and which ones less so? How does one prove this? The focus of the
study is divided into two parts. The first delves into the attributes
of phenomenology, its meaning, relationship to architecture, its
relationship to human wellbeing. The second looks into the
correlation between architectural phenomenology and human
physiological, physical and mental responses in the context of the
mosques which forms an integral part of the life of a Muslim.
Within 1 pre-selected mosque, all EEG recordings are recorded
inside the environment in real-time using the participants brain
electrical activity readings through a EMOTIV brainwave
equipment, as well as qualitative processes within a limited time
frame. The relationship between brain activity in relation to the
interior of a mosque is analysed and mapped to gain a better
understanding of the experiences one encounters within it. Four
(4) participants brain activity are analysed. Through a mapping of
the data, we will seek to uncover the relationship between
interior parameters of a mosque and its connection to their brain
activity. The cross intersection between the disciplines of
neuroscience and architecture is also reflected upon.

2.

Context

“While the brain controls our behaviour and genes control the
blueprint for the design and structure of the brain, the
environment can modulate the function of genes and, ultimately,
the structure of our brain, and therefore they change our
behaviour. In planning the environments in which we live,
architectural design changes our brain and behaviour”. – Fred
Gage, Adler Professor in the Laboratory of Genetics at Salk
Institute (Pallasmaa; et al., 2013)
As one can summate from the paragraph above, architectural
design has the capacity to change one’s behaviour thereby
modulating our brain reactions. According to Juhani Pallasmaa
(2005) “architecture initiates, directs and organises behaviour and
movement”. Pallasmaa also goes on to state that architecture
enforces the existential experience, one’s experience of being in
the world through not only vision but all the five (5) classical
senses. These five (5) senses involve several layers of sensory
experience which cohesively comes together and interacts to form
a multisensory experience. Though the vision may be seen as the
dominant sensory stimuli in our experiences, it is in actual reality
a cohesive unit of sensorial experience. However, does
architecture really have the ability to influence a person’s feelings
or behaviour?
In a study done by Shariff and Najafi (2011), five (5) state
mosques were chosen as a part of a study looking into factors
influencing public attachment to mosques in Malaysia. These five
(5) mosques were the National Mosque, Negeri Sembilan
Mosque, The Federal Territory Mosque, Putra Mosque as well as
the Al-Azim Mosque. In all selected mosques, participants
“experienced feelings of peacefulness, safety, refreshing,
relaxation, spiritual, tranquillity, comfort, calmness, presence of
God, and worship.” As such, it can be seen that architecture does
have an influence on human behaviour and feelings, with the
participants reporting feelings of calmness and tranquillity for all
five (5) mosques.

However, as gathered from the mentioned study, a gap of existing
literature exists wherein no substantiated evidence was offered. A
participant may express their feelings but there is no process in
which a validation of qualitative comments could occur. This is
seen in most research approaches in relation to phenomenology as
elements of biasedness may occur in regards to a participant’s
feedback. Most research approaches towards the study of
phenomena in general employs the qualitative approach such as
surveys, interviews, questionnaire which is deemed to be
subjective in nature and lacks a definitive evidence to substantiate
the claims of its participants.
Furthermore, there still remains criticism against the
methodologies of the architects, in part owing to its apparent
subjectivity. Without evidence, there is no proof to back up an
architect’s claims. However, an emerging field of cross
disciplinary research between neuroscience and architecture offers
hope that criticisms against a lack of evidence could finally be
subjugated. At the helm of this cross disciplinary research is
ANFA which stands for Academy of Neuroscience for
Architecture. In 2003, ANFA was formed by John P. Eberhard,
who is the founding president of the Academy of Neuroscience for
Architecture and the fellow of the American Institute of
Architects and his collaborators to address this growing body of
research in relation to human responses within the built
environment. ANFA’s purpose was anchored to a frustration with
a lack of evidence based design (Taylor-Hochberg, 2016).
It was found that many researchers rely on social sciences and
economic research that are too subjective in nature, whereas
neuroscience was found to offer solid evidence in comparison.
Jessica Pykett, a researcher at the University of Birmingham in the
School of Geography, Earth and Environmental Sciences, cited in
Karandinou and Turner (2017); adds on that neuroarchitecture
(fusion of the word neuroscience and architecture) can be seen as
a resolution for sceptics who sees flaws in an architect’s qualitative
as well as intuitive methodologies. Thus, what is neuroscience?
Edelstein and Macagno (2012) explains that “neuroscience
encompasses a range of disciplines that study the multiple
functions of our brains, and how these functions change from
birth to death and are affected by disease. Our brains survey our
environments through multiple sensory organs, and generate
appropriate behaviors, conscious and unconscious. Neuroscientific
research reveals how dynamic and plastic our brains are, and
informs us about how different our capacities to respond to our
environments are as children and as adults, and how exposure to
environmental conditions influence such capacities.” Here it is
important to emphasize that the brain scans the environment
through our senses and generates behaviours accordingly in
response to the environmental stimuli. The most appropriate
method for examining behaviour would be to understand the
neural mechanisms that selectively filters external information,
generates and produces behavioural tendencies (Taylor-Hochberg,
2016). Studies has been conducted in this cross disciplinary
research field to investigate such possibilities.
In 2017, a study was done by Banaei et al. (2017) through VR
simulated interior rooms to understand the impact of interior
forms on the human brain. On the overall, it was found that the
participants recorded a strong impact on their brain dynamics
when they were exposed to rooms with more curvature

14

Vickram Thevar & Mohamed Rashid - International Journal of Built Environment and Sustainability 6:3 (2019) 11–20

geometries. Hence it can be deduced that neuroscience has the
potential to uncover the relationship between the built
environment and our brain’s neural responses.
Thus, the relationship between neuroscience and architecture is a
highly promising fusion, as it enables an evidence-based approach
towards the design of the built environment. Though the exact
features that would be necessary to design a building in relation to
neuroscience has not been spelt out, architects can certainly
design buildings with features that promotes wellbeing through
neuroscience data (Dance, 2017).
Nonetheless there are criticisms of the integration between
neuroscience and architecture. Dan Montello, a geographer and
environmental psychologist at the University of California, cited
in Taylor-Hochberg (2016) claims that his concern is with the
overestimation of the benefits of neuroscience which will instead
be used to channel the designer’s attention from an empathy based
process to a quantitative based process instead. It has also been
pointed out that neuroscience could be used for the betterment or
quite the opposite in relation to the built environment. Rather
than the promotion of wellbeing, it could end up merely being
used as an excitement ploy by artists (Mehaffy & Salingaros,
2018).
Despite the reservations, as an emerging cross disciplinary field, it
is expected that there will be hesitations as to the appropriateness
of the medium in relation to the discipline. With more extensive
research being done in this area, perhaps more architects will
open up to the possibilities that neuroarchitecture offers.

3.

Methodology of Neuro-Architecture Research

With the emerging possibilities of cross-disciplinary research,
architects and neuroscientists alike has lent their voice to support
the integration of these two (2) disciplines. The advocates for this
integration claim that the fusion of these two (2) disciplines will
help architecture and the field of neuroscience move forward.
However, it is important to note that these two (2) bodies of
disciplines are quite different from one another especially in the
context of research methodology. In architectural research, the
architect has relied more on observation and intuition whereas in
neuroscience, the focus has been on experimentation and proof
(Sternberg & Wilson, 2006). In studying a phenomena, an
architect would usually observe the patterns of human behaviour,
study physical settings and intuitively synthesize a solution,
immersing themselves in a situation or experience to gain an
insight into the encounters that the built environment delivers. As
defined by the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy,
phenomenology is the “study of structures of consciousness as
experienced from the first-person point of view” (Smith, 2013).
This varies substantially from the methodology employed by
neuroscientists which seeks an evidence-based approach.
A neuroscientist would follow a predetermined path of research,
gathering quantitative data and then validating it, either proving
or disapproving the experiment’s hypothesis.
As such, the phenomenological (interpretive science) approach
used by architects differs from the method used by neuroscientists

due to different schools of scientific thought employed.
Neuroscientists follow a logical positivism approach, in which data
and facts takes precedence over intuition. According to
Amaratunga et al. (2002) “logical positivism uses quantitative and
experimental methods to test hypothetical-deductive
generalisations”. Positivism seeks fundamental laws and causal
explanations, and reduces the whole to simplest elements in order
to generate analysis. It is also based conceptually on social
structure and social facts, with quantitative and hypothesis tests
being used. On the other hand, the phenomenological approach
uses naturalistic and qualitative approaches to comprehend human
experience holistically. It is based on social construction and
meaning, with qualitative and hypothesis generation being its
cornerstone (Amaratunga et al., 2002).
According to Papale et al. (2016), both schools of scientific
approaches are equally needed to validate one another. “Many
socially relevant research questions could be explored by
neuroscience and architecture in synergy. Whereas currently the
outcomes of this dialogue and contamination between architecture
and neuroscience are hardly predictable, we believe in the
paramount importance of sharing knowledge among disciplines”
(Papale et al., 2016). Hence, the triangulation methodology was
employed for the purposes of this research. “Triangulation is the
combination of methodologies in the study of the same
phenomenon” (Amaratunga et al., 2002). The essence of
triangulation lies in its effectiveness to counter-balance the
weakness of each methodology and is seen as an effectual research
approach which combines both qualitative and quantitative
methodologies in approaching a phenomena. Thus, an
interdisciplinary synergy was deemed most appropriate for this
research with a combination of quantitative (neuroscience data)
and qualitative (interview) methodology being used to gain
further clarity into the phenomena.
As for the building typology, a space of worship was chosen. In a
study conducted on places to pause and be introspective,
participants identified places of worship (Shah, 2009). Therefore,
in Malaysia, as Muslims make up the majority of the population
and Islam being the established religion of the state (Embong,
2002), the mosque was chosen as the most appropriate typology
of worship spaces. In relation to the historical nuances of Malaysia
and feedback of visitors to mosques, the Iron Mosque of Putrajaya
was seen as the most appropriate mosque for the experiment to be
done as it has recorded numerous feedbacks online about the
calmness it exudes to its visitors (Saya, 2018) (Noorashani, 2018).
For this study, only a single case study of the mosque was
employed. This is because single case studies are proven to be
better models to test new theories (Gaya, 2016). The study is also
not comparing sets of mosques but rather looking into a single
mosque to understand the specific physiological changes of the
participants. This is also corroborated by Yin, cited in Gustafsson
(2017) who states that if a researcher is only focused on a single
group of people, then the single case study would be the best
method as it is not a comparative study.
For this experiment, four (4) participants from the Built
Environment discipline were chosen. The students from this
discipline was chosen because it has been proven that education
can affect the impact of a person’s experience. In one fMRI
(functional magnetic resonance imaging) study, Wiesmann and

15

Vickram Thevar & Mohamed Rashid - International Journal of Built Environment and Sustainability 6:3 (2019) 11–20

Ishai, cited in Coburn et al. (2017) found that architecture
students employed different cortical areas when viewing buildings
as compared to students from different disciplines. Architects also
seemingly employ activation of the hippocampus region and
precuneus when viewing buildings as compared to faces, which
demonstrates that their education memories had a contribution to
their affective responses.

(15) minutes (Rock & Kambouropoulos, 2007). However, since
this experiment is related to the context of the built environment,
a visual stimulus of the built environment is needed to correspond
to the brain signals therefore the act of sitting quietly for fifteen
(15) minutes in total with the eyes open was deemed the most
suitable position as shown in Figure 1.

All chosen participants were Muslims as it was necessary to enter
the prayer space to experience the interior context fully. On the
duration, the rationale behind the fifteen (15) minutes was to
record three (3) separate phases of five (5) minutes each. The
three (3) separate phases of habitation were outside of the prayer
space, in the prayer space and outside of the prayer space again.
This was necessary in order to understand the reaction of the
brainwaves before entering a mosque prayer area, whilst being in
it, and after departing it.
Through phenomenological literature contexts, the act of sitting
has appeared in various phenomenological discussions. According
to a study conducted by Shah (2009), “sitting is the activity which
most of the participants have described while narrating their
contemplative experiences – whether this be sitting on a bench in
a park, or church, sitting on the floor while praying, or sitting in a
tree for fun. It appears that the activity of sitting provides a
ground or basis for moving to another dimension of
experiencing.” In another two (2) studies, it was found that the
assessment of phenomenological experience could be reliably
tested through sitting quietly and keeping the eyes open or closed
(Pekala et al., 1986). For Elbow (1989), the act of sitting on the
floor achieved an altered feeling of phenomena. As Elbow
described, “I remember sometimes sitting on the floor-I'm not
sure why, but probably as a kind of bodily acting out of my sense
of desperation. I could type fast and I learned that I could just let
myself flow into words with a kind of intensity.” It can be
surmised that the act of sitting quietly with the eyes open or
closed could bring about a contemplative experience for a person,
which in turn leads to experiential phenomenology.
The participants were advised to avoid sudden movements and to
abstain from the act of prayer as movements could affect the
accuracy of data readings. This is because any activity of any kind
would result in biased consciousness which would display
inaccurate readings (L Singer et al., 1981). The EEG readings
were measured during non-prayer times as it was imperative to
avoid any sensory interferences which could result in biased
readings as the focus of this study is to understand the relationship
between the mosque’s-built environment and the participants
physiological responses. All participants have not experienced this
mosque before and are visiting for the first time.
In deciding the appropriate amount of time for a baseline EEG
reading to be stabilized, though the current range to achieve
baseline conditioning varies, a figure of four (4) minutes was
deduced. According to L Singer et al. (1981), a time period of
four (4) minutes is enough for any stable and intransient
properties of consciousness to be assessed without disrupting
one’s stream of consciousness and remembering the experience
would not be difficult. In another study, a psygram depicted the
pattern of the act of sitting quietly with eyes closed for fifteen

Figure 1 Participant’s Sitting Position
The device used to measure the brainwave signals is an Emotiv
Insight 5 Channel Mobile EEG Device, as shown in Figure 2. The
device has a high accuracy range with an over 85% accuracy range
for Excitement and over 70% for Interest. However it must be
noted that the accuracy of emotions varies across individuals as
not every individual has the same limits for certain emotions,
therefore EMOTIV calculates the dominant performance metric
of the motion out of a 0-100% range which is divided into
excitement, engagement, relaxation, interest, stress and focus on
the MyEmotiv application (Emotiv, 2019). Engagement is a
mixture of attention and concentration, focus is the measurement
of one’s fixed attention on a task, interest is the degree of
attraction or aversion, relaxation is the ability to rest and recover
or ‘switch off’, excitement is the level of mental arousal, whereas
stress is the measurement of the level of comfort one has with a
particular task (Emotiv, 2012). This device would enable the
justification of the objective of study which is to study
physiological differences of a person’s brainwave signals in
response to the built environment, which in this study is the Iron
Mosque in Putrajaya.

16

Vickram Thevar & Mohamed Rashid - International Journal of Built Environment and Sustainability 6:3 (2019) 11–20

Figure 2 EMOTIV Insight 5 Channel Device
Using the MyEmotiv application, the participants will have
their device calibrated between 1-2 minutes however this time
period will differ according to each participant’s sensor contact
with the scalp (Emotiv, 2018). After the calibration period, the
participants physiological responses will be recorded through
screenshots taken at three (3) intervals using the MyEmotiv
application which detects their Mental Performance Metrics.
It is postulated that in this study, participants may display
higher relaxation metrics whilst being in the mosque prayer area,
whereas prior to and after leaving the mosque, it is expected that
the participants will record higher engagement or excitement
metrics.
The participants were briefly interviewed the day after to garner
their qualitative feedback. This was important as the what the
participants felt could be cross validated to the data. Through an
analysis of the brainwave signals performance metrics, are there
any patterns that can be deduced from it? Is there a correlation
between the brainwave signals and the participants qualitative
feedback? These questions can be seen as stages of a scientific
process; as the testing of a new theoretical methodology in
relation to neuroarchitecture. The observation and recording of
the participants’ brain activity may reveal patterns as to their brain
wave performance metrics, such as engagement, excitement,
stress, focus or relaxation. The findings may potentially lead to
observations which will inform the impact of the space on the
participants physiology. This study has a limited number of
participants but is acceptable in relation to other studies done in
the field of neuroscience and architecture. This experiment is
exploring the possibility of theoretical cross fertilization between
neuroscience and architecture and therefore should not be used as
a generalized statistical outcome. It is an exploratory study and it
is the aim of this study to test the possibilities of neuroscience
within architecture.

4.

Principal Experiment Observations

Before delving into the experiment observations, the participants
were given an alphabetical and numerical combination label in
order to identify each participant. Since there are two (2) males
and two (2) females, the males are labelled M1 & M2 and the
females F1 & F2. All participants were given an informed consent
form and hence agreed to the publishing of specific details such as
gender. The following are the key findings observed throughout
the experiment for each participant for the EEG performance
metrics as well as the brief focus group feedback:
1st Interval
After the participants had achieved a stabilized EEG calibration,
the performance metrics were then captured. In the first interval,
based on the performance metrics dominant range, participants
exhibited either excitement or engagement dominant frequencies
as shown in Table 1. M1 recorded 74% on excitement, M2 had
82% on engagement, F1 displayed 92% on engagement and F2
recorded 73% on excitement. As previously mentioned,
engagement is a mixture of conscious concentration and attention
whereas excitement is the level of mental arousal. It could be
deduced that all participants exhibited a conscious level of
thinking and engagement with their new surroundings, and this is
consequently reflected in their performance metrics. According to
Patel (2015), arousal happens when the body issues chemicals into
the brain that stimulates emotions and creates physical agitation in
readiness for action. The dominant frequencies of the participants
appear to support the premise that all participants seem to be
either engaged or excited within the context of the compound of
the mosque.

17

Vickram Thevar & Mohamed Rashid - International Journal of Built Environment and Sustainability 6:3 (2019) 11–20

2nd Interval
During the second interval, another reading was taken after a
stabilization of the EEG calibration on the device. It was found
that all participants recorded a dominant relaxation frequency,
with participant M1 recording 73%, M2 with 82% as shown in
Figure 3, F1 with 83% and F2 with 80%. This appears to support
the early mentioned postulation that participants may record
relaxation frequencies whilst being within the prayer area of the
mosque. It could be surmised that participants were feeling
relaxed within the prayer area of the mosque and demonstrated
physiological changes that were specific to the area of the mosque.
3rd Interval
Upon exiting the prayer area of the mosque and being seated once
again at the compound of the mosque, a final reading was taken

after the calibration of the device. It was found that participants
returned to exhibiting either excitement or engagement
frequencies. Participant M1 recorded 72% on excitement, M2
with 78% on engagement, F1 with 82% on engagement and F2
with 69% on excitement. The dominant metric points to the
possibility that participants were actively engaged with their
thinking processes and the environment around them thereby
demonstrating these specific metrics. It appears that participants
display a sense of animation upon leaving the vicinity of the
mosque prayer area. It must be noted however that the frequency
of engagement and excitement is lower than at the first interval,
and this could be possibly attributed to the sense of relaxation
experienced at the second interval and the gradual engagement
with the outside world upon leaving the prayer area.

Table 1 Performance Metrics Dominant Readings at Tuanku Mizan Zainal Abidin Mosque
Participant and
Dominant Performance
Metrics

Before
Dominant Frequency
(0-100% Range)

During
Dominant Frequency
(0-100% Range)

After
Dominant Frequency
(0-100% Range)

M1

74
(Excitement)
82
(Engagement)
92
(Engagement)
73
(Excitement)

73
(Relaxation)
82
(Relaxation)
83
(Relaxation)
80
(Relaxation)

72
(Excitement)
78
(Engagement)
82
(Engagement)
69
(Excitement)

M2
F1
F2

Figure 3 Participant M2’s Brainwave Performance Metrics

18

Vickram Thevar & Mohamed Rashid - International Journal of Built Environment and Sustainability 6:3 (2019) 11–20

Experiment Summary & Feedback
We observed some principally similar themes that emerged
from this experiment.
Before entering the mosque prayer area and after leaving it, all
participants recorded excitement or engagement performance
metrics which is associated to active thinking processes and
mental arousal. Whilst being in the mosque area, all participants
recorded relaxation performance metrics which is related to
aspects of rest and recovery. This is corroborated by Aoun
(2016) in a study done using a portable EEG headset to measure
the impact of architectural elements on emotions. It was found
that architectural elements did trigger emotions and provoked
feelings of engagement, emotion and relaxation amongst others.
Thus, it can be determined that the participants were reacting in
relation to the environment around them across all three
intervals. It appears that the mosque prayer area was the context
that impacted them most positively as it brought about a sense of
relaxation.
Mosque Prayer Area (2nd Interval)
All participants expressed their affinity towards the design of the
interior of the mosque. They identified words such as joy,
serenity, surprise and amazement as the notable feelings they
felt within the interior. All participants agreed that scale was an
important factor in the feeling. They also observed that the
aspect of nature was involved in the design of the mosque and
that it had a positive reaction on them.
M1 remarked that the high ceiling of the mosque gave him a
feeling that he was small, and God was big. He also remarked
that he felt calm. M1 also felt that the multiple smaller entrances
which were small revealed a delightful surprise of the sudden
disclosure of the heightened scale of the mosque. M2 verbally
identified the views from the mosque looking outwards towards
the water feature had a calming effect.
He also commented that the materials on the floor felt cool to
the touch, and somehow felt a correlative effect on calming
himself down. F1 had similar views on the water feature which
felt like it had a calming effect on the body and mind however
she felt interrupted by the sudden construction noise. F2
observed that the scale of the space was big, and made her feel
like her problems were small and insignificant in comparison.
She mentioned that ‘there were greater things out there.’ F2
also pointed out that the volume of the space made her feel
‘overwhelmed.’
As such, it could potentially be surmised that the interior of the
mosque left a considerable impression on the participants at the
2nd interval. Being within the mosque’s prayer area seems to
have brought a change to the participants’ EEG performance
metric readings and could possibly point to the positive effect it
has on the wellbeing of a Muslim. There appears to be a
relationship between the performance metrics data and the
qualitative feedback. Both appear to support one another in
relation to the qualitative feedback of calm and the performance
metric of relaxation. The possibilities of portable EEG readings

in analyzing how a person may feel or respond within the
context of a mosque could determine the efficiency of the design
of the mosque in relation to the wellbeing of Muslims who
congregates there for prayers.
Technical / Equipment Constraints
Despite spending fifteen (15) minutes per participant for the
recording, the actual time to adjust the sensors and calibrate the
equipment for each participant and the three (3) intervals was
much longer. An approximate additional half an hour was spent
calibrating each participants’ sensors to achieve polymer contact
with the scalp. During the recording, there were moments in
which the sensors were detached and this produced ‘noise’
glitches on the readings. The removed noise glitches were left
out so as to not influence the bearing of this experiment.
It should also be noted research has demonstrated that though
one brainwave state may dominate at a specific time depending
on the individual’s activity, the remaining brainwave states are
present at all times. Thus if a person is exhibiting a dominant
brainwave, it does not mean that all other brainwave patterns
cease to exist; it would still be present at a trace level whilst
demonstrating the dominant frequency (Herrmann, 2019). This
must be kept in mind when viewing the performance metrics.

5.

Conclusions

This experiment was initiated as a point to further instigate the
possibilities of neuroarchitecture and to enhance the possibilities
of studying the wellbeing of occupants within the framework of
architecture and neuroscience. Throughout this study, several
observations were found to be supported by existing literature.
This is demonstrated by the recording of engagement and
excitement metrics whilst the participants were actively thinking
of their surroundings and involved in cognition processes. The
other observation found in this experiment relates to the
recording of relaxation metrics when the participants were
within the prayer area of the mosque, which demonstrated a
possible relaxation phase within the interior. The participants
also verbally identified words such as joy, serenity, and
amazement in relation to the interior of the mosque which
correlates to the collated data. Two (2) participants felt that the
scale of the mosque positively overwhelmed them into
contemplation and reflection. It can be surmised that specific
design factors of the mosque such as scale, tactile qualities and
the element of water within the mosque seems to have made an
impact on the participants’ emotions. It was also found that
setting up the equipment and calibrating it fit each participant
took much longer than expected and was challenging as there
were moments during the reading when the sensors would
become detached.
On another note, it is important to elucidate that the principal
observations are based on a small sampling size, four (4)
participants in one (1) mosque, for the purposes of testing the
cross disciplinary bridge between neuroscience and architecture.
It is imperative to note that this experiment was done as a
theoretical study, and must not be used as a generic tool to

19

Vickram Thevar & Mohamed Rashid - International Journal of Built Environment and Sustainability 6:3 (2019) 11–20

reach conclusions on a much larger scale representative of any
population. Having said that, this experiment develops new
ideas in relation to proving architectural phenomena in mosques
in Malaysia and seeks to enhance this discussion on a much larger
network.
It seeks to be part of an ongoing discourse on the relevance of
neuroscience within architecture and the various possibilities it
could propose in the context of architectural phenomenology.
As it stands, there has been further excavation of this crossdisciplinary research field with well-known architects involved
and therein lies potential for this body of research to be
investigated further. Architectural phenomenology, for all the
years it has been discussed, lectured on and debated, has not
been put through rigorous scientific tests hence this is an
opportunity to prove the existence of specific phenomena within
the context of architecture especially within Malaysia.
With such exciting collaborations between the field of
neuroscience and architecture, architectural phenomenology
may yet undergo a paradigm shift of sorts, examining the link
between space and brain, logic and intuition, architectural
design and human emotions. This is a narrative that will bring
together an alchemy of ideas and disciplines, though it may be
on opposite ends of the scale, to a new frontier of
phenomenological neuroarchitecture.

References
Amaratunga, D., Baldry, D., & Sarshar, M. (2002) Quantitative
and qualitative research in the built environment: application of
“mixed” research approach. Emerald Insight, 51(1): 17-31
Aoun, R. G. (2016) Emotional Design in Architecture. Academy
of Neuroscience for Architecture. 12-13
Ardhiati, Y. (2013) The new architecture of mosque design.
Global Advanced Research Journal of Arts and Humanities, 2(4): 1-6
Baharudin, N. A., & Ismail, A. S. (2014) Communal Mosques:
Design Functionality towards the Development of Sustainability
for Community. Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences, 153106120

Edelstein, E. A., & Macagno, E. (2012) Form Follows Function:
Bridging Neuroscience and Architecture. 5627-41
Elbow, P. (1989) Toward a Phenomenology of Freewriting.
Journal of Basic Writing, 8(2):42-71
Embong, A. R. (2002) Malaysia as a Multicultural Society.
Macalester International, 1224
Gaya, H. (2016) Developing a qualitative single case study in the
strategic management realm: An appropriate research design.
International Journal of Business Management and Economic Research,
7(2): 1-10
Gustafsson, J. (2017). Single case studies vs. multiple case
studies: A comparative study .Academy of Business, Engineering
and Science: 1-15. Halmstad, Sweden: Halmstad University.
Holl, S. Intertwining : selected projects, 1989-1995 (1996). New
York: Princeton Architectural Press 1-6.
Juhani Pallasmaa. The Eyes Of The Skin : Architecture And The Senses
(2005). Chichester; Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Academy ; John
Wiley & Sons 1-130.
Juhani Pallasmaa. (2014) Space, Place And Atmosphere.
Emotion And Peripherical Perception In Architectural
Experience. Lebenswelt. Aesthetics and philosophy of experience.
(4)233
Karandinou, A., & Turner, L. (2017) Architecture And
Neuroscience; What Can The EEG Recording Of Brain Activity
Reveal About A Walk Through Everyday Spaces? International
Journal of Parallel, Emergent and Distributed Systems. 32(sup1): S54S65
L Singer, J., J Pekala, R., & Levine, R. (1981). Mapping
Consciousness: Development of an Empirical-Phenomenological
Approach .1: 1-10.
Pallasmaa, J. The Thinking Hand: Existential and Embodied Wisdom
in Architecture (2009): Wiley, 6-7.

Bailey, A. Philosophy of Mind: The Key Thinkers (2013). London:
Bloomsbury, 37.

Pallasmaa;, J., Mallgrave;, H. F., & Arbib, M. Architecture and
Neuroscience (2013). Helsinki: Tapio Wirkkala-Rut Bryk
Foundation, 16.

Banaei, M., Hatami, J., Yazdanfar, A., & Gramann, K. (2017)
Walking through Architectural Spaces: The Impact of Interior
Forms on Human Brain Dynamics. Frontiers in Human
Neuroscience, 11(477): 2

Papale, P., Chiesi, L., Rampinini, A. C., Pietrini, P., &
Ricciardi, E. (2016) When Neuroscience 'Touches'
Architecture: From Hapticity to a Supramodal Functioning of
the Human Brain. Front Psychol, 7866

Coburn, A., Vartanian, O., & Chatterjee, A. (2017) Buildings,
Beauty, and the Brain: A Neuroscience of Architectural
Experience. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience. 13: 1525

Pekala, R. J., Steinberg, J., & Kumar, V. K. (1986)
Measurement
of
Phenomenological
Experience:
Phenomenology of Consciousness Inventory. Perceptual and Motor
Skills. 63(2): 983-989

Dance, A. (2017) Science and Culture: The brain within
buildings. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 114(5): 785-787

20

Vickram Thevar & Mohamed Rashid - International Journal of Built Environment and Sustainability 6:3 (2019) 11–20

Rock, A., & Kambouropoulos, N. (2007). Toward a
Phenomenology of Urge to Drink: A Future Prospect for the Cuereactivity Paradigm . 9: 396

Emotiv. (2018). EMOTIV Insight Brainwear® 5 Channel
Wireless EEG Headset. Retrieved 28/4, 2019, from
https://www.emotiv.com/insight/

Seamon, D. (2017) Architecture, Place, and Phenomenology:
Lifeworlds, Atmospheres, and Environmental Wholes. 1-16

Emotiv. (2019). How Accurately Does Our Insight Detect
Emotions- Emotiv. Retrieved 28/4, 2019, from
https://emotiv.zendesk.com/hc/en-us/articles/210680463How-accurately-does-our-Insight-detect-emotions-

Shah, R. (2009). A Phenomenological Study Of Contemplative
Experiences: Implications For Interior Design. Queensland University
of Technology, Australia.
Shariff, M. K. B. M., & Najafi, M. (2011) Factors influencing
public attachment to mosques in Malaysia. International Journal of
Architectural Research. 5(3): 1-18
Shirazi, M. (2012) An investigation on Tadao Ando's
Phenomenological Reflections. Technical University of Berlin.
4(4): 21-31
Smith, D. W. (2013). Phenomenology. In D. W. Smith (Ed.),
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Stanford, California: Center
for the Study of Language and Information.
Sternberg, E. M., & Wilson, M. A. (2006) Neuroscience And
Architecture: Seeking Common Ground. Cell. 127(2): 239-242
Taylor-Hochberg, A. (2016) Architects and Neuroscience.
Journal of Urban Design and Mental Health. 1(3): 1-3
Wang, L. G. D. Architectural Research Methods (2013). New
Jersey: Wiley 1-480.
Dictionaries, O. (2018). Definition of intersubjective in English
by Oxford Dictionaries.
Retrieved 24/6/, 2018, from
https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/intersubjective
Emotiv. (2012). Five Basic Measures of Mental Performance
Metrics – Knowledge Base.
Retrieved 28/4, 2019, from
https://emotiv.zendesk.com/hc/en-us/articles/201216195Five-Basic-Measures-of-Mental-Performance-Metrics

Herrmann, N. (2019). What is The Function Of The Various
Brainwaves.
Retrieved
8/1/,
2019,
from
https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/what-is-thefunction-of-t-1997-12-22/
Mehaffy, M. W., & Salingaros, N. A. (2018). The Neuroscience
of Architecture_ The Good, the Bad—and the Beautiful.
Retrieved
26/12/,
2018,
from
https://www.traditionalbuilding.com/opinions/theneuroscience-of-architecture
Noorashani. (2018). Masjid Tuanku Mizan Zainal Abidin (Masjid
Besi), Putrajaya.
Retrieved 28/12/, 2018, from
https://www.tripadvisor.com.my/Attraction_Reviewg298305-d7624437-Reviews
Masjid_Tuanku_Mizan_Zainal_Abidin_Masjid_BesiPutrajaya_Wilayah_Persekutuan.html
Patel, N. (2015). The Psychology of Excitement_ How to
Better Engage Your Audience. Retrieved 28/4, 2019, from
https://blog.hubspot.com/marketing/psychology-ofexcitement
Saya. (2018). Iron Mosque - Masjid Tuanku Mizan Zainal Abidin
(Masjid Besi), Putrajaya Traveller Reviews. Retrieved 28/12/,
2018,
from
https://www.tripadvisor.com.my/ShowUserReviewsg298305-d7624437-r599762206Masjid_Tuanku_Mizan_Zainal_Abidin_Masjid_BesiPutrajaya_Wilayah_Persekutuan.html

