Architectural Space Alters the Expression of Gene
that Regulate Physical and Emotional Stress
Ammar Ayman Zaino, Mohamed Yusoff Abbas
Centre of Studies, Architecture, Faculty of Architecture, Planning & Surveying,
Universiti Teknologi MARA, Puncak Alam, Malaysia
ammar_zaino@hotmail.com, myusoff801@uitm.edu.my
Tel.: +601164445148

Abstract
Newberg & Waldmans (2010) concluded their well-known scientific experiment, “A single word has the
power to influence the expression of genes that regulate physical and emotional stress”. However, could
architectural space also speaks? Or alter the expression of genes? This study aimed to investigate the
relationship between architecture, brain and genes. The objectives were to test the influence of
architecture over brain’s electrical-activity, and subsequently develop, a theory of space and genes. The
research methodology involved three phases. Firstly, an integrated approach for literature review.
Secondly, an experimental approach. Finally, an integrative analysis. Findings showed a significant
change of brain-electricity by change of environments. Thus, alteration in the expression of genes.
Keywords: Architecture; Emotions; Behaviour; Genes.
eISSN: 2514-751X © 2020 The Authors. Published for AMER ABRA cE-Bs by e-International Publishing House, Ltd.,
UK. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-ncnd/4.0/). Peer–review under responsibility of AMER (Association of Malaysian Environment-Behaviour Researchers),
ABRA (Association of Behavioural Researchers on Asians) and cE-Bs (Centre for Environment-Behaviour Studies),
Faculty of Architecture, Planning & Surveying, Universiti Teknologi MARA, Malaysia.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.21834/ajebs.v5i16.366

Zaino, A.A. & Abbas, M.Y. / Asian Journal of Environment-Behaviour Studies (ajE-Bs), 5(16) May / Aug 2020 (pp.1-19)

1.0 Introduction

As modern science emerged, human started to believe less in the spiritual dimension of life.
It impacted many people, including architects and engineers to implement a new pattern of
thinking in the way they live their lives and most importantly, In designing buildings, they
started to believe less in aesthetics, but more about, function, tangibles and materialism. It
has become all about money (Bica, 2016). With the evolution of science also, scientists and
researchers started to understand the effect of design on human wellbeing, depression, and
spiritual dimension. Neuroscience started to offer us a new perspective in the way we view
reality as found in recent studies by the World Federation for Mental Health (2016). By 2030,
it is anticipated that the most significant illness would be the mental disorder of “depression”.
Furthermore, contemporary architecture has started to receive more accusations with
emotional coldness, restrictive aesthetics, distanced from human and life (Pallasmaa, 2015).
Newberg & Waldman’s (2010) well-known scientific experiment concluded that words
have the power to change the brain in profound ways. By altering the neural resonance, would
eventually results in enhanced cognitive health. Their research suggested that long-term
compassionate communication and contemplative practices reinforce a specific neurological
circuit which generated peacefulness and solitude, followed by positive wellbeing.
Furthermore, Sharon Begley (2007) believes that the human brain can remake itself and be
changed through positivity. Neuroplasticity is the mechanism that allows these changes to
occur in the brain (scientifically). Compassionate experience is cognitively structured, where
thoughts-beliefs play a central role. This is because when we believe in a specific thing, we
are informing our brain, talking to our self, and silently saying words to our brain.
Neuroscience research suggests that compassionate experiences are associated with
patterns of brain activity. However, no specific brain area mediates those experience (Jeeves
& Brown, 2009; McNamara, 2014; Newberg & Waldman, 2010). Just looking at negative
words for a few moments will increase your worry and depression. The more you ruminate,
the more you damage key structures that regulate your memory, feelings, and emotions. You
willll disrupt your sleep, your appetite, and your ability to experience long-term happiness and
satisfaction.
Architecture speaks
Newberg and Waldman’s (2010) concluded their research on how powerful speaking a single
word can be. It alters emotions, followed by behaviour and the expression of gene. Long-term
influence of words scientifically proven for its ability to restructure the biological system of
one’s body and gens. Either positively or negatively. Everyone agrees with this conclusion.
However, do architecture also speaks? What is the definition of a “word”? According to the
Oxford dictionary (2020), a “word” is a single distinct meaningful element. Used to form a
sentence to create communication. This research hypothesises the definition of “space” which
is, “space” is a single meaningful element, built to form a structure to communicate with
human existence, emotionally, physiologically and finally genetically. However, if the
communication was uncompassionate it will influence humans, through three stages,
emotionally, behaviorally, and ultimately altering the expression of genes. Therefore, any form

2

Zaino, A.A. & Abbas, M.Y. / Asian Journal of Environment-Behaviour Studies (ajE-Bs), 5(16) May / Aug 2020 (pp.1-19)

of turmoil, emotional experience, or rumination, for instance, worrying about your economic
future, health, or achieving specific thing, will stimulate the release of destructive
neurochemicals. The more negative thoughts/feelings they have, the more likely to
experience emotional turmoil. But if you redesign things to be turned positively, you can turn
your life around. Not philosophically speaking, but, scientifically (Newberg, 2010).
A positive experience can fight your genes back—if someone was born with genes tells
that he is a depressed person, those genes create a neural pathway of depression in the
brain. However, the positive experience, positive thoughts, or positive emotions recreate
parallel neural pathway to the existing depressed ones. Those new neural pathways are
created to tell a different story—a story which is designed by your beliefs and the environment
around you (Newberg, 2010).
The objectives of the study were, to identify the variations of environments upon human’s
emotions and brain, and subsequently to develop a theory of spaces influence genes.

Figure 1: Research justification.
(Source: author).

2.0 Literature

The problem begins with the awareness of emotional architecture. Engineers and architects
do not believe in the emotional aspect of space. Artificial environments are turning the world
outside in, and that is not the way to save the planet (Simon Marvin, 2017). Contemporary

3

Zaino, A.A. & Abbas, M.Y. / Asian Journal of Environment-Behaviour Studies (ajE-Bs), 5(16) May / Aug 2020 (pp.1-19)

architecture has started to receive more accusations of emotional coldness, restrictive
aesthetics, distanced from human and life (Pallasmaa, 2015). Recent studies by the World
Federation for Mental Health (2016) revealed that the most significant illness in 2030 could
be the mental disorder of “depression”. According to statistics, 80-90% of our time are spent
inside buildings.
Architectural spaces designs affect how we feel. Feelings influence behaviour. Behaviour
influences genes. But the problem is people do not believe very strongly in the things they
cannot see, although many researchers are aware of emotional architecture. Still, not many
are taking it as a severe problem because emotion is something that cannot be touched or
seen.
Newberg & Waldman’s scientific experiment (2010)
Newberg & Waldman (2010) conducted a scientific experiment of uncompassionate
communication, as shown in Figure 2.

Figure 2: Summary of the experiment by Newberg, A., & Waldman, M.R. (2010).
(Source: author)

They tested the influences of negative words upon emotions, and tested different brain
experiencing negative words. They found that by just listening to negative words for a few

4

Zaino, A.A. & Abbas, M.Y. / Asian Journal of Environment-Behaviour Studies (ajE-Bs), 5(16) May / Aug 2020 (pp.1-19)

moments will increase worry and depression. The more you ruminate, the more you damage
key structures that regulate your memory, feelings, and emotions. You will disrupt your sleep,
your appetite, and your ability to experience long-term happiness and satisfaction. However,
the experiment, as shown in Figure 2 concluded that if you hear, experience, look and feel
negativity, it will change your thinking, subsequently will influence the expression of your
genes.
2.1 Emotions
2.1.1 Definition of Emotion
Emotion has many definitions. Oxford Dictionary (2019) defined emotion as a feeling which
resulted from one’s mood or circumstances. Taking a step further and looking at emotion from
the medical point of view, Friedman (2010) stated that it is a complex state of feeling that
resulted in a physiological change which influenced thoughts and behaviour. A more recent
definition by Davidoff in 2018 described emotion as a state of feeling which is expressed
through the physiological functions such as facial expressions, quicker heartbeat, and
behaviours such as aggression, or covering the face with hands. By studying all the
definitions, they all agree that emotions influence human behaviour, and it is a complex
feeling. It is complicated because it is influenced by many aspects such as environment and
genetics that are hard to scientifically outline how exactly it gets formed (Davidoff, 2018).
2.1.2 Design of space matter
While it is understood that the IEQ performance of space contains a signiﬁcant eﬀect on
emotion (Kim, Chong, Chun, & Choi, 2017; Steinmetz & Posten, 2017), studies suggested
that emotions can directly affect health. By influencing the immune systems, inﬂammatory
response, as well as indirectly alter health-related behaviours. Consequently, further
diminishing wellbeing. For example, negative emotional states affect disease aetiology and
cascade to lessen social interaction, physical movement and compliance with healthcare
recommendation as a secondary eﬀect on overall wellbeing (Kiecolt-Glaser, McGuire,
Robles, & Glaser, 2002). Design practitioners and researchers have long argued that the
places we inhibit, whether urban landscapes or even buildings, directly aﬀect our behaviour
(Altman & Wohlwill, 1976),
To matter means to be of consequence, of importance (but not self-importance)
significant, relevant, warrant note and significant value. After we discussed the importance of
the space we live, the evidence above shows that the critical the link between design features
and characteristics of the built environment, health and wellbeing of all humans alike.
2.1.3 The bio-psycho-social model of emotional construction
The bio-psycho-social model is one of the most recognised ways of understanding overall
human wellness, including emotions and behaviour (Epstein et al., 2004). This
interdisciplinary model associates the significance of three fundamental dimensions, (biology,
psychology and socioenvironmental) which collectively, is responsible for the human

5

Zaino, A.A. & Abbas, M.Y. / Asian Journal of Environment-Behaviour Studies (ajE-Bs), 5(16) May / Aug 2020 (pp.1-19)

wellbeing. Furthermore, it provides an integrated framework and understanding health and
wellness in various disciplines, ranging from social, emotional and behavioural difficulties
(Cooper, 2014) to health and human development. The model was first introduced by George
L. Engel in the 1970s, who argued the need for a new biomedical model (Engel, 1977). Since
then, it has been critiqued for its limitations, but yet continues to guide interventionists,
scientists and researchers in fields of psychology, health, and human development (Epstein
et al., 2004).
Overall human spiritual wellness is a combination of a complex process of these
interconnected factors to shape one’s welfare. The factors that may affect the emotional state
could be either genetic or sociological; simultaneously the environmental aspect plays a
significant role in impacting human emotions and reflecting it on the biological and social
being, as shown in the model in Figure 3. The environment shapes human behaviour and
vice versa.

Figure 3: Bio-psycho-social model, by George L. Engel in 1977.
(Source: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov).

2.1.4 Beauty is in the eye of the beholder. Beauty is subjective
An experiment conducted, supported by the “Evolutionary behavioural sciences” answered
the argument that beauty is subjective and there is no common good for all. The experimental
work presented in the Savannah principle brought kids from all around the world and photos
of different landscapes were showed to them. They were tasked to choose a view they liked

6

Zaino, A.A. & Abbas, M.Y. / Asian Journal of Environment-Behaviour Studies (ajE-Bs), 5(16) May / Aug 2020 (pp.1-19)

the most. 80% of them singled out the picture of the savannah landscape (Kanazawa, 2019)
The result of this seminal experiment established that regardless of the subjectivity of beauty,
there is a common good thing for all humans (Behling, 2016).
2.1.5 Human between good design and money
The World Business Council for Sustainable Development (2018) showed a surprisingly
common belief among the participants that around 17% of the overall cost of a building is
attributed to the green characteristics of that building. However, a study done on the green
cost of 146 green buildings indicated an actual marginal cost of less than 2% and showed
that green-certified buildings bring significantly higher rent than conventional buildings. A
University of California–Berkeley study evaluated and compared 694 certified green buildings
and 7,489 office buildings, each situated within a 400m radius of a green building. The results
showed a remarkable outcome that on average green-certified buildings rented 2% higher
than nearby conventional buildings after adjusting for occupancy level (Green Research
Institute, 2011).
2.1.6 Emotional experience from Theory to science
Traditionally, the study of emotions has always been theoretical, depending on interviews,
self-reports etc. Meaning, there is no scientific test that is measurable. However, when
neuroscience developed a device called Electroencephalography (EEG), measuring
emotions has become a scientific process. The possibility of studying the impact of a big
window on human emotions and behaviour has become scientifically measurable. Emotions
are no longer a theoretical science.
2.1.7 Designing Spaces of positive emotional experiences
Figure 4 is a collection of several studies from psychological, neuroscientific and medical
backgrounds; It explains the central values of creating spaces that evoke positive emotional
experiences. Positive environment designs can be understood by understanding those nature
and design elements, form and geometry. The integration with the natural environments are
the primary keys to build a positive emotional design
The essential elements in designing spaces to evoke positive emotions:
(1) Integration of water element. Presence of sound, colour and the touch of water, all
those elements are healers to human emotions. (2) Visual force of building form; curvy,
rigid, squarish or linear, every form brings a different experience on human’s emotions. (3)
Materiality: natural, e.g. wood and stone. (4) Quality of natural lighting: providing an
optimised lux level or figuring out the perfect level, for the targeted space. That brings a
significant difference in the emotion of space. (5) Psychology of colours: every colour
evokes different emotions, (6) Noise level: it has a significant impact on the user’s emotional
comfort. (7) Green element; one of the essential aspects to be considered to create a space
of positive emotions. (8) Creating alive spaces: the overall integration of birds singing,
natural lighting, buffering of trees, all the natural features that make a space comes alive
without the need for other things to bring the space alive like, televisions, music or people.

7

Zaino, A.A. & Abbas, M.Y. / Asian Journal of Environment-Behaviour Studies (ajE-Bs), 5(16) May / Aug 2020 (pp.1-19)

Figure 4: Collection of several studies from psychological, neuroscientific and medical backgrounds; It
explains the central values of creating spaces that evoke positive emotional experiences.
(Source: author).

2.2 Behaviour
While fear causes fleeing, and courage causes confronting, motivation helps to pursue
dreams. Behaviour is the key function of emotion. Emotion is the feedback system that
influences behaviour (Roy, 2007). Perhaps the idea of human behaviour shaped by
environments is not an argument anymore. What is missing is a deep understanding of the
neural underpinnings that drive human behaviour impacted by the environment. Thus, this
study, with the help of neuroscience explored the answer of the question - can space, shape
our action and behaviour followed by alteration of genes?
2.3 Genes
Human is a genetic creature. Genes express itself by giving commands to the brain. On the
long-term process, those genetic expressions influence the pattern of our thinking; it outlines
behaviour, emotions and thinking paradigms. However, genes develop neural pathways in
the brain. The neural pathways may carry a specific behaviour (or feature). It resists any
attempt to change. Nevertheless, it is not impossible to change it. According to many
neuroscientists such as Andrew Newberg (2010), we can change by creating new neural
pathways through starting new living experiences, positive emotional experiences, or change
the stories that we tell our self. This fact is called Neuroplasticity – the brain’s ability to
restructure itself by forming new neural connections/pathways throughout life. It allows the
neurons (nerve cells) in the brain to alter their behaviour in response to new situations or
changes. It also may compensate for injury, disease.

3.0 Methodology

The research was conducted in three phases, firstly is the literature review, specifically on the
nine principles as highlighted in Figure 3. Secondly, is the scientific experiments that tested
those elements, using Electroencephalography (EEG) device. Finally, comparing the results
from the experiments with each other to identify which element resulted in the highest positive
impact on emotions and brain.

8

Zaino, A.A. & Abbas, M.Y. / Asian Journal of Environment-Behaviour Studies (ajE-Bs), 5(16) May / Aug 2020 (pp.1-19)

Figure 5: Methodology stages justification.
(Source: author).

3.1 Stage 1: Integrated and argumentative approach for Literature review
The literature review was established based on research questions which are:
 Why is there not enough awareness of emotional design?
 What is the experiment done by Andrew Newberg?
 What are emotions?
 Can space affect emotions and cause depression?
 Is beauty subjective by all means?
 Is there a good design for all?
 Can we measure emotions?
 How to design a space to evoke positive emotions?
 How behaviour affected by negative experience?
 How are genes affected by negative behaviour and negative experience?
3.2 Stage 2: Single-case experimental design approach using Electroencephalography
(EEG).
“Single-subject research (also known as single case experiments) is well-known in the fields
of behavioural science and counselling. This study design is useful when the researcher is
attempting to examine the behaviour of a person repeatedly over changing conditions.
However, in this case, the changing conditions are nine different environmental settings

9

Zaino, A.A. & Abbas, M.Y. / Asian Journal of Environment-Behaviour Studies (ajE-Bs), 5(16) May / Aug 2020 (pp.1-19)

Figure 6: Design of experiments.
(Source: author).

3.2.1 Electroencephalography (EEG) test
The Electroencephalography (EEG) test assesses the electrical activity of the brain. EEG
scans are achieved by placing EEG sensors small metal discs called EEG electrodes on
your scalp. Those electrodes record the electrical activity in your brain. The collected EEG
signals are amplified, digitised, and then sent to a computer or mobile device for storage and
data processing, as shown in Figure 7and Figure 8.
3.2.2 The (EEG) device can detect six emotions

Figure 7: Emotions measured using EEG.
(Source: author).

3.2.3 The meaning of each colour
The different colours represent the behaviour of the different waves; each wave represents
a feeling. The lower the wavenumber, the higher the feeling of relaxation and positivism, and
vice versa. Figure 7 and Figure 8 demonstrates each colour’s meaning and what it renders.

10

Zaino, A.A. & Abbas, M.Y. / Asian Journal of Environment-Behaviour Studies (ajE-Bs), 5(16) May / Aug 2020 (pp.1-19)

Types of waves;
i) Delta wave – (1 – 3 Hz).
ii) Theta wave – (4 – 7 Hz).
iii ) Alpha wave – (7 – 15 Hz).
iv) Beta wave – (15 – 30 Hz)
v) Gamma wave – (>30 Hz)

Figure 8: Types of frequencies
(Source: www.quantumleapmindtraining.com).

Figure 9: Samples of brain scan.
(Source: Emotiv Insight).

Figure 10: Photo of the EEG.
(Source: author).
Water
element
Trees /
greenery

Proportion

Using EEG, Testing The
Emotional Response
Impacted by :
- Enviornmental Elements.
- Design elements.

Color

Material

Natural
lighting

Noise

Smell

Red colour indicates experiments were not

Figure 11: Experiments were carried.
(Source: author).

11

Zaino, A.A. & Abbas, M.Y. / Asian Journal of Environment-Behaviour Studies (ajE-Bs), 5(16) May / Aug 2020 (pp.1-19)

3.2.3 Procedures for conducting experiments.
Select field of experiment

Prepare EEG device for use.

Look into selected view

Wear EEG headset

Connect to mobile app/BCI.

Signal will be digitalized into the
computer/mobile

Feature extraction through
computer application

Classifications of information
through computer

Presenting information of emotions
and brain waves as an infographic

Final results of experiments

Figure 12: Procedures of conducting each experiment.
(Source: author).

3.3 Stage 3: Comparative analysis
After getting the results of experiments, it was compared to each other. Findings were
integrated into an existing literature review to form a theory of space and genes.

4.0 Results

Thirteen experiments were carried, presenting two of them thoroughly and the rest only the
data collected from the experiment.

12

Zaino, A.A. & Abbas, M.Y. / Asian Journal of Environment-Behaviour Studies (ajE-Bs), 5(16) May / Aug 2020 (pp.1-19)

Experiment 1: Description
The experiment was carried with an open water view (the sea) as shown in Figure 13, to
understand the impact of open view water view compared to the enclosed view of water such
as lake on the brain and emotions. The electrical activity of brain while experiencing the view
is as shown in Figure 14, while the results as shown in Figure 15.

Figure 13: View - water (Open Sea).
(Source: author).

a. Location: Pantai Remis, Selangor, Malaysia
b. Type of view: Sea-open view.
c. Methodology: EEG Device.
d. Lighting level: 1000 lux.
e. Noise level: 40db.
f. Temperature: 30c.
g. Time: 5:00pm
h. Participator: 1 male.
i. Time spent: 15mins.

Figure 14: Electrical activity of brain while experiencing the view.
(Source: author).

Figure 15: Results from (BCI) by (EEG) with a mobile app.
(Source: author).

13

Zaino, A.A. & Abbas, M.Y. / Asian Journal of Environment-Behaviour Studies (ajE-Bs), 5(16) May / Aug 2020 (pp.1-19)

Experiment 2: Description
The experiment was carried with a non-open water view setting (lake). Refer to Figure 17. To
understand the impact of the view compared to the open view of water on the brain and
emotions, The electrical activity of brain while experiencing the view is as shown in Figure 18,
while the results as shown in Figure 19.

Figure 16: View - water (Lake).
(Source:author).

a. Location: UiTM Puncak Alam,Selangor.
b. Type of view: Non-open view.
c. Methodology: EEG Device.
d. Lighting level: 800lux.
e. Noise level: 50db.
f. Temperature: 34c.
g. Time: 5:00pm.
h. Participator: 1 male.
i. Time spent: 15mins.

Figure 17: Electrical activity of brain while experiencing the view.
(Source: author).

Figure 18: Results from (BCI) by (EEG) with a mobile app.
(Source: Emotiv insights app).

14

43

53

54

44
40

67
67
55

43

54

40

53
40

61
30

40

44

33

42

30

45

23

42

44
47

50
60

40

54

41
44
39
40

40

67
35
67

55

43
35

33

54

0

Relaxation

Focus

Excitment

Interest

Engagment

Stress

44
45

42
41
40

Experminent 6c - Color (Green)

60
58

Experminent 6b - Color (Blue)

50
45

Experminent 6a - Color (White)

53
47

30

Experiment 5b - Smell (normal air)

55
65

44

40

Experiment 5a - Smell (Fragrance)

200
36

Experiment 4b- Noise (450db)

250
30

Experiment 4a- Noise (650db)

46

Experiment 3b- Natural lighting (350lux)

50
55

Experiment 3a- Natural lighting (450lux)

100
36

Experiment 2b-Greenery (Enclosed view)

150
33

Experiment 2a -Greenery (Open view)

70

Experiment 1b -water element (closed view water)

300

Experiment 1a -water element (Open view water)

Zaino, A.A. & Abbas, M.Y. / Asian Journal of Environment-Behaviour Studies (ajE-Bs), 5(16) May / Aug 2020 (pp.1-19)

Change Of Emotions By Change Of Environment

350

36

32
34

32

46

44

35
33

45

33

43

31

33

Figure 19: Data collected from experiments (emotions).

(Source: author).

15

6

4

2

0

16
8

(Source: author).

9.5
10
10

Experminent 6c - Color (Green)

9

Experminent 6b - Color (Blue)

Experminent 6a - Color (White)

9

Experiment 5b - Smell (normal air)

9.5

Experiment 5a - Smell (Fragrance)

10

Experiment 4b- Noise (450db)

10.5

Experiment 4a- Noise (650db)

10

Experiment 3b- Natural lighting (350lux)

9
9.5

Experiment 3a- Natural lighting (450lux)

10

Experiment 2b-Greenery (Enclosed view)

Experiment 2a -Greenery (Open view)

8

Experiment 1b -water element (closed view water)

8

Experiment 1a -water element (Open view water)

Zaino, A.A. & Abbas, M.Y. / Asian Journal of Environment-Behaviour Studies (ajE-Bs), 5(16) May / Aug 2020 (pp.1-19)

Change Of Electrical activity By Change Of Environment

12

Electrical activity - Hz

Figure 20: Data collected from experiments (Electrical activity).

Zaino, A.A. & Abbas, M.Y. / Asian Journal of Environment-Behaviour Studies (ajE-Bs), 5(16) May / Aug 2020 (pp.1-19)

5.0 Discussion

The scientific-discovery found by Newberg & Waldman’s (2010) proved the negative impact
of words over the brain; therefore, genes. They explained about the effects of negative
emotional experiences, such as, negative communications, or even looking at a list of
negative (or positive) words. It stimulates neural pathways in the brain, which in turn, leaves
a negative trace on our genetical system, In return, our genes rebuild another neural pathway
which carries a negative feature, if that experiment was emphasising on negative emotional
experience, which occurred by uncompassionate words, In contrast to that, architectural
space also brings different feelings - some have the perfect amount of light, some space has
a beautiful view, others are noisy. Architectural space has many elements that impact human
emotional wellbeing—for instance, temperature level, the geometry of the form, materials
used, and many other aspects. If space is not designed in a way that comforts human, such
as not having enough lighting or probably excessive lighting, it will bring a negative experience
Nevertheless, the argument is not about that different spaces have different feelings (many
researchers know that), it is more into turning this philosophical thinking into scientific work.
By analysing the issue (emotional coldness in contemporary architecture), it was found that
people do not take negative emotional experiences very seriously, unlike physical
experiences. If a kid was injured, the father would immediately take the kid to the doctor, as
the hurt is physical and seen visually, hence, easy to believe it. Many researchers believed in
this idea, but scientist proved it. According to Alan Fogel, a Professor of Psychology at the
University of Utah in Salt Lake City, when people feel emotional pain, the same areas of the
brain get activated as when people feel physical pain. Still, it is hard for people to equalise
those two aspects. However, one of the critical approaches in creating awareness is to turn
philosophical ideas into science work because of the possibility to measure it. After all, this
research attempted to provide a piece of scientific evidence for the seriousness of a bad
architectural space. During the experiment, the presence of water was very significant in
lowering the electrical activity of the brain and improving emotions of participates. Still, that is
not the central information needed. What is significant is the change of electrical activity that
occurred by the change of space and environment, and the change of emotional experiences
which was detected, by change of environment, as shown in Figure 19.

8.00H

9.50H

Figure 21: Compare between experiment 1 and 2 (Water and Greenery).
(Source: EEG).

17

Zaino, A.A. & Abbas, M.Y. / Asian Journal of Environment-Behaviour Studies (ajE-Bs), 5(16) May / Aug 2020 (pp.1-19)

Figure 21 is a comparison between two experiments only; the rest of the data is presented
in Figure 20. The data collected from thirteen different experiments using (EEG) were based
on a collection of study from diverse background about the principles that make a positive
emotional experience in a space. The experiments tested those principles. The chart showed
the change in the electrical activity of neural pathways as the condition of the environment
changed. In contrast to Newberg & Waldman’s (2010) experiment, he said in his book (Words
can change your brain), a single word has the power to change your brain and influence the
expression of genes that regulate physical and emotional stress. Correlating that, the change
of brain he referred to, is a change in the electrical activity of natural pathways, that change
has the power to alters the expression of a gene that regulate physical and emotional stress.
Change of space has also changed the brain of the participant. It changed the electrical
activity in the neural pathways. However, this alteration of the brain by the change of space
will lead to the modification of genes. According to Newberg & Waldman’s (2010) the change
of brain will alter the expression of a gene that regulate physical and emotional stress.

6.0 Conclusion

The research attempted to increase awareness about the seriousness of bad architectural
space design by turning philosophical and theoretical ideas, into work of science.
Scientific data was collected for a different aim. Surprisingly, it found the change of
electrical activity of neural pathways of the brain by the change of environment, By studying
Newberg & Waldman’s (2010) experiment, and merging this data with their findings it was
awakening to realise that architecture space does not just change our feelings and brain but,
alters the expression of a gene which regulate physical and emotional stress.
This research concluded the establishment of this Theory which hypothesis that:
architectural space alters the expression of gene that regulate physical and emotional stress.

References
Baumeister,
R.
F.
(2007).
How
Emotion
Shapes
5,2020,https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/1088868307301033
Behling, S. (2016). Architecture and the
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FbfPWalO_ss

Science

of

the

Behavior:
Senses

from.

Retrieved
Retrieved

April
from

Bermudez, J. (2015). Transcending architecture.
Borrell-Carrió, F. (2014). The biopsychosocial model 25 years later: principles, practice, and scientific inquiry. Annals
of Family Medicine. Retrieved from: https://doi.org/10.1370/afm.245.
Chavez,
C.
(1990).The
fight is never
about
https://www.brainyquote.com/quotes/cesar_chavez_381157

grapes

or

lettuce.

Retrieved

from

Clay, R.A. (2001). Green is good for you. Retrieved from: https://www.apa.org/monitor/apr01/gre Adams
ood?fbclid=IwAR1p9vZlQcep8yvSdE049g9sHzJeqo-duWlQL_j_NASFnV6GBiWxAr_79pU

18

Zaino, A.A. & Abbas, M.Y. / Asian Journal of Environment-Behaviour Studies (ajE-Bs), 5(16) May / Aug 2020 (pp.1-19)

Davidoff,
L.
(2018).
Emotion.
Retrieved
https://www.sciencedaily.com/terms/emotion.htm

October

8,

2019.Retrieved

from:

Day, C. (2015). Places of the Soul.
Friedman, B. H. (2010). Feelings and the body: The Jamesian perspective on autonomic specificity of emotion.
Biological Psychology, Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsycho.2009.10.006
Health, W. F. for M. (2016). World Federation for Mental Health. Retrieved
https://www.who.int/mental_health/management/depression/wfmh_paper_depression_wmhd_2012.pdf

from

Jr, W. C. S. (2019). Definition of Neuroplasticity. Retrieved April 6, 2020, from 2019 website:
https://www.medicinenet.com/script/main/art.asp?articlekey=40362
Kanazawa, S. (2019). The bad science of Satoshi Kanazawa - Big Think. Retrieved October. Retrieved from:
https://bigthink.com/neurobonkers/the-bad-science-of-satoshi-kanazawa
Keedwell, P. (2017). Headspace. UK, London: Great Britain.
Marvin, S. (2017). Artificial environments are turning the world outside.
Retrieved from:
https://theconversation.com/artificial-environments-are-turning-the-world-outside-in-but-thats-no-way-to-save-theplanet-75511
National Institutes of Health, M. H. (2017). Mental Health: Keeping Your Emotional Health - family doctor. Retrieved
from: https://familydoctor.org/mental-health-keeping-your-emotional-health/
Newberg, A., & Waldman, M.R. (2010). How God Changes Your Brain. Breakthrough findings from a leading
neuroscientist. Ballantine Books, New York.
Oxford.
(2019).
Architecture.
Definition
https://www.lexico.com/en/definition/architecture

of

Architecture

by

Lexico.

Retrieved

from:

Pallasmaa, J., Mallgrave, H.F., Robinson, S., & Gallese, V. (2015). Architecture and Empathy. Peripheral Projects,
Finland.
Plutchik, R. (2001). The nature of emotions: Human emotions have deep evolutionary roots. American
ScientistRetrieved from. https://doi.org/10.1511/2001.4.344
Ryn, S., & Allen, F. (2013). Design for an Empathic World. In Design for an Empathic World. Retrieved from
https://doi.org/10.5822/978-1-61091-505-2.

19

