Fundamental and applied researches

ISSN 2313-7525

in practice of leading scientific schools
journal homepage: http://farplss.org

Neuropsychological features personalities with deviant behavior
B. Tkach
G.S. Kostiuk Institute of Psychology of the National Academy of Educational Sciences of
Ukraine,Kyiv, Ukraine
Article info
Received 16.03.2018
Accepted 29.06.2018
G.S. Kostiuk Institute of
Psychology
of the National Academy of
Educational Sciences of
Ukraine,
Kyiv, Ukraine
bohdan.tkach@gmail.com

Tkach, B. (2018). Neuropsychological features personalities with deviant behavior.
Fundamental and applied researches in practice of leading scientific schools, 27 (3), 201206
In article presents the casual structure of deviant behavior, created on the basis of
complex and systematic neuropsychological research. Neuropsychological research is
proposed to be carried out together with Eye tracking and EEG, to eliminate the
subjectivity element in interpreting diagnostic results. Three components of the
symptom-complex of the mental stage of deviation are formed. It is shown that the
primary symptom complex is represented by minimal disruption of the functioning in
anterior part of brain: the orbitofrontal cortex part prefrontal cortex; dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex; anterior cingulate cortex; ventromedial prefrontal cortex. It is
established that the secondary symptom complex is due to the finding of an individual
under the influence naive realism, the dominance of heuristic thinking and the inability
to use expert thinking in everyday life; by a subzero communicative competence;
disadaptation from inability in time to see the alternative ways of decision of problem.
It is shown that the tertiary symptom complex - it, actually, an addiction – by a
pathological homeostasis. It is set that a choice of form of addictive behavior is not a
stochastic process, and depends on a social origin, valued-normative standards,
material possibilities and the information environment. It was found that the normal
functional state of the hippocampus is hedonistic motivation, and with weakened attracted motivation.
Key words: deviant behavior; neuropsychological diagnostics; personality
neuroscience; symptom complex; cerebral dysfunction; motivation; highly emotional
sphere.

Introduction
Theoretical foundations of research
Deviant behavior is behavior that deviates from the
values-normative standards accepted in society, was, is and
probably will be one of the most pressing problems in elite
societies. As dynamism of time, complication of social
practice and progress of humanity, constantly change rules
and norms in certain society. Globalization and
intensification of migration of people intensify the problem
of conflict of world views. In addition, digital expansion and
robotics fundamentally change the human being's life in the
historical, cultural and axiological contexts. In addition,
more and more often one has to deal with psychologists with
a cultural, civilization pathology. Given this problematic of
deviant behavior requires an in-depth neuropsychological
study.

If based on the research of Specker, Carlson, Christenson
and Marcotte (1995), Bechara et al. (2001), Potenza (2001),
Cavedini et al. (2002), Regard, Knoch, Gutling & Landis
(2003), Mendelevich (2003), Tkach (2006), Egorov (2006),
Andrukh (2011) and others make a simple taxonomy of
individual psychological peculiarities that are inherent to
individuals with deviant behavior, it is more likely to
resemble the questionnaire T. Leary "Diagnosis of
interpersonal relationships", rather than "averaged portrait
of deviant". It is clear that one person is not able to combine
all of these properties in himself, therefore, it makes no
sense to create an integral profile of a deviant person based
on a combination of non-combinable, as did previous
investigators. As Jackson (2015) notes, it will have no
practical or scientific value because of the mono-causal
principle of its construction.

Volume 27, Number 3, 2018
201

Fundamental and applied researches
in practice of leading scientific schools - ISSN 2313-7525
Volume 27, Number 3, 2018
Due to the fact that the structure the deviant substratum
of activity in modern society and the elements of subjectivity
are not taken into account in the procedure
neuropsychological studies, an incorrect interpretation of
the current data of neuropsychological diagnosis does not
appear. An integral profile of a deviant personality does not
allow
developing
adequate
approaches
to
neuropsychological correction.
Goal
The purpose article is to study neuropsychological
peculiarities of persons with deviant behavior in modern
society for constructing a neuropsychological concept of
deviant behavior.
Materials and Methods
For the study, a sample was formed that consisted of 400
people with deviant behavior, with a uniform gender
distribution and a uniform age distribution from 18 to 55
years with typical deviations for our society. Methods of
research: clinical conversation, collection of anamnestic data
and observation; the study of motor and sensory asymmetry
due to the methodology of the lateral organization
E.D. Khomskaya, I.V. Efimova; general medical examination.
The methodological basis of our neuropsychological
diagnostics is the theory of systemic dynamic localization of
the VFT by L. S. Vygotsky and A.R. Luria. By the central
method of research is a syndromic analysis of the violation
Higher Mental Functions by diagnosing the state of
neuropsychological factors. The formed neuropsychological
battery which included selected methods and samples. For
the study of stereognosis, tactile and somato-gnostic
functions, the following techniques were used: a sample of
tactile recognition of objects, a test for excellent tactile
sensitivity, contact localization, a DermaLexia test, a musclejoint feeling, a vibrating feeling, a sense of pressure, a sense
of mass. For the research of visual gnosis, a stimulus
material was used and the National Geographic web
magazine to evaluate the perception of realistic images,
colored gnosis, crossed out images, Poppelreiter figures,
alphabetic and digital gnosis, unfinished images, bizarre
images, disguised figures, integrity and attention switching,
test for fluctuations in visual attention, facial gnosis
(identification of acquaintances and strangers), emotional
gnosis, plot pictures, optic-spatial gnosis (localization
objects in space, orientation in real space, recognition of
time on a schematic clock, road test drawing of complex
figures, a test for the analysis of spatial relations, a method
of mental rotation R. Shepard). For the research of auditory
gnosis next methodologies were used: perception of
domestic and natural noises, recognition of the acquainted
melodies, perception and reproducing of rhythms. To
research the asymmetry of olfactory gnosis, a ruler and such
familiar smells as mustard, vinegar, valerian, lavender,
orange, pine needles, peanut oil. For the research of
kinesthetic praxis, the following techniques were used: the
execution of simple instructions, actions with real objects,
actions with imaginary objects, the performance of symbolic
actions, the transfer of poses by the kinetic pattern, oral
praxis. To research the kinetic (dynamic) praxis, the

Tkach, B.
Neuropsychological
features personalities
with deviant behavior

following techniques were used: a fist-rib-palm test, a palmhand, a choice reaction (conflict selection reaction), drawing
figures, a graphic test "Fence". For the research of spatial
praxis, the Head's test was used, the reproduction is
correlated with the position of the hands of both hands, and
for the study a constructive definition of praxis: the visual
motor test of
L. Bender, the copying of voluminous
geometric figures by
L.I. Vaserman. Neurological
tests were also used to study the state of the cerebellum:
stairs, maintaining balance, coordinating limb movements.
In the neuropsychological study of memory, the following
techniques were used: the reproduction of events, the
memorization of visual images, the trial of the triplet, the
test for associative memory, the semantic memory, the
memorization of meaningless words, the memorization of
stories. In the neuropsychological research of attention, the
following techniques were used: B. Burdon's proofs, John
Ridley Stroop "Color-words" test, labyrinths, confused lines,
Hugo Munsterberg's test. In the neuropsychological research
of speech functions, the following methods / tests were
used: understanding of complex logical and grammatical
constructions
(inflectional
relations,
introverted
constructions, double negation, spatial relations, synonyms,
antonyms, homonyms, intonation), reading aloud, reading
silent (speed), writing under dictation and independent,
account (elementary, automated, serial, triple). In the
neuropsychological research of the intellectual processes of
functions, the following techniques were used: the third one,
the understanding of the plot pictures, the selection of the
picture according to the story of the researcher, the
understanding of the pictures with the conflicted meaning,
the establishment of opposites, the classification of object
images, the Raven’s Progressive Matrices (RPM), the double
stimulation method in L.S. Vygotsky's and L.S. Sakharov's
(generalization, abstraction, classification and concept
formation). In the neuropsychological research of the
formation of concepts, the following methods were used: the
definition of concepts, the comparison of concepts, the
establishment of relations, the selection of concepts, verbal
analogies, the exclusion of superfluous, the search for
essential features, associative experiment, limited flow of
associations. In the neuropsychological research of
discursive thinking, the following methods were used: the
continuation of a numerical series, the solution of arithmetic
problems, the filling of a mathematical material, the
understanding of the conditions of problems, and the
solution of the syllogistic problems (T.V. Chernigivskaya,
V.L. Deglin). Research of cognitive distortions associated
with lack of information, information surplus, lack of
meaning, memory features was carried out during a
conversation with the use of the journal «National
Geographic». In the neuropsychological research of the
emotional sphere, the following techniques were used:
reaction to failure and character, perception of the
emotional tone of the story, perception of the emotional tone
of the stories, the method of free associations, the method of
studying empathy. A conscientious test (an ethical dilemma
with two situations on the railroad track) was also used to
study the relationship between cognitive processes and the
emotional sphere. As complex methodology was separately
used test of drawing of clock. The Rosenzweig Picture
Frustration test. Since neuropsychological research is a

Volume 27, Number 3, 2018
202

Fundamental and applied researches
in practice of leading scientific schools - ISSN 2313-7525
Volume 27, Number 3, 2018

Tkach, B.
Neuropsychological
features personalities
with deviant behavior

reasoning research, other tests and tests were used if
necessary (Bizyuk, 2005; Burlachuk, 2006; Maksimenko
2006; Khomskaya, 2008; Luria; 2008; Nikolaenko 2013;
Kolb & Whishaw, 2015). To eliminate the subjectivity
element in the interpretation of the results of
neuropsychological research, biometric instruments were
used: the EMOTIV Epoc + mobile neurointerface and the GP3
HD Eye Tracker 150Hz ambulatory infrared oscillography.
As well as the corresponding software EmotivPRO, EMOTIV
Brain Activity Map, Gazepoint Analisys Tryal v.4.1.0. (Clerc,
Bougrain & Lotte, 2016, Duchowski, 2017. This allows you to
know where the researcher looks and what he has at that

moment cognitive and emotional indicators, as well as to
know in which areas of the brain is active. At the present
stage in neuropsychology, the diagnosis of cognitive
disorders by excluding alternatives (differential diagnosis)
has not lost its relevance in the qualification of symptoms.
Using this approach, three components of the symptomcomplex of the mental stage of deviation were formed. Based
on the cluster analysis, four groups of people with nuclear
symptoms were identified, responsible for minimal
disruption of the functioning of the anterior part of the
brain. Actually, this is the primary symptom complex (see
Table No. 1).
Tab. 1
The prevalence of the primary symptom complex among the study sample

Syndromes of the functioning the Frontal Lobe
the orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) part prefrontal cortex
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC or DL-PFC)
anterior cingulate cortex (ACC)
ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC).

Results & Discussions
For the first group with manifestations of dysfunction,
the orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) part prefrontal cortex was
characterized by: infantilism; impulsiveness; emotional
lability; hedonistic motivation; moral agnosia; moral
apraxia; search activity; risk appetite.
Infantilism looks in this case, as a delay (excalation) or
regression to the earliest stages of development. It shows
the infantilism of impulsive reactions inherent in children.
Very similar to the protective mechanism for anxiety,
frustrating effects, intrapersonal conflict. Also characteristic
is restlessness (hyperactivity), weakness of willful attitudes
and
carelessness,
talkativeness,
naive
fantasies.
Impulsiveness is manifested by increased cheekiness,
hyperactivity, explosiveness, active direct aggression
(conflict, rudeness). Over time, aggression acquires an
addictive and pathological character. In this category of
persons, emotional lability is specific: a fast and frequent
low-motivated changeable emotion from neutral to
euphoric. This emotional liveliness, so to speak, often makes
these people leaders in the group. Lability of attention is also
characteristic. Hedonistic motivation is manifested by an
irresistible desire to immediately achieve what was
conceived. Such impatient persons depend not only on the
object, but also on time. Constantly there is a desire for
events to be carried out as quickly and often as possible.
Impatience, lack of self-control, inability to wait in situations
with a lack of structuring of time (for example, a day off)
causes frequent conflicts. Moral agnosia arises from the
uncritically of thinking, the absence of critical self-esteem
and one's own state, and not taking into account the desires
of others, and the inability to compare one's actions with the
real situation leads to a lack of moral experience, security,
frivolity and a tendency to unreasoned and peculiar immoral
acts. Often such aims that obviously for them is difficult put
before itself. Inability to a complex and long-term
relationship, causes a constant search for new sex partners,
you can even say "hunting for them." Also characteristic is a
living imagination / fantasy, or rather an uncontrolled

Male

Female

53%
28%
10%
9%

41%
37%
10%
12%

imagination, devoid of censorship makes these people
interesting, easily overstepped through taboos, rules and
norms. Moral apraxia is manifested by the inability to
comply with the rules / law, with its knowledge, and is
manifested by irresponsibility, delinquency, vulgarity,
grumbling and sexual promiscuity.
The search activity (interest), which consists in the
constant striving for novelty, as well as sensory hunger (the
taste of danger) with hedonistic motivation prompts the
search for more and more complex ways of achieving
satisfaction with extreme activities, experimenting with new
psychoactive substances, sexual deviations are also present
the desire for diversity, experimentation and dominance.
For the second group with manifestations of dysfunction
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC or DL-PFC), the
following characteristics were characteristic: weakness,
conformism, suggestibility, imitation, simplicity, naiveté,
attention reduced. Weakness was manifested by the inability
to actively and purposefully work without external
influence, helplessness, lack of independence in making
everyday decisions, and also the ease of inclusion in any
activity without weighing all the pros and cons.
Characterized by disorientation in everyday life, reduced
motivating motivation, defenselessness. They do not work
for themselves, but for someone, they help to realize other
people's dreams, not their own, do not create their own
model of the world, but they use the created mythologizers.
Almost not apt at an introspection.
Very pronounced conformism in relation to others /
society. There is a fear of potential separation, or the fear of
being abandoned by a person with whom there is a close
relationship. Because of this, there is obsession, passive
submissiveness, yielding and refusal of any requirements to
others. In addition, obedience is sent yet to shifting off to
responsibility for behavior and for a decision in vitally
important questions, planning of the future. But it is worth
noting, on the dominance of self-centered, rather than
altruistic motivation. Therefore, often this conformism, to
preserve belonging to the group, is transformed into deceit
and servility. Masochism and obedience prevail in sexual

Volume 27, Number 3, 2018
203

Fundamental and applied researches
in practice of leading scientific schools - ISSN 2313-7525
Volume 27, Number 3, 2018
preferences. Because of low criticality and compliance to
group influence are very vulnerable to auto-aggression and
instrumental aggression to others, without personal
motives.
Under suggestibility, as a personality trait, we
understand increased sensitivity to psychological influence
from the outside with a lack of critical judgment and a lack of
desire to resist this influence. They do not think
independently, but translate / reproduce the opinions of
others under the guise of their own. Everyone is taken for
granted, not deeply analyzed. Because of the frivolity among
them, many fans, but fanaticism is of a conformal nature, not
axiological.
By heredity we mean the ease of assimilation of other
people's beliefs, desires, aspirations, assessments, as well as
the imitation of manners and style of behavior / languages.
Mine-out stereotypes fall short of to one's own convictions.
Are prone to collecting various items, accumulation,
kleptomania and overeating.
Simple-heartedness is an inaccurate understanding of
the meaning of understanding the actions of others and
excessive
gullibility
through
superficial
thinking.
Characteristic shyness, shyness, deepening guilt. Naivety is
caused by inexperience, ignorance and insult for the
differences in expectation with reality. Because of the
reduced attention to activity, mono-tasking and
suggestibility are dominant.
The experiments of S. Ash and S. Milgram, as well as the
theory of social impetus B. Lateen explain the normative
pressure of the society and authorities in the propagation of
addictions, which leads to public concessions of the
individual, even without personal acceptance. However, with
the same parameters of the group, some individuals obey the
group, even if they do not share her beliefs, while others are
not inferior to their convictions. It is persons with
dysfunction of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC or
DL-PFC) that are easily influenced and become the first
among deviants. It is this category of people inherent
dissociation of deviations depending on external influences.
Individuals with this disorder, like "modeling clay" are
easily amenable to correction, but the effect is short-lived
when returning to the deviant environment. For the third
group, with manifestations of dysfunction of the anterior
cingulate cortex (ACC), characteristic was: antipathy
incompetence, stiffness, stasis at a certain kind of activity /
emotions or personality / quasi personality, prognostic
failure, intellectual weakness, conservatism. Anticipation
competence is the ability to fully adequately plan and predict
the future. However, it does not show up in typical
situations. Knowing about their intellectual insolvency, in
new situations, there arises an uncritical attitude and a
tendency to act without understanding the consequences of
their actions. This is not due to the loss of skills or the ability
to acquire new ones, but because of the inability to compare
one's own or another's experience with the current situation
and to predict the behavior of one's own and others in the
future. Rigidity (inertia) is the inflexibility / stiffness of all
mental activity. The inability of a person to change his
behavior (thought, attitude, attitude, motives, modus of
experience, etc.) in accordance with changes in the situation,
but stick to one mode of action in all situations - the context
of an independent decision-making style in uncertain

Tkach, B.
Neuropsychological
features personalities
with deviant behavior

situations with free choice. It touches fixing on certain
objects, maintenance of their emotional value, and it
generates jealousy. Characteristic obstinacy, absence of
compromises, alarm, timidity and unpleasant expectations,
suspicious, contemptuous, hostile attitude toward other,
obtrusive doubts result in alienation and social isolation.
However, in the part of the subjects (male 62%, female
37%), because of the presence of the illusion of superiority
over others in group activities, there is a desire for
leadership. Because of low emotionality, lack of empathy,
indifference, motor disinhibition, irritability, increased
aggressiveness - are prone to unlawful actions. For mentally
healthy people probability of prognostication is present with
many variants of development of events. Then, as this group
of deviants has a univariate forecast, which is built
exclusively on one subjectively significant forecast of the
development of events. Even if to offer other variants of
development of events, then however gravitate exceptionally
to the only. This inert reiteration of the same actions, at the
change of circumstances of context easily reveals in tests
with serial arithmetic operations. There are two extremes in
a prognosis: "all will be good" and repeat, as a mantra, or "all
will be badly" and combines with sense of inferiority. The
picture of the future is absent and an orientation prevails on
present tense. A maximalism is also characteristic, that
shows up in extremes in relation to looks, emotions, desires
- or all, or nothing. In neutral conditions, these intellectual
perseverations are not visible to others and are regarded as
confusion or strangeness. When performing tests for
intelligence, when time is limited, artificially created
controlled stress (a state of tension) - the disorder manifests
itself very clearly. Narrowing difficulties of distribution and
switching of attention appears the first. In stressful
situations are completely maladjusted, unable not something
to help another, or to call for help, and incapable of selfcontrol, errors of perception, memory disorder, disturbed
timing, broken complex movements and the like. Habitual
behavior is supplanted by a stereotype, which can be
manifested in extreme excitement, or lethargy.
Superficial judgement and absence of variants of model
of life become durable soil for orthodox fanaticism with
steady vital persuasions and principles. Love, it be possible
to say, even obsessed by the observance of ceremonies,
rituals and templates of behavior, styles of clothing,
languages and rules. Terrible does not love a novelty. Sexual
fetishism is characteristic. In the implementation of deviant
action there is an emotional discharge. In this group, most of
all bright gamers, gamblers (game addiction), persons with
overeating and drinking alcohol.
The structure of deviance, figuratively speaking, is "ironconcrete", and it is very difficult to correct. There is
connection between the display of syndrome and level of
social adaptation. At minimum displays well adapted in
society. At the maximum manifestations of the dynamism of
social processes is clearly maladjusted and neurotic.
Therefore, persons with this dysfunction of brain search
shelter in conservative and steady environments (religious
organizations, public institutions, societies etc.).
For the fourth group with manifestations of dysfunction
of the ventromedial parts of the prefrontal cortex, the
characteristic was: charismatic, lack of conscience, lack of
empathy, and good intellectual abilities.

Volume 27, Number 3, 2018
204

Fundamental and applied researches
in practice of leading scientific schools - ISSN 2313-7525
Volume 27, Number 3, 2018
We consider charisma as the integration of egocentrism,
overestimated self-esteem and the desire for publicity. Selfcenteredness manifests itself by fixing attention on oneself,
one's interests, desires, feelings. Excessive self-centeredness,
which in some situations is not noticeable. Behind the
seeming charm and friendliness in fact hiding coldness,
cruelty and mercantile spirit. The sense of excellence,
selectivity, originality changes the structure of the "One's
self-concept" and self-esteem. The thirst for recognition,
excessive need for admiration of others, vivid selfaffirmation, vanity, desire to differ is realized by rank games
in the society (power structures), gnomic activity, or in show
business. After all, the brightness of imagination,
impressions and fantasies makes it easy to transform into
other images, to ignore reality and to sink into the world of
dreams. Conscience, we examine as a complex of capacities
for pliability, to sense of guilt and stability to temptations.
But there is an overestimated self-esteem, hypocrisy,
irresponsibility, deepening guilt, self-confidence, selfishness,
violence (preferring delayed aggression and indirect),
actions are impulsive, inclined to manipulate and intimidate.
The absence of shame of feeling, duty and responsibility
makes such persons dangerous for society.
Developed intelligence allows exploiting, manipulating
and parasitizing others. In this state of greatness, sexual
preferences are sadism and swinging. Often, demonstrative
suicide is used to create feelings of guilt and control over
others. Characteristic is the impulsive (delayed),
instrumental (independent) and mediated aggression.
When longitudinal observation, an interesting mental
phenomenon was discovered-selfish shame, which arises
from the discomfort between the contrived self and the real,
as in such individuals the intellect is medium and high. Very
often, this critical self-evaluation becomes the cause of
genuine suicidal behavior, self-abasement and a tendency to
sexual masochism. During this period preference is given to
psychoactive substances with an overwhelming effect. In the
period of getting out of the state preference is given to
psychostimulants and hallucinogens. In the test for the
diagnosis of conscience (an ethical dilemma with two
situations on the railroad track). Mentally healthy people
with consciousness and a sense of moral responsibility for
their behavior, their actions to themselves and society in 6080% will switch the arrow, and 20% - will push the plump
man with a sense of guilt, in this far-fetched diagnostic
situation. Individuals without conscience, in all cases, will
switch the arrow and push the person. Most importantly,
they do not see any difference between the two situations
and they do not have any emotion when deciding this test. In
life follow mercantile, but not moral principles only. It is
these people in society who are often promoters of
addictions and deviations and very often are in leadership
positions.
So, four most typical profiles (syndromology of basal
cores) of deviants associated with dysfunctions are
distinguished:
A. The orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) part prefrontal cortex;
B. Dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC or DL-PFC);
C. Anterior cingulate cortex (ACC);
D. Ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC).

Tkach, B.
Neuropsychological
features personalities
with deviant behavior

According to their life experience, it is not difficult to
guess in which industry / field of activity and on which
hierarchical levels of society, positions, professions, you can
often meet people with certain neuropsychological features.
The secondary symptom complex is represented by
being under the influence of naive realism, domination of
heuristic (intuitive) thinking and inability to use expert
thinking (insufficient knowledge of traditional logic) in
everyday life; low communicative competence (insufficient
knowledge of symbolic logic) disadaptation (inability to see
in time alternative ways of solving the problem). It is worth
noting that the secondary symptom complex is not a
multilevel diagnosis (the tradition of American psychiatry),
but the disturbances resulting from the presence of the
primary symptom complex are minimal disruptions in the
functioning of the anterior part of the brain.
Actually secondary symptom complex within a social
context of circumstances, it becomes the immediate cause of
the formation of deviancy. It was believed that the choice of
the form of addictive behavior is supposedly stochastic. In
fact, it depends on social origin, value-normative standards,
material capacities and the information environment. There
is a definite tendency in the preferences of various
deviations for certain neuropsychological features.
Deviations acceptable / traditional for society / groups are
typical for persons with (DLPFC or DL-PFC); deviations that
are unacceptable and are of a conflict nature for the society
are inherent in the persons of (OFC); instead of the
declaration of one behavior, and to live on the diametrically
opposite - deviant is inherent for people with (vmPFC); the
most indiscriminate and "fixated" on certain deviations are
persons with (ACC). The level of total brain activity
determines the tendency of deviation. Persons with a lower
level of brain activity are looking for a psych stimulating
activity / substance, a person with a heightened - calming.
The motivational component of deviant behavior.
There was a direct link between low frustration tolerance
and atactic motivation. The functional state of the
Hippocampus determines what motivation will be. Ataractic
motivation is inherent in persons with a lowered function,
and hedonic motivation is normal and increased function. In
addition, it cannot be said that men in general are more
vulnerable to the appearance of deviations - all very
individually.
Tertiary symptom complex - actually there is an
addiction - pathological homeostasis (a constant desire to
receive pleasure), and addictive actions lose the conscious
component and become an automated process.
Convenient for diagnosis criteria Griffiths (2000) for the
definition of addictions: Priority - the favorite activity is of
paramount importance and prevails in the cognitive,
emotional and behavioral spheres; a change in mood accompanied by emotional upsurge or a transition to calm
when moving to a favorite activity; tolerance - a quantitative
increase in parameters (time, intensity, introduction of
novelty) activities to achieve the usual effect; withdrawal
symptoms - the appearance of unpleasant sensations
(physiological reactions) with the loss or sudden restriction
of the ability to engage in your favorite activities; conflict -

Volume 27, Number 3, 2018
205

Fundamental and applied researches
in practice of leading scientific schools - ISSN 2313-7525
Volume 27, Number 3, 2018

Tkach, B.
Neuropsychological
features personalities
with deviant behavior

confrontation intrapsychic, interpersonal due to the
dominance of your favorite activities before other activities
(social life, personal life, work, etc.); relapse - return to your
favorite activity after the withdrawal period.

Emotional sphere. The increased activity of the pleasure
center, the weakening of the center and the ways of
suppressing pleasure.
The end result is abnormal
homeostasis / addiction.

The affective component of deviant behavior. From
the anamnesis it became known that most of the subjects
already had established deviations at the age of 12-17. The
formation of deviation occurred on emotions, and not on the
basis of conscious choice. The level of co-dependence is not
constant, it is considered variable under the influence of the
current emotional state, somatic state, life circumstances
and changing worldview patterns. There are often
remissions, some additions are superseded by others.
However, the periodic desire to feel the change of states of
consciousness and the desire for situational happiness
remains constant. A mathematical model could be created if
the brain were not so volatile as to be influenced by
psychological and cognitive events in the environment.
Applying EEG monitoring, it was found that the control
group mainly has an active left hemisphere during the day
and a sufficient level of brain activity, whereas those with
deviation during the day are dominated by the right
hemisphere, while the left hemisphere is activated at the
moment of waiting and implementing deviant actions.

References

Conclusions
On
the
basis
of
complex
and
systematic
neuropsychological research, a causal structure of deviant
behavior has been identified, it makes it possible to form
components of the hierarchy of universality (properties of
the central nervous system) in neuropsychological concepts
of deviant behavior: Local dysfunction of the brain: the
orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) part prefrontal cortex;
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC or DL-PFC); anterior
cingulate cortex (ACC); ventromedial prefrontal cortex
(vmPFC) of the brain tonsils. This applies exclusively
nominalism - the only thing that exists is the specific
syndromes of destruction of different parts of the brain
(partiality). Intermediate forms do not exist, only multiple
lesions are possible, which generates a combination of
syndromes. Functional state of the Hippocampus. With a
normal functional state - hedonistic motivation, and with
weakened - ataractic motivation. There are mutually
exclusive attributes, that is, attributes that cannot be
simultaneously. However, this state can be, as a leading
trend in the individual psychological characteristics of the
personality, or it can be dynamic when in the first half of the
day ataractic motivation dominates, and in the second hedonistic. Taking these two arguments into account makes
it possible to understand its functional features.
Gnostic, cognitive, mnemonic violations - a hostile
attribution. Congenital and acquired cognitive distortions
can occur due to listed brain dysfunctions / features or have
a somatic origin (anxiety mechanism). The ratio can be
single (mono-system) and multi-site (poly-system).

Andrukh, P.G. (2011). The results of application of the MMPI
method in the psychodiagnostic examination of persons with
dependence on various types of psychoactive substances
(pathopersonological characteristics). International Medical
Journal, 17 (1), 13-19.
Bizyuk, A.P. (2005). Compendium of methods of neuropsychological
research. St. Petersburg: Speech.
Burlachuk, LF (2006). Psychodiagnostics. St. Petersburg: Peter.
Bechara, A., Dolan, S., Denburg, N., Hindes, A., Anderson, S.W. &
Nathan, P.E. (2001). Decision-making deficits, linked to a
dysfunctional ventromedial prefrontal cortex, revealed in
alcohol and stimulant abusers. Neuropsychologia, 39(4), 376389.
Cavedini, P., Riboldi, G., D'Annucci, A., Belotti, P., Cisima, M. &
Bellodi, L. (2002). Decision-making heterogeneity in obsessivecompulsive disorder: ventromedial prefrontal cortex function
predicts different treatment outcomes. Neuropsychologia,
40(2), 205-211.
lerc, M., Bougrain, L. & Lotte, F. (Eds.). (2016). Brain-Computer
Interfaces 1: Methods and Perspectives. London: ISTE.
Chomskaya, E.D. (2007). Neuropsychological diagnostics. Moscow:
Institute of General Humanitarian Studies V. Sekachev.
Duchowski, A.T. (2017). Eye Tracking Methodology: Theory and
Practice (3rd ed.). Berlin: Springer.
Egorov, A.Yu. (2006). Neuropsychology of deviant behavior. St.
Petersburg: Speech.
Griffiths, M.D. (2000). Internet addiction – time to be taken
seriously? Addiction Research, 8(5), 413-419.
Jackson, S.L. (2015). Research Methods and Statistics: A Critical
Thinking Approach (5th ed.). Stamford: Wadsworth Publishing.
Kolb, B. & Whishaw, I.Q. (2015). Fundamentals of Human
Neuropsychology (7th ed.). New York: Worth Publishers.
Luria, A.R. (2008). Fundamentals of Neuropsychology (6 ed.).
Moscow: Academy.
Maksimenko, S.D. (2006). Geneseus realization of personality. Kiev:
KMM.
Mendelevich, V.D. (2003). Drug addiction and comorbid behavior
disorders (psychological and psychopathological aspects).
Moscow: MEDpress-inform.
Nikolaenko, N.N. (2013). Modern neuropsychology. St. Petersburg:
Speech.
Potenza, M.N. (2001). The neurobiology of pathological gambling.
Semin. Clin. Neuropsychiatry, 6(3), 217-226.
Regard, M., Knoch, D., Gutling, E. & Landis, T. (2003). Brain damage
and addictive behavior: a
neuropsychological and
electroencephalogram investigation with pathologic gamblers.
Cogn Behav Neurol, 16(1), 47-53.
Specker, S.M., Carlson, G.A., Christenson, G.A. & Marcotte, M. (1995).
Impulse control disorders and attention deficit disorder in
pathological gamblers. Ann Clin Psychiatry, 7(4), 175-179.
Tkach, B.M. (2006). Individual psychological and neuropsychological
peculiarities of youth with addictive behavior. (Disserted
Candidate of Psychological Sciences). Institute of Psychology
named after. G.S.Kostyuk APS of Ukraine, Kyiv.

Volume 27, Number 3, 2018
206

