Маркетинг і цифрові технології

UDC: 339.138

Том 2, № 2, 2018

ISSN 2522-9087 (Print)
ISSN 2523-434X (Online)

JEL Classification: M 31
Marulin Stanislav
PhD, Senior Teacher System Software Department
Odesa National Polytechnic University (Odesa, Ukraine)

Blazhko Alexander
PhD, Associate Professor System Software Department
Odesa National Polytechnic University (Odesa, Ukraine)

Zlatova Iryna
PhD, Senior Teacher Marketing Department
Odesa National Polytechnic University (Odesa, Ukraine)

EFFICIENCY OF NEUROMARKETING IN DIGITAL GAMES
In this article the authors used the researches of neuromarketing of Finnish, Dutch scientists
to learn the best world practices and to develop own marketing research of influence of game design,
complexity of levels, different features on user experience, frequency of playing a game and the time
spent in game with help of NeuroSky technology. Sample calculations were made for further research
on brain activity in the game, in order to identify key points that contribute to the success of the game
on the market.
Keywords: game marketing, NeuroSky, neuromarketing, ECG researches, user experience,
usability of a game, triggers in game, games, virtual gaming, psychological triggers, emotional
triggers, flow, immersion, game design, emotions, addictions.

DOI: 10.15276/mdt.2.2.2018.7

Statement of the problem and it’s connection with significant scientific and
practical tasks. The gaming industry is working its way to becoming the largest
entertainment industry ever. The rise of various kinds of gaming options and increase in
revenue begs the question: what makes games playable? What are the factors that weigh in
when trying to lure customers? This thesis aims to identify and explain the qualities of digital
games that appeal to players and potential players on a psychological level. Different kinds of
factors are used in analyzing what sorts of qualities virtual games have that play a part in
customer persuasion and prolonged satisfaction, flow, immersion, emotion and character
identification to name a few.
Analysis of the latest research and publications, which initiated the solution of
this problem and on which the author relies. After characterizing virtual games, it is
practical to define what neuro triggers are. The first definition to be used is by Goodman and
Helin: «An emotional trigger is an event that causes a reaction. Some occurrence, real or
imagined, sets off a series of intense feelings, and those feelings become the reason behind
subsequent actions or strongly held convictions». Another definition for a trigger comes from
psychcentral.com (2015) in the article about traumas, «What is a Trigger?»: «A trigger is
something that sets off a memory tape or flashback transporting the person back to the event
of her/his original trauma». For example, a person suffering from post-traumatic stress
disorder related to a car crash might produce eccentric behavior when hearing, seeing or
reading about car crashes or signs of them. The crash would, in this instance, be the
psychological trigger to that behavior. In marketing psychological triggers are used in a
different, and intentionally positive way. Some interesting articles have been written about the
S. Marulin , A. Blazhko, I. Zlatova. Efficiency of neuromarketing in digital

87

Marketing and Digital Technologies

Volume 2, No 2, 2018

ISSN 2522-9087 (Print)
ISSN 2523-434X (Online)

act of purchasing a product, the decision to purchase to be exact. Phil Barden (2013) handles
this subject in his book «Decoded: the science behind why we buy». Based on research done
by Knutson, Rick, Wimmer, Prelec and Loewenstein (2007), Barden suggests regarding the
decision to purchase that: «... if the relation between reward and pain exceeds a certain value,
the respondents are willing to purchase this item for this price. Our brain calculates a kind of
‘net value’ and if this is high enough, if the difference between reward and pain is great
enough, then we buy».
The decision to purchase is closely related to impulse buying, which Rook (1987)
defines as occurring when a consumer experiences a sudden and persistent urge to buy
something immediately. According to Dawson and Kim (2009), impulse-buying sales account
for $4 billion annually in the United States, and most shoppers occasionally engage in impulse
buying. In «External and internal trigger cues of impulse buying online» they aim at
investigating the matter in more detail, finding out that impulse buying is linked to retailers’
effort to upgrade an existing customer’s purchase and cross-selling strategies. As is the case in
gaming markets also, Dawson and Kim (2009) state that online marketers frequently
implement promotional strategies promoting up – and cross – selling through various means
to maximize their profits, possibly on expense of customers’ purchases that they were not
going to do in the first place. As their title suggests, they divide impulse buying into external
and internal factors: external being the ones that refer to marketing cues or stimuli that are
controlled by the marketer in attempt to lure consumers into purchase, and internal the ones
that focus on the individual. They further conclude that there exists a significant relationship
between a person’s affective state and cognitive state and their online impulse-buying
behavior. By this, Dawson and Kim (2009) mean that when a customer is more responsive to
their affective state, they are more prone to impulse–buying, whereas being more responsive
to their cognitive state lessens the proneness to impulse–buying.
Psychological triggers are seen as the factor that makes players:
1) purchase the game;
2) play the game;
3) continue playing the game;
4) seek individual experiences;
5) seek social experiences.
When purchasing a game, one invests money as the cost and receives the game as a
reward. When playing a game, one invests time and effort as the cost and receives some level
of enjoyment as a reward [6].
All these triggers in a whole can be called marketing targets in the field of game
industry. To reach these targets marketeers use neuromarketing tools, to influence on the
players’ subconscious. When considering the development from marketing to
neuromarketing, essentially, the key issue which changed is the way in which information
about consumer wants and preferences is acquired (Ariely, & Berns, 2010). Within the –
neuro-area‖, we can differentiate between three terms, namely neuroscience, neuroeconomics
and neuromarketing. According to Plassmann et al. (2012), neuroscience – is the study of the
nervous system that seeks to understand the biological basis of behavior‖ (p. 18). Put
differently, it is the practical application of neurological findings to sciences that tries to
understand human behavior, emotions and thoughts. (Esch, Möll, Elger, Neuhaus, & Weber,
2008; Kumlehn, 2011; Camerer, Loewenstein, & Prelec, 2004). Then, neuroeconomics can be
seen as some kind of subdiscipline of neurosciences in general. As stated by Rustichini (2005)
and Sanfey, Loewenstein, McClure and Cohen (2006), neuroeconomics makes use of the
techniques offered by the field of neurosciences and tries to explore brain processes with it,
but having a main focus on decision-making and economic aspects at the same time. It tries to
88

Маркетинг і цифрові технології

Том 2, № 2, 2018

ISSN 2522-9087 (Print)
ISSN 2523-434X (Online)

understand all ongoing and economically relevant processes in the brain (Braeutigam, 2005).
Finally, let us come to the actual term of neuromarketing. Although there exist several
different definitions, we will summarize the most important ones in the following.
Neuromarketing can be seen as a sub-field of neuroeconomics, and therewith also of
neurosciences, which deals with problems relevant to marketing by making use of methods
from brain research in managerial practice (Hubert, 2010; Fugate, 2007; Lee, Broderick, &
Chamberlain, 2007; Gang, Lin, Qi, & Yan, 2012; Hubert, & Kenning, 2008; Ariely, & Berns,
2010; Dapkevičius, & Melnikas, 2011; Fisher, Chin, & Klitzman, 2010). Formulated
differently by Lee et al. (2007) neuromarketing is the application of neuroscientific methods
to analyze and understand human behavior in relation to markets and marketing exchanges
(p.200). Calvert and Brammer‘s definition (2012) also points to the measurement of – nonconscious‖ responses of the brain that can only be observed with neuromarketing techniques
[7].
The advertising industry realized the potential of psychology to understanding the
consumers’ subconscious in the early 1900’s (Lewis 2013: 8). It was realized that advertising
was as much persuasion as promotion (Lewis 2013: 10). «For the first time, the concept of
persuasion, which is a prime role of a salesman, was applied to the creation of advertising»
(O’Toole cited in Lewis 2013: 9). Psychoanalysts were the first psychologists to have a
profound influence on advertising, the majority of whom were followers of Freud.
Psychoanalysis places a lot of importance on the crucial part emotions played on a
consumer’s decision making. (Lewis 2013: 10.) At the time Dr. Ernest Dichter was one of the
leading psychologists following in the footsteps of Freud. He is known as the founder of
motivational psychology. He set up the Institute for Research in Mass Motivation (Lewis
2013: 10) or the ‘Dichter Institute’ as called in The New York Times. Dichter went on to
develop psychoanalytic theory and marketing that he sold to companies such as Exxon,
DuPont and Colgate–Palmolive (Ames 1998, Archives). By the 1950’s according to Lewis, an
estimated billion dollars was being invested into psychological research (2013: 12).
Until the mid-1960s the talk of conscious and subconscious were regarded as
unscientific. With time as the subconscious became more widely accepted, cognitive
psychology would become accepted by the advertising industry. This new field was focused
on skills such as memory, language, decision-making and reasoning (Lewis 2013: 14-15.) The
concept of neuromarketing was then developed. Professor Ale Smidts of Erasmus University,
Rotterdam is regarded by many as inventing the term Neuromarketing in 2002. He did so
explaining that the purpose of Neuromarketing was to better understand the consumers mind
and his or her response to stimulus and in turn to improve marketing effectiveness. (Lewis
2013: 17).
A study commissioned by the European Union divides the methods of
neuromarketing. It describes the first wave as ‘direct studies’ referring to analysing the brain
with e.g. Electroencephalography (EEG) and functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI)
technology. The second wave is a focus on ‘indirect studies’ another words analysing changes
in the physiological state. This includes the analysis of facial expressions, eyemovement, skin
conductance, rate of inhalation and heart rate. (Probst, Frideres, Demetri & Vomhof 2014).
To analyse the data collected my NM measurement techniques different software
packages are available. Limited information is available, but according to Hammou, Galib &
Melloul the most commonly used software for analysis of brain imaging data is statistical
parametric mapping (2013: 22). Direct and indirect research methods or in other words NM
measurement techniques will be reviewed later in Chapter 4 (see pages 39–41). Figure 7 is an
example of an EEG device; developed by Neuro Focus in 2011, a leading neuromarketing
company.
S. Marulin , A. Blazhko, I. Zlatova. Efficiency of neuromarketing in digital

89

Marketing and Digital Technologies

Volume 2, No 2, 2018

ISSN 2522-9087 (Print)
ISSN 2523-434X (Online)

Figure 8 highlights the difference of a traditional consumer persuasion model (figure
6: 16) compared to one with the application of neuro-imaging from the perspective of Wilson
et al. (2008). One of the questions of marketers is why and how consumers react to various
marketing stimuli. This section presents a consumer persuasion model that could be
implemented into future research of product integration in digital games. Figure 8 (see page
20) or the collective Neuromarketing persuasion model is almost identical to Figure 6 (see
page 16) or the traditional consumer persuasion model. It only differs in the screening phase;
this model introduces neuroimaging into the consumer behaviour paradigm. Instead of asking
for the conscious opinion of subjects, the consumers agree to neuroimaging measurements
methods while observing the marketing stimuli. The insertion of Figure 8 here in the study is
to highlight the difference in Neuromarketing research in regards to traditional marketing
research methods.
According to Loewenstein, Rick & Cohen (2008) researchers mostly accept that brain
functions rely on a scattered framework. Additionally, brain areas may contribute to more
than a single function. (Reimann, Schilke, Weber and Neuhaus & Zaichkowsky 2011: 619.)
The following numbers 1-11 are in reference to figures 9, 10 and 11 (see pages 22-23); 1:
Putamen; 2: Caudate nucleus; 3: Nucleus accumbens; 4: Right anterior insula; 5: Anterior
cingulate cortex (ACC); 6: Orbitofrontal cortex (OFC); 7: Ventromedical prefrontal cortex
(VMPFC); 8: Medical prefrontal cortex (MPFC); 9: Ventral Tegmental area (VTA); 10:
Amygdala; and 11: hippocampus.
Advergames are classified as product immersions, meaning that a product or brand is
the focal point of a story. As defined by Nelson and Waiguny «Advergames are games
specifically designed to promote one company’s brand or products; in this way, they most
closely resemble a traditional advertisement». These games can be found on virtually all
devices and platforms. Firstly, «reskinned games» are a form in which a brand’s artwork is
replaced with those of the existing game. The second form is a completely original game
because it is designed from ground up for a brand. The third form is that in which a brand has
an entire web game arena, for example a website full of interactive games. (2012: ch. 5.) In
any case, Kretchmer states that all Aadver-games combine the two elements of brand and
entertainment: and «offer advertisers a powerful and dynamic medium to engage consumers,
build brand interactivity, drive traffic, and capture market information in the guise of
entertainment» (2004: 48). Dahl, Eagle and Baez state that the aim of an advergame is to
«offer entertainment and to engage web or electronic game users in order to make an
emotional connection between the game and the brand featured within it» (2009: 47). Lee,
Park and Wise suggest that when advergames are used, the type of game needs to be
considered (2013: 1281).
In-game advertising (IGA) is classified as a product placement. Nelson and Waiguny
define in-game advertising «or product placement in games, as the inclusion of a product or
brand within an existing digital game that also features other brands and products» (2012: ch.
5). The primary purpose of the game is to bring entertainment to the player. Thus, in-game
advertising is second to the actual entertainment factor. In the beginning product placements
in games were unpaid, with an intention of adding realism to a game. Vedrasho (2006)
provides examples such as product placements of Ferrari, Renault and Lotus in Formula One
game. Presently, placements can occur in the background (subtly) as billboards or a part of the
scenery as well as prominently as they can be incorporated into game play, such as props,
clothing, game tools, etc. (Neslon & Waiguny 2012: ch. 5).
Games are uniquely adept at leveraging human psychology to motivate behavior. We
play them for hours on end and enter into a state of flow with an ease not found in other
fields. This is no accident: during my time studying game design and working in the field,
90

Маркетинг і цифрові технології

Том 2, № 2, 2018

ISSN 2522-9087 (Print)
ISSN 2523-434X (Online)

neurological language like «dopamine hits» and «social proof» were commonplace. In this
post, I’ll examine some of the common tools used by video game designers in order ensure
engagement and ultimately drive sales.
1. Reward Escalation and Variability.
The «core loop» of a video game is the task which a player repeats over and over
again, becoming better each time, in order to excel at the game. Fundamentally a core loop
needs only to involve a challenge and a reward. For example, in a role playing game like
Zelda, a single level represents a major core loop: each stage is spent beating a challenge (a
dungeon/boss) which is followed by a reward (a new weapon). In his book «the Power of
Habit», author Charles Duhigg uses this exact same model to describe how habits are formed,
explaining why video games are habit inducing (some would say «addictive»). Two major
neurochemical reactions are at play, here. First there is the adrenaline induced by the
challenge itself, and second there is the dopamine involved in anticipating reward. Video
game designers start games with small challenges and frequent rewards, in order to give the
player a taste of these sensations, and gradually begin to make the challenges harder and the
rewards further apart. Over time, they may also use reward variability to create additional
anticipation and dopamine release (some games even take this so far as to introduce slotmachine or other gambling mechanics, the ultimate exploitation of reward variability).
2. Social Proof and Collaboration.
Single player games, which offer no opportunities for competition or cooperation
between players, rely on players becoming excited enough to want to share the game in order
for the game to grow. This worked well in cases like Flappy Bird, but such examples are the
exception rather than the rule. Multiplayer features are so popular in today’s gaming culture
because they offer the game designer a way to engineer social elements into the game.
Game leaderboards are one of the earliest and most obvious examples of the use of
social proof in video games. In «the small BIG», it is suggested that an ideal use of social
proof is to «simply and honestly depict what the majority of others who are similar to your
target audience are already doing that you would like your audience to do, too». If you’ve
ever spent time in an arcade or watching gamers, you know that the leaderboard can use this
to transform the arbitrary concept of «points» or «score» into something that players are
willing to spend days and days attempting to one-up each other for. In essence, the social
proof provided by leaderboards says «this is fun, and other people are willing to put their own
time into it».
More sophisticated use of social components in video games provide mechanisms by
which the product becomes innately more fun when there are other people to play with. «Coop» mode is an example of a time where a challenge is too large to surmount alone, but
suddenly becomes achievable with friends. «Guilds» frequently offer no other benefits than
being able to associate with other players, and huge communities of devout gamers have
sprung up around the culture of joining and playing within online guilds. As a result, players
bring their friends into new games because they will collectively have more fun.
At a talk given by Zynga about Words With Friends at the 2010 Game Developer’s
Conference, the presenter discussed the massive increase in engagement/virality simply by
placing friends’ faces next to relevant actions. What they found is that accurately representing
achievements, leaderboards, scores, etc. with this highly visual social cue (a Facebook picture
as opposed to other things like names) social proof had a greater impact. So powerful is this
effect that Zynga created an entire series of games with the «… with Friends» suffix.
3. Time, Money and Sunk Costs.
Recently, the video game industry has seen a rise in «freemium» video games, where
the player does not need to pay anything up-front but can choose to buy things for in-app
S. Marulin , A. Blazhko, I. Zlatova. Efficiency of neuromarketing in digital

91

Marketing and Digital Technologies

Volume 2, No 2, 2018

ISSN 2522-9087 (Print)
ISSN 2523-434X (Online)

purchases down the line. Putting aside the question of if this model is ethical (humorously
addressed by South Park in the recent «Freemium Isn’t Free» episode), it employs some very
basic psychology. A player who has played a game for many hours for free will reversejustify his use of time and equate it with money. Consciously or not, the fact that he has
poured so much time into the game will make him more likely to spend money. One would
imagine that the narrative would sound something like this: «I put 10 hours into this game,
and only a fool would invest so much time into a bad game, and I’m no fool, so this game
must be good and therefore worth something». Some unscrupulous game designers will then
go a step further, leveraging the sunk cost fallacy in order to exploit this sunk time. They will
hold past progress hostage behind a paywall if the player wants to continue playing. Another
tactic is to leverage loss aversion by allowing the player to escape a situation where he would
lose game progress by paying money. For example, some games will cause the player to
forfeit a hard-earned piece of equipment or unit when he dies or loses a level… unless he pays
up. Obviously I discourage the use of the more exploitative of these tactics, yet there is still
something to be learned from the basic principles [8–10].
Highlighting the previously unresolved parts of the general problem to which the
article is devoted. The creators of the games, especially indie games, don’t have large
budgets for researches, so they can’t make rational conclusions about success of the game.
They can just guess, what exact triggers influence on players, what do they like or don’t like
in a game, what makes them stay in game and play for a long time. Traditional methods of
marketing researches, such as surveys or focus groups don’t help to find out deep motivating
factors, that allow to attract and to increase customer retention rates.
Formulation of the purpose of the article (statement of the problem). This paper
aims to formulate the ways of improving customer satisfaction within a game and retention of
the customers with help of neuromarketing tools in th game marketing field. The purpose of
the experiment: collecting electrical impulses of the brain. Type of provision of information:
electronic file with digital frequency (Hz) and power (μV) of received electrical pulses.
Statement of the main material of the research with full justification of the
scientific results obtained. The neuron is an electrically excitable cell that processes, stores
and transmits information using electrical and chemical signals. If there is an electrical
impulse, then it has a certain frequency and power (amplitude) that can be measured.
The electrical activity of the brain is of a wave nature. There are four categories of
brain waves [7], each of which corresponds to certain states of human consciousness (Tab. 1).
Table 1 – summary indicators of wave impulses of the brain
Wave
Beta

92

Frequency Hz/
Amplitude, μV
14-40/>20

State / Effect

How to achieve?

– higher cognitive processes
– focusing attention
– focus on solving any current problems
– strong agitation
– stress
– a feeling of anxiety
– nervousness
– confusion
– fussiness

– wakefulness with open eyes
– monitoring of events
– stressful situation
– resistance and protection
from something
– powerful counteraction to
negative circumstances
– feverish activity

Маркетинг і цифрові технології

Том 2, № 2, 2018

ISSN 2522-9087 (Print)
ISSN 2523-434X (Online)

Continue Tab. 1
Alpha

8-13/5-100

Theta

4-7/20-100

Delta

0-4/20-200

– activation of creative thoughts
– making sound decisions
– Increase of intellectual logical
abilities
– easy assimilation of information
– efficiency
– a sense of inner comfort and wellbeing
– improvement of sleep, immunity
– Stress and depression
– creative insights;
– Creativity;
– intuition;
– spiritual ties with one's inner self and
loved ones
– deep sleep without dreams;
– Sopor;
– coma;
– deep meditation;
– «exit from the body»

– manifested with closed eyes
and in a darkened room
– pacification
– meditation
– a state where you have not
yet fallen asleep, but «here»
you no longer exist, when you
are just beginning to fall into a
dream

– concussion of the brain;
– asthenic syndrome;
– a state of deep relaxation;
– Hypnosis
– drugs;
– children from 3 to 6 years;
– a prolonged mental load;
– listening to binaural beats;

The mathematical model of the research object is presented in the form of a black box,
depicted in Figure 1 and described by function 1.

Figure 1 – Mathematical model of the object of research software «BrainReaction»
(1)

Y = f(X, U,Z),

where:
X (x1, x2, xn) – independent control variables (input) variables, which can be
purposefully changed during the experiment;
U (u1, u2, un) – controlled disturbances that prevent a purposeful change in the course
of the study;
Z (z1, z2, zn) – uncontrolled and uncontrollable disturbances unknown to the researcher,
slowly varying in time randomly:
– external incentives (social networks, mobile games);
S. Marulin , A. Blazhko, I. Zlatova. Efficiency of neuromarketing in digital

93

Marketing and Digital Technologies

ISSN 2522-9087 (Print)
ISSN 2523-434X (Online)

Volume 2, No 2, 2018

– accumulated fatigue;
Y (y1, y2, yn) – controlled or calculated parameters characterizing the state of the
object: Beta, Alpha, Theta, Delta waves.
Stages of planning and organization of the experiment.
The type of equipment to collect information is a neuro-headset. We have 3 types of
headsets: MindWave Mobile, Emotiv Insight, Emotiv EPOC (Figures 2). For the experiment,
the Emotiv EPOC device was chosen, which, in comparison with other neuro interfaces, has
more accurate data fixation.

Figures 2 – MindWave Mobile, Emotiv Insight, Emotiv EPOC in action
Selecting a group of listeners. In this study, when it is not possible to provide a
sufficient number of neuro-types for all players, an experiment will be conducted on the basis
of a representative sample.
A representative sample is a sample of a finite volume that has all the properties of the
initial population, significant from the point of view of the research tasks. A necessary
condition for constructing a representative sample is the equal probability of including every
element of the general population in it.
The object of the research is 309 students, the average grade of which during the
winter session of the academic year 2017-2018 is ranged from 60 to 75 points. We consider
that for such students the need to increase the level of perception of information with the aim
of getting into the scholarship payment zone is clearly evident.
The size of the necessary sample was calculated by the function 2:

,
94

(2)

Маркетинг і цифрові технології

Том 2, № 2, 2018

ISSN 2522-9087 (Print)
ISSN 2523-434X (Online)

where:
N – number of the general population;
e – error margin (in the form of a decimal fraction);
z – confidence level (in the form of a z-score). Z-score measure of the standard
deviation of a certain fraction of the average value. For the confidence level of 95% z = 1.96.
p – percentage value (in the form of a decimal fraction). Requirements to the size of
the sample, which gives a definite answer. We will assume that 90% of students respond
correctly to the lecturer.
According to function 2, a representative number of students is 97.
The choice of the method of solution and strategy for its implementation. As a
solution, it was decided to select the SDK tools – community-sdk and Cortex API. Cortex
API in the basic version of BASIC, that allows you to obtain data of the following order:
mental commands, frequency ranges of brain waves, facial expression, motion data.
Function AverageBandPowers from community-sdk allows to collect averaged
frequency indices: theta (4–8 Hz), alpha (8–12 Hz), low-beta (12–16 Hz), high-beta (16–25
Hz), gamma 25–45 Hz).
Analysis and interpretation of results, their presentation. After obtaining the averaged
frequencies, a classification will be made according to the types of waves. The second step is
the spread of the resulting classes on the timeline (Figure 3).

Figure 3 – Resulting classes on the timeline
The process of the research included 90 minutes of testing the game PhilBattle (the
access to the game at Google Play: https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.
GoodsCo.PhilBattle). The game type is educational game. Players must seize territory by
answering the questions. The research has several advantages:
1. the research includes the process of gamification of the educational process and the
analysis of it’s efficiency;
2. the testing of the game helps to indicate bugs and to make an improvement of the
game;
3. the neural activity during the testing can help to develop triggers for the game.
In the first part of the study, students played the game without intervention from the
teacher – he did not change their behavior in the testing process.
In the second part of the study the objects of the study played the game, and the
teacher changed the behavior of students.
S. Marulin , A. Blazhko, I. Zlatova. Efficiency of neuromarketing in digital

95

Marketing and Digital Technologies

Volume 2, No 2, 2018

ISSN 2522-9087 (Print)
ISSN 2523-434X (Online)

The data collected in the form of files revealed average values states the entire
population, and distribute to the timeline.
Figure 4 is a graph showing the averages status monitoring group with the experiment
described above.
Minutes
.

Alpha rhythm (Creative)
Slow beta rhythm (Stress)
Quick beta rhythm (the
work)
Gamma wave
(Reflections)
Theta rhythm (Sleepy)
Quick beta rhythm (the
work)
Slow beta rhythm (Stress)

Figure 4 – The states of the objects of observation time
To obtain a reverse reaction, questionnaires were drawn up, on the basis of which
decisions were made on the percentage of the level of assimilation of the educational material
of the game. An example of the questionnaire is shown in Table 2.
Table 2 – Example of profiles for the reverse reaction
How do you rate the
level of interest to the
educational game?
5 - the game was
interesting about 75% of
the time of playing
4 - the game was
interesting about 50% of
the time of playing
3 - the game was
interesting about 30% of
the time of playing
2 - the game was
interesting abiut 15% of
the time of playing
1 - the game was not
interesting.

96

%

m
i
n
u
t
e
s

How do you rate
the level of
knowledge you
received in the
game?
5 - the level of
knowledge more
than 75%
4 - the level of
knowledge is about
50%
3 - the level of
knowledge is about
30%
2 - the level of
knowledge is about
15%
1 - the level of
knowledge is less
than 15%

%

m
i
n
u
t
e
s

The game testing time
was 90 minutes. How
do you rate the
percentage of time of
the maximum
involvement?
5 - the involvement
about 75% of the time
of playing
4 - the involvement
about 50% of the time
of playing
3 - the involvement
about 30% of the time
of playing
2 - the involvement
about 15% of the time
of playing
1 - the involvement less
than 15% of the time
of playing

%

m
i
n
u
t
e
s

Маркетинг і цифрові технології

ISSN 2522-9087 (Print)
ISSN 2523-434X (Online)

Том 2, № 2, 2018

Continue Tab. 2
5

75

67

1

0

0

4

50 45

4

50

45

1

0

0

2

15 13

5

75

67

3

30

27 3

30 27

2

15

13

4

50

45 3

30 27

1

0

0

1

0

0

3

30 27

5

75

67

5

75

67 5

75 67

2

15

13

5

75

67 2

15 13

According to the neural waves dinamic and the results of the questionnaires we made
the recommendations for the most efficient instruments for each type of neural wave, which
are represented in the Table 3.
Table 3 – Recommendations for a reverse reaction to the current state of the research object
Prevailing frequency of the
brain
Alpha rhythm

Slow beta rhythm

Quick beta rhythm

Gamma wave

Theta rhythm

Condition

Creative

Stress

the work

Recommendation
The object of the research is ready solve creative
problems.
Begin to offer creative problems. Pay attention to
focusing on the stated material.
Research object is in a state of stress.
Pause.
Change the type of activity.
Performing exercises for relaxation.
The object of research is ready to maximum
operating status.
Provide information with maximum intensity.
The audience is set to work.

Research object is in a state of active meditation
Reflections that helps to solve a specific tasks.
Go to solving tasks for reflection. Ask questions.

Sleepy

The object of the research is in a sleepy state.
Please note that the student needs to finish the
game.
Change the mode of the game.
Wake the object of study.

Conclusions from this research and prospects for further developments in this
area. According to the plan of research, developed in this article, the NeuroSky technology
can be used to find out:
1. The moment in a game, when the user lose interest.
2. The type of waves, that appear, when the player wants to exit.
S. Marulin , A. Blazhko, I. Zlatova. Efficiency of neuromarketing in digital

97

Marketing and Digital Technologies

Volume 2, No 2, 2018

ISSN 2522-9087 (Print)
ISSN 2523-434X (Online)

3. The best triggers to increase time spent in a game.
4. The research of the convenient moments to make a player to buy virtual money or
improvements.
5. Which combinations of waves facilitate retention.
Acknowledgements:
This work was partially funded by the European Union in the context of the project
«GameHub – University – Enterprises Cooperation in Game Industry in Ukraine» (Project
Number: 561728-EPP-1-2015-1-ES-EPPKA2-CBHE-JP) under the ERASMUS+ programme.
This document does not represent the opinion of the European Union, and the European
Union is not responsible for any use that might be made of its content. The Education,
Audiovisual and Culture Executive Agency and European Commission are not responsible for
any use that may be made of the information contains in communication or publication.

1. Castermans, T. (2011) Detecting biosignals with the Emotiv EPOC headset: a Review. Tangible
Feelings : a Symposium on EEG. Brussels: TCTS Lab.
2. Lebedev, & MA, Nicolelis, MA. (2006) Brain-machine interfaces: past, present and future. Trends
Neurosci. 29 (9): 536–46.
3. Lin, M. (2008) OCZ NIA Brain-Computer Interface. Retrieved from https://hothardware.com/
reviews/ocz-nia-braincomputer-interface.
4. Lees, M. (2015) A review of product integration in digital games and why neuromarketing may be
of value in future research. Retrieved from https://www.theseus.fi/bitstream/handle/10024/
92652/Lees_JuhoMalcom.pdf?sequence=1.
5. NeuroSky. Body and Mind. Quantified. Retrieved from http://neurosky.com/biosensors/eegsensor/biosensors.
6. Toivio, O. (2016) Psychological Triggers In Video Games. Retrieved from https://jyx.jyu.fi/
dspace/bitstream/handle/123456789/51380/URN:NBN:fi:jyu-201609164128.pdf?sequence=1.
7. Roth, V.A. (2013) The Potential of Neuromarketing as a Marketing Tool. Retrieved from
http://essay.utwente.nl/65342/1/Roth_BA_MB.pdf.
8. Claes, Z. 3 Neuromarketing Lessons from Video Games. Retrieved from https://www.
neurosciencemarketing.com/blog/articles/neuromarketing-video-games.htm.
9. Oklander, M.A., Oklander, T.O., & Yashkina, O.I. (2017). Tsyfrovyi marketynh – model
marketynhu ХХІ storichchia [Digital Marketing – The Marketing Model of the 21st Century].
Oklander, M.A. (Ed.). Odesa [in Ukrainian].
10. Sabaitytė, J., Davidavičienė, V. (2018). The analysis of Internet marketing research directions.
Marketynh i tsyfrovi tekhnolohii [Marketing and Digital Technologies], 2, 1, 7–20. Retrieved from
http://mdt-opu.com.ua/index.php/mdt/article/view/25/27.

С.Ю. Марулін, кандидат технічних наук, старший викладач кафедри системного
програмного забезпечення Одеського національного політехнічного університету (Одеса,
Україна)
О.А. Блажко, кандидат технічних наук, доцент кафедри системного програмного
забезпечення Одеського національного політехнічного університету (Одеса, Україна)
І.О. Златова кандидат економічних наук, старший викладач кафедри маркетингу
Одеського національного політехнічного університету (Одеса, Україна)
Ефективність нейромаркетингу в комп’ютернихних іграх
У цій статті автори використовували дослідження нейромаркетингу фінських,
голландських вчених з метою вивчення кращих світових практик та розробки власного
маркетингового дослідження впливу дизайну ігор, складності рівнів, різних особливостей гри
на специфіку гри користувача, частоту входів до гри та час, проведений в грі, за допомогою
98

Маркетинг і цифрові технології

Том 2, № 2, 2018

ISSN 2522-9087 (Print)
ISSN 2523-434X (Online)

технології NeuroSky. Здійснено розрахунки вибірки для подальших досліджень активності
мозку у грі, з метою виявлення ключових моментів, що сприяють успіху гри на ринку.
Ключові слова: ігровий маркетинг, NeuroSky, нейромаркетинг, дослідження ЕЕГ, UX,
юзабіліті гри, тригери в грі, ігри, віртуальні ігри, психологічні тригери, емоційні тригери,
дизайн гри, емоції, залежність.

Received to the editor May 22, 2018

S. Marulin , A. Blazhko, I. Zlatova. Efficiency of neuromarketing in digital

99

