Strathprints Institutional Repository
Wu, Chi-Hsu and Lakany, Heba (2015) Evaluation of the feasibility of a
novel distance adaptable steady-state visual evoked potential based
brain-computer interface. In: 2015 7th International IEEE/EMBS
Conference on Neural Engineering (NER). IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, pp. 5760. ISBN 9781467363891 , http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/NER.2015.7146559
This version is available at http://strathprints.strath.ac.uk/55570/
Strathprints is designed to allow users to access the research output of the University of
Strathclyde. Unless otherwise explicitly stated on the manuscript, Copyright © and Moral Rights
for the papers on this site are retained by the individual authors and/or other copyright owners.
Please check the manuscript for details of any other licences that may have been applied. You
may not engage in further distribution of the material for any profitmaking activities or any
commercial gain. You may freely distribute both the url (http://strathprints.strath.ac.uk/) and the
content of this paper for research or private study, educational, or not-for-profit purposes without
prior permission or charge.
Any correspondence concerning this service should be sent to Strathprints administrator:
strathprints@strath.ac.uk

Margin requirements for first page
Paper size this page US Letter

72 pt
1 in
25.4 mm

Evaluation of the feasibility of a novel distance adaptable SteadyState Visual Evoked Potential based Brain-Computer Interface *
Chi-Hsu Wu, Heba Lakany


54 pt
0.75 in
19.1 mm

Abstract— Steady-state visual evoked potential (SSVEP)
based brain-computer interface (BCI) has attracted great
attention in BCI research due to its advantages over the other
electroencephalography (EEG) based BCI paradigms, such as
high speed, high signal to noise ratio, high accuracy, commands
scalability and minimal user training time. Several studies have
demonstrated that SSVEP BCI can provide a reliable channel
to the users to communicate and control an external device.
While most SSVEP based BCI studies focus on encoding the
visual stimuli, enhancing the signal detection and improving the
classification accuracy, there is a need to bridge the gap
between BCI "bench" research and real world application.
This study proposes a novel distance adaptable SSVEP based
BCI paradigm which allows its users to operate the system in a
range of viewing distances between the user and the visual
stimulator. Unlike conventional SSVEP BCI where users can
only operate the system at a fixed distance in front of the visual
stimulator, users can operate the proposed BCI at a range of
viewing distances. 10 healthy subjects participated in the
experiment to evaluate the feasibility of the proposed SSVEP
BCI. The visual stimulator was presented to the subjects at 4
viewing distances, 60cm, 150cm, 250cm and 350cm. The mean
classification accuracy across the subjects and the viewing
distances is over 75%. The results demonstrate the feasibility of
a distance adaptable SSVEP based BCI.

I. INTRODUCTION
Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) translates users’ intents
into commands by detecting the brain activities without
relying on the brain normal output pathway [1, 2]. Several
electroencephalography (EEG) based BCI paradigms have
demonstrated that BCI can provide a reliable alternative
channel for healthy people as well as patients with
neuromuscular disorder to communicate and control an
external device. Among these EEG based BCI paradigms,
SSVEP based BCI has drawn relatively considerable
attention in BCI studies recently due to its high information
transfer rate (ITR), high signal to noise ratio (SNR), high
classification accuracy, ease of increasing the commands
and minimal user training time [3, 4].
The mean classification accuracies and ITR reported in
Bremen-BCI speller based on SSVEP were over 95% and
over 60 bits/min [5]. The highest ITR from one subject in
their study was up to 124 bits/min. An environment
controller utilizing 48 LEDs achieved ITR of 68 bits/min
[6]. Recently, a mental speller based on SSVEP allowed one
* This study is funded by Engineering and Physical Science Research
Council (EPSRC).
Both authors are with Biomedical Engineering Department of University
of Strathclyde, Glasgow, Scotland, UK.
e-mail {chihsu.wu, heba.lakany}@strath.ac.uk

letter to be spelled in one selection facilitated by a QWERT
keyboard which contained 30 LEDs representing 26 letters
and 4 symbols [7]. These studies have shown the high ITR
and classification accuracies in SSVEP based BCIs. They
also demonstrated that the superior performance of SSVEP
BCI can be achieved by one single selection task or a
sequential selection tasks.
There were a few SSVEP based BCI studies which
attempted to improve SSVEP detection rates and reduce the
calibration phase which is normally used to decide the best
parameters for individual subject. Lin et al. (2006) proposed
a SSVEP detection method based on canonical correlation
analysis (CCA). Their proposed CCA SSVEP detection
method found CCA correlation coefficients between EEG
signals and the reference signal corresponding to one
stimulus. The corresponding stimulus reference signal
producing the largest CCA correlation coefficient was
regarded as the attended target. Friman et al. (2007)
proposed a SSVEP detection method which combined the
multiple electrodes signals into a channel signal to enhance
SSVEP response and cancel the noise. Both methods
outperformed the conventional power spectral density
analysis [8, 9].
Meanwhile, a great effort has been made to overcome the
limitation of the number of the frequencies available to
encode the visual stimuli. Jia et al. (2011) used the
frequency and the phase to encode SSVEP visual stimuli.
More visual stimuli can be created by fewer frequencies. In
their study, 15 visual stimuli were made by three distinct
frequencies. 4 stimulating frequencies can present 6 to 10
visual stimuli by using dual frequencies for one stimulus
[11, 12]. Multiple frequencies sequential coding (MFSC)
presented one stimulus by multiple frequencies in a
sequential order. The maximum number of stimuli using
MFSC depended on the number of the coding epochs in one
sequence and the number of the stimulating frequencies [13].
For example, if the coding epoch is 2 and the number of the
frequencies is 3, the maximum number of stimuli is up to 9.
Currently, a few commercial EEG headsets available,
e.g. Emotiv, which provide user friendly EEG acquisition,
have been evaluated and used in BCI studies [14]. The
aforementioned studies have offered a solid theory
background in the implantation of SSVEP based BCI, from
the fundamental visual stimuli to SSVEP detection.
Therefore, there is a need to bridge the gap of BCI studies to
real world application.
This study proposes a novel SSVEP based BCI which can
adapt the change of the viewing distance between the users
and the visual stimuli and allows its users to operate the BCI
system at the distance within the range. In conventional
54 pt
0.75 in
19.1 mm

54 pt
0.75 in
19.1 mm

Margin requirements for the other pages
Paper size this page US Letter

54 pt
0.75 in
19.1 mm

SSVEP based BCI, the users have to be in front of the visual
stimuli in order to elicit SSVEP response to operate BCI.
The proposed new paradigm can improve the usability and
flexibility. It is hoped that the proposed paradigm can
broaden the potential target BCI users and the applications.
This paper is organized as follows: In Section II, the
experimental setup, protocol, and data analysis are
presented. Section III presents the analyzed results. Finally,
a general discussion is presented in Section IV.
II. METHODS AND MATERIALS
A. Subjects
10 healthy subjects (8 males, 2 females, mean age=30.3,
SD=7.9) with normal or corrected to normal vision
participated in the experiment to evaluate the feasibility of
the proposed system. Two of the subjects have experience in
SSVEP based BCI and the others are naïve to BCI. The
subjects are undergraduate or postgraduate students of the
university. Subjects were provided and signed the consent
form and read the information sheet before the experiment.
The experiments were approved by the departmental Ethics
Committee.

54 pt
0.75 in
19.1 mm

B. Data Acquisition
SSVEP is found most prominent at the area over the
visual cortex [3, 15] which is the region of interest (ROI) in
this study. 11 electrodes at the occipital region were selected
as the signal channels according to the international 10-20
electrode system. Cz and Fz were chosen as the ground and
the reference electrode respectively. Fig. 1 shows the
channels montage and electrode selection. Subjects were
seated on a comfortable chair and wore a 128 channels EEG
cap (EASYCAP) in a dim lit room. EEG abrasive skin
prepping gel (Nuprep Gel) and EEG conductive gel (ElectroGel) were applied to the electrode sites to eliminate the dead
skin and reduce the impedance between scalp and electrodes.
The impedance was kept under 5k throughout the entire
experiment. EEG was recorded by SynAmps2 (amplifier,
NEUROSCAN) and NeuroScan 4.5 (recording software,
NEUROSCAN). EEG was digitized by sampling frequency
2,000 Hz.
C. Visual stimuli and experiment protocol
The visual stimuli were four red LEDs (OSRAMTM,
LRCP7P which is a surface mount LED being mounted to a
substrate 20mm × 20mm). Four LED substrates were
attached at four corners of a rectangular (25cm × 25cm)
layout in the centre of a board (60cm × 40cm). Each LED
was modulated by a square wave with a distinct frequency
generated by a customized circuit based on a microcontroller
(MICROCHIPTM, PIC18F46K20). The microcontroller was
programmed to generate four square waves of four different
frequencies, 12, 13, 14 and 15 Hz. These stimulating
frequencies have been widely used in SSVEP based BCI
[16]. The duty cycle of the square waves was 50%.

Figure 1: Channels montage. 11 electrodes over occipital region (in the
black circle) were selected as EEG recording electrodes. Cz was the ground
electrode in yellow circle and Fz in purple circle was for the reference. The
figure of the electrode positions is from www.easycap.de.

During the experiment, the visual stimulator board
comprising 4 LEDs was present to the subject at four
viewing distances 60cm, 150cm, 250cm and 350cm. In our
previous study [17], it was found that the impact of the
viewing distance can be compensated by changing the
intensities of the visual stimuli. Therefore, the intensities of
LEDs presented to the subjects were different at different
viewing distance. The intensities of 60cm were the lowest
and the ones of 350cm were the highest in the experiment.
For each subject, the experiment contained 4 blocks. Each
block corresponded to one viewing distance. Each block
contained 4 runs. Each run corresponded to one stimulating
frequency and contained 20 trials. Each trial had one
attending phase and one resting phase. During the attending
phase, 4 LEDs flickered at different frequencies
simultaneously for 5 seconds. During the resting phase, 4
LEDs were off. To avoid the visual adaptation, the resting
phase lasted for 5 or 6 seconds randomly. Before each run,
the subject was instructed to attend to one of four targets for
20 trials. The viewing distances were presented to the
subject in a fixed order of 60-150-250-350cm. The order of
attending targets was counterbalanced in 4 blocks (i.e. 16
runs). Each target was attended in different order in each
block. There was a short break between two blocks. Subjects
were allowed to shift their gaze and head to attend the target
but instructed to avoid the movement during the attending
phase.
D. Data pre-processing and off-line analysis
EEG was band-pass filtered by 1-50Hz before being
further analyzed. EEG was extracted from 1 second before
stimulus onset to 5 seconds after stimulus onset for each
trial. Epoch extraction was performed by EEGLAB toolbox.
To reduce the computation time of the classification, EEG
was down-sampling at 100Hz.
Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) was used to visualize the
SSVEP response at different viewing distances. FFT was
also employed to compute SNR which is an important factor
54 pt
0.75 in
19.1 mm

54 pt
0.75 in
19.1 mm

Margin requirements for the other pages
Paper size this page US Letter

54 pt
0.75 in
19.1 mm

for SSVEP in the classification. SNR at frequency f is
defined by the equation (1) [18],
=

2× ×
=1[

×

+

(1)

]

+ ×

represents FFT power at frequency f.
in
equation (1) is the frequency resolution of FFT spectrum.
N is the number of neighboring frequencies of f. N was set
to 8 in this study. SNR analysis was to inspect the impact
of the viewing distance on SSVEP.
EEG was classified into one of 4 classes by CCA.
CCA is a statistical multi-variant technique used to
investigate the correlation of two sets of variables. CCA
transfers two sets of variable X and Y into two canonical
variables U (=XTwx) and V (=YTwy) such that the
correlation coefficient between U and V is maximized.
The vectors wx and wy can be found by solving the
equation (2)[4],
max

,

[

54 pt
0.75 in
19.1 mm

]

[

( , )=

] [ y

(2)
]

CCA was first proposed to detect SSVEP by [8]. CCA
computes more than one pair of the canonical variables.
The correlation coefficient of the first pair canonical
variables is the largest and the most important and is used
in SSVEP detection in this study. For SSVEP detection in
this study, two sets of variables are 11 electrode signals
and the reference signal corresponding to one of the
stimulating frequencies. For details of CCA in detection
of SSVEP, please see [4, 8].
III. RESULTS
Fig. 2 illustrates the grand average FFT powers of each
attended frequency across the subjects at different
viewing distances. The dot matrix beside the legend
stands for the ANOVA test of FFT powers of 20 trials
between the corresponding viewing distance (the row)
and one of the other distinct viewing distances (the
columns). The diamond, circle and square dots represent
the distances 150cm, 250cm and 350cm respectively. For
example, the row beside the legend of 60 cm stands for
ANOVA tests between 60cm and 150cm (diamond),
250cm (circle) and 350cm (square) respectively. The
unfilled black dots stand for p values of ANOVA tests
larger than 0.01 (i.e. not significant). The red filled dots
stand for the corresponding p values less than 0.01 (i.e.
the significance level is 0.01).
In spite of the LED intensities compensated, the grand
average of FFT powers still shows significantly different
between different viewing distances, especially between
60cm and other distances as seen in Fig. 2. Meanwhile
SSVEP components at unattended frequencies can be
seen in the frequency spectrum. SSVEP response at the
attended frequency is lower at the longer viewing distance
but SSVEPs of the unattended frequencies are higher at
the longer viewing distances compared to the ones at the
shorter viewing distances.

Figure 2: Grand average of FFT power across all subjects of each
attended frequency at different viewing distances. The dot matrix beside
the legend stands for the ANOVA test of FFT powers of 20 trials
between two distinct viewing distances. The diamond, circle and square
dots represent the distances 150cm, 250cm and 350cm respectively. For
example, the row beside the legend of 60 cm stands for ANOVA results
between 60cm and 150cm (diamond), 250cm (circle) and 350cm
(square) respectively. The black unfilled dots stand for the
corresponding p values of ANOVA tests > 0.01 (significance
level=0.01). The red filled dots stand for the corresponding p values <
0.01.

Fig. 3 is SNRs across 10 subjects of each attended
frequency at different viewing distances at 3 seconds after
the stimulus onset and their corresponding ANOVA tests.
SNRs across the subjects at 60cm are the highest among
all viewing distances. The blue vertical bars (error bars)
indicate the inter-subject variance in SNRs.
Fig. 4 is the mean accuracies of the attended frequency
across the subjects at different viewing distances and the
corresponding ANOVA tests. EEG epoch time interval of
Fig. 4 is 2 seconds and the number of SSVEP harmonics
is 1. Fig. 4 shows inter-subject variance at different
viewing distances within the same frequency. Intersubject variance of 12Hz is the least prominent while
15Hz is the greatest. However, the differences of the
mean accuracies at different viewing distances are not
significant for all attended frequencies. In our previous
study [17], the accuracies at 250cm and 350cm were very
low without intensities compensation.

Figure 3: (a)-(d) SNRs of each attended frequency across the subjects at
4 viewing distances. (e) SNRs across the subjects and the attended
frequencies corresponding to the same viewing distance. The dots at
each viewing distance represent ANOVA tests between SNRs of all
subjects at two different viewing distances. The shapes of the dots are
the same as Fig. 2.

54 pt
0.75 in
19.1 mm

54 pt
0.75 in
19.1 mm

Margin requirements for the other pages
Paper size this page US Letter

54 pt
0.75 in
19.1 mm

of the visual stimuli accordingly. Another direction is to
investigate if the combination of the different stimulating
frequencies can improve the classification accuracies.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]
Figure 4: (a)-(d) Mean classification accuracies of the attended
frequency across the subjects at different viewing distances and the
corresponding ANOVA tests. (e) Mean accuracies across the subjects
and the attended frequencies at different viewing distances. The shapes
of the dots are the same as Fig. 2.

[4]

[5]

IV. DISCUSSION

54 pt
0.75 in
19.1 mm

Even though the intensities of the LEDs were
compensated to respond to the change of the viewing
distances, the impact of the viewing distance cannot be
completely eliminated. This impact can be observed from
Fig. 2, half of the ANOVA tests of FFT powers at the
different viewing distances which are significant,
especially the tests between 60cm and other distances for
any attended target. However, SNRs of Fig. 3
demonstrate that although SNRs of 60 cm are higher than
the other viewing distances, the difference is not
significant. If the viewing distance of 60cm is used as the
benchmark, the results demonstrate that SSVEP elicited at
longer viewing distances can also be used as input to the
BCI system. Furthermore, the mean classification
accuracies of all attended targets using 2 seconds of EEG
epoch time interval are between 82% and 68%. These
results demonstrate that SSVEP response can be elicited
at the longer viewing distances and the detection rate of
SSVEP is acceptable. The proposed novel distance
adaptable SSVEP BCI is achievable with promising
results.
From Fig. 2, it can be seen that SSVEP components of
all the stimulating frequencies appear in the FFT power
spectrum. Moreover, the components of unattended
frequencies become more prominent as the viewing
distance increases. This might explain why the
classification accuracies at the longer viewing distance
are lower than the short viewing distance. The lower
classification accuracies might be resulting from the
interference of the unattended targets. However, as
mentioned in Section II, the viewing distances were
presented to the subjects in a fixed order of 60-150-250350cm. It cannot be ruled out the poor performance at
longer viewing distance is caused by the fatigue. For
example, 350cm is always the last block in the
experiment for all subjects.
The next step of this study is to implement a real time
online distance adaptable SSVEP BCI which can detect
the user’s positions automatically and adjust the intensities

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

J. R. Wolpaw, N. Birbaumer, W. J. Heetderks, D. J. McFarland, P. H.
Peckham, G. Schalk, et al., "Brain-computer interface technology: A
review of the first international meeting," IEEE Transactions on
Rehabilitation Engineering, vol. 8, pp. 164-173, Jun 2000.
J. J. Shih, D. J. Krusienski, and J. R. Wolpaw., "Brain-computer
interfaces in medicine," in Mayo Clinic Proceedings, 2012, pp. 268279.
P. Martinez, H. Bakardjian, and A. Cichocki, "Fully online
multicommand brain-computer interface with visual neurofeedback
using SSVEP paradigm," Computational intelligence and
neuroscience, pp. 13-13, 2007 2007.
G. Bin, X. Gao, Z. Yan, B. Hong, and S. Gao, "An online multichannel SSVEP-based brain-computer interface using a canonical
correlation analysis method," Journal of Neural Engineering, vol. 6,
Aug 2009.
I. Volosyak, "SSVEP-based Bremen-BCI interface-boosting
information transfer rates," Journal of Neural Engineering, vol. 8, Jun
2011.
X. R. Gao, D. F. Xu, M. Cheng, and S. K. Gao, "A BCI-based
environmental controller for the motion-disabled," IEEE Transactions
on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, vol. 11, pp. 137140, Jun 2003.
H.-J. Hwang, J.-H. Lim, Y.-J. Jung, H. Choi, S. W. Lee, and C.-H. Im,
"Development of an SSVEP-based BCI spelling system adopting a
QWERTY-style LED keyboard," Journal of Neuroscience Methods,
vol. 208, pp. 59-65, Jun 30 2012.
Z. Lin, C. Zhang, W. Wu, and X. Gao, "Frequency recognition based
on canonical correlation analysis for SSVEP-based BCIs," IEEE
Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 53, pp. 2610-2614, Dec
2006.
O. Friman, I. Volosyak, and A. Graeser, "Multiple channel detection
of steady-state visual evoked potentials for brain-computer interfaces,"
IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 54, pp. 742-750,
Apr 2007.
C. Jia, X. Gao, B. Hong, and S. Gao, "Frequency and Phase Mixed
Coding in SSVEP-Based Brain-Computer Interface," IEEE
Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 58, pp. 200-206, Jan
2011.
K.-K. Shyu, P.-L. Lee, Y.-J. Liu, and J.-J. Sie, "Dual-frequency
steady-state visual evoked potential for brain computer interface,"
Neuroscience Letters, vol. 483, pp. 28-31, Oct 8 2010.
H.-J. Hwang, D. H. Kim, C.-H. Han, and C.-H. Im, "A new dualfrequency stimulation method to increase the number of visual stimuli
for multi-class SSVEP-based brain-computer interface (BCI)," Brain
Research, vol. 1515, pp. 66-77, Jun 17 2013.
Y. Zhang, P. Xu, T. Liu, J. Hu, R. Zhang, and D. Yao, "Multiple
Frequencies Sequential Coding for SSVEP-Based Brain-Computer
Interface," Plos One, vol. 7, Mar 6 2012.
Y.-P. Lin, Y. Wang, and T.-P. Jung, "Assessing the feasibility of
online SSVEP decoding in human walking using a consumer EEG
headset," Journal of Neuroengineering and Rehabilitation, vol. 11,
Aug 9 2014.
S. T. Morgan, J. C. Hansen, and S. A. Hillyard, "Selective attention to
stimulus location modulates the steady-state visual evoked potential,"
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America, vol. 93, pp. 4770-4774, May 14 1996.
D. Zhu, J. Bieger, G. Garcia Molina, and R. M. Aarts, "A survey of
stimulation methods used in SSVEP-based BCIs," Computational
intelligence and neuroscience, p. 702357, 2010.
C. Wu and H. Lakany, "The effect of the viewing distance of stimulus
on SSVEP response for use in Brain-Computer Interfaces," IEEE
International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC),
pp. 1840-1845, Oct 13-16 2013.
Y. Wang, R. P. Wang, X. R. Gao, B. Hong, and S. K. Gao, "A
practical VEP-based brain-computer interface," IEEE Transactions on
Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, vol. 14, pp. 234-239,
Jun 2006.

54 pt
0.75 in
19.1 mm

54 pt
0.75 in
19.1 mm

