Journal of Learning and Teaching in Digital Age, 2018, 3(1), 21-34

Where does Arduino’s power come from?: An extended literature review
Mehmet Akif Ocak
Gazi University
maocak@gazi.edu.tr
ABSTRACT
The aim of this literature review is to examine the applications and researches related to
the use of Arduino boards in learning and teaching environments. The study conducted a
content review of 100 studies published between the years 2006-2016 by using the indexes
of Educational Research Information Center (ERIC), Academic Search Complete,
Directory of Open Access Journals (DOAJ), IEEE/IEL, Science Direct, Scopus, ProQuest,
Google Scholar and Web of Science. In-depth examination showed that that there were
various approaches and practices in the case of using Arduino technology in literature.
The fact that Arduino-based robot projects spread quickly and effectively was the first
thing that this study found. Due to the contribution of Arduino technology to design and
development process of educational robotics system, this study revealed that recent studies
mostly focused on the efforts of integration and implementation of Arduino boards into
educational activities and curriculums. This study listed the academic disciplines in which
the studies used Arduino boards for learning and teaching activities and revealed the
achievements with the application of Arduino boards. This study also determined the
research methods and technological tools used in the prior research and reported the
difficulties and problems related to the use of the Arduino boards.
Keywords: Arduino, sensor, robotics, STEM, IoT

INTRODUCTION
Arduino boards are small electronic circuits
including AT-mega microcontroller and other
electronic components. There are different types of
Arduino boards that their functionality are same,
but their size, pin numbers and Microprocessor
capabilities are different. The basic idea behind the
Arduino comes from the fact that it is open-source
and available to everyone interested in developing
new projects. Arduino IDE (integrated
development environment) is also very easy to
install, use, and develop new sketches based on the
integrated examples. Arduino boards also support
different types of shields by which anyone
interested in developing new and large projects
could use it easily.
Developed by 2005 from team Massimo Banzi,
David Cuartielles, Tom Ingoe, Gianluca Martino
and David Mellis in Italy, Arduino board’s starting
point was not education (Arduino, 2017). In
electronics, especially for robotics system, the idea
of DIY (do-it-yourself) developed rapidly with the
introduction of Arduino. Later, researchers

appreciated the freedom of Arduino boards and
looked for new opportunities for their projects to
create new ideas. Banzi (2008), as a co-founder of
Arduino, published a book titled as “Getting
Started with Arduino”. In his book, Banzi
explained the Arduino as
“The Arduino philosophy is based on making
designs rather than talking about them. It is a
constant search for faster and more powerful ways
to build better prototypes. We have explored many
prototyping techniques and developed ways of
thinking with our hands.”(p.5)
Limitations of the Arduino
On the other hand, some studies mentioned the
limitations of the Arduino boards. For example,
Scolnic (2015) argued that Arduino has traditional
text-based programming language based on C++
and makes it hard to understand the structure of the
programming of the Arduino for people who are inexperienced or new to Arduino. Other studies also
argued that a well-designed visual programming
might be easier to understand since Arduino
sketches also include traditional code writing

Correspondence to: Mehmet Akif Ocak, Associate Professor, Department of Computer and Instructional
Technologies Teaching, Faculty of Education, Gazi University, Ankara, Turkey, E-mail: maocak@gazi.edu.tr

M. A. Ocak

mentality (Blikstein, 2013; Lab Kits Using the
Arduino Prototyping Platform, 2010). Another
challenge comes from the fact that many researcher
and institutions are trying to understand how to
integrate Arduino more deeply in class
environments, for K-12 (David, 2011).
Scolnic (2015) indicated that Arduino, normally,
was not designed for educational purposes. The
starting point of the Arduino was based on
developing DIY electronic circuits for hobbyists
and designers. Because of this, many researchers
found it hard to implement Arduino based activities
into class environment. Moreover, Arduino, for
many high-level applications and projects, needs
external programs and user-developed libraries by
which users might develop further projects and
expand the capabilities of the Arduino boards.
Similarly, Linsalata (2012) indicates that Arduino
boards, as integrated software and hardware
environment,
maintain
high-level
coding
knowledge and wiring system thorough libraries
for inputs and outputs that make it hard to combine
basic functions together. Especially, high-level
projects like Arduino robotics systems need
abstraction of many different functions rather than
simple processor operations.
Arduino based Robotics Technologies
The answer to question of “Why Arduino” lies
beneath Arduino’ flexible and user-friendly
structure. It is very easy to distinguish Arduino
boards from microcontroller due to its simple and
accessible user experience. Arduino software and
hardware is very understandable for beginners, yet
flexible enough for advanced users, for example,
thinking of getting started with robotics
applications. In this sense, Hau-Shiue Juang, &
Lum (2013), in their study, reported the design,
construction and control of a two-wheel selfbalancing robot. Results showed that selfbalancing can be achieved with PI-PD control in
the vicinity of the upright position. Arduino based
structure allowed researchers to design
improvement, low cost remote control, and
obstacle avoidance and perimeter following.
Karvinen & Karvinen (2011) showed how to build
a robot that responded to electrical activity in brain.
They used Arduino that had basic mechanical
building skills. Their process mostly focused on
how to construct a robot that plays sounds, blinks
lights, and reacts to signals from an affordable head
22

set. Similarly, Margolis (2012), in his book,
showed building an Arduino based robot. In the
book, Arduino made it easy to construct and build
a program by which a robot could roam around.
Moreover, Gargava, Sindwani, & Soman (2014), in
their study, established an application to control a
robot on the Arduino platform by the use of a BCI
(brain control interface) system, which did not
require training for individual users. They designed
and developed BCI processing pipeline built on
open-source platforms using the Emotiv EEG
headset. Results showed that system achieved
around 96% accuracy using computationally
inexpensive feature extraction and classification
techniques.
In this regard, some studies also focused on
implementing Arduino based applications in
educational programs. For example, Jooeun,
Jooyoug& Jaechang (2014) performed a short-term
computer information and communication
technology education using Arduino. The purpose
of the study was about practicing basic examples
about H/W, S/W, communication, and solving
creative tasks. The study showed that they
developed meaningful ICT integrated curriculum
that had high usefulness in a short period. Results
showed that students completed 96% out of 10
Arduino
tasks.
creative
From an educational perspective, Busaidi(2012)
also discussed that any student can reconstruct and
start using it to understand his/her subject by
setting up platform and the algorithm adopted in
controlling the servos as well as reading from the
sensors in Arduino. In the study, the Arduino board
was utilized as a final controller for the
servomotors as well as a Data Acquisition Card
(DAC). Eguchi (2016), in her study, focused on
Arduino Robot as a competition and robotics
initiative. Study introduced a case of
RoboCupJunior and the effectiveness of its practice
for enhancing learning of STEM contents and skills
for innovation and creativity among participating
students. Similarly, Wong (2015), in his study,
proposed a new Arduino-based mobile robotics kit
design for class activities. The study discussed the
mechanical design, electronic components and
software developments method of the robotics kit.
Results argued that new robotics kit, CPSKit, has
several overwhelming features over existing K-12
educational robotics kits. Results showed that
© 2018, Journal of Learning and Teaching in Digital Age, 3(1), 21-34

Where does Arduino’ power come from?

CPSKit, as a 3D-printable Arduino-based mobile
robot, has good features such as versatility,
accessibility, cost, and capabilities such as
odometry and wireless communication. The study
furhet argued that CPSKit might be implemented in
K-12 or university level as manufacturing 3D-print
designs.
From a technological perspective, Timmis (2011)
focused on developing an Arduino based GPS
robot and sending the location of the robot to a
micro SD card and logging it to a text file. Araujo,
Portugal, Couceiro, & Rocha (2015) presented a
solution for integrating Arduino-based robotic
platforms in robotics operating system through the
development of a robotics operating system driver.
The study showed that Arduino presented an ideal
platform for educational robotics. Elfasakhany,
Yanez, Baylon, & Salgado (2011) designed,
developed and implemented an Arduino based
robot arm with enhanced control. The study
showed that Arduino robot arm accurately
accomplished simple tasks, such as light material
handling. Another Arduino based Robotics
application belongs to Balogh (2010). In his study,
Balogh (2010) described a new controller board for
a mobile robot based on Arduino platform. The
study showed the analysis and design principles of
the new board regarding Arduino. In addition, the
study showed some illustration examples. LopezRodriguez & Cuesta (2016) presented a low cost
robot based on Arduino. This study showed the
design of an open educational low cost modular and
extendable mobile robot. Similarly, Hernández,
Poot, Narváez, Llanes, & Chi (2010), in their study,
developed a robot with the help of Arduino and +Xbee. The robot could be controlled with certain
freedom and autonomy without using wires.
Alexan, Osan, & Oniga (2012) also focused on
developing a personal assistant robot designed by
Arduino. The study concentrated on designing
Arduino-based robot for disabled people, as its
main purpose is to assist an elderly or disabled
person.
Phal, Phal, & Jacob (2014), in their study, focused
on design and development process of an Arduinobased speech-controlled mobile robot. Zisimatos,
Liarokapis, Mavrogiannis, & Kyriakopoulos
(2014), similar to Elfasakhany, A., Yanez, E.,
Baylon, K., &Salgado, R. (2011)’ study, presented
a series of design directions for the development of
23

low-cost, light-weight, modular Arduino-based
robot hands. The study showed that robotic hands
could be used for various applications, indicating
that capabilities of hands were highly efficient.
Zhao and Zhu (2013), in their study, introduced the
design and implementation of an autonomous
obstacle-avoiding robot car. Arduino based robot
car gave good experimental effect to researchers.
Kulkarni, Grama, Suresh, Krishna, Antony (2014),
in a similar way, focused on developing fourwheeled surveillance robot by Arduino and
Android APIs. The researchers showed that the
possibilities with surveillance robot are endless.
The designed robot provided a platform for further
research into improving its capabilities.
Furthermore, Volos, Kyprianidis, & Stouboulos
(2013) presented autonomous mobile robot, a
motion controller, based on the dynamical behavior
of a known discrete chaotic system. The researcher
preferred to use Arduino for developing the robot
system, indicating that Arduino is probably the
most commercial platform which is used in a great
number of applications, especially in robotics.
Prabha, Antony, Meena and Pandian (2014)
designed an autonomous robot to sense
environmental data such as temperature, humidity,
and air quality, along with GPS coordinates and
store them on the cloud. The researchers used
Arduino microcontroller to control robot and
Raspberry Pi to communicate with the cloud.
Junior, Neto, Hernandez, Martins, Roger, & Guerra
(2013), in their study, presented an Arduino-based
low cost educational robotics kit. The researchers
indicated that the purpose of the robot was to
support the teachers in diversifying their studies
using robotics kit.
For a different field, Patoliya, Mehta, & Patel
(2015), in their study, designed and developed a
robot to detect and prevent any damage and loss to
human life in battlefield. The researchers argued
that robot would serve as an appropriate tool to help
military people and to prevent illegal activities. In
a similar way, Sathiyanarayanan, Azharuddin,
Kumar, & Khan (2014) also developed a robotics
system for military purposes. They successfully
built a prototype robot capable of being controlled
using hand gestures. The study argued that
developed robot could undertake missions like
border control, surveillance and active combat.
© 2018, Journal of Learning and Teaching in Digital Age, 3(1), 21-34

M. A. Ocak

focus on open-source applications. This process
also improved the platforms of the Arduino
(Balogh, 2010). Table 1 shows recent studies
dealing with Arduino based robotic design and
development. In this sense, it can be seen clearly
that some studies mainly focused on mindcontrolled robotic applications using Arduino
board (Gargava, Sindwani, & Soman, 2014;
Karvinen, & Karvinen, 2011). On the other hand,
other studies only concentrated on designing and
developing process of educational robotics system
by using Arduino (Hernández, Poot , Narváez,
Llanes, & Chi, 2010; Juang & Lum, 2013; Busaidi,
2012; Balogh, 2010; Elfasakhany, Yanez, Baylon,
& Salgado, 2011). From a different perspective,
Das, Sadhu, Vyas, Konar, & Bhattacharyya (2015)
showed a real-time cooperation between two robots
while transporting a stick from starting positions to
fixed goal positions. Some studies focus on
controlling Arduino based robotics system by
Android base APPs, which require Bluetooth
remote connection (Kulkarni, Grama, Suresh,
Krishna, Antony, 2014; Patoliya, Mehta, & Patel,
2015; Pahuja, & Kumar, 2014).

Al-Sahib, & Azeez (2015), by using Arduino and
Rasberyy Pi, developed Internet mobile robot. The
researchers indicated that developed robot could be
controlled from any place via the Internet. Pahuja
& Kumar (2014), in their study, designed a robot,
which could be controlled by Android mobile
Apps. The researchers also indicated that designed
robot along with quality and repeatability were
unmatched. Wasif, Raza, Rasheed, Farooq, & Ali
(2013) also focused on developing an Arduino
based robotic control system. They discussed the
control of unbalanced system by implementing an
adaptive rendition of the classic PD control. Lim,
Lee, Tewolde & Kwon (2014), also, developed an
efficient way of deployment of ultrasonic sensors
for low-cost mobile robots. They presented sensor
deployment strategies and a navigation method of
a mobile robot using an orientation sensor of a
Smartphone. Study results showed possibility of
developing a low-cost indoor robotics platform for
college education and robotics research
laboratories.
Generally, prior research shows that Arduino based
microcontroller applications are very successful in
robotics design, development and implementation.
It is very clear that Arduino made it easy to develop
robotics applications easily, yielding people to

Table 1. Some of the recent studies focusing on robotic design and development based on Arduino
The study
Eguchi (2016)
Wong(2015)

Araujo, Portugal,
Couceiro, &Rocha
(2015)
Gargava, Sindwani, &
Soman (2014)
Hernández,
Poot,
Narváez, Llanes & Chi
(2010)
Juang & Lum (2013)

Busaidi (2012)

Balogh (2010)

24

Purpose
STEM, Educational
STEM,
educational,
3Dprintable Arduino-based mobile
robot
kit
with
various
capabilities
Educational Mobile Robot

Platform
Arduino
Arduino

Example
RoboCupJunior
CPSKit

Arduino-based

TraxBot; TraxBot; StingBot/ROS
driver

Brain control interface

BCI+ Arduino

Robot control with BCI

Design and implementation of a LPT
Robotics system
Interface/ Arduino +
X-bee
Design,
construction
and Arduino
control of a robot
microcontroller
board
Development of an educational MATLAB+Arduino
environment for online control
of robot
Educational Robotic Platform
Arduino

Parallel port controlled robot

Two-wheel self-balancing robot

Bioloid Biped robot

Acrob(robot)

© 2018, Journal of Learning and Teaching in Digital Age, 3(1), 21-34

Where does Arduino’ power come from?

Elfasakhany, Yanez,
Baylon, &Salgado
(2011)
Alexan, Osan &
Oniga (2012)

Design and development of a Labview+Arduino
robotic arm

Robotic arm applications

Sathiyanarayanan,
Azharuddin, Kumar, &
Khan (2014)
Lim, Lee, Tewolde, &
Kwon (2014)

Gesture Controlled Robot For Arduino based
Military Purpose

Robot

Use of
Arduino based
Smartphone Sensors for Mobile
Robot Navigation

Robot

Robotic assistance to disabled Arduino compatible Assistive technology/robot
persons
board
(CHIPKIT
Max32) +Android
Karvinen, & Karvinen Mind controlled robot
Arduino
Robot
(2011)
Phal, Phal, & Jacob Speech controlled robot
Arduino based
Robot
(2014)
Zhao & Zhu (2013)
Design and implementation of Arduino based
Robot car
an
autonomous
obstacleavoiding robot car
Zisimatos, Liarokapis, design and development of low- Arduino based
Robotic hands
Mavrogiannis,
& cost, light-weight, modular
Kyriakopoulos (2014) robot hands
Kulkarni,
Grama, Four-wheeled surveillance
Arduino+Android
Survillance robot
Suresh,
Krishna, robot
Antony (2014)
Volos, Kyprianidis, & The design of an
Arduino
Mobile robot
Stouboulos (2013)
autonomous mobile robot, a
motion controller, based on the
dynamical behavior of a known
discrete
chaotic system
Prabha, Antony,
Autonomous robot to measure Arduino+
Robot
Meena & Pandian
temperature, humidity, and air Raspberry Pi
(2014)
quality, along with GPS
coordinates and store them on
the cloud
Das, Sadhu, Vyas,
Two mobile robots carrying a Arduino based+ X Two robots avoiding obstacles
Konar, &
stick to a destination
bee
Bhattacharyya (2015)
Junior, Neto,
Educational robotics
Arduino based
Robot
Hernandez, Martins,
kit
Roger, & Guerra
(2013)
Patoliya, Mehta, & War field spy robot using night Arduino+Android
Robot
Patel (2015)
vision wireless camera
Al-Sahib, & Azeez Internet mobile robot
Arduino+
Robot
(2015)
Raspberry Pi
Pahuja, & Kumar Mobile
Phone
Controlled Arduino+Android
Robot
(2014)
Bluetooth Robot
Wasif, Raza, Rasheed, Design and Implementation of a Arduino based
Robot
Farooq, & Ali (2013)
Two Wheel
Self-Balancing Robot

25

© 2018, Journal of Learning and Teaching in Digital Age, 3(1), 21-34

M.A.Ocak

Table 1 clearly shows that many recent studies
describe their robot design process developed on
Arduino platforms. It is clear to see that in robotic
projects, researchers mostly prefer to use Arduino
microcontroller. Arduino based technology allows
researchers to support and motivate learning in
design and development process of robot projects.
The reason for that is economically feasible, taking
in consideration its low cost. Secondly, due to
open-source feature, Arduino based robotic
projects give independence of suppliers of parts
and components. On the other hand, other robotics
kits such as Legos has only closed standard and
proprietary components.

Literature review clearly shows that in design and
development process of robotics systems using
Arduino, integrating other software technologies
into same project create new opportunities and
directions for the Arduino based platforms. In this
sense, Pahuja, & Kumar (2014), Patoliya, Mehta,
& Patel (2015), and Kulkarni, Grama, Suresh,
Krishna, Antony (2014) focused on creating a
robotics system by using Arduino platform and
Android API together. Especially, projects based
on surveillance or military purposes, using Arduino
with other technological tools seemed to be more
implementable in real world applications (Figure
1).

Figure 1. A content map regarding Arduino technology
Arduino in educational field
It would be a good idea to relate Arduino
experiences in teaching and learning process while
providing the students access to the Arduino
platform and its open source community. Thus, this
study intended to investigate Arduino in course
environments and tried to show how the Arduino
can be used to expose the students to many of the
topics normally included in educational programs.
For example, Jamieson (2010) described a project
based learning embedded system course. Study
results showed that using the Arduino exposed
students to sufficient complexity and challenges for
26

an embedded system course. From a different
perspective, García-Peñalvo, Rees, Hughes,
Jormanainen, Toivonen, & Vermeersch (2016), in
their study, presented the most popular robotics
products in order to help teachers to introduce
programming in pre-university studies. In this
sense, many products like Robbo and mBot are
built with Arduino microcontrollers. Arduinobased Robots have LED, sensors and motors to
move the robots around. In this way, students can
get easily involved in programming and coding
process. Similarly, Grover, Krishnan, Shoup, and
Khanbaghi (2014) investigated an undergraduate
mechatronics course using the Arduino platform.
The study showed very encouraging results and
© 2018, Journal of Learning and Teaching in Digital Age, 3(1), 21-34

Where does Arduino’ power come from?

indicated Arduino-based course provided effective
learning environment for undergraduate students.
Kapur, Hochenbaum, Darling, Diakopoulos,
Trimpin (2011) focused on the technical details of
the Arduino-based NotomotoN, a musical robotic
system, and discussed its use in performance and
educational scenarios. The study results showed
that NotomotoN served as a means by which
students could rapidly test new beater designs.
Gartseev, Lee, and Krovi (2011) created
ArEduBot, an Arduino-based low-cost realtime
mobile-robot platform. The study discussed the
educational aspects of the ArEduBot
in introductory robotics and mechatronics classes
to complement the lecture and to support

project-based learning. Rahul, Whitchurch, and
Rao (2014) introduced a graphical approach to
programming in an undergraudate level coursr. The
programming utility was basically developed for an
open source Arduino platform. The results showed
that students found to be easy to learn by
programming tool with the robotic hardware.
Candelas, García, Puente, Pomares, Jara, Pérez,
Mira, & Torres (2015), in their study, described
using Arduino platform in different laboratory
experiments of engineering courses. Furthermore,
the study results showed that Arduino based
laboratory experiments increased students’ interest
verified by academic results and surveys.

Table 2. Some recent studies implementing Arduino in class environments
The study
Field
Approach
Jamieson (2010)
Computer Science/Engineering
Project-based learning with Arduino
García-Peñalvo,
Rees, Programming/
Pre-university Tools/resources regarding Arduino
Hughes,
Jormanainen, level
Toivonen, & Vermeersch
(2016)
Grover, Krishnan, Shoup, and Undergraduate
mechatronics Robotics
course
Khanbaghi (2014)
course
curriculum/classroom
teaching
Arduino based platform
Androutsopoulos,
First year Computer Science
Attendance/engagement/progression
Gorogiannis,
Loomes,
(A racket-based robot)
Margolis,
Primiero,
Raimondi, Varsani, Weldin, &
Zivanovic (2014)
Kapur, Hochenbaum, Darling, Musical classes/
New learning strategies
Diakopoulos, Trimpin (2011) musical
robotic
education
curriculum
Gartseev, Lee, and Krovi Robotics & Mechatronics class
Complementing the lecture and
(2011)
supporting project-based learning.
Rahul, Whitchurch, and Rao Introductory programming
Visual learning
(2014)
curriculum for undergraduates
Kuan, Tseng, Sufen, & Wong Physics
Students’ confidence and motivation
(2016)
Qiu, Buechley, Baafi, & Computer Science/programming Successful implementation of the
Dubow (2013)
curriculum
Albrecht,
Bender,
& Computer Science
n/a
Kussmann (2012)
Candelas, García, Puente, Engineering Courses/ Automatic Laboratory
Pomares, Jara, Pérez, Mira, & Control and
experiments
Torres (2015)
Robotics course
Prior research clearly shows that compared to other
microcontrollers and microcontroller platforms
such as Parallax Basic Stamp, Netmedia's BX-24,
Phidgets, MIT's Handyboard, Arduino presents
27

some unique features that make it preferable for
educational purposes. The prominent feature of the
Arduino boards is their cost. Secondly, many
microcontroller platforms only runs on Windows.
© 2018, Journal of Learning and Teaching in Digital Age, 3(1), 21-34

M. A. Ocak

However, Arduino boards runs on Windows,
Macintosh OSX and Linux operating systems. In
this way, everyone can use Arduino boards
according to their needs. Moreover, Arduino offers
an open-source platform for everyone. With this
feature, even unexperienced users can develop
different modules, programs and boards by which
order-based projects and programs are easily
developed. In this sense,
Androutsopoulos, Gorogiannis, Loomes, Margolis,
Primiero, Raimondi, Varsani, Weldin, & Zivanovic
(2014), in their study, described Arduino-based
open-source robot platform to support teaching of
core Computer Science topics. The study presented
teaching and assessment strageis, as well as
evaluation of their teaching approach. Kuan,
Tseng, Sufen, & Wong (2016) proposed an
Arduino-based integrated curriculum for the
freshmen of a physics department. Results showed
that the curriculum helped students gain knowledge
of programming and instrumentation, and
increased the students’ confidence and motivation
to learn physics and computer languages.
Qiu, Buechley, Baafi, & Dubow (2013) presented
a curriculum teaching computer science and
computer programming. The study results clearly
showed that curriculum increased students’
comfort with, enjoyment of, and interest in working
with electronics and programming. In a similar
way, Albrecht, Bender, & Kussmann (2012)
proposed an Arduino based curriculum in
undergraduate computer science course. The
researchers argued that the Arduino platform
would bring a new direction and attract new
students into program.
There are also opposite views and research
regarding the implementation of Arduino boards
into class curriculum and activities. For example,
Linsalata (2012) argues that although Arduino
boards are favorable for educational purposes,
there are still some limitations to use Arduino
boards in educational environments. The most
noticeable deficiency is Arduino’ programming
language. Since Arduino uses C/C++ programming
language and environment, every sketch of
Arduino must rely on C/C++ coding and compiling
to generate a working code system. This brings
another problem that since all Arduino boards are
similar to each other, Arduino programming
28

environment works only by using C/C++
programming environments and passing to code
sketches to a compiler. In this sense, the Arduino
compiler only sends low-level coding sketches to
compiler, meaning that high-level coding
knowledge and programming needs some kind of
expertise to produce advanced projects. Linsalata
(2012) further argues that Arduino boards only use
similar microprocessors within the same chip
family (Atmega 128 etc.). This feature limits to use
different chip architecture, meaning that allows
developing different projects and ideas. Arduino’
similar microprocessor structure allows users to
develop projects with simple differences by
defining same functions.
Arduino and STEM education
Research on using Arduino boards in STEM
education has two folds. One approach focuses on
only design, development and implementation
process of a robotics system (Hernández, Poot,
Narváez, Llanes & Chi, 2010; Juang & Lum, 2013;
Busaidi, 2012; Elfasakhany, Yanez, Baylon
&Salgado, 2011; Zhao & Zhu, 2013; Zisimatos,
Liarokapis, Mavrogiannis, & Kyriakopoulos,
2014; Volos, Kyprianidis, & Stouboulos, 2013;
Wasif, Raza, Rasheed, Farooq, & Ali, 2013). This
kind of research mainly tires to focus on robotics
design in terms of engineering perspective and
handle the robotics system as control and design of
developed robots. Brain control robots, mind
controlled robots, speech controlled robots,
surveillance robots are some examples of this kind.
Fields like Military, Surveillance are other good
examples for this kind approach. Developing
robotic systems seem more important than teaching
or learning with robotics systems. However, as a
second approach, some studies directly focused on
implementing
robotics
system
in
class
environments (Jamieson, 2010; García-Peñalvo,
Rees, Hughes, Jormanainen, Toivonen, &
Vermeersch, 2016; Grover, Krishnan, Shoup, and
Khanbaghi, 2014; Androutsopoulos, Gorogiannis,
Loomes, Margolis, Primiero, Raimondi, Varsani,
Weldin, & Zivanovic, 2014; Kapur, Hochenbaum,
Darling, Diakopoulos, Trimpin; 2011; Gartseev,
Lee, and Krovi, 2011; Rahul, Whitchurch, and Rao,
2014; Kuan, Tseng, Sufen, & Wong, 2016; Qiu,
Buechley, Baafi, & Dubow, 2013; Albrecht,
Bender, & Kussmann, 2012). In this regard, for
specific college courses and curriculums, schools
© 2018, Journal of Learning and Teaching in Digital Age, 3(1), 21-34

Where does Arduino’ power come from?

began to use robotics systems to teach topics not
necessarily relate to robotics technology (Wong,
2015). Some college level courses use Arduino
based robotics system to teach subjects such as
Computer Science/Engineering, pre-university
level programming, mechatronics and physics
courses.
Hoffer (2012), in his study, argued that Arduino
boards and their open source nature make it ideal
platform for STEM (Science, Tecnology,
Engineering, and Matematics) education. Faugel,
& Bobkov (2013), in their study, argue that IDE
environment of the Arduino provides a large
number of libraries easing the implementation of
standard applications such as using sensors or I/O
devices. Moreover, the price of the Arduino boards
is reasonably low and affordable by many students
and the software development process by IDE is
free in Arduino boards. Thus, the students and
teachers freely can download the IDE of the
Arduino in website and use it to develop their own
projects in STEM education. Moreover, there are a
variety of web sites and educational blogs to further
education and expand the capabilities of the
Arduino boards. However, as an opposite view,
Hayward (2016), also, focused on definition of ISTEM (Integrated STEM education) in his study,
in terms of teachers’ point of view, indicating
factors that support I-STEM lessons. The study
results clearly showed that there was a lack of
consistency among I-STEM disciplines, including
Engineering
Courses,
PLTW
Courses,
Python/Arduino Sketch and Technology of Robotic
Design.
Eguchi (2016), in her study, introduced a robotics
system to enhance students’ learning in STEM
contents and skills for innovation and creativity.
The study results argued that Arduino based
educational robotics systems, generally, increase
students’ interest and motivation. Especially, the
study showed that robotics competition activities
provided long-lasting impacts for STEM subjects.
In a similar way, Wong (2015), in his study, argued
that robotics systems used in class activities might
be the dominant effect on science and technology.
Nature of designing robotics system allows
handling many interdisciplinary areas in STEM
fields. In sum, prior research mostly shows that
Arduino based robotics activities help students
keep engaged in STEM education.
29

Arduino and IoT (Internet of Things)
According to Wortmann, & Flüchter (2015), the
definition of IoT is very broad and there is no
common consensus on what IoT technologies
actually include. Prior research clearly shows that
IoT technologies mainly were based on RFID
(radio-frequency identification) infrastructures
(Doukas, 2012; Xia, F., Yang, L. T., Wang, L., &
Vinel, 2012). Since then, general definitions of IoT
emphasis the things that become connected with
Internet. Internet protocols and network technology
seemed important components in IoT technologies.
In addition to these definitions, Atzori, Iera, &
Morabito (2010) added cloud technologies (data
management,
process
management
and
thing/device communication and management) to
the definition of IoT. Based on prior research, it can
be concluded that applications of IoT technologies
are very broad and continuing to extend nowadays.
The basic idea behind IoT is the network that
connects physical devices (things) with Cloud
technologies, Internet/web applications and
network communications (Doukas, 2012). In this
sense, IoT based devices allows users to access,
store and retrieve data on the Internet and interact
with other physical devices (Xia, Yang, Wang, &
Vinel, 2012). Therefore, in order to create IoT
based devices and applications, users need to use
platforms allowing remote controls and data
management systems. Doukas (2012) argues that
Arduino boards are one of the suitable examples for
IoT technologies. Arduino boards have IDE
environment easy to understand and use, and
micro-controllers allowing controlling different
sensors and many Arduino shields. For this reason,
the idea of “open-source” mentality of Arduino
boards fits very well with IoT platforms, which
Arduino boards offer simple, functional and
extendable features for wired and wireless projects.
In this regard, Al-Fuqaha, Guizani, Mohammadi,
Aledhari, & Ayyash (2015), in their study, indicate
that IoT elements include following components:
identification,
sensing,
communication,
computation, services, and semantic. The study
clearly argued that Arduino (among other
platforms such as TinyOS, Contiki, LiteOS,
RiotOS) was one of the most common operating
systems used in IoT environments.
© 2018, Journal of Learning and Teaching in Digital Age, 3(1), 21-34

M. A. Ocak

IoT based research in literature review mostly
seems to focus on home control and monitoring
systems. For example, Piyare (2013) presented a
home control and monitoring system remotely
using Arduino based technology. The study argued
that IoT based system was feasible and effective in
terms of controlling devices in home environment.
Similarly, Soliman, Abiodun, Hamouda, Zhou, &
Lung (2013) focused on creating smart home
system in which home appliances and settings were
controlled by IoT based technology. The study
used embedding intelligence into sensors using
Arduino board. Sundmaeker, Guillemin, Friess, &
Woelfflé (2010), in their book, described Arduino
as one of the specific IoT products that have indeed
gained visibility recently. Barbon, Margolis,
Palumbo, Raimondi, & Weldin (2016) presented an
Arduino based IoT system including service
interface programming model in which provided
support to network boards using different
strategies.
Research clearly shows that Arduino boards play
an important role in developing IoT based
technologies. Arduino provides an open-source
implementation of the code running on Arduino
boards and in this way, users create flexible and
functional wired or wireless projects according to
their needs (Wortmann, & Flüchter, 2015; Xia,
Yang, Wang, & Vinel, 2012; Sundmaeker,
Guillemin, Friess, & Woelfflé, 2010; Soliman, M.,
Abiodun, T., Hamouda, T., Zhou, J., & Lung, 2013;
Piyare, 2013; Doukas, 2012; Barbon, Margolis,
Palumbo, Raimondi, & Weldin, 2016; Atzori, Iera,
& Morabito, 2010; Al-Fuqaha, Guizani,
Mohammadi,
Aledhari,
& Ayyash, 2015).
Galadima (2014), in his study, presented
applications to be taken as examples that can help
make learning Arduino more interesting. The study
argued that these examples encourage students and
teachers to learn more about electronics and
programming.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE REMARKS
This paper presented an extended literature review
regarding Arduino technology, in terms of its low
cost and flexible system using an embedded
microcontroller, with STEM, IoT and Maker
movement aspects including coding teaching and
prototyping. This study clearly, and in detail,
shows the strength and popularity of the Arduino
30

boards with respect to similar systems and explains
the studies focusing on the design, development
and implementation process of Arduino based
robotics systems. This study argues that Arduino
boards offers a suitable environment to create both
wired and wireless projects using different
communication protocols and monitoring and
controlling different IoT technologies.
Prior
research argues that Arduino based projects are
easy to be extended and applied to different
situations since Arduino has ability to support
different sensors and shields showing the
feasibility and effectiveness of Arduino based
systems (Xia, Yang, Wang, & Vinel, 2012;
Sundmaeker, Guillemin, Friess, & Woelfflé, 2010;
Piyare, 2013).
For the purpose of this study, 100 studies(research
articles, proceedings, books, dissertations) mainly
focusing on Arduino boards and their relation to
robotics systems, education, STEM, IoT, Maker
and prototyping were investigated deeply to make
a clear understanding on how prior research shaped
around Arduino technology and to which direction
research focus have gone so far. This study found
that Arduino technology and compatible products
have an overwhelming superiority over other
systems. This superiority comes from the fact that
Arduino boards use open-source microcontroller
technology and IDE environment allowing
everyone to contribute and customize it. Thus,
Arduino based projects seem to widespread into
many disciplines and influence many people from
different fields.
Secondly, this study found that Arduino based
robotics systems are very common in researchers.
Moreover, it is clear from prior research that
Arduino based robotics systems enhances students
and teachers’ point of view and catches their
attention toward educational robotics and
promotes STEM interests among students. This
study clearly found that Arduino technology allows
student and teachers to develop project-based and
goal-oriented activities regarding STEM related
fields. Many schools and educational institutions
began to integrate embedded systems like Arduino
into their curriculum and class activities. Research
results generally shows that Arduino based
activities have long-lasting impact on students’
understanding of STEM fields. Computer
Science/Engineering courses, pre-university level
© 2018, Journal of Learning and Teaching in Digital Age, 3(1), 21-34

Where does Arduino’ power come from?

programming courses, undergraduate mechatronics
courses, Musical classes, and Physics are some
examples in which Arduino technology was
successfully integrated into curriculum and classes.
This study highlighted four cases of technological
contributions made by Arduino systems: (1)
Arduino based Robotics technologies (2) Arduino
in educational field (3) Arduino and STEM
education (4) Arduino and IoT (Internet of Things).
What was presented in this study was related to
contributions made by Arduino technology to
different fields in general. For example, IoT
technologies, STEM and robotics systems seem to
be effected and benefited from Arduino’s open
source mentality and Maker Movement of Arduino
(Barbon, Margolis, Palumbo, Raimondi, & Weldin,
2016; Hayward, 2016; Hoffer, 2012; Soliman,
Abiodun, Hamouda, Zhou, & Lung, 2013; Xia,
Yang, Wang, & Vinel, 2012).
Opposite views also exits in literature review
(Scolnic, 2015; Blikstein, 2013; Lab Kits Using the
Arduino Prototyping Platform, 2010; David, 2011;
Linsalata, 2012. Firstly, there is a lack of
collaboration and consensus on how to implement
Arduino based technologies in educational
organizations, and schools interested in promoting
Arduino in their environments. This study argues
that Arduino based technologies provides valuable
impacts on educational field, as explained in Table
2, by experiencing and advancing new
technological opportunities among students,
teachers and researchers. Secondly, Arduino
boards have some technical limitations. For
example, when it is necessary to make and use the
circuits permanently, the difficulties of
conventional circuit production are more visible in
Arduino circuits. Moreover, initial Arduino cards
are economical; however, the cost for the advanced
Arduino boards and shields are increasing
dramatically. This can be considered as a hidden
disadvantage for Arduino boards. In addition, the
input/output ports on some boards like UNO are
limited. Many middle-level and advanced projects
and applications inevitably push users to use
different Arduino boards, which lead to a change in
cost.
This research clearly shows that IoT technologies
are getting popular and expectations are rising. In
this regard, Arduino technology seems to
31

contribute in communication and network and
manage things/devices in IoT technologies. In
addition, this study argues that Arduino technology
plays a dominant role in providing embedded
sensors, actuators, processors, and other physical
devices to IoT based projects. This study also
argues that more research is needed to investigate
how the implementation of Arduino platforms suit
with integration of information and communication
technologies in IoT applications. Thus, the idea of
open source mentality and effectiveness of Arduino
boards might be deeply investigated and adapted to
create
new
design,
development
and
implementation of IoT technologies. To better
control for risky factors and to identify any
technology based problems regarding Arduino
boards, future studies should investigate different
embedded platforms to compare and contrast
features and identify and address experiences
regarding using embedded platforms in robotic
system as well as in IoT technologies. Moreover,
from an educational point of view, implementation
of Arduino based technologies require more
concrete evidence by which educators will be eager
to integrate hardware and software features of
Arduino boards in class activities. This study
presented some research regarding using Arduino
in curriculum and class activities; however, prior
research shows that there is lack of focus and
harmonization with regard to applying Arduino
bases technologies into class environments. Also,
Arduino based STEM activities and Maker
movements need some kind of standardization and
alignment as well as the integration of the
embedded hardware and software domains to
enhance student learning and teacher awareness
and productivity representing further important
challenges in the development of Arduino based
technologies.
REFERENCES
Al-Fuqaha, A., Guizani, M., Mohammadi, M.,
Aledhari, M., & Ayyash, M. (2015).
Internet of things: A survey on enabling
technologies, protocols, and applications.
IEEE
Communications
Surveys
&
Tutorials, 17(4), 2347-2376.
Albrecht, W., Bender, P., & Kussmann, K. (2012).
Integrating
microcontrollers
in
undergraduate
curriculum.
Journal
of
Computing Sciences in Colleges, 27(4), 4552.
© 2018, Journal of Learning and Teaching in Digital Age, 3(1), 21-34

M. A. Ocak

Alexan, A. I., Osan, A.R., & Oniga, S. (2012).
Personal assistant robot. 18th International
Symposium for Design and Technology in
Electronic Packaging (SIITME), 25-28 Oct.
2012 (DOI: 10.1109/SIITME.2012.6384348).
Al-Sahib, N. K. A., & Azeez, M. Z. (2015). Build
and Interface Internet Mobile Robot using
Raspberry Pi and Arduino. Innovative
Systems Design and Engineering, 6(1),
106-114.
Androutsopoulos, K., Gorogiannis, N., Loomes,
M., Margolis, M., Primiero, G., Raimondi,
F., Varsani, P., Weldin, N., & Zivanovic, A.
(2014, May). A racket-based robot to teach
first-year
computer
science.
In
7th
European Lisp Symposium (p. 54).
Araujo, A., Portugal, D., Couceiro, M.S., &Rocha,
R. P. (2015). Integrating Arduino-Based
Educational Mobile Robots in ROS.
Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems,
77(2), 281-298.
Arduino (2017). Credits. Retrieved 18.10.2107
from
https://www.arduino.cc/en/Main/Credits
Atzori, L., Iera, A., & Morabito, G. (2010). The
internet of things: A survey. Computer
networks, 54(15), 2787-2805.
Balogh, R. (2010). Educational robotic platform
based on Arduino. Proceedings of the 1st
international conference on Robotics in
Education, RiE2010. FEI STU
Banzi, M. (2008). Getting Started with Arduino,
Make: Books, CA: USA.
Barbon, G., Margolis, M., Palumbo, F., Raimondi,
F., & Weldin, N. (2016). Taking Arduino
to the Internet of Things: the ASIP
programming
model. Computer
Communications, 89, 128-140.
Blikstein, P. (2013). Gears of our childhood:
constructionist
toolkits,
robotics,
and
physical computing, past and future.
Proceedings of the 12th International
Conference on Interaction Design and
Children, 173–182.
Busaidi, A. M. (2012). Development of an
educational environment for online control
of a biped robot using MATLAB and
Arduino.
Mechatronics
(MECATRONICS)
Mecatronics-REM,
November 21-23, 2012, Paris, France
(DOI:
10.1109/MECATRONICS.2012.6451030)
Candelas, F. A., García, G. J., Puente, S., Pomares,
J., Jara, C. A., Pérez, J., Mira, D., & Torres,
F. (2015). Experiences on using Arduino
for laboratory experiments of Automatic
32

Control
and
Robotics.
IFACPapersOnLine, 48(29), 105-110.
Das, P., Sadhu, A. K., Vyas, R. R., Konar, A., &
Bhattacharyya,
D.
(2015,
February).
Arduino based multi-robot stick carrying by
Artificial
Bee
Colony
optimization
algorithm. In Computer, Communication,
Control
and
Information
Technology
(C3IT),
2015
Third
International
Conference on (pp. 1-6). IEEE.
David K. (2011). The making of arduino, October
2011.
Received
10.12.2017
at
https://spectrum.ieee.org/geek-life/handson/the-making-of-arduino
Doukas, C. (2012). Building Internet of Things with
the ARDUINO. CreateSpace Independent
Publishing Platform.
Eguchi, A. (2016). RoboCupJunior for promoting
STEM education, 21st century skills, and
technological
advancement
through
robotics
competition.
Robotics
and
Autonomous Systems
75/B, 692-699.
Elfasakhany, A., Yanez, E., Baylon, K., &
Salgado,
R.
(2011).
Design
and
Development of a Competitive Low-Cost
Robot. Modern Mechanical Engineering,
1, 47-55.
Faugel, H., & Bobkov, V. (2013). Open source
hard-and software: Using Arduino boards to
keep old hardware running. Fusion
Engineering and Design, 88(6), 1276-1279.
Galadima, A. A. (2014, September). Arduino as a
learning tool. In Electronics, Computer and
Computation
(ICECCO),
2014
11th
International Conference on (pp. 1-4).
IEEE.
Gargava, P., Sindwani, K., & Soman, S. (2014).
Controlling an arduino robot using Brain
Computer Interface. Proceedings of 3rd
International Conference on Reliability,
Infocom Technologies and Optimization,
8-10 Oct. 2014, Noida, India. (DOI:
10.1109/ICRITO.2014.7014713)
Juang, H., & Lum, K. (2013). Design and Control
of a Two-Wheel Self-Balancing Robot
using the Arduino Microcontroller Board.
10th IEEE International Conference on
Control and Automation (ICCA) (pp.634639), Hangzhou, China, June 12-14, 2013.
Hayward, J. B. (2016). An analysis of secondary
integrated STEM lesson plans: Common
characteristics, learning expectations and
the impact from the teacher's definition of ISTEM (Order No. 10249253). Available
from ProQuest Dissertations & Theses
© 2018, Journal of Learning and Teaching in Digital Age, 3(1), 21-34

Where does Arduino’ power come from?

Global. (1850983195). Retrieved from
https://search.proquest.com/docview/
1850983195?accountid=11054
Hernández, C., Poot R., Narváez, L., Llanes, E., &
Chi, V. (2010). Design and Implementation
of a System for Wireless Control of a
Robot. International Journal of Computer
Science Issues, 7(5), 191-197.
Hoffer, B. M. (2012). Satisfying STEM education
using the arduino microprocessor in C
programming
(Order
No.
1520533).
Available from ProQuest Dissertations &
Theses Global. (1069255002). Retrieved
from
https://search.proquest.com/docview/1069
255002?accountid=11054
Jamieson, P. (2010). Arduino for teaching
embedded systems. Are computer scientists
and engineering educators missing the
boat?
Revised
10.9.217
at
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/
summary?doi =10.1.1.217.7157
Jooeun, S., Jooyoug, K., & Jaechang, S. (2014). A
Study on Training Courses Development
and Analysis for Improving the Creativity
using
Arduino.
Journal
of
Korea
Multimedia Society, 17(4), 514-525.
Junior, L. A., Neto, O. T., Hernandez, M. F.,
Martins, P. S., Roger, L. L., & Guerra, F.
A. (2013). A low-cost and simple arduinobased educational robotics kit. Cyber
Journals: Multidisciplinary Journals in
Science and Technology, Journal of
Selected Areas in Robotics and Control
(JSRC), December edition, 3(12), 1-7.
García-Peñalvo, F. J., Rees, A. M., Hughes, J.,
Jormanainen,
I.,
Toivonen,
T.,
&
Vermeersch, J. (2016). A survey of
resources for introducing coding into
schools. In F. J. García-Peñalvo (Ed.),
Proceedings of the Fourth International
Conference on Technological Ecosystems
for Enhancing Multiculturality (TEEM’16)
(Salamanca, Spain, November 2-4, 2016)
(pp. 19-26). New York, NY, USA: ACM.
Gartseev, I. B., Lee, L. F., & Krovi, V. N. (2011,
September). A low-cost real-time mobile
robot platform (ArEduBot) to support
project-based learning in robotics &
mechatronics. In Proceedings of 2nd
International Conference on Robotics in
Education (RiE 2011) (pp. 117-124).
Grover, R., Krishnan, S., Shoup, T.,& Khanbaghi
M. A.(2014). Competition-Based Approach
for Undergraduate Mechatronics Education
Using
the
Arduino
Platform.
Interdisciplinary
Engineering
Design
33

Education Conference (IEDEC) (DOI:
10.1109/IEDEC.2014.6784685)
Kapur, A., Hochenbaum, J., Darling, M.,
Diakopoulos, D., Trimpin, J. M. (2011).
The KarmetiK NotomotoN: A New Breed
of Musical Robot for Teaching and
Performance.
Proceedings
of
the
International
Conference
on
New
Interfaces for Musical Expression, 30 May
- 1 June 2011, Oslo, Norway
Karvinen, T., & Karvinen, K. (2011). Make a
Mind-Controlled Arduino Robot: Use Your
Brain as a Remote. Oreilly, Tokyo.
Kuan, W., Tseng, C., Sufen, C., Wong, C. (2016).
Development
of
a
Computer-Assisted
Instrumentation Curriculum for Physics
Students: Using LabVIEW and Arduino
Platform. Journal of Science Education and
Technology, 25(3), 427–438.
Kulkarni, C., Grama, S., Suresh, P. G., Krishna,
C.,
&
Antony,
J.
(2014,
April).
Surveillance
Robot
Using
Arduino
Microcontroller, Android APIs and the
Internet. In 2014 Proceedings of 2014
First International Conference on Systems
Informatics, Modelling and Simulation.
Lab Kits Using the Arduino Prototyping Platform
(2010). American Society for Engineering
Education.
Lim, J., Lee, S. J., Tewolde, G., & Kwon, J. (2014,
June).
Ultrasonic-sensor
deployment
strategies and use of smartphone sensors for
mobile
robot
navigation
in
indoor
environment.
In
Electro/Information
Technology (EIT), 2014 IEEE International
Conference on (pp. 593-598). IEEE.
Linsalata, R. S. (2012). Development of a universal
robotics API for increased classroom
collaboration within robotics education
(Order No. 1512750). Available from
ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Global.
(1023453761).
Retrieved
from
https://search.proquest.com/docview/1023
453761?accountid=11054
Lopez-Rodriguez, F. M., & Cuesta, F. (2016).
Andruino-A1: Low-Cost Educational Mobile
Robot
Based
on
Android
and
Arduino.
Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems,
81, 63–76
Margolis, M. (2012). Make an Arduino-controlled
robot. O’Reilly Media, USA.
Pahuja, R., & Kumar, N. (2014). Android Mobile
Phone Controlled Bluetooth Robot Using
8051
Microcontroller.
International
Journal of Scientific Engineering and
Research, 2(7), 14-17.
© 2018, Journal of Learning and Teaching in Digital Age, 3(1), 21-34

M. A. Ocak

Patoliya, J., Mehta, H., & Patel, H. (2015,
November). Arduino controlled war field
spy robot using night vision wireless
camera and Android application. In
Engineering (NUiCONE), 2015 5th Nirma
University International Conference on
(pp. 1-5). IEEE.
Phal, D. D., Phal, K. D., & Jacob, S. (2014,
December). Design, implementation and
reliability estimation of speech-controlled
mobile robot. In Emerging Technology
Trends in Electronics, Communication and
Networking
(ET2ECN),
2014
2nd
International Conference on (pp. 1-6).
IEEE.
Piyare, R. (2013). Internet of things: ubiquitous
home control and monitoring system using
android based smart phone. International
Journal of Internet of Things, 2(1), 5-11.
Prabha, S. S., Antony, A. J. P., Meena, M. J., &
Pandian, S. R. (2014, April). Smart cloud
robot using raspberry Pi. In Recent Trends
in Information Technology (ICRTIT),
2014 International Conference on (pp. 15). IEEE.
Rahul, R., Whitchurch, A., & Rao, M. (2014,
December). An open source graphical robot
programming environment in introductory
programming
curriculum
for
undergraduates. In MOOC, Innovation and
Technology in Education (MITE), 2014
IEEE International Conference on (pp. 96100). IEEE.
Qiu, K., Buechley, L., Baafi, E., & Dubow, W.
(2013, June). A curriculum for teaching
computer science through computational
textiles. In Proceedings of the 12th
International Conference on Interaction
Design and Children (pp. 20-27). ACM.
Sathiyanarayanan, M., Azharuddin, S., Kumar, S.,
& Khan, G. (2014). Gesture Controlled
Robot for Military Purpose. International
Journal for Technological Research in
Engineering, 1(11), 1300-1303.
Scolnic, J. (2015). Design, development and
analysis
of
the
EVDuino
robotics
prototyping platform (Order No. 1589510).
Available from ProQuest Dissertations &
Theses Global. (1705857868). Retrieved
from
https://search.proquest.com/docview/1705
857868?accountid=11054
Soliman, M., Abiodun, T., Hamouda, T., Zhou, J.,
& Lung, C. H. (2013, December). Smart
home: Integrating internet of things with
web
services
and
cloud
computing.
In Cloud
Computing
Technology
and
34

Science (CloudCom), 2013 IEEE 5th
International Conference on (Vol. 2, pp.
317-320). IEEE.
Sundmaeker, H., Guillemin, P., Friess, P., &
Woelfflé, S. (2010). Vision and challenges
for realising the Internet of Things. Cluster
of European Research Projects on the
Internet
of
Things,
European
Commision, 3(3), 34-36.
Timmis, H. (2011). Robot Integration Engineering
a GPS Module with the Arduino. In:
Practical Arduino Engineering, Apress
Retrieved
at
28.12.2017
from
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4302-38867_5)
Volos, C. K., Kyprianidis, I. M., & Stouboulos, I.
N. (2013). Experimental investigation on
coverage
performance
of
a
chaotic
autonomous mobile robot. Robotics and
Autonomous Systems, 61(12), 1314-1322.
Wasif, A., Raza, D., Rasheed, W., Farooq, Z., &
Ali, S. Q. (2013, September). Design and
implementation of a two-wheel selfbalancing robot with a two level adaptive
control.
In
Digital
Information
Management
(ICDIM),
2013
Eighth
International Conference on (pp. 187-193).
IEEE.
Wong, N. K. (2015). Affordable open-source
mobile robot kit for education and
research (Order No. 10036057). Available
from ProQuest Dissertations & Theses
Global. (1774020355). Retrieved from
https://search.proquest.com/docview/1774
020355?accountid=11054
Wortmann, F., & Flüchter, K. (2015). Internet of
things. Business & Information Systems
Engineering, 57(3), 221-224.
Xia, F., Yang, L. T., Wang, L., & Vinel, A. (2012).
Internet of things. International Journal of
Communication Systems, 25(9), 1101.
Zhao, J., & Zhu, S. C. (2013). Design of Obstacle
Avoidance Robot Car Based on Arduino
Microcontroller
[J].
Automation
&
Instrumentation, 5, 002.
Zisimatos,
A.
G.,
Liarokapis,
M.
V.,
Mavrogiannis, C. I., & Kyriakopoulos, K.
J.
(2014,
September).
Open-source,
affordable,
modular,
light-weight,
underactuated robot hands. In Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS 2014), 2014
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on (pp.
3207-3212). IEEE.

© 2018, Journal of Learning and Teaching in Digital Age, 3(1), 21-34

