PUBLISHED BY

World's largest Science,
Technology & Medicine
Open Access book publisher

3,100+

OPEN ACCESS BOOKS

BOOKS

DELIVERED TO
151 COUNTRIES

103,000+

INTERNATIONAL
AUTHORS AND EDITORS

AUTHORS AMONG

TOP 1%

MOST CITED SCIENTIST

106+ MILLION
DOWNLOADS

12.2%

AUTHORS AND EDITORS
FROM TOP 500 UNIVERSITIES

Selection of our books indexed in the
Book Citation Index in Web of Science™
Core Collection (BKCI)

Chapter from the book Brain-Computer Interface Systems - Recent Progress and
Future Prospects
Downloaded from: http://www.intechopen.com/books/brain-computer-interfacesystems-recent-progress-and-future-prospects

Interested in publishing with InTechOpen?
Contact us at book.department@intechopen.com

Chapter 11

Review of Wireless Brain-Computer Interface Systems
Seungchan Lee, Younghak Shin, Soogil Woo,
Kiseon Kim and Heung-No Lee
Additional information is available at the end of the chapter
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/56436

1. Introduction
Over the past two decades, the study of the Brain Computer Interfaces (BCI) has grown dra‐
matically. According to Scopus search engine, a search result with the keyword “Brain Com‐
puter Interface” returns only two papers for year 1991. But, the same query returns 897
journals and conference papers for year 2011 (date of search: March 14, 2013). BCI systems
provide a new communication channel to humans who use it. They measure neurophysio‐
logical signals of the human, electroencephalogram (EEG) in particular. EEG based BCI sys‐
tems are designed to decode the intension of the human user and generate commands to
control external devices or computer applications. The human can produce these commands
by generating the neurophysiological signals intentionally. This process can become more
successful – fast and accurate – through training and practice. This technology allows the
users with new experiences which enable a direct communication between the human and
the computers or external devices such as home appliances, and prosthetic devices.
The BCI systems consist of two parts, signal acquisition and translation (see page 7 Figure
2). The signal acquisition part contains electrodes, analog circuit and digital system for neu‐
rophysiological signal recording and transmission. The translation part is normally comput‐
ing devices which are equipped with high performance processor such as laptops, PDAs,
and smart phones. With an application program, this part performs algorithmic processes
such as feature extraction and classification to convert the raw neurophysiological signals
into computer readable messages. Depending on the type of connection between the two
parts, we can divide BCI systems into two kinds, wired versus wireless BCI systems.
Many conventional BCI systems are wired. With just three electrodes positioned at the occi‐
pital lobe, the acquisition part of wired BCI systems generally comes with bulky and heavy
amplifiers and preprocessing units. Connection wiring is usually complicated with a large

© 2013 Lee et al.; licensee InTech. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

216

Brain-Computer Interface Systems – Recent Progress and Future Prospects

number of cables between the electrodes and the acquisition part. For these reasons, prepa‐
ration time for measuring EEG signals is typically very long. In addition, user’s movement is
limited due to cable constraints. Therefore, the application of BCI systems is difficult to es‐
cape from laboratory scale experiments. These restrictions make the types of applications for
which BCI systems can be made useful be severely limited. Wireless BCI systems are to
eliminate the wire connection, between the signal acquisition and the translation part, with
the use of a wireless transmission unit such as Bluetooth and Zigbee modules. Removing
wire connections, portability of BCI systems is greatly improved. Postures and movements
of users wearing the acquisition part of wireless BCI systems are also unimpeded. These de‐
sirable aspects of wireless BCI systems promote to go beyond a laboratory scale experiments
and to develop everyday-life applications.
With portable wireless BCI systems, various real-life applications are under development
now. In the early days of BCI researches, cursor control and speller applications were devel‐
oped mainly targeted for helping the disabled people. Recently, with growing interest, wire‐
less BCI systems have been applied in entertainments as well. For example, Emotiv and
Neurosky companies have recently released their wireless BCI headsets for entertainment
uses such as brain gaming and mind monitoring. Moreover, international research groups
have applied wireless BCI systems for interesting new applications such as home automa‐
tion system based on monitoring human physiological states [29], cellular phone dialing
[28], and drowsiness detection for drivers [19][20][32].
In this book chapter, we will review recent research trends in wireless BCI systems. In Sec‐
tion 2, we summarize several research topics in wireless BCI systems such as electrodes, em‐
bedded systems, user-friendly designs, and novel applications. We then take a closer look
into emerging wireless BCI systems designed by BCI researchers, and discuss general BCI
systems recently introduced into the market in Section 3. In Section 4, we discuss current
challenges and possible future research directions on wireless BCI systems. Finally, we pro‐
vide concluding remarks in Section 5.

2. Research trends of wireless BCI systems
Wireless brain computer interface (BCI) systems are neurophysiological signal acquisition
and processing systems where acquired physiological signals are wirelessly transmitted to
the translation unit. Wireless systems, unlike their traditional wired counterparts, are de‐
signed to provide convenience in monitoring the neurophysiological signals of users.
Compared to conventional wired BCI systems, wireless BCI systems provide enhanced port‐
ability and wearability, facilitated by elimination of the wire connections between the wear‐
able acquisition unit and the translation unit. The translation unit is usually housed in a
portable device such as laptops and smart phones. This improvement provides an easy in‐
stallation process and freedom of postures for users. Furthermore, owing to advanced inte‐
grated circuit designs, the components of the wireless BCI systems are small in sizes and
efficient in power consumption. Employing these components, the acquisition part of wire‐

Review of Wireless Brain-Computer Interface Systems
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/56436

less BCI systems can be miniaturized. These advantages allow wireless BCI systems to be
shaped in user friendly styles such as baseball caps [14][19][21][29], headsets [16][17][23][25]
[27], and headbands [18][20][22][28][30][32]; thus, applying them in various applications
such as entertainments and health care becomes easier than ever before.
Even though wireless BCI systems may provide a number of advantages, there are still
many issues that need to be resolved including improving signal quality, more compact and
stylish system designs, and excavation of useful applications. First, the quality of the meas‐
ured EEG signals has to be improved for more precise classification of user’s intensions. The
measured EEG signals are easily contaminated by various noise sources such as the pres‐
ence of other physiological signals and the power line noise. Moreover, various impedi‐
ments exist in electrodes-scalp interfaces such as hairs, sweat, and stratum corneum of skin
[6]. These obstacles cause deleterious effects in signal measurements with high leakage cur‐
rents and high contact impedances. Due to these difficulties, EEG signals get easily corrupt‐
ed and the quality of measured signals is often undesirable. Consequentially, these factors
lead to drop of application accuracy. Second, stylish, miniaturized and light weight wireless
BCI systems are necessary for daily life application and long-term wearing. Conventional
wired BCI systems are bulky, not user-friendly in system appearances because of their com‐
plicated connection between electrodes and signal acquisition part. Multi-channel electrode
installation is also inconvenient and time-consuming, usually taking more than 30 minutes.
Thus, the users are easily irritated and long-term monitoring becomes difficult. Third, killer
applications are needed. Many researchers and developers introduced various applications
related to entertainments and health care. But such contributions are still not enough to
make any fundamental change in our life.
To help these issues, research groups are paying attention to the following aspects:
1.

Advanced electrodes for measuring clean EEG signals

2.

Low-power, miniaturized, portable and wearable BCI systems

3.

A killer application, an application of such a great value and popularity that it assures the
success of the BCI technology.

In this section, we aim to analyze the current status of research and development efforts in
these directions.
2.1. New electrodes for EEG signal acquisition
Among the above research topics, the development of advanced EEG electrodes which
measure brain signals precisely with low noise is the most important challenge. Practically,
the signal acquisition part of general wireless BCI systems only contains a signal acquisition
circuit and a micro-processor based embedded system for transmission of the measured
EEG signals. For example, a well-known Emotiv EPOC neuro-headset is composed of 14
channel electrodes and a small integrated embedded system powered by an onboard battery
for signal conditioning and transmission. In the translation part of wireless BCI systems,
analysis of acquired signals is performed either online or offline on a computer or a mobile

217

218

Brain-Computer Interface Systems – Recent Progress and Future Prospects

device which is equipped with high-performance processors. For this segregated structure
to work well, signal acquisition part of a wireless BCI system should be devoted to high fi‐
delity signal recording. To provide clear EEG signal acquisition at the electrode-skin inter‐
face, development of outstanding electrodes becomes a critical issue. For this reason, many
research groups have recently been interested in developing advanced electrodes which can
provide low-noise recording, convenience in installation, and comfort even in long-term
wearing.
In conventional wired BCI systems, passive electrodes are widely used to measure EEG sig‐
nals. Generally, these electrodes are disc or ring shaped and are made of Ag/AgCl alloy [10].
Due to their simple structure, it is easy to make them small. However, they have many dis‐
advantages as well. Extra treatments are essential for recording reliable EEG signals because
the scalp potentials are only on the order of several micro-volts and thus very noise-sensi‐
tive. Treatments are needed, including a hair preparation step and the use of conductive
gels or glues for better attachment and higher conductivity. These preparations induce dis‐
comfort and require long preparation time. Furthermore, the conductive gels easily desic‐
cate and lose their adhesion. These problems bring about worse contact impedances at
electrode-scalp interfaces, causing a large reduction of signal-to-noise ratio. In addition, the
quality of recorded signals is sensitive to cable vibrations [17]. For these reasons, the longterm monitoring of EEG signals using passive electrodes is not feasible.
Recently, to overcome the weaknesses of passive electrodes, many researchers have studied
advanced electrodes. For examples, research of dry electrodes is active recently. Generally,
dry electrodes are defined as those that do not require the use of conductive gels or glues for
installation process. Thus, a user can conveniently attach the electrodes to the user’s scalp
without any hair arrangement. To make dry contact at the electrode-skin interface, research‐
ers employ special materials or shapes in the design of dry electrodes. Extensive research
has produced a huge variety of electrode materials and structures, including conductive
rubber [8][9], conductive carbon nanotubes [7], micro-tip structures [6], micro-machined
structures [14][15][20], non-contact types [4][5], spring-loaded fingers [2][13], bristle struc‐
tures [3], and conductive foams [27]. The most widely used dry electrode design is a set of
contact posts which look like fingers [13][16]. This design has an advantage in contact ability
because it is easy to penetrate into the scalp through the hair without an extended hair ar‐
rangement. Recently, some research groups have altered this finger design to produce ad‐
vanced mechanical designs, such as spring-loaded fingers [2] or bristle structures [3]. These
designs seem to provide flexibility and geometric adaptation between the sensor and the ir‐
regular scalp surface to obtain low interface impedance. To achieve low contact impedance
and provide a robust and stable electrical interface, some research groups have employed
multi-walled carbon nanotube arrays [7] and micro-tip structures [6], which are able to pen‐
etrate the outer skin layer (which is 5 to10 um thick and called the stratum corneum).
While we can reduce the installation time significantly using dry electrodes, the contact im‐
pedance between the scalp and the electrodes is higher than that with gel-based passive
electrodes due to the absence of conductive gels. Thus, signal quality of dry electrodes
would be not better than that of the gel-based passive electrodes. To overcome this draw‐

Review of Wireless Brain-Computer Interface Systems
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/56436

Figure 1. Various EEG electrode types. (a) a miniature passive ring electrode [10] (b) a spring-loaded dry electrode [2]
(c) a bristle-type dry electrode [3] (d) the Quasar hybrid EEG biosensor [11] (e) a non-contact-type active dry EEG sen‐
sor [4] (f) Diagram of a micro-tip electrode and the pyramidal shape of a micro-tip [6].

back, many research groups have been interested in active electrodes. Active electrodes con‐
tain amplifier or buffer circuits integrated to the electrodes themselves [1][4][5][7][11][12]
[13]. This amplifier or buffer circuits are located between the electrodes and the signal ac‐
quisition frontend. They are aimed at impedance conversion. Providing high input impe‐
dance on the electrode-amplifier interface, active circuits reduce the distortion of the
measured signals. This is desired for dry electrodes which do not use conductive fluids. Al‐
so, the low output impedance of the amplifier eliminates artifacts caused by posture changes
in mobile environments. Therefore, the quality of measured physiological signals can be re‐
mained in a desirable state by the use of active electrodes.
Recent wireless BCI systems are equipped with active dry electrodes to combine the advan‐
tages of active and dry electrodes such as convenient installation and high fidelity signals.
Because these electrodes provide more robust and stable signal quality in mobile environ‐
ments, they are suitable for wireless BCI systems. Researchers working on the development
of advanced electrodes have produced a variety of active dry electrodes. Valchinov et al. de‐
signed body surface electrodes equipped with a biopotential amplifier using two op-amps
[1]. Matthews et al. designed an ambulatory wireless EEG system using Quasar hybrid bio‐
sensors [11][12][13]. In this type of sensors, they employ a special circuit which uses the
common mode follower (CMF) technology. This technology provides an ultra-high input
impedance to ensure low distortion of the biopotential signals. Chi et al. designed and built
dry and non-contact electrodes [5]. In their dry electrodes, a unity gain buffer is used to re‐
duce the effects of cable artifacts and external interference. Their non-contact electrodes also

219

220

Brain-Computer Interface Systems – Recent Progress and Future Prospects

integrate discrete circuits to achieve high input impedance. To further optimize the size and
power consumption of such electrodes, some researchers have employed customized ASIC
designs for amplifiers. Xu et al. produce a low-power 8-channel active electrode system [17].
In this system, to reduce the power consumption of voltage buffers in dry electrodes, they
designed active electrodes including ASICs based on chopper instrumentation amplifiers.
2.2. Wireless BCI system design and structure
In EEG-based wireless BCI systems, additional signal conditioning is essential to enable the
transmission of precise neurophysiological signals. Many noise sources are present such as
physiological interferences and power line noise. Physiological interferences are the other
biopotential signals such as electromyogram (EMG), electrocardiogram (ECG), and electroo‐
culogram (EOG). They have relatively lager amplitudes around 50uV and up to 20-30mV
while the amplitude of EEG signals is much smaller on the scale of roughly 10~100uV. Thus,
the EEG signals are easily buried by these physiological signals unavoidably. In the case that
the BCI system is connected to a desktop which operate with the electric power outlet, we
also have to consider the power line noise as well. The power line noise contaminates the
desired EEG signals in the range of 50 or 60Hz. Furthermore, the users of portable wireless
BCI systems are usually in an active state making free motions and postures, whereas the
users of wired BCI system are asked to stay in a motionless state, while their EEG signals are
monitored. Therefore, the measured EEG signals of wireless BCI systems are also subject to
heavy motion and vibration artifacts.
To avoid interference from the various noise components and recognize the user’s intention
correctly, the system must be designed carefully. Figure 2 is the general block diagram of a
typical wireless BCI system. In EEG acquisition block of the system, there are two main
parts, namely, the analog front end circuit and the digital system.

EEG Acquisition part
Analog Front End
EEG Sensors

Translation part
Digital system

Filters(Bandpass,
50/60Hz notch)

Multiplexer
(MUX)

Microprocessor

Amplifier

Analog to Digital
Converter (ADC)

Wireless
Transmitter

Receiver
Signal Processing
(Feature translation)
Application Program

Figure 2. Block diagram of a typical wireless BCI system

In the analog front-end stage, the amplifier and bandwidth limiter circuits are included to
make more robust and reliable EEG signals from the sensitive raw signals. Because the am‐
plitude of EEG signals is quiet small, the pre-amplification of the measured EEG signals at
the analog front end is extremely important. In this amplification process, many developed
wireless BCI systems use operational amplifiers or instrumentation amplifiers. Those ampli‐
fiers normally provide a gain ranging from thousands to hundreds of thousands. Amplifica‐

Review of Wireless Brain-Computer Interface Systems
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/56436

tion with high gain provides greater robustness against a variety of noise sources. However,
we need to determine a suitable amplification gain to maximize the signal resolution in the
analog digital converter (ADC) because the ADC has a restricted input dynamic range.
Therefore, the amplification gain of the analog front end varies depending on the compo‐
nents of the digital system.
We also need a frequency filtering procedure to remove various noise components. The EEG
signals occupy a narrow bandwidth: normally from 0.1Hz to less than 50 Hz. Thus, filtering
is helpful for extracting useful signals from the desired frequency bands. To filter out signals
from useless frequency bands, the analog front-end of the system takes both a low-pass filter
and a high-pass filter. Especially to filter out the power line noise, a notch filter which elimi‐
nates the specific frequency components of signals is also applied in this stage. Those filter‐
ing processes are performed using passive or active filtering circuits [24][26].
In the digital system stage, four integrated circuits are included: a multiplexer, an ADC, a
microprocessor, and a wireless transmission unit. Generally, most EEG-based wireless BCI
systems support multi-channel recording. To measure multi-channel signals simultaneous‐
ly, a multiplexer is needed to access all of the channels. Because the measured EEG signals
are analog signals, an ADC has to be included to process the recorded EEG data on the digi‐
tal circuits. This integrated circuit transforms the EEG analog signals into discrete digitized
data with a specific sampling frequency. The sampling frequency is determined by the
speed of the microprocessor, wireless transmission, and translated frequencies of EEG fea‐
tures. Formally, researchers and system developers choose the sampling frequency between
about 100 Hz and 1000 Hz. The microprocessor makes data packets from the corrected EEG
data and hands them over to the wireless transmission unit. The microprocessor also man‐
ages the components of the entire system. Some wireless BCI systems load the feature ex‐
traction algorithm on the microprocessor to process the EEG signals internally [19][20][21]
[29][30]. Because the recorded multichannel EEG data is transmitted from the portable EEG
acquisition device to the host system, the wireless transmission unit is essential. Regarding
the protocol of wireless transmissions, various communication modules are employed for
transmission of the measured signals from the signal acquisition unit to the translation unit,
such as Bluetooth and IEEE 802.15.4 Zigbee. Bluetooth has many advantages such as suffi‐
cient transmission rates and wide accessibility. Thus, many wireless BCI systems employ
this transmission module. Including analog front-end and digital system stage, the acquisi‐
tion unit of wireless BCI systems generally operates onboard power sources such as Li-ion,
Li-polymer, and NiMH batteries.
Because the analog front-end and digital system parts have to be loaded in portable and
wearable acquisition part of wireless BCI systems, longer operation time and small size are
necessary in system specifications. Thus, system developers should choose low-power com‐
ponents with smaller packages. Recently, many semiconductor manufacturers have released
low-power microprocessors and integrated analog front end circuits for bio-potential meas‐
urements. For example, Texas Instruments released the ADS129x series integrated circuit
solutions [34] for the analog front end of ECG/EEG applications. This series provides up to
8-channel high-resolution ADCs and a built-in programmable gain amplifier (PGA) with

221

222

Brain-Computer Interface Systems – Recent Progress and Future Prospects

low noise and low power consumption features. In the microprocessor area, various ultralow power processors have been released on the market for portable devices. The most
widely used microprocessors are the PIC24 microcontroller series [35], the dsPIC digital sig‐
nal controller series [36] (manufactured by Microchip Technology) and the MSP430 micro‐
controller series [37] (manufactured by Texas Instruments). In particular, the dsPIC
processor series is applied as the processing unit of the Emotiv EPOC system [38].
Regarding the design approach of system appearance, a variety of designs have been adopt‐
ed depending on the application purpose and target users. Widely used styles of the acquisi‐
tion part of wireless BCI systems include headsets [16][17][23][25][27], head bands [18][20]
[22][28][30][32], baseball caps [14][19][21][29], and military helmets [13]. In designing the ap‐
pearance of wireless BCI systems, we need to consider several factors, such as wearability,
stability, and convenience of installation. To provide long-term monitoring capability, wear‐
able part of wireless BCI systems has to be light with comfort fitting. Also, convenient instal‐
lation is necessary to save time in the set up process. Appropriate pressures are also needed
to maintain stable electrode positions and low impedance characteristics at the sensor-skin
interfaces. Additionally, to allow for the diversity of users’ head sizes, the materials used in
wireless BCI systems should be flexible, or size adjusters must be added. Various designs of
wireless BCI systems are shown in Figure 3.

Figure 3. Various designs of wireless BCI systems: (a) wearable EEG acquisition headset [27], (b) 8-channel EEG moni‐
toring headset [16], (c) baseball cap-based EEG acquisition device [14], (d) wireless EEG system for SSVEP application
[25], and (e) soldier’s Kevlar helmet-based ambulatory wireless EEG system for real-time workload classification [13].

Review of Wireless Brain-Computer Interface Systems
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/56436

2.3. Signal features and applications
In EEG-based BCI systems, they translate the specific signal features that reflect the user’s
intentions or cognitive states into commands or feedback signals for controlling of the target
applications. For these operations, BCI systems analyze and capture the user’s intensions
based on detection of ERPs [33] or power spectra changes in specific brain rhythms.
Most research groups have focused on sensorimotor rhythms (SMRs) [39] and event related
potentials (ERPs) [40], including visual evoked potentials (VEPs) such as P300 [41] and
steady-state visual evoked potentials (SSVEP) [42]. The SMRs are spontaneous responses
which can be actively generated by motor imageries, such as the left hand, the right hand, or
the foot movements measured by electrodes placed on the scalp over the sensorimotor cor‐
tex area. These rhythms appear as suppression or enhancement of the power spectra, called
event-related desynchronization (ERD) and event-related synchronization (ERS). The VEPs
are behavioral responses which are passively synchronized by the frequency of flickering
visual stimulus from the occipital lobe. Because the SMRs and VEPs reflect the user’s inten‐
sions, we can utilize them as a means to control commands in applications. Moreover, vari‐
ous cognitive states are also studied, such as drowsiness, alertness, and mental focusing [27]
[29][30][32]. These cognitive states are related to the power changes of specific rhythms,
called alpha, beta, theta rhythms and so on. Several studies have shown that the power of
the alpha rhythm has a negative relationship with mental concentration [27][29][30]. Also,
researchers have found that when subjects feel sleepy or fall into a deep sleep, the power
spectra of alpha and theta bands change depending on these drowsiness conditions [29][30]
[32]. Using these relationships, the BCI systems detect the user’s cognitive states and pro‐
vide feedbacks such as focusing indicator [27] and sleep warning [32].
Among the signal features mentioned above, many researchers have chosen VEPs or users’
cognitive states as a means for BCI based controls. The reason is that these features are easy
to generate and provide good accuracy in the application of BCI systems. Also, the features
of VEPs and cognitive state make it easy to classify users’ intentions with a relatively simple
feature extraction method, and a small number of electrodes and training session are needed
to achieve higher accuracy. Compared with ERPs like VEPs, the SMRs can be generated by
voluntary imagination, such as motor imagery, generally require long-term training to ach‐
ieve higher accuracy in BCI applications. Furthermore, approximately 30% of normal people
cannot generate SMRs due to the phenomenon of BCI illiteracy [43].
In the application parts of BCI systems a variety of promising rehabilitation-related applica‐
tions have already been developed with EEG-based wired BCI systems. Because BCI sys‐
tems measure and analyze neurophysiological signals, these systems provide practical
assistance for patient diagnosis, treatment, and rehabilitation. For example, using BCI sys‐
tems, long-term monitoring of EEG signals assists the diagnosis of epilepsy and the predic‐
tion of epileptic seizures [44]. For people with severe motor disabilities, the P300 speller [41]
and wheelchair control [45] applications provide practical assistance in everyday life by pro‐
viding non-muscular motor functions.

223

224

Brain-Computer Interface Systems – Recent Progress and Future Prospects

In spite of these useful applications, the dissemination of BCI systems is limited because of
the drawbacks of wired BCI systems. Wired BCI systems are generally bulky, complicated,
and expensive. Also, the users of wired BCI systems are confined to a limited space without
freedom of postures and movements. To overcome these limitations, wired BCI systems are
gradually being replaced with the wireless BCI systems.

Figure 4. Applications of wireless BCI systems: (a) workload classification application screenshot (data collection and
engagement classifier running on the gaming subject) [13], (b) EEG-based BCI archery game screenshot [27], and (c)
SSVEP-based dialing application using smart phone [28].

Recently, with the development of wireless BCI systems, researchers have shifted their focus
from applications for disabled people to applications of interest to the general public in the
entertainment, smart living environment, and cognitive neuroscience areas. In the entertain‐
ment area, Liao et al. developed an EEG-based gaming interface based on a real-time focus‐
ing detection algorithm with a wireless EEG acquisition device [27]. For smart living
environment, Lin et al. developed an environmental auto-control system based on human
physiological states, such as drowsiness and alertness [29][30]. Similarly, Guge et al. devel‐
oped a smart home control system based on P300 EEG response [31]. For mobile applica‐
tions, Wang et al. developed a cellular phone dialing application [28]. In cognitive state
monitoring, D’Arcy et al. developed a diagnostic device which provides an evaluation of an
individual’s conscious awareness based on various ERP components [33]. In this research,

Review of Wireless Brain-Computer Interface Systems
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/56436

they found that sensation, perception, attention, memory, and language are properly related
with the P1, mismatch negativity (MMN), P300 (tones), P300 (speech), and N400 responses.
Also, Matthews et al. developed a real-time workload classification system during subject
motion with a compact ambulatory wireless EEG system [13]. Figure 4 shows application
examples of wireless BCI systems.

3. Review of wireless BCI systems
Over the past 20 years, many research achievements associated with BCI and the neuro‐
sciences have been made and they have helped stimulate the interest of the general public.
Owing to the advances in wireless BCI systems, bulky wired biopotential acquisition sys‐
tems have been replaced with portable and wearable devices. Following this trend, the num‐
ber of published papers with the topic of wireless BCI systems and (their) applications is
being continuously increased. A few commercial companies have developed and released
portable wireless EEG acquisition systems with interesting new entertainment applications.
Now, measuring brain activity is no longer limited to hospital-based medical diagnostics,
but includes more courageous applications aiming at changing the lifestyle of users. In this
section, we aim to first review several wireless BCI systems which have appeared in recent
research articles. Second, we will introduce several examples of wireless BCI systems which
have been lately released into the market for consumer and research usages.
3.1. Wireless BCI systems in scientific papers
In the research field, many research articles have been published in the last decade with the
topic of wireless BCI systems. There are some distinct features in them such as the use of dry
electrodes and novel applications which we are interested in reviewing in this subsection.
For example, see the wireless BCI systems listed in Table 1. This table shows system specifi‐
cations such as the number of channels and operation hours. They are all wireless and wear‐
able systems, some aiming for applications that average people can find useful, including
drowsiness detection and workload monitoring. Specifications for each system are opti‐
mized for its own target application.
In what follows, we will briefly review each of the system listed in Table 1
3.1.1. Wireless BCI system for archery game control
Recently, utilizing wireless BCI systems, the number of game applications has been in‐
creased. For example, Liao et al. [27] have developed an EEG based BCI device for an arch‐
ery game control. This device is designed as a user friendly headset (see Figure 3 (a)) and
equipped with three channels, each channel with a dry EEG sensor. For the control of arch‐
ery game, the sensors measure the power of alpha rhythm collected off of user’s forehead
when a user concentrates on a target. This power value is converted to a measure of focus‐
ing intensity in real time. Any user can test out the level of one’s concentration effort using

225

226

Brain-Computer Interface Systems – Recent Progress and Future Prospects

Reference

Signal features

Application

Sensor type

Liao et al., 2012

Yu Mike Chi et

[27]

al., 2012 [5]

Mental focusing
feature
Archery game
control
Dry foam-based
EEG sensor

Nuno Sérgio
Diasa et al., 2012
[6]

SSVEP

Not mentioned

Neuro-feedback

Not mentioned

Dry and
noncontact
electrodes

Micro tip dry
electrodes

Chin-Teng Lin et

R. Matthews et

Lindsay Brown et

al., 2010 [20]

al., 2008 [13]

al., 2010 [16]

Alpha and Theta

Cognitive state

rhythms

(workload)

Drowsiness

Workload

detection

monitoring

Not mentioned

Not mentioned

Not mentioned

Finger type

Dry electrode

hybrid biosensor

with contact post

7 channels EEG,
# of channels

3 channels

Not mentioned

5 channels

3 channels

ECG, EMG, EOG 2

8 channels

channels
Frontend
processing unit
Backend
processing unit

TI MSP430

PC

Transmission

Bluetooth v2.0

protocol

+EDR

Signal resolution
and sampling rate
Power source and
operation time

Design

12bit, 256Hz
23 hours with a
3.7v 750mAh Liion battery
Headset with
elastic band

Microchip PIC24F

Nokia N97
cellular phone

Atmel
Atmega128

TI MSP430

Not mentioned

TI MSP430 and
ASIC

ADSP-BF533
PC

embedded

Laptop

Not mentioned

Bluetooth

2.4GHz

16bit, 240Hz for

11bit, 256 ~

EEG

1024Hz

processor

Bluetooth

Bluetooth

24 bit

16bit, 1kHz

10 hours with 2

25 hours using 2

AAA batteries

AA batteries

Not mentioned

Brain cap

Bluetooth v.
2.0+EDR
12bit, 512Hz
33 hours with a
3.7v 1.1Ah Li-Ion
battery
Headband

80 hours with 2
AAA batteries

Soldier helmet

30 hours with a
3.7v 140mAh LiIon battery
Headset

Table 1. Comparison of wireless BCI systems in scientific articles

this game (see Figure 4 (b)). If a user maintains for a certain period a high level of concentra‐
tion state, for example, the arrow will hit the center of target.
3.1.2. Mobile BCI using dry and noncontact EEG sensors
These days, smart phones come with high performance processors. They can be useful for
wireless EEG monitoring. In [5], Yu Mike Chi et al. have developed a wireless BCI device
based on smart phones. They have developed an smartphone application with a GUI inter‐
face for signal monitoring and analysis. They have tested two types of electrodes, dry and
noncontact EEG sensors. Dry sensors consist of several spring-loaded electrodes, each comes
with a finger post and a unity gain buffer. Noncontact electrodes employ CMOS amplifiers

Review of Wireless Brain-Computer Interface Systems
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/56436

to improve their impedance performance. Both electrodes offer easy installation and good
signal quality.
3.1.3. Wireless BCI system based on dry electrodes with a needle-shape structure
As mentioned in Section 2, novel electrode design is important part in wireless BCI systems.
In [6], Nuno Sérgio Dias et al. have developed a wireless EEG acquisition system with novel
dry electrodes. For the electrode design, they have employed 16 micro tip structures each
looks like a needle (see Figure 1 (f)). They are designed to make direct contacts with electro‐
lyte fluids of the inner skin layers of the scalp. Therefore, signal quality is satisfactory with‐
out the use of conductive gels. The proposed system consists of an EEG brain cap with five
dry electrodes, an acquisition device which is attached to the brain cap, and a wireless base
station connected with a computer. The acquisition device can operate for 25 hours with two
AA batteries.
3.1.4. Design of wireless BCI system for drowsiness detection
Wireless BCI systems can be utilized in practical applications such as house control system
[29][30][31] and drowsiness detection system [20] for drivers. In [20], Chin-Teng Lin et al.
have proposed a real-time wireless EEG-based BCI system for drowsiness detection and
shown usefulness in providing sleep alerts to a driver in car driving simulation. They have
designed a wireless signal acquisition module and a signal processing module. The acquisi‐
tion module is small enough to be embedded into a wearable headband. These modules are
linked with each other via a Bluetooth connection. Therefore, it provides the advantages of
mobility and long-term monitoring (more than 33 hours with a 1100-mA Li-Ion battery). Al‐
so, they have developed a real-time drowsiness detection algorithm. The algorithm detects
the user’s drowsiness by analyzing the theta rhythm and the alpha rhythm of the EEG sig‐
nals.
3.1.5. Ambulatory wireless BCI system for real time workload classification
A compact, lightweight, and ultra-low power ambulatory wireless BCI system has been de‐
veloped in [13]. This system consists of soldier’s helmet with biosensors and a data acquisi‐
tion unit (see Figure 3 (e)). They use Quasar hybrid biosensors which are equipped with dry
electrodes shaped like a set of fingers (see Figure 1 (d)). This system provides high freedom
of motions with data quality as good as that of wet electrodes. They have also developed a
real time classifier for determination of the cognitive workload of a user.
3.1.6. Design of wireless EEG monitoring headset
In [16], Lindsay Brown et al. have introduced a design of wireless EEG monitoring headset.
This headset is equipped with the 8-channel dry electrodes as shown in Figure 3 (b). Each
electrode is designed with contact posts which are coated with Ag/AgCl for easy penetration
into the user’s hairs. Each electrode is connected to its electrode housing via a magnetic ball
and a socket for tilting and vertical movement of electrodes. They have employed an 8-chan‐

227

228

Brain-Computer Interface Systems – Recent Progress and Future Prospects

nel EEG acquisition application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC) into which preamplifiers
are embedded for low power consumption. This system can operate for long time over 30
hours using a 140 mAh Li-Ion battery.
3.2. Wireless BCI systems for consumer use
In the market of consumer-grade wireless BCI systems, there are many commercial compa‐
nies such as Emotiv, Neurosky, MyndPlay, PLX devices, and OCZ technology. These com‐
panies have competitively released their own wireless BCI systems along with various
applications related to gaming, utilities, and mental-state monitoring. In this section, we re‐
view these wireless BCI devices for consumer use shown in Figure 5.

a

c

b

d

e

Figure 5. Pictures of Wireless BCI systems for consumer use: (a) Emotive EPOC headset [38], (b) NeuroSky Mind Set
[46], (c) MyndPlay Brainband [50], (d) PLX devices XWave headset [49], (e) OCZ Neural Impulse Actuator [51].

The device released by Emotiv is the EPOC headset. The EPOC headset [38] is a multi-chan‐
nel wireless BCI system. This headset is equipped with 14 saline-based wet-contact resistive
electrodes for measuring EEG, Electrooculogram (EOG), and facial Electromyogram (EMG).
Additionally, the EPOC headset also has a 2-axis gyroscope for measuring the head rotation.
Employing 2.4GHz wireless connectivity, this system provides wide accessibility for devices
such as PCs, laptops, and smart phones. The package of the EPOC headset provides a bun‐
dle software which contains a suite of built-in signal processing algorithms for interpreta‐
tion of EEG signals. The built-in algorithms discern the user’s conscious intentions,
emotional states, and facial expressions based on measured EEG, Electromyogram (EMG)
and Electrooculogram (EOG) signals. Through this software, the users can interact with var‐

Review of Wireless Brain-Computer Interface Systems
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/56436

ious applications related to virtual reality, game controlling, and brain state monitoring.
These applications can be downloaded by accessing their web site.
The Neurosky Mind Set [46] is a wireless headset added with an EEG signal acquisition unit.
This headset is equipped with earphones and a microphone, and a single dry-contact elec‐
trode for measuring the user’s EEG signals on the user’s forehead. Along with the capability
of raw EEG recording, the Mind Set has the patented algorithm, named as eSense [47]. This
algorithm interprets the user’s mental states such as attention and meditation. These transla‐
tions are estimated by monitoring the power levels in specific frequency bands such as al‐
pha, beta and theta rhythms. The monitoring values of the brain state are utilized for
making a control commands in applications.
The MyndPlay and the PLX devices are released with their own model of wireless BCI sys‐
tems. MyndPlay Brainband [50] and PLX devices XWave [49] headset utilizes the ThinkGear
Application-Specific Integrated Circuit (ASIC) module [48]. This module, designed by Neu‐
rosky, is a system-on-chip integrated circuit equipped with signal acquisition components.
These devices come in a headset or a harness style. They have supported the control of vari‐
ous applications such as media player, cognitive state visualization, and arcade games for
PC and mobile devices.
OCZ technology, a PC component manufacturer such as solid-state drives (SSD) and power
supplies, has released a game controller by utilizing an wireless BCI technology. The name
of this controller is Neural Impulse Actuator (NIA) [51]. Using NIA, the users can control a
PC game by translating facial expressions, eye movements, and concentrated brainwave ac‐
tivity, instead of using traditional input devices such as a keyboard and a mouse. This de‐
vice now supports various PC games including shooting, role playing, virtual worlds, and
racing.
3.3. Wireless BCI systems for research uses
Wireless BCI systems have many advantages, such as freedom of user’s postures and con‐
venient installation. Therefore, wireless BCI systems are useful in the research field as well.
Some companies have been involved in research with universities and research institutes to
develop wireless BCI systems for research uses. They include, but not limited to, Advanced
Brain Monitoring, Quasar, Starlab and Guger technologies (G.tec). In this subsection, we re‐
view their wireless BCI systems, as shown in Figure 6.
Advanced Brain Monitoring has recently released the B-Alert X series wireless EEG systems
[52] for mobile neurophysiological data acquisition and analysis. These systems include
three models that have different numbers of channels, i.e., 4, 10, and 24. Among these mod‐
els, the B-Alert X24 system is equipped with 24 channel electrodes for biopotential measure‐
ments, such as EEG, Electrocardiogram (ECG), Electromyogram (EMG), and
Electrooculogram (EOG). This system measures and delivers real-time EEG signals via a
Bluetooth connection. The system provides more than 8 hours of operation time and less
than 10 minutes of installation time. Also, this system supports a variety of applications
such as drowsiness, cognitive workload, and neuro-dynamics monitoring.

229

230

Brain-Computer Interface Systems – Recent Progress and Future Prospects

a

b

c

Figure 6. Pictures of Wireless BCI systems for research use: (a) Advanced Brain Monitoring B-Alert X24 system [52], (b)
Quasar DSI 10/20 system [53], (c) Starlab Enobio system [54].

Quasar [53] has developed and released a wireless BCI solution. This solution includes Dry
Sensor Interface (DSI) 10/20, wireless Data Acquisition (DAQ), and a suite of software of its
own. DSI 10/20 is a wireless BCI headset which is equipped with up to 21 EEG sensors. The
EEG sensors are dry electrodes and provide high input impedance good for measuring the
high fidelity EEG signals. Wireless DAQ is a peripheral device for signal transmission and
onboard recording using a flash memory. QStreamer is a suite of software which contains
data acquisition algorithms as well as different cognitive state classification algorithms. The
classification algorithms estimate user’s mental states in terms of workload, engagement,
and fatigue.
Enobio [54] is a wireless EEG acquisition device developed by Starlab. This device is a cap
style with light weight feature (only 65g). It has multiple channels, supporting an option of 8
or 20 channels in particular; each is equipped with a dry electrode. It can operate up to 16
hours long using a rechargeable Lithium Polymer battery. It is connected with a computer
via a Bluetooth connection. A bundle software provides real time visualization of EEG sig‐
nals such as power spectrum and raw signal monitoring. This system has been applied to
various applications associated with medical, neurofeedback, and cognitive state monitor‐
ing.
Guger technologies (G.tec) is a medical engineering company which provides comprehen‐
sive BCI solutions. This company has released a mobile biopotential acquisition system
named as g.MOBIlab+ [55]. This system is available in two different modes: the 8 channel
EEG acquisition mode and the multi-modal acquisition mode. In the multi-modal acquisi‐
tion mode, this system can measure the EEG signals with other physiological signals such as
Electrocardiogram (ECG), Electromyogram (EMG), and Electrooculogram (EOG). With a
Bluetooth connection, it operates up to 100 hours using four AA batteries.

Review of Wireless Brain-Computer Interface Systems
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/56436

4. Challenges and future research directions for wireless BCI systems
Many wireless BCI systems have already been developed for consumers or research uses,
and they are attracting public attention. However, only limited areas of applications, such as
medical and entertainment applications, have taken advantages of these systems so far.
Wireless BCI systems have not yet fully made their way into our life. In this section, we aim
to analyze the current challenges the wireless BCI systems research must face, and discuss a
few possible future research directions to enable wireless BCI systems to be practically uti‐
lized in a much wider scale.
4.1. Challenges in wireless BCI systems research
Wireless BCI systems currently face the following problems: 1) insufficiency in features con‐
trollable by EEG signals, 2) deficiency in accuracy in EEG signal interpretation, and 3) lack
of killer applications.
First, the available features of EEG signals are limited to be utilized for increasing the speed
and accuracy of brain computer communications. The EEG signals are not easy for a user to
freely generate in user’s own intension. It means that the controllable dimension of EEG sig‐
nals is not large. In the EEG-based BCI systems, sensorimotor rhythms (SMRs), visual
evoked potentials (VEPs) and brain rhythms which generated by particular cognitive states
are used as controllable features. Among these features, SMRs usually require long-term
training to be adopted in control of BCI applications. Without enough training, the accuracy
of SMR-based BCI is usually very low. Also, VEPs cannot be generated without visual stim‐
ulations. Therefore, among the wireless BCI systems on scientific articles and commercial
products, many BCI systems have utilized the specific brain rhythms generated under the
specific cognitive states of users [27][46][49][50][51], such as attention and relaxation, as con‐
trollable features of EEG signals. The users can control an application by intentionally
changing their own cognitive state. For example, in [27], the users can control the direction
of arrows in an archery game, using a wireless BCI system. The direction of arrows is deter‐
mined from the quantification of the focusing intensity of the users. As can be seen here, the
intensity level is only single dimensional; the degree of control the users can issue cannot
but be limited. This limitation in the control dimension comes with easiness in adapting to a
program within a short learning time, but it plays a limiting role as well. Consequently, the
applications BCI systems can be applied are limited as well. To remedy this limitation, some
research groups have focused on discovering other controllable EEG features. One example
is to use detection of various cognitive states, such as drowsiness and alertness [20][29][30]
[32]. With all these efforts, however, the number of features that can be obtained is still con‐
sidered very limited. Namely, wireless BCI systems today can interpret only simple mas‐
sages from user’s intensions.
Second, current BCI systems are not reliable enough to be used in accuracy-critical applica‐
tions, such as vehicle controls and data telecommunications. To utilize them in a wide range
of applications, improving the accuracy of brain computer communication is one of most
important issues. In wireless BCI systems, many features of the EEG signals, such as cogni‐

231

232

Brain-Computer Interface Systems – Recent Progress and Future Prospects

tive states, event related potentials (ERPs) in P300, and steady-state visual evoked potentials
(SSVEP), are used for BCI based controls. These features are easily affected by various noise
and inference sources. For example, in ambulatory applications, such as the workload moni‐
toring [13], a user may need to wear a wireless EEG acquisition device for a long period of
time and may need to be able to move around. In such a situation, the accuracy of applica‐
tions can easily decline due to vibrations and noises. Furthermore, because every person has
somewhat different characteristics in EEG features, training to find the best feature set
should be carried out in the individual basis for achieving higher accuracy. For these rea‐
sons, most commercial wireless BCI systems are developed for less accuracy-critical applica‐
tions such as computer games and home appliances.
Third, killer applications for wireless BCI systems are needed. In wireless BCI systems, a
killer application can be said to be a useful application which influenced on the life of an
average person. What BCI system provides ultimately is a human computer interface. But it
is not the only form that human can interact with the computer. Speech recognition and
hand-motion recognition are, for example, other easier means perhaps with faster and more
accurate performance than a BCI can provide. In commercial wireless BCI systems, applica‐
tions for game and utility control have been mostly developed for entertainment uses. In
these applications, it is possible to choose an alternative control interface, such as speech rec‐
ognition and hand motion, instead of the EEG signals for application controls. Thus, these
applications are not a killer application. In the research field, valuable applications related to
smart living environment [29][30][32], drowsiness detection [15][19][20][32], and communi‐
cations [28] have been developed for wireless BCI systems, but they are still not suitable due
to lack of sufficient field verifications. Therefore, identification of a killer application still re‐
mains to be an urgently needed research topic for wireless BCI systems to thrive.
4.2. Future research directions for wireless BCI systems
Future research on wireless BCI systems should take the following directions: 1) hybrid sig‐
nal acquisition and 2) development of adaptive classification algorithms.
First, hybrid signal acquisition is needed for higher accuracy and fast brain computer inter‐
action. Hybrid signal acquisition through simultaneous recording of multiple brain signals
has been shown to ensure higher accuracy thanks to complementary analysis of user’s moti‐
vations. There are two different ways to do a hybrid signal acquisition we wish to discuss
here. The first is utilizing other biopotential measurements, such as Electrocardiogram
(ECG), Electromyogram (EMG), and Electrooculogram (EOG). This approach is already em‐
ployed in commercial wireless BCI systems such as Emotiv’s EPOC system, OCZ technolo‐
gy’s Neural Impulse Actuator, and Advanced Brain Monitoring’s B-Alert X series. With
these additional physiological signal measurements, the users can use not only brain waves
but also facial expressions and eye movements. The second is utilizing the multiple features
among the available EEG features, such as sensorimotor rhythms (SMRs), P300, and steadystate visual evoked potentials (SSVEP) simultaneously. Most commercial wireless BCI sys‐
tems use only the cognitive states as the controllable feature of wireless BCI systems. If
wireless BCI systems employ additional features of EEG signals which are not generated by

Review of Wireless Brain-Computer Interface Systems
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/56436

the same motivation, the accuracy of the applications will be improved by adoption of the
complementary classification. Recently, Brunner et al. [56] have published a paper on a hy‐
brid BCI. In that paper, a hybrid approach using both the event-related desynchronization
(ERD) and the SSVEP was experimentally found to provide better accuracy with little or no
training.
Second, adaptive algorithms are needed to reduce training time and achieve higher accura‐
cy. Because every person has a unique set of their own EEG characteristics, most applica‐
tions require training procedures for learning the user’s EEG patterns. However, the EEG
patterns typically change continuously affected by many factors such as the mental state of
the users and the circumstance surrounding the users. Furthermore, long-term training can
make the users tired and induce degradation in accuracy. For these reasons, the reduction of
training in applications is an important issue in BCI researches. To reduce trainings, addi‐
tional signal processing schemes likes adaptive classification algorithms can be added to BCI
systems. Because these schemes can discern changes in EEG features, the accuracy of appli‐
cations can be improved. In the BCI research field, some researchers have already studied
adaptive classification. Vidaurre et al. have published papers about adaptive discriminant
analysis [57][58]. This algorithm is based on quadratic discriminant analysis (QDA) and line‐
ar discriminant analysis (LDA). Using this algorithm, they have shown that accuracy can be
improved greatly in their own BCI experiments built on imagery motor movements.

5. Conclusion
BCI is a useful technology for people with disabilities as it can offer them an additional
means of communication, and reinstate a damaged motor control function. Recently, BCI
has started its way to grab the attention of the general public as well because this technology
has shown the possibility of a new type of user experience. For example, drowsiness detec‐
tion can be applied to car drivers for preventing traffic accidents. And, real time monitoring
of bio-potential signals is useful for diagnosis of patients who have brain diseases such as
epilepsy and Alzheimer’s disease. To use BCI systems in real-life applications on a daily ba‐
sis, portable, wearable wireless BCI systems are critical, instead of bulky and cumbersome
wired BCI systems. Recently, several wireless BCI systems have been introduced by leading
research groups and commercial companies.
In this book chapter, we have reviewed the recent research trends in the development of
wireless BCI systems. Various research groups have focused on biosensors, user friendly
system designs, and more influential applications. Also, there are a few companies which
have developed and released wireless BCI systems into that market, with some commercial
successes. Nevertheless, research challenges, such as the insufficiency in controllable fea‐
tures, the deficiency in BCI’s control accuracy, and the lack of killer applications are still the
issues remained to be resolved. The first two challenges are technical issues which will be
resolved in time with continuous research efforts. When good wireless BCI systems which
provide high-fidelity data acquisition and fast onboard signal processing are available at
low cost, they will surely promote the creation of very useful real-life applications.

233

234

Brain-Computer Interface Systems – Recent Progress and Future Prospects

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded
by the Korean government (MEST) (Do-Yak Research Program, No. 2012-0005656)

Author details
Seungchan Lee, Younghak Shin, Soogil Woo, Kiseon Kim and Heung-No Lee*
*Address all correspondence to: heungno@gist.ac.kr, seungchan@gist.ac.kr
Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology(GIST), Cheomdan-gwagiro, Buk-gu, Gwangju,
Republic of Korea

References
[1] Emil S Valchinov and Nicolas E Pallikarakis, “An active electrode for biopotential re‐
cording from small localized bio-sources,” BioMedical Engineering Online, Vol. 3,
Iss. 1, 2004.
[2] Lun-De Liao, I-Jan Wang, Sheng-Fu Chen, Jyh-Yeong Chang and Chin-Teng Lin,
“Design, Fabrication and Experimental Validation of a Novel Dry-Contact Sensor for
Measuring Electroencephalography Signals without Skin Preparation,” Sensors, Vol.
11, Iss. 6, pp. 5819-5834, 2011.
[3] Cristian Grozea1, Catalin D. Voinescu, and Siamac Fazli, “Bristle-sensors - Low-cost
Flexible Passive Dry EEG Electrodes for Neurofeedback and BCI Applications,” Jour‐
nal of Neural Engineering, Vol. 8, Iss. 2, 2011.
[4] Thomas J. Sullivan, Stephen R. Deiss, and Gert Cauwenberghs, “A Low-Noise, NonContact EEG/ECG Sensor,” Biomedical Circuits and Systems Conference, pp. 154 –
157, 2007.
[5] Yu Mike Chi, Yu-Te Wang, Yijun Wang, Christoph Maier, Tzyy-Ping Jung, and Gert
Cauwenberghs, “Dry and Noncontact EEG Sensors for Mobile Brain–Computer In‐
terfaces,” IEEE Trans. on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, Vol. 20,
No. 2, 2012.
[6] Nuno Sérgio Diasa, João Paulo Carmo, Paulo Mateus Mendes, José Higino Correiac,
“Wireless instrumentation system based on dry electrodes for acquiring EEG sig‐
nals,” Medical Engineering & Physics, Vol. 34, pp. 972-981,
[7] Giulio Ruffini, Stephen Dunne, Esteve Farrés, Ívan Cester, Paul C. P. Watts, S. Ravi P.
Silva, Carles Grau, Lluís Fuentemilla, Josep Marco-Pallarés and Bjorn Vandecasteele,

Review of Wireless Brain-Computer Interface Systems
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/56436

“ENOBIO dry electrophysiology electrode; first human trial plus wireless electrode
system,” 29th IEEE EMBS, pp. 6689 – 6693, 2007.
[8] Gaetano Gargiulo, Rafael A. Calvo, Paolo Bifulco, Mario Cesarelli, Craig Jin, Armin
Mohamed, André van Schaik, “A new EEG recording system for passive dry electro‐
des,” Clinical Neurophysiology, Vol. 121, pp. 686–693, 2010.
[9] Gaetano Gargiulo, Paolo Bifulco, Rafael A. Calvo, Mario Cesarelli, Craig Jin and An‐
dré van Schaik, “A mobile EEG system with dry electrodes,” BioCAS, pp. 273 – 276,
2008.
[10] Vadim V. Nikulin, Jewgeni Kegeles, Gabriel Curio, “Miniaturized electroencephalo‐
graphic scalp electrode for optimal wearing comfort,” Clinical Neurophysiology,
Vol. 121, Iss. 7, 2010.
[11] Robert Matthews, Neil J. McDonald, Paul Hervieux, Peter J. Turner, and Martin A.
Steindorf, “A Wearable Physiological Sensor Suite for Unobtrusive Monitoring of
Physiological and Cognitive State,” 29th IEEE EMBS, pp. 5276 – 5281, 2007.
[12] Robert Matthews, Neil J. McDonald, Harini Anumula, Jamison Woodward, Peter J.
Turner, Martin A. Steindorf, Kaichun Chang, and Joseph M. Pendleton, “Novel Hy‐
brid Bioelectrodes for Ambulatory Zero-Prep EEG Measurements Using Multi-chan‐
nel Wireless EEG System,” Foundations of Augmented Cognition Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, Vol. 4565, pp. 137-146, 2007.
[13] R. Matthews, P.J. Turner, N. J. McDonald, K. Ermolaev, T. Mc Manus, R.A. Shelby,
and M. Steindorf, “Real Time Workload Classification from an Ambulatory Wireless
EEG System Using Hybrid EEG Electrodes,” 30th IEEE EMBS, pp. 5871-587, 2008.
[14] Thomas J. Sullivan, Stephen R. Deiss, Tzyy-Ping Jung, Gert Cauwenberghs, “A BrainMachine Interface Using Dry-Contact, Low-Noise EEG Sensors,” IEEE ISCAS, pp.
1986-1989, 2008.
[15] Jin-Chern Chiou, Li-Wei Ko, Chin-Teng Lin, Chao-Ting Hong, Tzyy-Ping Jung,
Sheng-Fu Liang and Jong-Liang Jeng, “Using Novel MEMS EEG Sensors in Detecting
Drowsiness Application,” IEEE BioCAS, pp. 33-36, 2006.
[16] Lindsay Brown, Jef van de Molengraft, Refet Firat Yazicioglu, Tom Torfs, Julien Pen‐
ders and Chris Van Hoof, “A low-power, wireless, 8-channel EEG monitoring head‐
set,” 32nd IEEE EMBS, pp. 4197-4200, 2010.
[17] Jiawei Xu, Refet Firat Yazicioglu, Bernard Grundlehner, Pieter Harpe, Kofi A. A. Ma‐
kinwa, and Chris Van Hoof, “A 160uW 8-Channel Active Electrode System for EEG
Monitoring,” IEEE Trans. on Biomedical Circuit and system, Vol. 5, No. 6, 2011.
[18] Lun-De Liao, I-Jan Wang, Che-Jui Chang, Bor-Shyh Lin, Chin-Teng Lin, and Kevin C.
Tseng, “Human Cognitive Application by Using Wearable Mobile Brain Computer
Interface,” TENCON, pp. 346-351, 2010.

235

236

Brain-Computer Interface Systems – Recent Progress and Future Prospects

[19] Chin-Teng Lin, Yu-Chieh Chen, Teng-Yi Huang, Tien-Ting Chiu, Li-Wei Ko, ShengFu Liang, Hung-Yi Hsieh, Shang-Hwa Hsu, and Jeng-Ren Duann, “Development of
Wireless Brain Computer Interface with Embedded Multitask Scheduling and its Ap‐
plication on Real-Time Driver’s Drowsiness Detection and Warning,” IEEE Trans. on
Biomedical Engineering, Vol. 55, No. 5, 2008.
[20] Chin-Teng Lin, Che-Jui Chang, Bor-Shyh Lin, Shao-Hang Hung, Chih-Feng Chao,
and I-Jan Wang, “A Real-Time Wireless Brain–Computer Interface System for
Drowsiness Detection,” IEEE Trans. on Biomedical Circuit and system, pp. 214 – 222,
2010.
[21] Chin-Teng Lin, Li-Wei Ko, Jin-Chern Chiou, Jeng-Ren Duann, Ruey-Song Huang,
Sheng-Fu Liang, Tzai-Wen Chiu, and Tzyy-Ping Jung, “Noninvasive Neural Prosthe‐
ses Using Mobile and Wireless EEG,” Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 96, No. 7, July
2008.
[22] Chin-Teng Lin, Li-Wei Ko, Che-Jui Chang, Yu-Te Wang, Chia-Hsin Chung, Fu-Shu
Yang, Jeng-Ren Duann, Tzyy-Ping Jung, and Jin-Chern Chiou, “Wearable and Wire‐
less Brain-Computer Interface and Its Applications,” HCII 2009, pp. 741–748, 2009.
[23] Thorsten Oliver Zander, Moritz Lehne, Klas Ihme, Sabine Jatzev, Joao Correia, Chris‐
tian Kothe, Bernd Picht and Femke Nijboer, “A dry EEG-system for scientific re‐
search and brain-computer interfaces,” Frontiers in Neuroscience, Vol. 5, 2011.
[24] Robert Lin, Ren-Guey Lee, Chwan-Lu Tseng, Yan-Fa Wu, Joe-Air Jiang, “Design and
Implementation of Wireless Multi-Channel EEG Recording System and Study Of
EEG Clustering Method,” Biomedical Engineering applications Basis & Communica‐
tions, Vol. 18 No. 6, 2006.
[25] Luca Piccini, Sergio Parini, Luca Maggi and Giuseppe Andreoni, “A Wearable Home
BCI system: preliminary results with SSVEP protocol,” 27th IEEE EMBS, pp. 5384 –
5387, 2005.
[26] Alexandre Ribeiro, António Sirgado, João Aperta, Ana Lopes, Jorge Guilherme, Pe‐
dro Correia, Gabriel Pires and Urbano Nunes, “A Low-Cost EEG Stand-Alone Device
For Brain Computer Interface,” BIODEVICES, pp. 430-433, 2009.
[27] Lun-De Liao, Chi-Yu Chen, I-Jan Wang, Sheng-Fu Chen, Shih-Yu Li, Bo-Wei Chen,
Jyh-Yeong Chang and Chin-Teng Lin, “Gaming control using a wearable and wire‐
less EEG-based brain-computer interface device with novel dry foam-based sensors,”
Journal of Neuro Engineering and Rehabilitation, Vol.9 No.5, 2012.
[28] Yu-Te Wang, Yijun Wang and Tzyy-Ping Jung, “A cell-phone-based brain–computer
interface for communication in daily life,” Journal of Neural Engineering, Vol.8, 2011.
[29] Chin-Teng Lin, Fu-Chang Lin, Shi-An Chen, Shao-Wei Lu, Te-Chi Chen, Li-Wei Ko,
“EEG-based Brain-computer Interface for Smart Living Environmental Auto-adjust‐

Review of Wireless Brain-Computer Interface Systems
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/56436

ment,” Journal of Medical and Biological Engineering, Vol. 30, Iss. 4, pp. 237-245,
2010.
[30] Chin-Teng Lin, Bor-Shyh Lin, Fu-Chang Lin, and Che-Jui Chang, “Brain Computer
Interface-Based Smart Living Environmental Auto-Adjustment Control System in
UPnP Home Networking,” IEEE Systems Journal, 2012.
[31] Guger C, Holzner C, Grönegress C, Edlinger G, Slater M, “Control of a Smart Home
with a Brain-Computer Interface,” 4th International Brain-Computer Interface Work‐
shop and Training Course, 2008.
[32] Shao-Hang Hung, Che-Jui Chang, Chih-Feng Chao, I-Jan Wang, Chin-Teng Lin, Borshyh Lin, “Development of Real-time Wireless Brain Computer Interface for Drowsi‐
ness Detection,” ISCAS 2010, pp. 1380-1383, 2010.
[33] Ryan C. N. D’Arcy, Sujoy Ghosh Hajra, Careesa Liu, Lauren D. Sculthorpe, and Don‐
ald F. Weaver, “Towards Brain First-Aid: A Diagnostic Device for Conscious Aware‐
ness,” IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, Vol. 58, No. 3, March 2011.
[34] http://www.ti.com/product/ads1298
[35] http://www.microchip.com/pagehandler/en-us/family/16bit/architecture/pic24f.html
[36] http://www.microchip.com/pagehandler/en-us/family/16bit/architecture/
dspic33f.html
[37] http://www.ti.com/lsds/ti/microcontroller/16-bit_msp430/overview.page
[38] http://emotiv.com/store/hardware/epoc-bci/epoc-neuroheadset/
[39] Gert Pfurtschellera, Christa Neuper, “Motor imagery activates primary sensorimotor
areas,” Neuroscience Letters, Vol. 239, pp. 65-68, 1997.
[40] Simon P. Levine, Jane E. Huggins, Spencer L. BeMent, Ramesh K. Kushwaha, Lori A.
Schuh, Mitchell M. Rohde, Erasmo A. Passaro, Donald A. Ross, Kost V. Elisevich,
and Brien J. Smith, “A direct brain interface based on event-related potentials,” IEEE
Trans. on Rehabilitation Engineering, Vol. 8, Iss. 2, pp. 180-185, 2000.
[41] Emanuel Donchin, Kevin M. Spencer, and Ranjith Wijesinghe, “The mental prosthe‐
sis: assessing the speed of a P300-based brain-computer interface,” IEEE Trans. on
Rehabilitation Engineering, Vol. 8, Iss. 2, pp. 174-179, 2000.
[42] Ming Cheng, Xiaorong Gao, Shangkai Gao, and Dingfeng Xu, “Design and imple‐
mentation of a brain-computer interface with high transfer rates,” IEEE Trans. on Bi‐
omedical Engineering, Vol. 49, Iss. 10, pp. 1181-1186, 2002.
[43] Carmen Vidaurre, Benjamin Blankertz, “Towards a Cure for BCI Illiteracy,” Brain
Topography, Vol. 23, Iss. 2, pp. 194-198, 2010.

237

238

Brain-Computer Interface Systems – Recent Progress and Future Prospects

[44] Ling Guo, Daniel Rivero, Alejandro Pazos, “Epileptic seizure detection using multi‐
wavelet transform based approximate entropy and artificial neural networks,” Jour‐
nal of Neuroscience Methods, Vol. 193, pp.156-163, 2010.
[45] F. Galán, M. Nuttinc, E. Lewa, P.W. Ferreza, G. Vanackerc, J. Philipsc, J. del R. Mill‐
án, “A brain-actuated wheelchair: Asynchronous and non-invasive Brain–computer
interfaces for continuous control of robots,” IEEE Trans. on Rehabilitation Engineer‐
ing, Vol. 8, Iss. 4, pp. 441-446, 2000.
[46] http://www.neurosky.com/Products/MindSet.aspx
[47] http://developer.neurosky.com/docs/doku.php?id=esenses_tm
[48] http://www.neurosky.com/Products/ThinkGearAM.aspx
[49] http://www.plxdevices.com/product_info.php?id=XWAVESONIC
[50] http://myndplay.com/products.php?cat=1
[51] http://www.ocztechnology.com/nia-game-controller.html
[52] http://advancedbrainmonitoring.com/neurotechnology/systems/
[53] http://www.quasarusa.com/
[54] http://neuroelectrics.com/enobio
[55] http://www.gtec.at/Products/Hardware-and-Accessories/g.MOBIlab-Specs-Features
[56] C Brunner, B Z Allison, C Altstätter and C Neuper, “A comparison of three brain–
computer interfaces based on event-related desynchronization, steady state visual
evoked potentials, or a hybrid approach using both signals,” Journal of Neural Engi‐
neering, Vol. 8, 2011.
[57] C. Vidaurre, A. Schlögl, R. Cabeza, R. Scherer, and G. Pfurtscheller, “A Fully On-Line
Adaptive BCI,” IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, Vol. 53, No. 6, 2006.
[58] C. Vidaurre, A. Schlögl, R. Cabeza, R. Scherer, and G. Pfurtscheller, “Study of OnLine Adaptive Discriminant Analysis for EEG-Based Brain Computer Interfaces,”
IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, Vol. 54, No. 3, 2007.

