We are IntechOpen,
the world’s leading publisher of
Open Access books
Built by scientists, for scientists

3,500

108,000

1.7 M

Open access books available

International authors and editors

Downloads

Our authors are among the

151

TOP 1%

12.2%

Countries delivered to

most cited scientists

Contributors from top 500 universities

Selection of our books indexed in the Book Citation Index
in Web of Science™ Core Collection (BKCI)

Interested in publishing with us?
Contact book.department@intechopen.com
Numbers displayed above are based on latest data collected.
For more information visit www.intechopen.com

Chapter 8

Brain Computer Interfaces for Cerebral Palsy
Pedro Ponce, Arturo Molina, David C. Balderas and
Dimitra Grammatikou
Additional information is available at the end of the chapter
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/57084

. Introduction
Cerebral Palsy CP is a group of disorders that affect movement and posture, causing activity
limitation to the person who suffers from it. It is caused by a lesion that occurred in the
developing brain, usually before birth but also during or after. Cerebral palsy manifests itself
early in life, during infancy or preschool years with delayed or aberrant motor progress and
it is non-progressive, which means that at the time of the diagnosis, the disturbance that incited
the cephalic lesion is no longer active. “t the moment there is no cure for cerebral palsy ”ax
.
Cerebral Palsy is a condition which affects approximately out of every
newborns. The
total number of children with cerebral palsy has remained stable since
, but at the same
time there has been a consistent rise in the risk of cerebral palsy associated with preterm infants
Thornhill
. Since it was first reported by Little in
, it has been widely documented
and it has attracted research interest.
“ccording to the World Health Organization WHO , more than one billion people of the
world’s population lives with a disability and this number is rising as the population grows,
the increase of chronic health conditions, and the life expectancy becomes higher World report
on disability,
.
There are

possibilities to restore function

• Using remaining muscular pathways as substitute for paralyzed muscles. The use of eye or
hand movement can give control over communication devices.
• Using EMG, above the level of lesion, as control for paralyzed muscles.
• Provide the brain with a new form of communication and control that uses no muscular
paths.

© 2014 The Author(s). Licensee InTech. This chapter is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

246

Cerebral Palsy - Challenges for the Future

Despite the motor limitations of the physically disabled, most of the time the brain activity
remains intact. ”rain-Computer Interfaces ”CI are communication devices that translate
signals from the brain or nervous system e.g. Electroencephalogram EEG into electrical
signals For the control of devices, allowing people to regain some form of control and regain
interaction with the environment Rao
, Wolpaw
. Even though, ”CIs where initially
developed as assistive devices for people with severe neuromuscular disorders, such as brain
or spinal cord injury, cerebral palsy, muscular dystrophies, multiple sclerosis, and numerous
other conditions the increasing interest in non-medical application looking for an improved
technology for Human-Computer Interaction HCI such as exoskeletons, robot or wheelchair
control, or augmented reality Lotte
, has generated clinical, scientific and commercial
interest in the use of ”CI’s for an augmentative communication and control technology.

. Examples of success
Despite, that ”CIs have shown their possibility as communication and control device through
spelling devices Donchin
, used as control of prosthesis Tenore
, web browsing
Mugler
, for control in a virtual reality environment Lotte
and for entertainment
Rao
, there are still more possible applications and room for improvement, using
combined technology e.g. Hybrid ”CIs , improving or creating new classification algorithms,
and better recording technology. In this chapter we give a brief description of the recording
technology, pattern selection, current classification algorithms used for ”CI and the state of
the art as well as future technology.

Figure 1. Basic components of a BCI. The image illustrates the map between the input and output through the trans‐
lating algorithm. Signals are acquired by electrodes and then translated into a control signal for an external device
(e.g. wheelchair, neuroprosthesis or exoskeleton) using a sequence of processing steps.

Brain Computer Interfaces for Cerebral Palsy
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/57084

. Evaluation and classification
. . Neuromotor examination of neonates and infants
The diagnosis of CP is made largely through clinical observations. The natal history is of vital
importance for the identification of reasons for concern and the determination of the cases
which merit closer monitoring. Failure to meet gross motor milestones is often the initial
concern of parents. Significantly delayed motor milestones, persistence of primitive reflexes,
and abnormal postural reactions are additional reasons for concern and referral to a neurolo‐
gist or expert in neurodevelopment for evaluation. Clusters of symptoms or evolving abnormal
movement patterns may be indications of CP and thus should be explored further with
diagnostic instruments.
Instruments like the Hammersmith Neurological Examination Dubowitz
, the “miel
Tison Neurological “ssessment Tison
or the INF“NI” Infant Neurological Interna‐
tional ”attery for the “ssessment of Neurological Integrity in Infancy Ellison
have
proven extremely valuable in the earlier identification of the difficulties that at-risk neonates
and, as a result, a better targeted, early intervention.
These instruments offer a neurological or neuromotor exploration of the neonate and the
infant, assessing the existence of primitive reflexes, the automatic system or any other
involuntary movements, that appear in normal infants and should be integrated by the th
month of life. Their persistence past that age is a reflection of abnormalities in terms of control
in the central nervous system and may indicate cerebral palsy. The persistence of primitive
reflexes causes changes in muscle tone and the position of limbs, which makes it interfere with
the development of voluntary motor movements by causing changes in muscle tone and the
position of the limbs. Failure to develop protective reflexes such as the parachute response or
an asymmetrical response is also taken into consideration.
The instruments also take into consideration the age when the infant met the motor milestones
head control, sitting, voluntary grasp, ability to kick, rolling, crawling, standing and walking
and may include some items of attention, sensory function or self regulation, as well as muscle
tone and posture are considered.

. Nature and typology of the motor disorder
Cerebral Palsy is a symptom complex with various types and degrees of motor impairment.
Depending on the area of the brain that has been affected, according to the SCPE Elison P
, SCPE working group
we may identify the predominant motor characteristics of
the condition as of three types Spastic, dyskinetic and ataxic.
Spastic CP results from defects or damage occurring in the brain's corticospinal pathways, also
described as upper motor neuron damage. Spastic CP accounts for almost % of all cases of
CP, with cognitive impairments seen in approximately % of the cases with CP SCPE

247

248

Cerebral Palsy - Challenges for the Future

working group
, Palisano
. “lthough increased , as well as muscle tone is the
predominant feature observed, hyperreflexia, clonus, extensor ”abinski response, and
persistent primitive reflexes are commonly seen.
Dyskinetic and ataxic CP are caused by damage to nerve cells outside of the pyramidal tracts
in the basal ganglia or the cerebellum. Dyskinetic CP is then further divided into athetoid and
dystonic. It accounts for % to % of all cases of CP, with dyskinetic accounting for % to
% and ataxic approximately %. The resulting disability is global with abnormal tone
regulation, postural control, and coordination SCPE Working Group, Palisano
It is actually quite common to see many different combinations of types of CP, since this
depends on the area of brain damage the types overlap very frequently, which can make it
very difficult to precisely label the resulting disability within the typical subtypes. “s a result,
when not one type dominates we make reference to a mixed category.

. Functional motor abilities
What is of particular interest for the parents of the children affected is evaluating the functional
consequences of the condition. The Gross Motor Function Classification System GMFCS
Eliasson
was developed as an evaluation tool in order to offer a prognosis or to assess
differences in motor functions after an intervention. It recognizes motor function as dependent
on age due to the expected change of the developing child. It separates clusters of periods - ,
- , - and - years of age .
Degree of

Gross Motor Function

Manual Ability Classification System

functionality

Classification System (GMFCS)

(MACS)

Level I

Child´s ability to walk is not affected

Child handles objects easily and
successfully

Level II

Child´s ability to walk is slightly affected

Child handles objects with somewhat
reduced quality

Level III

Child walks with assistive device

Child handles objects with difficulty

Level IV

Limited self-mobility with assistive device

Child handles only a few, adapted objects

Level V

No self-mobility

Child cannot handle objects

Table 1. Classification of gross motor function and manual ability in children with cerebral palsy.

In this chapter we have cited the classification of a child´s gross motor function between and
years of age, which is divided into five levels, based on functional mobility or activity
limitation. Particular emphasis is made on the function of sitting and walking. Children in
level I are the most independent motor function and children in Level V are the least
according to the Gross Motor Function Classification System for Cerebral Palsy.

Brain Computer Interfaces for Cerebral Palsy
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/57084

The Manual “bility Classification System for Children with Cerebral Palsy M“CS ”ottcher
is widely used to evaluate and classify how children with cerebral palsy use their hands
to handle objects in daily activities. Like the Gross Motor Function Classification System,
M“CS describes five levels. The levels are based on the children’s self-initiated ability to handle
objects and their need for assistance or adaptation to perform manual activities in everyday
life.

. Accompanying impairments
“ child with cerebral palsy often has other conditions related to developmental brain abnor‐
malities, such as intellectual disabilities. “lmost % of children with CP have an average
intelligence, % have an intelligence slightly lower than average borderline intelligence . The
rest % its not mentioned if its more inteligent or not than average. Most patients that have
spastic tetraparetic, discinetic and ataxic have a severe mental discapacity SCPE Working
Group
There have been studies that prove that children with CP with average intelligence have
attentional deficits or problems with the executive functions, which may partially account for
the behavioral problems that sometimes present. Guzzetta
They might have deficits in
visioperceptive functioning. The child has difficulties recognizing the spatial relations between
objects, as well as between objects and his own body. This results frequently in a constructive
dyspraxia. The saccadic movement of the eye to focus on an object that appears periferically
at the previous point of focus are slow and dyspraxic, which constitutes an added difficulty
in order to achieve the perceptive integration. The proprioceptive-visual integration of the
parietal lobe is necessary in order to orient the movements and postures of the upper limbs to
reach for and manipulate the surrounding objects and starting the proceeding automatic
movement that experience and repetition offers. These deficits are completely independent
from the vision problems that may coexist Guzzetta
.
Language problems are also common and their severity depends on the timing that the lesion
took place, in the prelinguistic period or later, when the linguistic function has already started
to form.

. Implications for everyday life
“lthough there are many compelling reasons to give the diagnosis as early as possible parents
frustration of handling a child with abnormal tone such as feeding, sleep, and temperament
problems, plan in advance for long-term treatments and management options that may be
needed by the child, possible increased insurance benefits and in some cases federal assistance,
benefits that come from an early intervention the diagnosis should not be formally made until
the second year of age. For the SCPE in Europe minimum age of years old is required to make

249

250

Cerebral Palsy - Challenges for the Future

a diagnosis so that transitory alterations of neurodevelopment or degenerative diseases may
not be confused with CP SCPE Working Group
.
The diagnosis has an impact on the life of the family and, of course, the child. The major issue
of concern is, for most parents, walking. Once confronted with the diagnosis, the first question
that parents ask their child´s health care specialist if the child is going to walk. Children will
CP will experience some degree of difficulty with movement. This can range from problems
like clumsiness that does not disrupt everyday life activities all the way to difficulties with
walking. The child may move slowly, may need to use a walking aid or a wheelchair.
Simple activities like dressing, bathing, eating can be a real challenge to the child with CP and
their family. The activities can take longer, especially if the child needs more assistance,
physical help or specialized equipment.
Language problems are common among children with CP. Children may have difficulties with
both verbal and non verbal aspects of language. The expression and understanding of the
formal aspects of language can be affected for example articulation or denomination which
may eventually lead to problems with reading and writing or even interfere with the child´s
ability to communicate verbally. The other aspect of language that can be impaired is prag‐
matics, which refers to the ability to place words in the context of one´s own mind and the
interlocutor´s, which creates problems in the child´s social adjustment.

. Attentional processes
The aim is for every child with CP to achieve their potential. Depending on the child´s
individual characteristics decisions must be taken that will determine whether he would
benefit more from mainstream placement in a school or from a placement in a more specialized
environment that could tend to his needs.
In order for the interface to be able to read the brain signal, the child needs to be focused. Not
always is it possible for all children to emit a signal strong enough so that it can be captured
by the interface. The emission of a strong signal depends on the attention of the child which
can be negatively affected by a variety of factors which have no relation with the interface but
which affect its ability to read the brain signals.
The attention of the child can be hindered by three main factors which are at constant interplay
and affect the prefrontal cortex and the ability of the child to focus on a particular task. The
three main factors are
a.

Cognitive

b.

Emotional

c.

”ehavioral

“lthough the cognitive function of children with CP has not been systematically studied, and
more research is needed, there is evidence suggesting that children with CP and normal

Brain Computer Interfaces for Cerebral Palsy
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/57084

intelligence present impairments in executive functions. Executive functions are the brain
functions that regulate and control impulse, anticipate consequences, put attention, regulate
emotion, allow flexibility, plan and monitor results. Executive functions are highly fragile
because they are the last cognitive area to mature. They involve the prefrontal cortex and they
rely on an extensive interconnectivity with other parts of the brain. Damage to that area results
in slower information processing, and a decrementation in sustained attention performance,
which is necessary for the reading of the signal by the interface Guzzetta
.
In the case of an intellectual disability, which as we have seen affects almost half of the children
with CP, we cannot speak of attention problems. The degree of cognitive impairment is such
that the attention processes cannot reach the required level so that it can be captured by the
interface.
The attentional processes are also going to be affected by the emotional problems that the child
may be experiencing Parkes
. This is also an issue that has not been researched but there
is enough evidence to suggest that children with CP, like children with some sort of a disability
in general, are more likely to suffer from depression, anxiety and low self esteem. This is
associated with the severity and visibility of the condition, which affects the child´s ability to
control his own body and the way his peers may perceive him as being different from them.
McDermott
The lack of social support, the anxiety of the parents, the child´s inability to
use words to express his emotions are all factors that put the child at increased risk to experi‐
ence emotional problems. Emotional problems hinder the ability of a child to focus and pay
enough attention so as to send a strong signal to the interface.
”ottom of Form
Children with CP have behavioral problems like being defiant and disobedient. The behavior
problems reported by parents were times more likely in children with cerebral palsy
compared with children having no known health problems. ”ehavioral problem are associated
with some kind of combination of the impairment, the environment and interpersonal
relationships. Damage to the prefrontal cortex affects, as we have seen, cognitive flexibility,
the abilities for strategic planning, tolerance to frustration, behavioral inhibition hyperactiv‐
ity-impulsivity as well as the associated impairment of inattention. The child that has trouble
maintaining his attention on the signal is more likely to refuse to try or abandon the task.
It is important to mention epilepsy as one of the factors that cause behavior and attention
difficulties in children with cerebral palsy.
Epilepsy affects to % children with cerebral palsy. Epilepsy, in itself, takes away part of
the vitality of the brain, with the frequent crises affecting the cognitive abilities of the child.
”ehavior and attention difficulties are highly common in children with cerebral palsy who
have epilepsy. Furthermore, the crises are frequently a motive for the child to stop receiving
education. Medical treatment for epilepsy can be helpful, keeping in mind that although
antiepileptic drugs may impair the cognitive functions of the child, with the careful monitoring
of the physician and the new medical intervention, this side effect would be very infrequent.

251

252

Cerebral Palsy - Challenges for the Future

. Communication system
There are some limits that can be solved using the brain activity. This activity allows the
communication between the processor and the person.
. . Brain signals
Through the recording and processing of direct brain electrical activity via signal processing
and machine learning algorithms, ”CIs enables communication and control to assistive
devices. “lthough the aim of a ”CI is to identify and translate brain electrical signals into
commands, it is not a thought-reading device or systems able to literally translate arbitrary
cognitive activities. ”CIs are design for translation of well characterized a priori defined brain
activity patterns through the use of machine learning techniques and patterns recognition
methods into commands.
Considered as a control system, a ”CI has an input e.g. EEG , an output e.g. control signal ,
and components that translate input into output, a protocol that determines the timing
operation and in some cases some feedback is provided to the user Figure . .

Figure 2. Exemplification on EEG (a), ECoG (b) and Single-neuron recording (c) electrode placement over the head

. . Functional neuroimaging
Invasively or noninvasively brain activity is recorded either from recording electrical activity
through electrodes EEG, Electrocorticography ECoG or from single-neuron recordings
within the brain , recording magnetic fields using magnetoencephalography MEG , or

Brain Computer Interfaces for Cerebral Palsy
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/57084

recording metabolic activity reflected in changes in blood flow positron emission tomography
PET , functional magnetic resonance imaging fMRI and functional Near Infrared fNIR .
Despite the fact that MEG, PET, fMRI and fNIR have shown success for ”CI applications these
techniques are still technically demanding and expensive technologies that require sophisti‐
cated equipment that can be operated only in special facilities. Furthermore, PET, fMRI and
fNIR techniques depend on metabolic processes, such as blood flow, having long latencies and
thus less suitable for the control of ”CIs.
On the other hand, the non-invasive EEG and the invasive ECoG and single neuron recordings
Figure . , are methods that have relative low costs, are simpler to use and have higher
temporal resolutions, making them more practical to the use with ”CIs.
Invasive techniques such single-neuron recording and ECoG take recordings over the cortex
while single-neuron recording records the activity within the cortex, ECoG records the activity
over the cortical surface of the brain. Single-neuron recordings and ECoG does not record
single neuron activity but records activities over small regions of the brain giving them a high
spatial resolution, and as it is implanted directly over the cortex, they have a high bandwidth,
high SNR and high amplitude. Since ECoG electrodes do not penetrate the cortex, recorded
signals are also not subjected as heavily to immune response, possess lower risk to implant as
well. Furthermore, maintaining long term reliable recording with implantable electrodes is
difficult.
“lthough, ECoG has a higher spatial resolution compared to EEG i.e. . - . mm vs
centimeters higher frequency bandwidth [ , ] i.e. − Hz vs. − Hz , have higher signal
amplitude
−
µV maximum vs.
− µV maximum , and being less susceptible to
artifacts i.e. EMG, EOG or electrical devices , EEG has become the most common source for
brain activity due to its none invasiveness requiring no craniotomy surgical incision of the
skull , being more practical for everyday situations. EEG measures the potential over the
scalp, reflecting the collective activity over large population of neurons located underneath
the sensor position.
. . Recording and processing
”rain signal recordings, like EEG or ECoG, are obtained with electrodes attach from the surface
of the skull or to the surface of the brain measuring difference over the potential that reflect
the activity within the brain. The electrodes are connected to biosignal amplifier where they
are amplified and go through an analog-digital conversion. These signals are sent to the signal
processing system that is in charge to perform the feature extraction and classification. Finally,
a signal will be send to the control system as final output. The ”CI can be design to present
feedback that is beneficial to learn the ”CI control faster.
The electrodes measure a difference in potential i.e. the voltage between two electrodes. The
difference in potential reflects neural activity below the electrode. There are different EEG
electrode montages. Usual EEG recordings use unipolar montage rather than bipolar electro‐
des, meaning that they use a common reference for all electrodes. “ ground is added to keep
the voltage levels close to the amplifier ground voltage level. The reference and ground can

253

254

Cerebral Palsy - Challenges for the Future

be positioned everywhere within the array of electrodes, but they are normally placed either
over the ear or the mastoids the temporal bone behind the ear . There also exist a bipolar and
Laplacian montage that each electrode represents the difference between the electrode and its
surrounding electrodes see Figure .
EEG recordings electrodes usually use small metal plates made out of gold or “g/“gCl.
“lternative materials such as Tin have been used, but they present drifting noise below HZ,
making them unsuitable for some applications, such as Slow Cortical Potentials. The electrodes
could be either passive or active i.e. pre-amplified with gain disks that are connected
through a cable to the biosignal amplifier. “ctive electrodes are less susceptible to environ‐
mental noise, and can work with higher skin impedance than passive electrodes. There exist
also dry and wet electrodes. “s the dry electrodes normally use an array of pins to go through
the hair have contact with the skin, the wet electrodes use a gel that reduces the impedance
and make a better connection to the skin. Even though dry electrodes have the advantage that
require less preparation and cleaning time not requiring conductive gel and They are proven
to be an alternative for EEG recordings Zander
, More in-depth research is necessary for
their successful dailybased application. daily-base application.

Figure 3. Examples of non-invasive BCI, with visual stimuli and virtual control of ball movement

. . . Electrode distribution
The standard EEG electrodes naming and position on the scalp are according to the interna‐
tional - electrode system Jasper
. The system ensures that different laboratories share
the same names over electrode positioning. It is based on arcs dividing the scalp in an array,
using the Nasion and Inion as longitudinal reference points i.e. front and back respectively
and the left and right Pre-“uricular points as lateral reference points Figure a. . The inter‐
section between the longitudinal line and the lateral is called the Vertex, and at this point it is
located over the center. The - system identify each point using each lobe Frontal-F,
Temporal-T, Central-C, Parietal-P and Occipital-O and each hemisphere Left-Odd, Right-

Brain Computer Interfaces for Cerebral Palsy
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/57084

Even numbers and z or zero over the midline as a marking. “n extension to this configuration
is using electrodes Figure b. , subdividing in between the - arcs using the combina‐
tions of the letters for reference . In addition, the letters “ and Fp are used to identify the
earlobes and frontal polar sites respectively . The electrode can either be placed directly over
the scalp, Which requires practice and is time consuming. “ second technique is using caps,
Which already have the marking of the electrodes and their position, some even have the
electrodes pre-mounted making them easier to work with. These caps come in different sizes
and can be adjusted to different persons.
Currently electrode caps are mainly intended to be used in a laboratory environment, therefore
being expensive, the electrode and cap placement is difficult and need special preparation,
making them not practical for an everyday use. Current commercial caps, such as the Emotive
Epoc, they present an alternative for an everyday use being more economically accessible, they
have the drawback that they use wet electrodes that dry quickly, and they are difficult to
position and remain stable, which is problematic as it gives a high variance over recordings,
as well as the same recording, and they are not possible to use in a different configuration. For
the remaining of this section we will only focus on laboratory caps and EEG recording, as these
are the most commonly used for ”CI.

a) Scalp references

b)10-20 Electrode Montage

Figure 4. EEG Electrode Montage (Jasper 1958)

. . . Artifacts
Since EEG is further away from the neurons it has low spatial resolution and very noisy
overview of ongoing brain activity. There are mainly two sources of noise while performing
EEG recordings Environment and Physiological artifacts.
Environment artifacts: Electrical power lines and/or surrounding electrical equipment become
a problem while recording EEG. Their frequencies can overlap with the EEG feature the
There is also the “F marking the subdivision in between the Frontal and Frontal polar site

255

256

Cerebral Palsy - Challenges for the Future

classification algorithm is working on. For laboratory settings these artifacts are normally
solved by using some isolation from environmental signals, avoiding the interference with
EEG recordings. “ notch pass filter over the frequency over the power line
or
Hz for
“merica or Europe recordings respectively may also be applied suppressing signals in a
narrow band.
Physiological artifacts: “lthough, muscle activation, eye movement or eye blinking can serve
as communication signals for HCI, they can mask EEG frequencies and mislead researchers
by mimicking EEG-based control and/or hide EEG features. Some EEG recording incorporate
these signals as either control signals, or they used to filter the desired signal. “ different way
of control is to remove the EEG recordings that have been contaminated by artifacts, leaving
only the trials that were not contaminated for the training of the classifier.
. . BCI signal processing
To design a ”CI, we need to decide on the type of signal, the location, the desired feature and
the appropriate classification technique.. In this section a description of the different types of
signals, the different types of feature extraction that has been used, and finally a brief descrip‐
tion of the different machine learning algorithms available is presented.
. . Evoked potentials and oscillatory activity patterns
The two major types of EEG signals used in ”CI are Evoked Potentials EPs and changes in
the spontaneous oscillatory EEG activity, also known as event-related desynchronization
ERD , and event-related synchronization ERS Pfurtscheller
.
EPs are electrical potential shifts that are time-locked to perceptual events, such as a rare visual
or audio stimulus. Time-locked implying here that the time between the event and the time
potential shift is approximately constant. Due to its low Signal-to-Noise Ratio SNR are
typically analyzed by averaging EEG data over time beginning of the perceptual event for
duration over s. There are different types of EPs based on the source of stimulus e.g. visual,
auditory or tactile
On the other hand, oscillatory activity can be voluntary induced by the user e.g. imagination
of kinesthetic body movement, aka motor imagery, Neuper
. Such imagery usually
generates a decrease or increase in power in a particular frequency band ERD or ERS ERDS
respectively . ERS are normally associated with an ERD appearing either after the termination
of the movement or simultaneously to the ERD, but in other areas of the cortex. “lthough,
Oscillatory patterns detection is less robust and reliable compare to EP, which as synchronous
signal i.e. knowing its time and shape requires little adaptation and its detection is robust,
as an asynchronous ”CI it allows the user to send information at their own pace, unlike
synchronous ”CIs that require to follow the cues or prompts from the system.
Figure illustrates the use of EP and ERDS for achieving brain-computer interaction in physical
and virtual environment.

Brain Computer Interfaces for Cerebral Palsy
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/57084

Figure 5. Examples of evoke potentials with either lights or screen squares flickering at different frequencies

. . BCI control commands
Within these two ways of brain signal extraction there are four main strategies to consider for
input at a ”CI system. extraction there exist mainly common strategies are considered for
input of a ”CI system, a Motor imaginary. b Slow Cortical Potentials, c the P
wave of
visual evoke potentials, and d Steady State Visual Evoked Potential SSVEP
. . . Motor imaginary
It is believed that the mechanisms of brain operations are characterized by groups of neurons
synchronizing themselves to a certain physiological frequency Engel
. These oscillations
has been divided into different frequency bands and are referred as brain rhythms Delta [ .
− Hz], Theta [ − Hz], “lpha [ − Hz], Mu [ − Hz] , ”eta [ − Hz], Gamma wave [
−
Hz] Figure a. . Movements are normally accompanied by changes of the Mu and ”eta
rhythm over the motor/sensory cortical areas see Figure b. . For example movements of the
hand are associated with decrease of power or desynchronization over the Mu rhythms and
associated with a decrease over the ”eta rhythm, particularly contralateral to the movement.
The same effect occur with motor imagery Neuper
, making the Mu/”eta rhythm as base
for a ”CI. The most common approach used for classification is to calculate the bandpower in
a specific frequency band and then use discrimination via some machine learning technique
e.g. Fisher linear discriminant analysis .
. . . Slow cortical potentials
Slow cortical potentials SCPs are slow voltage changes generated over the cortex. These
changes in potential occur over . − s. These potentials can be divided in Negative SCPs,
“lthough the “lpha and Mu rhythm occur over the same frequency, one is located over the resting visual cortex at the
back of the scalp, while the second is found over the motor cortex

257

258

Cerebral Palsy - Challenges for the Future

typically associated with movement and other typical cortical activation, and Positive SCPs
that is associated with a reduce cortical activation, the viability of the use of SCPs that after a
period of learning user has gain control selecting words or pictograms from a computerized
language ”irbaumer
or used with patients Suffering from a locked-in condition such as
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis “LS K(bler
. The drawback of using SCPs is that It
requires a long training process that allows the user to gain control, a normal training can go
for several weeks or even months. The normal training for a SCP based ”CI users first learn
to move a cursor vertically on a monitor selecting targets at the top or the bottom of the screen.
Next, a split keyboard into two where an area is selected, the selected characters are once more
split into two and once more selected, and this is done until the final choice is made.

a) EEG Rhythms

b)Motor and somatosensory

Figure 6. Example of different types of normal EEG rhythms (Lotte 2009) and Primary Motor and somatosensory corti‐
cal homunculus

. . . The P

wave of visual evoke potentials

The P
P wave of visual evoke potentials henceforth referred only as P
is a positive
wave that appears
ms after a stimulus is presented Figure a. . It was first described by
Sutton Sutton
. The most known paradigm for P
is the one described by FarwellDonchin
, where characters and numbers are represented in a six by six grid Figure b.

Brain Computer Interfaces for Cerebral Palsy
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/57084

where the rows and columns are repeatedly flashed and when the character containing the
chosen character is flashed a P
is evoked. These characters number or letters can be
replaced with different symbols and used not only as spelling device, but for navigation or for
control tasks, using symbols as arrows or object selection. P
can be used as a lie detector,
providing certain stimuli e.g. picture, phrase or word related to the lie that P
is generated
if the subject has knowledge of the stimuli presented Farwell
, Farwell
.
“s a normal procedure, the P
of different repetitions are averaged, to reduce the effect of
artifacts, or the presence of different mental activity that could masked the ongoing P
.
Different features and classification techniques e.g. Linear Discriminant “nalysis or Support‐
ed vector machines, Krusienski
has been used for P
based systems, these techniques
will be described in a following section.

a) P300 Wave

b) P300 paradigm

Figure 7. P300 wave and the classical P300 spelling paradigm described by Farwell-Donchin 1988. Figure 6a show a
change of potential occur approximately 300ms after the stimulus is presented (Picture adapted from Scherer 2013).
In Figure 6b shows the classical spelling paradigm, where a P300 potential is generated if either the row or column
flashes over the letter desired.

. . . Steady State Visual Evoked Potential
Steady State Visual Evoked Potential SSVEP are brain responses to visual stimulus e.g.
flickering LEDs or phase-reversing checkerboards , flashing at constant frequencies between
approximately −
Hz. SSVEP is a frequency-locked signal that manifests itself as an increase
of the EEG amplitude of the stimulated frequency over the occipital lobe. Classification of
SSVEP is done either using FFT-spectrum analysis or by the use of canonical correlation
analysis CC“ or finally by using of the minimal energy approach.
SSVEP have shown to be independent to eye movement, making them a good alternative for
people with well preserve eye acuity but are incapable to moving their eyes ”rendan
.
Some drawbacks while using SSVEP is that if a computer screen is used only frequencies that

259

260

Cerebral Palsy - Challenges for the Future

entire division over its base refresh rate e.g. a Hz screen only , , , , or lower are
possible . “ second drawback is that SSVEP are usually developed with a short number of
flickering channels trying to avoid distraction and hence lower performance.
. . Feature extraction
Even though the amount of electrodes, the number of tasks performed, the high sample
frequency required, the classes and the different patterns make that the amount of data
recorded large, the normal training data set is short. Identifying, Selecting and extracting the
relevant properties or features of the signals that better describe the EEG signals are essential
steps in the design of a ”CI. The correct selection of the features is crucial, if the features
extracted from EEG are not relevant and do not accurately describe the EEG signals employed,
the classification algorithm will have trouble selecting the class or label the user intended. The
feature extraction could be divided in two main groups temporal and frequential methods, a
third group can be added as hybrid between temporal and frequency techniques.
. . . Temporal methods
Features that present a time dependent variation can be treated using a temporal method. The
changes can be as the ones that occur on P
wave, which depend of the flashing of the selected
command to
ms later to be generated. The main temporal methods are the parametric
models e.g. “R or ““R modeled the signal using a weighted sum of values, the Hjorth
parameters that describe the dynamics of the signal by the use of three measures activity,
mobility and complexity and finally the signal amplitude method that concatenates the
electrodes amplitude into a feature vector that is used as input into the classification algorithm.
. . . Frequency methods
The different oscillations or rhythms that characterize the EEG signals present variations while
performing a mental task e.g. motor imagery or with a steady state evoked potential that a
change in the oscillation is highly related to the stimulus frequency. Frequency methods are
commonly used for the ease of application and computational speed. The most commonly
used methods are power spectral densities and band powers. The third method uses a feature
that can be located both in time and frequency domain. This method uses the Short Time
Fourier Transform or the Wavelet transform to have a time-frequency representation of the
signal.
. . Classification techniques
“fter the features have been selected the next step is to translate them into a command. This
translation can use regression/classification methods. There are different classification
methods and they can be divided using their classifier properties into Linear classifiers, neural
networks, non-linear ”ayesian classifiers, nearest neighbor classifiers and combinations of
classifiers Lotte
.

Brain Computer Interfaces for Cerebral Palsy
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/57084

. . . Linear classifiers
Linear classifiers are discriminant algorithms that use linear functions to separate between
classes. The most common used for ”CI are Linear Discriminant “nalysis also known as
Fisher’s LD“ and supported vector machines. These two methods separate the data using
hyperplanes, for two-classes they are divided depending on the side of the hyperplane they
are located see Figure . . For LD“ and SVM the popular method to solve a multiclass situation
N-number of classes is selecting a class and separating it from the rest, this technique is
referred One Versus the Rest Schlögl
. This technique is very computational efficient
and suitable for online classification. One drawback of LD“ is when it deals with complex
nonlinear EEG data Garcia
. Even though SVM is originally linearly, it can be expanded
using the kernel trick. The trick consists of mapping the data into another space, using a
kernel function. For ”CI usually the Gaussian or radial basis function K x,y =exp[−||x−y||/
σ ]. This trick gives a better generalization, but has lower speed execution Lotte
.

Figure 8. LDA and SVM hyperplanes that separate between two classes (circles and crosses).

LD“ has been used for motor imagery Pfurtscheller
, for a multiclass asynchronous
motor imagery Scherer
, as well as for P
Congedo
.
. . . Neural networks
The second most used for classification method for ”CI is using Neural Networks NN . NN
are non-linear classifiers that use assembly of neurons to produce the boundaries. The most
used technique is the Multilayer Perceptron ”ishop
, that uses an input layer where the
features are inserted, some hidden layers for processing and finally an output that defines the
class Figure . . Even though NNs can adapt to any number of classes and composed with
enough neurons they can approximate any function, they are susceptible to over training and
noise ”ishop
.

261

262

Cerebral Palsy - Challenges for the Future

“ conventional feed-forward artificial neural network “NN´s is a system constructed by a
finite number of basic elements called neurons, which are grouped in layers. Every neuron is
highly interconnected in the whole topology the structure has a number of inputs and outputs
that depends on the system that will be approximated.
“ neuron is the basic element in an artificial neural network that simulates biological neurons
which receives electrical impulses which are received through its dendrites, from other
neuron’s axons. Those electrical impulses are added in order to have a final potential. This
potential must exceed a certain level to have the neuron generate an electrical impulse on its
axon. If the level required is not met, then the axon of that neuron doesn’t fire its axon. Neurons
can be divided as dendrites which are channels of input signals, core cell that processes all
these signals and axons that transmit output signals of the processed information came from
dendrites.
The “NN´s are applied to approximate normally a non-linear system as universal approxi‐
mations. The first step to design an “NN´s is to train the neural network in order to fix the
interconnection namely weights which are between the neurons. The training process can take
a lot of time in the case of the back-propagation algorithm. “fter training the “NN´s the
response could show a high-quality behavior, when a new input signals is presented to the
system.
In other words the “NN´s could generalize any input signal. These “NN´s mimic the human
brain, on the basic process of learning and generalization. Normally the process of training the
“NN´s is slow and defining the correct topology could be complicated. The main advantages
of artificial neural networks are
• “bility to generalize and learn.
• “cquire knowledge from internal and external parameters.
• “bility to learn from examples and adapt to situations based on its findings.
• Generalization of knowledge to Production of adequate responses to unknown situations.
• “rtificial neural networks solve complex problems that are difficult to manage by approx‐
imation.
• Produce linear or non-linear relationships
• Fault Tolerance
“n extension to this technique is the Restricted ”oltzmann Machines R”M that have a
bidirectional connection between the layers see Figure b. , this quality allows the R”Ms to
be train as normal NN and retrained using back propagation Hinton
. Success of NN
can be seen in Kalcer
, Pfurtscheller
,
Hsu
while for R”M in ”alderas
.

Brain Computer Interfaces for Cerebral Palsy
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/57084

. . . Non-linear Bayesian classifiers
There are mainly types ”ayesian classifiers used for ”CI systems ”ayes quadratic and Hidden
Markov Models HMM . ”oth these classifiers produce nonlinear decision boundaries.
Furthermore, they are generative, which allows them to reject uncertain samples more
efficiently than discriminative classifiers Lotte
. While ”ayesian assign the class to the
feature vector with the highest probability, HMM is probabilistic automaton that can provide
the probability of observing a given sequence of feature vectors Rabiner
, Lotte
.

Figure 9. Neural Networks architectures having Multilayer Perceptron and RBM

. . . Nearest Neighbor classifiers
Nearest Neighbor classifiers are also used in ”CIs with the k Nearest Neighbor kNN and
Mahalanobis Distance MDist as preferred Nearest Neighbor classifier methods. kNN assign
to an unseen point the dominant class among its kNN within the training set. kNN algorithms
are sensitive to the curse of dimensionality making them fail in several ”CI experiments,
however they may perform efficiently with low-dimensional feature vectors Lotte
.
Mahalanobis Dististance based classifiers use Mahalanobis distance to assign a class to a
feature vector to the nearest prototype. Mahalanobis Distance has been used to detect motor
imagery of the hand giving accuracies over the % Ming
.
. . . Combinations of classifiers
Combinations of classifiers are proposed trying to reduce the variance and thus increase
classification accuracy. Voting, ”oosting, Stacking and Random subspaces. Voting consists of
assign different classifiers the input feature vector and select the class with the higher majority

263

264

Cerebral Palsy - Challenges for the Future

of votes hence the name . ”oosting uses several classifiers in cascade where the errors
committed by previous classifier are focus by each classifier. Stacking uses several classifiers
level- classifiers running through the input vector. The output of the different classifiers is
then use as input vector for a meta-classifier or level- classifier which is responsible for the
final decision. Lastly Random subspaces uses subsets of the original feature vector as training
set for different classifiers and the final decision is made by majority voting.
. . State of the art
The design of a ”CI comes with two major challenges, the non-stationary and inherent
variability of the EEG signals. Data from the same experimental paradigm but recorded at
different instances are likely to exhibit differences due to for instance shift of the electrodes
positions between sessions or changes in the sensor mechanical properties of the electrodes
e.g. change in the impedances . “dding to this problem the noisy nonlinear superposition of
the measured EEG activity can mask underlying neural patterns and hamper their detection.
The user current mentally state e.g. due to tiredness, workload or stress may impact in the
ability to focus and generate specific mental events. Due to these factors, statistical signal
processing and machine learning techniques play a crucial role in recognizing EEG patterns
and translating them into control signals.
.

. Co-adaptive training

“ normal training of a ”CI uses information from a first or previous sessions EEG recordings
are used to pre-train the pattern recognition algorithms for classification or regression. On a
posterior session user uses the trained algorithm for control. One of the drawbacks is that the
variability of brain activity requires that the system is robust enough to handle the changes.
“dding to this, the high adaptability of the brain gives the problem on how much has to be
relegated for the system and how much left for the brain. It has been shown that using invasive
over single neuron or a population of neurons the can rapidly learn to generate an appropriate
pattern for a fix task. The same adaptation using EEG could take months to have a similar level
of performance K(bler
. “dding to this normal neuromuscular activity depends of
feedback to have a successful control. “ strategy to improve the control over the ”CI system
has to have a control that uses feedback. “ good strategy is to use co-adaptive training, with
a self-optimizing pattern detector and user adaptation, using new data to update the system.
So new data is collected in different session and used to update the classifier to user’s most
recent brain patterns. Feedback can be provided during the new session to helping to generate
more distinct EEG patterns, which increases detection performance. “n Online adaptation can
be included to provide a faster update of the training parameters and have a faster coadaptation.
.

. Hybrid BCI

There exists almost no reason why different technology could be combined, combining
different patterns e.g. EP and motor imaging or different recording technology, combining

Brain Computer Interfaces for Cerebral Palsy
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/57084

invasive and non-invasive, or using different electrophysiological signals with the combina‐
tion of ”CI technologies.
.

. HCI recording

“ case study was made using a commercial HCI, the amplifier Emotiv EPOC, which can record
EEG signals as well as movement from the head with an incorporated gyroscope. The interface
was created using the amplifier gyroscope signals as control for the displacement and the
direction for an electric wheelchair see Figure . .

Figure 10. Example of the control with the movements of the head, translated with a gyroscope into the control of an
electric wheelchair.

The gyroscope counts with two rotation axes that were used for displacement and turn. “lso
the velocity of displacement and turn was control depending on the amount of rotation the
gyroscopes detect from the movement of the head.
The wheelchair counts with the displacement control of the two back wheels, giving it advance
and turn control. This control was adapted to be controlled directly from a D“Q that has a
direct interface with Labview.
.

. Methodology

The case study was divided in three areas Signal acquisition, Signal processing, and control
signal Figure . . For the signal acquisition we use the amplifier driver connected with
Simulink Matlab . ”oth signals were filtered and amplified using the rotation left-right for the
turn and the rotation frontal-backward for forward or backward motion. The online process
was done in the same interface that was used for recording in Simulink Figure a. , which
finally send the signals to Labview using a UDP protocol. Labview was finally in charge of the
control signal Figure b. that had control over the wheelchair wheels.

265

266

Cerebral Palsy - Challenges for the Future

Figure 11. Control Process

Figure 12. Matlab-Simulink and Labview interfaces

Brain Computer Interfaces for Cerebral Palsy
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/57084

The control was first tested on a free environment and later on a simple maze Figure
Testing the manageability to make turns and understand the commands.

(a) Test 1

..

(b) Test 2

Figure 13. Interfaces de Matlab-Simulink y Labview

. Conclusion
Even though the control with the Emotiv EPOC was limited, the viability of developing an
HCI was shown using the gyroscope signals as control signals for a wheelchair.

Author details
Pedro Ponce, “rturo Molina, David C. ”alderas and Dimitra Grammatikou
Institu to Tecnológico y de Estudios Superiores de Monterrey -Campus ciudad de México,
Departamento de posgrado en ciencias de la ingeniería, Mexico City

References
[ ] ”rendan Z. “llison, Dennis J. McFarland, Gerwin Schalk, Shi Dong Zheng, Melody
Moore Jackson, and Jonathan R. Wolpaw. Towards an independent brain–computer

267

268

Cerebral Palsy - Challenges for the Future

interface using steady state visual evoked potentials. Clinical Neurophysiology,
–
,
.
[ ] David ”alderas, Thorsten Zander, Fabian ”achl, Christa Neuper, and Reinhold
Scherer. Restricted boltzmann machines as useful tool for detecting oscillatory eeg
components. In Proc. of the th International ”rain-Computer Interface Conference,
Graz, “ustria., pages – ,
.
[ ] N. ”irbaumer, “. Kubler, N. Ghanayim, T. Hinterberger, J. Perelmouter, J. Kaiser, I.
Iversen, ”. Kotchoubey, N. Neumann, and H. Flor. The thought translation device
ttd for completely paralyzed patients. Rehabilitation Engineering, IEEE Transac‐
tions on,
–
,
.
[ ] Christopher M. ”ishop. Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition. Oxford University
Press, Inc., New York, NY, US“,
.
[ ] M Congedo, F Lotte, and “ L´ ecuyer. Classification of movement intention by spa‐
tially filtered electromagnetic inverse solutions. Physics in Medicine and ”iology,
,
.
[ ] Emanuel Donchin, Kevin M. Spencer, and Ranjith Wijesinghe. The mental prosthesis
“ssessing the speed of a p
-based brain–computer interface. IEEE Transactions on
Rehabilitation Engineering, ,
.
[ ] “ndreas K. Engel, Pascal Fries, and Wolf Singer. Dynamic predictions Oscillations
and synchrony in top-down processing. Nature Reviews Neuroscience,
–
,
.
[ ] L. “. Farwell and E. Donchin. Talking off the top of your head toward a mental
prosthesis utilizing event-related brain potentials. Electroencephalography and Clini‐
cal Neurophysiology,
– ,
.
[ ] Lawrence “. Farwell, DrewC. Richardson, and GrahamM. Richardson. ”rain finger‐
printing field studies comparing p -mermer and p
brainwave responses in the
detection of concealed information. Cognitive Neurodynamics, pages – ,
.
[

] Lawrence “. Farwell and Sharon S. Smith. Using brain mermer testing to detect
knowledge despite efforts to conceal. Journal of Forensic Sciences, pages
–
,
.

[

] Charles M. Gaona, Mohit Sharma, Zachary V. Freudenburg, Jonathan D. ”reshears,
David T. ”undy, Jarod Roland, Dennis L. ”arbour, Gerwin Schalk, and Eric C. Leu‐
thardt. Nonuniform high-gamma
–
hz power changes dissociate cognitive
task and anatomy in human cortex. The Journal of Neuroscience,
–
,
February
.

[

] G.N. Garcia, T. Ebrahimi, and J. Vesin. Support vector eeg classification in the fourier
and time-frequency correlation domains. In Neural Engineering,
. Conference
Proceedings. First International IEEE EM”S Conference on, pages
– ,
.

Brain Computer Interfaces for Cerebral Palsy
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/57084

[

] Geoffrey E. Hinton and Terrence J. Sejmowski. Learning and Relearning in ”oltz‐
mann Machines , volume , chapter , pages
– . MIT Press, Cambridge,
.

[

] WEI-YEN HSU. “pplication of competitive hopfield neural network to braincomput‐
er interface systems. International Journal of Neural Systems,
– ,
.
PMID
.

[

] H.H. Jasper. The ten-twenty electrode system of the international federation. Electro‐
encephalography and clinical neurophysiology,
– ,
.

[

] J. Kalcher, D. Flotzinger, and G. Pfurtscheller. Graz brain-computer interface an eegbased cursor control system. In Engineering in Medicine and ”iology Society,
.
Proceedings of the th “nnual International Conference of the IEEE, pages
–
,
.

[

] “ndrea K(bler, ”oris Kotchoubey, Thilo Hinterberger, Nimr Ghanayim, Juri Perel‐
mouter, Margarete Schauer, Christoph Fritsch, Edward Taub, and N. ”irbaumer. The
thought translation device a neurophysiological approach to communication in total
motor paralysis. Experimental ”rain Research,
– ,
.

[

] Dean J Krusienski, Eric W Sellers, Fran¸ cois Cabestaing, Sabri ”ayoudh, Dennis J
McFarland, Theresa M Vaughan, and Jonathan R Wolpaw. “ comparison of classifi‐
cation techniques for the p
speller. Journal of Neural Engineering,
,
.

[

] Eric C Leuthardt, Gerwin Schalk, Jonathan R Wolpaw, Jeffrey G Ojemann, and Dan‐
iel W Moran. “ brain–computer interface using electrocorticographic signals in hu‐
mans. Journal of Neural Engineering,
,
.

[

] Fabian Lotte. Study of electroencephalographic signal proccessing and classification
techniques towards the use of brain-computer interfaces in virtual reality applica‐
tions. PhD thesis, Intitute National des Sciences “ppliquees de Rennes, January
.

[

] Fabian Lotte, M Congedo, “ L´ ecuyer, F Lamarche, and ” “rnaldi. “ review of clas‐
sification algorithms for eeg-based brain–computer interfaces. Journal of Neural En‐
gineering, R –R ,
.

[

] Fabien Lotte, Josef Faller, Christoph Guger, Yann Renard, Gert Pfurtscheller, “natole
L´ ecuyer, and Robert Leeb. Combining bci with virtual reality Towards new appli‐
cations and improved bci. In ”rendan Z. “llison, Stephen Dunne, Robert Leeb, Jos´ e
Del R. Mill´ an, and “nton Nijholt, editors, Towards Practical ”rain-Computer Inter‐
faces, ”iological and Medical Physics, ”iomedical Engineering, pages
–
.
Springer ”erlin Heidelberg,
.

[

] Dong Ming, Yuhuan Zhu, Hongzhi Qi, ”aikun Wan, Yong Hu, and K. D K Luk.
Study on eeg-based mouse system by using brain-computer interface. In Virtual En‐
vironments, Human-Computer Interfaces and Measurements Systems,
. VE‐
CIMS ’ . IEEE International Conference on, pages
– ,
.

[

] E.M. Mugler, C.“. Ruf, S. Halder, M. ”ensch, and “. Kubler. Design and implemen‐
tation of a p
-based brain-computer interface for controlling an internet browser.

269

270

Cerebral Palsy - Challenges for the Future

Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, IEEE Transactions on,
,
.

–

[

] Christa Neuper, Reinhold Scherer, Miriam Reiner, and Gert Pfurtscheller. Imagery of
motor actions Differential effects of kinesthetic and visual–motor mode of imagery
in single-trial {EEG}. Cognitive ”rain Research,
–
,
.

[

] World Health Organization. World report on disability,

[

] Gert Pfurtscheller, J. Kalcher, Christa Neuper, D. Flotzinger, and M. Pregenzer. On‐
line eeg classification during externally-paced hand movements using a neural net‐
workbased classifier. Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology,
–
,
.

[

] Gert Pfurtscheller and Fernando Lopes da Silva. Eeg event-related desynchroniza‐
tion erd and event-related synchronization ers . Electroencephalography ”asic Prin‐
ciples and Clinical Neurophysiology,
– ,
.

[

] Gert Pfurtscheller and Fernando Lopes da Silva. Event-related EEG/MEG synchroni‐
zation and desynchronization basic principles. Clinical Neurophysiology,
–
,
.

[

] L. Rabiner. “ tutorial on hidden markov models and selected applications in speech
recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE,
– ,
.

[

] Rajesh P.N Rao. and Reinhold Scherer. ”rain–computer interfacing more than the
sum of its parts. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine,
– , July
.

[

] R. Scherer, G.R. Muller, C. Neuper, ”. Graimann, and G. Pfurtscheller. “n asynchro‐
nously controlled eeg-based virtual keyboard improvement of the spelling rate. ”io‐
medical Engineering, IEEE Transactions on,
– ,
.

[

] Reinhold Scherer, Josef Faller, David ”alderas, Elisabeth V. C. Friedrich, Markus Pr°
oll, ”rendan “llison, and Gernot M° uller-Putz. ”rain–computer interfacing more
than the sum of its parts. Soft Computing,
– , February
.

[

] “lois Schlögl, Felix Lee, Horst ”ischof, and Gert Pfurtscheller. Characterization of
four-class motor imagery eeg data for the bci-competition
. Journal of Neural En‐
gineering,
L ,
.

[

] S Sutton, M ”raren, J Zubin, and ER John. Evoked-potential correlates of stimulus
uncertainty. Science New York, NY ,
–
,
.

[

] Francesco Tenore, “nder Ramos, “mir Fahmy, Soumyadipta “charya, Ralph Etien‐
neCummings, and Nitish V. Thakor. Towards the control of individual fingers of a
prosthetic hand using surface emg signals. In Proceedings of the th “nnual Inter‐
national, pages
–
,
.

.

Brain Computer Interfaces for Cerebral Palsy
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/57084

[

] Johnathan R. Wolpaw, Niels ”irbaumer, Denis J. McFarland, Gert Pfurtscheller, and
Theresa M. Vaughan. ”rain-computer interfaces for communication and control.
Clinical Neurophysiology,
– ,
.

[

] Thorsten Oliver Zander, Moritz Lehne, Klas Ihme, Sabine Jatzev, Joao Correia, Chris‐
tian Kothe, ”ernd Picht, and Femke Nijboer. “ dry eeg-system for scientific research
and brain-computer interfaces. Fronti

[

] ”ax M, Goldstein M, Rosenbaum P, Leviton “, Paneth N.
Proposed definition
and classification of cerebral palsy, “pril
. Dev Med Child Neurol
– .

[

] Cerebral Palsy Classification and Epidemiology, “my Thornhill Pakula, Kim Van
Naarden ”raun,Marshalyn Yeargin-“llsopp, Phys Med Rehabil Clin N “m
–
. Published by Elsevier Inc.

[

] Dubowitz LM, Dubowitz V, Mercuri E. The neurological assessment of the preterm
and full-term newborn infant. nd ed. London Mac Keith Press
.

[

] “miel –Tison C. Update of the “miel-Tison neurologic assessment for the term neo‐
nate or at weeks corrected age. Pediatr Neurol
. -

[

] Ellison P The INF“NI” “ reliable method for the neuromotor assessment of Infants,
Therapy Skill ”uilders,

[

] SCPE Working Group. Prevalence and characteristics of children with cerebral palsy
in Europe. Dev Med Child Neurol
-

[

] SCPE Working Group. Surveillance of cerebral palsy in Europe a collaboration of
cerebral palsy surveys and registers. Dev Med Child Neurol
-

[

] Robert Palisano, Peter Rosenbaum, Stephen Walter, Dianne Russell, Ellen Wood, ”ar‐
bara Galuppi, Gross Motor Function Classification System for Cerebral Palsy, Dev
Med Child Neurol
-

[

] Eliasson, “.-C., Krumlinde-Sundholm, L., Rösblad, ”., ”eckung, E., “rner, M., 5hr‐
vall, “.-M. and Rosenbaum, P.
, The Manual “bility Classification System
M“CS for children with cerebral palsy scale development and evidence of validity
and reliability. Developmental Medicine & Child Neurology,
– .

[

] ”ottcher T, Flachs EM, Uldall P. “ttentional and executive Impairments in children
with spastic cerebral palsy. Developmental Medicine & Child Neurology,
E- - .

[

] Guzzetta “, Fazzi ”, Mercuri E, ”ertuccelli ”, Canapicchi R, Van Hof Duin J et al. Vis‐
ual Function in children with hemiplegia in the first years of life. Dev Med Child
Neurol
-

[

] Cognitive Deficits in Depression Possible implications for functional neuropatholo‐
gy, Marie-Paule “ustin, Philip Mitchel and Guy M. Goodwin, ”ritish Journal of Psy‐
chiatry
,
,
-

271

272

Cerebral Palsy - Challenges for the Future

[

] Jackie Parkes, Chris McCusker, Common psychological problems in cerebral palsy
Paediatrics and Child Health Volume , Issue , Pages
- , September
.

[

] Suzanne McDermott, “nn L. Coker, Subramani Mani, Shanthi Krishnaswami, Ri‐
chard J. Nagle, Laura L. ”arnett-Queen and Donald F. Wuori, “ Population-”ased
“nalysis of ”ehavior Problems in Children with Cerebral Palsy Journal of Pediatric
Psychology, Volume , Issue , Pp.
.

