Author manuscript, published in "2012 IEEE International Conference on Multimedia & Expo Workshops (ICMEW), Melbourne :
Australia (2012)"
DOI : 10.1109/ICMEW.2012.33

2012 IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and Expo Workshops

VIRTUAL INTERACTIONS: CAN EEG HELP MAKE THE DIFFERENCE
WITH REAL INTERACTION?
Jan Rzepecki, Jonathan Delcourt, Matthieu Perreira Da Silva, Patrick Le Callet

hal-00724400, version 1 - 20 Aug 2012

IRCCyN - University of Nantes
La Chantrerie - rue Christian Pauc - BP 50609
44306 Nantes Cedex 03
France
ABSTRACT
Science and technology progress fast, but mouse and keyboard are still used to control multimedia devices. One
of the limiting factors of gesture based HCIs adoption is
the detection of the user’s intention to interact. This study
tries to make a step in that direction with use of consumer
EEG sensor headset. EEG headset records in real-time data
that can help to identify intention of the user based on
his emotional state. For each subject EEG responses for
different stimuli are recorded. Acquiring these data allows
to determine the potential of EEG based intention detection.
The ﬁndings are promising and with proper implementation
should allow to building a new type of HCI devices.

of the 60’s [6]. This could be explained by the fact that
users do not adopt new HCI’s based on their technological
performance, but mostly on their ergonomics, naturalness
and ease of use [7]. As a matter of fact, most of efﬁcient
HCI are limited to direct contact interface. A recurrent issue
is related to the difﬁculty to identify gestures, vocal inputs
and others which are not intended to trigger any interaction
with the machine (talking to someone else, taking a drink,
moving, etc.). Consequently, one limiting factor of current
HCIs is the detection of the intention of the user with respect
to the multimedia device [8]. Solving this problem would
lead to devices that “know” when you are addressing an
order to them and thus would allow much more natural
interactions (no/less false alarms on gestures/words not directed to the machine). This is somehow related to attentive
user interfaces, which try to adapt the quantity and the
way information is provided to users in order to keep their
cognitive load at a reasonable value [9].
This paper is focused on the automatic detection of user
intention and improvement of comfort of interaction. In
particular, we try to determine if there is a perceptible
difference on "meta-electroencephalograph" signals between
two interaction scenarios: actions in the real world vs actions
in relation with an environment displayed on a screen.
Another question is related to the manipulation of real or
virtual objects. If this distinction is possible, it is the ﬁrst
contribution for more advanced multimodal user intention
detection, and so more natural human computer interaction
without touch contact. The intention detection that is subject
of the study can be linked to works on affective computing
because in these two cases physiological signals are used.
On the other hand this work focus on intention and affective
computing focus on affect1 [10].
In section 2, we ﬁrst describe experimental protocol that
have been adopted to perform user interaction experiments
using EEG sensors. As different interaction conditions are
considered, the rest of the paper is dedicated to data processing to seek for any automatic classiﬁcation of these

Index Terms— Brain Computer Interface, Electroencephalography, Human Computer Interaction.
I. INTRODUCTION
Providing natural or at least easy and convenient Human
Computer Interaction (HCI) or Man-Machine-Interaction
(MMI) is a hot feature of many emerging multimedia applications. In the ﬁeld of computer games, all major brands
have developed new interaction devices for their respective
consoles: Nintendo Wii-mote, Sony Playstation Move, or Microsoft Kinect. These examples provide good gesture based
interaction. Recent advances in pattern matching, machine
learning and computer vision allow to extend interaction
facilities. Face recognition [1] or speech-recognition [2] can
be used to personalize user experience based on its identity,
face detection [3], gesture [4] or gaze-tracking can be used
as input device for "mouse" pointer replacement, etc. They
can even be combined in order to perform multimodal HCI
[5].
Despite these scientiﬁc and technological progresses, we
still generally use old and basic interaction devices and
methods in order to communicate with computers and multimedia devices: mouse, keyboards and other simple key
based remotes which date back to the early 50’s are still
standard devices. Even modern smartphones and tablets use
the touchscreen paradigm which was developed in the end
978-0-7695-4729-9/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICMEW.2012.33

1 an

151

expressed or observed emotional response

conditions based on EEG recordings. Data preprocessing
are presented in section 3 prior to describe, in section
4, classiﬁcation process and performance analysis. Finally
conclusions are drawn in last section.

map camera3 and is used only for visual feedback (no hand
positioning measure are performed).
Instead of recording raw brain signals, preprocessed emotional state features provided by EPOC SDK: Excitement,
Engagement/Boredom, Meditation and Frustration have been
used. According to the manufacturer these features were
extracted from EEG signals as universal for different subjects
on a wide range of stimuli, mainly in the game context.
These signals are deﬁned as follows:
• Excitement describes anticipation for stimulating content, game reward, unexpected event, story twist. It is
registered in terms of short-term and long-term excitement.
• Engagement/Boredom is linked to how subjects are
engaged in current activity. Data was collected during
intensive gameplay that was challenging but not overwhelming. Conversely Boredom was registered when
little happened in the game.
• Frustration represents the level of stress connected
with resistance to the fulﬁllment of certain tasks. Experiments tested response on problems during gaming
sessions such as: problems with connectivity and peaks
of latency, problems with shot accuracy in ﬁrst person
shooter games.
• Meditation is related to relaxation of the subjects.
Reference features extraction was made with wide open
eye subjects that were trained in meditation technique.
Reference data was gathered in sessions of relaxed
conversation altering with documentation reading,

hal-00724400, version 1 - 20 Aug 2012

II. EXPERIMENTS AND PROTOCOL
In order to investigate the possibility to distinguish between human interaction with computer (through information displayed on a screen) or interaction with real world,
this paper focus on brain activity instead of analyzing all
movements, voice commands or other possible interactions
with computer. Each interaction takes its origin in brain, it is
consequently interesting to check if an EEG headset can lead
to access interaction intentions from brain activity (to certain
extent, as it will be explained later). Towards this goal,
we have designed an experiment based on recording brain
signals of test participants via EEG headset. Different user
exercises, all based on moving hand across a table following
a predesignated rectangular path, have been considered.
There are, in total, four type of exercise (with or without
object and with or without feedback).
Experiments are based on recording brain signals of test
subjects via EEG headset during different activities based
on moving hand across a table, following a predesignated
rectangular path. There are four variations of the activities :
with or without object and with or without feedback.
II-A. Subjects
Experiments have been performed on a population of 12
persons, for whom average age is 26.3 years with a standard
deviation of 2.3 years. The population is composed of 10
males and 2 females coming from 6 different countries. All
participants are daily computer users.

II-C. Apparatus and task

The experiments have been conducted on an Intel Xeon
machine with a nVidia Quadro 4000 graphics card, using Microsoft Kinect camera for hand tracking and Emotiv EPOC
headset for EEG recording and processing. The testing room
where tests have been performed conforms to ITU-R BT50011 recommendation (ﬁg.1).
Software used consists of an application developed with
Unity 3D game engine for visual feedback (ﬁg. 2). A Unity
3D library was also used to record EEG data. Additionally,
the Emotiv SDK Control Panel was used to monitor EEG
preprocessed data. Finally, hand tracking was made with
use of OpenNI framework which provides enough facilities
to automatically detect gestures and track hands2 . Tracking
was made via detection of temporal and spatial continuity
of the tracked object. The method used is based on depth

Procedure was explained to each subject before starting
each test. As it was mentioned before each one had to
perform four different tasks connected with different stimuli:
• with object and with feedback (WOWF);
• with no object and with feedback (NOWF);
• with object and with no feedback (WONF);
• with no object and with no feedback (NONF).
Lets us deﬁne a visual feedback task (WF) as a test where
the subject is kept focused on the screen, on which he sees
a virtual object following his hand movements. Depending
on which state of experiment takes place, virtual object is a
shape of a ball - for movements not recorded, simulating
hand position - or a cylinder - for recorded movements,
simulating moving object. The use of these two objects try
to help a test subject to differentiate when he virtually drags
an object or not.
No visual feedback task (NF) is a test where the subject
is kept focused on his hand and natural environment (real
world). During that test the feedback screen is switched off.

2 in this project OpenNI is installed with the component for Unity via
ZigFu developer bundle : http://zigfu.com/legacy.html

3 Kinect device can provide three signals: depth map video, RGB video
and multichannel audio signal.

II-B. Hardware and software

152

hal-00724400, version 1 - 20 Aug 2012

The other part of the experiment is when a test subject
holds an object or not. Holding object task (WO) is deﬁned
as a task where the subject grabs a cylindrical object in
his hand (in our test the object is a small plastic bottle).
In contrast, empty hand task (NO) is when the subject
holds nothing - but makes an action of holding something
(imaginary cylinder for example).
The activity performed in all tasks is the same and is based
on hand movement between four markers put on a table in
a rectangular shape. Movements are ordered in clockwise
direction, slightly raising hand between markers and laying
down on them (a good precision is not asked to test subjects).
The activity is repeated continuously for 30 seconds. In cases
where subjects have no visual feedback, end of exercise
is signalized by supervisor based on timer included in the
application.
Each subject performed the experiment as follows:
• setting up EEG headset;
• one round of the four different tasks is performed by the
test subject to see if he has understood the instructions
(and is helped if he has not);
• ﬁnally the tasks recording starts
Datasets recordings were made repeating 4 times the same
task (giving 16 datasets for the 4 tasks). Number of acquisitions for the same user was selected to 4 as optimal
compromise between largest possible amount of data and
mental fatigue of subjects. Due to technical issues described
later on, the number of datasets for some users had to be
reduced to 12 or 8. Consequently users were divided into
3 groups based upon number of datasets available, ranging
from 2 to 4 datasets per task. The ﬁnal distribution of the
number of recorded datasets is as follows:
• 4 users with 16 datasets (4 times the 4 tasks),
• 6 users with 12 datasets (3 times the 4 tasks),
• 2 users with 8 datasets (2 times the 4 tasks).
For data analysis, we added users with a greater number
of datasets to those with the smaller number of datasets by
removing one dataset for each experiment. It resulted in 3
different groups of datasets:
• G1 (group 1): 4 users with 16 datasets,
• G2: 10 users with 12 datasets
• G3: 12 users with 8 datasets.

Fig. 1. Testing room and experiments setup.

Fig. 2. Preview of the visual feedback window presented to
the subject during the experiments.

wireless connection was not stable causing data loss
during transmission. In that case the last received value
of the signal was repeated (and information indicating
that this acquisition is invalid is also stored).
• high sensitivity of sensor used to capture electric
activity of the brain can also detect electric noise,
especially muscles electric activity. So when the user
speaks or frowns, sensors could record wrong data.
Another observed error was that headset state sometimes
became ﬂickering. In that case the same data is recorded
twice. All datasets were checked and cleaned from invalid
data using automated scripts.
•

III. DATA PREPROCESSING
Before EEG data can be analyzed, some pre-processing is
necessary. Indeed, due to technical issues some of recorded
data had to be cleaned or, depending on test, datasets were
normalized.

III-B. Normalization

III-A. Technical issues

Our experiments are based on pre-processed data registered from EPOC device SDK. The EEG device can give
inter-user normalized data, but normalization procedure is
not known and (according to the manufacturer documenta-

It occurred that during the acquisition process the EEG
headset gave invalid or no data. It appears that the problems
was coming from two main causes:

153

hal-00724400, version 1 - 20 Aug 2012

Table I. Classiﬁcation accuracy using the SVM classiﬁer (1
sample, different types of classiﬁcation)

tion) can only be effective after 30 minutes of brain signal
recording.
In the ﬁrst part of our study (intra-user) we do not
need to normalize data, since analysis is done for each
user independently. However, for the second part of the
study (inter-user comparison) we need to make a proper
normalization to ensure that all data are comparable. Mean
values and standard deviation of the same attributes differ
between different subjects. However these differences are
constant between experiments, so data are normalized by
transforming the mean value of each user to zero and
rescaling by adjusting standard deviation to one (we make
the hypothesis that the data have a normal distribution) . This
operation is deﬁned by equation 1
xk − x̄
(1)
xN
k =
σx
where xk is a series of a single attribute acquired by EEG
headset, x̄ and σx are mean and standard deviation values
of the attribute for all data gathered for that user.

G1
G2
G3

CA
σ
CA
σ
CA
σ

O
96.7%
1.73%
98.3%
0.98%
98.9%
0.83%

Type
F
98.1%
1.26%
99.1%
1.25%
99.5%
0.56%

OF
96.6%
1.57%
98.2%
0.99%
99.1%
0.74%

Classiﬁcation is made with 4 different methods which are
SVM6 , k-NN7 , Naive Bayes and Tree Classiﬁer.. Parameters
of these classiﬁers are presented below.
SVM
is implemented in libsvm library using
C-SVM type with RBF
k-NN
is using 5 neighbors, euclidean metric
and normalized continuous attributes.
Naive Bayes
is using relative frequency method for
probability estimation
Tree Classiﬁer with attribute selection based upon Information Gain.
For other parameters, classiﬁers use default values supplied by Orange Canvas. Each classiﬁer is tested with
random sampling for training and testing data (repeated 10
times with 70:30% relative size ratio). Performance of classiﬁcation is measured by means of classiﬁcation accuracy
(CA).
Data is analyzed dividing it into smaller chunks of (1, 5,
10, 15) samples. For avg or mean analysis, chunks are later
averaged over values of the same attribute. For raw analysis,
attributes from different samples form an input vector of k∗n
size (k being the number of samples and n = 5 the number
of attributes).
Results show the same tendency for all users under all
groups and for each classiﬁer. Results in function of different
sizes of chunks, and mean/raw types of features are depicted
in Fig. 3 and 4 (only results of SVM classiﬁer for G1 and
G2 are shown for illustration). Best classiﬁcation results are
obtained for 1 sample chunks, CA decreases with increasing
number of samples. Reducing the number of attributes by
averaging helps slightly, however the accuracy is still not
as good as for lower sample count. The SVM classiﬁer
gives better results than other classiﬁers (naive Bayes being
the worst), but cost little more time for training. In some
applications, 4 classes are not necessary, so more general
classes can be used , table I presents results of SVM
classiﬁcation for different groups of classes (O, F, OF). We
can observe that F type classiﬁcation gives better results than
two others for all analyzed groups.
The results obtained can be explained by the fact that
averaging masks signal ﬂuctuations, which appear in raw

IV. DATA ANALYSIS
This section is composed of 3 different analysis. Firstly,
users are taken into account independently. EEG signals
are classiﬁed for each user with no regard to other users’
datasets. A sampling length study is also conducted to ﬁnd
out if the sample size inﬂuences the classiﬁcation accuracy.
Secondly, all user datasets are analyzed together aiming to
verify the possibility of building a universal model. Finally,
we study the importance of the ﬁve EEG signals and their
impact on the classiﬁcation accuracy. Orange Canvas4 and
Numpy5 , respectively, a Python based data visualization and
analysis tool for data mining and a Python package for
scientiﬁc computing, are used in this section to calculate
and visualize different classiﬁers on our datasets.
In the rest of this paper 8 classes will be used, divided
into 3 groups resuming the deﬁnitions of section II-C:
• a group of 4 classes:
NONF, NOWF, WONF and WOWF (type OF).
• two groups of 2 classes:
– NO and WO (type O).
– NF and WF (type F).
These groups were constituted to serve different purpose.
First of all we wanted to be able to classify all type of
activities (OF). Later in search for increase in classiﬁcation
accuracy groups O and F were formed, grouping together
classes describing opposite activities (with-object, no-object)
IV-A. Intra-user analysis
The following analysis is focused on single user datasets,
aiming to classify subject activity in 4 classes – type OF
(see section II-C).

6 Support

4 http://orange.biolab.si/

Vector Machine
Neighbors

7 k-Nearest

5 http://numpy.scipy.org/

154

hal-00724400, version 1 - 20 Aug 2012

Fig. 3. Classiﬁcation accuracy for the 4 users of group G1,
using SVM classiﬁer

Fig. 5. Classiﬁcation results for a user independent model
on group G1

Figure 5 presents results showing the relation between
classiﬁcation accuracy and two factors: the number of chunks
and the type of processing of data for G1. Processing
consists of the two processes described before: reduction
by averaging and normalizing datasets with users’ statistical
parameters (see sec. III-B). Results are still not as good as in
intra-user analysis, but we can observe the same tendencies.
Another conclusion that can be drawn from these results is
that the normalization method used here is not well suited
to this kind of data and classiﬁcation.

IV-C. Attributes importance analysis
The aim of this analysis is to quantify the importance of
the 5 different EEG signals on classiﬁcation.
Features used are limited to 1 sample raw data chunks
(with no averaging) and SVM classiﬁer.
Analysis is based upon evaluating all possible combinations of attributes in search for CA parameter. For every
attribute (Long Term Excitement, Short Term Excitement,
Frustration, Boredom, Meditation) all combinations (along
each group of users) including this attribute were listed.
CA scores were paired so CA score for subset including
certain attribute and CA score for the same subset but with
this attribute removed were taken together. Each CA score
formed as many pairs as it was necessary. Differences of
scores in pairs were taken and averaged between different
pairs of same type of attribute forming attribute’s averaged
loss of classiﬁcation CAL(si ) .

Fig. 4. Classiﬁcation accuracy for the 10 users of group G2,
using SVM classiﬁer

samples - and so slightly improve classiﬁcation results.
Because classiﬁcation results are better for 1 sample, we
can make near real-time classiﬁcation (limited to sampling
acquisition speed and SVM classiﬁcation one). Slightly
better results, for F type of classiﬁcation can be explained
by lower number of classes. However, the same case is for O
type of classiﬁcation, and it notes lower results. Therefore,
it is more probable that visual feedback stimuli have greater
impact on brain data registered by EEG headset.
IV-B. Inter-user analysis
The aim of this analysis is to assess the feasibility of
a universal (inter-user) classiﬁer, which posses pre-trained
classes that are efﬁcient regardless of users.

S = {lte, ste, f ru, bor, med} T = 2S \{∅}

155

(2)

[2]

[3]

[4]

hal-00724400, version 1 - 20 Aug 2012

Fig. 6. Impact of each emotional state feature on classiﬁcation accuracy. Average loss of classiﬁcation accuracy on
attribute removal.

|T |

[5]



[6]

CA(tj ) − CA(tj \{si }) if si ∈ tj
0
else

CAL(si ) =
|T | 1 if si ∈ tj
j=0
0 else
(3)
The results obtained are presented in ﬁg.6. Despite the fact
that values varies slightly between groups, it is noteworthy
that Long Term Excitement attribute and later Boredom
attribute have higher importance than other attributes, it
means that by their removal classiﬁcation accuracy drops
on average by the highest percentage.
j=0

[7]

[8]

V. CONCLUSION
EEG based classiﬁcation of user interaction is the ﬁrst
step for better HCI devices, as it opens more natural ways
of controlling machines. The results obtained from the
experiment are promising, especially for intra-user analysis
we found that classiﬁcation accuracy is really high (CA
96%). It can be further improved by reducing the number of
classes. Still it is surprising that even considering high level
features used in experiment, results are so good. Considering
1 sample classiﬁcation requirement (0.5 s), the process can
be nearly real-time. This can possibly lead to HCI device
that detects intentions and instantaneously knows when user
wants to interact with it. To sum up, this work opens the
door for further investigation.

[9]

[10]

VI. REFERENCES
[1] W. Zhao, R. Chellappa, P. Phillips, and
A. Rosenfeld, “Face recognition: A literature

156

survey,” Acm Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 35,
no. 4, pp. 399–458, 2003. [Online]. Available:
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=954342
M. A. Anusuya and S. K. Katti, “Speech Recognition
by Machine : A Review,” Journal of Computer Science
and Information Security, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 181–205,
2009.
C.
Zhang,
“A
survey
of
recent
advances
in
face
detection,”
Microsoft
Research, June, no. June, 2010. [Online]. Available: http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/um/people/
chazhang/publications/tr2010-66\_chazhang.pdf
S. Mitra, “Gesture recognition: A survey,” Systems,
Man, and Cybernetics, Part C:, vol. 37, no. 3, pp.
311–324, 2007. [Online]. Available: http://ieeexplore.
ieee.org/xpls/abs\_all.jsp?arnumber=4154947
A. Jaimes and N. Sebe, “Multimodal human–computer
interaction: A survey,” Computer Vision and Image
Understanding, vol. 108, no. 1-2, pp. 116–134, Oct.
2007. [Online]. Available: http://linkinghub.elsevier.
com/retrieve/pii/S1077314206002335
E. A. Johnson, “Touch display—a novel input/output
device for computers,” Electronics Letters, vol. 1,
no. 8, p. 219, 1965. [Online]. Available: http:
//link.aip.org/link/ELLEAK/v1/i8/p219/s2\&Agg=doi
V. Venkatesh, M. Morris, G. Davis, and F. Davis,
“User acceptance of information technology: Toward
a uniﬁed view,” MIS quarterly, vol. 27, no. 3, pp.
425–478, 2003. [Online]. Available: http://www.jstor.
org/stable/10.2307/30036540
Z. Bien, K. Park, and J. Jung, “Intention reading
is essential in human-friendly interfaces for the
elderly and the handicapped,” Industrial Electronics,
IEEE, vol. 52, no. 6, pp. 1500–1505, 2005.
[Online]. Available: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpls/abs\
_all.jsp?arnumber=1546365
R. Vertegaal, “Attentive user interfaces,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 46, no. 3,
pp. 30–33, 2003. [Online]. Available: http:
//www.hml.queensu.ca/papers/vertegaalcacm0303.pdf
R. Picard, “Affective computing. media laboratory, perceptual computing tr 321,” 1995.

