34

ELECTRONICS, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JUNE 2018

Epilepsy Detecting and Halting Mechanism
Using Wireless Sensor Networks
Sayantani Basu, Ananda Kumar S. and Bhuvana Shanmugam

Abstract—Epilepsy is a condition that affects thousands of
people worldwide. In the laboratory setting, it becomes difficult to
monitor patients and analyze when the next seizure would recur.
Although algorithms have been proposed for deriving when the
next seizure is probable, it is difficult to generalize such models
for the various types of epilepsy that are occurring every day. A
more promising solution is the use of Wireless Sensor Networks
(WSNs) that is proposed to simulate small electrodes used in
EEG that will be placed on the scalp of the patient as a wearable
device along with a portable kit that is capable of monitoring the
patient in both ambulatory and resting condition. As much as a
detection system is required for epilepsy, a halting mechanism is
also needed to prevent such high flow of bio-electrical signals in
the brain during seizures. It is estimated that millions of brain
cells die during epileptic seizures, which can prove detrimental
or even fatal in some cases. In order to overcome this, an IoTbased epilepsy detection and halting system with wireless sensor
networks and focal cooling mechanism has been proposed in
order to regionally cool the regions of the brain when a seizure is
probable or suddenly occurs.
Index Terms—epilepsy, seizure detection, seizure halting,
wireless sensor networks.

Original Research Paper
DOI: 10.7251/ELS1822034B
I. Introduction

W

ireless sensor networks (WSNs) are a class of wireless
networks that use sensors to monitor a specific
environment. WSNs have made their way to several interesting
applications in healthcare over the last decade [1]. In addition
to being of potential use to patients, such systems also find
considerable applications for children and elders.
Usually the group of sensors carried or worn by the patient
(in the form of wearable sensors) forms the Body Area Network
(BAN). The sensors located in the immediate surrounding

Manuscript received 18 December 2017. Received in revised form 22 April
2018 and 26 May 2018. Accepted for publication 5 June 2018.
Sayantani Basu is with the School of Computer Science and Engineering,
VIT University, Vellore, Tamil Nadu, India (e-mail: sayantani.basu2014@vit.
ac.in).
Ananda Kumar S. is with the School of Computer Science and Engineering, VIT University, Vellore, Tamil Nadu, India (e-mail: s.anandakumar@vit.
ac.in)
Bhuvana Shanmugam is with the Sri Krishna College of Technology, Coimbatore, India, Vellore, Tamil Nadu, India (e-mail: ss.bhuvana@skct.edu.in).

environment form the Personal Area Network (PAN). Generally,
monitoring systems consist of healthcare professionals viewing
and interacting with the patient via a Graphical User Interface
(GUI) in the form of a mobile application whereas in detecting
systems, an algorithm judges the condition of a patient using
Artificial Intelligence and Statistical models.
In the healthcare domain, WSN systems commonly comprise
the following components: (i) BAN Subsystem, (ii) PAN
Subsystem, (iii) Wide Area Networks (WAN), (iv) Gateway to
Wide Area Networks (GWAN), and (v) Patients and other users.
The BAN subsystem consists of an ad hoc sensor network that
is wearable by the patients. Some examples include RFID tags,
accelerometers and EEG sensors. Care should be taken so that
the sensors do not cause any harm to the patients since they will
be required to wear them for prolonged durations. The PAN
subsystem consists of the devices in the immediate surrounding
environment of the patient. Such a subsystem is also capable
of features like location tracking, which may necessitate the
use of RFID, Bluetooth, Near Field Communication (NFC) and
GPS facilities as well. The Medium Access Control (MAC)
layer should be made energy efficient to make the system
low-power. All constituents among a subsystem should be
interconnected appropriately. The WAN subsystem is needed
for remote monitoring scenarios. If the healthcare system
is to be implemented globally, satellite networks may also
be employed. GWAN is used for the purpose of connecting
PAN subsystem and WAN subsystem to the WAN. Finally, as
mentioned earlier, the entire system is used by patients or other
users like children or elders.
The evolution of IoT (Internet of Things) has resulted in
efficiency and better exchange of data using technologies like
WSNs and embedded systems. The present work has focused
on an IoT-based system involving usage of WSNs for detecting
and halting epilepsy. Epilepsy is a condition of the brain defined
by at least 2 unprovoked seizures occurring at >24 hrs apart and
one unprovoked seizure or probable seizures occurring during
the next 10 years [2]. This disease affects thousands of people
worldwide and can be fatal in extreme conditions. Epilepsy
detection has been an important topic in medical research.
The exact cause of epilepsy and how to completely cure it
is still an unsolved puzzle. Research has uncovered various
types of epilepsy, broadly categorized as generalized epilepsy
and partial epilepsy, and specific types including childhood
epilepsy, temporal lobe epilepsy and focal epilepsy.
Epilepsy is most commonly detected using the technique of
EEG (Electroencephalography). The graphs are then analyzed
by doctors or healthcare professionals who determine the type

ELECTRONICS, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JUNE 2018

of epilepsy and the associated course of treatment. In some
cases, MRI and CT imaging is also used. However, in most
cases, EEG graphs show continuing occurrences of seizures
or only slightly decrease using medications. Most medications
even cause harmful side effects. In other words, it is difficult
for doctors to determine the exact type and origin of seizures
from a single EEG report. It is even more challenging to predict
the occurrence of the next possible seizure and immediately
halting it. Common approaches to reduce epileptic seizures
include using one or a combination of medications, surgery,
brain stimulation and focal cooling [3].
During an epileptic attack, seizures may happen due to
sudden misfiring or incorrect connections in neurons in the
brain. This results in sudden increases in electrical voltage in
the neural cells. Each epileptic attack damages hundreds of
brain cells that can be very harmful for the patients. As a result,
it is important to halt or at least reduce the intensity to prevent
such damages.
In the present work, a model has been proposed that uses
WSNs to monitor and detect epileptic seizures as well as a me­
chanism using focal cooling to halt the seizures.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section
II gives an overview of previous related work. Section III
discusses about the proposed method. Section IV highlights the
implementation and results. Section V concludes the paper and
suggests possible future work.
II. Related Work
Previously, several methods have been proposed for
seizure detection. Lay-Ekuakille et al. [4] have developed a
system using WSNs to detect epilepsy from joint EEG-ECGErgospirometric signals. It consists of a wireless ECG and EEG
systems. It uses a K4b2, which is a device worn by patients
for pulmonary monitoring purposes. It can be worn while the
patient is in motion and operates on battery power. Generally,
the wave ranges for a normal EEG have been observed to be
as follows [5]: (i) alpha (8-13 Hz), (ii) beta (13-30 Hz), (iii)
delta (0.5-4 Hz) and (iv) theta (4-7 Hz). Along with acquiring
the ECG and EEG signals, authors have then measured the
Heart Rate Variability (HRV) before and after exercise, while
simultaneously observing the corresponding changes in the
Average Message Transmission Time (AMTT). Amplitudes
over 45 and 100 microvolts imply suspected cases of epilepsy.
The authors have noted that a simulator can enhance their
results and that the method can be improved if WSNs can be
related to the foci.
Otoum et al. [6] have developed Epilepsy Patients Moni­
toring System (EPMS) using WSNs. More specifically, they
have proposed an SMAC (Sensor Medium Access Control)
based system in order to reduce the power consumption of the
system. They have designed the system using MICAz sensor
motes (developed by Crossbow Technology). The EPMS
consists of five sensor nodes that acquire the seizure infor­
mation and pass it on to the coordinator. The coordinator then
sends the information to the receiver. They have evaluated the

35

performance of their system using NS2 simulator. Their SMAC
protocol has shown lower average delay in packets compared
to the ZigBee protocol. Their future work suggests allowing
patients more freedom of movement by incorporating GPS and
routing protocols.
Sareen et al. in [7] have proposed a mobile framework to
predict seizures from EEG data. They acquired the EEG sig­
nals using Emotiv EPOC headset containing 14 sensors. They
have extracted the desired features using fast Walsh-Hadamard
transform (FWHT) and Higher Order Spectral Analysis (HOSA).
Then k-means has been used to obtain a classification accuracy
of 94.6%. They have tested their model in Amazon EC2 cloud.
The data stored in the cloud is also used to connect to other
family members and doctors in case of medical emergencies.
A drawback of their work is they are only predicting seizures
and not proposing any first hand technique of combatting the
seizures by the time medical help arrives.
Salem et al. [8] have proposed a Discrete Wavelet Transform
(DWT) and Ant Colony Optimization (ACO) based approach
with WSNs for detecting seizures. They have acquired the data
by placing electrodes on the scalp of the patient and acquiring
the data and forwarding it to a transceiver and storing the
data on a Local Processing Unit (LPU). They have identified
the ictal period (during which a seizure is occurring) as being
characterized by a discharge of polymorphic waveforms of
varying amplitude and frequency that exhibit continuous spikes.
Their model has shown a detection rate (DR) of 100% and a
False Alarm Rate (FAR) of 9%. The shortcoming of this model
is that the data is being processed after recording, that is, it is not
being implemented in a real-time scenario.
Borujeny et al. in [9] have proposed an algorithm using
WSNs and k-nearest neighbors (kNN) for detection of epilepsy
using accelerometry and have proved that it gives better
performance compared to using neural networks. For the
purpose of acquiring signals, they have used MICAz wireless
motes. Three 2D accelerometer sensors are placed on the left
thigh, left arm and right arm of the patient. The system is also
capable of monitoring the patient and sending the location of the
patient to the family members or hospital staff when a seizure
occurs. However, the system is capable of detecting epilepsy
only when the acquired signals show at least 50% of seizures.
Kramer et al. [10] have designed a system that works to
detect seizures and alert close family members of an epilepsy
patient. The motion sensing unit comprising an accelerometer
and transmitter were fitted in the form of a bracelet on the
patient’s wrist. They have developed an algorithm using time
and frequency domain analysis to map the motion of the subject
with previously gathered ictal data obtained from video EEG.
Their system correctly identifies 91% of the captured seizures.
They have suggested refining the algorithm to have above 95%
accuracy and test it on larger populations.
Jeppesen et al. in [11] have developed a portable device
capable of seizure detection that uses Near infrared spectroscopy
(NIRS). For recording the signals, they have used two PortaLite
wireless NIRS devices. They have then evaluated the changes
in levels of oxygenated- (HbO), deoxygenated- (HbR) and

36

ELECTRONICS, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JUNE 2018

total-hemoglobin (HbT). Their method has shown that the
levels change by 6-24% during seizures. They have suggested
individual tailor-made seizure detection for patients in the future.
Yilmaz and Dehollain [12] have used a wireless approach
for data transmission for the purpose of monitoring intracranial
epilepsy. They have used inductive coupling which is perfor­
med with the same frequency as that of the power transfer.
Implantation is necessary in order to sense the signals and fullduplex communication has been established between the implant
and the external unit. The authors have suggested using energyper-bit connections between the uplink and downlink channels for
future designers.
Conradsen et al. in [13] have suggested a wireless surface
electromyography (sEMG) device that can be used for recording
epileptic seizures. Their system was capable of detecting 4 out of
7 seizures with a false detection rate of 0.003/h. However, in some
instances the model was unable to record data and the authors
have suggested testing sEMG on the biceps instead of the tibia.
El Menshawy et al. [14] have developed an algorithm for
automated detection and analysis of epileptic seizures using signal
processing techniques. Using MATLAB, they have also used
feature extraction to reduce the vector space. They have stated
that the limitation is that their approach has no error detection
mechanism and absence of domain ontology for EEG.
TABLE I
Survey Table
Reference

Proposed Work

Limitations

Year

Lay-Ekuakille
et al.
[4]

EEG, ECG and HRV
analysis

WSNs not related
to the foci

2013

Otoum et al.
[6]

EPMS and SMAC for
monitoring

Does not allow
patients enough
freedom of
movement

2015

Sareen et al.
[7]

Mobile framework
using FWHT and HOSA
in cloud

Only predicting
seizures

2016

Salem et al.
[8]

DWT and ACO
approach with LPU

It is not
implemented in a
real-time scenario

2014

Borujeny
et al.
[9]

kNN based detection
model with
accelerometer sensors

Detects only >50%
of seizures

2013

Not tested on
larger populations

2011

Kramer et al.
[10]
Jeppesen et al.
[11]
Yilmaz and
Dehollain [12]

Bracelet for ictal
data analysis using
accelerometry
NIRS and changes in
HbO, HbR and HbT
levels in blood
Inductive coupling
and full-duplex
communication between
internal implant and
external sensing unit

Conradsen
et al.
[13]

sEMG placed on tibia
for detection of seizures

El Menshawy
et al.
[14]

Automated detection
using signal processing
and feature extraction

Seizure detection is
not tailor-made for
different patients
No presence of
energy-per-bit
connections
between uplink and
downlink channels
Unable to record
data in some cases;
Not tested on
biceps of patient
No error detection
mechanism;
Absence of domain
ontology

2015

2014

2012

2015

III. Proposed Method
In the proposed method, the data is first acquired using
WSNs. The EEG signals are recorded and processed simulta­
neously. This proposed system will work with inputs of both
non-seizure as well as seizure data.
An independent component analysis is performed on the
data in order to extract the channel spectra for quantitative
analysis. The unwanted artifacts are then rejected by visualizing
the 2-D component maps and individual activity power spectra
of each of the components. Once this step is completed, the
peak and amplitude (peak-to-peak) are calculated for each of
the remaining channels.
The data points are then plotted for both seizure and
non-seizure data. The classification boundary is then used
for detection of the seizure data. Additionally, focal cooling
mechanisms can also be included in this system for halting the
seizures whenever they are detected. The proposed methodology
is shown in Fig. 1. The entire proposed methodology consists of
the following steps:
1. Data Acquisition from Epilepsy patient using WSN
electrodes: Data is acquired from the patient through
wireless electrodes.
2. Input Seizure/Non-seizure data: The data (seizure/nonseizure) is input into the system.
3. Perform ICA: Independent Component Analysis is
performed to evaluate the spectra of the EEG. ICA is
also later used to perform artifact rejection.
4. Plot Channel Spectra: The channel spectra are plotted to
find the frequencies at which peaks occur in seizure and
non-seizure data.
5. Plot Activity Power Spectrum for each component: The
activity power spectrum is also a useful parameter for
visualizing peak and amplitude of seizures occurring in
every individual Independent Component (IC).
6. Rejection of Artifacts: Rejection of artifacts is done to
eliminate all unwanted signals which may give erroneous
results in the model. This is done manually based on the
ICA, channel spectra and activity power spectra.
7. Calculate peak and amplitude from Activity Power
Spectrum: After rejection of artifacts, the activity power
spectrum is considered only for the useful components.
8. Plot obtained data points: The data points are plotted
using the peak and amplitude values obtained.
9. Classification boundary for seizure detection: A classi­
fication boundary is set for classifying seizure and nonseizure data.
10. Focal Cooling for Halting: Based on the classification,
focal cooling is used to lower the temperature of the
electrodes which can help in controlling and possibly
halting the seizures.
IV. Implementation and Results
The EEGLab Toolbox [15] in MATLAB has been used for
the purpose of this simulation. Data was obtained from the
PhysioNet [16] database on CHB-MIT Scalp EEG [17]. This

ELECTRONICS, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JUNE 2018

dataset contains both seizure and non-seizure EEG data of ep
ilepsy patients.

B. Independent Component Analysis (ICA)
In order to evaluate the spectra of the EEG, an ICA
(Independent Component Analysis) was first performed on the
given data. A rank of 21 was used for ICA in this experiment.
ICA in EEG data is used to distinguish the particular regions
of the brain contributing to robust EEG signals. The 2-D
component maps of all the ICA components of non-seizure and
seizure data are shown in Fig. 4 and Fig. 5 respectively.

Fig. 1. Proposed Methodology.

A. Data Acquisition
The data considered from subject chb21 was evaluated for
both non-seizure data and seizure data. The EEG signals were
acquired using 28 electrodes. The locations of all the electrodes
on the scalp are shown in Fig. 2.

Fig. 4. 2-D Component plots of non-seizure data.

Fig. 2. Locations of 28 channels (WSN electrodes).

The EEG signals that have been acquired using this setup
are shown in Fig. 3.

Fig. 5. 2-D Component plots of seizure data.
Fig. 3. Acquired EEG signals.

37

38

ELECTRONICS, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JUNE 2018

C. Channel Spectra
Once ICA has been performed, the spectrum of the EEG
can be plotted to visualize the frequencies at which peaks
are occurring and hence, quantitatively detect the possibility
of seizures [18]. The channel spectrums for non-seizure and
seizure data are shown in Fig. 6 and Fig. 7 respectively.
D. Activity Power Spectrum
The single channel activity power spectrum is then plotted
for all the ICA components in both non-seizure and seizure
data. Like the channel spectrum, the activity power spectrum
also provides insights into information about peaks occurring in
seizure and non-seizure data. One such activity power spectrum
is shown in Fig. 8.

Fig. 8. Activity power spectrum for single component.

E. Artifact Rejection
Artifacts are unwanted signals due to eye blinking, heartbeat,
muscle activity and so on that result in unwanted signals in EEG
data. In order to retain only the brain signals, it is important to
reject the artifacts using ICA. In this case, artifact rejection was
done manually by visualizing each component.
Fig. 6. Channel spectrum in non-seizure data.

F. Detection of Seizure Data
After the process of artifact rejection, only those components
were retained that contributed to brain activities. From each
graph, the peak and amplitude (peak-to-peak) was calculated.
A separate set of data points were then obtained for non-seizure
and seizure data. The points were then plotted as shown in
Fig. 9 and a classification boundary (the line that was deemed
best-fit) was set for detecting and separating seizure data from
non-seizure data. This provides a suitable model for a particular
subject (patient) and future prediction can be done based on the
peak and amplitude.
Non-seizure
Seizure

30

Fig. 7. Channel spectrum in seizure data.

Amplitude

20

10

0

0

10

20

Peak

30

40

Fig. 9. Classification boundary for detection of seizure data.

ELECTRONICS, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JUNE 2018

An average classification accuracy of 90% and false positive
rate of 9% was obtained using the proposed detection system.
The proposed system performs at par with previously proposed
systems having average accuracy 94.6% [7], detection rate
100% and false positive rate 9% [8], accuracy 91% and false
negative rate 9% [10] efficiency 30% [11] and sensitivity 57%
[13].
Hence, given any EEG sample, the proposed methodology
can be followed and the detection of seizures can be carried out
using its activity power spectrum and plotting its data point.
When seizures are detected, a focal cooling mechanism can
be incorporated along with the mobile WSN EEG electrodes
to cool the focal region in order to prevent impending seizures
from arising.

[4]

[5]
[6]

[7]
[8]

[9]

V. Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, an IoT-based system using wireless sensor
networks has been proposed by incorporating machine learning
for detection of seizures and a focal cooling mechanism
for halting of seizures in epilepsy patients. This system is
particularly helpful in the case of mobile EEG, especially in
cases of patients with epilepsy who require monitoring even in
ambulatory condition. The classification approach for detection
of seizures has obtained 90% classification accuracy and
9% false positive rate, which is competent with the previous
approaches.
Future approaches with regard to this work include enhan­
cing the system with more advanced wireless electrodes and
more advance machine learning algorithms.
References
[1]
[2]
[3]

H. Alemdar and C. Ersoy, “Wireless sensor networks for healthcare: A
survey,” Comput. Networks, vol. 54, no. 15, pp. 2688–2710, 2010.
R. S. Fisher, C. Acevedo, A. Arzimanoglou, A. Bogacz, J. H. Cross, C.
Elger, et al., “ILAE Official Report: A practical clinical definition of
epilepsy,” Epilepsia, vol. 55, no. 4, pp. 475–482, 2014.
M. Fujii, T. Inoue, S. Nomura, Y. Maruta, Y. He, H. Koizumi, et al.,
“Cooling of the epileptic focus suppresses seizures with minimal influence
on neurologic functions,” Epilepsia, vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 485–493, 2012.

[10]
[11]

[12]
[13]

[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]

39

A. Lay-Ekuakille, P. Vergallo, A. Trabacca, M. De Rinaldis, F. Angelillo,
F. Conversano, et al., “Low-frequency detection in ECG signals and joint
EEG-Ergospirometric measurements for precautionary diagnosis,” Meas.
J. Int. Meas. Confed., vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 97–107, 2013.
A. Lay-Ekuakille, P. Vergallo, D. Caratelli, F. Conversano, S. Casciaro,
and A. Trabacca, “Multispectrum approach in quantitative EEG: Accuracy
and physical effort,” IEEE Sens. J., vol. 13, no. 9, pp. 3331–3340, 2013.
S. Otoum, M. Ahmed, and H. T. Mouftah, “Sensor Medium Access
Control (SMAC)-based epilepsy patients monitoring system,” in
Canadian Conference on Electrical and Computer Engineering, 2015, vol.
2015–June, no. June, pp. 1109–1114.
S. Sareen, S. K. Sood, and S. K. Gupta, “An Automatic Prediction
of Epileptic Seizures Using Cloud Computing and Wireless Sensor
Networks,” J. Med. Syst., vol. 40, no. 11, 2016.
O. Salem, A. Naseem, and A. Mehaoua, “Epileptic seizure detection from
EEG signal using Discrete Wavelet Transform and Ant Colony classifier,”
in Communications (ICC), 2014 IEEE International Conference on, 2014,
pp. 3529–3534.
G. T. Borujeny, M. Yazdi, A. Keshavarz-Haddad, and A. R. Borujeny,
“Detection of epileptic seizure using wireless sensor networks.,” J. Med.
Signals Sens., vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 63–8, 2013.
U. Kramer, S. Kipervasser, A. Shlitner, and R. Kuzniecky, “A Novel
Portable Seizure Detection Alarm System: Preliminary Results,” J. Clin.
Neurophysiol., vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 36–38, 2011.
J. Jeppesen, S. Beniczky, P. Johansen, P. Sidenius, and A. FuglsangFrederiksen, “Exploring the capability of wireless near infrared
spectroscopy as a portable seizure detection device for epilepsy patients,”
Seizure, vol. 26, pp. 43–48, 2015.
G. Yilmaz and C. Dehollain, “Single frequency wireless power transfer
and full-duplex communication system for intracranial epilepsy
monitoring,” Microelectronics J., vol. 45, no. 12, pp. 1595–1602, 2014.
I. Conradsen, S. Beniczky, P. Wolf, P. Jennum, and H. B. D. Sorensen,
“Evaluation of novel algorithm embedded in a wearable sEMG device for
seizure detection,” in Proceedings of the Annual International Conference
of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, EMBS, 2012,
pp. 2048–2051.
M. El Menshawy, A. Benharref, and M. Serhani, “An automatic mobilehealth based approach for EEG epileptic seizures detection,” Expert Syst.
Appl., vol. 42, no. 20, pp. 7157–7174, 2015.
A. Delorme and S. Makeig, “EEGLAB: An open source toolbox for
analysis of single-trial EEG dynamics including independent component
analysis,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 134, no. 1, pp. 9–21, 2004.
A. L. Goldberger et al., “PhysioBank, PhysioToolkit, and PhysioNet:
Components of a New Research Resource for Complex Physiologic
Signals,” Circulation, vol. 101, no. 23, pp. e215–e220, 2000.
A. Shoeb and J. Guttag, “Application of Machine Learning To Epileptic
Seizure Detection,” Seizure, pp. 975–982, 2010.
A. S. M. D. S. Braga, B.D.R.R. Assis , J.T.R. Ribeiro, P.M.S. Polla, B.J.H.
Pereira, R.G. Fonseca et al., “Quantitative EEG evaluation in patients
with acute encephalopathy” Arq. Neuropsiquiatr., vol. 71, no. 12, pp.
937–42, 2013.

