[Downloaded free from http://www.jmssjournal.net on Saturday, September 28, 2019, IP: 10.232.74.23]

Short Communication

Drowsiness Analysis Using Common Spatial Pattern and Extreme
Learning Machine Based on Electroencephalogram Signal
Abstract
An alarm system has become essential to prevent someone from drowsiness while driving,
considering the high incidence due to fatigue or drowsiness. This study offered an alternative
to overcome all the limitations provided by the conventional system to detect sleepiness based
on the driver’s brain electrical activity using wearable electroencephalogram (EEG), which is
lighter and easy to use. The EEG signals were collected using EMOTIV Epoc + and then were
decomposed into narrowband frequency, such as delta, theta, alpha, and beta using DWT. The
relative power, as the result of feature extraction, then were processed further by calculating its
variance using the common spatial pattern (CSP) method to optimize the accuracy of extreme
learning machine (ELM). Comparison of relative power between awake and drowsy state showed
that during the drowsy state, theta‑wave, alpha‑wave, and beta‑wave were tend to be higher than
in the awake state. However, despite with the help of ELM, the accuracy was not too high (below
87%). The feature extraction which continued by calculating its variance using CSP algorithm
before classified by ELM obtained a high accuracy, even with small amount of data training. This
showed that CSP combining with ELM could be useful to shorten the time in training/calibration
session, yet still, obtained high accuracy in classifying the awake state and drowsy state. The
overall average accuracy of testing ranged from 91.67% to 93.75%. This study could increase the
ability of EEG in detecting drowsiness that is important to prevent the risk caused by driving in a
drowsy state.

Osmalina Nur
Rahma,
Akif Rahmatillah
Department of Physics,
Airlangga University,
Surabaya, Indonesia

Keywords: Common spatial pattern, drowsiness, electroencephalogram, extreme learning machine

Introduction
Drowsiness is a condition between awake
or alert and sleep. Drowsiness is one of the
highest causes in accidents. Based on the
incidence of traffic accidents and deaths
collected by the National Police Corps,
in 2014, the number of traffic accident
victims reached 95,906 victims, and 17.2%
of the total was death. The data of traffic
incidence showed that 83% of the accidents
were caused due to human error, which
consists of disorganized, indifferent/sleepy
and exceeding the speed limit.[1]
An alarm system has become essential to
prevent someone from drowsiness while
driving, considering the high incidence
of traffic accidents due to human error,
such as fatigue or sleepiness, including
adding sensors that placed in the car, such
as a camera to monitor eye movements or
sensors placed on a tire that can give an
alarm when the driver is sleepy. However,

the system is limited because it only applies
to specific circumstances. The alternative
offered to overcome all the limitations
provided by the conventional system was
to detect sleepiness based on the driver’s
brain electrical activity. The electrical
activity of the brain would changes when
a person starts to sleep, and this could
become a promising tool for detecting
the drowsiness while driving. In 2014,
Awais researched to detect sleepiness
based on alpha and theta wave spectrum
using Fast Fourier transform.[2] Nikita
Gurudath and Bryan Riley used discrete
wavelet transform (DWT) to get the
alpha, beta, theta, and gamma subwaves
and then calculated the average value,
median, variant, and standard deviation to
distinguish alertness and drowsiness.[3]
This
study
tried
to
analyze
electroencephalogram
(EEG)
signals
automatically based on EEG signal in
nondrowsy (awake state) and in the drowsy

Access this article online
Website: www.jmssjournal.net
DOI: 10.4103/jmss.JMSS_54_18
Quick Response Code:

This is an open access journal, and articles are
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution‑NonCommercial‑ShareAlike 4.0 License, which allows
others to remix, tweak, and build upon the work non‑commercially,
as long as appropriate credit is given and the new creations are
licensed under the identical terms.

How to cite this article: Rahma ON, Rahmatillah A.
Drowsiness analysis using common spatial
pattern and extreme learning machine based on
electroencephalogram signal. J Med Signals Sens
2019;9:130-6.

For reprints contact: reprints@medknow.com

Received: November, 2018. Accepted: February, 2019.

130

Address for correspondence:
Miss. Osmalina Nur Rahma,
Department of Physics,
Airlangga University,
Surabaya, Indonesia.
E‑mail: osmalina.n.rahma@fst.
unair.ac.id

© 2019 Journal of Medical Signals & Sensors | Published by Wolters Kluwer - Medknow

[Downloaded free from http://www.jmssjournal.net on Saturday, September 28, 2019, IP: 10.232.74.23]
Rahma and Rahmatillah: Drowsiness analysis based on EEG signal

state with digital signal processing using a wearable EEG
device. Wearable EEG was light and easy to use; hence, it
would be suitable for detecting drowsiness while driving.
Besides, the wearable EEG such as EPOC or MindWave
Neurosky has been used widely for drowsiness detection,[4,5]
eye state identification,[6,7] classifying imaginary hand
movement,[8] and other brain‑computer interface (BCI)
applications. Compared to the medical‑used device, the
wearable EEG had nonsignificant differences and generated
a good performance for the specific task.[7]
The EEG signals were decomposed into narrowband
frequency, such as delta, theta, alpha, and beta. Then, this
sub‑band frequency was calculated to get its power spectral
density (PSD) and its relative power. The PSD of the delta,
theta, alpha, and beta would change if a person’s state
change from awake to drowsy.[3,9,10] The relative power of
each sub‑band frequency, as the result of feature extraction
and then were processed further by calculating its variance
using the common spatial pattern (CSP) method to enlarge
the distance between drowsy and awake and could be used
as a feature for the extreme learning machine (ELM). The
addition of CSP was proven to increase the accuracy of the
classifier since CSP maximize the variance of signals in
one class while minimizing the variance of signals in the
other class.[6,11,12] This study could improve the ability of
EEG in detecting drowsiness that is important to prevent
the risk caused by driving in a drowsy state.

Materials and Methods
Experiment protocol
BCI is a subject‑dependent system where each person
had different characteristic and resulted in better accuracy
values if each individual was trained and tested on
their recordings.[13,14] The 28 EEG signals consist of the
drowsy and awake states were collected from two healthy
individuals (male and female, age ranged from 20 to
25 years old who did not experience insomnia) using
EMOTIV Epoc+ with 14 channel electrodes and two
references (CMS/DRL noise cancellation configuration
in P3/P4 locations). The sampling rate of EMOTIV
Epoc+ device is 128 sampling per sequence with resolution
14 bits 1 least significant bit = 0.5 µV (16‑bit ADC, 2‑bit
instrumental noise floor discarded) and connected by
Bluetooth. The EEG data were recorded in the research
laboratory of Biomedical Engineering study Program,
Universitas Airlangga. The individual was asked to sit
down and play a game, which was assumed as a condition
of driving a car for 10 min in alert conditions and 10 min
during sleepy condition. The alert condition was a condition
when the individuals start the activity in the morning and
3 h after the individuals got up from sleep. Drowsiness
was a condition while the individual had not slept for
more than 18 h and felt drowsy. The electrode must be
hydrated using saline solution every time before using the
headset and make sure all the quality contact is green for

proper contact of sensors on the scalp. The electrode was
placed based on the EMOTIV tool shown in Figure 1.[15,16]
This position represents the electrical activity of the brain
in the frontal cortex (AF3, AF4, F3, F4, F7, and F8),
frontocentral cortex (FC5‑FC6), temporal cortex (T7‑T8),
parietal cortex (P7‑P8), and occipital cortex (O1‑O2). Data
of EEG were saved in European Data Format (.EDF) and
converted into. CSV to be processed further.
Signal preprocessing
It is necessary to do the preprocessing stage before
processing the data to decompose the EEG signal into a
subwave based on the frequency range, namely, alpha,
beta, theta, and delta using wavelet transform (DWT).
Decomposition of the EEG signal into a subwave at
frequency sampling 128 Hz requires four levels using
Daubechies 4 as the mother wavelet, with a detailed
description of each level as follows:
• Level 1 is AD2 (0–32 Hz) and CD2 (32–64 Hz) which
were considered as noise
• Level 2 is AD3 (0–16 Hz) and CD3 (16–32 Hz) which
were included in the beta frequency range
• Level 3 is AD4 (0–8 Hz) and CD4 (8–16 Hz) which
were included in the alpha frequency range
• Level 4 is AD5 (0–4 Hz) which was included in
the delta, and CD4 frequency ranges (4–8 Hz) were
included in the theta frequency range.
Feature extraction and classification
Relative power ratio
Sub‑band frequency selection for the features was
conducted using DWT then obtained its PSD by calculating
the squared magnitude of the decomposed signal (each
sub‑band frequency).
The afterward process was to gain the value of the relative
power ratio (RPR) of each sub‑band power that was the
ratio between the power sub‑band power to the total of all
sub‑band power (alpha + beta + delta + theta).

Figure 1: Electrode placement EPOC

Journal of Medical Signals & Sensors | Volume 9 | Issue 2 | April-June 2019

131

[Downloaded free from http://www.jmssjournal.net on Saturday, September 28, 2019, IP: 10.232.74.23]
Rahma and Rahmatillah: Drowsiness analysis based on EEG signal

Relative power ratio =

power (sub-band frequency)

total 4sub-band power

 G (a1, b1, x1 )  G (aL, bL, x1 ) 






 
 G (a b x )  G (a b x ) 
1, 1, N
L, L, N  N× L


(1)

Common spatial pattern
The result of RPR value was processed further using the
common spatial pattern (CSP) method to achieve better
accuracy in classifying the drowsy and awake states.
CSP improves the accuracy by increased the distinction
of each class and was an excellent method for BCI
signal classification.[8,17] This algorithm maximized the
variance of one class and then minimized the variance of
the other class.[6,11] This study used the frequency‑based
CSP algorithm by first filtering the signal into sub‑bands
frequency (delta, theta, alpha, and beta) and then were
calculated its variance based on CSP algorithm. The CSP
was obtained using the script from James Ethridge and
William Weaver.[18]
Extreme learning machine
The decrease and increase in the magnitude or power
of sub‑band frequency have been linked to drowsiness.
However, it was challenging to classify the awake
state and the drowsy state using a threshold or linear
classifier from the changes of frequency.[1] Therefore,
the nonlinear classifier such as ELM was required to
distinguish drowsy state and awake state. ELM is a
single hidden layer of feedforward type neural network
with L hidden neuron, activation function i (x) as the
following equation:[19]

∑

L
i =1

β i G (ai , bi , xi ) = t j

j = 1,…, N

with Hβ = T

Equivalent
(2)

Where ai is an input weight that connected j‑input nodes (xi)
with i‑hidden node. bi is an impact factor from the i‑hidden
node, while βi is an output weight which connected the
i‑hidden node with output node. ti is a threshold or the
input target from the j‑input node.
ELM was implemented to minimize the error training using
Moore Penrose Pseudo Inverse by multiplied the inverse
matrix H (H†) and target (T). Training was required to
obtain weight values that were suitable for testing using the
following algorithm:
• Step 1: Initialize the input weight (ai) and impact
factor (bi) randomly based on the suitable activation
function G (x). In this study, the sigmoid function was
used as the activation function.
The sigmoid activation function:
1
H (a1, b1, x1) =
(3)
−G ( a b x ) 
1+ e 1, 1, 1
• Step 2: Calculate all the output at the hidden neuron
using the activation function and put it into matrix H
L
G (a1, b1, x1 ) = ∑ i =1 ai xi + bi 
(4)
H (a1,…, aL, b1, …bL, x1,…, xn) =
132

•

(5)

Step 3: Calculate the output weight (β) from the hidden
layer.
β = H†T
(6)

While for testing was generated using the following algorithm:
• Step 1:
Setting the parameters obtained from the
training.
• Step 2:
Calculate all the output at the hidden
neuron using the activation function and put it into
matrix H (Eqs. 4 and 5)
• Step 3:
Calculate the output node by multiplying
the matrix H with output weight (β) from the training
process.
L
O j = ∑ i =1 β H (ai , bi , x j ) 
(7)
The result of the output node Oj was then compared to the
input target (T) to obtain the accuracy.
The classification, including training and testing, was
conducted using K‑fold Cross‑validation (K = 3); hence,
each individual was trained and tested three times with
three different combinations of data classification. Thus, the
accuracy was calculated from the average of each accuracy.
1
K
accuracy = ∑ K =1 accuracy k 
(8)
K
Training and testing in different individuals were conducted
separately and respectively. BCI is a subject‑dependent,
which is specific and only suitable for just one particular
individual,[20] so for different individual would need
calibration/training session before the usage. Minimal
data training would be preferable in BCI since the more
data needed during training would make the individual feel
uncomfortable and tired. Therefore, this study also tried to
lessen the total data of training to observe the performance
of the system with a small amount of data training. First,
six data of training consist of three drowsy and three
awake state data were used in each individual to test eight
data. Then, the total data of training was lessen into four,
which consist of two drowsy and two awake states were
processed to test ten data. Finally, two data training were
used to test the rest of the data. All of these training and
testing were repeated three times (3‑fold cross‑validation)
with three different combinations of data.

Results and Discussion
EEG data were obtained from the EEG EMOTIV EPOC
with 14 channels, namely, AF3, AF4, F3, F4, F7 and F8
(frontal left and right), FC5‑FC6 (frontocentral left and
right), T7‑T8 (temporal left), P7‑P8 (parietal left and right),
and O1‑O2 (occipital left and right). Recordings were done
by asking the individuals to play a simulation game driving

Journal of Medical Signals & Sensors | Volume 9 | Issue 2 | April-June 2019

[Downloaded free from http://www.jmssjournal.net on Saturday, September 28, 2019, IP: 10.232.74.23]
Rahma and Rahmatillah: Drowsiness analysis based on EEG signal

on a mobile phone for approximately 10 min during drowsy
and awake states as shown in Figure 2.
As mention before that frequency related to the drowsiness;
therefore, the increment or decrement of sub‑band frequency
needs to be processed further to obtain accurate information.
EEG recording data obtained from the EMOTIV EPOC
EEG device were stored in the. CSV format and then
filtered into four sub‑bands based on the frequency range,
which was delta, theta, alpha, and beta wave using DWT.
The signal required four‑level decomposition and mother
wavelet type Daubechies 4 (DB4) to obtain the coefficients
that correspond to the frequency range of alpha, beta, delta,
and theta. The following step was calculating the PSD and
RPR of each sub‑band frequency.
Comparison of PSD between awake and drowsy state in
each sub‑band frequency is shown in Figure 3. Figure 3

showed that during the drowsy state, theta, alpha, and beta
were higher than in the awake state. It was challenging to
design a linear threshold from the changes of frequencies[1]
since the correlation between drowsy and awake states
was regarded as moderate (Pearson’s correlation, r = 0.5,
P < 0.05). Therefore, it required the nonlinear classifier
such as ELM. However, despite with the help of ELM,
the accuracy was not too high (below 87%) [Figures 4‑6].
Therefore, the feature needed to be processed further to
obtain higher accuracy.
The augmented of common spatial pattern algorithm to
optimize the extreme learning machine
CSP algorithm was implemented in the matrix of relative
power alpha, beta, theta, and delta in the drowsy and awake
states. As shown in Figure 7, before the CSP algorithm was
applied, the relative power features were difficult to classify
but after continued the calculation using the CSP algorithm,
the features started to group into two classes. Thus, the CSP
method was necessary to improve the accuracy of ELM.
The performances of CSP in optimizing the classification
from relative power features are shown in Figures 4‑6.
Figure 4 showed that CSP along with ELM classifier could
increase the accuracy using six data of training to test
eight data. The relative power features, which continued
to calculate the variance using CSP algorithm had a better
average accuracy of ELM (93.75% ± 0.00%) than the one
which only using relative power spectral as the features for
ELM (85.41% ± 9.55%).

Figure 2: Acquisition data

Figure 5 was conducted using four data of training;
consisted of two data of awake state and two data of
drowsy state. The average accuracy of ELM testing from

Figure 3: Comparison of power spectral density in awake and drowsy states

Journal of Medical Signals & Sensors | Volume 9 | Issue 2 | April-June 2019

133

[Downloaded free from http://www.jmssjournal.net on Saturday, September 28, 2019, IP: 10.232.74.23]
Rahma and Rahmatillah: Drowsiness analysis based on EEG signal

Figure 4: Testing accuracy using six data of the training

Figure 5: Testing accuracy using four data of the training

eight data that continued by calculating the variance using
the CSP algorithm after going through the cross‑validation
process was 91.67% ± 2.89%, while the average accuracy
of testing without CSP calculation algorithm was only
64.98% ± 18.38%.
The similar behavior was shown in ELM training using
two data, which consist of one drowsy state and one awake
state. The average accuracy of ELM testing from 12 data
feature which continued by calculating its variance using
the CSP algorithm was 91.67% ± 0.00%, while the average
accuracy of 12 data testing without CSP algorithm was
72.23% ± 9.63%.
Overall, it could be concluded that the ELM accuracy
combined with CSP tend to give higher accuracy, even
134

with a small amount of data. Thus, the augmented of CSP
could optimize the ELM in obtaining the high accuracy.

Conclusions
In this study, we have tried to analyze and classify the
drowsy state and awake state using relative PSD of
sub‑band delta, theta, alpha, and beta. CSP and ELM were
implemented to obtain better accuracy in differentiating
the relative power of the drowsy and awake states. The
overall average accuracy of testing ranged from 91.67%
to 93.75%, even with a small amount of data training.
Minimal data training could be useful to shorten the time
in training/calibration session, yet still, obtain a good
accuracy in classifying the awake state and drowsy state by

Journal of Medical Signals & Sensors | Volume 9 | Issue 2 | April-June 2019

[Downloaded free from http://www.jmssjournal.net on Saturday, September 28, 2019, IP: 10.232.74.23]
Rahma and Rahmatillah: Drowsiness analysis based on EEG signal

Figure 6: Testing accuracy using two data of the training

Figure 7: Scatter plot of relative power features without and with the variance calculation using common spatial pattern algorithm

implementing CSP and ELM. This study could increase the
ability of EEG in detecting drowsiness that is important to
prevent the risk caused by driving in a drowsy state.

3.

Financial support and sponsorship

4.

8.

Kesehat 2016;15:30‑42.
Awais M, Badruddin N, Drieberg M. Driver drowsiness
detection using EEG power spectrum analysis. IEEE Region 10
Symposium. Kuala Lumpur 2014:244‑7.
Gurudath N, Bryan Riley H. Drowsy driving detection by
EEG analysis using wavelet transform and K‑means clustering.
Procedia Comput Sci 2014;34:400‑9.
Kartsch V, Benatti S, Rossi D, Benini L. A wearable EEG-based
drowsiness detection system with blink duration and alpha waves
analysis. 8th International IEEE/EMBS Conference on Neural
Engineering (NER), Shanghai, 2017:251‑4.
Saghafi A, Tsokos CP, Farhidzadeh H. Common spatial
pattern method for real‑time eye state identification by
using electroencephalogram signals. IET Signal Process
2017;11:936‑41. Available from: https://www.scopus.com/
inward/record.uri?eid=2‑s2.0‑85030532927&doi=10.1049%2Fiet
‑spr. 2016.0520&partnerID=40&md5=e613ef2af3f4c7055d3d137
d56ae189c. [Last accessed on 2018 Nov 01].
7.Roesler O, Bader L, Forster J, Hayashi Y, Heßler S, SuendermannOeft D. Comparison of EEG devices for eye state classification. Proc.
of the AIHLS 2014. Available from: http://www.antikenschlacht.com/
su/pdf/aihls2014.pdf. [Last accessed on 2018 Nov 02].
Rahma ON, Hendradi R, Ama F. Classifying imaginary

Journal of Medical Signals & Sensors | Volume 9 | Issue 2 | April-June 2019

135

This study was supported by the Faculty of Science
Technology, Airlangga University (Research grant
1893/UN3.1.8/LT/2018). The authors wish to thank
Research and Innovation Center Airlangga University
all members who participated in this study.

and
no.
the
and

Conflicts of interest

5.

6.

There are no conflicts of interest.

References
1.

2.

Rohit F, Kulathumani V, Kavi R, Elwarfalli I, Kecojevic V,
Nimbarte A. Real‑time drowsiness detection using wearable,
lightweight brain sensing headbands. IET Intell Transp Syst
2017;11:255‑63.
Djaja S, Widyastuti R, Tobing K, Lasut D, Irianto J. Gambaran
Kecelakaan lalu lintas di Indonesia, Tahun 2010‑2014. J Ekol

7.

[Downloaded free from http://www.jmssjournal.net on Saturday, September 28, 2019, IP: 10.232.74.23]
Rahma and Rahmatillah: Drowsiness analysis based on EEG signal

9.
10.

11.

12.

13.

hand movement through electroencephalograph signal for
neuro‑rehabilitation. Walailak J Sci Technol 2018;16:4.
Putra AE, Design AH. EEG‑Based Microsleep Detector using
Microcontroller; 2016.
Peiris MR, Jones RD, Davidson PR, Bones PJ. Detecting
behavioral microsleeps from EEG power spectra. Conf Proc
IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc 2006;1:5723‑6.
Lange G, Low CY, Johar K, Hanapiah FA, Kamaruzaman F.
Classification of electroencephalogram data from hand grasp
and release movements for BCI controlled prosthesis. Procedia
Technol 2016;26:374‑81. Available from: http://www.linkinghub.
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S2212017316303954. [Last accessed on
2018 Oct 10].
Cantillo‑Negrete J, Gutierrez‑Martinez J, Carino‑Escobar RI,
Carrillo‑Mora P, Elias‑Vinas D. An approach to improve the
performance of subject‑independent BCIs‑based on motor
imagery allocating subjects by gender. Biomed Eng Online
2014;13:158.
Liu Y, Sourina O. EEG‑based subject‑dependent emotion
recognition algorithm using fractal dimension. Conf Proc – IEEE

Int Conf Syst Man Cybern; 2014. p. 3166‑71.
14. Arslan MT, Eraldemir SG, Yildirim E. Subject‑Dependent and
Subject‑Independent Classification of Mental Arithmetic and
Silent Reading Tasks; 2017.
15. EMOTIV. EPOC User Manual; 2014. Avaialble from: https://
www.emotiv.zendesk.com/./EPOCUserManual2014.pdf.
[Last
accessed on 2018 Nov 02].
16. Kawala‑Janik A, Baranowski J, Podpora M, Piatek P, Pelc M.
Use of a cost‑effective neuroheadset Emotiv Epoc for pattern
recognition purposes. Int J Comput 2014;13:25‑33.
17. Szachewicz P. Classification of Motor Imagery for
Brain‑Computer Interfaces. Poznan University of Technology,
Institute of Computing Science, Poznań; 2013.
18. Ethridge J, Weaver W. Common Spatial Patterns Alogarithm.
Matlab Central; 2009.
19. Huang GB, Zhu QY, Siew CK. Extreme learning machine:
Theory and applications. Neurocomputing 2006;70:489‑501.
20. Hatamikia S, Nasrabadi AM. Subject Independent BCI based on
LTCCSP Method and GA Wrapper Optimization. 2015 22nd Iran
Conf Biomed Eng ICBME 2015; November, 2016. p. 405‑9.

BIOGRAPHIES
Osmalina Nur Rahma was born in 1991.
She received her B.Eng degree in
Biomedical Engineering from Airlangga
University and M.Sc degree in Biomedical
Engineering from University of Indonesia
in 2013 and 2016, respectively. Currently,
she is a lecturer in Biomedical Engineering
Study Program, Department of Physics,
Airlangga University, Surabaya, Indonesia. She has a great
interest in biomedical application especially biomedical
signal and her current research projects are mostly in digital
signal processing, EEG, EMG, Brain Computer Interface.

Akif Rahmatillah was born in Balikpapan,
Indonesia, in 1986. He received his B.Eng
degree
in
Engineering
Physics
(Instrumentation and Control minor) from
Universitas Gadjah Mada in 2008 and the
M.Eng degree in Control and Intelegent
System from Bandung Institute of
Technology in 2013. Currently, he is a
lecturer Biomedical Engineering Study Program, Department
of Physics, Airlangga University, Surabaya, Indonesia. His
research interest include medical signal processing, control
system and mechatronics for physical rehabilitation.

Email: osmalina.n.rahma@fst.unair.ac.id

Email: akif-r@fst.unair.ac.id

136

Journal of Medical Signals & Sensors | Volume 9 | Issue 2 | April-June 2019

