International Journal of Latest Research in Engineering and Technology (IJLRET)
ISSN: 2454-5031
www.ijlret.com ǁ PP.25-31

Design and Implementation of Programmed Motion in a Vehicle
Using Brain Wave Signals
Arvind Iyer*, Mahesh Babu*, Snehal Chandra*, Thejas N*, Dr. Jayadeva G. S.#
# Professor in Telecommunication Department, BMSIT & M
*Students of VIII Semester Telecommunication Department, BMSIT & M

Abstract: This paper presents the results of efforts towards understanding the current scenario of brain
computer robots and the associated technologies. Brain Computer Interfaces (BCI‟s) are systems that can bypass
conventional channels of communication (i.e., muscles and thoughts) to provide direct communication and
control between the human brain and physical devices by translating different patterns of brain activity into
commands in real time. With these commands a mobile robot can be controlled. An attempt is made to study the
pertinent literature and test the workability of hardware to meet the basic requirements of BCI‟s.
Keywords: EEG Sensor, Relay Driver, Embedded platform, communication module, image acquisition
module, BCI-Brain computer interface.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Robotic control is employed extensively in industry. Most of the intelligence for control is embedded
in the robot itself. External control of robots via wireless communication is preferred for obvious reasons. Brain
wave sensing is an eclectic discipline which has received lot of attention in the present days. Generating a signal
transmitting it and actuating a device in a common practice but actuation by a thought signal is something that
has fascinated engineers and scientists.
For electronic and telecommunication engineers studying and handling brain waves has been a nontrivial task. The present work focuses on a study and implementation of brain wave sensor to perform a
particular function. The available scant literature speaks about special interfaces such as sip-and-puff systems,
single switches and eye tracking systems [1]. These interfaces may not work for patients with severe disabilities.
All the electrical waves sensed by the brain wave sensors are converted into data packets and
transmitted through Bluetooth medium [1]. Level analyser unit (LAU) will receive the brain wave raw data and
it will extract and process the signal using MATLAB platform. Then the control commands will be transmitted
to the robotic module to process. With such systems, we can move a robot according to the human thoughts and
it can be turned by blink muscle contraction.
The basic idea of BCI is to translate user produced patterns of brain activity into corresponding
commands. A typical BCI is composed of signal acquisition and signal processing (including pre-processing,
feature extraction and classification) [2]. Although some BCI systems do not include all components and others
group two or three components into one algorithm, most systems can be conceptually divided into signal
acquisition, pre-processing, feature extraction, and classification The brain signals that are widely used to
develop EEG-based BCIs include P300 potentials, which are a positive potential deflection on the on-going
brain activity at a latency of roughly 300ms after the random occurrence of a desired target stimulus from nontarget stimuli the stimuli can be in visual, auditory, [3] or tactile modality Steady State Visually Evoked
Potentials (SSVEP), which are visually evoked by a stimulus modulated at a fixed frequency and occur as an
increase in EEG activity at the stimulus frequency and the event-related de synchronization (ERD) and eventrelated synchronization (ERS), which are induced by performing mental tasks, such as motor imagery, mental
arithmetic, or mental rotation [4].
Although many researchers have developed various brain-controlled mobile robots, to the best of our
knowledge, none of the existing brain-controlled mobile robots is brought out of a controlled laboratory
environment. The main reason for this is that the BCI is not stable due to the non-stationary nature of the EEG
signals. Thus, to make these mobile robots usable in real-world situations, stable BCI systems need to be
explored. If a BCI system is not stable, other techniques should be further developed to improve the overall
driving performance. Rebsamen et al., Iturrate et al. also combined a P300 BCI and an autonomous navigation
system to develop a robotic wheelchair. The main difference between them is that the latter allows a wheelchair
to move in an unknown environment. In addition, the user is able to control the wheelchair to turn left or right at
any time by focusing his/her attention on the “turn left” or “turn right” icons at the lower section of the visual
display to elicit a corresponding P300.
In the present work, an earnest attempt is made to review relevant literature, demonstrate a working
prototype and report the observations. The focus is on achieving one or simpler device actuations through a

National Conference on Control, Communication and Power Systems-2017

25 | Page

International Journal of Latest Research in Engineering and Technology (IJLRET)
ISSN: 2454-5031
www.ijlret.com ǁ PP.25-31
sensing device. It is felt that studying such systems having special applications in neurology is an enriching
experience for electronic and communication engineers.

II.

DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION

Brain-controlled mobile robots are divided into two categories according to their operational modes.
One category is called “direct control by the BCI,” which means that the BCI translates EEG signals into motion
commands to control robots directly who first developed a brain-controlled robotic wheelchair whose left or
right turning movements are directly controlled by corresponding motion commands translated from user brain
signals while imagining left or right limb movements, and tested this system in real-world situations [5]. The
robotic platform is illustrated also used a BCI based on motor imagery to build a brain-controlled mobile robot,
as illustrated which can perform three motion commands including turning left and right and going forward, and
validated this robot in a real world.
As shown in figure 1 the Brain secret card section contains EEG Sensor to sense the human brain, and
it will be sensed by using the Brainwave Headset which is provided by NeuroSky. Technologies and those
signals will be transferred by using Bluetooth which is embedded into the Brainwave headset, for this
Brainwave headset we need to supply power using a AAA battery which is shown in figure 2.The Brainwave
headset comes with Power switch, a sensor tip, flexible ear arm and a ground connection Ear clip. In this
headset we use non-invasive sensor that won‟t cause any pain to the user who wears the headset. After inserting
an AAA battery switch on the Brainwave headset using the power switch the LED indicator will blink and if the
red colour light does not blink the headset is powered on but not connected to with the computer‟s Bluetooth. If
the blue colour LED does not blink, it means the headset is powered on and connected. If the red or blue colour
blinks it shows that the battery getting low.

Fig 1: Brain secret card section [2]
As shown in figure 3 the data transmitted by the Brainwave headset will be received by the computer‟s
Bluetooth receiver.
And then all these data will be analyzed by the Level Analysis platform. The level analysis platform
will extract the raw data using the MATLAB. After the analysis of this data, this data will be sent to the robot
module using serial data transmission.

Fig 2: Brainwave Headset provided by NeuroSky[2]

National Conference on Control, Communication and Power Systems-2017

26 | Page

International Journal of Latest Research in Engineering and Technology (IJLRET)
ISSN: 2454-5031
www.ijlret.com ǁ PP.25-31

Fig 3: Data Processing Unit[4]

Fig 4: Robotic Module[6]
As shown in figure 4, in the robot module there will be an XBee receiver will receive the data which is
transmitted by the XBee transmitter. According to the data received by the XBee the ARM processor will give
the directions to the motors and the robot is self-controlled robot with ultrasonic sensor and connected with a
relay and a driver circuit. And all this information will be displayed on the LCD display

III.

SYSTEM HARDWARE

3.1 ARM Processor
The ARM processor is 32-bit embedded RISC microprocessor. The ARM7 processor needs very low
power, high performance and small size. ARM7 processor used in this work will receive the signals from the
Bluetooth receiver and it will process the signals and it will give the signals to the driver circuit and according to
that signals received from the processor, according to the signals received from driver circuit the motors will
rotate to cause forward movement in clockwise and anti-clockwise direction. Here ARM processor will wait
until the signals received from the Brainwave headset and after receiving the signals it will moves the robot. The
driver circuit will connect to the port 1 of the processor.
3.2 Wireless communication
The XBee and XBee-PRO OEM RF Modules were engineered to meet IEEE 802.15.4 standards and
support the unique needs of low-cost, low-power wireless sensor networks [6]. The modules require minimal
power and provide reliable delivery of data between devices. The modules operate within the ISM 2.4 GHz
frequency band. Here we are using XBee to connect robot with the computer wirelessly through a logic-level
asynchronous serial port. Through its serial port, the module can communicate with any logic and voltage
compatible Universal Asynchronous Receiver / Transmitter (UART) [7]. The computer will transform the data
which is analysed by using the level analyser unit using MATLAB. The data which is transmitted by the XBee
module from the computer will be received by the XBee receiver which is connected to the ARM processor.
3.3 EEG Signals
EEG signals can be collected with electrodes that are placed on the surface of the scalp. The most
widely used electrodes are silver/silver chloride (Ag/AgCl) because they have low cost, low contact impedance,
and relatively good stability. Furthermore, there are rather mature commercialized acquisition systems including

National Conference on Control, Communication and Power Systems-2017

27 | Page

International Journal of Latest Research in Engineering and Technology (IJLRET)
ISSN: 2454-5031
www.ijlret.com ǁ PP.25-31
the amplifier and EEG cap with integrated Ag/AgCl electrodes, which have been successfully applied in
scientific research and clinical diagnosis. However, using Ag/AgCl electrodes requires removing outer skin
layer and filling gel between electrodes and scalp (and thus, this kind of electrodes is also called “wet”
electrodes). These operations take long time and are uncomfortable to users. To address these limitations of
“wet” electrodes, some researchers have been exploring “dry” electrodes, which do not need to use gel and skin
cleaning [8-11]. The main disadvantage of existing dry electrodes is that the acquired EEG signals are worse
than those acquired with conventional electrodes due to the increase of contact impedance [12]. Some
companies (such as Quasar, Emotiv Systems Inc., and NeuroSky Inc.) have been commercializing acquisition
systems based on dry electrodes [13, 14]. Here we are usingNeuroSky Brainwave headset. However, they are
not yet mature, and some researchers have doubts about what physiological signals these systems actually
acquire [15]. Therefore, until now, all brain-controlled wheelchairs adopt “wet” electrodes to collect brain
signals.
3.4 NeuroSky Technology i. Brainwaves:
The last century of neuroscience research has greatly increased our knowledge about the brain and
particularly, the electrical signals emitted by neurons firing in the brain. The patterns and frequencies of these
electrical signals can be measured by placing a sensor on the scalp. The Mind Tools line of headset products
contain Neurosky Think Gear technology, which quantify the analog electrical signals, commonly referred to as
brainwaves, and exercise them into digital signals. The Think Gear technology then makes those computations
and signals available to games
(a) Attention eSense:
The eSense attention meter shows the intensity of a user's level of mental “focus” or “attention”, such
as that which occurs during intense concentration and directed (but stable) mental activity. Its value ranges from
0 to 100. Distractions, wandering thoughts, lack of focus, or anxiety may lower the attention meter level.
Brainwav
e Type

Frequen
cy range

Mental states and conditions

Delta

0.1Hz to
3Hz

Deep, dreamless, non-REM sleep,
unconscious

Theta

4Hz to
7Hz

Intuitive, recall, fantasy,
imaginary,
dream

Alpha

8Hz to
12Hz

Relaxed, but not drowsy,
tranquil,
conscious

Low Beta

13Hz to
15Hz

Formerly SMR, relaxed yet
focused, integrated

Midrange
Beta

16Hz to
20Hz

Thinking, aware of self &
surroundings

High Beta

21Hz to
30Hz

Alertness, agitation

(b) Meditation eSense:
The eSense meditation meter shows the level of a user's mental “calmness” or “relaxation”. Its value
ranges from 0 to100. Note that Meditation is a measure of a person's mental states, not physical levels, so
simply relaxing all the muscles of the body may not instantly result in an intensified effect meditation level.
However, for most people in most normal circumstances, relaxing the body often helps the mind to relax as
well. Meditation is related to reduce activity by the active mental processes in the brain. It has long been

National Conference on Control, Communication and Power Systems-2017

28 | Page

International Journal of Latest Research in Engineering and Technology (IJLRET)
ISSN: 2454-5031
www.ijlret.com ǁ PP.25-31
observed that closing one's eyes turns of the mental activities which process images from the eyes. So closing
the eyes is often an effective method for increasing the Meditation meter level. Distractions, wandering
thoughts, anxiety, agitation, and sensory stimuli may lower the Meditation meter levels [16].
iv. eSense Meter - Technical Description
For each different type of eSense (i.e. Attention, Meditation), the meter value is reported on a relative
eSense scale of 1 to 100. On this scale, a value between 40 to 60 at any given moment in time is considered
“neutral” and is similar in notion to “baselines” that are established in conventional brainwave measurement
techniques (though the method for determining a ThinkGear baseline is proprietary and may differ from
conventional brainwaves).

IV.

DESIGN FLOW

The flow diagram of Brainwave Controlled Robot unit is shown in figure 6. It shows all the step by
step functions of robot, how it will be controlled by using brainwave signals. After switching on the Brainwave
headset and the robot kit, the processor will initialize and the headset will start sensing the neurons signals and
after sensing the signals it will transfer them to through the Bluetooth and the acquisition module will receive
the signals in the processor and in the processor the EEG signals comparison will be done if it is yes then the
robot will move according to the signals or else it will go to the relay circuit and robot movement will be there
and the process will be stopped.

Fig 5: Design Flow

V.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The research and development of brain-controlled mobile robots have received a great deal of attention
because they can help bring mobility back to people with devastating neuromuscular disorders and thus improve
their quality of life. A comprehensive up-to-date review of the complete systems, key techniques, and evaluation
issues of brain-controlled mobile robot is presented. The results with NeuroSky headset, gives up to 95%
accuracy of brainwaves. The procedure adapted in the present work involves the following: (a) Installation of
NeuroSky (NeuroSky, Inc. is a manufacturer of Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) technologies for consumer
product applications,founded in Silicon Valley, California. It works as a Original Equipment Manufacturer,
collaborating with industry partners.) software. (b) Connecting head-set via blue tooth. (c) Execution of
MATLAB code to open window and display of „attention‟ & „blink signals‟ (e) transfer of signals to robot
through Zigbee and (f) Receiving of signals, decoding & transfer of control to robotic movement mechanisms.

National Conference on Control, Communication and Power Systems-2017

29 | Page

International Journal of Latest Research in Engineering and Technology (IJLRET)
ISSN: 2454-5031
www.ijlret.com ǁ PP.25-31

Figure 6: Screenshot of Attention level and Blink level

Figure 7: Screenshot of Graph (Black: Blink level, Red: Attention level)

VI.

CONCLUSION

For individuals suffering from neuro muscular disorders, brain controlled mobile robots are of great
help. The present work focuses on improvising our contemporary understanding of the subject. An attempt is
made to design a simple BCR to perform basic functions.

VII.
[1]
[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]
[6]
[7]

REFERENCES

Luzheng Bi, Xin-An Fan, Yili Liu “EEG-Based Brain-controlled Mobile Robots: A survey”,
Human-Machine Systems, IEEE Transactions on (Volume:43, Issue:2), pp. 161-176, Mar 2013.
Kale Swapnil T, MahajanSadanand P, RaksheBalu G, Prof. N.K.Bhandari “Robot Navigation
control through EEG Based Signals” International Journal Of Engineering And Computer Science
ISSN:2319-7242 Volume 3 Issue 3 March-2014 Page No. 5105-5108.
Priyanka.MManjuPaarkavi.RDhanasekhar.S “An Intelligent Acoustic Communication System for
Aphasia Forbearings” International Conference on Signal Processing, Embedded System and
Communication Technologies and their applications for Sustainable and Renewable Energy
(ICSECSRE ‟14), Vol. 3, Special Issue 3, April 2014.
John Jonides, Patricia A. Reuter-Lorenz, Edward E.Smith, Edward Awh, Lisa L.Barnes, Maxwell
drain, Jennifer Glass, Erick J.Lauber, Andrea L.Patalano, Eric H.Schumacher, “Verbal and Spatial
Working Memory in Humans” The Psychology of Learning and Motivation, Vol.35.
I.I. Goncharova, D.J. McFarland, T.M. Vaughan, J.R. Wolpaw “EMG contamination of EEG: spectral
and topographical characteristics” Clinical Neurophysiology 114 (2003) 1580–1593.
Sparkfun, “Xbee manual” [online] Available:
https://www.sparkfun.com/datasheets/Wireless/Zigbee/XBee-Manual.pdf
Cytron Technologies, “SKXbee starter kit” [online] Available:
http://www.cytron.com.my/datasheet/WirelessDevice/SKXbee_User's_ Manual_v1.pdf

National Conference on Control, Communication and Power Systems-2017

30 | Page

International Journal of Latest Research in Engineering and Technology (IJLRET)
ISSN: 2454-5031
www.ijlret.com ǁ PP.25-31
[8]

[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

C. Fonseca, J. P. S. Cunha, R.E. Martins, V. M. Ferreira, J. P. M. de Sa, M. A. Barbosa, and A. M. da
Silva, “A novel dry active electrode for EEG recording,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 54, no. 1, pp.
162– 165, Jan. 2007.
F. Popescu, Y. Fazli, S. Badower, B. Blankertz, and K.-R. Muller,¨ “Single trial classification of motor
imagination using 6 dry EEG electrodesm,” PLoS ONE, vol. 2, no. 7, 2007.
A. Taheri, R. Knight, and R. Smith, “A dry electrode for EEG recording”, Electroencephalogr. Clin.
Neurophysiol. vol. 90, no. 5, pp. 376– 383, May 2014.
A. Searle and L. Kirkup, “A direct comparison of wet, dry and insulating bioelectric recording
electrodes,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 71– 83, May 2000.
G. Gargiulo, P. Bifulco, R. A. Calvo, M. Cesarelli, C. Jin, A. McEwan, and A. van Schaik, Intelligent
and Biosensors. Rijeka, Croatia: In Tech, Jan. 2010, ch. 6.
E. W. Sellers, P. Turner, W. A. Sarnacki, T. Mcmanus, T. M. Vaughan, and B. Matthews, “A novel dry
electrode for brain–computer interface,” in Proc. 13th Int. Conf. Human–Computer Interac., San
Diego, CA, 2009, pp. 623–631.
T. J. Sullivan, S. R. Deiss, T. P. Jung, and G. Cauwenberghs, “A brain– machine interface using drycontact low-noise EEG sensors,” in Proc.Conf. Rec. 2008 IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst., Seattle, WA,
May 2008,pp. 1986–1989.
J.d.R.Millan, R.Rupp, G.R.Muller-Putz, R. Murray-Smith, C.Giugliemma, M.angermann, C. Vidaurre,
F.Cincotti, A.Kubler, R. Leeb, C.Neuper, K.-R. Muller, and D.Mattia, “Combining brain– computer
interfaces and assistive technologies state-of-the-art and challenges,” Frontiers Neurosci., vol. 4, pp. 1–
15, 2010.
Neurosky, “Mind-set instruction manual”, [online] Available:
http://developer.neurosky.com/docs/doku.php?id=mindset_instruction_ manual.

National Conference on Control, Communication and Power Systems-2017

31 | Page

