healthcare
Article

How to Relax in Stressful Situations: A Smart Stress
Reduction System
Yekta Said Can 1, * , Heather Iles-Smith 2 , Niaz Chalabianloo 1 , Deniz Ekiz 1 ,
Javier Fernández-Álvarez 3 , Claudia Repetto 3 , Giuseppe Riva 3 and Cem Ersoy 1
1
2
3

*

Computer Engineering Department, Bogazici University, Istanbul 34342, Turkey;
niaz.chalabianloo@boun.edu.tr (N.C.); deniz.ekiz@boun.edu.tr (D.E.); ersoy@boun.edu.tr (C.E.)
Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust/University of Leeds, Leeds LS1 3EX, UK; heather.iles-smith@nhs.net
General Psychology and Communication Psychology, Catholic University of Milan, 20123 Milan, Italy;
javier.fernandezkirszman@unicatt.it (J.F.-Á.); claudia.repetto@unicatt.it (C.R.);
giuseppe.riva@unicatt.it (G.R.)
Correspondence: yekta.can@boun.edu.tr

Received: 27 February 2020; Accepted: 10 April 2020; Published: 16 April 2020




Abstract: Stress is an inescapable element of the modern age. Instances of untreated stress may lead to
a reduction in the individual’s health, well-being and socio-economic situation. Stress management
application development for wearable smart devices is a growing market. The use of wearable smart
devices and biofeedback for individualized real-life stress reduction interventions has received less
attention. By using our unobtrusive automatic stress detection system for use with consumer-grade
smart bands, we first detected stress levels. When a high stress level is detected, our system suggests the
most appropriate relaxation method by analyzing the physical activity-based contextual information.
In more restricted contexts, physical activity is lower and mobile relaxation methods might be more
appropriate, whereas in free contexts traditional methods might be useful. We further compared
traditional and mobile relaxation methods by using our stress level detection system during an eight
day EU project training event involving 15 early stage researchers (mean age 28; gender 9 Male,
6 Female). Participants’ daily stress levels were monitored and a range of traditional and mobile
stress management techniques was applied. On day eight, participants were exposed to a ‘stressful’
event by being required to give an oral presentation. Insights about the success of both traditional and
mobile relaxation methods by using the physiological signals and collected self-reports were provided.

Keywords: commercial smartwatch; mental stress; psychophysiological; emotion regulation; heart
rate variability; electrodermal activity

1. Introduction
Stress constitutes a complex process that is activated by a physical or mental threat to the individuals’
homeostasis, comprising a set of diverse psychological, physiological and behavioral responses [1].
Although it is usually considered a negative response, stress actually constitutes a key process for
ensuring our survival. However, when a stress response is repeatedly triggered in the absence of
a challenging stimulus, or if there is constant exposure to challenging situations, stress can become
harmful. Evidence suggests that, in either of these two contexts, stress is a persistent factor for the
development of psycho-pathological conditions [2,3].
When faced with stressful events, people make autonomic and controlled efforts to reduce the
negative impact and maximize the positive impact that every specific situation may provoke. Generally,
this process is denominated as emotion regulation, formally defined as the process by which individuals

Healthcare 2020, 8, 100; doi:10.3390/healthcare8020100

www.mdpi.com/journal/healthcare

Healthcare 2020, 8, 100

2 of 19

can influence what emotions they have, when they have them and how they experience and express
those emotions [4]. It has been suggested that the term emotion regulation can be understood as a broad
tag that comprises the regulation of all responses that are emotionally charged, from basic emotions to
complex mood states as well as regulation of everyday life [5].
Failure to address triggers of stress has been shown to lead to chronic stress, anxiety and depression,
and attributed to serious physical health conditions such as cardiovascular disease [6]. The World
Health Organization concluded that psychological stress is one of the most significant health problems
in the 21st-century and is a growing problem [7]. There are various interventions to minimize stress
based on individual preferences and requirements. Stress management techniques including ancient
practices such as Tai Chi [8] and yoga [9] as well as other physical activities [10] are often cited as
being helpful in combating stress. Likewise traditional meditation, mindfulness [11] and cognitive
behavioural therapy (CBT) [12] all have established benefits. These techniques are not applicable in
office or social environments, or during most daily routines. Therefore, a smart device based stress
management application may be of benefit. Recently, smartphone applications such as Calm, Pause,
Heartmath and Sway have been developed for indoor environments. However, these applications
are not individualized nor do they include biofeedback and studies that validate their effects are
limited [13].
In this study, we used the stress level detection scheme using physiological signals and added
a physical activity based context analyzer. When the user experiences a high stress level, the system
suggests appropriate stress reduction methods (traditional or mobile). We further compare the effects
of traditional and mobile stress alleviation methods on physiological data of 15 international Ph.D.
students (participants) during eight days of training. In addition, 1440 h of physiological signals from
Empatica E4 smart bands were collected in this training event. Stress management techniques based on
the emotion regulation model of James Gross [4] were applied to reduce participant stress levels. To the
best of our knowledge, this work is the first one suggesting appropriate stress reduction methods based
on contextual information and comparing both traditional and mobile stress management interventions
in the real-life environment using a commercial smart-band based automatic stress level detection
system that eliminates motion artifacts. Using such a system is essential because these offline stress
level detection algorithms could be used in real-time biofeedback apps.
Application of our stress level detection algorithm, in a real world context, could allow individuals
to receive feedback regarding high stress levels along with recommendations for relaxation methods.
Additional continued monitoring may also enable the individual to better understand the effectiveness
of any stress reduction methods. However, for our stress detection algorithm to be applied in daily
life, the smart device should be unobtrusive (i.e., should not be comprised of cables, electrodes,
boards). Our system works on smart-bands which are perfect examples of this type of unobtrusive
wearable device.
This paper describes emotion regulation in the context of stress management and how yoga
and mindfulness can be used for regulating emotions (Section 2). Methods of detecting stress and
analyzing context based on physical activity are described (Section 3) and data are presented related to
our method for stress level detection with the use of smart-bands (Section 4). Experimental results and
discussion are also presented (Section 5) and we present the conclusions and future works of the study
(Section 6).
The major research contributions of this study are the following:
•
•

•

Developing a physical activity based context analyzer and relaxation method suggestion system
Comparison of stress reduction methods (mobile mindfulness, traditional mindfulness and yoga) and
their effectiveness in the context of stress management with the use of an unobtrusive smartwatch
based stress level detection system
Application of James Gross’s prominent emotion regulation model in the context of stress management
and measuring the physiological component with smart bands.

Healthcare 2020, 8, 100

3 of 19

2. Background
2.1. Emotion Regulation in the Context of Stress Management
Stress is a normal part of daily life. However, its effects often vary across individuals and despite
similar circumstances, some people do not feel under strain while others may be severely affected.
Multiple reasons exist for these differences between individuals, including how people perceive reality
and how they respond to the numerous stimuli to which they are exposed. When a person believes
that a certain situation surpasses their available coping mechanisms, it is referred to as perceived stress.
Thus, perceived stress varies from person to person depending on the value that an individual gives to
a situation and their self-recognition of the resources to deal with it.
Numerous psychological scientists have investigated perceived stress. Individuals who display
a mismatch between contextual demands and perceived resources constantly (rather than during a
specific moment in time) are referred to as experiencing chronic stress. Chronic stress has not only
been shown to be very relevant in people’s well-being and quality of life, but also important in the
appearance and maintenance of several physical and mental diseases [14].
As a consequence, mounting research has focused on the mechanisms that people implement
in order to alleviate the physical and cognitive burden associated with that perceived stress. Coping
styles, stress management techniques, self-regulation, or emotion regulation techniques are different
labels that define the way people implement certain behavioral, cognitive, or emotional strategies to
maintain allosteric load [15]. In other words, every living organism needs to vary among plasticity and
stability in order to survive. Human beings are not the exception to the rule and the complex system
that applies to every single person and the necessity of reaching a constant level of regulation permits
the individuals to pursue their goals.
Specifically, emotion regulation has been defined as the study of “the processes by which we influence
which emotions we have when we have them, and how we experience and express them” [4]. A large
body of evidence has shown that there are very different consequences depending on the effectiveness
people achieve to regulate their emotions. Naturally, both at an implicit or explicit level, people regulate
emotions in order to maintain those allosteric levels previously mentioned. Therefore, when there are
specific stressors that demand a particular cognitive or physical response, the emotional reactivity may be
stronger and the need for a proper regulation more relevant. Indeed, emotion regulation has shown to
be a transdiagnostic factor that is present at a wide range of mental disorders. In other words, the way
people initiate, implement and monitor their emotional processes, in order to reach more desirable states,
has a significant impact on the stress levels. Some emotion regulation (ER) strategies have shown to be
correlated with mental health issues. Among these strategies, cognitive reappraisal, problem-solving, or
acceptance shall be mentioned as strategies that are negatively correlated with psychopathology, while
rumination, experiential avoidance, or suppression are positively correlated with psychopathology [16].
In this regard, hinging on the different ER strategies deployed, ER can constitute a protective factor to
face stress responses that all individuals experience after minor or major stressors [17]. Additionally,
an adaptive regulation of emotions, by managing stress, may also be beneficial for clinical populations,
such as people suffering from affective disorders [18,19].
Therefore, from whole psychotherapeutic treatments to single self-applied applications, studies in
the literature have focused on how people can better regulate their emotions and manage their stress
levels. Among many other techniques, cognitive behavioral therapy, autogenic training, biofeedback,
breathing exercises, relaxation techniques, guided imagery, mindfulness, yoga, or Tai-Chi, are some of
the stress management interventions that have received attention from researchers [20,21].

Healthcare 2020, 8, 100

4 of 19

2.2. Yoga and Mindfulness: As Tools for Emotion Regulation
2.2.1. Yoga
Yoga is an ancient Eastern practice that developed more than 2000 years ago. Although its original
creator and source are uncertain, the earliest written word ‘Yoga Sutra’ describes the philosophy of
yoga focussing on growing spirituality, regulating emotions and thoughts. Initially, the focus was on
awareness of breathing and breathing exercises ‘pranayama’ to calm the mind and body, ultimately
reaching a higher state of consciousness.
As yoga evolved, physical movement in the form of postures was included and integrated with
yogic breathing ‘prana’ and elements of relaxation. The underlying purpose is to create physical
flexibility, reduce pain and unpleasant stimuli and reduce negative thoughts and emotions to calm the
mind and body, thereby improving well-being. In the healthcare literature, the benefits are reported to be
far-reaching both for mental and physical health conditions such as anxiety, depression, cardiovascular
disease, cancer and respiratory symptoms. It is also reported to reduce muscular-skeletal problems and
physical symptoms through increasing the awareness of the physical body.
Yoga has become a global phenomenon and is widely practiced in many different forms. Generally,
all types of yoga include some elements of relaxation. Additionally, some forms include mainly
pranayama and others are more physical in nature. One such practice is vinyasa flow which involves
using the inhale and exhale of the breathing pattern to move through a variety of yoga postures; this
leads to the movement becoming meditative. The practice often includes pranayama followed by
standing postures linked together with a movement called vinyasa, (similar to a sun salutation) which
helps to keep the body moving and increases fitness, flexibility and helps maintain linkage with the
breath. The practice also often includes a range of seated postures, an inversion (such as headstand or
shoulder stand) and final relaxation ‘savasana’.
2.2.2. Mindfulness
Mindfulness involves being more present at the moment by acknowledging the here and now,
often referred to as ‘being present’ rather than focussing on the past or future [8]. Being present may
include being aware of our surroundings and the environment, or of what we are eating and drinking
and physical sensations such as the sun or wind on our skin.
Acknowledging the thoughts and body are also aspects of mindfulness. Each day humans experience
thousands of thoughts, the majority being of no consequence. In some instances, these thoughts are
repetitive and negative in nature which can lead to increased stress and the related unpleasant physical
symptoms such as feeling anxious, nausea and tension headaches. Being mindful includes an awareness
of our thinking and whether we are caught up with our thoughts rather than being aware of the moment.
Additionally, on a daily basis, awareness of the physical body may be minimal; being mindful includes
increasing this awareness through becoming more connected with the sensations in the body. This might
include experiencing the legs moving when walking, or feeling the ground under the feet or the natural
way of the body whilst standing.
Mindfulness has been shown to be of benefit to physical and mental health. It is currently recommended
by the National Institute for Clinical Excellence [22] as adjunctive therapy to Cognitive Behavioural
Therapy (CBT) for the prevention of relapse depression.
However, it may be challenging for some individuals to do this with a multitude of distractions
around them and, therefore, they may choose to identify a particular time and place when and where
they can sit in a comfortable position to start to become aware of their breathing and bodily sensations.
2.2.3. Mobile Mindfulness Inspired By Tai-Chi—Pause
Tai-Chi is an internal Chinese martial art practiced for both its defense training, its health benefits
and meditation. There is good evidence of benefits for depression, cardiac and stroke rehabilitation
and dementia [23]. The term Tai-Chi refers to a philosophy of the forces of yin and yang, related to the

Healthcare 2020, 8, 100

5 of 19

moves. An iPhone application Pause inspired by Tai-Chi is used for guided mindfulness which draws
upon the principles of mindfulness meditation to trigger the body’s rest and digest response, quickly
restoring attention [24].
3. Related Work
Researchers have created the ability to detect stress in laboratory environments with medical-grade
devices [25–28]; smartwatches and smart bands started to be used for stress level detection studies [29–31].
These devices provide high comfort and rich functionality for the users, but their stress detection
accuracies are lower than medical-grade devices due to low signal quality and difficulty obtaining data
in intense physical activity. If data are collected for long periods, researchers have shown that their
detection performance improves [32]. During movement periods, the signal can be lost (gap in the data)
or artifacts might be generated. Stress level detection accuracies for 2-classes by using these devices are
around 70% [29,30,33,34].
After detecting the stress level of individuals, researchers should recover from the stressed state to
the baseline state. To the best of our knowledge, there are very few studies that combine automatic stress
detection (using physiological data) with recommended appropriate stress management techniques.
Ahani et al. [35] examined the physiological effect of mindfulness. They used the Biosemi device which
acquires electroencephalogram (EEG) and respiration signals. They successfully distinguished control
(non-meditative state) and meditation states with machine learning algorithms. Karydis et al. [36]
identified the post-meditation perceptual states by using a wearable EEG measurement device (Muse
headband). Mason et al. [37] examined the effect of yoga on physiological signals. They used PortaPres
Digital Plethtsmograph for measuring blood pressure and respiration signals. They also showed the
positive effect of yoga by using these signals. A further study validated the positive effect of yoga with
physiological signals; researchers monitored breathing and heart rate pulse with a piezoelectric belt and
a pulse sensor [21]. They demonstrated the effectiveness of different yogic breathing patterns to help
participants relax. There are also several studies showing the effectiveness of mobile mindfulness apps
by using physiological signals [20,38,39]. Svetlov et al. [20] monitored the heart rate variability (HRV),
electrodermal activity (EDA), Salivary alpha-amylase (sAA) and EEG values. In other studies, EEG and
respiration signals were also used for validating the effect of mobile mindfulness apps [38,39]. When
the literature is examined, it could be observed that the effect of ancient relaxation methods and mobile
mindfulness methods are examined separately in different studies. Ancient methods generally require
out of office environments that are not suitable for most of the population, since, in the modern age,
people started to spend more time in office-like environments. On the other hand, some smartphone
applications such as Pause, HeartMath and Calm do not require extra hardware or equipment and
be applicable in office environments. Hence, an ideal solution depends on the context of individuals.
A system that monitors stress levels, analyzes the context of individuals and suggests an appropriate
relaxation method in the case of high stress will benefit society. Furthermore, mobile methods along
with the ancient techniques should be applied in stressful real-life events and their effectiveness should
be compared by investigating physiological signals. When the literature is examined, there is not any
study comparing the performance of these methods in real-life events (see Table 1). Another important
finding is that these methods should be compared with unobtrusive wearable devices so that they could
be used for a biofeedback system in daily lives. Individuals may be reluctant to use a system with cables,
electrodes and boards in their daily life. Therefore, a comparison of different states with such systems
could not be used in daily life. There is clearly a need for a suggestion and comparison of ancient
and mobile meditation methods by using algorithms that could run on unobtrusive devices. An ideal
system should detect high stress levels, suggest relaxation methods and control whether users are doing
these exercises right or not with unobtrusive devices. Our algorithm is suitable to be embedded in such
daily life applicable systems that use physiological signals such as skin temperature (ST), HRV, EDA
and accelerometer (ACC). In this paper, we present the findings of our pilot study that tested the use of
our algorithm during general daily activities, stress reduction activities and a stressful event.

Healthcare 2020, 8, 100

6 of 19

Table 1. Comparison of our work with the studies applying different types of meditation techniques
for stress management in the literature.
Article

YOGA

Ahani et al. [35]

X

Mason et al. [37]
Svetlov et al. [20]

Mobile
Relaxation

Device

Signal

Daily
Suitable

X

Biosemi

EEG and Respiration

No

X

Digital Plethysmograph
(PortaPres)

Virtual Blood Pressure
Respiration

No

X

Several

HRV, EDA, sAA and EEG

No

X

X

MPU 6050 + piezoelectric belt
+ pulse sensor + smartphone

Heart Rate + Respiration

No

X

Mindfulness

X
X

Puranik et al. [21]
Karydis et al. [36]

X

Muse Headband

EEG

No

Cheng et al. [38]

X

X

Emotiv wireless headset

EEG

No

Ingle et al. [39]

X

X

8-channel Enobio EEG +
piezoelectric belt

EEG + Respiratory

No

Empatica E4 wristband

PPG (Photoplethysmography),
EDA, ACC, ST

Yes

Our work

4. Methodology
4.1. Unobtrusive Stress Detection System with Smart Bands
Our stress detection system developed in [32] allows users to be aware of their stress levels during
their daily activities without creating any interruption or restriction. The only requirement to use this
system is the need to wear a smart band. Participants in this study wore the Empatica E4 smart band
on their non-dominant hand. The smart band provides Blood Volume Pressure, ST, EDA, IBI (Interbeat
Interval) and 3D Acceleration. The data are stored in the memory of the device. Then, the artifacts of
physiological signals were detected and handled. The features were extracted from the sensory signals
and fed to the machine learning algorithm for prediction. In order to use this system, pre-trained
machine learning models are required. For training the models, feature vectors and collected class
labels were used.
4.1.1. EDA Preprocessing Artifact Detection and Removal Methods
The body sweats when emotional arousal and stress are experienced and, therefore, skin
conductance increases [40]. This makes EDA a promising candidate for stress level detection. Intense
physical activity and temperature changes contaminate the SC (Skin Conductance) signal. Therefore,
affected segments (artifacts) should be filtered out from the original signal. In order to detect the
artifacts in the SC signal, we used an EDA toolkit [41] which is 95% accurate on the detection of the
artifacts. While developing this tool, technicians labeled the artifacts manually. They trained a machine
learning model by using the labels. In addition to the SC signal, 3D acceleration and ST signals were
also used for artifact detection. We removed the parts that this tool detected as artifacts from our
signals. We further added batch processing and segmentation to this tool by using custom software
built-in Python 2.7.
4.1.2. EDA Feature Extraction Methods
After the artifact removal phase, features were extracted from the EDA signal. This signal has two
components phasic and tonic; features from both components were extracted (see Table 2). The cvxEDA
tool [42] was used for the decomposition of the signal into these components. This tool uses convex
optimization to estimate the Autonomic Nervous System (ANS) activity that is based on Bayesian statistics.
Tonic Component Features
The tonic component in the EDA signal represents the long-term slow changes. This component
is also known as the skin conductance level. It could be regarded as the indicator of general
psychophysiological activation [43].

Healthcare 2020, 8, 100

7 of 19

Table 2. EDA features and their definitions.
Feature

Description

Quartdev Tonic
Strong Peaks Phasic
Peaks Phasic
Perc20
Perc80 Tonic
Mean Tonic
SD Tonic

Quartile deviation (75 percentile–25 percentile) of the phasic component
The number of strong peak per 100 s
The number of peaks per 100 s
20th percentile of the phasic component
80th percentile of the phasic component
Mean of the phasic component
Standard deviation of phasic component

Phasic Component Features
The phasic component represents faster (event-related ) differences in the SC signal. The Peaks
of phasic SC component as a reaction to a stimulus is also called Skin Conductance Response [43].
After we decompose the phasic component from the EDA signal, peak related features were extracted.
4.1.3. Heart Activity Preprocessing (Artifact Detection and Removal) and Feature Extraction Methods
Heart activity (or, more specifically, HRV) reacts to changes in the autonomic nervous system
(ANS) caused by stress [44] and it is, therefore, one of the most commonly used physiological signal
for stress detection [40]. However, vigorous movement of subjects and improperly worn devices may
contaminate the HRV signal collected from smartwatches and smart bands. In order to address this
issue, we developed an artifact handling tool in MATLAB programming language [45] that has batch
processing capability. First, the data were divided into 2 min long segments with 50% overlapping.
Two-minute segments were selected because it is reported that the time interval for stress stimulation
and recovery processes is around a few minutes [46]. The artifact detection percentage rule (also
employed in Kubios [47]) was applied after the segmentation phase. In this rule, each data point was
compared with the local average around it. When the difference was more than a predetermined
threshold percentage, (20% is commonly selected in the literature [48]), the data point was labeled as
an artifact. In our system, we deleted the inter-beat intervals detected as the artifacts and interpolated
these points with the cubic spline interpolation technique which was used in the Kubios software [47].
The time-domain features of HRV are calculated. In order to calculate the frequency domain features,
we interpolated the RR intervals to 4 Hz. Then, we applied the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT). These time
and frequency domain features (see Table 3) were selected because these are the most discriminative
ones in the literature [30,49,50].
Table 3. HRV features and their definitions [32].
Feature

Description

Mean RR
STD RR

Mean value of the inter-beat (RR) intervals
Standard deviation of the inter-beat interval
Percentage of the number of successive RR intervals varying more than 50 ms
from the previous interval
Root mean square of successive difference of the RR intervals
Related standard deviation of successive RR interval differences
Total number of RR intervals divided by the height of the histogram of all RR intervals
measured on a scale with bins of 1/128 s
Triangular interpolation of RR interval histogram
Power in low-frequency band (0.04–0.15 Hz)
Power in high-frequency band (0.15–0.4 Hz)
Prevalent low-frequency oscillation of heart rate
Prevalent high-frequency oscillation of heart rate
Power in very low-frequency band (0.00–0.04 Hz)
Ratio of LF-to-HF

pNN50
RMSSD
SDSD
HRV triangular index
TINN
LF
HF
pLF
pHF
VLF
LF/HF

Healthcare 2020, 8, 100

8 of 19

4.1.4. Accelerometer Feature Extraction Methods
Research has shown that movements of the human body and postures can indeed be employed
as a means to detect signs of different emotional states. The dynamics of body movement were
investigated by Castellano et al. who used multimodal data to identify human affective behaviors.
Specific movement metrics, such as the amount of movement, intensity and fluidity, were used to help
deduct emotions, and it was found that the amount of movement was a major factor in distinguishing
different types of emotions [51]. Melzer et al. investigated whether movements comprised of collections
of Laban movement components could be recognized as expressing basic emotions [52]. The results
of their study confirm that, even when the subject has no intention of expressing emotions, particular
movements can assist in the perception of bodily expressions of emotions. Accelerometer sensors may
be used to detect these movements and different types of affect. The accelerometer sensor data are
used for two different purposes in our system. Firstly, we extracted features from the accelerometer
sensor, for detecting stress levels. We also selected the features to be used as described in Table 4 [53]
and, as mentioned above, this sensor was also employed to clean the EDA signal in the EDAExplorer
Tool [41].
Table 4. ACC features and their definitions.
Feature

Description

Mean X
Mean Y
Mean Z
MeanAccMag
Energy

Mean acceleration over x axis
Mean acceleration over y axis
Mean acceleration over z axis
Mean acceleration over acceleration magnitude
FFT energy over mean acceleration magnitude

4.1.5. Skin Temperature
A skin temperature signal is used for the artifact detection phase of the EDA signal in the EDAExplorer
Tool [41]. After we divide our data into segments, different modalities were merged into one feature
vector. The heart activity signal started with a delay (to calculate heartbeats per minute at the start)
and all signals were then synchronized. We included start and end timestamps for each segment,
and each modality was merged with a custom Python script.
4.1.6. Machine Learning Classifier Algorithms
The Weka machine learning toolkit [54] is used for identifying stress levels. The Weka toolkit has
several preprocessing features before classification. Our data set was not balanced when the number
of instances belonging to each class was considered. We solved this issue by removing samples from
the majority class. We selected random undersampling because it is the most commonly applied
method [55]. In this way, we prevented classifiers from biasing towards the class with more instances.
In this study, we employed five different machine learning classification algorithms to recognize
different stress levels: MultiLayer Perceptron (MLP), Random Forest (RF) (with 100 trees), K-nearest
neighbors (kNN) (n = 1–4), Linear discriminant analysis (LDA), Principal component analysis (PCA)
and support vector machine (SVM) with a radial basis function. These algorithms were selected because
they were the most commonly applied and successful classifiers for detecting stress levels [30,48].
In addition, 10-fold stratified cross-validation was then applied and hyperparameters of the machine
learning algorithms were fine-tuned with grid search. The best performing models have been reported.
4.1.7. Dimensionality Reduction
We applied correlation-based feature selection (CBFS) technique which is available in the Weka
machine learning package for combined signal [56]. The CBFS method removes the features that are
less correlated with the output class. For every model, we selected the ten most important features.

Healthcare 2020, 8, 100

9 of 19

This method is applied for MLP, RF, kNN and LDA. In order to create an SVM based model, we applied
PCA based dimensionality reduction where the covered variance is selected as 0.95 (the default setting).
4.1.8. Insights from the Feature Selection Process

Feature Importance

The CBFS method computes the correlation of features with the ground truth label of the stress
level. Insights about the contribution of the features to the stress detection performance can be obtained
from Figures 1 and 2. Three of the best features (over 0.15 correlation) are frequency domain features.
These features are high, low and very-low frequency components of the HRV signal (see Figure 1).
When we examine the EDA features, peaks per 100 s feature are the most important and distinctive
feature by far. Since the EDA signal is distorted under the influence of the stimuli, the number of peaks
and valleys increases. Lastly, when the acceleration signal is investigated, the most discriminative
feature is mean acceleration in the z-axis (see Figure 2b). This could be due to the nature of hand and
body gestures which are caused by stressed situations.

0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00

F

fft_H

LF

fft_V

TRI

F

fft_L

N

TIN

SD

RMS

d
sds

f
f
F
F
stdV HFratio PNN50 fft_pH fft_pL lomb_l omb_h meanV
l
F
L
_
t
ff

HRV Features

Figure 1. Top-ranking features selected for the HRV signal.

Feature Importance

Feature Importance

0.125
0.100
0.075
0.050
0.025
0.000

k
v
n
0
0
pea perc8 mea perc2 uartDe
q

EDA Features
(a) EDA Features.

std _peak aQual
ng
dat
stro

0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00

cc_z

n_a

mea

rgy

ene

c
n_a
mea

c_y

ACC Features

c_x
_ac

n
mea

(b) ACC Features.

Figure 2. Top-ranking features selected for the EDA and ACC signals.

4.2. Relaxation Method Suggestion by Analyzing the Physical Activity-Based Context
Context is a broad term that could contain different types of information such as calendars, activity
type, location and activity intensity. Physical activity intensity could be used to infer contextual
information. In more restricted environments such as office, classrooms, public transportation and
physical activity intensity could be low, whereas, in outdoor environments, physical activity intensity
could increase. Therefore, an appropriate relaxation method will change according to the context
of individuals.
For calculating physical activity intensity, we used the EDAExplorer tool [41]. The stillness metric
is used for this purpose. It is the percentage of periods in which the person is still or motionless. Total
acceleration must be less than a threshold (default is 0.1 [41]) for 95 percent of a minute in order for this
minute to count as still [41]. Then, the ratio of still minutes in a session can be calculated. For the ratio

Healthcare 2020, 8, 100

10 of 19

of still minutes in a session, we labeled sessions below 20% as still, above 20% as active and suggested
relaxation method accordingly (see Figure 3).

ve
i
ct
yA
l
l
a
c
i
ys
Ph

Sugges
t

Hi
ghSt
r
es
sDet
ec
t
ed

Ph
y
s
i
c
al
l
yI
nac
t
i
v
e

Sugges
t

Figure 3. The whole system diagram is depicted. When a high stress level is experienced, by analyzing
the physical activity based context, the system suggests the most appropriate reduction method.

4.3. Description of the Data Collection Procedure
The proposed stress level monitoring mechanism, for real-life settings, was evaluated during an
eight day Marie Skłodowska-Curie Innovative Training Network (ITN) training event in Istanbul, Turkey,
for the AffecTech project. AffecTech is a program funded by Horizon 2020 (H2020) framework established
by the European Commission. The AffecTech project is an international collaborative research network
involving 15 PhD students (early stage researchers (ESR)) with the aim of developing low-cost effective
wearable technologies for individuals who experience affective disorders (for example, depression,
anxiety and bipolar disorder).
The eight-day training event included workshops, lectures and training with clearly defined
tasks and activities to ensure that the ESR had developed the required skills, knowledge and values
outline prior to the training event. At the end of the eight-day training, ESRs were required to deliver
a presentation about their PhD work to two evaluators from the European Union where they received
feedback about their progress (see Figure 4 for raw physiological signals at the start of the presentation).
For studying the effects of emotion regulation on stress, yoga, guided mindfulness and mobile-based
mindfulness, sessions were held by a certified instructor.

Figure 4. Sample data belong to a presentation session. The increase in EDA, ST and IBI could be
observed when the subject started the presentation.

During the training, physiological and questionnaire data were collected from the 16 ESR
participants (9 men, mean age 28); 15 ESRs and one of the AffecTech project academics, all of whom

ry 2015

Healthcare 2020, 8, 100

11 of 19

gave informed consent to participate in the study. Participants were from different countries with
diverse nationalities (two from Iran, two from Spain, two from Italy, one from Argentina, one from
Pakistan, one from China, one from Switzerland, one from Belarus, one from France, one from England,
one from Barbados, one from Turkey and one from Bulgaria). Due to the fault of one of the Empatica
E4 devices, it was not possible to include data from one participant. The remaining 15 participants
completed all stages of the study successfully.
During the eight days of training and presentations, psychophysiological data were collected
from 16 participants during the training event from Empatica E4 smart band while they are awake.
For studying the effects of emotion regulation on stress, yoga, guided mindfulness and mobile-based
mindfulness sessions were held by a certified instructor. The timeline of the event is shown in Figure 5.
Training

Training
Days 1, 2, 3, 4

Day 6

Yoga + Meditation
Meditation (Start)
Meditation (End)

Midterm + Presentations
Free day

Days 7 and 8

Day 5

Presentations

Yoga (End)

10:00AM

10:00AM

03:00PM

01:00PM
02:30PM

01:00PM
02:00PM

Presentations

PAUSE

Yoga (Start)

Figure 5. Time-line depicting eight days of the training event. Presentations, relaxations and lectures
are highlighted.

4.3.1. Physiological Stress Data
The psychophysiological signal data were collected using the Empatica E4 smart band whilst
participants were awake throughout the eight days of the AffecTech training. Physiological data
included IBI, EDA, ACC (Accelerometer) and ST and stored in different csv files. In addition, 27.39% of
the data are obtained from free times (free day and after training until subjects slept 5:00 p.m.–10:00 p.m.),
43.83% of the data comes from lectures in the training, 11.41% is the presentation session and relax
sessions consist of 17.35% of the data. As mentioned previously, we randomly undersampled (most
commonly applied method [55] ) the data to overcome the class imbalance problem. The participants’
blood pressure (BP) was also recorded using CE(0123) Harvard Medical Devices Ltd. automated
sphygmomanometer prior to and after each stress reduction event (yoga and mindfulness), in order
to demonstrate whether the participants stress levels were modified. On each occasion that the
participants’ BP was recorded, the mean of three recordings was used as the final BP. A reduction in
the participants’ blood pressure and/or pulse rate may be seen, which demonstrates a reduction in
5/16/2015
11/15/2015
stress level.
Milestone Description
Milestone Description
4.3.2. Ethics
The procedure used in this study was approved by the Institutional Review Board for Research with
Human
Subjects of Boğaziçi University
Quarter
1
Quarter 2with the approval number 2018/16.
Quarter 3Prior to data acquisition,
each participant received a consent form describing the experimental procedure and its benefits and
implications to both the society and the subject. The procedure was also explained verbally to the
Apr 2015
Jul 2015
Oct 2015
subject. All of the data are stored anonymously.

Quarter 4

4.3.3. Questionnaire Self-Report Stress Data
A session-based self-report questionnaire comprised of six questions based on the Nasa Task
8/6/2015
9/6/2015
Load Index (NASA-TLX) [57]. The frustration scale was
specifically used to measure perceived
stress
Event
Event
levels [32]. We asked the following question to the participants
for each session:
How irritated, stressed and annoyed versus content, relaxed and complacent did you feel during
the task?
Phase 1

1 July 2015

Phase 2

Phase 3

Healthcare 2020, 8, 100

12 of 19

Questionnaires were completed daily (at the end of the day) and, after each presentation, lecture
and stress reduction event (such as yoga and mindfulness).
4.3.4. Stress Management Scheme Using Yoga and Mindfulness
During the eight day training, it is assumed that the participants’ stress levels are likely to have
increased day by day because they were required to give a presentation (perceived as a stressful event)
reporting their PhD progress to the EU project evaluators at the end of the training.
Underpinned by James Gross’s Emotion Regulation model (see Figure 6) [4], we modified the
situation to help the participants to reduce their thoughts of the end of the training presentation. To help
participants manage their stress levels, we applied Yoga and mindfulness sessions on two separate days
(day three and day four, respectively). These sessions lasted approximately 1 h and, throughout the
sessions, participants wore an Empatica E4 smartband. In addition to the physiological signals coming
from the Smartbands, participants’ blood pressure values were also recorded before and after the yoga
and mindfulness sessions.

Figure 6. Application of James Gross’s Emotion Regulation model [4] in the context of stress management.

5. Experimental Results and Discussion
5.1. Statistical Data Analysis
5.1.1. Validation of Different Perceived Stress Levels by using the Self-Reports
In order to validate that the participants experienced different perceived stress levels in different
contexts (lecture, relaxation, presentation), we used the Frustration item (see Section 4.5) from the
NASA-TLX [57]. The distribution of answers is demonstrated in Figure 7. Our aim is to show that the
perceived stress levels (obtained from self-report answers) differ in relaxation sessions considerably when
compared to the presentation session (high stress). To this end, we applied the t-test (in R programming
language) to the perceived stress self-report answers of yoga versus presentation, mindfulness versus
presentation and pause (mobile mindfulness) versus presentation session pairs. The paired t-test is
used to evaluate the separability of each session. The degree of freedom is 15. We applied the variance
test to each session tuple; we could not identify equal variance in any of the session tuples. Thus, we
selected the variance as unequal. We used 99.5% confidence intervals. The t-test results’ (p-values and
test statistics) are provided in Table 5. For all tuples, the null hypothesis stating that the perceived stress
of the relaxation method is not less than the presentation session is rejected. The perceived stress levels
of participants for all meditation sessions are observed to be significantly lower than the presentation
session (high stress).

Healthcare 2020, 8, 100

13 of 19

Table 5. T-test results for session tuple comparison of perceived stress levels using self-reports.
Session Tuple

t-Test Statistic

p-Value

Yoga—Presentation
Guided Mindfulness—Presentation
Mobile Mindfulness—Presentation

−4.0027
−5.4905
−4.2677

p < 0.005
p < 0.005
p < 0.005

Frustration Score

80
60
40
20
0
Mindfulness

Yoga

Pause

Activity Type

Lecture Presentation

Figure 7. Visual representation of the frustration scores collected in different types of sessions.

5.1.2. Before and After Physiological Measurements for Evaluating Performance of Yoga and
Mindfulness with Blood Pressure
In this section, we compared the effect of stress management tools such as yoga and mindfulness
on blood pressure. It is expected that blood pressure sensors will be part of unobtrusive wrist-worn
wearable sensors soon. We plan to integrate a blood pressure (BP) module to our system when they
are available. Therefore, by using the measurements of a medical-grade blood pressure monitor, we
provided insights about how stress reaction affects BP. We further applied and tested the prominent
emotion regulation model of James Gross by analyzing these measurements in the context of stress
management. We measured the diastolic and systolic BP and pulse using a medical-grade blood
pressure monitor before and after the yoga and mindfulness sessions. In order to ensure that the
participants were relaxed and that an accurate BP was recorded, BP was measured three times with the
mean as the recorded result. A one-sample t-test was applied to the difference between mean values.
The results are shown in Table 6.
Mindfulness decreased the systolic BP, –1.13% (ns), increased diastolic BP, +1.75% (p < 0.05) and
decreased the pulse –5.75% (p < 0.05). Medicine knows that systolic blood pressure (the top number
or highest blood pressure when the heart is squeezing and pushing the blood around the body) is
more important than diastolic blood pressure (the bottom number or lowest blood pressure between
heartbeats) because it gives the best idea of the risk of having a stroke or heart attack. In this view,
the significant reduction of systolic BP after mindfulness is an important result.
Moreover, the difference between systolic and diastolic BP is called pulse pressure. For example,
120 systolic minus 60 diastolic equals a pulse pressure of 60. It is also known that a pulse pressure
greater than 60 can be a predictor of heart attacks or other cardiovascular diseases, while a low pulse
pressure (less than 40) may indicate poor heart function. In our study, pulse pressure was lower after
mindfulness (we had both a significant reduction in systolic BP and an increase in diastolic BP), but its
value was higher than 40 (42.69 mean difference before the mindfulness and 40.48 mean difference
after the mindfulness), suggesting that this result can also be considered clinically positive.
During yoga, there was a decrease in systolic BP by −5.81% (p < 0.05), diastolic BP by −1.93%
(ns) and increase in pulse +8.06% (p < 0.05). Yoga appears to be more effective than mindfulness at
decreasing systolic and diastolic blood pressure, although mindfulness seems to be more effective than
yoga for decreasing the pulse due to the activity involved in yoga.

Healthcare 2020, 8, 100

14 of 19

Table 6. The difference between the mean diastolic blood pressure, the mean systolic blood pressure
and the mean pulse, before and after sessions of guided mindfulness and guided yoga. (* p < 0.05).
Activity

Systolic

Diastolic

Pulse

Guided Mindfulness
Guided Yoga

−1.31%
−5.81% *

1.75% *
−1.93%

−5.75% *
8.06% *

5.2. Physiological Stress Level Detection with Wearables by Using Context Labels as the Class Label
We tested our system by using the known context labels of sessions as the class label. We used
Lecture (mild stress), Yoga and Mindfulness (relax) and Presentation in front of the board of juries (high
stress) as class labels by examining perceived stress self-report answers in Figure 6. We investigated
the success of relaxation methods, different modalities and finding the presenter.
5.2.1. Effect of Different Physiological Signals on Stress Detection
We evaluated the effect of using the interbeat-interval, the skin conductance and the accelerometer
signals separately and in a combined manner on two and three class classification performance. These
classes are mild stress, high stress and relax states from mindfulness and yoga sessions. The results
are shown in Tables 7–9. For the three-class classification problem, we achieved a maximum accuracy
of 72% by using MLP on only HRV features and 86.61% with only accelerometer features using
the Random Forest classifier and 85.36% accuracy combination of all features with LDA classifier
(see Table 7). The difficulty in this classification task is a similar physiological reaction to relax and
mild stress situations. However, since the main focus of our study is to discriminate high stress from
other classes to offer relaxation techniques in this state, it did not affect our system performance. We
also investigated high-mild stress and high stress-relax 2-class classification performance. For the
discrimination of high and mild stress, HRV outperformed other signals with 98% accuracy using
MLP (see Table 8). In the high stress-relax 2-class problem, only HRV features with RF achieved a
maximum accuracy of 86%, whereas ACC features with MLP achieved a maximum of 94% accuracy.
In this problem, the combination of all signals with RF achieved 92% accuracy which is the best among
all classifiers (see Table 9). For all models, EDA did not perform well. This might be caused by the
loose contact with EDA electrodes in the strap due to loosely worn smartbands.
Table 7. Effect of different modalities and their combination on the system performance. Note that the
number of classes is fixed at 3 (high stress, mild stress and relax).
Algorithm

Accuracy, %
HRV

EDA

ACC

Combined

MLP

72.14

36.61

74.29

82.68

RF

67.86

36.96

86.61

85.18

kNN

65.00

29.82

70.89

78.39

LDA

69.82

31.96

73.39

85.36

SVM

47.14

30.54

58.57

46.96

Table 8. Effect of different modalities and their combination on the system performance. Note that the
number of classes is fixed at 2 (high stress and mild stress).
Algorithm

Accuracy, %
HRV

EDA

ACC

Combined

MLP

98.00

60.00

64.00

98.00

RF

98.00

42.00

72.00

98.00

kNN

94.00

44.00

58.00

94.00

LDA

94.00

40.00

54.00

94.00

SVM

66.00

54.00

54.00

66.00

Healthcare 2020, 8, 100

15 of 19

Table 9. Effect of different modalities and their combination on the system performance. Note that the
number of classes is fixed at 2 (high stress and relax).
Algorithm

Accuracy, %
HRV

EDA

ACC

Combined

MLP

82.00

66.00

96.00

90.00

RF

86.00

60.00

94.00

92.00

kNN

82.00

66.00

88.00

90.00

LDA

78.00

64.00

92.00

88.00

SVM

78.00

62.00

52.00

74.00

5.2.2. Effectiveness of Yoga, Mindfulness and Mobile Mindfulness (Pause)
We applied three different relaxation methods to manage stress levels of individuals. In order to
measure the effectiveness of each method, we examined how easily these physiological signals in the
relaxation sessions can be separated from high stress presentations. If it can be separated from high
stress levels with higher classification performance, it could be inferred that they are more successful
at reducing stress. As seen in Tables 10 and 11, mobile mindfulness has lower success in reducing
stress levels. Yoga has the highest classification performance with both HR and EDA signals.
Table 10. The classification accuracy of the relaxation sessions using stress management methods and
stressful sessions using EDA.
Algorithm

Accuracy, %
Guided Mindfulness

Yoga

Mobile Mindfulness

MLP

65.71

78.57

75.00

RF

67.14

87.14

67.64

kNN

64.29

82.86

77.94

LDA

65.71

80.00

51.47

SVM

70.00

72.86

58.82

Table 11. The classification accuracy of the relaxation sessions using stress management methods and
stressful sessions using HRV.
Algorithm

Accuracy, %
Guided Mindfulness

Yoga

Mobile Mindfulness

MLP

90.00

97.50

93.94

RF

97.50

95.00

87.89

kNN

90.00

90.00

93.93

LDA

87.50

87.50

75.75

SVM

85.00

80.00

81.82

6. Conclusions
In this study, by using our automatic stress detection system with the use of Empatica-E4
smart-bands, we detected stress levels and suggested appropriate relaxation methods (i.e., traditional
or mobile) when high stress levels are experienced. Our stress detection framework is unobtrusive,
comfortable and suitable for use in daily life and our relaxation method suggestion system makes its
decisions based on the physical activity-related context of a user. To test our system, we collected eight
days of data from 16 individuals participating in an EU research project training event. Individuals

Healthcare 2020, 8, 100

16 of 19

were exposed to varied stressful and relaxation events (1) training and lectures (mild stress), (2) yoga,
mindfulness and mobile mindfulness (PAUSE) (relax) and (3) were required to give a moderated
presentation (high stress). The participants were from different countries with diverse cultures.
In addition, 1440 h of mobile data (12 h in a day) were collected during this eight-day event from
each participant measuring their stress levels. Data were collected during the training sessions, relaxation
events and the moderated presentation and during their free time for 12 h in a day, demonstrating that
our study monitored daily life stress. EDA and HR signals were collected to detect physiological stress
and a combination of different modalities increased stress detection, performance and provided the most
discriminative features. We first applied James Gross ER model in the context of stress management
and measured the blood pressure during the ER cycle. When the known context was used as the label
for stress level detection system, we achieved 98% accuracy for 2-class and 85% accuracy for 3-class.
Most of the studies in the literature only detect stress levels of individuals. The participants’ stress levels
were managed with yoga, mindfulness and a mobile mindfulness application while monitoring their
stress levels. We investigated the success of each stress management technique by the separability of
physiological signals from high-stress sessions. We demonstrated that yoga and traditional mindfulness
performed slightly better than the mobile mindfulness application. Furthermore, this study is not without
limitations. In order to generalize the conclusions, more experiments based on larger sample groups
should be conducted. As future work, we plan to develop personalized perceived stress models by using
self-reports and test our system in the wild. Furthermore, attitudes in the psychological field constitute
a topic of utmost relevance, which always play an instrumental role in the determination of human
behavior [58]. We plan to design a new experiment which accounts for the attitudes of participants
towards relaxation methods and their effects on the performance of stress recognition systems.
Author Contributions: Y.S.C. is the main editor of this work and made major contributions in data collection,
analysis and manuscript writing. H.I.-S. made valuable contributions in both data collection and manuscript
writing. She was the yoga and mindfulness instructor in the event and contributed the related sections regarding
traditional and mobile methods. She also led the blood pressure measurement efforts before and after relaxation
methods. D.E. and N.C. contributed equally to this work in design, implementation, data analysis and writing
the manuscript. J.F.-Á., C.R. and G.R. contributed the experiment design and provided valuable insights into
both emotion regulation theory. They also contributed to the related sections in the manuscript. C.E. provided
invaluable feedback and technical guidance to interpret the design and the detail of the field study. He also
performed comprehensive critical editing to increase the overall quality of the manuscript. All authors have read
and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This work has been supported by AffecTech: Personal Technologies for Affective Health, Innovative
Training Network funded by the H2020 People Programme under Marie Skłodowska-Curie Grant Agreement
No. 722022. This work is supported by the Turkish Directorate of Strategy and Budget under the TAM Project
number DPT2007K120610.
Acknowledgments: We would like to show our gratitude to the Affectech Project for providing us the opportunity
for the data collection in the training event and funding the research.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Bali, A.; Jaggi, A.S. Clinical experimental stress studies: Methods and assessment. Rev. Neurosci. 2015, 26, 555–579.
Ingram, R.E.; Luxton, D.D. Vulnerability-stress models. In Development of Psychopathology: A Vulnerability-Stress
Perspective; SAGE Publications: Thousand Oaks, CA, USA, 2005; pp. 32–46.
Harkness, K.L.; Hayden, E.P. The Oxford Handbook of Stress and Mental Health; Oxford University Press:
Oxford, UK, 2018.
Gross, J.J. The emerging field of emotion regulation: An integrative review. Rev. Gen. Psychol. 1998, 2, 271–299.
Koole, S.L.; Aldao, A. The self-regulation of emotion: Theoretical and empirical advances. In Handbook of
Self-Regulation: Research, Theory and Applications; Guilford Publications: New York, NY, USA, 2016; pp. 24–41.
Dimsdale, J.E. Psychological Stress and Cardiovascular Disease. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 2008, 51, 1237–1246.
Fink, G. Stress: Concepts, Definition and History. 2017. Fink, G. Stress: Definition and history. In Stress
Science: Neuroendocrinology; Elsevier Publishing: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2010; pp. 3–9.

Healthcare 2020, 8, 100

8.
9.
10.

11.
12.

13.

14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.

20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.

26.
27.

28.

29.
30.

17 of 19

Exercise: A Guide to Tai Chi. 2019. Available online: https://www.nhs.uk/live-well/exercise/guide-to-taichi (accessed on 25 February 2020).
Chong, C.S.; Tsunaka, M.; Chan, E.P. Effects of yoga on stress management in healthy adults: A systematic
review. Altern. Ther. Health Med. 2011, 17, 32.
Asmundson, G.J.; Fetzner, M.G.; DeBoer, L.B.; Powers, M.B.; Otto, M.W.; Smits, J.A. Let’s get physical:
A contemporary review of the anxiolytic effects of exercise for anxiety and its disorders. Depress. Anxiety
2013, 30, 362–373.
Song, Y.; Lindquist, R. Effects of mindfulness-based stress reduction on depression, anxiety, stress and
mindfulness in Korean nursing students. Nurse Educ. Today 2015, 35, 86–90.
Arch, J.J.; Ayers, C.R.; Baker, A.; Almklov, E.; Dean, D.J.; Craske, M.G. Randomized clinical trial of adapted
mindfulness-based stress reduction versus group cognitive behavioral therapy for heterogeneous anxiety
disorders. Behav. Res. Ther. 2013, 51, 185–196.
Cheng, P.; Lucero, A.; Buur, J. PAUSE: Exploring Mindful Touch Interaction on Smartphones. In Proceedings
of the 20th International Academic Mindtrek Conference (AcademicMindtrek’16), Tampere, Finland,
17–18 October 2016; ACM: New York, NY, USA, 2016; pp. 184–191.
Harkness, K.; Hayden, E.; Olino, T.; Mennies, R.; Wojcieszak, Z. Personality-Stress Vulnerability Models.
In The Oxford Handbook of Stress and Mental Health; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 2020.
McEwen, B.S. Stressed or stressed out: What is the difference? J. Psychiatry Neurosci. 2005, 30, 315.
Aldao, A.; Nolen-Hoeksema, S. The influence of context on the implementation of adaptive emotion
regulation strategies. Behav. Res. Ther. 2012, 50, 493–501.
Troy, A.S.; Mauss, I.B. Resilience in the face of stress: Emotion regulation as a protective factor. Resil. Ment.
Heal. Chall. Across Lifesp. 2011, 1, 30–44.
Mennin, D.S.; Fresco, D.M.; Ritter, M.; Heimberg, R.G. An open trial of emotion regulation therapy for
generalized anxiety disorder and cooccurring depression. Depress. Anxiety 2015, 32, 614–623.
Radkovsky, A.; McArdle, J.J.; Bockting, C.L.H.; Berking, M. Successful emotion regulation skills application
predicts subsequent reduction of symptom severity during treatment of major depressive disorder. J. Consult.
Clin. Psychol. 2014, 82, 248–262.
Svetlov, A.S.; Nelson, M.M.; Antonenko, P.D.; McNamara, J.P.; Bussing, R. Commercial mindfulness aid does
not aid short-term stress reduction compared to unassisted relaxation. Heliyon 2019, 5, e01351.
Puranik, K.A.; M, K. Wearable Device for Yogic Breathing. In Proceedings of the 2019 Amity International
Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AICAI), Dubai, UAE, 4–6 February 2019; pp. 605–610.
NICE. Depression in Adults: Recognition and Management. Clinical Guideline [CG90]; National Institute for
Clinical Excellence: London, UK, 2009.
Huston, P.; McFarlane, B. Health benefits of tai chi. Can. Fam. Physician 2016, 62, 881–890.
PauseAble—Mindfulness in Motion. Available online: https://www.pauseable.com/ (accessed on
24 November 2019).
Castaldo, R.; Montesinos, L.; Melillo, P.; Massaro, S.; Pecchia, L. To What Extent Can We Shorten HRV
Analysis in Wearable Sensing? A Case Study on Mental Stress Detection. In EMBEC & NBC 2017; Springer:
Singapore, 2018; pp. 643–646.
Fernández, J.R.M.; Anishchenko, L. Mental stress detection using bioradar respiratory signals. Biomed. Signal
Process. Control 2018, 43, 244–249.
Giannakakis, G.; Pediaditis, M.; Manousos, D.; Kazantzaki, E.; Chiarugi, F.; Simos, P.G.; Marias, K.;
Tsiknakis, M. Stress and anxiety detection using facial cues from videos. Biomed. Signal Process. Control 2017,
31, 89–101.
Castaldo, R.; Xu, W.; Melillo, P.; Pecchia, L.; Santamaria, L.; James, C. Detection of mental stress due to
oral academic examination via ultra-short-term HRV analysis. In Proceedings of the 2016 38th Annual
International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), Orlando, FL,
USA, 16–20 August 2016; pp. 3805–3808.
Vildjiounaite, E.; Kallio, J.; Kyllönen, V.; Nieminen, M.; Mäntyjärvi, J.; Gimel’farb, G. Unobtrusive stress detection
on the basis of smartphone usage data. Pers. Ubiquitous Comput. 2018, doi:10.1007/s00779-017-1108-z.
Gjoreski, M.; Luštrek, M.; Gams, M.; Gjoreski, H. Monitoring stress with a wrist device using context.
J. Biomed. Inform. 2017, 73, 159–170.

Healthcare 2020, 8, 100

31.

32.
33.
34.
35.

36.

37.

38.
39.
40.
41.

42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.

48.
49.
50.
51.

52.

18 of 19

Gjoreski, M.; Gjoreski, H.; Luštrek, M.; Gams, M. Continuous Stress Detection Using a Wrist Device: In
Laboratory and Real Life. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive
and Ubiquitous Computing: Adjunct (UbiComp’16), Heidelberg, Germany, 12–16 September 2016; ACM:
New York, NY, USA, 2016; pp. 1185–1193.
Can, Y.S.; Chalabianloo, N.; Ekiz, D.; Ersoy, C. Continuous Stress Detection Using Wearable Sensors in Real
Life: Algorithmic Programming Contest Case Study. Sensors 2019, 19, 1849.
Ciman, M.; Wac, K. Individuals’ stress assessment using human-smartphone interaction analysis. IEEE Trans.
Affect. Comput. 2016, 9, 51–65.
Sysoev, M.; Kos, A.; PogaăźNik, M. Noninvasive Stress Recognition Considering the Current Activity. Pers.
Ubiquitous Comput. 2015, 19, 1045–1052.
Ahani, A.; Wahbeh, H.; Miller, M.; Nezamfar, H.; Erdogmus, D.; Oken, B. Change in physiological signals
during mindfulness meditation. In Proceedings of the 2013 6th International IEEE/EMBS Conference on
Neural Engineering (NER), San Diego, CA, USA, 6–8 November 2013; pp. 1378–1381.
Karydis, T.; Langer, S.; Foster, S.L.; Mershin, A. Identification of Post-meditation Perceptual States Using
Wearable EEG and Self-Calibrating Protocols. In Proceedings of the 11th PErvasive Technologies Related to
Assistive Environments Conference (PETRA’18), Corfu, Greece, 26–29 June 2018; ACM: New York, NY, USA,
2018; pp. 566–569; doi:10.1145/3197768.3201544.
Mason, H.; Vandoni, M.; Debarbieri, G.; Codrons, E.; Ugargol, V.; Bernardi, L. Cardiovascular and respiratory
effect of yogic slow breathing in the yoga beginner: What is the best approach? Evid.-Based Complement.
Altern. Med. 2013, 2013, 743504.
Pause EEG Validation Article. Available online: https://www.ustwo.com/blog/the-story-of-pause (accessed
on 24 November 2019).
Ingle, R.; Awale, R. Impact Analysis of Meditation on Physiological Signals. JOIV Int. J. Inform. Vis. 2018,
2, 31–36.
Can, Y.S.; Arnrich, B.; Ersoy, C. Stress Detection in Daily Life Scenarios Using Smart Phones and Wearable
Sensors: A Survey. J. Biomed. Inform. 2019, 92, 103139.
Taylor, S.; Jaques, N.; Chen, W.; Fedor, S.; Sano, A.; Picard, R. Automatic identification of artifacts in
electrodermal activity data. In Proceedings of the 2015 37th Annual International Conference of the IEEE
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), Milan, Italy, 25–29 August 2015; pp. 1934–1937.
Greco, A.; Valenza, G.; Lanata, A.; Scilingo, E.P.; Citi, L. cvxEDA: A Convex Optimization Approach to
Electrodermal Activity Processing. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 2016, 63, 797–804.
Kappeler-Setz, C. Multimodal Emotion and Stress Recognition; ETH Zurich: Zurich, Switzerland, 2012; pp. 20–26.
Kim, H.G.; Cheon, E.J.; Bai, D.S.; Lee, Y.H.; Koo, B.H. Stress and heart rate variability: A meta-analysis and
review of the literature. Psychiatry Investig. 2018, 15, 235.
MATLAB. 9.7.0.1190202 (R2019b); The MathWorks Inc.: Natick, MA, USA, 2018.
Stress Response. Available online: https://www.anxietycentre.com/anxiety/stress-response.shtml (accessed
on 25 February 2020).
Tarvainen, M.P.; Niskanen, J.P.; Lipponen, J.A.; Ranta-aho, P.O.; Karjalainen, P.A. Kubios HRV—A Software for
Advanced Heart Rate Variability Analysis. In Proceedings of the 4th European Conference of the International
Federation for Medical and Biological Engineering, Antwerp, Belgium, 23–27 November 2008; Vander Sloten, J.;
Verdonck, P.; Nyssen, M.; Haueisen, J., Eds.; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2009; pp. 1022–1025.
Cinaz, B.; Arnrich, B.; Marca, R.; Tröster, G. Monitoring of Mental Workload Levels During an Everyday Life
Office-work Scenario. Pers. Ubiquitous Comput. 2013, 17, 229–239.
Alberdi, A.; Aztiria, A.; Basarab, A. Towards an automatic early stress recognition system for office
environments based on multimodal measurements: A review. J. Biomed. Inform. 2016, 59, 49–75.
Greene, S.; Thapliyal, H.; Caban-Holt, A. A Survey of Affective Computing for Stress Detection: Evaluating
technologies in stress detection for better health. IEEE Consum. Electron. Mag. 2016, 5, 44–56.
Castellano, G.; Villalba, S.D.; Camurri, A. Recognising human emotions from body movement and gesture
dynamics. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction,
Lisbon, Portugal, 12–14 September 2007; pp. 71–82.
Melzer, A.; Shafir, T.; Tsachor, R.P. How Do We Recognize Emotion From Movement? Specific Motor
Components Contribute to the Recognition of Each Emotion. Front. Psychol. 2019, 10, 1389.

Healthcare 2020, 8, 100

53.
54.
55.
56.

57.
58.

19 of 19

Tang, T.B.; Yeo, L.W.; Lau, D.J.H. Activity awareness can improve continuous stress detection in galvanic skin
response. In Proceedings of the IEEE SENSORS 2014, Valencia, Spain, 2–5 November 2014; pp. 1980–1983.
Eibe, F.; Hall, M.; Witten, I. The WEKA Workbench. Online Appendix for “Data Mining: Practical Machine
Learning Tools and Techniques”; Morgan Kaufmann: Burlington, MA, USA, 2016.
Zhang, W.; Ramezani, R.; Naeim, A. WOTBoost: Weighted Oversampling Technique in Boosting for imbalanced
learning. arXiv 2019, arXiv:1910.07892.
Holmes, G.; Donkin, A.; Witten, I.H. WEKA: A machine learning workbench. In Proceedings of ANZIIS’94—
Australian New Zealnd Intelligent Information Systems Conference, Brisbane, Australia, 29 November–2
December 1994; pp. 357–361.
Hart, S.G. NASA Task Load Index (TLX); Paper and Pencil Package; NASA Ames Research Center: Mountain
View, CA, USA, 1986; Volume 1.0.
Glasman, L.R.; Albarracin, D. Forming attitudes that predict future behavior: A meta-analysis of the
attitude-behavior relation. Psychol. Bull. 2006, 132, 778.
© 2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

