Th.GS-6.2-7

Development of an ERD measurement system using Emotiv Epoc

Daiki TAKEHARA , Hidenori KAYANUMA2 , Miku MATSUBARA2, Naoto SEKI2,
1

Kenya WADA1, Masaya KURATA1, Yumie ONO1
1

Department of Electronics and Bioinformatics, School of Science and Technology, Meiji University
2

Electrical Engineering Program, Graduate School of Science and Technology, Meiji University


Abstract: We developed a low-cost, event-related desynchronization (ERD) measurement system using
consumer-grade EEG system (Emotiv Epoc) for application of motor-imagery (MI) related brain machine
interface (BMI). We investigated accuracy of ERD power detection of Epoc by comparing the ERD power
calculated from simultaneously recorded EEG via Epoc and medical-grade EEG system (g.USBamp: g.tec
medical engineering). Eleven healthy participants performed MI of holding a rolling tennis ball and opening the
grasped hand under the observation of hand movement video. The mean ERD power was comparable between
Epoc and g. USBamp with both hand gestures tested. ERD detection accuracy of Epoc was 70.5% of the all trials
tested. Considering the price of Epoc, our results suggest that Epoc could be a good substitute for medical-grade
EEG systems for the purpose of MI-based BMI.
Keyword: BMI, Emotiv, event-related desynchronization



1. Introduction

556

Most of the conventional Brain-machine interface
(BMI) technology uses a medical-grade EEG to
detect cortical activity[1,2], but it is expensive and
difficult for practical use. In recent years, a low-cost
consumer-grade EEG, such as Emotiv Epoc[3] and
openBCI[4], are on the market to facilitate the
application of BMI. Although there are reports that
consumer-grade EEG systems have lower accuracy
over medical-grade EEG systems in detection of
event-related potential (ERP) [5], they might be useful
for BMI that utilizes changes in spontaneous EEG
whose amplitude is more than 10 times of that of ERP.
An event-related desynchronization (ERD) is one of
such spontaneous brain signals that can be utilized as
operating signal of BMI. ERD is a suppression of μ
band activity during imagery or actual movement of
body parts, representing the active state of the motor
cortex[6]. ERD is currently used in many BMI
applications such as operation of wheelchair[7] and
stroke hand-motor rehabilitation [1,2].
In this study, we developed a low-cost ERD
measurement system using consumer-grade EEG
system (Epoc: Emotiv) for application of
motor-imagery (MI) related BMI. We investigated
accuracy of ERD power detection of Epoc by
comparing the ERD power calculated from
simultaneously recorded EEG via Epoc and
medical-grade EEG system (g.USBamp: g.tec
medical engineering).

2. Methods
A. Participants

Eleven healthy participants (a1-a11; 11 males, mean
22.3 ± 0.4 years old, all right-handed) participated in
the experiment. The study was approved by the

Institutional Review Board and all participants gave
written informed consent for participation.

B. Modification on Epoc electrode arm

Epoc is consisted of the fixed 14 electrodes.
However, none of the electrodes covers the hand
motor area (typically C3 and C4 according to the
international 10% electrode arrangement). We
therefore made an electrode arm attached to Epoc
with a 3D printer and transferred AF3 and F4
electrodes to the positions of C3 and C4, respectively
(Figure 1). The electrode arm also equips an
electrode holder for an active electrode of a
medical-grade EEG system (g.ACTIVEelectrode
1015: g.tec medical engineering) so that two
electrodes of different EEG systems can be closely
positioned over the hand motor area. We conducted
simultaneous measurements using this modified
Epoc.

Figure 1. Modified Epoc system for ERD
measurement from the primary motor cortex.

C. ERD measurement

Participants sat comfortably in a chair and a tablet
screen was arranged in front of them over their right
forearm. A hand movement video of a first-person
perspective was used to facilitate the MI related ERD.
Participants were instructed to consider the hand in

the tablet screen as their own hand and to imagine the
movement of their hand synchronized with the hand
in the movie. Participants performed MI for their
dominant hands (Figure 2). Each trial (16 s) was
consisted of a movie showing the following still and
motion pictures of: a black fixation cross on a white
screen (4 s) to relax, a hand at rest (3.2 s), the hand
holding a tennis ball rolling into the hand (1.4 s), the
hand remaining to hold the tennis ball (3.4 s), the
hand opening to release the ball (0.6 s), and the hand
at rest again (3.4 s). Participants watched this movie
for 8 times in serial. We set the sampling rate,
band-pass-filter, and notch filter at 128 Hz, 0.2 - 43
Hz, and 50 Hz and at 128 Hz, 0.5 - 60 Hz, and 50 Hz
in Epoc and g.USBamp, respectively. The electrode
of Epoc system was positioned over the hand motor
cortices at C3. The electrode position of g.USBamp
was located 1.9 cm inside to the longitudinal fissure
from the electrode position of Epoc. The ground
electrode of g.USBamp was attached to the center of
the forehead and the reference electrode was attached
to the right earlobe. Because of the device
configuration, the reference electrodes of Epoc were
placed at P3 and P4, and no ground electrode was
used.

detection of ERD, we calculated the accuracy of ERD
detection (Accuracy) using the following equation
(2):
TP + TN
× 100 (2)
Accuracy [%] =
n

where TP and TN indicate the number of coincident
positive (ERD power ≥ 0) and negative (ERD power
< 0) detection of ERD from g.USBamp and Epoc,
respectively. n indicates the number of the trials for
each participant. The mean Accuracy was calculated
with both grasping and hand-opening MI trials.

Figure 2. Experimental setting.

D. Data analysis

Since the online bandpass filter of two EEG
systems was not set identically, we applied a same
off-line bandpass filter of 2-30 Hz to both data sets in
the analysis. When obviously large noise (amplitude
exceeding ± 100 μV) was observed in the EEG data,
we removed the trial from the analysis. We found
such large noise with Epoc only in one trial out of 8
trials in one participant during MI of holding a rolling
tennis ball. Therefore, we analyzed the whole data
except for this one trial. The ERD analysis was done
as previously described by Matsubara et al.[2] Briefly,
the ERD power was determined by a time-frequency
analysis of EEG data using a wavelet transform. We
used the Morlet wavelet as a mother wavelet. We
defined the ERD power with the following equation
(1):
(Rest – maxERD)
(1)
ERD power [%] = 100 ×
Rest
where Rest and maxERD indicate the μ band power
(8-13 Hz) for 1s before the hand-motor imagery and
that for any 1s of minimum μ band power during 0-2s
after starting hand imagery, respectively (Figure 3).
 Statistical significance of differences in ERD
power between Epoc and g.USBamp was
investigated by paired t-test. We further investigated
the correlation of detected ERD powers between
Epoc and g.USBamp. Either Pearson's correlation
coefficient or Spearman's rank correlation coefficient
was calculated depending on the result of the
Shapiro–Wilk normality test. We considered P values
< 0.05 to be statistically significant.
In order to investigate the validity of Epoc in the

557

Figure 3. Representative result of wavelet
transform-based time-frequency analysis
(participant a3, g.USBamp, right hand MI of
holding a rolling tennis ball and opening the
grasped hand).
TABLE 1.
participant.

Average

ERD

power

of

each

㻱㻾㻰㻌㼇㻑㼉
㻴㼛㼘㼐㼕㼚㼓㻌㼍㻌㼞㼛㼘㼘㼕㼚㼓㻌㼠㼑㼚㼚㼕㼟㻌㼎㼍㼘㼘 㻻㼜㼑㼚㼕㼚㼓㻌㼠㼔㼑㻌㼓㼞㼍㼟㼜㼑㼐㻌㼔㼍㼚㼐
㻼㼍㼞㼠㼕㼏㼕㼜㼍㼚㼠
㻱㼜㼛㼏
㼓㻚㼁㻿㻮㼍㼙㼜
㻱㼜㼛㼏
㼓㻚㼁㻿㻮㼍㼙㼜
㼍㻝
㻞㻥㻚㻢
㻞㻢㻚㻡
㻠㻤㻚㻣
㻡㻥㻚㻠
㼍㻞
㻝㻡㻚㻥
㻜㻚㻢
㻡㻟㻚㻠
㻡㻢㻚㻟
㼍㻟
㻞㻥㻚㻞
㻢㻞㻚㻣
㻡㻞㻚㻥
㻡㻠㻚㻡
㼍㻠
㻟㻥㻚㻣
㻞㻚㻠
㻞㻢㻚㻞
㻥㻚㻡
㼍㻡
㻝㻟㻚㻜
㻠㻚㻝
㻟㻠㻚㻥
㻝㻠㻚㻠
㼍㻢
㻞㻟㻚㻠
㻟㻜㻚㻞
㻟㻟㻚㻠
㻞㻤㻚㻟
㼍㻣
㻞㻠㻚㻜
㻝㻜㻚㻜
㻞㻢㻚㻣
㻞㻜㻚㻜
㼍㻤
㻝㻝㻚㻟
㻝㻥㻚㻟
㻡㻜㻚㻥
㻠㻣㻚㻢
㼍㻥
㻠㻜㻚㻥
㻟㻤㻚㻣
㻝㻚㻢
㻠㻚㻣
㼍㻝㻜
㻝㻤㻚㻞
㻝㻥㻚㻝
㻢㻚㻟
㻝㻡㻚㻠
㼍㻝㻝
㻞㻜㻚㻤
㻝㻢㻚㻞
㻜㻚㻣
㻡㻚㻜
㻭㼢㼑㼞㼍㼓㼑
㻞㻠㻚㻞
㻞㻜㻚㻥
㻟㻜㻚㻡
㻞㻤㻚㻢

3. Result

558

TABLE 1 shows the average ERD power of all
participants measured from two EEG systems. The
average ERD power of all participants when holding
a rolling tennis ball was 24.2 ± 2.8% in Epoc and
21.0 ± 5.3% in g.USBamp and those when opening
the grasped hand was 30.5 ± 5.8% in Epoc and 28.6 ±
6.2% in g.USBamp (Figure 4), respectively. There
was no significant difference between ERD power
detected between Epoc and g.USBamp.
Figure 5 shows the relationship between ERD
power detected by Epoc and g.USBamp during MI of
holding a rolling tennis ball in all trials of all
participants. There was no statistically significant
correlation between ERD power detected using Epoc
and g.USBamp in holding a rolling tennis ball
conditions (Spearman's rank correlation coefficient
R = 0.151, P > 0.1). Figure 6 shows the relationship
between ERD power detected by Epoc and
g.USBamp during MI of opening the grasped hand in
all trials of all participants. There was a statistically
significant correlation between ERD power detected
by Epoc and g.USBamp in opening the grasped hand
conditions (Spearman's rank correlation coefficient
R = 0.374, P < 0.01). Further investigation of the
correlation between ERD powers detected by two
systems in each participant showed individual variety
in the strength of correlation. The relationships
between ERD powers from Epoc and g.USBamp
varies from highly positive correlation (R = 0.810,
P < 0.05) to almost no correlation (R= -0.049, P >
0.1) during MI of opening the grasped hand.
Accuracy of ERD detection was 68% in holding a
rolling tennis ball conditions and 73% in opening the
grasped hand conditions.

the head in some cases, which resulted in low
correlation between ERD signals measured from two
EEG systems. We may be able to improve the
electrode contact by wearing a head band over Epoc
to push the electrodes.

Figure 4. The average ERD power of all
participants.
Error bars show standard error.

Figure 5. Correlation of ERD power of all
participants detected by Epoc and g.USBamp for
MI of holding a rolling tennis ball.

4. Discussion

 The mean ERD power values were almost the
same in two EEG systems when participants
performed MI of holding a rolling tennis ball and
opening the grasped hand under the observation of
hand movement video. The ERD power detected by
Epoc with both MI conditions was slightly higher
than that detected by g.USBamp. It is considered to
be due to the difference in the measurement position
between these two modalities, in which an electrode
of Epoc system was positioned at C3 and that of
g.USBamp was positioned next to the Epoc electrode.
The overall correlation of ERD power of all
participants detected by Epoc and g.USBamp was not
so high. At the same time we found wide variety in
correlation coefficients in the individual correlation
analysis. It is considered to be the difference between
the measurement equipment of Epoc and g.USBamp
and the difference in the measurement positions
between these two modalities. Since the length of the
fabricated electrode arm attached to Epoc was fixed,
this might cause an insufficient electrode contact to

Figure 6. Correlation of ERD power of all
participants detected by Epoc and g.USBamp for
MI of opening the grasped hand.
In addition, since the number of measurements
during one trial is small, we need to increase the
number of measurements to further confirm the
correlation in the detected ERD powers from these
two modalities. When we focused on the detection
accuracy of ERD (a judgement of whether there is an
event-related de-synchronization or synchronization),

the mean Accuracy was 70.5% through both hand
gestures tested. Although the amplitude of ERD
detected from Epoc failed to have linear relationship
to that detected from medical-grade EEG system in
some cases, Epoc would be useful for most of BMI
application that requires the detection of ERD but not
the amplitude of ERD.
In summary, the average ERD power was
comparable between Epoc and g. USBamp with both
hand gestures tested. This result suggests that Epoc
can measure ERD with similar detection accuracy
with g.USBamp. Considering the price of Epoc, Epoc
could be a good substitute for medical-grade EEG
systems for the purpose of MI-based BMI.

Reference

[1] F. Pichiorri, G. Morone, M. Petti, J. Toppi, I.
Pisotta, M. Molinari, S.Paolucci, M. Inghilleri, L.
Astolfi, F. Cincotti, and D. Mattia, “Brain–computer
interface boosts motor imagery practice during stroke
recovery”, Annals of Neurology., vol.77, pp. 851-865,
May 2015
[2] M. Matsubara, H. Kayanuma, Y. Ono, S. Omatsu,
and T. Tominaga, “Determination of appropriate
imagery task to discriminate ERD of "Pinch" and
"Hold" movements in healthy participants and stroke
patients”, Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc., vol.
2015, pp. 4598-4601, August 2015.
[3] GS. Taylor, C. Schmidt, “Empirical Evaluation of
the Emotiv EPOC BCI Headset for the Detection of
Mental Actions”, PROCEEDINGS of the HUMAN
FACTORS and ERGONOMICS SOCIETY 56th
ANNUAL MEETING, pp. 193-197, 2012
[4] H. Suryotrisongko, F. Samopa, “Evaluating
OpenBCI Spiderclaw V1 Headwear’s Electrodes
Placements for Brain-Computer Interface (BCI)
Motor Imagery Application”, Procedia Computer
Science, vol.72, pp. 398-405, 2015
[5] M. Duvinage, T. Castermans, M. Petieau, T.
Hoellinger, G. Cheron and T. Dutoit, “Performance of
the Emotiv Epoc headset for P300-based
applications”, BioMedical Engineering OnLine.,
2013
[6] G. Pfurtscheller and C. Neuper, “Motor imagery
activates primary sensorimotor area in humans”,
Neuroscience Letters, vol. 239, pp. 65-68, November
1997.
[7] J. Long, Y. Li, H. Wang, T. Yu, J. Pan, and F. Li
“A Hybrid Brain Computer Interface to Control the
Direction and Speed of a Simulated or Real
Wheelchair”, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL
SYSTEMS AND REHABILITATION ENGINEERING,
vol.20,NO. 5, pp. 720-729, September 2012

559

