NeuroQuantology | September 2012 | Volume 10 | Issue 3 | Page 482-488
Haas A., Synchronistic dyadic interpersonal interaction

482

Article.

A Brain Charge Mechanism Modeled in
Synchronistic Dyadic Interpersonal Interaction
Alan S. Haas
ABSTRACT
A simple model of charged brain states in coupled synchronous interpersonal interaction is presented. Active states are treated
as electromagnetically positive and passive and receptive states are negative. Cognitive and behavioral action is modeled during
simultaneous charge-paired dyadic conversational exchange as well as in longer-term social decision-making processes.
Theoretical principles are derived from electrochemical and neurobiological foundations that can be tested using imaging and
electrophysiological techniques.
Key Words: brain charge, synchrony, interpersonal coupling, mirror neuron, interpersonal coordination, coordination dynamics,
brain electrodynamics
NeuroQuantology 2012; 3: 482-488

Introduction1
Interest in the features of synchronously
‘coupled’ interpersonal interaction has grown
in recent years. It is now well-understood that
there are often simultaneous activations of
matched brain regions between interrelated
individuals and that there are special physical
mechanisms of interdependently linked
processes in social coordination dynamics
(Haken et al., 1985; Tognoli et al., 2007;
Kelso, 2008). New theories of interpersonal
synchronization and entrainment have
appeared (Semin and Cacioppo, 2008) as well
as empirical studies of the simultaneous social
exchange between individuals (Rotondo and
Boker, 2002; Stephens et al., 2010). Much of
the interest in this topic followed from the
discovery of the mirror neuron system and an
Corresponding author: Alan S. Haas, Ph.D.
Address: Dr. Haas is Founder of the Psychobiophysics Research
Organization and also performs research in the Department of
Psychology at Harvard University. Correspondence regarding this
article should be sent to Alan Haas: P.O. Box 540311, Waltham, MA
Phone: + 02454: (617) 271-6836
e-mail: alan@psychobiophysics.org
Received April 30, 2011. Revised June 1, 2011. Accepted Sept 6, 2012.
eISSN 1303-5150

increasing recognition of the importance of
functionally
aligned
behavior
between
individuals
that
enhances
productive
cooperative interaction (Gallese et al., 2007).
Recent brain imaging demonstrations leave
little doubt that socially paired individuals will
often exhibit a simultaneous activation in
similar brain regions during interaction and
that dyads may be understood to be coupled
with each other in a unique way (Stephens et
al., 2010).
At the same time, there has also been a
dramatic increase in the use of electrically
based technologies such as EEG and EMG to
measure a variety of cognitive and behavioral
processes (Lagopoulos et al., 2009; Naeem et
al., 2012). For example, it is now possible to
routinely measure the electrical difference
between two states of mind using inexpensive
devices available to the general public (e.g. the
Emotiv EPOC headset). The technology has
advanced to the level of being able to control
computers and devices merely by thinking a
specific thought. Surprisingly, however, a
complete theoretical biophysical description of
some of the basic aspects of the biological
www.neuroquantology.com

NeuroQuantology | September 2012 | Volume 10 | Issue 3 | Page 482-488
Haas A., Synchronistic dyadic interpersonal interaction

physics behind quantitative measurement of
variable states of mind and matched states in
coupled interpersonal systems remains
lacking.
For example, in comparing one state of
mind to another or when contrasted with a
baseline level of activity, there will be a
quantitative difference between two distinct
states of mind that is more than a matter of
identifying the characteristic waveform or
location of the two measured states. The same
will apply when there is a complementary
matching and pairing of simultaneous states
between two individuals, where the difference
between them can be measured in both a
chemical and electrical way. In these cases, it
is implied that there must be an
electrochemical (“electrical”) potential and
charge difference between two such related
states. For example, it may be considered that
an individual will reside in what would be
considered a “default mode” state of lower
baseline activity level (Raichle et al., 2001) but
when thinking a specific thought or engaging
in a particular matched social activity there
will be an increase in the “task positive
network” relative to the baseline or
complementary state. There will be a net
difference in the biochemical activity between
two related states when they are treated as a
pair of relatively active and passive or
receptive states in an individual or coupled
interpersonal interaction.
Currently, however, there is little or no
research literature describing the possibility of
such an explicit electrochemically based (i.e.,
“electromagnetic”)
model
of
charged
individual cognition and coupled interpersonal
behavior, and of genuine biophysical “positive”
and “negative” states of mind (see discussion
in Haas, 2011a; 2011b; 2011c; 2011d). Yet it
has long been known that neurobiological
processes involve a large number of
electrochemical phenomena, including action
potentials, ion channel gating, etc. These have
traditionally
been
measured
with
electrophysiological biophysical techniques at
the single cell level such as with the patch
clamp method or through the result of bulk
statistical cellular activities using EEG and
MRI that measure larger collections of group
neural activity. But there remains no extant
model that would describe the actual
functional units of cognitive and behavioral
action using explicit physical terminology

483

correlated directly to the physical chemical
origin and nature of these neural events,
although electrophysiological methods are
capable of measuring an impressive amount of
fundamental bioenergetic activity.
For example, while certain EEG
brainwaves (alpha, beta, delta, etc.) represent
oscillations in potential at the surface of the
skull indicative of general classes of cognitive
processes (e.g., alert or resting states), they
have not been described in a way that would
define the specific state of mind using a
physical concept that is correlated precisely to
the cognitive neurochemical action of the
brain and body. Similarly, models of complex
interpersonal coordination dynamics that use
physical concepts to explain synchrony or
entrainment as self-organizing (Haken et al.,
1985) and emergent processes have not
detailed how these would arise from the actual
physical chemistry of the brain and body. The
signals are typically treated as byproducts or
fingerprints of cognition and behavior rather
than physical cognition itself, though useful
EEG signatures of general states of
interpersonal synchrony have been identified
(Tognolli et al., 2007; Naeem et al., 2012).
It is important to recognize that the
brain and body are likely to be driven by
biochemical and electrochemical charged
states at specific moments and episodes of
cognitive and behavioral action. These may
represent very specific active or passive and
receptive states that can be considered
inherently “charged” in a direct psychological
and physical conceptual way.
This may
become particularly important in optimally
coupled interactions where individuals are
matched in complementary ways during
resonant
synchronistic
interpersonal
interaction and in relation to other objects in
the environment (Kelso and Engstrom, 2006;
Stephens et al., 2010). The physical principle
of brain charges would correlate directly with
specific cognitions and would not be unlike the
concept of electromagnetic attraction or
repulsion, except that it is different in its
biological mechanisms and manifestation
(Haas, 2011c).
It can be proposed that there are indeed
net
electromagnetically
“positive”
and
“negative” mental states during alternate
states of greater and lesser mental activity in
individuals and matched interpersonal
behavior. Such charged states may occur both
www.neuroquantology.com

NeuroQuantology | September 2012 | Volume 10 | Issue 3 | Page 482-488
Haas A., Synchronistic dyadic interpersonal interaction

in an individual’s personal changing states as
well as in coupled interpersonal active and
receptive interactions that utilize specific
cognitive and behavioral functions. For
example, affective states that are commonly
described by psychologists as being of a
positive or negative valence could be more
accurately described by how the cognitive and
emotional states arise from the actual
chemistry and physics of the brain and body.
Anger or fear, typically considered to be
“negative” emotions, may often require a
higher level of effort and action than relatively
passive states of bliss or happiness that are
typically considered to be positive states or
emotions. Using a fully physical scientific
model of psychology, however, such ostensibly
“negative” active states like anger would
perhaps be more accurately treated as
physically positive. The physical reality of
psychology will depend on how the reaction is
generated from within the body and its
interactive coupling with the environment.
For example, directing one’s own positive
angry “electromagnetic” energy productively
toward beating a competitor or wisely actively
running in fear from danger could certainly be
considered psychologically positive in some
ways, especially in regard to the increase in
energy expenditure by the brain and body
relative to a passive or defeated state.
There are a number of pieces of
biophysical evidence and simple chemical
principles that can be used to convincingly
inductively reason toward a charge-like model
of the brain during cognition and behavior.
First, on the whole, active brain regions are
known to use a greater amount of oxygen than
resting or inactive regions (Lin et al., 2011).
This is the basis for BOLD measurements that
are generally correlated to the region of the
brain responsible for a given cognitive event.
Wherever there is greater neural activity, there
is likely to be greater oxygen required for
energy generation within mitochondria
because those areas consume more oxygen
during a given brain process. What may be
less appreciated, however, is the fact that this
chemical “combustion” of oxygen with
electrons derived from the late products of
metabolism, is likely to yield a net positive
result. For example, the reduction of oxygen
by the fourth mitochondrial complex,
cytochrome c oxidase, uses electrons originally
derived from food and the subsequent low

484

potential metabolic substrate NADH. This
ultimately liberates energy by taking
advantage of the higher electrochemical redox
potential or chemical “electronegativity” of
oxygen (Haas et al., 2001), and is likely to be
net positive as shown in Figure 1.
From a physical chemical perspective,
the end products of the first part of the
metabolic reaction must be considered to
result in a net positive conversion with respect
to the entire system and environment.
However, much of the energy generation will
be conserved through subsequent negative
results during the following production of ATP
in the brain (Abrahams et al., 1994). But the
ATP is likely to be utilized in subsequent
reactions in the cell until the point at which an
approximation of the original equilibrium
constant value (or “homeostasis”) of the brain
system is restored.
Even under the
assumption of a very high efficiency in the
total work done in the latter part of the
reaction by the neural system, which could not
be perfectly efficient, it is not likely that the
system would be driven into an equal or
greater negative state when compared to the
initial amount of net positive transformation
in the first part of the sequence. So the net
result of the chemical “burning” of organic
material in such a way will yield a net
electrically positive result while being a part of
the entire surroundings that includes the
biological system, due to the net movement of
electrons
toward
relativity
positive
(electronegative) oxygen nuclei and a less than
perfectly efficient second half of the
bioenergetic process.
The oxygen consuming part of the
metabolic process may therefore be treated as
net positive within the context of the entire
system and environment, and the second part
will, at best, be equally negative or slightly less
so. Regardless of precise knowledge of all the
later cellular processes involved in the
neurobiology, the net result on the entire
system during cognitive activity will
consequently be the transformation of an
initial quantity of electrochemical potential
driving force (∆G) to a new and increasingly
positive
form.
From
a
bioenergetic
perspective, the entire system must move up
or down an electrochemical charge gradient
and potential, and in this case the result will
always be at least slightly positive when
compared to times of lower neurological
www.neuroquantology.com

NeuroQuantology | September 2012 | Volume 10 | Issue 3 | Page 482-488
Haas A., Synchronistic dyadic interpersonal interaction

activity, though some cellular components and
parts of the brain are possibly driven to an
increased negative state. For the purposes of
creating an operational physical definition
useful to psychology, however, higher levels of
cognitive and bodily action and activity can be
simplified as being positive, and periods of
lower activity may be defined as negative. The
positive nature of neurochemical activity itself
can be inferred from the metabolism up to the
point of oxygen reduction or from the result of
all activity. Indeed, each step of the
bioenergetic metabolic process can be
described in terms of potential and kinetic
energy as in Figure 1, and the final step of ATP
consumption itself is likely to be a positive
kinetic action.
There are also other ways in which
neural components may exist in comparatively
charged ensembles of states. For instance,
enzymatic
modifications
such
as
phosphorylation may control action in
neurons, and there are of course many ways in
which learning and memory creation take
place, such as through the creation of stronger
synaptic connections (Kandel, 2006). These
modifications may be treated as net positive or
negative in themselves, as collections of cells
comprising functionally devoted regions of the
brain that attain states of slightly higher or
lower potential, analogously to dynamic active
or less active oxygen consuming regions. In
these cases, direct chemical and genetic
modification may lead collections of cells to
reside in a higher or lower electrochemical
state. Modifications could create small
changes in potential in the state of a cell itself
as well as by regulating functional activity. For
instance, the addition of formally negative
inorganic phosphate to an enzyme or the
switching on of a voltage gated ion channel
through a conformational change may create a
slightly increased positive or negative
electrostatic state of an enzyme or cell. Thus,
in addition to the relatively dramatic transient
kinetic mechanism during greater oxygen
consumption, there are likely to be other
modes by which cognitive and behavioral
states become net positively or negatively
charged. These cases of stronger biochemical
modification could control longer-term
cognitive processes as effected through longer
lasting chemical bonds and biological
structures, while kinetically active cognition

485

and behavior utilize larger bursts of metabolic
oxygen consumption for short-term activities.
These
fundamental
biochemical
principles can be used to support the
hypothesis that cognitive and behavioral states
are in fact truly electromagnetically “positive”
and “negative” (Haas, 2011a; 2011b; 2011c).
Positive and negative cognition and social
interaction can be considered to be pairs of
such charged physical states. For instance,
social receptivity may involve a relative
decrease in activity in some areas of the brain,
and this may require a relatively negative basal
level of activity in these areas. A receptive
listener might also create stronger impressions
and longer-term bonds in the brain that are
negative, although the act of creating such
impressions may be positive due to the neural
activity required to do so. Conversely, an active
speaker, who is likely to be using a greater
number of motor skills, would be more
positive in relevant active brain regions, and
this
would
also
include
the
electrophysiological properties and energy
consumption of other parts of the body.
Both
scientific
and
colloquial
descriptions of “negative” behavior might be
considered with a less pejorative connotation.
For example, actively listening would be
relatively negative in the areas involved in
speaking but positive in areas of the brain
required for paying active attention or
involved in actively creating a memory
(although the memory itself may be stored in
negative form). Listening may often be equally
positive to speaking in many ways, although it
is sometimes considered an inferior activity.
Both positive and negative activities are
required
for
coupled
interpersonal
coordination: for every active positive speaker
there must be an equally negative receptive
listener(s) in some specific attributes, and vice
versa in others. The two may be paired and
use similar amounts of energy in many of the
same parts of their brain and contrasting
amounts in others. But the speaker on the
whole may generally be considered more
positive due to his or her greater energy
consumption. Figure 2A offers a simple model
of how the active state of mind of one
individual would be received in a negative
receptive part of another person’s brain during
a synchronously coupled interpersonal
interaction
such
as
during
ordinary
conversation.
www.neuroquantology.com

NeuroQuantology | September 2012 | Volume 10 | Issue 3 | Page 482-488
Haas A., Synchronistic dyadic interpersonal interaction

Comprehensive quantitative analysis of
whole brain signals will help to clarify
precisely how and in which parts of the
brain/body these events occur (Naeem et al.,
2012). It is likely to be the case that a person
will be both positive and negative in different
parts of their neural networks at the same
time, and that is why two charges per brain are
shown in Figure 2. There will probably be
many more pairs that are equilibrated within
the brain itself (Haas, 2011a). For the purposes
of introducing of the simplest physics of this
model, it is important to emphasize the
electromagnetic nature of the states and their
higher or lower relative activity. The details of
precisely where these processes occur in the
brain and body (whose activities must be
evaluated together as whole) and how they are
complementarily
balanced
intraand
inter-individually will need to be elucidated.
There are likely to be differences between two
individual’s perceptual, motor, short and
longer-term
memory
areas
that
are
complementary in their activity levels, and it is
already known that the mirror neuron system
activates many of the same regions.

486

depicted in Figure 2B&C. For instance, after
or during a social interaction, each individual
will cognitively process their prior experience
and ultimately make decisions. They will
“recharge” and redistribute the potential
energy of their instinctual drives and
motivations before responding or choosing to
meet with the other person again. Ideally,
perhaps, as regards synchronistic behavior, a
subsequent meeting would take place at a later
time optimized for additional productive
cooperative interpersonal exchange, taking
advantage of the maximal efficiency of
complementarily charged states (Haas, 2011a;
2011d). In these instances, synchronistic
events may occur at times of effective mutually
aligned interests in a unique simultaneous and
specially matched way. They may emerge
from subconscious processes after a period of
time (Cambray 2002; Hogenson, 2009; Haas
2011d).

Figure 1. Simplified description of net electrochemical charge
changes during cellular combustion of organic substrates in
the brain and body. Food is broken down through metabolic
cycles in mitochondria to the relatively negative product of
NADH that is converted to a positive electrochemical proton
gradient and then into relatively negative energy rich ATP. In
a final step the ATP is used for neural activities and the
release of its negative potential energy is treated as a positive
kinetic step. For purposes of simplification, the changes in
charge of potential and kinetic energy are normalized in each
step to be a sum total of 1, a key principle of
psychobiophysics (Haas, 2011a).

The state of an individual’s brain may
also change as a function of a longer period of
time, especially following interpersonal
interactions. This would be mediated primarily
through the suggested second class and mode
of charge transformation involving neural
modifications
in
longer-term
memory
processes. The case of longer-term processes is

Figure 2. (A) Coupled individuals are simultaneously activated
in matched regions of the brain (+) and overlap in oppositely
charged regions, e.g. expressive(+)/receptive(-) areas. This
may occur in a speaker-listener exchange while the speaker is
using a larger number of active motor skills and the listener
creates an impression of the speaker in their memory. (B)
After the two individuals engage in a mutual synchronously
aligned behavior, they may reverse roles or separate to
process their experiences, regenerate productive interactive
desires, and make decisions. After an interval of time passes
they become optimally “recharged” or redistributed and their
neural networks are rebalanced. (C) They may exchange roles
www.neuroquantology.com

NeuroQuantology | September 2012 | Volume 10 | Issue 3 | Page 482-488
Haas A., Synchronistic dyadic interpersonal interaction

and return to meet again to repeat the exchange with the
opposite person being more positive.

The effect is suggested to resemble the
classic Jungian synchronicity phenomenon
(Jung, 1955). In this case, a plausible physical
synchronistic mechanism is provided through
a model involving the concomitant occurrence
of a physically matched and aligned set of
electrochemical events and circumstances
(Haas, 2011a). Much of this synchronous
alignment and charge-driven behavior may
take place beneath ordinary conscious
awareness in the biochemistry of the brain and
body, and to that extent it can be considered
unconscious or non-conscious. There may
often be a lack of awareness or understanding
of the strength and mechanisms of this kind of
overlapping of physical interpersonal chemical
“bonding” (Haas, 2011a; 2011c). Recent
studies have begun to show that individuals in
dyads and groups will exhibit a sense of
coordinated timing even after entraining cues
cease to provide the zeitgeber (Hove, 2008;
Oullier et al., 2008; Valdesolo, 2010), but the
effects have not been described in an
electrodynamical way.

487

To confirm the central features of this
model, it remains to clarify which parts of the
brain are paired in opposite complementary
ways during simultaneously timed interaction,
that whole brain and body states are
differentially charged, and that the effects can
persist through longer periods of time. This
may be achieved using a global brain analysis
of net differences in cognitive activities from
EEG and MRI measurements; e.g., using sums
from the entire brain, or body. If such effects
can be proven, it may have substantial
implications regarding the physical description
of mental and behavior states, as well as in
understanding the general timing and
organization of thought and behavior in social
structures. From this perspective, it may
eventually become possible to construct a
practical physical scientific theory of mind and
social behavior. The approach would be
similar to that which already exists for sensory
psychophysics, and would have a much
broader social application if used in
conjunction
with
the
traditional
thermodynamically derived principles of
psychoanalysis (Haas, 2011a).

www.neuroquantology.com

NeuroQuantology | September 2012 | Volume 10 | Issue 3 | Page 482-488
Haas A., Synchronistic dyadic interpersonal interaction

References
Abrahams JP, Leslie AG, Lutter R, Walker, JE. Structure
at 2.8-angstrom resolution of F1-ATPase from
bovine-heart mitochondria. Nature 1994; 370:
621-628.
Cambray J. Synchronicity and emergence. American
Imago 2002; 59: 409-434.
Gallese V, Eagle MN, Migone P. Intentional attunement:
Mirror neurons and the neural underpinnings of
interpersonal relations. Journal of the Ameican
Psychoanalytic Association 2007; 55: 131-176.
Haas AS, Pilloud DL, Reddy KS, Babcock GT, Moser CC,
Blasie JK, Dutton PL. Cytochrome c and cytochrome
c oxidase: Monolayer assemblies and catalysis.
Journal of Physical Chemistry B 2001; 105:
11351-11362.
Haas AS. The interpretation of telepathy-like effects: A
novel electromagnetic and synchronistic version of
the psychoanalytic model. Neuroquantology 2011a; 9:
22-35.
Haas AS. The discovery of quantum tunneling in
biological electron transfer and the possibility of a
redox-like mechanism of the mind: A retrospective.
NeuroQuantology 2011b; 9: 415-418.
Haas AS. The nature of the relation between psychology
and physics: An argument for a central role of
electromagnetism in thought and behavior.
NeuroQuantology 2011c; 9: 892-909.
Haas AS. On a physical scientific approach to
transpersonal psychology. International Journal of
Transpersonal Studies 2011d; 30: 69-81.
Haken H, Kelso JAS, Bunz H. A theoretical model of
phase transitions in human hand movements.
Biological Cybernetics 1985; 51: 347-356.
Hogenson GB. Synchronicity and moments of meeting.
Journal of Analytical Psychology 2009; 54: 183-197.
Hove MJ. Shared circuits, shared time, and interpersonal
synchrony. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 2008; 31:
29-30.
Jung CG. The interpretation of nature and the psyche.
Synchronicity: an acausal connecting principle.
Pantheon Books: New York, USA, 1955.
Kandel ER. In search of memory. New York: W. W.
Norton and Company, 2006.
Kelso JAS and Engstrom DA. The complementary
nature. Cambridge, MA: MIT press, 2006.
Kelso JAS. An essay on understanding the mind.
Ecological Psychology 2008; 20: 180-208.
Lagopoulos J, Xu J, Rasmussen I, Vik A, Malhi GS,
Eliassen CF, Arntsen IE, Saether JG, Hollup S, Holen
A, Davanger S, Ellingsen O. Increased theta and
alpha EEG activity during nondirective meditation.
Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine
2009; 15: 1187-1192.
Lin P, Hasson U, Jovicich J, Robinson S. A neuronal
basis for task-negative responses in the human brain.
Cerebral Cortex 2011; 21: 821-830.
Naeem M, Prasad G, Watson DR, Kelso JAS.
Electrophysiological signatures of intentional social
coordination in the 10-12 Hz range. NeuroImage
2012; 59: 1795-1803.
Oullier O, DeGuzman GC, Jantzen KJ, Lagarde J, Kelso
JA. Social coordination dynamics: Measuring human
bonding. Social Neuroscience 2008; 3: 178-192.
Raichle ME, MacLeod AM, Snyder A, Powers WJ,
Gusnard DA, Shulman GL. A default mode of brain

488

function. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Science 2001; 98: 676-682.
Rotondo JL and Boker SM. Behavioral synchronization
in human conversational interaction. In Mirror
Neurons and the Evolution of Brain and Language;
Stamenov M, Gallese V, Eds; John Benjamins
Publishing Company: Amsterdam, Netherlands
2002; pp. 151-162.
Semin G and Cacioppo JT. Grounding social cognition:
Synchronization, coordination, and co-regulation. In
Embodied grounding: Social, cognitive, affective, and
neuroscientific approaches; Semin G, Smith E, Eds.;
Cambridge University Press: New York 2008; pp
119-147.
Stephens GJ, Silbert LJ, Hasson U. Speaker-listener
neural coupling underlies successful communication.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
2010; 107: 14425-14430.
Tognolli E, Lagarde J, DeGuzman GC and Kelso JAS. The
phi complex as a neuromarker of human social
coordination. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 2007; 104: 8190-8195.
Valdesolo P, Ouyang J, DeSteno D. The rhythm of joint
action: Synchrony promotes cooperative ability.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 2010; 46:
693-695.

www.neuroquantology.com

