SBC Journal on Interactive Systems, volume 5, number 1, 2014

3

Understanding and Proposing a Design Rationale of
Digital Games based on Brain-Computer Interface:
Results of the AdmiralMind Battleship Study
Alessandro Luiz Stamatto Ferreira, Juvane Nunes Marciano,
Leonardo Cunha de Miranda, Erica Esteves Cunha de Miranda
Department of Informatics and Applied Mathematics
Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte (UFRN)
Natal, RN, Brazil
alexmatto@ppgsc.ufrn.br, juvane@ppgsc.ufrn.br, leonardo@dimap.ufrn.br, erica@dimap.ufrn.br

Abstract—Brain-Computer Interfaces (BCIs) present great potential
to the field of digital games, though the design of this kind of interface is
still a challenge for most of the game designers and developers. In this
work it is presented a literature review about digital games based on BCI,
aiming to analyze the interaction design of these games, to identify the
approaches applied, limitations and implications related to BCIs design.
After the review, we accomplish a reflection about the design decisions
involved in the development of digital games based on BCI. This
approach leads to the construction of a design rationale developed to
support the process of BCI-based games, with its use established on the
design of a battleship game based on BCI. As contributions of this work,
we highlight the literature review, design rationale and results of the
study accomplished.
Keywords—BCI, EEG, P300, SSVEP, HCI, designer.

I.

INTRODUCTION

The digital games industry is growing increasingly,
attracting all kinds of people with innovations in several areas,
such as hardware, software, 3D graphical interfaces and new
ways of interaction. The scope of new interaction ways has
motion sensors – e.g. Nintendo WiiMote sensors –
accelerometers in smartphones, visual recognition of gestures –
e.g. through Microsoft Kinect – and augmented reality. Even in
this scope, one of the most promising interaction ways for the
“future” is the one provided by Brain-Computer Interfaces
(BCIs), which allows interaction desired by many
users/players, i.e. control of games only through the brain,
without using any physical artifact of interaction, even the
innovative ones as the Adjustable Interactive Rings [35][36].
Nowadays, electroencephalography devices (EEG) are able
to provide a BCI where the interaction is done by capturing the
user’s brain activity. The development of commercial 1 EEG
headsets 2 , for example, by NeuroSky (e.g., ThinkGear AM,
MindWare, Mindwave Mobile and MindSet), by Emotiv (e.g.,
EPOC Neuroheadset and EEG Neuroheadset) and by BCINet
(e.g., NIA Game Controller), allows end users to submerse in

this “new” interaction paradigm, also in the context of digital
games. The three most used detection techniques in BCI-based
systems are: (i) neurofeedback, in which Alpha and Beta
waves are used to estimate focus, relaxing/meditation and
concentration of the user; (ii) visual stimuli, in which an
element being watched by the user is recognized by detecting
brain response to a visual effect that acts as stimulus; the
detection depends on the visual stimulus used. A transient
stimulation is characterized by elements that blink one by one
and when the target element lights, that one observed by the
user, the brain answers with a “surprise” wave – the P300 –
detected by an EEG device. In an oscillating stimulus – called
Steady State Visually Evoked Potential (SSVEP) – all visual
elements blink simultaneously, each at a different frequency,
which causes the user’s brain to respond in a frequency similar
to the frequency of oscillation of the target element; and (iii)
imagined movement, in which it is possible to detect kinetic
thoughts as, for example, the imagination of the user’s right
hand opening and closing, thanks to the synchronization and
desynchronization of the Mu rhythm3.
For this work, we start from previous results already
achieved with accomplishment of research in the field of BCI.
In [18], we describe the state of the art of interactive systems
based on BCI, as well as present and discuss the main
challenges of this domain. In the present work, our focus is to
explore, specifically, digital games based on BCI, therefore, we
investigate BCI in the digital games scenario, in order to
identify approaches, its limitations, and implications related to
the design of BCIs. Also, we develop a design rationale 4 ,
which supports the design process of BCI-based games. Still,
the developed design rationale, was applied in the design
process of a battleship game explaining and discussing, in this
study, the key issues in designing a BCI game.

3
1

Information about each mentioned headset can be found, respectively, in:
http://www.neurosky.com,
http://www.emotiv.com,
and
http://www.bcinet.com.
2
The term “headset” is used in this work to unify the various formats of
capture devices that may include headbands, caps, bandanas, headphones and
helmets.

ISSN: 2236-3297

Mu rhythm is a pattern of brain electrical activity that occurs in the motor
cortex, strongly related to the control of voluntary movements. A person
suppresses this pattern when performing, imagining, or observing a motor
action.
4
Design rationale [27] is a document with an explicit listing of decisions
involved in the design process. Each decision must contain the possible
alternatives, their reasons and pro and con arguments.

4

This paper is organized as follows: Section II describe the
related works; Section III presents a literature review about
BCI-based games; Section IV describes the developed design
rationale; Section IV presents and discusses the results of the
application of the design rationale in the design process of a
BCI-based game; and Section VI concludes the paper.
II. RELATED WORKS
Lotte [10] identifies BCI challenges in the context of
games, highlighting five drawbacks of current BCIs: (i) the
user needs to be in a stationary position, since movements can
cause interference in the captured signal; (ii) boredom for the
user to calibrate the BCI; (iii) discomfort in the use of headsets,
due to the their limitations, as the need to use gel in the
sensors; (iv) high error rate; and (v) limited set of mental
activities that can be detected with good accuracy. On the other
hand, this author defends the potential of BCIs, explicating, as
an example, the use of game's difficulty setting based on the
user's tension. Gürkök et al. [11] argue that BCI games are
guided by two principles: motivation (“why” play), and
interaction paradigm (“how” to play). These authors then
identify three elements that can motivate players, i.e. challenge,
fantasy, and social. The authors also define three interaction
paradigms, i.e. concentration, imagined movement, and
response to stimuli, and finally classify four BCI games
according to each of these elements of motivation and
interaction paradigms.
Sung et al. [15] created an architecture for the development
of serious games, i.e., games where the entertainment is not the
main goal, but factors such as education, training or simulation.
The process proposed by these authors aims to separate those
involved on the development, in specific and specialized roles
where BCI experts create templates that can be used by those
who have no knowledge in the field, as game experts. These
authors also show creation tools, based on templates, for game
development. Kaplan et al. [17] accomplish a literature review
about BCI games that use, specifically, the P300 approach,
identifying negative factors for user experience, and how these
factors have been overcome.
Bos et al. [26] present the factors and challenges of HumanComputer Interaction (HCI) involved in BCI games, with a
study focused on usability and user experience. These authors
conclude that more research is needed in real usage scenarios
with users acting naturally, and the HCI community
involvement is crucial to the improvement of this interaction
way. Marshall et al. [30] present a review of BCI games,
classifying them into conventional genres. These authors
discuss the current use of BCIs in every game genre and based
on that, make recommendations for the best use of BCIs for
each of the genres presented. On the other hand, van Veen [19]
evaluates the current BCI games under the criterion of the
paradox of control, which, according to the author, is a
requirement that makes an interactive system be considered a
game.
Unlike the works mentioned above (related), this work
focuses on the interaction involved in games that use this
“new” way of interaction with digital games, regardless of the
BCI detection approach, and also presents a design rationale

SBC Journal on Interactive Systems, volume 5, number 1, 2014

that supports game designers with the issues involved in the
design of BCI games.
III. LITERATURE REVIEW OF GAMES BASED ON BCI
Initially, we present a literature review of BCI games, as a
key part of this work, since through this review we will better
understand the impact of this interaction way in the design of
digital games. Thus it is important to highlight that our
intention with this section is not to present an exhaustive list of
digital games based on BCI, but a selection of the main works
that contribute to a better understanding of design of BCI
games. The search strategy consisted of manual and automatic
searches in scientific libraries and bibliographic databases.
Automatic/manual searches were conducted in IEEE Xplore,
ACM DL, Springer, Elsevier, Scielo, Scopus, ISI Web of
Knowledge, and Google Scholar. In the search process, it was
used a combination of the following keywords (listed below in
alphabetical order): “BCI”, “brain”, “computer”, “design”,
“EEG”, “EPOC”, “Emotiv”, “game”, “HCI”, “interaction”,
“interface”, “MindSet”, “MindWave”, “NeuroSky”, “P300”,
“rationale”, and “SSVEP”. For this study we only selected
published papers that, in fact, present a BCI game.
The use of BCI in digital games can be divided into four
distinct groups depending on the detection method applied in
the BCI game, i.e. (i) neurofeedback based games, such as the
measurement of relaxation and/or concentration of the user, (ii)
games based in response visual stimuli, (iii) games based on
imagined movement, and (iv) games based on hybrid detection,
i.e. using a combination of two or more forms as described
above in (i) (ii) and (iii). In addition, the game control is
considered multimodal when using multiple interaction ways,
especially in the input, for example, the use of keyboard and
mouse together with a BCI. Therefore, the hybrid detection is
related to multiple BCI detection approaches used together,
while multimodal indicates that BCI and non-BCI interaction
ways are used together.
A. BCI Games based on Neurofeedback
In the Finding Star game, developed by Ko et al. [9],
control is multimodal, since the concentration and relaxation of
the user are captured by MindSet and the movement of the
character is done by a conventional keyboard, and the target by
a conventional mouse. The accuracy depends on the user’s
concentration, i.e. in low concentration, the target becomes
unstable; as the former grows, the accuracy of the latter
improves. In these battles the character loses energy and need
to sleep to recover it. For the game heroine to sleep, it is
needed that the user reaches a certain level of relaxing. The
user state also affects the visibility of certain items of the game
GUI, since some elements appear only when the user is quite
concentrated, while others only appear when the user is
relaxed.
Kang et al. [48] begin the design of a horror puzzle game
that will use a BCI during the stages’ design. In the game, the
player needs to win riddles/puzzles while horror elements
appear (like spirits appearing suddenly). Through a BCI, the
player’s fear will be evaluated, and through that
neurofeedback, it will be possible to maximize the terror of the

ISSN: 2236-3297

SBC Journal on Interactive Systems, volume 5, number 1, 2014

game. In an initial prototyping, the authors have managed to
capture the fear of people who watch a horror movie, finding
which scenes do cause the greatest fear. This demonstrates that
not only concentration or relaxation, fear can be exploited in
games with BCI – giving the game the ability to interact
directly with the player's feelings, in this case, fear.
Liao et al. [4] developed a more convenient headset, where
sensors are placed in a polymer sponge in order to let the user
more comfortable. To test the solution, the authors developed
Archery Game, a game based on the level of user focus, in
which the user should focus on a target for 10 seconds, and
then an arrow is fired towards the target. The arrow precision is
based on the focus level reached by the user. In an experiment,
they compare the performance of a user in a controlled and
silent environment, with the performance of the same user in
an environment with several distractions, sounds and videos in
the sight of the user. There was a decrease in performance that
demonstrates the difficulty of users to focus in an uncontrolled
environment. Jiang et al. [13] developed a game for
rehabilitation, where control is performed by a BCI based on
concentration. In the game, the user must maintain a level of
attention, to allow a virtual hand to reach and grab a tiny red
fruit on a plate. The game aims to assist in the rehabilitation of
children with attention deficit.
Coulton et al. [7] created a game for smatphone called
Brain Maze that uses the MindSet. The objective of the game is
to take a ball from a starting point to an ending point. To move
the ball, the smartphone’s accelerometer is used. However,
some roads are blocked by gates. When the user concentrates
in attention, attention gates are open, and if the user relaxes,
meditation gates are open. Basori [33] developed the Emotion
Walking, a game that uses a BCI headset together with a
motion capture glove to detect the user’s feelings, such as
happiness and anger, and then change the facial expression of
an avatar. The walking speed of the avatar depends on the
user’s level of exciting. The glove tracks the current state of the
hand, and improves the accuracy of the feelings captured.
According to the authors, if the user is in a fist and tense, then,
the user is angrier, while an open hand and relaxed indicates
greater peace or happiness.
Bernays et al. [37] developed a 3D maze game in first
person, called Lost in The Dark, with a BCI based on
neurofeedback. The motion controls are conventional, while
neurofeedback acts on various parts of the game. In the game,
you must escape a cylindrical maze where a ball – called Light
Bot – accompanies the player and lights the way. As the player
gets tense or excited, the Light Bot fades, and as the player is
calm the light increases. Through the maze, there are locked
doors that only open if the player reaches a certain “state of
mind”, i.e. calm, excited, or tense. The music of the game
adapts to the user’s state; when the player is calm, music is
quiet low and calm, when excited, music is high and fast.
In the game Mind Garden (Fig. 1a), developed by Su et al.
[39], the goal is to create and maintain a garden. For this, the
player plant trees, and for them to grow, the user must achieve
a high level of relaxation. To adorn the garden, the player can
also control elements like clouds, sun and rainbow. For these
elements to develop, the player needs to achieve a high level of

ISSN: 2236-3297

5

attention, thus, the player must carefully control the attention
and relaxation in order to create the desired garden. Yoh et al.
[38] add interactivity to the fairy tale “Hansel and Gretel” in
the form of a BCI game called NeuroWander (Fig. 1b). In the
game you need to reach a certain state of mind at every stage,
for the characters in the story to have success. For example, it
is necessary to relax to spread bread crumbs, and maintain a
high level of attention to successfully push the witch – the
villain – into the cauldron.

Fig. 1. Graphical interfaces of BCI games based on neurofeedback (a) Mind
Garden (b) NeuroWander. Sources: [39][38].

B. BCI Games based on Visual Stimulus
Hakvoort et al. [8] developed the Mind the Sheep game
(Fig. 2a), whose goal is to control dogs via BCI, to take sheep
into a fence. The control uses a multimodal approach, where
the visual focus is used to select which dog to move, while the
mouse position indicates where the dog must go. The visual
focus is detected by a BCI based on SSVEP. On the other
hand, Obbink et al. [22] expanded the game cited above – Mind
the Sheep – to a BCI cooperative version, where the
map/scenario is higher and users should control the dogs
together. Some difficulties were encountered, such as the fact
that participants avoided talking or gesturing to one another,
because it caused interference in the BCI SSVEP detection;
this limitation made it difficult to communicate. Another
problem identified was the breaking of focus in certain natural
situations, such as laughter of a user making the others to do
wrong moves. Lalor et al. [12] developed the MindBalance
game (Fig. 2b), a game where a character, similar to a frog,
must balance up and cross a tightrope. The game is controlled
with a BCI based on SSVEP, where the visual stimulus is two
flags, increased by the fact that each flag has squares arranged
opposite to each other.

Fig. 2. Graphical interfaces of BCI games based on visual stimulus (a) Mind
the Sheep (b) MindBalance. Sources: [8][12].

Another game that uses the same scheme of flags is the 2D
racing game developed by Martinez et al. [44], where a car
must complete laps on a race track; the flags oscillate in
SSVEP style. The car is surrounded by four flags, which
represent an up/down and left/right move, and the user must

6

focus the attention on the flag that represents the direction
desired for the car to move.
Vliet et al. [6] developed a game controlled by the EPOC,
and compared the performance of this commercial EEG
headset destined to the end user, with the high cost headset
named actiCAP. To put the headset, it was observed that the
EPOC was easier, with the user being able to put it in three
minutes, while for put actiCAP it was always necessary
someone to assist the user, with an average time of 10 minutes.
The game developed is tower defense genre, in which the
player must protect a tower from waves of enemies, that appear
distant from the tower and go towards it. When an enemy
reaches the tower, the user loses the game. The game works in
two steps, first the user decides the layout, position, and type of
the buildings, and builds the tower defense as preferred. In the
second step, the user has no control over the game and the
enemies begin to appear, as the user only observes whether the
defense architecture will be able to protect the tower of three
waves of enemies. The game BCI uses the SSVEP approach,
but with only a single flash each time. The performance
between EPOC and actiCAP vary depending on the capturing
time interval; if it is 0.5 seconds, the EPOC has an accuracy of
66% versus 79% of actiCAP, while in the case of 2.2 seconds,
EPOC has an accuracy of 85% versus 88% of actiCAP.
Chumerin et al. [23] present a maze game (Fig. 3a), where
a BCI based on SSVEP is responsible for controlling the
character represented by the face of Bart Simpson (from the
Simpsons cartoon), which must reach a donut. Four yellow
arrows act as visual stimuli. One difficulty in the design of the
game is the fact that it takes certain time to capture and classify
the EEG signals, which causes a notable delay in the response
of the game. To minimize this problem, “hiding” the “delay”,
the character constantly moves while the command is referring
to the next decision point – crossroads – of the maze. On the
other side, Maby et al. [20] developed a BCI version of the
game Connect Four (Fig. 3b), whose goal is to form a row,
column, or diagonal of four coins. Two players, represented by
the colors red and yellow, alternate in choosing a column to
enter the coin. A P300 visual stimulus is used, in the form of a
rectangle of the player’s color, flashing on each column, one at
a time. Fig. 3b shows a game screen where the visual stimulus
is on the penultimate column. The rationale time mitigates the
time for choosing a column, giving impression that the game
follows the same speed than the conventional version.

Fig. 3. Another graphical interfaces of BCI games based on visual stimulus
(a) The Maze (b) Connect Four. Sources: [23][20].

SBC Journal on Interactive Systems, volume 5, number 1, 2014

Congedo et al. [1] developed, supported by the OpenViBE5
platform, a game with a P300 based BCI, called Brain
Invaders, inspired by the classic game Space Invaders. In this
game, gray aliens are presented in a grid and one of them is
special, being red instead of gray. The aliens flash randomly,
the red flashes to blue, while the other flash to a lighter gray;
and to destroy an alien, the user must focus on it visually. The
user gains after destroying the alien red, or any 14 aliens. The
authors state in their game, three enhancements of conventional
BCIs: (i) the alien blink in random groups, providing a higher
data speed over BCIs which flash one element at a time, and
maintaining a good precision; (ii) the time between two flashes
is random, reducing predictability, increasing BCI accuracy
and game fun; and (iii) increasing the size of target elements
during a flash also increases the accuracy, i.e. the red alien's
size is increased by 30% in flashing time.
Angeloni et al. [5] developed a P300 based BCI for a
memory game. Five undergraduate students participated in
tests with the BCI. Initially each one of them typed words
using a BCI speller, aiming to calibrate and configure system
parameters. Then they played a game where it is presented a
3x4 matrix of letters. The authors believe that the memory
game can be a good way to train users in BCIs. Another P300
based game is MindGame, by Finke et al. [43], in which the
player, represented by a cartoon character, must move by a grid
map. This map contains several trees, and the goal of the game
is to visit all the trees. Although the grid contain numerous
positions, only those in front of trees are explored, i.e. only
those that flash – in P300 style – for the player to select one.
C. BCI Games based on Imagined Movement
Scherer et al. [2][3] created a BCI called Graz BCI Game
Controller, which allows the use of two headsets, the Graz BCI
[2] and the EPOC. The BCI was tested in the World of
Warcraft (WoW) game, that was not originally designed to
operate via BCI. The BCI is based on three imagined
movements, the right hand turns the screen to the right, the left
hand rotates the screen to the left, and the feet moves the
character forward. Additionally, certain actions are triggered
automatically when the character is standing in the range
required to achieve it. Non-critical actions, like picking up a
resource, are activated immediately, while critical actions, such
as starting a fight with a monster, are carried out only after a
period of time, so that the user can cancel the action by moving
the character; the biggest limitation found was the low speed of
the BCI. This problem has been soften by the macro system of
the game, in which a single command may be interpreted as
different actions, depending on the current context, making
them more flexible and providing a larger input rate. With the
EPOC – Instead of Graz BCI – it is possible to send emoticons
based on user's facial expression. In this BCI, user's eyes
closed make the character sleep, while a user's smile makes the
character laugh.
Leeb et al. [16] developed the game Thinking Penguin to
work via BCI, based on the conventional game PlanetPenguin
Racer. In the original game – PlanetPenguin Racer – the player
should control a penguin down a snowy mountain, collecting
5

http://openvibe.inria.fr.

ISSN: 2236-3297

SBC Journal on Interactive Systems, volume 5, number 1, 2014

fish on the way. For the BCI version, the authors modified the
game putting all the fish in the air. In this new way, the player
must enable jumps through the imagination of the movement to
lift both feet – dorsiflexion – to collect the fish. For greater
immersion, the game takes place in a virtual reality CAVE
system, in which the user is surrounded by walls with
projectors targeted to each of them. Thus, the game interface is
multimodal with movement of the penguin controlled through
a joystick and the jumps through BCI. An experiment showed
that the concomitant use of the joystick did not compromise the
performance of the BCI. According to the authors, the game
requires a short training period.
Badia et al. [47] created a serious game for rehabilitation of
people, especially adults, who lost the movement of the arms
due to a stroke. The game is in first person and the goal of the
game is to “block” balls coming towards the player. The game
interface changes its input depending on the severity of motor
loss of the player, if the player is able to move the arms,
interaction is for computer vision: a camera above the monitor
tracks the movement of the arms, while a BCI based on
imagined movement is used if the player does not have enough
arm motor control. The imagination of arm movement
stimulates the brain to regain lost motor skills. The control is
done by the imagination of the movement of the right and left
arms, beginning at the center of the screen (in front of
character’s torso) and imagination of one of the arms moves it
in the right direction (right arm) or left (left arm). The extent of
movement is proportional to the time the player imagine that
motion, if it passes a long time imagining, the arm makes a
long move to the side of the screen, whereas in a short time the
arm makes a small movement.
On the other hand, Bordoloi et al. [46] developed a 2D
maze game with a BCI based on imagined movement. The
imagination of the movement of both hands simultaneously
moves the character up, as the imagination of the movement to
close the hand to fist moves the character down, and
imagination of one hand moves the character in that direction,
i.e. left or right. The game is different from most BCI games,
because it switches between capture state, where the BCI tries
to classify the thought of the player in one of the imaginations
of movement, and the pause state, where no capture is made
and the player can relax. To indicate its status, the game
presents the symbol of a lamp: when off, the player can relax,
and when on, the player must imagine one of the control
movements of the game (the lamp symbol was chosen to
represent an “idea/thought”). The maze is represented by a
square grid, where the square on which the player is standing,
is painted in the yellow color.
Hasan and Gan [14] developed a BCI where the game
command is not reached from time to time, but when the user
decides so. The game is Hangman (Fig. 4a), in which the user
must find out what is the “hidden” word, by testing whether
different letters are part of the word. This game’s BCI is based
on two imagined movements, one changes the letters in
selection, and other chooses that letter to be tested. The user
selects two of three imagined movements detected by the
game, i.e. the right hand, left hand, or feet. If the player is tired,
the game will notice the performance decrease, and will adapt
the control to be more permissive and identify weaker signals

ISSN: 2236-3297

7

of choice. Lopetegui et al. [32] developed BCI Tennis (Fig.
4b), a tennis game with a gameplay similar to the classic Pong,
but with a theme of the tennis game. An imagined movement
of the hand/arm up moves the character upward, and down,
moves the character down. The game is intended for users with
physical disabilities who cannot play games with the
conventional interface via mouse/keyboard.

Fig. 4. Graphical interfaces of BCI games based on imagined movement (a)
Hangman (b) BCI Tennis. Sources: [14][32].

Laar et al. [41] developed a relatively simple game, called
BrainBasher, where the player is presented with a symbol
representing the left or right hand, and then should quickly
imagine the movement of that hand. Speed is the main
challenge of the game, following a style of play based on
reflection, but this time based purely on a BCI.
Pineda et al. [21] developed a BCI based on imagined
movement for a game of the genre First Person Shooter (FPS).
The BCI is used only to rotate the character clockwise or
counterclockwise. The other commands are made using the
conventional keyboard, for example the ‘S’ key moves the
character forward and the ‘x’ key moves the character
backwards. The time needed for training, so that the user can
precisely control the character game via the BCI is, on average,
of six and a half hours. According to the authors, the
immersion in the game accelerated the training process.
McCreadie et al. [28], thinking about game accessibility for
visually impaired, developed Auditory Asteroids, a game where
the only feedback is sonorous, i.e. no visual interface. In the
pilot study, the authors develop a sound version of the game
Asteroids, in which the user controls a spaceship and must
avoid asteroids. Seven speakers are arranged on a sphere
geometry. The control is a BCI based on imagined movement,
with the imagination of the movement of the left and right arm,
moving the ship in the corresponding direction.
Wei [31] used the BCI20006 system as control to a game
where the player must drive a car and avoid obstacles
imagining the movement of the right or left arm. The game
does not punish the player drastically, in an attempt of not to
discourage the user because of the difficulty found in this new
interaction way: if the player hits an obstacle, the vehicle
simply stops and makes a slow detour around the obstacle.
Thus, the feedback error is not frustrating to the user. On the
other side, Coyle et al. [45] developed a game of the asteroids
genre, in which the player must avoid asteroids imagining
left/right hand movement, and feet, causing the ship to move
down, and tongue, causing the ship to move up. In the game, a
lot of graphic elements appear to distract the player, like stars,
that move across the screen. It is not needed to avoid these
6

http://www.bci2000.org.

8

additional elements, since they exist only to increase the
difficulty of the game and make it more interesting.
Bonet et al. [29] study the interaction involved in a game
called BrainArena, controlled by a multi-user BCI. In
BrainArena the user must move a ball to right or left,
imagining the movement of the hand in the same direction until
the ball reaches the bottom of the screen. The authors argue
that a BCI may be multi-user at four different levels: (i) level
of signal processing, where signals from users are mixed in a
single analysis; (ii) level of decision, in which the analysis of
each user are used together, for example, finding a dominant
emotion of a cine audience; (iii) the level of interaction
technique, in which the users’ analysis are used to perform a
multi-user command, for example, for a user to drag a window,
one controls direction and another controls the way, that are
combined to perform a single command; and (iv) application
level, where each user has independent interaction, such as
control of several characters in a virtual world, each being
controlled by a different user. The game developed by these
authors is therefore multi-user at the decision level.
Games with some physical component, different from those
purely digital, can also have an interaction by BCI. One of
these works is LaFleur et al. [34], that use a BCI in a game
called AR.Drone, where the player controls an Unmanned
Aerial Vehicle (UAV) – a quadcopter – together with the
feedback from a camera attached to the front of the UAV. In
the BCI, the player must learn to imagine four hand
movements: (i) the movement of the right hand turns the
quadcopter clockwise; (ii) the left rotates counter-clockwise;
(iii) the imagination of both hands to same time increases the
height of the quadcopter; and (iv) at rest/relaxing – without
imagination of hand movements – the quadcopter loses
altitude. The UAV is constantly moving forward. The goal is to
cross 2.30m diameter rings. First the user must go through
several training sessions where should learn to control the
vehicle in one dimension – just rotate clockwise/anti-clockwise
– to then train control in two dimensions, adding the command
to raise/lower altitude with imagination of both hands
simultaneously versus rest/relaxing state. Then the user must
train in a virtual world, to finally control the quadcopter in a
real environment. The authors use a school gym to the real
environment, with two rings placed close to the center, facing
one another at a distance of 5.2m from each other.
Another work that embraces physical elements is BCIPinball, by Tangermann et al. [42]. These authors change the
design of a conventional pinball machine, so that it is played
by a BCI. The control is made through the imagined movement
of the hands, where each of these movements activates one of
the two pinball flippers. To adapt to the current reality of BCIs,
three modifications were made: (i) the side exits were closed,
so the only way out of the ball is the gap between the flippers;
(ii) an obstacle was added between and slightly above the
flippers, so that the ball always tends to one of the two sides –
since a perfectly vertical fall would require the simultaneous
activation of the two flippers, which requires a very high
temporal accuracy of the BCI; and (iii) the slope of the
machine was reduced to slow the ball drop. With this new
machine design, BCI served as a good control, achieving even
the need for high-speed response inherent to pinball games.

SBC Journal on Interactive Systems, volume 5, number 1, 2014

D. BCI Games based on Hybrid Detection
In the game Bacteria Hunt (Fig. 5a), developed by Mühl et
al. [25], the user controls an amoeba to eat bacteria in a certain
time limit. The game has four stages, each one using a different
detection approach. In the first stage, control is via keyboard,
but has a chance of not working. In the second stage, the
concentration is used, where high levels decrease the chance of
the keyboard to fail. In the third stage, SSVEP stimulus is
added, when the character comes close to a bacterium, the user
must focus on a circle which flashes upon the amoeba and
bacteria, otherwise the bacteria escapes. In the last stage, P300
stimulus is used, the bacteria are divided into groups and each
group increases in size and flashes, at a time.
Pires et al. [40] developed the BCI-Tetris (Fig. 5b), a
version of Tetris game controlled by a BCI. In the game, the
piece rotation is selected by P300 in four possible rotations,
while its positioning is done by imagined movement, with the
imagination of movement of the left/right hand moving the
piece for the respective sides. The authors also experimented
alternative designs, before deciding for the hybrid version. In a
previous version, the player selected the piece and its rotation
at the same time via a P300 interface. The large number of
possibilities (16) decreased the accuracy, so the authors
attempted a second version where the piece is automatically
selected, then the player selects the rotation through P300 and
finally chooses one of the four positions for the piece, also in
the P300. With the addition of detection by imagined
movement for the selection of the position, according to the
authors, the game managed to achieve good accuracy while
keeping a certain fidelity to the style of the original Tetris.

Fig. 5. Graphical interfaces of BCI games based on hibrid detection (a)
Bacteria Hunt (b) BCI-Tetris. Sources: [25][40].

An adapted BCI for an existing game is presented by
Maruthappan et al. [24], which developed Brain-Chess, an
elaborate BCI control to play chess. The player must
participate in training sessions, which also aims to capture the
mental profile of the player in every step of controlling a move.
The first training is done with a special memory game in which
each type of chess piece is represented by a letter with a picture
of a piece. In this training, it is registered a specific signature of
the “thinking” associated with each piece of each user. So, after
this training, it is possible to detect which piece the player
wants to move. In the second part of the training, the player
should imagine the movement of the chess pieces, and the
signal is recorded for each type of movement, such as “move
diagonally” and “move horizontally”. Finally, the player
selects to which square he wants the piece to move. This
selection is made by P300, where the user defines the position
of the board choosing a letter and a number in a matrix.

ISSN: 2236-3297

SBC Journal on Interactive Systems, volume 5, number 1, 2014

E. A Synthesis of the Main Findings of the Literature Review
Table I presents a synthesis of the BCI-based games
presented above.
TABLE I.

SYNTHESIS OF THE LITERATURE BCI-BASED GAMES.

Game
genre
Finding Star
Adventure
(horror game)
Puzzle
Archery Game
Sport
(ADHD rehabilitation)
Sport
Brain Maze
Puzzle
Emotion Walking
Simulation
Lost in the Dark
Puzzle
Mind Garden
Simulation
NeuroWander
Adventure
Puzzle/
Mind the Sheep
Action
MindBalance
Sport
(2D race game)
Sport
(BCI tower defense) Strategy
The Maze
Puzzle
Connect Four
Strategy
Brain Invaders
Shooter
(memory game)
Puzzle
MindGame
Puzzle
Work

Year Ref.

2009
2012
2012
2011
2011
2013
2012
2011
2010
2011
2012
2004
2007
2012
2012
2012
2011
2012
2009
2011
2012
2013
2013
2012
2012
2011
2009
2003
2012
2010
2011
2013
2013
2008
2010
2011
2011

[9]
[48]
[4]
[13]
[7]
[33]
[37]
[39]
[38]
[8]
[22]
[12]
[44]
[6]
[23]
[20]
[1]
[5]
[43]
[2]
[3]
[16]
[47]
[46]
[14]
[32]
[41]
[21]
[28]
[31]
[45]
[34]
[29]
[42]
[25]
[40]
[24]

Game name

Player

Detection
approach

9

could use oscillating stimulus, with higher frequencies
indicating bombs about to explode, while a game of puzzle
could use transient stimulus, where the user thinks quietly
about the next step. Even in games based on visual stimulus,
the matrix disposal usually provides greater accuracy. A matrix
disposal is good for board games, in which the “world”
consists of a grid of squares. Games like Minesweeper and
Battleship have a direct mapping to this graphic disposal.

Single
Single
Single
Single
Single
Neurofeedback
Single
Single
Single
Single
Single
Multi
Single
Visual Stimulus
(SSVEP)
Single
Single
Single
2 players
Single
Visual Stimulus
Single
(P300)
Single
Massive
World of Warcraft MMORPG
multiplayer
Thinking Penguin
Racing
Single
(Motor rehabilitation)
Sport
Single
(movement maze game) Puzzle
Single
Hangman
Puzzle
Single
BCI Tennis
Sport
Multi
Imagined
BrainBasher
Action
Single
Movement
(BCI for a FPS game)
FPS
Online multi
Auditory Asteroids
Shooter
Single
(cehicle control game) Simulation
Single
(asteroids-like game) Shooter
Single
(AR.Drone BCI)
Action
Single
BrainArena
Sport
2 players
BCI-Pinball
Action
Single
Bacteria Hunt
Action
Single
Hybrid
BCI-Tetris
Puzzle
Single
Detection
Brain-Chess
Strategy
2 players

In turn, detection based on imagined movement appears to
be most advantageous for a 3D environment control, and has
been used in 3D shooting games (FPS), racing, and Massively
Multiplayer Online (MMO). Another interesting question is the
influence of social elements in these games based on BCI, as
the break of the controlled environment due to social
interactions outside to Mind the Sheep, the use of Connect
Four in competitiveness, and multi-user interactions in the
design of BrainArena. The disadvantages of certain
approaches, such as limited control offered by detecting the
concentration of the user, are not criteria for elimination, but
for option – presenting the reality that it is difficult to develop a
game that uses only the concentration, but on the other hand, to
use it as part of the control of the game can be very interesting.

Based on the analysis of games of the literature, it is found
that the first trend is the fact that games developed with a focus
on BCI are usually simplified so that the BCI is able to
exercise total control over it. Although, it is possible to seek
the most similar/close genre to a game based on BCI, in order
to find the most appropriate BCI approach. These games
follow genres based on classic games, like Asteroids (shooter),
Pac-Man (puzzle-maze) “snake” game (action-snake) and
chess (strategy-board). This trend is due to two reasons, i.e., to
simplify the necessary controls and the development of the
game, so that the focus is on the BCI design.

IV. DESIGN RATIONALE
Digital games, including BCI-based games, are very
diverse applications, ranging in genre, style and target
audience. Therefore, it is difficult to define unique guidelines
that cover all genres of digital games. A more flexible
approach is the development of a Design Rationale – a
reflection and documentation about the design decisions, as
well as solutions and available technologies [49]. The design
rationale of BCI-based games can be useful for the academic
community and industry, since it outlines the major design
issues that should be considered when developing games that
use this new interaction way. In the design rationale, every
choice is balanced with pro and con arguments, so that game
designers – not necessarily specialize in BCI – can get relevant
information about the design. Fig. 6 presents the design
rationale developed and mapped with Compendium tool
[50][51]. It is important to highlight that the development of
this design rationale is based on previous results of our

When using an interaction based on visual stimulus, is
important to take into account the pace of the game: an
oscillatory stimulus, in which everything flashes
simultaneously, indicates a frenetic pace and high frequencies
could indicate a more dangerous element; whereas a transient
stimulus, where elements flash one at a time, indicates a milder
and calculated pace. As an example, a game with "bombs"

ISSN: 2236-3297

In Finding Star, concentration serves as a relaxed state of
the character, which thus can sleep; while in WoWAlpha,
concentration is used as the “anger” of the user, making the
character to be transformed into its wild form. In both games,
the concentration is used as part of control, managing the
current difficulties of this approach.
In action games, sports, FPS and Real-Time Strategy (RTS)
the biggest challenge is the time present in the gameplay.
These games need reflexes and quick actions by the user, and
the quick and instant pace characterized by these genres is
hardly captured by current BCI. In the case of games where
there is no notion of time, like puzzle games, strategy and
Role-Playing Games (RPGs) based in turns, it is easier to use
BCI as control. The smoother pace also resembles the high
reasoning required in each step. Shooter genre games, such as
asteroids or alien invaders, combine with BCIs based on visual
stimulus, because enemies can be used as a focus target.

10

SBC Journal on Interactive Systems, volume 5, number 1, 2014

research in the context of BCI [18] and by the analysis of the

BCI games from the literature, as discussed earlier.

Fig. 6. Design rationale for digital games based on BCI, proposed in the present work.

The reading of the design rationale starts in “Digital games
based on BCI” (represented by the icon in Fig. 7a) from where
the questions/reflections start, represented by the symbol of
Fig. 7b. There is no need to follow the questions in a specific
order, but the design rationale suggests an order by numbering
each of the questions from the first to the eighth. The seventh
question has only importance in cases where detection based
on visual stimulus is used, thus, it is a subquestion that comes,
situationally, from question 6). Thinking first about the game
genre facilitates the reflections made by other questions. Each
question is linked to choices, possible answers to the question,
represented by the symbol of Fig. 7c. For each of these
choices, there are positive points (represented by the icon in
Fig. 7d), negative points (represented by the icon in Fig. 7e), or
variable, which can be pro or con depending on the context of
the game design (represented by the icon in Fig. 7f). The
choices of the genre questioning are represented by a different

symbol (Fig. 7g) because they are a definition that comes from
the concept of the game, so instead of positive/negative points,
they have recommendations linked to them (represented by the
symbol in Fig. 7h).

Fig. 7. Symbols used in the design rationale.

The design rationale is a tool that allows the game designer
to incorporate controls via BCI in a game design, and to
consider the current reality of this kind of interface. Hence, the
designer can develop a design even without knowledge of the
BCI field. Some choices may appear to have very limiting
negative points, as “few control options”, but in fact, they not

ISSN: 2236-3297

SBC Journal on Interactive Systems, volume 5, number 1, 2014

11

affect the design of certain games, like the acclaimed game
Jetpack Joyride, which has only a single button to control.
Similarly, there are positive points that will not matter for a
specific design. That is, the design rationale does not provide
universal answers, but questions to be considered and adapted
by the game designer.
As seen, the design rationale presented is intended to
explain the opportunities and challenges of each approach,
while guiding the designer in the construction of the game –
especially related to controls. The developed design rationale
does not embrace decisions that depend of the target audience,
such as user’s age or experience, because it intends to be
applicable to any game with BCI – independent of the user.
V. ADMIRALMIND BATTLESHIP STUDY
In this section, first, we present the methodology used in
the study of AdmiralMind Battleship BCI game, and then
present and discuss the results of the study.
A. Methodology
The design rationale presented is a tool to be used in the
design cycle, shown in Fig. 8, being the second step of each
iteration of the cycle. Initially, the game designer must think
about the concepts of the game, i.e., its central ideas. In this
first step, of game concept, do not set any specific control, but
the goals of the game, and entertainment elements. In the
second step, the designer gets support in the design rationale
to analyze, and consider, the way a BCI control works in the
intended game concept.
Based on the game gender, it is possible to see the
recommendations suggested by the design rationale and take
them into account, considering other decisions stated on the
design. In the third step, the designer should define the reason
for each of the decisions, defining the rationale of them. This
definition is made through the design rationale, providing
answers to each one of the questions set out by the design
rationale. Finally, the last step of each iteration is the creation
and reflection of the game design. At this stage, the game
should already have a significant planning, with defined
gameplay, controls, and goals. If the designer is not satisfied
with the game, or if the designer wants to think about
alternatives, additional iterations can be made in the design
cycle of a game with BCI. The process proposed in this paper
does not cover entirely the step 4 (game design) as it does not
lead to a “complete” game design, but allows the designer to
get closer to this goal. The design rationale does not define, for
example, a graphical interface for each game.

ISSN: 2236-3297

Fig. 8. Overview of the design process for digital games based on BCI,
proposed in the present work.

As shown in Fig. 8, the output of each step serves as input
to the next step. So, it is only possible to use the design
rationale after an initial concept of the game; the setting of the
decisions should be made after reading, analysis, and reflection
of the design rationale; and the game design is built with the
decisions made (and the reflections coming from the entire
cycle of design).
B. Results
As a study of the application of the proposed design
rationale, decisions are discussed for a Battleship game. The
game is played by two players, and each one of them arranges
their ships in the respective territory, i.e., a board in grid/matrix
style. Then, they alternate in turns, choosing a square of the
enemy’s territory to attack. The target player indicates whether
or not the shot hit, showing if there is a ship in that point. The
first decision of the designer is to define the genre of the game,
in this case it was decided to draw the game as “strategy”,
based on how battleship is played. Then, the designer thinks
about the pace of the game, if it should be in real time or turn
based. It is decided to be turn based, based again in the original
game.
Now the designer must make several decisions about the
BCI game. What headset use, commercial or professional?
Using design rationale, the designer observes that professionals
have better accuracy, but it is difficult to acquire – usually
present only in research or medical centers. On the other hand,
commercial headsets are easier to get and to use. Commercial
headsets have less precision, but reach a larger audience. Thus,
the designer decides to use a commercial headset. To detection
approach, it is desired one that offers enough control to select
multiple squares on the board, so by eliminating the
concentration way (limited control), and favoring detection by
imagined movement – that would be used the imagined
movement of the hand to navigate the board, and of the feet to
select – and the one based on visual stimulus – where the
visual focus allows the selection of the desired square. The
imagined movement approach requires training, but it offers a
faster interaction and does not depend on game’s graphic
elements; whilst the visual stimulus approach does not need
training, but it has a slow interaction and depends on arbitrary
changes on the game visual interface – as continuous flashes. If
the visual stimulus is used, the P300 approach seems more
appropriate, as it has a good mapping to grid, and mild pace
stimulates strategic thinking.

12

SBC Journal on Interactive Systems, volume 5, number 1, 2014

The SSVEP approach seems to be unfavorable, the large
amount of square flashing intermittently would cause great
discomfort to the user. Then, it is decided what kind of headset
to use, professional or commercial? It is expected that the game
is played by people outside the academic world, so the best
way would be to use a commercial headset – accessible to the
target audience. As the game is simple – and has few controls –
a multimodal complement with keyboard and mouse would
make the game less interesting, and a form of hybrid detection
would be confusing and unnecessary, so it is best that the game
is purely controlled by a BCI, and only one detection approach.
Still about multimodal interaction, a virtual reality environment
is attractive, but the high cost of the equipment would not be
accessible to the end user, and would project more complex –
requiring a more elaborate graphical interface. Finally, it is
defined that the feedback should have be mainly visual, but
also a sonorous feedback, indicating right or wrong, would
enrich the user experience.
TABLE II.

RESULTS OF THE DECISIONS RATIONALE FOR A BCI GAME.

Design
Rationale
decision
1. What is the Strategy.
game genre?
The design will follow the
2. Real time or original style of the game, in
turn based?
which the players alternate
in turns.
Commercial, once the target
3. Commercial
user are gamers with lower
or professional
purchasing power.
headset?

Game design

Guessing Game, as the pen
and paper game.
Each player must choose an
opponent’s board position,
which indicates the hit or
miss – ending the turn.
The headset will be EPOC,
which has a good costbenefit ratio between ease of
acquisition and resources.
No. Battleship has limited The game is controlled only
commands, the player just by BCI.
4. Do use of chooses a square by turn.
multimodal More entries would make
interface?
the game more complex
without offering benefits in
return.
Hybrid approach. A hybrid The game will provide more
5. One
approach can be more than one detection approach,
detection
flexible to the player if used but only one is active at a
approach or
with wisdom, despite being time. This will allow the
hybrid
necessary to be cautious to player to select the preferred
detection?
avoid a confusing control.
interaction.
Visual stimulus, since the The
opponent’s
board
game environment is a grid squares will act as visual
– which is the classic matrix stimuli, flashing at the time
interface.
Furthermore, of selection. In the imagined
flashes give a clearer movement mode, the player
6. Which
impression of a battlefield. will be able to control a
detection
Additionally, it will be used cursor by moving left/right
approach to be detection based on imagined with the imagination of the
used?
movement – simulating the movement of the arms,
movement, in the real game, moving down with the feet,
of moving the pin to the and moving up with the
target.
imagination
of
arms’
movement
together
simultaneously.
7. Which
P300, since a milder pace The rows and columns will
stimulus to be stimulates thinking and flash randomly, causing an
used?
turn’s strategy.
impression of danger.
Visual, considering that the The constant feedback from
8. Feedback
game depends on visual the game will be visual, but
visual,
elements because of the BCI there will be audio tips to
sonorous or
detection approach chosen. indicate the player’s turn,
haptic?
Additionally,
an
audio and a blast to indicate a hit.

Design
decision

Rationale

Game design

feedback is necessary to
indicate hit or miss of the
target.

It is important to detach that the design rationale outlines
the questions to be answered by designing a game based on
BCI, but does not define specific responses such as, for
example, related to the graphical interface elements of the
game. The designer can choose the alternatives, being aware of
the pro and con of each one, and adapting it to reality, finally
applying the design rationale for the specific scenario. The
presentation of the battleship game scenario, as described
above, illustrated how the design rationale developed in this
work can help in the reflection of the designer, regarding the
design decisions of a digital game based on BCI.
C. Discussion
Digital games based on BCI have a different interaction
reality, compared to games with conventional controls, e.g. via
keyboard and mouse. The BCI control has great potential for
immersion, and can be used in various game genres. Several of
the literature works show solutions with multimodal
interaction, i.e. BCI complemented with another interaction
way. This demonstrates, in a way, how complex is the game
design based only on BCI.
The use of BCIs in games causes a strong impact on the
interaction design, changing gameplay aspects, even related to
the graphical interface. Neurofeedback based games often use a
bar to indicate the level of attention/relaxation of the user (e.g.
both in Fig. 1). On the other hand, games based on visual
stimulus need elements that are strange to the game (that
operate as the stimuli). In Mind the Sheep, the three flashing
circles clashes from the scenario (Fig. 2a), while in
MindBalance game, it was necessary to insert checkered flags
on each side of character’s rod, notwithstanding balance rods
have no flags (Fig. 2b). Still, in The Maze, it was necessary to
insert huge arrows, occupying half of the screen; arrows that
would not exist if this game did not use BCI (Fig. 3a). In
Connect Four, columns become out of visibility, hidden by the
swinging bar, which complicates the player’s reasoning (Fig.
3b).
On the other hand, some games based on BCI add
unnecessary elements such as a graphic with the reading of
brain waves – a feedback difficult to be understood by a player
(Fig. 4a/Fig. 5a). The care with the graphical interface is more
important in games with hybrid detection, because in these
games, control is already complicated and it is difficult to
deduce how to play. Choices – such as detection approach –
will impact on gameplay and graphical interface. However, the
purpose of the design rationale is not to define the graphical
interface of the game, but rather support the designer, bringing
reflections of how to use BCI in a game.
In games with the “stealth” element, the user should be
relaxed to improve the ability to keep on hidden; in puzzle
games, mental effort combines with the fun; and in games with
virtual reality, BCI extends the feeling of being in another
“world”. It is understood that the design rationale, as described,

ISSN: 2236-3297

SBC Journal on Interactive Systems, volume 5, number 1, 2014

supports the designer in the design of new BCI-based games. It
is difficult to adapt conventional games for BCI, as they were
developed and guided by other requirements. The pace in
conventional games can be very fast, and the required accuracy
is very high. Whereas, in the case of BCI, it is necessary to
adapt to the current reality, where EEG detection has a delay
and consists of an interaction with a slow pace.
Most of these BCI controls require a lot of
concentration/focus from the user, which can be complicated in
situations of actual use, as the work of Obbink et al. [22]
shows, in which the user is not able to “pause” the BCI control.
In the literature, most BCI games are based on visual stimulus,
generating an accessibility problem that complicates or forbids
its use by visually impaired users. Moreover, it affects
cohesion/immersion of the design, since having many stimuli –
like flashing circles in black and white – clash of the visual
style of the game, and visual elements become forced and
artificial. A good adaptation can minimize, or even eliminate,
these challenges of BCI games. Then, the design rationale
helps in creating a game whose BCI control is well adapted,
improving the user experience. Another benefit of the design
rationale is to encapsulate the knowledge about the BCI field,
allowing the design of games by developers who have low
knowledge in BCI.
BCIs change significantly the interaction way with systems
in the area of BCI games, bringing new interaction ways that
create a new connection to the player, such as: the creation of
virtual “members” through imagined movement; the transfer of
the state of mind to the game characters - which relax or
concentrate along with the player; the mental selection with the
visual image currently in the brain (the one being focused); the
brain control of objects (like the telekinetic power of the
gaming world); and even a link between player’s heart with the
game character’s – in which emotions like fear are explored in
the game. This provides great immersion potential of the game:
the player must remain calm as the secret agent infiltrated in
the enemy base; the player can feel the fear of the hero in the
sudden appearance of a spirit; and imagining an arm wielding a
sword, the player can hit a heroic stroke to the villain who
terrorizes the city.
This work deals with any type of game controlled by BCI,
without being attached to a specific genre or approach. But at
the same time, it identifies the differences in each game,
arguing that the design depends on the scenario and game
desired. Still, it does not point out strict rules to be followed,
but the decisions to be made by the designer during the design
of a BCI-based game. There are not ideal approaches, it is
necessary to adapt to the context and take into consideration
that each one has pro and con points. This work presents, as far
as we know, the first design rationale to guide designers in the
design of new BCI-based digital games. The design rationale is
able to cover all kinds of games, without losing the specificity
required for each case. Hence, it contributes to any designer
interested in developing a game based on BCI.
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper presented a literature review about digital games
based on BCI. Based on this survey, and on previous results of

ISSN: 2236-3297

13

our research in this area, we developed a design rationale to
support game designers in designing digital games based on
BCI. Still, we conducted a study where we apply the design
rationale in the design process of a naval battleship game
controlled by BCI.
As future work, based on the results of this work, we
suggest the implementation/coding of AdmiralMind Battleship,
whose early stages of the design process were supported by the
design rationale presented in this work. Later, it is still
considered relevant to evaluate the interface and user
experience with the target audience of this BCI game.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was partially supported by the Brazilian Federal
Agency for Support and Evaluation of Graduate Education
(CAPES), by the Brazilian National Council of Scientific and
Technological Development (CNPq grant #163408/2012-2),
and by the Physical Artifacts of Interaction Research Group
(PAIRG) at Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte
(UFRN), Brazil.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

M. Congedo, M. Goyat, N. Tarrin, G. Ionescu, L. Varnet, B. Rivet, R.
Phlypo, N. Jrad, M. Acquadro, and C. Jutten, “’Brain Invaders’: a
prototype of an open-source P300-based video game working with the
OpenViBE platform,” in Proceedings of the 5th International BrainComputer Interface Conference (BCI’11), HAL, 2011, pp. 280–283.
R. Scherer, E. Friedrich, B. Allison, M. Pröll, M. Chung, W. Cheung, R.
Rao, and C. Neuper, “Non-invasive brain-computer interfaces: enhanced
gaming and robotic control,” in Proceedings of the 11 th International
Work-Conference on Artificial Neural Networks (IWANN’11), Springer,
2011, pp. 362–369, doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-21501-8_45.
R. Scherer, M. Proll, B. Allison, and G.R. Muller-Putz, “New input
modalities for modern game design and virtual embodiment,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE Virtual Reality Short Papers and Posters
(VRW’12), IEEE, 2012, pp. 163–164, doi: 10.1109/VR.2012.6180932.
L.-D. Liao, C.-Y. Chen, I.J. Wang, S.-F. Chen, S.-Y. Li, B.-W. Chen, J.Y. Chang, and C.-T. Lin, “Gaming control using a wearable and
wireless EEG-based brain-computer interface device with novel dry
foam-based sensors,” in Journal of Neuroengineering and
Rehabilitation, vol. 9, no. 5, BioMed Central, 2012, pp. 1 –12, doi:
10.1186/1743-0003-9-5.
C. Angeloni, D. Salter, V. Corbit, T. Lorence, Y.-C. Yu, and L.A.
Gabel, “P300-based brain-computer interface memory game to improve
motivation and performance,” in Proceedings of the 38th Annual
Northeast Bioengineering Conference (NEBEC’12), IEEE, 2012, pp.
35–36, doi: 10.1109/NEBC.2012.6206949.
V.M. Vliet, A. Robben, N. Chumerin, N.V. Manyakov, A. Combaz, and
M.M. Van Hulle, “Designing a brain-computer interface controlled
video-game using consumer grade EEG hardware,” in Proceedings of
the ISSNIP Biosignals and Biorobotics Conference (BRC’12), IEEE,
2012, pp. 1–6, doi: 10.1109/BRC.2012.6222186.
P. Coulton, C.G. Wylie, and W. Bamford, “Brain interaction for mobile
games,” in Proceedings of the 15th International Academic MindTrek
Conference (MindTrek’11), ACM, 2011, pp. 37–44, doi:
10.1145/2181037.2181045.
G. Hakvoort, H. Gürkök, D.P. Bos, M. Obbink, and M. Poel,
“Measuring immersion and affect in a brain-computer interface game,”
in Proceedings of the 13th IFIP TC 13 International Conference on
Human-Computer Interaction (INTERACT’11), Springer, 2011, pp.
115–128, doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-23774-4_12.
M. Ko, K. Bae, G. Oh, and T. Ryu, “A study on new gameplay based on
brain-computer interface,”in Proceedings of the Digital Games
Research Association (DiGRA’09), Brunel University, 2009, pp. 1–7.

14
[10] F. Lotte, “Brain-computer interfaces for 3D games: hype or hope?,” in
Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Foundations of
Digital Games (FDG’11), ACM, 2011, pp. 325–327, doi:
10.1145/2159365.2159427.
[11] H. Gürkök, A. Nijholt, and M. Poel, “Brain-computer interface games:
towards a framework,” in Proceedings of the 11th International
Conference on Entertainment Computing (ICEC’12), Springer, 2012,
pp. 373–380, doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-33542-6_33.
[12] E. Lalor, S.P. Kelly, C. Finucane, R. Burke, R.B. Reilly, and G.
McDarby, “Brain computer interface based on the steady-state VEP for
immersive gaming control,” in Biomedizinsche Tecknik, vol. 49, no. 1,
2004, pp. 63–64.
[13] L. Jiang, C. Guan, H. Zhang, C. Wang, and B. Jiang, “Brain computer
interface based 3D game for attention training and rehabilitation,” in
Proceedings of the 6th IEEE Conference on Industrial Electronics and
Applications (ICIEA’11), IEEE, 2011, pp. 124–127, doi:
10.1109/ICIEA.2011.5975562.
[14] B.A.S. Hasan and J.Q. Gan, “Hangman BCI: an unsupervised adaptive
self-paced brain-computer interface for playing games,” in Computers in
Biology and Medicine, vol. 42, no. 5, Elsevier, 2012, pp. 598–606, doi:
10.1016/j.compbiomed.2012.02.004.
[15] Y. Sung, K. Cho, and K. Um, “A development architecture for serious
games using BCI (brain computer interface) sensors,” in Sensors, vol.
12, no. 11, MDPI, 2012, pp. 15671–15688, doi: 10.3390/s121115671.
[16] R. Leeb, M. Lancelle, V. Kaiser, D.W. Fellner, and G. Pfurtscheller,
“Thinking Penguin: multimodal brain-computer interface control of a
VR game,” in IEEE Transactions on Computational Intelligence and AI
in Games, vol. 5, no. 2, IEEE, 2013, pp. 117–128, doi:
10.1109/TCIAIG.2013.2242072.
[17] A. Kaplan, S. Shishkin, I. Ganin, I. Basyul, and A. Zhigalov, “Adapting
the P300-based brain-computer interface for gaming: a review,” in IEEE
Transactions on Computational Intelligence and AI in Games, vol. 5,
no. 2, IEEE, 2013, pp. 141–149, doi: 10.1109/TCIAIG.2012.2237517.
[18] Ferreira, A.L.S., Miranda, L.C., Miranda, E.E.C., and Sakamoto, S.G.,
“A survey of interactive systems based on brain-computer interfaces,” in
SBC Journal on 3D Interactive Systems, vol. 4, no. 1, SBC, 2013, pp. 3–
13.
[19] G.F.P. van Veen, “Thought games: advancements in gaming with a
brain-computer interface from a game design perspective,” Internet:
http://hmi.ewi.utwente.nl/verslagen/capita-selecta/RT-Veen-Gijsvan.pdf [Aug. 31, 2013].
[20] E. Maby, M. Perrin, O. Bertrand, G. Sanchez, and J. Mattout, “BCI
could make old two-player games even more fun: a proof of concept
with ’Connect Four’,” in Advances in Human-Computer Interaction,
vol. 2012, 2012, pp. 1–8, doi: 10.1155/2012/124728.
[21] J.A. Pineda, D.S. Silverman, A. Vankov, and J. Hestenes, “Learning to
control brain rhythms: making a brain-computer interface possible,” in
IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering,
vol.
11,
no.
2,
IEEE,
2003,
pp.
181–184,
doi:
10.1109/TNSRE.2003.814445.
[22] M. Obbink, H. Gürkök, D.P.O. Bos, G. Hakvoort, M. Poel, and A.
Nijholt, “Social interaction in a cooperative brain-computer interface
game,” in Proceedings of the 4 th International ICST Conference on
Intelligent Technologies for Interactive Entertainment (INTETAIN’11),
Springer, 2012, pp. 183–192, doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-30214-5_20.
[23] N. Chumerin, N.V. Manyakov, A. Combaz, A. Robben, M. van Vliet,
and M.M. Van Hulle, “Steady state visual evoked potential based
computer gaming - the Maze,” in Proceedings of the 4 th International
ICST Conference on Intelligent Technologies for Interactive
Entertainment (INTETAIN’11), Springer, 2012, pp. 28–37, doi:
10.1007/978-3-642-30214-5_4.
[24] N. Maruthappan, N. Iyengar, and P.S. Patel, “Brain chess - playing
chess using brain computer interface,” in Proceedings of the
International Conferece on Advancement in Information Technology
(ICAIT’11), IPCSIT, 2011, pp. 183 –191.
[25] C. Mühl, H. Gürkök, D. Bos, M. Thurlings, L. Scherffig, M. Duvinage,
A. Elbakyan, S. Kang, M. Poel, and D. Heylen, “Bacteria hunt,” in
Journal on Multimodal User Interfaces, vol. 4, no. 1, Springer, 2010, pp.
11–25, doi: 10.1007/s12193-010-0046-0.

SBC Journal on Interactive Systems, volume 5, number 1, 2014
[26] D. Bos, B. Reuderink, B. Laar, H. Gürkök, C. Muhl, M. Poel, D.
Heylen, and A. Nijholt, “A human-computer interaction for BCI games:
usability and user experience,” in Proceedings of the International
Conference on Cyberworlds (CW’10), IEEE, 2010, pp. 277–281, doi:
10.1109/CW.2010.22.
[27] J. Lee and K.Y. Lai, “What’s in design rationale?,” in Human-Computer
Interaction, vol. 6, no. 3-4, Taylor & Francis, 1991, pp. 251–280, doi:
10.1080/07370024.1991.9667169.
[28] K. McCreadie, D.H. Coyle, and G. Prasad, “Sensorimotor-rhythm
modulation feedback with 3D vector-base amplitude panning – a braincomputer interface pilot study,” in Proceedings of the Irish Signals and
Systems Conference, IET, 2012, pp. 1–6.
[29] L. Bonnet, F. Lotte, and A. Lecuyer, “Two brains, one game: design and
evaluation of a multiuser BCI video game based on motor imagery,” in
IEEE Transactions on Computational Intelligence and AI in Games, vol.
5, no. 2, IEEE, 2013, pp. 185–198, doi: 10.1109/TCIAIG.2012.2237173.
[30] D. Marshall, D. Coyle, S. Wilson, and M. Callaghan, “Games,
gameplay, and BCI: the state of the art,” in IEEE Transactions on
Computational Intelligence and AI in Games, vol. 5, no. 2, IEEE, 2013,
pp. 82–99, doi: 10.1109/TCIAIG.2013.2263555.
[31] P. Wei, “An virtual vehicle control game for online brain computer
interface feedback training,” in Proceedings of the International
Conference on Mechatronics and Automation (ICMA’10), IEEE, 2010,
pp. 1942–1944, doi: 10.1109/ICMA.2010.5589104.
[32] E. Lopetegui, B. Garcia Zapirain, and A. Mendez, “Tennis computer
game with brain control using EEG signals,” in Proceedings of the 16 th
International Conference on Computer Games (CGAMES’11), IEEE,
2011, pp. 228–234, doi: 10.1109/CGAMES.2011.6000344.
[33] A.H. Basori, “Emotion walking for humanoid avatars using brain
signals,” in International Journal of Advanced Robotic Systems, InTech,
2013, pp. 1–11, doi: 10.5772/54764.
[34] K. LaFleur, K. Cassady, A. Doud, K. Shades, E. Rogin, and B. He,
“Quadcopter control in three-dimensional space using a noninvasive
motor imagery-based brain-computer interface,” in Journal of Neural
Engineering, vol. 10, no. 4, IOP, 2013, doi: 10.1088/17412560/10/4/046003.
[35] L.C. Miranda, H.H. Hornung, and M.C.C. Baranauskas, “Adjustable
interactive rings for iDTV,” in IEEE Transactions on Consumer
Electronics, vol. 56, no. 3, IEEE, 2010, pp. 1988–1996, doi:
10.1109/TCE.2010.5606356.
[36] L.C. Miranda, H.H. Hornung, R. Pereira, and M.C.C. Baranauskas,
“Exploring adjustable interactive rings in game playing: preliminary
results,” in Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Design,
User Experience and Usability (DUXU/HCII’13), Springer, 2013, pp.
518–527, doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-39241-2_57.
[37] R. Bernays, J. Mone, P. Yau, M. Murcia, J. Gonzalez-Sanchez, M.E.
Chavez-Echeagaray, R.M. Christopherson, and R. Atkinson, “Lost in the
dark: emotion adaption,” in Adjunct Proceedings of the 25 th ACM
Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST
Adjunct’12), ACM, 2012, pp. 79-80, doi: 10.1145/2380296.2380331.
[38] M.S. Yoh, J. Kwon, and S. Kim, “NeuroWander: a BCI game in the
form of interactive fairy tale,” in Proceedings of the 12th ACM
International Conference Adjunct Papers on Ubiquitous Computing –
Adjunct (Ubicomp’10 Adjunct), ACM, 2010, pp. 389–390, doi:
10.1145/1864431.1864450.
[39] L. Su, M. Wenyan, and H. Qiqian, “The Mind Garden: a brain computer
interface
game,”
Internet:
https://wiki.cc.gatech.edu/designcomp/images/2/24/MindGardenFinalRe
port.pdf [Aug. 31, 2013].
[40] G. Pires, M. Torres, N. Casaleiro, U. Nunes, and M. Castelo-Branco,
“Playing tetris with non-invasive BCI,” in Proceedings of the 1 st IEEE
International Conference on Serious Games and Applications for Health
(SeGAH’11), IEEE, 2011, pp. 1–6, doi: 10.1109/SeGAH.2011.6165454.
[41] B. van de Laar, R. Boris, D.P.-O. Bos, and D. Heylen, “Evaluating user
experience of actual and imagined movement in BCI gamin,” in
International Journal of Gaming and Computer-Mediated Simulations,
vol. 2, no. 4, IGI Global, 2010, pp. 33–47, doi:
10.4018/jgcms.2010100103.

ISSN: 2236-3297

SBC Journal on Interactive Systems, volume 5, number 1, 2014
[42] M. Tangermann, M. Krauledat, K. Grzeska, M. Sagebaum, B. Blankertz,
C. Vidaurre, and K.-R. Müller, “Playing pinball with non-invasive BCI,”
in Proceedings of the 22nd Annual Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems (NIPS’08), 2008, pp. 1641–1648.
[43] A. Finke, A. Lenhardt, and H. Ritter, “The MindGame: a P300-based
brain-computer interface game,” in Neural Networks, vol. 22, no. 9,
Elsevier, 2009, pp. 1329–1333, doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.2009.07.003.
[44] P. Martinez, H. Bakardjian, and A. Cichocki, “Fully online
multicommand brain-computer interface with visual neurofeedback
using SSVEP paradigm,” in Computational Intelligence and
Neuroscience, vol. 2007, pp. 13–13, doi: 10.1155/2007/94561.
[45] D. Coyle, J. Garcia, A.R. Satti, and T.M. McGinnity, “EEG-based
continuous control of a game using a 3 channel motor imagery BCI: BCI
game,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Computational
Intelligence, Cognitive Algorithms, Mind, and Brain (CCMB’11), IEEE,
2011, pp. 1–7, doi: 10.1109/CCMB.2011.5952128.
[46] S. Bordoloi, U. Sharmah, and S.M. Hazarika, “Motor imagery based
BCI for a maze game,” in Proceedings of the 4 th International
Conference on Intelligent Human Computer Interaction (IHCI’12),
IEEE, 2012, pp. 1–6, doi: 10.1109/IHCI.2012.6481848.

ISSN: 2236-3297

15
[47] B. Badia, A. García Morgade, H. Samaha, and P.F.M.J. Verschure,
“Using a hybrid brain computer interface and virtual reality system to
monitor and promote cortical reorganization through motor activity and
motor imagery training,” in IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and
Rehabilitation Engineering, vol. 21, no. 2, IEEE, 2013, pp. 174–181,
doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2012.2229295.
[48] T.R. Kang, I. Perez, and G.L.E. Matias, “Design and development of an
affect-sensitive horror game,” in Proceedings of the 12th Philippine
Computing Science Congress, 2012.
[49] H. Hornung and M.C.C. Baranauskas, “Towards a design rationale for
inclusive eGovernment services,” in International Journal of Electronic
Government Research, vol. 7, no. 3, IGI Global, 2011, pp. 1–20, doi:
10.4018/jegr.2011070101.
[50] S.J.B. Shum, A.M. Selvin, M. Sierhuis, J. Conklin, C.B. Haley, and B.
Nuseibeh, “Hypermedia support for argumentation-based rationale,” in
Rationale management in software engineering, Springer, 2006, pp.
111–132, doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-30998-7_5.
[51] A. Brasher, G. Conole, S. Cross, M. Weller, P. Clark, and J. White,
“CompendiumLD – a tool for effective, efficient and creative learning
design,” in Proceedings of the 2008 European LAMS Conference:
Practical Benefits of Learning Design, 2008.

