(IJCRSEE) International Journal of Cognitive Research in Science, Engineering and Education
Vol. 3, No.1, 2015.

EEG BASED COGNITIVE WORKLOAD CLASSIFICATION
DURING NASA MATB-II MULTITASKING
M-Tech. Sushil Chandra, Bio Medical Engineering Department, Institute of Nuclear Medicine and Allied Sciences, DRDO, Delhi, India, E-mail: sushil.inmas@gmail.com
M.Sc. Kundan Lal Verma, Department of Electronics, DDU Gorakhpur University, Gorakhpur, Uttar Pradesh,
India, E-mail: klv.elect@gmail.com
M-Tech. Greeshma Sharma, Bio Medical Engineering Department, Institute of Nuclear Medicine and Allied Sciences, DRDO, Delhi, India, E-mail: greeshmacct@gmail.com
Dr. Alok Mittal, Instrumentaion and Control Engineering Department, Netaji Subhas Institute of Technology,
Delhi, E-mail: mittalap@gmail.com
Dr. Devendra Jha, Scientific Analysis Group, DRDO, Delhi, India
E-mail: sagdjha@gmail.com

Received: January, 06.2015.
Accepted: February, 09.2015.
Original Article
UDK 004.032.26

Abstract. The objective of this experiment was to
determine the best possible input EEG feature for classification of the workload while designing load balancing logic for an automated operator. The input features
compared in this study consisted of spectral features of
Electroencephalography, objective scoring and subjective scoring. Method utilizes to identify best EEG feature
as an input in Neural Network Classifiers for workload
classification, to identify channels which could provide
classification with the highest accuracy and for identification of EEG feature which could give discrimination
among workload level without adding any classifiers. The
result had shown Engagement Index is the best feature
for neural network classification.
Keywords: Cognitive Workload, Discrete wavelet
transform, EEG spectral feature, Neural Network.

1. INTRODUCTION
Cognitive Workload is defined as the
load generated due to processing of multiple
activities (or sub activities of a task) by the
human brain in the time domain. In our context, it depends on how efficiently there is an
interaction between operator’s resource capabilities and computer/machine on which the
tasks have to be displayed. When the operator’s workload is at the peak, then a properly
Corresponding Author
Greeshma Sharma, Research Fellow
Bio Medical Engineering Department,
Institute of Nuclear Medicine and Allied Sciences,
DRDO, Delhi.
E-mail: greeshmacct@gmail.com

designed automation task can reduce workload
or maintain its optimal level (Kramer, 1991).
Workload assessment of operator during task
can offload some of his tasks to the machine
with the help of smart system design. For
designing of such system, psychological and
physiological aspects are carefully assessed for
finding out suitable combination that can provide optimum utilization of human resource
with the machine. In this research paper, we
tried to identify EEG channels with the best
feature that could give a maximum classification of workload. It also included feature identification without adding any classifiers. There
are three methods to assess the cognitive
workload, i.e. task score, subjective score and
spectral features of the EEG (Wickens, 1988).
Workload assessment through giving a questionnaire about a task makes subjective judgments about the task (Reid and Nygren, 1988).
Multi Attribute Task Battery (MATB-II) was
used for workload assessment in two modes,
LWL and HWL. It was used for multitasking
as well as for workload assessment (Singh, A.
L., Tiwari, T., Singh, I. L, 2010; Singh, I. L.,
Sharma, H., Singh, A. L., 2005). Advantage of
choosing MATB over others were its qualification for providing objective and subjective
scoring along with different level of workload
(Hart and Staveland, 1988).
Different Attentional demands like
to divide attention which is generated by a
task change pattern of subjective workload
and its psychological impacts (Mazloumi,
Kumashiro, Izumi, and Higuchi, 2010). There

www.ijcrsee.com

35

(IJCRSEE) International Journal of Cognitive Research in Science, Engineering and Education
Vol. 3, No.1, 2015.

is a nonlinear relation between workload and
performance (Gawron, 2000). Therefore, we
didn’t rely completely on subjective & objective scores; we included electrophysiological (EEG) factors also (Gevins and Smith,
2003). There are a lot of research articles that
show significant relationships between EEG
parameters like engagement indices and performance both in fields and off fields (Berka
et al., 2007; Freeman, Mikulka, Scerbo and
Scott, 2004; Mikulka, Scerbo and Freeman,
2002). EEG analysis is performed using classically defined frequency bands alpha (8-12
Hz), beta (13-22 Hz), delta (23-30 Hz), theta
(5-7Hz) and gamma (30-70 Hz) (Dickson,
2005; Dorneich, Ververs, Mathan and Whitlow, 2005) or sometimes it can be analyzed
using some ratio of frequency bands, Prinzel
et al (2000) developed an EEG-engagement
index based on beta power divided by alpha
power plus theta power. A feed forward neural
network based on back propagation algorithm was used to classify the workload into
NWL, LWL and HWL among 14 channels in
MATLAB 2012.
The objective was (i) Comparison
among input features to determine their qualifications as a workload level discriminating
factor. Here input features included objective
scores, subjective scores and EEG features. (ii)
To determine the most suitable input feature
that can be used in designing human-machine
load balancing logic for an automated operator. It was based on statistical parametric testing that gave output with significance.

2. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Procedure

Figure 1. Lab Arrangement

B. Technique
(i) Feature Extraction
Root mean square (RMS) value

Subjects (n=10, age group 20-30 years,
all male and right handed) from the Institute
of Nuclear Medicine and Allied Science,
New Delhi were invited to perform NASA‘s
MATB-II pilots multitasking tasks, which had
no prior experience of MATB like piloting
tasks. Consent was taken from all subjects to
participate in this project. They were required
to fill a questionnaire to build their general
profile. Each subject was well trained with the
MATB-II software at the beginning of the testing as per given module of MATB-II software
(Fairclough and Venables, 2010; Fairclough,
Venables, and Tattersall, 2005).Lab ergonomics were followed by the idealarrangement.
The MATB-II task stimuli was presented on
a computer screen (15 inches) with a dark
36

background and a viewing distance of 80cm.
EEG from each subject was recorded with
low-cost EEG device Emotiv EPOC (Knoll,
Wang, Chen, aand Xu, 2011) which was a
14-channel, 128 Hz neuro-signal acquisition
and processing wireless neuro headset (Figure
1).
The following steps were performed by
the subjects for workload assessment through
the tasks assigned as per NASA‘s MATB-II,
which was designed according to an eight
minute event file.
1. During the experiment, three minute baselines was recorded with eyes open. In
this situation, a laptop screen with no luminescence was kept in front of the subject‘s eyes.
2. 1 minute rest.
3. NASA MATB-II tasks at Low workload level were given to subjects.
4. 1 minute rest.
5. NASA MATB-II tasks at High
workload level were given to subjects.

The RMS value is mainly used for varying a quantity and useful statistical parameter
to see the effect of workload on EEG signals
(Basmajian and Luca, 1985). It is useful to
measure power in amplitude of EEG signals
from the cerebral cortex (Abdul-latif, Cosic,
Kumar, Polus, and Da Costa, 2004).
The RMS for a collection of N values
{x1, x2, ..., xN} is given by the equation

www.ijcrsee.com

(IJCRSEE) International Journal of Cognitive Research in Science, Engineering and Education
Vol. 3, No.1, 2015.

Sub band Energy

were taken for validation and 20% for training
and rest inputs were test data. Linear transforWavelet packet node energy is more mation matrix was used to map between input
useful in representing a signal. Wavelet packet and output. It had used features × channels,
component energy E and total signal energy matrix for training and testing data set.
can be defined as

3. RESULTS

Multi-channel full-band EEG signals are
decomposed into five well-known frequency
sub-bands: delta, theta, alpha, beta, and
gamma. Different energy bands like gamma,
alpha, beta and theta have been calculated
with MATLAB programming (Sun, 2008).
Power Spectral Density (PSD)

The overall result was calculated on the
basis of psychological (MATB-II test score
analysis with subjective score) and physiological (EEGSignal) data analysis separately.
The following three findings were
extracted from MATB-II data.
1. Subjective score was calculated
using NASA-Tlx scoring and total score displayed in Figure2for comparison between
LWL and HWL.

The power spectral density is mostly
directed at the continuous spectrum of the
Figure 2. Total NASA-Tlx score of participants
signal (Sun, Chang, and Tang, 2006). In con- in the MATB-II
trast to the mean-squared spectrum, the peaks
in this spectrum have no reflection of the
power at a given particular frequency (Zarjam,
Epps, and Chen, 2011).
Engagement Index (EI)
Task engagement is defined as how
much the subject is involved in particular tasks
on different levels of workload (Kamzanova,
Matthews, Kustubayeva, and Jakupov, 2011).
EEG engagement index denoted by formula
(β/(α+θ)) and has been to classify workload
(Berka et al., 2007).

2. Objective score was calculated for
system monitoring (sysmon) and tracking
(ii) EEG Signal Analysis
task in the form of response time (in second)
and Root mean square deviation (RMSD)
EEG signal processing means for oper- respectively. In sysmon, percentage of corating in some fashion on a signal to extract rect responses were more in LWL case for
some useful information from EEG data, dif- five subjects (Figure 3) and also response time
ferent features such as power spectral densi- was less for HWL (increase stress sometime
ties, energy and root mean square (RMS) were improve performance) (Figure 4).
extracted from the signal with the help of
MATLAB programming.
Figure 3. Percentage correct responses for
system monitoring task

(iii) Neural Network classifiers
We used feed forward neural network
based on back propagation algorithm. It is
assumed superior classifiers for discriminating workload level (Wilson and Russell, 2003,
Wilson and Russell, 2007; Wilson, Estepp, and
Christensen, 2010; Wilson, Estepp, and Davis,
2009). Twenty-five percentage of the inputs
www.ijcrsee.com

37

(IJCRSEE) International Journal of Cognitive Research in Science, Engineering and Education
Vol. 3, No.1, 2015.
Figure 4. Response Time (in second) of system
monitoring for participants who gave responses

3. Three subjects were unable to give
the responseinsysmon as they were unable
to shift their attention. Improve performance
was observed in a tracking task for HWL as in
figure 5. Applying t- test on objective scores,
we found: t= 1.550 at degree of freedom =9
for tracking task at probability = 0.155 and t
= 1.030 at degree of freedom = 9 for system
monitoring task at probability = 0.330.There
were no significant difference between
LWL and HWL task of tracking and system
monitoring.

Figure 6. Beta energy for AF3 channel for different condition, energy is summarized among all
ten participants. BL=baseline, LWL=Low Workload,
HWL=High Workload

2. The RMS value of gamma sub-band
had the most significant difference between
NWL and LWL as displayed in Table 1 for all
channels.
Table1. Significant result on 14 channels for
RMS value after applying one way ANOVA. Difference between NWL and LWL after applying post hoc
test (Tuckey-d)

Figure 5. Root means square deviation (RMSD)
scores for tracking task

Three features are extracted from the
EEG signal. To summarize the findings are:
1. Subband energy value was increased
as the workload increased for theta [4-8 Hz],
alpha [8-13 Hz], beta [13-30 Hz] as showed
in figure 6for channel AF3. More energy was
displayed from channels when high attention
is required to execute the task.

38

3. The most important channels in Engagement Index (EI) were AF3, AF4, F7 and
F8 as we could see an increase in EI with the
increase in workload clearly from figure 7.

www.ijcrsee.com

(IJCRSEE) International Journal of Cognitive Research in Science, Engineering and Education
Vol. 3, No.1, 2015.
Figure 7. Engagement index for each channel
on Baseline (BL), Low workload level (LWL) and high
workload Level (HWL)

4. The above mentioned three EEG features were taken as an input for NN classifiers
and EI was selected as most appropriate input
for workload classification after doing parametric statistical testing.
5. Confusion matrix for all 14 channels
had been displayed in Table 2, showed an idea
about channel identification for automated
operator designing. As per the result accuracy
was more on anterior frontal channels while
less in temporal channels.
Table 2. Confusion Matrix result for classification of NWL, LWL and HWL, after applying NN classifiers with 1000 iteration for channels

full knowledge regarding operator cognition
and system interface. It is evident that workload
is task dependent and can vary from individual to individual (Gawron, 2000; Mazloumi,
Kumashiro, Izumi, and Higuchi, 2010). The
objective of this experiment was to identify
the measurement technique that can discriminate the workload and to determine the best
possible input EEG feature for classification
of workload while designing load balancing
logic (i.e. between human and machine) for an
automated operating system. We found some
answers which could be supportive for objective completion. We discussed three methods
to assess cognitive workload, i.e. task score,
subjective score and spectral features of the
EEG as per Wickens, 1988. Objective scores
collected from sysmon and tracking tasks
using MATB-II, failed to produce any significant difference. Difference in result failed to
correlate the workload level with the performance of individuals. However, we found a
subjective score making workload discrimination, but we could not rely on subjective feeling because it was invasive which could be
inappropriate for our objective. EEG was reliable and modest measured for workload discrimination (Gevins and Smith, 2003; Gevins
and Smith, 2005; Wang, Hope, Wang, Ji, and
Gray, 2011). The primary goal was to identify
the best EEG feature which could be taken as
an input for NN classifiers. Out of three EEG
features, i.e. energy, RMS and EI, EI was best
identified feature for NN classifiers. In previous studies EI was also identified best correlated feature with workload (Kamzanova
et al., 2011). Second goal was to identify the
best channels which provided the classification with the highest accuracy. Anterior frontal channels were the most appropriate channels. The third goal was to identify EEG feature which could give discrimination among
workload level without adding any classifiers.
Gamma sub-band RMS value was qualified to
discriminate (except AF4) with significant difference at P ≤ 0.05.

5. CONCLUSIONS
To identify measurement technique for
workload assessment supplemented designing of automated operator. Objective score
4. DISCUSSION
failed to discriminate and subjective score
succeeds, but they were invasive. We left with
Workload offloading is often required to only electrophysiological method of workload
reduce error and improve performance in the discrimination that was necessary for designsmart system. It can be done when we acquire ing of automated operator. Therefore, to rely
www.ijcrsee.com

39

(IJCRSEE) International Journal of Cognitive Research in Science, Engineering and Education
Vol. 3, No.1, 2015.

on electrophysiological measures did become
one of the major key in workload classification (Lysaght, 1989; Noyes, J.M. and Bruneau, 2007; Rubio, Diaz, Martin, and Puente,
2004; Verma, 2012). Gamma RMS was identified best feature without adding classifiers
and EI was the best feature to be used as an
input for NN classifiers. Best selected channels were anterior frontal for workload classification. The limitation of our study could be
less number of subjects and channels in EEG.
Result based on the onetime assessment of
the workload, could have changed in the next
assessment. Future direction of work will be
based on the overcoming limitation with many
time assessments with sufficient number of
subjects and channels.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank the volunteers for participating in the experiment, and
are grateful for the assistance of Mr. James R.
Comstock and Miss Yamira Santiago, NASA
Langley Research Centre in providing the
software NASA MATB-II. The authors are
also thankful to Director INMAS for their support and help during the course of the experiment. This research was granted by INMAS,
DRDO, Delhi.
Conflict of interests
Authors declare no conflict of interest.

REFERENCES
Abdul-latif, A. A., Cosic, I., Kumar, D. K., Polus, B.,
& Da Costa, C. (2004). Power Changes of EEG
Signals Associated with Muscle Fatigue: The
Root Mean Square Analysis of EEG Bands.
Intelligent Sensors Sensor Networks and Information Processing Conference (pp. 531-534).
IEEE. doi:10.1109/ISSNIP.2004.1417517
Basmajian, J. V., & De Luca, C. J. (1985). Muscles
alive. Muscles alive: their functions revealed by
electromyography, 278, 126.
Berka, C., Levendowski, D. J., Lumicao, M. N., Yau,
A., Davis, G., Zivkovic, V. T., ... & Craven, P.
L. (2007). EEG correlates of task engagement
and mental workload in vigilance, learning, and
memory tasks. Aviation, space, and environmental medicine, 78 (Supplement 1), B231-B244.
Dickson, B. T. (2005). The Cognitive Cockpit-a testbed for Augmented Cognition. In 1st International Conference on Augmented Cognition, Las
Vegas, NV.
40

Dorneich, M. C., Ververs, P. M., Mathan, S., & Whitlow,
S. D. (2005, October). A joint human-automation cognitive system to support rapid decisionmaking in hostile environments. In Systems,
Man and Cybernetics, 2005 IEEE International
Conference on (Vol. 3, pp. 2390-2395). IEEE.
Fairclough, S.H., Venables, L., & Tattersall, A. (2005).
The influence of task demand on learning on
the psychophysiological response. International
Journal of Psychophysiology, 56(2), 171-184.
Fairclough, S.H., & Venables, L. (2010). Prediction
of subjective states from psychophysiology: a
multivariate approach. Biological psychology,
71(1), 100-110.
Freeman, F. G., Mikulka, P. J., Scerbo, M. W., & Scott,
L. (2004). An evaluation of an adaptive automation system using a cognitive vigilance task.
Biological psychology, 67(3), 283-297.
Gawron, V.J. (2000). Human performance measures
handbook. Mahwah, NJ, US: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers.
Gevins, A., & Smith, M. E. (2003). Neurophysiological measures of cognitive workload during
human–computer interaction. Theoretical Issues
in Ergonomics Science, 4,113–131.
Gevins, A., & Smith, M. E. (2005). Assessing fitnessfor-duty and predicting performance with cognitive neurophysiological measures. In J. A.
Caldwell & N. J. Wesensten (Eds.), Proceedings of SPIE Defense and Security Symposium,
Biomonitoring for Physiological and Cognitive Performance during Military Operations
(pp.127–38). Orlando: The International Society
for Optical Engineering.
Hart, S. G., & Staveland, L. E. (1988). Development
of NASA-TLX (Task Load Index): Results of
empirical and theoretical research. Advances in
psychology, 52, 139-183.
Kamzanova, A. T., Matthews, G., Kustubayeva, A. M.,
& Jakupov, S. M. (2011). EEG Indicesto TimeOn-Task Effectsand to a Workload Manipulation
(Cueing). World Academy of Science, Engineering and Technology, 80.
Knoll, A., Wang, Y., Chen, F., Xi, J., Ruiz, N., Epps,
J., & Zarjam, P. (2011). Measuring CognitiveWorkloadwith Low Cost Electroencephalogram.
Human Computer Interaction-Interact, lecture
Notes in Computer Sciences, 6949, 568-571.
Kramer, A. F. (1991). Physiological metrics of mental
workload. In D. L. Damos (Eds.). Multiple task
performance (pp.279-328). London: Taylor &
Francis.
Lysaght, R. J., Hill, S. G., Dick, A. O., Plamondon, B.
D., & Linton, P. M. (1989). Operator workload:
Comprehensive review and evaluation of operator workload methodologies (No. TR-2075-3).
ANALYTICS INC WILLOW GROVE PA.
Mazloumi, A., Kumashiro, M., Izumi, H., & Higuchi,

www.ijcrsee.com

(IJCRSEE) International Journal of Cognitive Research in Science, Engineering and Education
Vol. 3, No.1, 2015.
Y. (2010). Examining the Influence of Different
Attentional Demands and Individuals’ Cognitive
Failure on Workload Assessment and Psychological Functioning. International Journal Of
Occupational Hygiene, 2(1), 17-24.
Mikulka, P. J., Scerbo, M. W., & Freeman, F. G. (2002).
Effects of a biocybernetic system on vigilance
performance. Human Factors, 44, 654–64.
Noyes, J. M. & Bruneau, D. P. J. (2007). A self-analysis
of the NASA-TLX workload measure. Ergonomics, 50(4), 514 – 519.
Prinzel, L. J., Freeman, F. G., Scerbo, M. W., Mikulka,
P. J., & Pope, A. T. (2000). A closed-loop system
for examining psychophysiological measures
for adaptive task allocation. The International
Journal Of Aviation Psychology, 10(4), 393-410.
Reid, G. B., & Nygren, T. E. (1988). The subjective workload assessment technique: A scaling procedure for measuring mental workload.
Advances in psychology, 52, 185-218.
Rubio, S., Diaz, E., Martin, J., Puente, J. M. (2004).
Evaluation of Subjective Mental Workload: A
Comparison of SWAT, NASA-TLX, and Workload Profile Methods. Applied Psychology: An
International Review, 53(1), 61–86.
Singh, I. L., Sharma, H., Singh, A. L. (2005). Effect of
Training on Workload in Flight Simulation Task
Performance. Journal of the Indian Academy of
applied Psychology, 31, 83-91.
Singh, A. L., Tiwari, T., Singh, I. L. (2010). Performance Feedback, mental Workload and Monitoring Efficiency. Journal of the Indian Academy of applied Psychology, 36(1), 151-158.
Sun, S. (2008). The extreme energy ratio criterion for
EEG feature extraction. In Artificial Neural
Networks-ICANN 2008 (pp. 919-928). Springer
Berlin Heidelberg.
Sun, L., Chang, G., & Tang, H. (2006). Wavelet Packet.
Entropy in the Analysis of EEG Signals. 8th
International Conference on Signal Processing (pp.16-20). Beijing: IEEE.doi:10.1109/
ICOSP.2006.346140.
Verma, K. L. (2012). EEG correlates of Cognitive
Workload during Multitasking Work. Dissertation, University of Gorakhpur. ISBN: 9783-659-30224-4. Germany, Lambert Academic
Publishing.
Wang, Z., Hope, R. M., Wang, Z., Ji, Q., & Gray, W. D.
(2011). An EEG Workload Classifier for Multiple Subjects. 33rd Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and
Biology Society. Washington, DC: IEEE Press.
Wickens, C. D. (1988). Processing resources in attention, dual task performance and workload
assessment. University of Illinois: Engineeringpsychology research laboratory.
Wilson, G. F., & Russell, C. A. (2003). Operator
functional state classification using multiple

psychophysiological features in an air traffic
control task. Human Factors: The Journal of the
Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, 45(3),
381-389.
Wilson, G. F., Russell, C. A. (2007). Performance
enhancement in an uninhabited air vehicle task
using psychophysiologically determined adaptive aiding. Human Factors, 49, 1005-1018.
Wilson, G. F., Estepp, J., & Christensen, J. C. (2010).
How does day-to-day variability in psychophysiological data affect classifier accuracy. Human
Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting Proceedings, 54, 264-268.
Wilson, G. F., Estepp, J., & Davis, I. (2009). A comparison of performance and psychophysiological classification of complex task performance.
Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, 53, 141-145.
doi: 10.1177/154193120905300301.
Zarjam, P., Epps, J., & Chen, F. (2011). Spectral EEG
Features for Evaluating Cognitive Load. 33rd
Annual International Conference of the IEEE
EMBS (pp. 3841-3844). Boston, Massachusetts
USA. doi: 10.1109/IEMBS.2011.6090954

www.ijcrsee.com

41

(IJCRSEE) International Journal of Cognitive Research in Science, Engineering and Education
Vol. 3, No.1, 2015.

42

www.ijcrsee.com

