Sains Malaysiana 49(9)(2020): 2091-2099
http://dx.doi.org/10.17576/jsm-2020-4909-07

Nocturnal Blue Light Exposure Increase Alpha and Beta Brain Waves as Cognition
Function for Two Consecutive Night Driving in a Car Simulator
(Pendedahan Cahaya Biru Nokturnal Meningkatkan Gelombang Otak Alfa dan Beta sebagai Fungsi Pengecaman
untuk Dua Pemanduan Malam Berturut-turut dalam Pensimulasi Kereta)
L ULU L USIANTI F ITRI*, K INANTI P RESTIASANI & S UPRIJANTO

ABSTRACT

Driving is a complex activity that engage complex motor, sensor, and cognitive function which can be analyzed through
brain wave using electroencephalograph (EEG). Decrease of cognitive function while driving in long period at night
linked with drowsiness and exposure of blue light to driver in night-driving could improve cognitive function; yet, studies
driving session on the car simulator with a straight and monotonous road for 2 consecutive nights for 30 min without
pause. The participants were divided into three driving groups as follows: in dark condition (control), under exposure to
polychromatic blue light (450-540 nm) and monochromatic blue LED light (460 nm). All participants’ brain waves were
recorded by EEG during the driving session from two channels of F3 and F4 representing cognitive function of the brain.
The result showed that there was a significant increase of beta and alpha wave power spectral density on the second day of
exposure in both blue light treatment groups. However, monochromatic blue light gave a more stable beta wave than the other
two lights which incidate a much stronger cognitive process. There was also a synchronization from both channels of F3 and
F4 in all treatments which shows that aplha and beta wave do not necessarily work in an antagonistic way. In summary,
repeated, continuous exposure of blue light may increase aplha and beta wave power spectral density, in which monochomatic
blue light cuses better cognitive state than polychromatic blue light.
Keywords: Blue light; brain wave; driving simulator; EEG; power spectral density

ABSTRAK

Memandu ialah aktiviti kompleks yang dipengaruhi fungsi motor, sensor dan pengecaman otak serta dapat diukur
melalui perangkat elektroensefalograf (EEG). Memandu pada tempoh yang lama pada waktu malam boleh meningkatkan
rasa mengantuk serta menurunkan fungsi pengecaman. Ini dapat dibantu dengan mendedahkan cahaya biru untuk
meningkatkan fungsi pengecaman, namun data menunjukkan bahawa pendedahan memerlukan tempoh yang lama
dan berulang. Kajian ini menggunakan 15 pemandu lelaki dalam pensimulasi kereta selama dua malam berturut-turut
di jalan raya yang lurus dan bosan selama 30 min tanpa berhenti. Pemandu dibahagikan kepada tiga kumpulan iaitu:
tanpa cahaya (kawalan), pendedahan kepada cahaya biru polikromatik (450-540 nm) dan pendedahan cahaya biru
LED monokromatik (460 nm). Gelombang otak setiap pemandu diukur menggunakan EEG daripada dua saluran F3
dan F4 yang mewakili fungsi pengecaman di otak, Hasil menunjukkan kenaikan daya gelombang beta dan alfa secara
bererti (p <0.01) pada hari kedua dalam kedua-dua pendedahan cahaya biru. Gelombang beta cahaya biru monokromatik
lebih stabil sejurus menjelaskan berlangsungnya proses pengecaman yang lebih tinggi berbanding cahaya biru
polikromatik dan kawalan. Penyegerakan pola gelombang otak di F3 dan F4 menunjukkan gelombang alfa dan beta
tidak perlu bertindak secara bertentangan. Secara rumusan, pendedahan berulang cahaya biru dapat meningkatkan
gelombang alfa dan beta pada fungsi pengecaman otak ketika memandu pada waktu malam dan cahaya biru
monokromatik memfasilitasi proses pengecaman yang lebih baik daripada cahaya biru polikromatik.
Kata kunci: Cahaya biru; EEG; gelombang otak; nilai daya gelombang; pensimulasi memandu

I NTRODUCTION
Organisms always interact with their environment, as
especially for human. Indonesia, an archipelago country

close to Malaysia, is located in the equator line with the
yearly sun lighting up to 60.000-80.000 Lux (Zain-Ahmed
et al. 2002) and solar irradiation ranging between 4.6-7.2
kWh/m2 (Rumbayan et al. 2012). This condition shapes the

2092

people who live in Indonesia and other tropical countries
to get used to fairly high annual light intensity. Moreover,
the equatorial location also implies that the duration of
night and day throughout the year affects the people’s
circadian rhythm (Kűller 2002).
The sun is a polichromatic light and it consists of
more than one wavelength (Treutlein 2016), while visible
light has wavelengths of 380-780 nm, which consists
of various colors (Blume et al. 2019). These lights are
responded by rod and cone cells in the eye’s retina to
be processed further as visual information in the brain,
though there is one type of blue light spectrum process
receptor namely Intrinsically Photoreceptic Ganglion
Cell (ipRGC) (Cao & Barrionuevo 2015). The ipRGC is
connected to the circadian rhythm and attention so its
role is crucial in managing individual activities (Blume et
al. 2019). At night when there is no natural lighting from
and LED light is used widely. Although artificial light such
LED appears white, but LED still have peak emission of
blue light ranging about 400-490 nm (Tosini et al. 2016).
Based on data from the National Transportation Safety
caused by human factors about 69% (KNKT 2016) and
raised up to 72% in 2019 (Republika 2019). This human
factor is due to drowsiness or distraction while driving
and drowsiness alone contributed up to 30% of driving
accident (Boyce et al. 2006). When driving during the day,
ipRGC will give a signal to the brain to increase the
hormone melatonin in the body and feeling drowsy. This
causes a condition called driving drowsiness which is
characterized by a decrease in cognitive function due to
time to respond in dangerous situation (Lin et al. 2005).
Since driving is a complex process involving
planning and appropriate execution based on the
comprehension of the surroundings, the brain’s frontal lobe
is important for executive functioning, including attention,
wakefulness, working memory process, and decision
making (Sakai et al 2012). A study using hemoglobin
density as measured by NIRS (Near Infrared Spectroscopy)
has shown changes in frontal lobe when participants
were actively moving their hand while driving indicate
highly activity in the brain region (Takahashi et al. 2011).
Things done to the brain occur in the cerebral cortex can
be measured using electroencephalograph (EEG) device.
This tool measures the electrical activity of the brain that
can represent the state of the human brain in real-time
(Subha et al. 2010). However, when drowsiness occurs
during night driving, it is manifested as a decrease,
intermittent and decline of alpha brain wave, followed by
a low-voltage, combined pattern and height waves in EEG
data (Santamaria & Chiappa 1987). In an attempt to reduce

drowsiness, blue light has been applied in an experiment
at night to participants driving in simulator and shown
their beta brain waves increased when compared to the
dark condition (Fitri et al. 2018). In a similar study,
participant drove in the simulator for 16 min, consisted
of 8 min adaptation and 8 min of driving taken for 2
nights consecutively, either in blue light irradiation or
in darkness, showed that beta waves in every 2 min
pattern in several cortex areas such as in frontal, parietal,
premotor cortex, and visual (Purawijaya et al. 2015). In
this research, the purpose of this study was to analyze the
LED

light exposure on alpha and beta brain waves as measured
by EEG
driving simulator.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
INSTRUMENTS AND MATERIAL

The instruments used in this experiment were
Electroencephalograph (EEG) EMOTIV EPOC 3.0.0.41, a
laptop, a simulator set consists of Logitech G27 steering
wheel, and a 40 inch LED TV a steering chair. Two light
stimuli were applied: a pair of Phillips GO LITE
(460 nm monochromatic blue light) and a pair of white
LED (450-540 nm polychromatic light) with layers of
blue transparent coating the lamp were used as a placebo.
The material used in this research was saline water as a
conductor for the EEG electrodes. The spectral distributions
of both LED arrays are assessed by the Engineering
Physic Department, Faculty of Industrial Technology,
Insitut Teknologi Bandung.
TIME, PLACE, AND EXPERIMENT CONDITIONS

This experiment was conducted at Medical
Instrumentation Laboratory, Engineering Physics
Department Institute Teknologi Bandung. The Installation
of driving simulator on Figure 1 consists of LCD screen
located 1.3 m from steering chair that equipped with
steering wheel, and a set of clutch, brake and accelerator.
In front of the steering chair, there were a set of blue light
that positioned like on a car dashboard. These blue lights
were connected with a system that allows the researcher
to activate the light stimuli from distance. The software
used in this experiment bas City Car Simulator 2.0 in the
Free Driving night mode. The road used in the experiment
also prepared as monotonous straight highway with no
of the car simulator. To create the closest condition with
real night time driving experience, the room has lighting
and outside sound source minimalized.

2093

FIGURE 1. Simulator installation consists of driving simulator, LCD

screen and a set blue lights on the dashboard

FIGURE 2. Interface

of City Car Simulator with night mode

2094
DATA COLLECTING

There are three sessions of the experiment: conditioning,
habituation, and recording session. In conditioning
session, the tools and materials needed were prepared
and re-checked prior to the experiment. All 15 male
participants were provided written informed consent
prior engagement to the study. In the habituation session,
the participants were allowed to make themselves
familiar with the car simulator game set for 5-15 min. Next,
the participant has EEG assembled into their head. In the
recording session, the participant drove in the simulator
for 30 min non-stop in a highway with speed range of 40-

60 km/h. This speed range intended to minimize accident
risk in the game during the recording session. Duration of
the recording session is 30 min, which consists of 2 min
of baseline brainwave recording and 28 min of recording
with lighting treatment. There are three group of light
treatment in this experiment: control, with no additional
light, polychromatic LED light as placebo blue light with
wavelength of 450-540 nm, and monocrhomatic LED blue
light with wavelength of 460 nm. There are two areas of
the brain that recorded using the EEG: the left and right
side of the frontal lobe, namely F3 and F4. Table 1 explains
the conditon of each treatment groups for a total of 30 min
and Table 2 describes the research design.

TABLE 1. Scheme of EEG recordings

Duration

Phase I 15 minutes

Phase II 120 seconds

Phase III 28 minutes

Agenda

Conditioning and
habituation on simulator

Baseline

Driving in Highway without
distraction and obstacle

Light

None

None

Darik/Blue Light (random)
Group 1: Dark

Treatment

-

-

Group 2: LED Blue Light Placebo
Group 3: LED Blue Light

No EEG recordings

Note

EEG recordings

TABLE 2. Research

Day 1

Day 2

Design

√

√

Dark Control
Light intensity room: 0,22 lx

EEG recordings

design
Situation

2095

√

√

√

√

Blue Light Placebo (Polychromatic)
Light wave length: 450-540 nm
Light intensity: 10,26 lx
Light intensity room: 0,96 lx

Blue Light LED (Monochromatic)
Light wave length: 460 nm
Light intensity: 6.5 lx
Light intensity room: 6.38 lx

DATA PROCESSING

After the EEG recording session, the EEG data Wat
extracted from .edf format to .csv format and then from the
brain wave recording, the total wave data to be analyzed
can be determined in number. Based on the 128 Hz
sampling rate (128 data per s), three treatment groups, two
points of the brain area observed, so that there are only
28 points from the total observation of 30 min. Statistical
analysis were done using the General Lineal Model with
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The measurement result of spectral distribution both
LED light is seen in Figure 3. The Polychromatic LED
light has wavelength 450-540 nm and Monochromatic
LED light has wavelength 460 nm. Based on the brain
wave recordings, the total wave data to be analyzed was

determined in number. Based on the 128 Hz sampling rate
(128 data per s), three treatment groups, two points of the
brain area observed, the duration of data retrieval was
1800 s and the number of data from 15 participants with
each repetition twice, it can be determined that the total
brain wave data what must be analyzed is 128 × 3 × 2 ×
1800 × 30 = 41,472,000. This data was then transformed
from the time domain into the frequency domain using
the Fast Fourier Transfer algorithm so that it could be
presented in the form of a Power Spectral Density (PSD)
graph represents the average value of a wave from a certain
time span. In Figures 4 and 5, it can be seen that the PSD
chart represents the value of power every minute of the
observation session and does not include the baseline value
so that there are only 28 points from the total observation
of 30 min.

FIGURE 3. The spectral distribution of (a) Polychromatic LED light (wavelength
450-540 nm) and (b) monochromatic LED light (wavelength 460 nm)

2096
PROFILE OF ALPHA AND BETA BRAIN WAVES IN ALL
CONDITION

The power spectral graph contains data on the alpha brain
waves in each treatment group, left (F3) and right (F4)

than the alpha waves, particularly near the end of session.
During exposure of monochromatic blue light, both

condition (Figures 4 & 5). In general, these are several
phenomenon regarding the alpha and beta brain waves in
all treatments as follows. In dark condition, alpha waves
power tend to stabilize in dark condition, though alpha

night. Moreover, beta brain waves were higher and more

on the second day, while beta waves increased higher
with alpha brain waves. Under the placebo blue light
(Polychromatic light) irradiation, both alpha and beta brain

higher function of cognitive activity. Above all, the right
than the left hemisphere in all treatments indicating the
right hemisphere was more dominant in cognitive function
during driving at night.

FIGURE 4. Power Spectral Density of alpha Brainwave on each treatment

(a) dark, (b) blue light placebo (polychromatic light), and (c) blue light
(monochromatic light), from the left (F3) and right (F4) of the frontal lobe

2097

FIGURE 5. Power Spectral Density of alpha brainwave on each treatment

(a) dark, (b) blue light placebo (polychromatic light), and (c) blue light
(monochromatic light), from the left (F3) and right (F4) of the frontal lobe

The occurrence of alpha brain waves that stay stabilize
in darkness suggests relaxed state, while beta brain waves
were still active in giving attention to drive. Thus,
dynamic oscillation of beta brain waves in dark as well
as in lighting condition showed the synchronization did
not occur at all time, indicating that attention and focus
arose intermittently and alternately with alpha waves
(Lim et al. 2019). To maintain its function, brain must
be dynamically active over all its region (Striade et al.
1990). The possibility of higher beta brain waves signify
that the cognitive process needed at the time of recording

occurred more in the right brain. This is called a topdown information processing mechanism where internal
information processing takes place using working memory
to achieve certain goals (Benedek et al. 2011). Moreover,
similar trend to previous research was achieved from the
higher power spectral density in beta waves indicate that
blue light exposure can increase brain wave response
thus increasing voluntary motoric as well as cognitive
response (Purawijaya et al. 2015). Monochromatic blue
light results in an increase in cognitive function that is
better than the placebo lamp which was polychromatic
and this result proves that ipRGC functions with a very

2098

blue light to drivers, the blue light spectrum can be a
major concern (Taillard et al. 2012). It is also associated
with monochromatic and polychromatic light that have a
melanopsin photosensitivity function (Revell et al. 2010).
Since the right hemisphere of the frontal lobe showed
higher power density than the left hemisphere, either in
inverse of cognitive activity (Bazanova & Vernon 2014).
When alpha waves are suppressed during driving, this
condition may associate with attention and cognitive
engagement (Mazaheri et al. 2014). Thus, monochromatic
blue light can be applied in a car to help driver to improve
alertness instead of drowsiness while driving at night as
already proved in a study using the blue enriched white
light in several workplaces (Viola et al. 2008).
CONCLUSION
Based on the research that has been done, it can be
concluded that blue light exposure in 30-min duration
Of the two types of treatment, namely monochromatic
light (460 nm) and polycromatic placebo (450-549 nm),
the monochromatic blue light causes a greater increase in
the beta wave. Further research is needed to use a more
accurate integration system, the number of narrators
multiplied, more frequent data retrieval with a longer
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This research was supported by P 3 MI (Program
Penelitian, Pengabdian kepada Masyarakat dan Inovasi)
ITB research funding year program 2018-2019.
REFERENCES

Bazanova, O.M. & Vernon, D. 2014. Interpreting EEG alpha
activity. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 44: 94110.
Benedek, M., Bergner, S., Konen, T., Fink, A. & Neubauer,
A.C. 2011. EEG alpha synchronization is related to topdown processing in convergent and divergent thinking.
Neuropsychologia 49(12): 3505-3511.
on human circadian rhythms, sleep and mood. Somnologie
23(3): 147-156.
Boyce, P.R., Veitch, J.A., Newsham, G.R., Jones, C.C.,
Heerwagen, J., Myer, M. & Hunter, C.M. 2006. Lighting
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, United States
Department of Energy.
Cao, D. & Barrionuevo, P.A. 2015. The importance of intrinsically
photosensitive retinal ganglion cells and implication for
lighting design. Journal of Solid State Lighting 2: 10-17.
Fitri, L.L., Chusnia, C. & Suprijanto. 2018. Blue light exposure

driver in car simulation at night. In IOP Conference Series:
Earth and Environmental Science 197-012051. pp. 1-6.
humans. Journal of Physiological Anthropology 21(2):
87-91.
Lim, S., Yeo, M. & Yoon, G. 2019. Comparison between
concentration and immersion based on EEG analysis. Sensors
19: 1-13.
Lin, C.T., Wu, R.C., Liang, S.F., Chao, W.H., Chen, Y.J. &
Jung, T.P. 2005. EEG - Based drowsiness estimation for
safety driving using independent component analysis. IEEE
Transaction on Circuits and Systems-I: Regular Papers
52(12): 2726-2738.
Mazaheri, A., van Schouwenburg, M.R., Dimitrijevic, A., Denys,
in oscillatory alpha activity serve to facilitate processing
in the visual and auditory modalities. NeuroImage 87:
356-362.
Purawijaya, D.A., Fitri, L.L. & Suprijanto. 2015. Evaluation
of blue light exposure to β brainwave on simulated
night driving. In AIP Conference Proceedings for the 5th
International Conference on Mathematics and Natural
Sciences. pp. 1-3.
Revell, V.L., Barret, D.C.G., Schlangen, L.J.M. & Skene, D.J.
2010. Predicting human nocturnal nonvisual responses to
monochromatic and polychromatic light with a melanopsin
photosensitivity function. Chronobiology International
27(9-10): 1762-1777.
Rumbayan, M., Abudureyimu, A. & Nagasaka, K. 2012. Mapping
of solar energy potential in Indonesia and geographical
information system. Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Reviews 16(2012): 1437-1449.
Sakai, H., Takahara, M., Honjo, N.F., Doi, S.I., Sadato, N. &
Uchiyama, Y. 2012. Regional frontal gray matter volume
associated with executive function capacity as a risk factor
for vehicle crashes in normal aging adults. PLoS ONE 7(9):
e45920.
Santamaria, J. & Chiappa, K.H. 1987. The EEG of drowsiness
in normal adults. Journal of Clinical Neurophysiology 4(4):
327-382.
Subha, D.P., Joseph, P.K., Acharya, R. & Lim, C.M. 2010. EEG
signal analysis: A survey. Journal of Medical Systems 34:
195-212.
Taillard, J., Capelli, A., Sagaspe, P., Anund, A., Akerstedt, T.
& Phillip, P. 2012. In car nocturnal blue light exposure
improves motorway driving: A randomized controlled trial.
PLoS ONE 7(10): e46750.
Takahashi, N., Shimizu, S., Hirata, Y., Nara, H., Inoue, H., Hirai,
N., Kikuchi, S., Watanabe, E. & Kato, S. 2011. Basic study
of analysis of human brain activities during car driving. In
Human Interface, Part I, HCII, LCBS 6771. pp. 627-635.
on the circadian system and eye physiology. Molecular
Vision 22: 61-72.
Treutlein, P. 2016. Photon qubit is made of two colors. Physics
9: 135.
Viola, A.U., James, L.M., Schlanger, L.J. & Dijk, D.J. 2008.
Blue-enriched white light in the workplace improves
self-reported alertness, performance and sleep quality.

2099

Scandinavian Journal of Work, Environment & Health 34(4):
297-306.
Zain-Ahmed, A., Sopian, K., Abidin, Z.Z. & Othman, M.H.Y.
2002. The availability of daylight form tropical skies - A case
study of Malaysia. Renewable Energy 25(1): 21-30.
Lulu Lusianti Fitri* & Kinanti Prestiasani
School of Life Science and Technology
Institut Teknologi Bandung
Jalan Ganesha 10, Bandung 40312
Indonesia

Suprijanto
Engineering Physics Department
Faculty of Industrial Technology
Institut Teknologi Bandung
Jalan Ganesha 10, Bandung 40132
Indonesia

Received: 26 January 2020
Accepted: 1 April 2020

