NEURAL CORRELATES OF BEHAVIORAL REACTIONS TO GSM
OPERATOR’S WEB SITES FOR SMART PHONES
Yener GİRİŞKEN1
Caner GİRAY2
Eda OCAK3

Abstract
User experience is of critical importance for companies because of the significance of brand
perception, image formation. Positive perceptions make consumers further inclined to
approach the brand and vice-versa. Therefore, an ability to measure user experience will
enable companies to enhance the user-friendliness of websites, shops, products and
packaging. In this exploratory study, the user experiences of 20 participants (10 men and
10 women) whilst browsing websites of GSM operators selling smartphones are analyzed
using several neuromarketing methods including electroencephalography (EEG) and eyetracking devices. By synchronizing EEG and eye tracking, it is possible to analyze where
on websites users tend to be drawn to. More importantly, it is possible to measure how
participants feel instantaneously whilst browsing. The findings of this neuromarketing
study are qualitative and therefore cannot be generalized. However, the insights reached
are important for GSM operators who have the potential to enhance their users’
experiences by implementing small changes to their websites, informed by some of this
paper’s findings.
Keywords: Neuromarketing, EEG, Eye-Tracking, User Experience, and Consumer
Behavior

Dr., İstanbul Bilgi Üniversitesi yener.girisken@thinkneuro.net
Yrd. Doç. Dr., Gedik Üniversitesi canergiray1@gmail.com
3 Thinkneuro, eda.ocak@thinkneuro.net
1
2

2

Pazarlama ve Pazarlama Araştırmaları Dergisi, Sayı: 14, Temmuz 2014, ss. 1-20

1. Introduction
It is a difficult conquest within any discipline to predict the decisions of
individuals. Although decades of experimentation and research in a variety of
fields of social and physical sciences offer many important findings, we are still a
considerable distance away from achieving such an aim with any reliable
certainty.
‘Marketing science’ aims to understand, interpret and predict the behavior and
attitudes of one of the focal social agents within and subject to various social
processes - the consumer. For a considerable time, marketing science has
attempted to predict consumer behavior using data obtained from consumers’
own statements. Very recently, with the help of data provided by neuroscience,
it has been revealed that consumers predominantly make purchasing decisions
both irrationally and unconsciously (Ariely and Berns, 2010).
Such findings imply significant things for business marketing, communication,
brand management and especially advertising strategies. The rationality axioms
assumed within so much of the social sciences have been one basis on which
marketing managers have approached gaining an insight into consumer tastes
and preferences, lying at the heart of many stated preferences techniques.
However, from what the famous advertiser and communications professional,
David Ogilvy, one stated – “people cannot think what they feel, say what they
think and do what they say” – it seems necessary to seek out an alternative means
for understanding the motives and impulsions leading to purchasing decisions,
as well as decisions made within other aspects of their lives. Thus, in developing
marketing strategies, rather than taking consumers’ statements as wholly
conclusive, it can be important to measure emotional and unconscious reactions
that are believed to inform of consumers’ perceptions well (Giray and Girisken,
2013).

2. Literature Review
2.1. What is Neuromarketing?
Neuroeconomy was the pioneering interdisciplinary area where neuroscience
and economics first intersected (Kenning and Plassman, 2005). Subsequently,
neuroscience findings began to find their way into marketing approaches.
Neuromarketing is where neuroscience and marketing meet and the techniques
used in neuroscience are applied with the aim to gain a greater understanding of

Neural Correlates of Behavioral Reactions to GSM Operator’s Web Sites for Smart Phones

3

consumer behavior (Lee et al., 2007). Neuromarketing is of especial interest to
researchers interested in consumers’ preferences towards some marketing stimuli
because it does not rely on the same rationality assumptions as many stated
preference methods, instead focusing on the voluntary and involuntary reactions
and brain activities of agents (Babiloni, 2012). According to Tuzel (2010),
neuromarketing identifies what affects the conscious and unconscious mind of
the consumer with these findings then being influential in formulating effective
marketing strategies and methods using these preference assumptions.
This synthesis of two different disciplines (neuroscience and marketing) aims to
understand consumers’ preferences using medical technology to measure brain
pulses in response to a stimulus or product. Measuring the changes in activity
that emerge in different sections of the brain can potentially indicate not only how
and why consumers choose a product, but also which part of the brain is active
during this choice (Ural, 2008).
2.2. The Reasons for the Emergence of Neuromarketing
Marketing is the process of developing sales and implementing marketing
communication and business administration strategies in order for businesses to
determine which goods and/or services will attract consumers (Kotler and Keller,
2009). For many years prior to the adoption of these scientific techniques,
businesses have been investing heavily to obtain accurate information about
consumer tastes. Despite this however, often prior methods fell short of getting
the results sought after because such questionnaire-based studies were merely
able to reach information at the conscious level. However, findings within
economics, psychology, neuroscience and marketing research in recent years
show that a more effective way to attain real consumer insights is through gaining
unconsciously revealed information (Damasio, 1994; Zaltman, 2003). Research on
the brain and mind obtained within neuroscience have proven too valuable for
marketing science not to utilize.
Many of the studies conducted in this field in the last decade have led to the
proliferation of new theories leading to a paradigm shift within marketing. The
idea that “people make decisions rationally” has been replaced with “many
decisions are made unconsciously”. People most often determine their behavior;
though make decisions under the influence of unconscious processes. For
instance, the brain records and interprets 85% of environmental messages
unconsciously (Krakoff, 2010).

4

Pazarlama ve Pazarlama Araştırmaları Dergisi, Sayı: 14, Temmuz 2014, ss. 1-20

The significant question within much research is ‘why the customers choose a
product?’ Understanding how customers’ perception and choices are formed is
one of the major issues that companies are trying to resolve in the field of
marketing. Various experiments have been conducted in order to determine its
decisive factors and therefore to study the role of the human brain in decisions
and perceptions.
Four distinctly pioneering neuromarketing studies are especially significant for
an understanding of the reasons for the increasing interest in this field.
The first, conducted by Bar and Neta (2008), put forward a synthesis of empirical
research that enabled the prediction of future decisions even with minimal
information obtained from consumers’ brains. This study offered significant
contributions to marketing literature in terms of its product and advertisement
design potential.
Secondly, Gakhal and Senior’s 2008 study is a good example of how neuroscience
methods do not merely consist of fMRI and EEG scans that measure brain
reactions. These researchers tried to find the impacts of using celebrities and
attractive models in consumer behavior and consumer perceptions using
neuromarketing methods such as Galvanic Skin Reaction (GSR) and Skin
Conductivity Reaction (SCR) that measure electro dermal body reactions.
In the next study, Stoll, Baecke and Kenning (2008) considered very basic
neuroscientific findings and the latest developments in an appropriate context for
marketing, transferring these developments into the marketing literature. The
study emphasized that human brains evaluate positive and negative stimuli
differently. Similarly, consumers’ brain activity evaluates attractive and
unattractive packaging differently, showing that while attractive packaging
activates consumer attention and a reward system within the brain, unattractive
packaging activates other areas of the brain associated with displeasure.
Finally, Plassmann and Kenning's 2008 study that used the fMRI measurement
method has attracted great attention in recent years. This article indicated that
increased activity in the part of the brain that determines brand preference was
significantly triggered by knowledge about the brand and perception of
uncertainty.
It is well known that the brain perceives everything that occurs in its vicinity,
whether consciously or subconsciously. A variety of studies examine the external

Neural Correlates of Behavioral Reactions to GSM Operator’s Web Sites for Smart Phones

5

factors that guide perception and the messages that affect the unconscious mind.
Many experiments have been conducted to shed light on these processes. For
example, Jiang et al. (2006) conducted an experiment based on people’s
recognition of some of the messages they continuously receive from the
environment consciously, while not recognizing others, in order to identify and
analyze the messages able to directly reach the unconscious mind. The study
measured the level of distraction in heterosexual and homosexual men and
women by showing them highly stimulating erotic photographs. The study
found that the brain is influenced by environmental factors are not typically
thought to be perceived by the sensory organs.
2.2. Measurement Methods
Neurological studies (regarding the study of the nervous system) are based on
observations of the reactions of various nerves in the human body to internal and
external stimuli. For instance, when a message regarding a product or brand, or
a visual stimulus completely unrelated to that product, is being watched, music
is heard, or an odour is smelt unconsciously, the brain is known to perceive,
interpret and react to these external factors even when we are not aware of them
on a conscious level. These reactions play an immense role in understanding the
determination of choices of individuals. Sometimes memories of the past or plans
for the future can be evoked subconsciously in order to encourage a decision
regarding a product.
These influences on the human brain and the nervous system are determined
using a variety of methods that can be divided into two categories: The first
category is known as ‘biometrical measurement’ that tries to reveal the true
nature of perception by measuring physiological reactions using methods such
as GSR (Galvanic Skin Reaction), PET (Positron Emission Tomography) and
Facial Coding; The second category includes EEG (Electroencephalogram) and
fMRI (Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging). These methods measure the
effect of marketing stimuli by producing images of changes in brain activity.
Most significantly, these methods measure the reactions of the unconscious mind
to subliminal messages using various biometric and brain imaging techniques.
Thus, factors that affect decisions can be analyzed to inform how effective
marketing strategies could be developed accordingly.

6

Pazarlama ve Pazarlama Araştırmaları Dergisi, Sayı: 14, Temmuz 2014, ss. 1-20

2.2.1. The Neuromarketing Measurement Methods Used in This Study
2.2.1.1 Eye-Tracking
Eye tracking is used to identify what attracts the attention of consumers browsing
internet pages, supermarket aisles or examining product packaging. Following
eye movements makes it possible to accurately determine what the viewer is
focusing on within a given visual. From these findings, one can attempt to
optimize the presentation of a product in a given setting by focusing on the nature
of consumer attention. For instance, in studies conducted for a specific product
of a specific brand, the location of the brand’s logo was updated after testing to
find that sales increased as a result of moving the logo to a more central location
from its former location where it was difficult to focus on (Hur and Kumbasar
2001). Eye tracking can also be used to measure the degree to which consumers
focus on any other stimuli related to the brand (Laubrock et al., 2007).
2.2.1.2 EEG / Electroencephalography
The brain is like an electrical closed circuit. The electroencephalograph, using
electrodes placed on the scalp or directly on the cerebral cortex of the brain, can
measure its electrical activity. During measurement, no external electric current
is administered to the subjects with the only electrical activity involved coming
from the test subject’s brain. Due to the nature of such impulses, electromagnetic
waves spread simultaneously leading to a very accurate degree of measurement.
Additionally, using more electrodes will lead to more accuracy in results because
of the increased number of signals and electrical fields involved.
In comparison to the findings obtained with fMRI and EEG methods in recent
years, the results of biometric measurements are less reliable. This is because the
duration of participant’s actions observed can be longer than the duration of their
reactions. Moreover, bodily reactions and their timing can change from person to
person so that, if biological reactions following brain impulses are studied and
generalized, results may be inaccurate. Consequently, biometric measurements
are no longer considered useful for marketing (Bernal, 2012).

3. The Aim and Importance of the Study
The aim of this exploratory study, which analyzes a sample of consumers’
reactions to a Turkish GSM operator’s website using neuro methods, is to uncover

Neural Correlates of Behavioral Reactions to GSM Operator’s Web Sites for Smart Phones

7

insights into user behavior and their underlying emotional templates. Four main
insights influencing consumers were found from the qualitative research.

4. Methodology
The study used a sample of 20 participants: 10 female; 28% between the ages of
16-25, 43% between 26-35, and 29% between 36-45; 57% were chosen from the C1
and the remaining 43% from the C2 SES group in accordance with their target
market. The sample consisted of people planning to buy a smartphone within
three months after the date of the study. Participants were asked to examine the
different smartphone models on GSM operators’ websites according to their own
preferences and inclinations.
During the study, the 20 GSM users browsed the GSM operators’ websites with
a given scenario while wearing EEG and Eye Tracking devices that recorded their
brain waves and eye movements. Afterwards, in-depth interviews were held
with each participant based upon their neuro-score: experiment moderators
considered their reactions and brain activity whilst on each page or action and
subsequently interviewed them on the basis of the emotional data gathered. The
purpose of these interviews was to reveal the underlying reasons for these notwholly-conscious reactions in conjunction with knowledge derived from the
brainwaves of the participants.
While the subjects viewed different smartphone models on GSM operators’ web
sites, their brain waves were measured using EEGs and their emotional reactions
were recorded. The locational placement of the electrodes of the 14-channel
devices used were designed according to the international 10-20 system of the
EEG device use: AF3, F7, F3, FC5, T7, P7, O1, O2, P8, T8, FC6, F4, F8, AF4
(Khushaba et al., 2013). This high-resolution device (the ‘Emotiv EPOC’) collects
data at a rate of 128 samples per second with the collected data then transferred
to a computer wirelessly at a frequency of 2048 Hz (Anderson et al., 2011). The
data revealed the emotional reactions of the study’s test subjects using algorithms
(Sourina and Liu, 2011) and each subject’s eye-tracking and brainwave data were
closely monitored in real-time throughout. Among the behavioral and emotional
templates and findings from subjects’ reactions, emotional valence, cognitive load
and attention data were taken into special consideration.
The emotional valence curve shows the emotional connection between a
marketing stimulus and the subject exposed to it. As any emotional connections
increase, the graph records a rise while it is reduced where a connection drops

8

Pazarlama ve Pazarlama Araştırmaları Dergisi, Sayı: 14, Temmuz 2014, ss. 1-20

with an emotional disconnection observed as a sudden drop. Although this study
is based mainly on emotional bond data, attention and frustration data was also
used occasionally for evaluation.
A rise of the cognitive load curve reflects the scenario where either the participant
could not understand the stimuli or the stimuli disturbed the subject. In such
situations, the stress of not being able to make sense of a situation reaches high
levels. Hence, positive perceptions of a product and the brand can be at risk when
this curve rises.
The attention curve reflects any unconscious focusing tendencies towards
marketing stimuli. Although increased attention shows the strength of the focus,
it does not explain the emotions causing it: Increased attention may not indicate
a positive perception necessarily. Findings from experimenting using television
advertisements and similar media reveal common fluctuations of the attention
curve due to the effects of the music used, the flow of the dialogue, and with the
any modulations within storylines. Such findings facilitate the quantification of
several prominent elements within common marketing stimuli. Observing
fluctuations of the attention curve help to identify the elements that attract or
repel people to these marketing stimuli.

5. Findings
Four important factors that were identified with this study:
1) Identifying with Advertising: The websites used in this study have videos
showing the functioning of smartphones. The video’s model holds the phones in
their left hand while offering information about the device. All participants who
saw the smart phone being held in the model’s left hand showed a drop in their
emotional bond curve. The neuroscore-based in-depth interviews later failed to
reveal any conscious justifications for the drop among respondents. Hence,
although participants indicated that they were not aware of the phone being held
in the agent’s left hand, their brains had recorded it and reacted negatively to it.
Such knowledge could help such websites to easily correct this component
yielding the negative effect.
That the majority of participants were right-handed suggests that participants
“identify with the advertisement” and emotionally connect more easily with
websites and other marketing stimuli, when they can see themselves reflected in
them.

Neural Correlates of Behavioral Reactions to GSM Operator’s Web Sites for Smart Phones

9

2) Inconsistent Promises and Design: It was found that failing to find an
advertised price on a checkout webpage lead to either a drop in participants’
emotional bond to the website or to them leaving the page. For instance, a
participant who saw prices starting from 29 TL for a Samsung Galaxy S4 had a
sharp rise in emotional bond at first yet when the same participant failed to find
the same price on the following checkout page, the participant’s emotional bond
and attention curves dropped, and frustration rose.

The beginning of increase in
the emotional valence curve

The beginnining of the drop in
the emotional valence curve

10

Pazarlama ve Pazarlama Araştırmaları Dergisi, Sayı: 14, Temmuz 2014, ss. 1-20

These observations provide scientific evidence of participants’ emotional
detachment from the site, emotional distress and loss of interest in the website,
resulting in the leaving of it, as a result of not finding the price. Instead of
searching for the same stated offer, browsers preferred to leave the page and look
elsewhere.
Not only are potential customers perhaps lost to competitor websites, but
participants felt like a promise of the initial attractive offer was not honoured,
leaving perhaps leaving a lasting negative impression on the consumer, acting to
reduce their trust in the brand.
Similarly, it was observed that phrases like “prices starting from x Turkish Liras”
and “prices up to y Turkish Liras” created a sense of uncertainty amongst
participants that distanced these potential users from the website. Such
statements induced user pessimism in that they began to feel as though “they
might make a mistake” by committing to the brand, again damaging their
emotional connections with the brand.
3) Effective Technical Specification Positioning: Interestingly, every user who
went to the product specifications page of the websites browsed experienced a
decrease in their emotional connection with the brand.

The beginning of the drop in the
emotional valence curve

Neural Correlates of Behavioral Reactions to GSM Operator’s Web Sites for Smart Phones

11

The beginning of the rise in the
cognitive load curve
The arrangement of the product specifications page should be optimized for a
better user experience. The existing page seen by participants contains a “box of
contents”, followed by “general specifications” where processor and operation
system details are provided, with the “display and size” section containing screen
specifications and phone dimensions following. The research and neuroscorebased in-depth interviews revealed that participants are primarily interested in
camera, Internet and connection specifications. However, this information was
not immediately available to browsers as they had scroll down somewhat to find
it. Having to find this information at the bottom of the page resulted in a drop in
the emotional bond curve of respondents suggesting that a reorganization of the
page moving these items of interest further to the top may lead to an
improvement in user experience.

12

Pazarlama ve Pazarlama Araştırmaları Dergisi, Sayı: 14, Temmuz 2014, ss. 1-20

The beginning of increase in the
attention curve

A drop in emotional valence curve
4) Options That Do Not Cause Uncertainty and Attract Attention: Upon
selecting a smartphone within the main catalogue browsing page of the website,
a pop-up window opens to provide participants with a brief summary of

Neural Correlates of Behavioral Reactions to GSM Operator’s Web Sites for Smart Phones

13

information about the phone selected, as well as two buttons. The first button is
purple, which contrasts with the page’s background, containing the word
“Choose”. The second “Details” button is a light shade of grey, not contrasting
greatly with the pop-up page’s background. Participant observations revealed
that the contrasting “Choose” button attracted users’ attention though users
tended not to understand what exactly they choose when hitting the “Choose”
button. This was revealed during the neuroscore-based in-depth interviews.
Clicking the “choose” button would direct participants to the payment options
page though no participants actually selected it, suggesting that it was not clear
if they were choosing the phone, putting it in a shopping basket to compare with
others, or beginning the process of purchasing the phone. Additionally, it was
found that many participants subsequently looked for details about the same
phone model on other pages after closing this pop-up page.
Though the “Choose” button attracted attention due to its bold, contrasting color,
it did not achieve its desired effect because of the uncertainty it created.
Conversely, the “Details” button designed for users to gain more knowledge
about a model was difficult to locate because of its color. The search and
comprehension processes involved caused sudden drops in the emotional bond
curves of participants and led to them quickly leaving the page. That these
participants looked for the same phones elsewhere meant that the website’s
arrangements sub-optimal for user experience and often awkward to browse.
Hence, that the percentage of users who continue to use the website after this
pop-up page is very low, this page can be thought of as the website’s “dead-end”
page suggesting it could be removed to improve user experience.

14

Pazarlama ve Pazarlama Araştırmaları Dergisi, Sayı: 14, Temmuz 2014, ss. 1-20

The beginning of the drop in
emotional valence curve.
Emotional Bonds Increase Close to Purchase
Brand perception is key in both appealing to consumers and attracting their
attention, and establishing an emotional bond with the brand. The smartphone
brands having strongest bonds with individuals influence their behavior during
their experiences on GSM operators’ websites.

Neural Correlates of Behavioral Reactions to GSM Operator’s Web Sites for Smart Phones

15

The iPhone is one of the strongest brands in the market. The left-hand image
shows the iPhone’s heatmap of the webpage while the right-hand shows that of
the Samsung Galaxy S4. Red areas indicate higher focus while green indicates
lower. From contrasting these images, it could be suggested that the users tended
to focus more on the iPhone that the Samsung Galaxy S4. By analyzing the
heatmap results of each smart phone observed, GSM operators can use their
observations of preferences form such observations to optimize the position of
smartphones on their main catalogue screens. Additionally, such findings may
assist operators when devising enticing offers that appeal to customers. Utilizing
these and other neuromarketing research tools can enhance the perception and
design of any offers conceived.

16

Pazarlama ve Pazarlama Araştırmaları Dergisi, Sayı: 14, Temmuz 2014, ss. 1-20

6. Conclusion and Suggestions
Today more than ever, it is especially difficult to attract the attention of, and send
the desired messages to, the minds of potential consumers. Consumers are
regularly exposed to high volumes of intensive marketing messages and so it is
in the interest of firms to find effective ways of standing out amongst competition.
Any single perception of a stimulus of a brand is certainly not enough for a
message to be implanted within the mind of a consumer at the conscious or
unconscious level. Hence, it is clear that a common assumption within traditional
marketing is still valid: communication with consumers needs to be regular and
sustained at both the conscious and subconscious levels.
Acknowledging that the quantity of marketing messages diffused to consumers
is important, message content and design (‘quality’) is also of great importance
since these are the considerations that will positively impact a company’s target
market and its consumers, and create emotional connections with a brand. The
objective of this study has been to suggest how the right message can be
developed with the right design, using an applied example.
Certain visual stimuli perhaps usually overlooked within wider marketing
communication have been showed to be of previously understated importance.
For instance, the negative effect of the choice of a left-handed model in webcontent, among other factors that should be recognized as highly important in
connecting with consumers, was revealed using the neuromarketing methods
under consideration within this study. Therefore, it is clear that communication
channels, such as corporate websites that today are considered perhaps the most
direct means of access to brand and product information, needs to be carefully
designed accounting for the types of findings neuroscience has to offer.
It was found that consumers faced with marketing stimuli that are physically,
verbally or visually related to themselves in some regard are significantly affected
via an emotional connection with this stimuli and its message. It was found that
such similarities could be perceived on both a conscious and subconscious level.
Additionally, webpages containing product information can be considered
synonymous with physical product packaging in that there is a need for the most
important consumer information to be most readily available in order to
stimulate potential customers. Similarly, descriptions and instructions on
packaging or webpages should be consistent with the product actually offered in
order to maintain a positive image of the brand among consumers.

Neural Correlates of Behavioral Reactions to GSM Operator’s Web Sites for Smart Phones

17

Finally, EEG results reveal that the information offered to webpage users should
not lead to uncertainty or confusion because such emotions are associated with
emotional disengagement and later, brand image degradation. Any perceived
risks to consumers from marketing proposals similarly were found to have been
met with negativity and consequently, disinterest, create a “dead-end” point for
consumers who perhaps would have made a purchase otherwise.
Many of the world’s leading brands have a lot to say about their products.
However, commonly only a few specifications and qualities deemed significant
are mentioned. By looking at the negative outcomes of offers and product
attributes that are not relevant to customers, this research has revealed that it is
more effective for both customers and companies to prioritize and increase the
visibility of the information that is most important. Such neuromarketing
methods are able to unveil which elements of great significance to market
consumers these are.

7. Limitations
This is a qualitative research using EEG and eye tracking together while 20
volunteer participants experience the webpages of the GSM operators. Therefore
the results cannot be generalized. Also, in order to reach deeper insights and
observe more common reactions to a given stimuli, the number of participants
could be increased.
The research findings are based on unconscious reactions of the participants
along with the in-depth results. Even though in-depth interviews were conducted
with guidance of neuroscores, there were occasions that the unconscious and
claim data point two different results. Also, to increase the number of scenarios
can provide better angles to the researches for the future research.

18

Pazarlama ve Pazarlama Araştırmaları Dergisi, Sayı: 14, Temmuz 2014, ss. 1-20

References
Anderson, E. W., Potter, K. C., Matzen, L. E., Shepherd, J. F., Preston, G. A., &
Silva, C. T. (2011). A User Study of Visualization Effectiveness using EEG
and Cognitive Load. Computer Graphics Forum, 30(3), 791–800.
Ariely D., & Berns G. S., (2010). Neuromarketing: The Hope and Hype of
Neuroimaging in Business. Nature Reviews Neuroscience. 11(4), pp. 284292.
Babiloni, F., (2012). Consumer Neuroscience: A New Area of Study for
Biomedical Engineers, Pulse, IEEE , Volume:3, Issue: 3.
Bar, M. and Neta, M., (2008). The Proactive Brain: Using Little Information to
Make Predictive Judgements, Journal of Consumer Behaviour, Volume 7,
Issue: 4-5, Page: 319–330, July-October
Bernal, L., (2012). Gaining A Competitive Advantage Through Neuromarketing,
Colegio de Estudios Superiores de Administracion, Published Graduate
Thesis, p.45.
Crandall, K., (2006). Invisible Commercials and Hidden Persuaders: James M.
Vicary and the Subliminal Advertising Controversy of 1957.
Undergraduate Thesis. Florida: Department of History
Damasio, A. (1994). Descartes’ Error: Emotion Reason and the Human Brain. New
York: Grosset/Putnam
Du Plessis, E., (2011). The Branded Mind. America & England: Kogan Page
Limited.
Gakhal, B. and Senior, C., (2008). Examining the Influence of Fame in the Presence
of Beauty: An Electrodermal, Neuromarketing Study. Journal of Consumer
Behaviour, Volume 7, Issue: 4-5, Page 331–341, July-October.
Giray, C. and Girisken, Y., (2013). “Gozun Bilinc Seviyesinde Duyumsayamadigi
Uyaranlari Beynin Algilamasi Mumkun Mudur? Noropazarlama
Yontemi ile Olcumleme Uzerine Deneysel Bir Tasarim,” 18. Ulusal
Pazarlama Kongresi, Kars, June.
Hur, S. and Kumbasar, S., (2011). Goz hareketlerine dayali arastırma cozumleri
Eye tracking teknolojisi Arastırmada yenilikler konferansi, Istanbul p. 30.
Jiang, Y., Costello, P., Fang, F., Huang, M., & He, S. (2006). A Gender-and Sexual
Orientation-dependent Spatial Attentional Effect of Invisible Images.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 103, 17048–
17052.

Neural Correlates of Behavioral Reactions to GSM Operator’s Web Sites for Smart Phones

19

Kenning, P. and Plassmann, H., (2005). NeuroEconomics: An Overview from an
Economic Perspective. Brain Res. Bull.
Khushaba, R., N., Wise, C., Kodagoda, S., Louviere, J., Kahn, B. and Townsend,
C., (2013). Consumer Neuroscience: Assessing the Brain Response to
Marketing Stimuli Using Electroencephalogram (EEG) and Eye Tracking,
Expert Systems with Applications, Volume 40, Issue 9, p. 3803-3812.
Kotler, P. & Kevin, K., (2009). Marketing Management, 13/E, New Jersey: Prentice
Hall.
Krakoff, P., (2010). 7 Ways to Market to the Subconscious Brain: The Homer
Simpson
Guide
to
Content
Marketing.
[online],
USA,
http://writingontheweb.com/2010/10/21/ways-market-subconsciousbrain-br-homer-simpson-guide-content-marketing/ (29.04.2013).
Lee, N., Broderick, A., J., and Chamberlain, L., (2007).What Is ‘Neuromarketing’?
A Discussion and Agenda for Future Research. Int. J. Psychophysiology.
Laubrock, J., Engbert, R., Rolfs, M., & Kliegl, R. (2007). Microsaccades Are an
Index of Covert Attention: Commentary on Horowitz, Fine, Fencsik,
Yurgenson, and Wolfe. Psychological Science, 18, 364–366.
Morris, J. S., Ohman, A. and Dolan, R. J., (1998), Conscious and Unconscious
Emotional Learning in the Human Amygdala, Nature 393, 467-470.
Plassmann, H., and Kenning, P., (2008), How Choice Ambiguity Modulates
Activity in Brain Areas Representing Brand Preference: Evidence from
Consumer Neuroscience, Journal of Consumer Behaviour, Volume 7,
Issue: 4-5, Page: 360–367, July-October
Pradeep, A.K., (2010). The Buying Brain: Secrets for Selling to the Subconscious
Mind. New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons.
Rogers, S., (1992).“How a Publicity Blitz Created the Myth of Subliminal
Advertising,” Public Relations Quarterly 37 (Winter 1992): 12.
Sourina, O., and Liu, O. (2011). A Fractal-based Algorithm of Emotion
Recognition from EEG using an Arousal-valence model. In Proc.
Biosignals 2011, Rome, p. 209-214.
Stoll, M., Baecke, S., and Kenning, P., (2008), What They See is What They Get?
An fMRI Study on Neural Correlates of Attractive Packages, Journal of
Consumer Behaviour, Volume 7, Issue: 4-5, Page: 342–359, July-October
Tuzel, N., (2010). Tuketicinin zihnini okumak noropazarlama ve reklam. Marmara
İletisim Dergisi. (16), p. 164-165.

20

Pazarlama ve Pazarlama Araştırmaları Dergisi, Sayı: 14, Temmuz 2014, ss. 1-20

Ural, T., (2008). Pazarlamada yeni yaklasım: Noropazarlama uzerinde kurumsal
bir degerlendirme. C.U. Sosyal Bilimler Enstitusu Dergisi. 17(2) p. 421.
Zaltman, G., (2003). How Customers Think: Essential Insights into the Mind of
the Market. Boston: Harvard Business Press.

