We are IntechOpen,
the world’s leading publisher of
Open Access books
Built by scientists, for scientists

5,100

126,000

145M

Open access books available

International authors and editors

Downloads

Our authors are among the

154

TOP 1%

12.2%

Countries delivered to

most cited scientists

Contributors from top 500 universities

Selection of our books indexed in the Book Citation Index
in Web of Science™ Core Collection (BKCI)

Interested in publishing with us?
Contact book.department@intechopen.com
Numbers displayed above are based on latest data collected.
For more information visit www.intechopen.com

Chapter

Wavelets for EEG Analysis
Nikesh Bajaj

Abstract
This chapter introduces the applications of wavelet for Electroencephalogram
(EEG) signal analysis. First, the overview of EEG signal is discussed to the recording
of raw EEG and widely used frequency bands in EEG studies. The chapter then
progresses to discuss the common artefacts that contaminate EEG signal while
recording. With a short overview of wavelet analysis techniques, namely; Continues
Wavelet Transform (CWT), Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT), and Wavelet
Packet Decomposition (WPD), the chapter demonstrates the richness of CWT
over conventional time-frequency analysis technique e.g. Short-Time Fourier
Transform. Lastly, artefact removal algorithms based on Independent Component
Analysis (ICA) and wavelet are discussed and a comparative analysis is demonstrated. The techniques covered in this chapter show that wavelet analysis is wellsuited for EEG signals for describing time-localised event. Due to similar nature,
wavelet analysis is also suitable for other biomedical signals such as Electrocardiogram and Electromyogram.
Keywords: EEG, artefacts, wavelet analysis, CWT, DWT, WPD,
artefact removal algorithms, time-frequency analysis

1. Introduction
Biomedical signals are electrical activities recorded by sensors from a part of the
body, such as the brain, heart, muscles, etc. They can be recorded as images e.g.
functional Magnetic resonance Image (fMRI) from brain or a temporal signal e.g.
Electrocardiogram (ECG), Electroencephalogram (EEG), Electromyogram (EMG),
Galvanic Skin Response (GSR), etc. These signals contain useful information to
analyse and understand the underlying physiological response of the body, thus
they are also referred to as physiological signals. Biomedical signals are extensively
used in healthcare to diagnose deceases and monitor health. With recent advancements and ease of using the devices to record the biomedical signals have open a
window to use it to analyse and understand the day-to-day activities, emotions,
and, experiences [1–3]. While recording the physiological activities through sensors, the signals are usually contaminated by noise and various artefacts [4].
Corrupted signals mislead the analysis and understanding of the underlying physiology [5]. The characteristics of wavelet to identify the time-localised events makes
it suitable for the biomedical signals to clean, process, feature extraction, and
analyse for various applications. Recent studies have shown the promising results of
using wavelet in biomedical signals [6].
In this chapter, first, we introduce one kind of biomedical signal - EEG. We will
explain the conventional features used in EEG studies. We will introduce the artefacts that commonly contaminate EEG signals, which makes it harder to use. The
1

Wavelet Theory

chapter then will move towards a short description of Wavelet analysis techniques,
namely Continues Wavelet Transform (CWT), Discrete Wavelet Transform
(DWT), and Wavelet Packet Decomposition (WPD). We would, then, compare
CWT and STFT for EEG signal. Then, we will discuss artefact removal algorithms,
with more details on Wavelet-based algorithms. The chapter will show the comparative analysis of artefact removal algorithm. The approach and analysis shown in
this chapter for EEG signals can easily be applied to other biological signals.

2. Electroencephogram - EEG
The brain processes any information by means of neurons that use electrical and
chemical signals to communicate by releasing and receiving neurotransmitters. The
neural activity in the human brain is an electrical change. The brain generates
electrical signals throughout the day for various activities. Studying these electrical
signals is vital to understanding the neurophysiological behaviour of the brain [4].
A number of techniques are used to study brain activities. Functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI), Functional Near-Infrared Spectroscopy (firs), and
Electroencephalography (EEG) recordings widely used techniques. The fMRI measures brain activity by scanning the blood flow. The fNIRS measures brain activity
by measuring hemodynamic response in the brain through detecting the temporal
changes in infrared light source. The EEG measures the electrical activity of the
brain by electrodes placed on the scalp. Comparing to the other two, EEG measures
brain activity directly, with high temporal resolution and most accessible and portable for the research. The fMRI has a high spatial resolution but very expensive,
therefore it is mostly limited to medical diagnosis and treatments.
2.1 The EEG measure
The EEG signal is measured by placing multiple electrodes on the scalp that
measure the current flow from neurons. A setup for EEG recording is shown in
Figure 1. Each neuron (brain cell), when activated, it produced an electrical and
magnetic field around the scalp. Since there are 100 billion neurons in the brain,
when an electrode is placed on the scalp, it measures the accumulative activity of
many neurons together. The complex structure of the brain attenuates the electrical
signals, therefore an electrode can record the brain activity, only when a large
number of neurons generate enough potential. The EEG devices amplify the
recorded signal to store and process it [4].

Figure 1.
EEG recording setup: (a) a wireless device Emotiv Epoch mounted on a subject, transmitting EEG signal to a
computer. (b) Electrode positions as 10–20 system, source: https://www.emotiv.com/.

2

Wavelets for EEG Analysis
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.94398

The placement of electrodes has been standardised with the specific anatomical
landmarks with a distance between electrodes as 10% or 20% of total length. This
placement is called the 10–20 system, as shown in Figure 1b. The number of
electrodes used for EEG recording varies, depending on the device. One of the low
spatial resolutions can be of a 14-channel EEG device and high spatial resolution
with 128 or 256 channels. The name of the electrode position is labelled as character
followed by a number to identify the part of the brain. The characters are Fop for
pre-frontal, F for frontal, P for parietal, T for temporal, O for occipital, and C for
central lobe of the brain. A few in between two landmarks are named with two
characters, such as AF, between Fp and F and FC, between F and C [4]. An example
of 14-channel is shown in Figure 1b.
The raw recording of EEG signal in the time-domain is complex to interpret.
Similar to many other signals, frequency domain analysis has been widely used. The
decades of work on EEG studies have identified five major frequency bands for EEG
signals and established the correlation between behaviour and neural activity of a
certain part of the brain. The frequency bands widely used are; Delta (0:1 4 Hz or
0:5 4 Hz), Theta (4 8 Hz), Alpha (8 14 Hz), Beta (14 30 Hz), Gamma
(30 63 Hz). A raw EEG signal from a channel and corresponding signal in different bands are shown in Figure 2. It can be observed that low frequency, Delta
activity, is the dominating wave in raw EEG and high-frequency Gamma is almost
noise like with a little amplitude [4].
Due to multichannel signals, it is usually viewed as topographical brain activity
(heatmap over an image of head) under different frequency bands. An example of
5 seconds EEG recording with a 14-channel device is shown in Figure 3. The first
second of all the channels are used to compute the energy distribution over brain
regions. In Figure 3, the top left shows the raw EEG signal and corresponding brain
activity, which shows a high activity in the frontal lobe of the brain. However,
under different frequency bands, the different part of the brain shows higher
activity.
The frequency bands; Delta, Theta, Alpha, Beta, and Gamma, are also called
brain rhythms. Brain rhythms have been investigated over decades and a few
characteristic behaviour of these brain rhythms have been established [4].

Figure 2.
The signal channel raw EEG signal and corresponding frequency bands: Delta (0:1
alpha (8 14 Hz), Beta (14 30 Hz), gamma (30 63 Hz).

3

4 Hz), theta (4

8 Hz),

Wavelet Theory

Figure 3.
Topographical view of brain activity: Energy distribution of EEG recording over different brain regions under
five frequency bands and raw signal.

• Delta: Delta waves were first introduced by Walter in 1936, it ranges from 0.1
(or 0.5) to 4 Hz in frequency. Delta waves are usually observed in deep sleep.
Since delta wave is the low-frequency wave, it is easily confused by the
movement artefact, due to similar nature. Delta waves have also been linked to
continuous attention tasks.
• Theta: Theta waves were introduced by Dovey and Wolter, ranges from 4 to
8 Hz in frequency. Theta waves are linked to drowsiness and deep meditation
state.
• Alpha: Alpha waves, perhaps are the most widely investigated waves in EEG
studies. Alpha waves were introduced by Berger in 1929. They lie in a range
from 8 to 14 Hz. Alpha waves usually appear on the occipital lobe of the brain.
Alpha waves are the most common indication of a relaxing state of mind and
are also linked to closing eyes. Any sign of anxiety or attention reduces the
alpha waves.
• Beta: Beta waves lie in the range of 14–30 Hz of frequency. Beta waves have
been associated with active thinking, anxious, high alert, and focus of the
brain.
• Gamma: Gamma waves are the higher frequency waves, ranges from 30 to
onwards. Gamma wave is considered to play a complex role in brain
functionality, such as combining information from two different sensory
inputs. It is also used to confirm certain brain diseases.
2.2 Artefacts in EEG
While recording, EEG signals are frequently contaminated with various artefacts. The most common types of artefacts are motion, muscular, ocular, and cardiac artefacts [4], which are shown in Figure 4. The motion artefacts are caused by
4

Wavelets for EEG Analysis
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.94398

Figure 4.
Common type of artefacts in EEG. Corresponding artefacts are circled in the figure.

the physical movement of the person’s body. As shown in Figure 4a, motion
artefacts produce a sudden high valued spike in all the channels of EEG recording.
The muscular artefacts, shown in Figure 4b are caused by any muscular contraction
such as grinding the teeth. It produces high-frequency bursts in EEG recording as
circled in the Figure 4b. The cardiac artefacts, shown in Figure 4c, are caused by
the electrical activities of the heart. They appear as a weak form of QRS wave of
heart and most likely to be appeared in the channels near to ears (temporal lobe),
though it can be sometimes present in channels from the frontal lobe [7]. The ocular
artefacts are slow oscillating waves appear on the frontal lobe, caused by the eye
movements or closed eyes, as circled in the Figure 4d. The higher magnitude of the
artefacts corrupts the EEG recording and leads to misinterpretations of the results
and analysis [5]. Even though there are many algorithms to remove the artefacts,
but there is always a possibility of losing the cerebral information while removing
the artefacts.

3. Wavelet analysis
Most of the real-life signals are non-stationary in behaviour, which means their
properties change over time. To localise the events of interest, time-frequency
analysis is widely used. The conventional way of time-frequency analysis is the
Short-Time Fourier Transform (STFT), where Fourier transform of the signal is
taken over short-windows, resulting spectrogram plot. STFT has limitations on
resolutions, due to Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle, e.g. improvement in time
resolution results in poorer frequency resolution and vice-versa. The alternative to
STFT is wavelet transform, which exploits the property of low-frequency signals
5

Wavelet Theory

Figure 5.
4-level decomposition tree for (a) discrete wavelet transform (DWT), (b) wavelet packet decomposition
(WPD).

being widespread over time and high-frequency bursts occurring on short intervals.
Wavelet transform uses the variable size of windows with a wavelet function.
Wavelet analysis is usually applied in two ways, Continuous Wavelet Transform
(CWT) and Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT). CWT uses a wavelet function
ψ ðtÞ and produces a scalogram, similar to a spectrogram for time-frequency analysis. However, DWT decomposes a signal into two (1) average or lowpass signal,
using scaling function and (2) difference or highpass signal using wavelet function.
The conventional DWT recursively decomposes lowpass signal with the same scaling and wavelet functions to the desired level of decomposition. A decomposition
tree for DWT is shown in Figure 5a. For some applications, it is useful to decompose highpass signal at each level too, this is called Wavelet Packet Decomposition
(WPD). A tree for WPD is shown in Figure 5b.
As shown in Figure 5, block LP is a lowpass filter hðnÞ and block HP is a highpass
filter g ðnÞ, both followed by downsampler (↓2). The coefficients of lowpass filter
are corresponds to scalling function ϕðnÞ and coefficients of highpass filter are
corresponds to wavelet funciton ψ ðnÞ. A N-level DWT decomposes a signal xðnÞ
N
N 1
1
into set of signals: [X N
L , X H , X H , … , X H ], each with different dimensions. HowN
ever, a N-level WPD decomposes a signal xðnÞ into set of packets: [X 1N , X 2N , … , X 2N ],
each with same dimensions.

4. Time-frequency analysis of EEG using CWT
As discussed, a conventional way to time-frequency analysis is STFT, however,
using CWT with different wavelet functions can enrich the analysis with more
details. In this section, we will show, how a continuous wavelet function (ψ ðtÞ), can
be applied to a discrete EEG signal xðnÞ, and compare the spectrogram with scalogram of different wavelet functions.
A spectrogram is obtained using STFT, which is Fourier Transform computed
for a short windows. STFT X stft ðτ, ωÞ of signal xðtÞ as given as Eq. (1), where wðtÞ is a
window function. On the other hand, CWT X cwt ða, bÞ of a signal xðtÞ is given by
6

Wavelets for EEG Analysis
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.94398
∗
Eq. (2), where ψ a,b
ðtÞ is a complex conjugate of scaled and shifted version of mother
wavelet ψ ðtÞ, a is scaling parameter and b is shifting parameter.

X stft ðτ, ωÞ ¼

ð∞

X cwt ða, bÞ ¼

∞

xðtÞwðτ

ð∞

∞

tÞe

jωt

dt

∗
xðtÞψ a,b
ðtÞdt:

(1)
(2)

CWT operation from Eq. (2) can be seen as convolution of input signal xðtÞ with
scaled version of wavelet function ψ ðtÞ.
X cwt ðaÞ ¼ xðtÞ⊛ψ a∗ ðtÞ

(3)

X cwt ð f Þ ¼ X ð f Þψ a ∗ ð f Þ

(4)

where X ð f Þ is Fourier transform of xðtÞ, and the same for others. For computations with discrete signal xðnÞ, both equations; 3 and 4 can be used with discrete
operations, e.g. convolution and multiplication and discrete wavelet function ψ ðnÞ,
while for Fourier Transform, Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) is used. For computational efficiency, however, Eq. (4) is widely used, by multiplying FFT of xðnÞ and
FFT of scaled and discrete version ψ ðnÞ. Even though, for discrete signal xðnÞ,
discrete wavelet function ψ ðnÞ is used, however, the conventional definitions of
wavelet functions for CWT are defined in continues time-domain. A set timedomain and frequency-domain equations for six complex wavelet functions are
defined below. Figure 6 shows all the six wavelet functions, with their real and
imaginary part. All six functions are similar, in terms of smoothness and being
derived from exponential and sinusoidal functions, however, they have different
parameters to control the oscillation and frequency band to be captured.
Gaussian Wavelet: A time-domain wavelet it derived from a Gaussian function
centered at t0 and modulated by a complex exponential function with frequency f 0 [8].
2

ψ ðtÞ ¼ e aðt t0 Þ  e

pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ψ ð f Þ ¼ π=a e 2πjft0  e
where a ¼




f0 2
.
Q

Figure 6.
Continues wavelet functions.

7

2πjf 0 ðt t0 Þ
π2



ð

f

f 0Þ

(5)
 
2
=a

(6)

Wavelet Theory

Gabor Wavelet: Gabor wavelet is perhaps the most widely used function for
various applications. It is essentially the same as Gaussian wavelet function, with
simplified equations, as follow [8, 9];
ðt t0 Þ2 =a2

ψ ð tÞ ¼ e
ψ ð f Þ ¼ e ðð

f

f 0 Þ aÞ

e

jf 0 ðt t0 Þ

2

jt0 ð f

e

(7)
f 0Þ

(8)

where a is oscillation rate and f 0 is center frequency, t0 is centred time.
Morlet Wavelet: Morlet is considered very similar to Gabor wavelet and Gabor
filters. The oscillation of Morlet wavelet is controlled by σ. A higher value of σ
results in higher oscillation [10].
0:25

ψ ðtÞ ¼ Cσ π


ψ ðwÞ ¼ Cσ π 0:25 e

where Cσ ¼ 1 þ e

σ2

2e

3 2
4σ



0:5

e

0:5t2



ejσt

0:5ðσ wÞ2

, Kσ ¼ e

Kσ
Kσ e

0:5σ 2



0:5w

(9)

2

(10)

, and w ¼ 2πf .

Poisson Wavelet: Poisson wavelet is defined by positive integers (n), unlike
other, and associated with Poisson probability distribution [11, 12].
1
ð1 jtÞ
2π
1
wn e
ψ ðwÞ ¼
Γn þ 1
ψ ð tÞ ¼

ðnþ1Þ

(11)

w

(12)

uðwÞ

where w ¼ 2πf and uðwÞ is a unit step function, e.g. uðwÞ ¼ 1 if w > ¼ 0, 0 else.
Complex Mexican hat wavelet: Complex Mexican hat wavelet is derived from
the conventional Mexican hat wavelet. It is a low-oscillation wavelet which is
modulated by a complex exponential function with frequency f 0 [13].
2
ψ ðtÞ ¼ pﬃﬃﬃ π
3

1
4



pﬃﬃﬃ
π 1

2


t e

rﬃﬃﬃ
2
ψ ðwÞ ¼ 2 π
3

1=4

1 2
2t

ðw


pﬃﬃﬃ
pﬃﬃﬃ
j 
2jt þ π erf pﬃﬃﬃ t 1
2
w0 Þ 2 e

1
2ðw

w0 Þ 2

if w ≥ 0,

2



t e

1 2
2t

0 else


e

2πjf 0 t

(13)
(14)

where w ¼ 2πf and w0 ¼ 2π f 0 .
Complex Shannon wavelet: Complex Shannon wavelet is the most simplified
wavelet function, exploiting Sinc function by modulating with sinusoidal, which
results in an ideal bandpass filter. Real Shannon wavelet is modulated by only a cos
function [14].
ψ ðtÞ ¼ Sincðt=2Þ  e 2jπ f 0 t
Yw w0 
ψ ðwÞ ¼
π

(15)
(16)

Q
where ðxÞ ¼ 1 if x ≤ 0:5, 0 else and w ¼ 2πf and w0 ¼ 2π f 0 .
An example of using the above six wavelet functions for a small single-channel
EEG segment is shown in Figure 7, along with spectrogram. It can be observed,
spectrogram highlights a few events in signal (sharp peaks and lowpass wave),
8

Wavelets for EEG Analysis
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.94398

Figure 7.
Scalogram and spectrogram of a segment of signal channel EEG signal with six wavelet functions and STFT.
Figure obtained using spkit python library - https://spkit.github.iohttps://spkit.github.io

however, using CWT with different Wavelet functions, much richer information
can be observed. Since, we observed that in the formulation of wavelet functions
that they are similar to the underlying principle, we could also observe the similarities across different scalograms. Specifically, spectrogram using Complex Shannon
and Complex Mexican hat wavelet are much similar. Interestingly, Morlate and
Poisson wavelet functions are able to produce a better resolution towards lower
frequencies.

5. Artefact removal algorithms using DWT and WPD
Artefacts in EEG recording is a primary obstacle that all researchers have to deal
with. There are decades of research work in literature to remove these artefacts
[15, 16]. A range of methods have been proposed to remove the artefacts, starts with
a statistical with interpolation method [17] and regression method [18]. The most
commonly used approaches are based on Blind Source Separation (BSS) using
Independent Component Analysis (ICA) [19, 20]. ICA based approach have been
widely explored with statistical measures [21–24], and variant of ICA as FastICA,
InfoMax, and Extended InfoMax [25–27]. Wavelet-based approaches are well suited
for time-localised short events, as opposed to ICA. This property has been exploited
to remove artefacts from single-channel EEG. In contrast to a single channel,
wavelet has also been used for multi-channel EEG [28] and in combination with
ICA [29–34], in which identified artifactual component is cleaned with wavelet
rather than removed. The ICA-based approaches can only be applied to multichannel EEG and need an expert to select artifactual component, which has been
9

Wavelet Theory

automated with heuristics [21, 35, 36]. In contrast, most wavelet-based algorithms
remove artefacts from each channel individually.
The key idea of wavelet-based artefact removal algorithms is to apply DWT on
single-channel EEG signal xðnÞ and remove (set to zero) wavelet coefficients that
fall above some statistical threshold and reconstruct signal back using inverse-DWT
^ðnÞ [37–39]. With linear property of electrical activities, recorded EEG
(IDWT) x
signal is considered as xðnÞ ¼ sðnÞ þ vðnÞ, where sðnÞ is source signal of brain
activity and vðnÞ is artifactual components. The two most widely used threshold
formulations are used with wavelet.
Global Threshold: Also known as the optimal threshold for removing whitegaussian noise from any signal [40] using DWT. Global Threshold (T G ) is defined as;
T G ¼ σ^

pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
medianðjwjÞ
2logN for σ^ ¼
0:6745

(17)

where N is the length of signal and for wavelet coefficients w, σ^ is the estimate of
noise variance. To denoise a signal, wavelet coefficients with magnitude below the
threshold T G are set to zero and reconstruct the signal back. However, for recorded
EEG signal xðnÞ, source signal sðnÞ is considered to be zero mean and normally
distributed, i.g. sðnÞ  N ð0, σ Þ [4]. For which any wavelet coefficients with a
magnitude above the threshold T G is considered to be artifactual and removed
(set to zero).
Standard Deviation (STD) Threshold: As name suggests, STD threshold is
based on Standard Deviation (STD) of wavelet coefficients [39].
T STD ¼ 1:5  STDðwÞ

(18)

ATAR algorithm: A recent study has shown that approaches based on above
thresholds are very aggressive, since, statistically, a few wavelet coefficients of any
signal will always fall above these thresholds [14]. In contrast, an Automatic and
Tunable Artefact Removal (ATAR) Algorithm based on WPD was proposed [41],
which provides three different wavelet filtering modes and a tunable parameter. As
shown a block diagram of ATAR algorithm in Figure 8, a single channel EEG signal
xðnÞ is first split into smaller windows xw ðnÞ, apply L-level WPD to get wavelet
coefficients w ¼ X L ðkÞ ¼ WPDðxw ðnÞÞ, then wavelet coefficients are filtered using
^ ¼ λðwÞ to reconstruct signal x
^ðnÞ from corrected windows x
^w ðnÞ.
wavelet filtering w

Figure 8.
A block diagram of ATAR algorithm [41].

10

Wavelets for EEG Analysis
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.94398

The three filtering modes in ATAR algorithm are namely; Elimination λe ðÞ, Linear
attenuation λa ðÞ, and soft thresholding λs ðÞ, which are defined below;
λe ðwÞ ¼

w

if ∣w∣ ≤ θα

0

else

(19)

8
w
if ∣w∣ ≤ θα
>


>
<
∣w∣ θα
sgn ðwÞθα 1
if θα < ∣w∣ ≤ θβ
λa ðwÞ ¼
>
θβ θα
>
:
0
else
8
if ∣w∣ < θγ
<w
1
θα θγ
αw
λ s ð wÞ ¼ 1 e
log
where α ¼
:
θγ
θα þ θγ
θα otherwise
1 þ e αw

(20)

(21)

where w is a wavelet coefficient, sgn ðÞ is the signum function, and θα > θγ . A
default setting for θγ and θβ is; θγ ¼ 0:8θα and θβ ¼ 2θα. The characteristics of wavelet
filtering mode are shown in Figure 9. From Figure 9, it can be seen that Elimination
mode of filtering is the same as conventional filtering, however, Linear attenuation
and soft-thresholding modes do not remove the wavelet coefficient, rather suppress
them softly. Another distinction ATAR algorithm has over others is the threshold
selection. The threshold θα is computed from Interquartile Range (IQR) of wavelet
coefficients using Eq. (22), which is robust against outliers, as oppose to STD.
θα ¼

f β ðrÞ
k1

if f β ðrÞ ≥ k1
else

where f β ðrÞ ¼ k2 exp




100 r
β
k2 2

(22)

where r is Interquartile Range (IQR) of coefficients i.e. r ¼ IQRðwÞ and k1 and k2
are lower and upper bounds on filtering.
Figure 10 shows a visual comparative analysis of wavelet-based approaches (i.e.
Global threshold, STD threshold, and ATAR algorithm) and ICA based approaches
(FastICA, InfoMax, and Extended-InfoMax) to remove the artefacts. It is visually
apparent that wavelet-based approaches are better than ICA-based approaches.

Figure 9.
Wavelet filtering modes for ATAR algorithm. For θα ¼ 200, θγ ¼ 0:8θα ¼ 160, θβ ¼ 2θα ¼ 400 [41].
11

Wavelet Theory

Figure 10.
Comparison of artefact removal approaches from [41].

Among wavelet-based approaches, using ATAR gives much control over Global and
STD based threshold selection. Other quantitative analyses of the above-mentioned
approaches are discussed in the article [41], which also demonstrate the effect of
tuning parameter and filtering modes on different predictive tasks of EEG signal.
The formulation of relationship, algorithmic implementation details, and comparative results are given in article [41].

6. Conclusions
This chapter presents the overview of Wavelet for EEG analysis. The first chapter introduces EEG signal, commonly used features for predictive analysis, and
artefacts that often contaminate EEG signal. Then chapter discusses the Wavelet
analysis approaches, namely CWT, DWT, and WPD. The richness of CWT over
STFT for time-frequency analysis using various wavelet functions is demonstrated.
Finally, the artefact removal algorithms based on wavelet and ICA are discussed.
The comparative analysis present in the chapter shows that the wavelet-based
approach outperforms ICA based approach. Specifically, a recent algorithm
(ATAR) allows controlling the removal or suppression of assumed artifactual components in the signal, which can be tuned to improve the performance of any
predictive tasks. The techniques presented in this chapter show how wavelet can be
used for EEG studies to extract rich information and removing the artefacts. The
comparative analysis shows wavelet based approaches are well suited for EEG signal
processing. Further, similar approaches can be used with other biomedical signals
such as electrocardiogram (ECG or EKG), Electromyography (EMG) etc.

12

Wavelets for EEG Analysis
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.94398

Author details
Nikesh Bajaj1,2
1 University of East London, London, United Kingdom
2 Queen Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom
*Address all correspondence to: n.bajaj@uel.ac.uk; n.bajaj@qmul.ac.uk

© 2020 The Author(s). Licensee IntechOpen. This chapter is distributed under the terms
of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/3.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium,
provided the original work is properly cited.
13

Wavelet Theory

References
[1] D. Petit, J.-F. Gagnon, M. L. Fantini, L.

Ferini-Strambi, J. Montplaisir, Sleep and
quantitative eeg in neurodegenerative
disorders, Journal of psychosomatic
research 56 (2004) 487–496

poisson wavelet transform, Computers
& chemical engineering 21 (1997)
601–620.
[12] Poisson wavelet, https://en.wikiped

ia.org/wiki/Poisson wavelet, 2020.
[2] M. L. Perlis, M. T. Smith, P. J.

Andrews, H. Orff, D. E. Giles, Beta/
gamma eeg activity in patients with
primary and secondary insomnia and
good sleeper controls, Sleep 24 (2001)
110–117.
[3] A. R. Clarke, R. J. Barry, R. McCarthy,

M. Selikowitz, Eeg analysis in attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder: a
comparative study of two subtypes,
Psychiatry research 81 (1998) 19–29.
[4] S. Sanei, J. A. Chambers, EEG signal

processing, John Wiley & Sons, 2013.
[5] D. Hagemann, E. Naumann, The

effects of ocular artifacts on
(lateralized) broadband power in the
eeg, Clinical Neurophysiology 112
(2001) 215–231.
[6] H. Olkkonen, Discrete Wavelet

Transforms: Biomedical Applications,
BoD–Books on Demand, 2011.
[7] G. Dirlich, T. Dietl, L. Vogl, F. Strian,

Topography and morphology of heart
action-related eeg potentials,
Electroencephalography and Clinical
Neurophysiology/Evoked Potentials
Section 108 (1998) 299–305.
[8] T. S. Lee, Image representation using
2d gabor wavelets, IEEE Transactions on
pattern analysis and machine
intelligence 18 (1996) 959–971.
[9] Gabor wavelet, https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Gabor wavelet, 2020.
[10] Morlate wavelet, https://en.wikiped

ia.org/wiki/Morlet wavelet, 2020.
[11] K. A. Kosanovich, A. R. Moser, M. J.

Piovoso, A new family of wavelets: the
14

[13] Complex mexican hat wavelet,

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Complex
Mexican hat wavelet, 2020.
[14] Shannon wavelet, https://en.

wikipedia.org/wiki/Shannon wavelet,
2020.
[15] J. A. Urigüen, B. Garcia-Zapirain,

EEG artifact removal—state-of-the-art
and guidelines, Journal of neural
engineering 12 (2015) 031001.
[16] M. Fatourechi, A. Bashashati, R. K.

Ward, G. E. Birch, Emg and eog artifacts
in brain computer interface systems: A
survey, Clinical neurophysiology 118
(2007) 480–494.
[17] M. Junghöfer, T. Elbert, D. M.

Tucker, B. Rockstroh, Statistical control
of artifacts in dense array EEG/MEG
studies, Psychophysiology 37 (2000)
523–532.
[18] J. Woestenburg, M. Verbaten, J.

Slangen, The removal of the eyemovement artifact from the eeg by
regression analysis in the frequency
domain, Biological psychology 16 (1983)
127–147.
[19] T.-P. Jung, S. Makeig, C.

Humphries, T.-W. Lee, M. J. Mckeown,
V. Iragui, T. J. Sejnowski, Removing
electroencephalographic artifacts by
blind source separation,
Psychophysiology 37 (2000) 163–178.
[20] L. Shoker, S. Sanei, W. Wang, J. A.
Chambers, Removal of eye blinking
artifact from the electroencephalogram, incorporating a new
constrained blind source separation

Wavelets for EEG Analysis
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.94398

algorithm, Medical and Biological
Engineering and Computing 43 (2005)
290–295.
[21] H. Nolan, R. Whelan, R. Reilly,

FASTER: fully automated statistical
thresholding for EEG artifact rejection,
Journal of neuroscience methods 192
(2010) 152–162.
[22] R. R. Vázquez, H. Velez-Perez, R.

Ranta, V. L. Dorr, D. Maquin, L.
Maillard, Blind source separation,
wavelet denoising and discriminant
analysis for eeg artefacts and noise
cancelling, Biomedical Signal Processing
and Control 7 (2012) 389–400.
[23] A. Mognon, J. Jovicich, L. Bruzzone,

M. Buiatti, Adjust: An automatic eeg
artifact detector based on the joint use
of spatial and temporal features,
Psychophysiology 48 (2011) 229–240.
[24] A. Belouchrani, K. Abed-Meraim, J.F. Cardoso, E. Moulines, A blind source
separation technique using secondorder statistics, IEEE Transactions on
signal processing 45 (1997) 434–444.
[25] D. Langlois, S. Chartier, D. Gosselin,

An introduction to independent
component analysis: Infomax and
fastica algorithms, Tutorials in
Quantitative Methods for Psychology 6
(2010) 31–38.

wavelet analysis, kurtosis and renyi’s
entropy for artifact detection, in: 2007
International Conference on
Information Acquisition, IEEE, pp. 195–
200.
[29] N. P. Castellanos, V. A. Makarov,

Recovering eeg brain signals: artifact
suppression with wavelet enhanced
independent component analysis,
Journal of neuroscience methods 158
(2006) 300–312.
[30] M. T. Akhtar, W. Mitsuhashi, C. J.

James, Employing spatially constrained
ica and wavelet denoising, for automatic
removal of artifacts from multichannel
eeg data, Signal Processing 92 (2012)
401–416.
[31] H. Ghandeharion, A. Erfanian, A

fully automatic ocular artifact
suppression from eeg data using higher
order statistics: Improved performance
by wavelet analysis, Medical
engineering & physics 32 (2010) 720–
729.
[32] N. K. Al-Qazzaz, S. H. B. M. Ali, S.

A. Ahmad, M. S. Islam, J. Escudero,
Discrimination of stroke-related mild
cognitive impairment and vascular
dementia using eeg signal analysis,
Medical & biological engineering &
computing 56 (2018) 137–157.
[33] R. Mahajan, B. I. Morshed,

[26] A. J. Bell, T. J. Sejnowski, An

information-maximization approach to
blind separation and blind
deconvolution, Neural computation 7
(1995) 1129–1159.

Unsupervised eye blink artifact
denoising of eeg data with modified
multiscale sample entropy, kurtosis, and
wavelet-ica, IEEE journal of Biomedical
and Health Informatics 19 (2014) 158–
165.

[27] T.-W. Lee, M. Girolami, T. J.

Sejnowski, Independent component
analysis using an extended infomax
algorithm for mixed subgaussian and
supergaussian sources, Neural
computation 11 (1999) 417–441.

[34] N. Al-Qazzaz, S. Hamid Bin Mohd

Ali, S. Ahmad, M. Islam, J. Escudero,
Automatic artifact removal in eeg of
normal and demented individuals using
ica–wt during working memory tasks,
Sensors 17 (2017) 1326.

[28] G. Inuso, F. La Foresta, N.

Mammone, F. C. Morabito, Brain
activity investigation by eeg processing:
15

[35] W. Kong, Z. Zhou, S. Hu, J. Zhang,
F. Babiloni, G. Dai, Automatic and

Wavelet Theory

direct identification of blink
components from scalp eeg, Sensors 13
(2013) 10783–10801.
[36] R. N. Vigário, Extraction of ocular

artefacts from EEG using independent
component analysis,
Electroencephalography and clinical
neurophysiology 103 (1997) 395–404.
[37] S. V. Ramanan, N. Kalpakam, J.

Sahambi, A novel wavelet based
technique for detection and de-noising
of ocular artifact in normal and epileptic
electroencephalogram (2004).
[38] V. Krishnaveni, S. Jayaraman, S.

Aravind, V. Hariharasudhan, K.
Ramadoss, Automatic identification and
removal of ocular artifacts from eeg
using wavelet transform, Measurement
science review 6 (2006) 45–57.
[39] P. S. Kumar, R. Arumuganathan, K.

Sivakumar, C. Vimal, Removal of ocular
artifacts in the eeg through wavelet
transform without using an eog
reference channel, Int. J. Open Problems
Compt. Math 1 (2008) 188–200.
[40] D. L. Donoho, J. M. Johnstone, Ideal

spatial adaptation by wavelet shrinkage,
biometrika 81 (1994) 425–455.
[41] N. Bajaj, J. R. Carrión, F. Bellotti, R.

Berta, A. De Gloria, Automatic and
tunable algorithm for eeg artifact
removal using wavelet decomposition
with applications in predictive modeling
during auditory tasks, Biomedical Signal
Processing and Control 55 (2020)
101624.

16

