Interdisciplinary collaborations at work
in brain-machine interfacing
Jonathan Brumberg, Assistant Professor, Speech-Language-Hearing,
University of Kansas

P

ublic universities are facing growing uncertainty, specifically in our ability to
recruit students and secure appropriate funding to support our research programs. In this paper, interdisciplinary and translational research are discussed
as avenues of growth that have the potential to increase research productivity, and
diversify institutional research portfolios capable of weathering these unstable times.
Cognitive neuroscience, neurocomputational modeling and brain-machine interface
research will be discussed as frameworks for pursuing interdisciplinary and translational research.
Brain machine interfacing (BMI) is a
relatively recent addition to the field of
neuroscience, and derives from a
longstanding history of cognitive neuroscience. It is truly an area of applied neuroscience in the sense that the intended
goals of BMIs are to use neurological activity for interacting with computerbased devices without direct manipulation by a human controller (cf. keyboard
typing, mouse clicking, etc.). Such an
achievement depends greatly on our ability to quantitatively model the brain (i.e.,
neurocomputational modeling), and associate those measurements with sensory
perception and motor behavior. One major application of BMI devices is for rehabilitation and assistive technology, including the remote control of movement
devices (robotic exoskeletons, wheelchairs) and communication systems (e.g.,
augmentative and alternative communication devices). The development, deployment and use of BMI technology relies on a coordinated effort to effectively

integrate expertise from a number of disciplines according to the needs underlying the specific BMI application.
For success in an academic research
environment, much of this expertise can
be drawn, or developed, from student involvement, particularly at the graduate
level. Management of such an interdisciplinary project, however, requires team
leadership with sufficient experience in
many, if not all, areas of expertise. The
present paper begins with an overview of
cognitive and computational neuroscience research in speech and language,
follows with examples of BMI research
for communication and concludes with a
discussion of strategies for facilitating interdisciplinary research, recruiting future
generations of researchers, and engaging
our regional and national communities.
Speech, language and hearing neuroscience is specifically explored as a prime
example of interdisciplinary research
with many potential translational appli-

57

cations. Three neurotechnological applications are discussed, each of which have
important societal value: cochlear implants to restore hearing for those with
profound hearing loss, deep brain stimulators for ameliorating motor symptoms
of Parkinson's disease, and brain-machine interfaces to enable communication
for individuals with locked-in syndrome.
Advancement in areas such as these have
the potential to drive even greater discoveries and benefit to society. Specific suggestions are provided for fostering interdisciplinary research at public universities.
Introduction
Cognitive and computational neuroscience has for many years been at the
forefront of discovering the link between
brain and behavior as we experience the
world. Using advanced neuroimaging
and electrophysiological tools such as
functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI), positron emission tomography
(PET)
and
electroencephalography
(EEG), we have been able to infer relationships between changes in the metabolic and electrical activities in the brain
to distinct sensory, motor and cognitive
functions. Areas of particular interest are
in the neuroscience of reading, speech
and language production, speech perception and language comprehension. It is
now possible to translate the experimental conclusions of cognitive and computational neuroscience into practice for
diagnosing and rehabilitating disorders
with a neurological deficit. The remainder of this paper will discuss the interdisciplinary basis of speech and language
neurological research, translational applications of neuroscience research and
end with suggestions on supporting the

growth of interdisciplinary research, in
an otherwise uncertain time, using applied speech neuroscience as a framework.
Cognitive & computational neuroscience in speech-language research
Speech and language are uniquely
human capabilities that in many ways define our species, yet are also some of our
most underrated, or overlooked abilities.
Often, it is not until a deficit is encountered that we truly realize the importance
of speech and language in our daily lives.
Deficits in speech, language and hearing
often have a neurological origin, which
requires comprehensive study of the related brain structures and activations in
individuals with, and without disorder.
Some of the earliest cognitive neuroscience investigations took place in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries as
researchers were uncovering the critical
role of specific areas of the brain for producing speech (e.g., Broca's area) and understanding speech (e.g., Wernicke's
area). One of the most frequent methods
used at the time relied on associating
post-mortem anatomical examinations of
human brains with the presence or absence of specific production or comprehension deficits. At the same time, investigators were also discovering that electrical stimulation of brain tissue could
elicit behavioral responses and that specific deficits or overexcitation led to the
occurrence of seizures, which could be alleviated by resection of the dysfunctional
tissue. Importantly, both approaches provided the first steps toward understanding how the brain mediates speech and
language, and whether they realized it or
not, these early cognitive neuroscientists

58

were engaging in interdisciplinary research involving medical treatment of patients, neuroscientific study and an understanding of speech-language processing. This last point is very important
for the topic of the present paper; cognitive neuroscience has been an interdisciplinary field from its inception.
In the twentieth century, the advent
of non-invasive functional neuroimaging
methods (PET, fMRI) helped to expand
speech and language neuroscience beyond the study of disorder using innovative techniques. With these new methods,
it was finally possible to systematically
investigate, in large populations of individuals without impairment, prior conclusions regarding the speech and language processes of the brain obtained
from anatomical and electrical stimulation studies [see Price (2012); and Indefrey & Levelt (2004); for reviews]. In the
years since, multiple regions have been
shown to contribute to speech preparation and production, as opposed to a single region described by Broca. Similarly,
speech perception and language comprehension are subserved by a number of anatomical regions working in concert. In
more recent years, the dramatic explosion
of computational power has led to the development of neurocomputational models of speech and language processes
(Saltzman & Munhall 1989; Guenther et
al. 2006; Houde & Nagarajan 2011). These
models extended previous theoretical
models by using computer programs to
simulate the information processing by
the brain according to empirical evidence
from functional neuroimaging studies.
As a result of the advances in modern
cognitive and computational neuroscience, the study of the brain mechanisms

of speech, language and hearing has
grown even more interdisciplinary to include computer scientists, electrical & biomedical engineers, linguists and psychologists (among many others). An engineering branch of computational neuroscience seeks to move from using a
computer to model the brain toward the
brain modeling, or controlling, a computer. This inversion of computational
neuroscience is at the heart of brain-machine interfacing.
Applied neuroscience
The term applied neuroscience is
used here to refer to any aspect of neuroscientific research that results in our ability to alter or influence neurological processes for rehabilitation. Some visible examples of this type of translational research include the neuropharmaceutical
treatments (e.g., antidepressants) and
neurologically targeted rehabilitation of
stroke and traumatic brain injury. Some
neurotechnological translational research
examples include intervention in cases of
sensorineural hearing loss via cochlear
implants, and motor deficits associated
with Parkinson's disease via deep brain
stimulation. In both of these cases, neurological models were first constructed
based on empirical evidence, then "inverted" to allow communication between
computational devices and neurological
tissue.
For developing cochlear implants,
the physiology of the cochlea was first
mapped and discovered to encode acoustic frequency according to location along
the basilar membrane. This frequency information is then electrically transmitted
through the auditory nerve to the nervous system via movement of the inner
hair cells of the cochlea. For individuals

59

with profound sensorineural hearing
loss, encoded sounds are not transmitted
to the central nervous system, though the
location-frequency representations of the
cochlea and auditory nerve are preserved. In accordance with this model of
cochlear function, the cochlear implant
uses a miniature computer to acquire and
analyze incoming sound for its frequency
content and electrically stimulate the
cochlea at the appropriate location via
implanted electrodes. In this way, the peripheral nervous system and a computational device are in direct communication
to provide the central nervous system
with restored hearing information for
processing.
Similarly, in the case of deep brain
stimulating implants, neuroscientfic investigations first uncovered the function
and structure of the brain regions implicated in the motor deficits associated
with Parkinson's disease. These structures, known as the basal ganglia, are important for selecting and initiating voluntary movements such as reaching with
the arm or speaking. Two specific areas,
the globus pallidus (GP) and subthalamic
nucleus (STN), appear to be particularly
affected in Parkinson's disease; their dysfunction causes the basal ganglia network, through its connection with neurological motor pathways, to excessively inhibit movement. Here, the network of
structures are still intact, but are improperly activated resulting in the motor
symptoms of Parkinson's disease. The
deep brain stimulator addresses this neurological deficit through direct electrical
stimulation of the GP and STN resulting
in the disinhibition of voluntary motor
behavior, and the alleviation of Parkin-

sonian motor symptoms. Through a theoretical and quantitative description of
this complicated neural circuit, it was
possible to identify a specific portion of
basal ganglia that under electrical stimulation had the potential to ameliorate the
motor dysfunction of Parkinson's disease.
Both of the above applications, cochlear implants and deep brain stimulators,
are great examples of the translational research potential at the intersection of engineering and neuroscience. In these examples, computers are interfacing directly with neural tissue in a one-way, input fashion (e.g., they direct the nervous
system to act in a prescribed manner).
The reverse design pattern in which neural activity controls a computer is also relevant for rehabilitation purposes, and are
more traditionally considered brain-machine interfaces.
Brain-machine interfacing
In its most general sense, a brain-machine interface is any device designed to
enable control of computational devices
(e.g., robots, assistive or augmenting
technology, communication aids) using
brain activity alone, without any overt
motor intervention. One area of particular interest is in the development of a BMI
as an assistive communication device for
individuals with quadriplegia and mutism, which is often the result of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) or brainstem stroke. Both of these conditions can
lead to locked-in syndrome (LIS; Plum &
Posner 1972), or the state in which an individual is completely unable to perform
voluntary motor behaviors despite intact
cognition and sensation. As a result of
such profound speech and motor deficits,
individuals with LIS are typically unable

60

to use even the most advanced computerbased augmentative and alternative communication (AAC) devices. High-tech
AAC devices are currently capable of detecting the smallest amount of voluntary
movement behavior (e.g., muscular activity and eye-gaze location) to facilitate artificially aided communication, but even
these capabilities are ineffective for individuals with LIS. In contrast, brain-machine interfaces are an ideal alternative
for individuals with LIS; a BMI requires
only a consistent and reliable source of
neurological activity for mapping user intentions onto a communication device.
Principles of BMI development. A
number of varieties of BMI devices for
communication have been developed in
recent years, each focusing on some aspect of neurological activity that can be
willfully modulated by a participating
user. Some examples include the P300
Speller (Donchin et al. 2000), sensorimotor rhythm keyboard spellers (Miner et
al. 1998), event-related desynchronization keyboards (Neuper et al. 2003; Obermaier et al. 2003) and steady state visually evoked potential spellers (Friman et
al. 2007). See (Brumberg & Guenther
2010) for a review of each of these techniques. Each BMI example follows a core
set of design principles in which a number of factors are optimized. These factors
include:
1. Choosing the desired outcome
2. Determining the outcome delivery
method
3. Selection of information bearing neural signals from participant
4. Statistical signal processing: mapping
brain signals to outcomes
5. Training / treatment

All of the previously mentioned BMI
examples selected communication as the
desired outcome, and typing for the delivery method. Each example differed in the
type of neurological activity used for the
BMI, ranging from neural signals related
to intended motor actions (e.g., imagined
or attempted limb movements or visual
evoked potentials), but all used non-invasive techniques involving the recording
of electroencephalography. The statistical
mapping procedures often depend on the
neurological signal acquired for controlling the device, but usually rely on some
form of machine learning algorithm. An
alternative BMI device to those mentioned enables continuous control of an
artificial speech synthesizer, with the
long-term goal of providing a means for
fluent speech production (Brumberg et al.
2010). This method also selects communication as the desired outcome, but uses
continuous synthesizer control with instantaneous auditory output as the delivery
method. For this BMI, motor-related neurological signals have been targeted both
from
intracortical
microelectrodes
(Brumberg et al. 2010) and electroencephalography. The last principle, training /
treatment, is an area of recent attention
and can most benefit from collaboration
with speech-language pathologists specializing in AAC in order to help BMI users learn the skills needed to control their
devices.
Institutional support for interdisciplinary research
Computational neuroscience, brain
machine interface, and many initiatives
for translational research result in outcomes that are both important to scientific advancement and have benefit to society. Research universities that support

61

such initiatives can leverage these positive outcomes to further grow their local,
regional and national standing. The question of how to best grow and support
these lines of scientific inquiry is doubly
important as public universities change
their plans for future research in response
to uncertainty in public higher education.
Much of the discussion of uncertainty is
related to the stability of federal funding
of scientific research, and state funding of
public education institutions. In many
ways, as research faculty of public universities, we are being asked to do more
with potentially much less. That said,
public universities are in a unique position to thrive even in this difficult environment given our reputations as the face
of our respective states' generators of educated citizens and engines of innovations. We also have a special ability to
reach a broad cross-section of the population, ranging from our own students and
faculty, to the local communities who
represent either future students, or future
voters who will be responsible for our
long-term success. A focus on interdisciplinary and translational research is one
avenue for of growth that is already fully
compatible with the research missions of
public universities. Further, these research efforts have the potential to truly
do more with less (though we should always strive to do more with more), and
the linking of multiple disciplines can
spur new ideas to attract currently nontraditional contributors to public university research.
Engaging in community partnerships, and encouraging student participation in research.

The best way to increase the likelihood of continued success as a public institution is to give current and future voters a reason to support our endeavors.
Many universities already participate in
research experience programs where undergraduate students work alongside
faculty and graduate student researchers
in a laboratory setting. These experiences
are critical for shaping future careers and
perspectives, and should not be limited to
undergraduates; opportunities for high
school and middle school students can
have a similar impact, and help direct
younger students to our programs.
In the applied neurosciences, community and student engagement are especially important. Neuroscience education occurs primarily at the graduate
level, and public perceptions of neuroscience often conjure images of medical doctors wearing white lab coats in hospitals.
However, modern applied neuroscience
in the form of brain machine interfacing
is much more accessible -- commercial
devices exist for acquiring neurological
data (e.g., Emotiv Epoc), recent national
initiatives in computer programming education has increased the number of
young students with the skills to develop
advanced software, mobile and educational computer hardware is more affordable than ever (e.g., RaspberryPi, Arduino), and a generation of "makers" are
creating sophisticated robotics, electronics and even communication aids in their
parents' basements. In addition, there is a
growing awareness of speech-languagehearing disorders, their neural bases and
technological remedies, and an increasing number of students interested in pursuing health and rehabilitation (e.g.,
speech-language pathology, physical and

62

occupational therapy) who need and
want experience with tomorrow's technology for aiding future clients. Public
universities are in a prime position to
guide and inspire this growing popula-

In these times of uncertain federal
funding, junior and senior research faculty must begin to look elsewhere for research support. Especially in the sciences,
the gold standard (particularly for pro-

Figure 1. In this example, each field ordinarily searches for faculty, applies for funding, recruits
students and publishes in discipline-specific fashions. With the incorporation of an interdisciplinary field, such as applied neuroscience, the individual disciplines can more easily collaborate,
transfer knowledge and ideas, and identify new areas of research that can benefit our students,
universities and communities.

tion of young people with sophisticated
skills and knowledge to pursue public
collegiate education and make innovative and lasting contributions to our regions and country.
Adapting education for faculty to
maximize funding.

motion and tenure) has been significant
external funding from the federal government (e.g., National Institutes of Health,
National Science Foundation). The effect
of either declining or unstable federal
funding will hopefully result in an increase in funding from other sources in-

63

cluding private foundations, research institutes and commercial partners. Institutional support should be increased to
help investigators navigate the changing
landscape of research funding, and identify new and creative models for maintaining our research programs. This is especially true for junior faculty who may
have less experience in obtaining external
funding.
One area of particular growth for
brain-machine interfacing is collaboration with commercial partners. As an
area of applied science, BMI for communication are intended to be used by individuals as an AAC device. Fortunately, a
strong industry already exists for developing AAC devices with frameworks in
place for interfacing with federal medical
agencies including Medicare, Medicaid
and the FDA. Increasing outreach to
(new) faculty from the offices of technology transfer and business will be especially helpful for pursuing collaborative
and sponsored projects from commercial
partners for translational research applications. Finally, as a result of these
changes in funding, departmental and
college committees for promotion and
tenure may need to reevaluate, or at least
consider, the differences between candidates in federal-rich vs federal-sparse
funding intervals. These discussions
should result in feedback to candidate
faculty to help establish a standard
against which future plans may be made.
Recognizing interdisciplinary connections in your field; building interdisciplinary faculty.
Interdisciplinary and translational
research programs have the potential to
increase the relevance and impact of pub-

lic universities on their communities. Additionally, many national funding agencies are now requiring some practical or
translational outcome for research proposals. Therefore, pursuing interdisciplinary connections and collaborations will
have a significant impact on the success
and future of public universities in terms
of local, regional and national support.
To build and maintain such programs, universities, colleges and departments may need to reconsider the
method by which they recruit new faculty. Researchers with experience in multiple areas of study are prime candidates
to lead interdisciplinary efforts and forge
new connections between departments,
programs and schools; however, these
faculty candidates often do not fit in existing departmental models for faculty
search and recruitment. In the past, departments may have limited the scope for
faculty recruitment to either replace or
augment an area of strength or bridge a
gap in a domain specific area of work. To
support interdisciplinary growth, departments may find it advantageous to look
outside-the-box for potential faculty candidates with multiple interests and who
are capable of increasing the diversity of
perspectives, skills and research. Similarly, once hired, interdisciplinary faculty
may need additional support to make the
appropriate connections for obtaining
courtesy and / or joint appointments with
relevant collaborating departments and
programs. Discussions with senior faculty mentors will be important to determine the impact of supplementary appointments, scholarly publishing in a variety of journals and sources of funding
on the promotion and tenure process.

64

Additionally, agreements between programs may be necessary for enabling primary mentoring of graduate and undergraduate students, standing on dissertation committees, and other university
service opportunities. Finally, interdisciplinary collaborations within the univer-

reach out to new audiences to highlight
the importance and impact of public universities on their communities as well as
adapting to the new realities of local and
national funding. Investing in interdisciplinary and translational research can address many of these challenges and serve

Table 1: A summary of suggested considerations for growing university involvement in
interdisciplinary research.

sity and beyond are sometimes best discovered and grown by student efforts.
We can support these efforts through
cross-department, cross-school workshops where faculty and students can
meet and showcase their work. Such
workshops can be expanded to regional
meetings to establish strong ties with our
neighbors to take advantage of our
pooled resources.
Summary
Recent trends in national and local
policy have led to some uncertainty for
the future of the research missions of
public universities. Rather than presenting an obstacle to future research, these
trends may potentially increase diversity
of scientific study and add to our ongoing
research activities. Success during these
uncertain times depends on our ability to

to reiterate the need for public research in
our culture and economy.
Many academic institutions are already engaging in interdisciplinary and
translational research, and the suggestions discussed in this paper are designed
to focus on these efforts as part of the discussion on the future of research at public
universities. The main areas of emphasis
include: (1) engaging our communities,
especially new generations of students
from primary school through college to
stimulate an early interest in research, (2)
adapting continuing and professional development for faculty to broaden their
scope of research to help better demonstrate the need for public university research while searching for additional opportunities for alternative funding (e.g.,

65

Neural Engineering. Kohala Coast, HI:
IEEE, pp. 354–357.
Guenther, F.H., Ghosh, S.S. & Tourville, J.A.,
2006. Neural modeling and imaging of
the cortical interactions underlying syllable production. Brain and Language, 96(3),
pp.280–301.
Houde, J.F. & Nagarajan, S.S., 2011. Speech
production as state feedback control.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 5, p.82.
Indefrey, P. & Levelt, W.J.M., 2004. The spatial and temporal signatures of word production components. Cognition, 92(1-2),
pp.101–44.
Miner, L.A., McFarland, D.J. & Wolpaw, J.R.,
1998. Answering questions with an electroencephalogram-based brain-computer
interface. Archives of Physical Medicine and
Rehabilitation, 79(9), pp.1029–1033.
Neuper, C. et al., 2003. Clinical application of
an EEG-based brain-computer interface: a
case study in a patient with severe motor
impairment. Clinical Neurophysiology,
114(3), pp.399–409.
Obermaier, B., Müller, G.R. & Pfurtscheller,
G., 2003. “Virtual keyboard” controlled
by spontaneous EEG activity. IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation
Engineering, 11(4), pp.422–6.
Plum, F. & Posner, J.B., 1972. The diagnosis
of stupor and coma. Contemporary Neurology Series, 10, pp.1–286.
Price, C.J., 2012. A review and synthesis of
the first 20 years of PET and fMRI studies
of heard speech, spoken language and
reading. NeuroImage, 62(2), pp.816–47.
Saltzman, E.L. & Munhall, K.G., 1989. A Dynamical Approach to Gestural Patterning
in Speech Production. Ecological Psychology, 1(4), pp.333–382.

private foundations and industry collaborations), and (3) discussing and planning for targeted interdisciplinary hires,
and post-hiring support (e.g., considerations for promotion and tenure, crossuniversity affiliations, and infrastructure
needs for interdisciplinary faculty).
Table 1 provides a succinct summary of suggested considerations for
how to enhance university involvement
in interdisciplinary research. Interdisciplinary research is not a solution in itself,
and universities pursuing such initiatives
should do so carefully to ensure sufficient
planning, resources, and support are
available to future interdisciplinary and
translational researchers. If so, their addition will contribute toward a diverse institutional research portfolio capable of
adapting to the changing landscapes of
today and tomorrow.
References
Brumberg, J.S. & Guenther, F.H., 2010. Development of speech prostheses: current
status and recent advances. Expert Review
of Medical Devices, 7(5), pp.667–79.
Brumberg, J.S. et al., 2010. Brain–computer
interfaces for speech communication.
Speech Communication, 52(4), pp.367–379.
Donchin, E., Spencer, K.M. & Wijesinghe, R.,
2000. The mental prosthesis: assessing the
speed of a P300-based brain-computer interface. IEEE Transactions on Rehabilitation
Engineering, 8(2), pp.174–179.
Friman, O. et al., 2007. Spelling with SteadyState Visual Evoked Potentials. In 2007
3rd International IEEE/EMBS Conference on

66

