Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

ScienceDirect
Procedia Computer Science 55 (2015) 1410 – 1419

Information Technology and Quantitative Management (ITQM 2015)

Order and chaos in the brain: fractal time series analysis of the
EEG activity during a cognitive problem solving task.
Hernán Díaz M.a,*, Felisa M. Córdovaa, Lucio Cañeteb, Fredi Palominosc, Fernando
Cifuentesa, Crystian Sánchezd, Matías Herrerad.
a

Neurocognitive Engineering Lab, Department of Industrial Engineering, Faculty of Engineering. University of Santiago de Chile.
b
Faculty of Technology. University of Santiago de Chile.
c
Department of Mathematic and Computer Science, Faculty of Science. University of Santiago de Chile.
Av. Ecuador 3469, Santiago 9170124, Chile.
d
Aerospatial Department, Aviation Brigade of the Army (BAVE)
Av. Baquedano 768, Región Libertador Bernardo O’Higgins, Rancagua, Chile.

Abstract
The study of brain dynamics has been approached from different mathematical strategies with the aim to obtain more
information of the bioelectrical signals coming from an electroencephalogram (EEG). Although several of these tools try to
conciliate the fact of using linear approaches to study a non-linear phenomenon, during the last years a set of
complementary and alternative approaches has been used to mine deeper into the nature of the brain dynamics and its
correlates with experience, thoughts and actions. One of these approaches comes from chaos theory and fractal geometry
and considers a model where brain activity, as a time series of an electrical potential variation (EEG) recorded from the
scalp, can be assumed as a dynamical state that moves in the range of 1/f α (fractal) noise. In this model it is possible to see
brain dynamics as a functional state who moves from more chaotic or unpredictable dynamics (Brown or Gaussian
uncorrelated noise), to quasi-chaotic or statistical noise (fractal or self-similar noise). The amount of order into the chaotic
EEG background must be an indicator of the organization of brain procedural resources dealing with different
circumstances. At the same time, it must reflect the degree of inter-individual differences and intra-individual variability in
the way each different brain works. To test this hypothesis we implemented a study where EEG activity was recorded
during the performing of a simple visual intelligent test (Raven test, abbreviated version of 15 questions) in a set of 10
adults to study their similarities and differences in the rendering of the test (estimated range of IQ) and in the process of
solving the easy and the difficult part of the test. We estimated the Hurst exponent and the fractal dimension of the time
series for each of the 14 EEG channels (Emotiv-Epoc® BCI headset) and searched for correlations and consistencies in the
values of H and the difficulty level of the cognitive task. We found that order tend to emerge from a chaotic background
when brain focuses on problem solving, rising the degree of predictability, self-similarity and persistent behavior of the
EEG signal.
©
by Elsevier
B.V. This
is an openB.V.
access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
©2015
2015Published
The Authors.
Published
by Elsevier
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Selection
and/or
peer-review
under
responsibility
of theoforganizers
of ITQM 2015
Peer-review under responsibility of the Organizing Committee
ITQM 2015

Keywords: Order; Chaos; 1/f Noise; Hurst exponent; Fractal dimension; Problem solving; EEG phenomenology.

* Hernán A. Díaz M. Tel.: +56-2-73768400; fax: +56-2-23260268.
E-mail address: hernan.diaz@usach.cl

1877-0509 © 2015 Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Peer-review under responsibility of the Organizing Committee of ITQM 2015
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.07.135

M. Hernán Díaz et al. / Procedia Computer Science 55 (2015) 1410 – 1419

1. Introduction
Electroencephalographic (EEG) dynamics has captured our curiosity since Hans Berger in 1929 [1] recorded
human brain electrical activity from the scalp revealing that brain cortex manifests a complex oscillatory
undercurrents that in a way or another must be correlated with our behavioral and mental activity.
Since then, this source of information about brain electrical phenomena has been the focus of many
generations of neuroscientists that has tried to unveil different aspects of the underlying processes that seems to
be associated to our motor, perception and cognitive skills. As it is possible to expect, the central attention of
these studies has been concentrated in clinical problems, in which fortuitous circumstances have brought some
light over very specific problems associated with local brain damages [2]. Thank to this quasi-localized general
structure and function correlations has been possible to map into the brain cortex functional areas specifically
related with the many ways we human beings deal with the world [3].
Once this structural mapping was done and perfected, the next step has been to understand the functional
processing of the brain, meaning how the brain manage its resources to monitor, control and modulate an
always behaving animal. In this respect one of the more successful research areas has been the studies
conducted by chronobiology [4], which looking at the sleep-awake cycle, has revealed the complex behavior of
the brain even in a state we call resting, showing first that the brain never rests and that while that part of our
life in which we are sleeping and we have very scarce narrative record of our experiences, the brain works in
many different states which bring forth important consequences to our awake daily life. Even though a big deal
of findings has been done in this area, there are still some central questions that keep the flame of curiosity and
exploration to continue digging in this area for more answers [5].
Until now, electroencephalography has been a powerful tool to ‘see’ what can be happening in the brain.
The fact that we can measure electrical fluctuations from the brain cortex allow us to model brain functioning
in terms of a communication system that use waves to transport messages and exert control over distant places
of the brain. As we can only detect the local whole electrical signal captured by electrodes settled in different
parts of the scalp, it is necessary to dissect first this signal in their intensity and frequency components and then
to look for consistencies or correlations among these variations according to a particular experimental design
built to answer specific questions.
The study of functional organization of the brain involves the analysis of intensity and spectral components
of the brain signal in deeper detail, in a way that incorporates new descriptive and quantitative approaches,
specially when recent findings and theories development coming from diverse areas of science allow us to look
at the electrical brain activity as a case of a set of many other common natural phenomena that has been shown
following some natural laws that can be mathematically well described [6].
1.1. Non-linear systems and EEG phenomenology.
One of the main advances carried out during the last decades has been the incorporation of mathematical
tools that describe non-linear systems [7-8]. A system of this nature is such that as a consequence of its intrinsic
complexity it is impossible to accurately describe it with mathematical functions of simple proportionality.
During the long history of electroencephalography and until just recently, the only way to explore the brain
functioning in terms of the EEG signal has been to see it in a very simplistic but descriptive fashion. By first
comparing differences in the intensity of the signals it started to smooth over the arid terrain of a very complex
system. First descriptions were enthusiastic in finding correlated changes of intensity of the signal under
particular experimental conditions [9] making to believe that the brain were not so complex to understand as
we may thought earlier. Further findings that expanded the experimental questions showed a panorama not so
simple to conciliate with a simplistic way to approach the problem. Intensity variations were not enough to say
something clear concerning to the brain functional dynamics. At first glance it seemed that if we focus on the
correlations between signal intensity variations of a single EEG frequency band, associated with a particular
behavioral or perceptual task, the more experimental conditions or tasks we tried, the more participation of the
same EEG band appear [10].

1411

1412

M. Hernán Díaz et al. / Procedia Computer Science 55 (2015) 1410 – 1419

More success was carried out when studying the spectral distribution of the EEG frequencies. It has been
characterized that the whole frequency spectrum of the EEG signal can be subdivided into five frequency
ranges in a progression from sleep to awake in an increasing cognitive workload activity. These frequency
bands receive the names of Delta (0-4 Hz), Theta (4-8 Hz), Alpha (8-12 Hz), Beta (12-30 Hz) and Gamma (>30
Hz). All after Berger gave the name of Alpha wave to the first clean EEG recording he obtained coming from
the occipital region.
Having this spectral classification, intensity variations, correlation, auto-correlation and coherence analysis
of the signal acquired, still the approach continued using mainly a linear understanding of the phenomena. As
far as we can stretch this view during the last decades, sooner we started to realize that it was a very good
starting jump but to mine deeper in the mysteries of the brain we better start considering it as what it is, a
system more easily understandable having a non-linear dynamics substrate and a whole new realm of possible
interpretations coming from complex and chaotic system theory, having variable stability, volatility, showing
phenomena of persistence, long memory and fractal functional structure [11-12].
1.2. The brain as a predictive device.
The model of the brain as a predictive system found appeal when we think about how we make mistakes.
For decades perceptual mistakes (or illusions) have been used to understand the underneath processes that
allow us to explain these experiential discontinuities that we call errors. From experience, it is fairly evident
that we, manipulating perception, can cheat the brain and that, at the same time, the brain, modulating its own
activity, can cheat us making us believe that something is there when it is not. Experimental evidences making
this clearer are the studies of the blind spot in our retina, the place where neuron axons from photoreceptors
joint together to build up the optic nerve. If we close one eye and experiment with the open one, soon we will
find a place in our visual field where we do not have visual information. The strange thing is that usually we
are not aware of this partial blindness. In part because our eyes are always moving and we count with a pair of
these visual devices, the lack of vision in this area is compensated, but if we perform controlled experiments we
will find that the brain makes a more impressive adjustment to deal with this situation. If we surround the field
of vision around the blind spot with a simple design, say a set of diagonal black and white bars, the brain
completes the perception of the blind spot with the surrounding design. In other words, it seems that the brain
completes any missing things by assuming anything what it is supposed to be there. That is also the reason
because sometimes our attention is not captured by a conspicuous novelty that is in the middle of a very
familiar environment. It is necessary to call the attention upon it, to notice it. So, in a very general way we can
say the brain itself is kind of blind, meaning by this that it is not aware mainly of the surrounding environment
but instead of the internal coherences and experiential regularities experienced through individual and social
learning history. Therefore, a fairly valid question arises: How we can predict the behavior of a system that
works as a predictive system?
1.3. Order and Chaos in the brain.
Complex non-linear systems move in the verge of instability and for this reason they are difficult to predict.
In fact, it is the characteristic of unpredictability what better describes chaotic phenomena which give us a
broader field of understanding of these processes far from the more intuitive and narrow view of chaos as only
implying disorder. Living beings are very complex systems in such a way that many interacting variables must
be taken into account simultaneously. Maybe we are able to predict their behavior under repetitive, controlled
or stable conditions, but in front of a new and unknown challenge we will be not very confident about our bet.
Trying to understand how the brain manages to monitor, coordinate and organize itself based on the EEG
recording could be very disappointing because interpretation based only on traditional lineal way to understand
the problem is incomplete. By the contrary, thinking the brain as a chaotic or quasi-chaotic system gives us the
opportunity to model it in a more realistic, even though not simpler, way.

M. Hernán Díaz et al. / Procedia Computer Science 55 (2015) 1410 – 1419

1413

In a previous work [13] some of us showed that in the EEG signal it is possible to find short-term
predictable processes arising in the middle of a chaotic background. The predictability and self-similarity of
these processes are related with some particular characteristic of these transient activities, specially its autocorrelation parameters. Using a musical transformation and further analysis of the brain signal we found
transient harmonic activity arising as ordered and frequency synchronized functional configurations of the eeg
signal during a mental task. According to our results it is possible to identify and analyze individually each of
these musical self-similar or transient fractal harmonies in the brain. We also found substantial differences in
the number of these fractal events when we explore inter- and intra-individual differences, or inter-hemispheric
asymmetry.
1.4. Hurst Exponent, Fractal Dimension and 1/f Noise.
A time series of events allows the possibility to study the whole process tendency, and not only the final
result or global parameters that by their mathematical nature are obligated to collapse the time giving us a
frozen picture of the phenomena. Though this can be no problem while studying and analyzing historically
independent samples, it is not the case when the study is focused on chronological processes in which any new
event can be dependent in some extent to the previous states. For this kind of phenomena, an average
comparison does not give us much information. Using global and time collapsed parameters can help us to look
for some research initial directions to decide from where to start digging the data, but afterwards it is necessary
to deal with time series analysis.
In studying historical phenomena, time series analysis allowed the discovery of some historical processes,
apparently independent of its own past behavior that showed some regularity in their occurrence, as if an inner
historical process would be clicking with a specific and regular time-lag
One the first of this characterization came from Harold Edwin Hurst [14] who was studying the hydrology
time parameters of the Nile River when he found some strange auto-correlation in the periodicity of the Nile
changing flux behavior. The mathematical model of this process gave rise to the Hurst exponent which can be
understood as a measure of the long-range dependence that the time series has with respect to its own past
history. The H parameter describes the behavior of the underlying physical system over which the observable
phenomena arises. The dynamical patterns turn to be self-similar or long-memory, depending on the value of H
which measures the intensity of this dependence to the past. Hurst exponent ranges from 0 to 1, having in the
0.5 value a phase shift limit. When 0 < H < 0.5 indicates a time series with long term switching in sequential
values, meaning that a high value in the series will probably followed by a low value, and so on. The result of
this kind of behavior is a permanent return to average values without showing a particular trend or tendency.
Values of 0.5 < H < 1 indicates long term positive autocorrelation, meaning that high values are more probably
followed by high values, occurring the same when low values appear, being more probably followed by low
values. H = 0.5 indicates a completely uncorrelated series of Gaussian (Brownian motion) noise. This series is
normally distributed and involves no long memory process. The higher the H value is, the more apparent the
underlying tendency is, and the time series looks less “jagged” compared with those with low H values. Hurst
exponent determines the rate of chaos, in other words, it measures the amount of ordered incidents occurring in
time arising from a chaotic or uncorrelated background, and it is useful to distinguishing fractal from random
time series. H is also a measure of the ‘mild’ or ‘wild’ randomness of the data series.
The formula D = 2 – H, indicates the relationship between Hurst exponent and fractal dimension (D). The
concept of fractal dimension was formally introduced by Benoit Mandelbrot [15] and is a parameter indicating
how smooth or rough is the time series. Values of fractal dimension are fractional and non-integers, as is
common to think about in term of Euclidean dimensions. In the case of our interest here D values ranges
between 1 and 2, meaning intermediate dimensions between a line (D = 1) and a plane (D = 2). Table 1 show
the relationship between values of H, D and alpha (α) which is related to H (and D) by the formula H = (1+ α)/2.
It comes from the fact that the amount of energy that distributes in a particular frequency range of a stochastic
process has the form of S(f) = constant / f α. 1/f noise is the generalized form to refer to this kind of signals in
which its energy distribution decay as a straight line with negative slope in a log-log plot of energy v/s
frequency. 1/f fluctuations are widely found in nature occurring in many diverse systems both in natural world

1414

M. Hernán Díaz et al. / Procedia Computer Science 55 (2015) 1410 – 1419

and man-made procedures. It has been observed in physics, technology, ecology, EEG signals; cardiac response;
astrophysics, geophysics, language and even music [16-17-18].
Table 1. Relationship between H, D and α values.
H
0
0.5
1

D
2
1.5
1

α
-1
0
1

Table 2 shows the relationship between these parameters and the three 1/f noises.
Table 2. Relationship between White, Pink and Brown noise with H and α values.

α
H
D

WHITE NOISE
1/ f 0
-1
-

PINK NOISE
1/ f
0
2

BROWN NOISE
1/ f 2
0.5
1.5

All of these parameters indicate slightly different but complementary characteristics of a time series. They
have been widely used testing the value of prediction in the stock market [19-20] and recently has been applied
to physiological phenomena like heart beat dynamics [21], epilepsy [22], non-linear analysis of the EEG during
mathematical problem solving [23], and body balance strategies [24].
Aimed with these non-linear tools that allow us to explore brain dynamics and describe EEG
phenomenology in more heuristic ways taking into consideration the complex nature of brain dynamics, we can
be more confident and accurate in trying to unveil and quantitatively describe some aspects of the physical
system that underlies the electrical brain activity emerging during a problem solving task.
In this work we explore the hypothesis that brain functional dynamics must change adapting accordingly to
the level of difficulty of the faced problem and that this operational change may be related with a process of
adequacy and adjust of the use of resources available for information management and problem solving. We
expect to find differences at the level of frequency bands in charge of different processes involved in a problem
task with increasing level of difficulty, and also inter-individual differences probably due to a different set of
strategies and cognitive skills previously learned by experience.
2. Method
2.1. Raven’s (abbreviated version) progressive matrices test.
Raven’s Progressive Matrices test [25] is a non-verbal test that consists of a number of problems in which
the subject selects, from a set of alternatives, missing pieces of a chart with the aim to complete a drawing
logical series. The task consists in compare forms and figures reasoning by analogy. The test used in this
experiment corresponds to a reduced version (15 questions) of the original Raven test. Sequential figures are
presented in a computer screen and the response process recorded in real time, while an electroencephalogram
(EEG) is simultaneously recorded from 14 electrodes settled on the subject’ scalp.
2.2. EEG recording and analysis.
EEG recording consisted of N=12 subjects in basal (resting conditions) EEG with open and closed eyes,
prior to the test and a further EEG recording captured during the whole resolution of the Raven test. We used

M. Hernán Díaz et al. / Procedia Computer Science 55 (2015) 1410 – 1419

1415

the non-invasive brain computer device Emotiv EPOC® [26] to record 14 channels from head locations
according to the standard 10/20 system. After subtracting the baseline and eliminating common signal artifacts
with the assistance of EEGLAB and ADJUST [27] toolboxes running under Matlab, we obtained clean signals
for the five EEG bands: delta, theta, alpha, beta and gamma. These signals reflect the ongoing functional
dynamics of each subject's brain operation in two conditions of quiet resting awake (eyes open and closed), and
during the execution of the abbreviated version of Raven test.
The EEG signal was then analyzed by filtered frequency bands during the execution of the whole test. Hurst
exponent was estimated by rescaled range procedure [28], which estimates H by mean of calculating the slope
of the curve as indicated in Figure 1. For the final analysis we focused on gamma band (30-64 Hz) expected to
be more implicated in cognitive workload.

Fig. 1. Pox plot for estimating Hurst Exponent.

3. Results
3.1. Hurst Exponent and EEG bands
Figure 2 shows H values for a representative subject in basal conditions with eyes opened. A strong
difference can be seen when comparing H value between 0-4 Hz with rest of the EEG range.

Fig. 2. H values versus EEG frequency bands in 4 Hz steps. Basal condition with eyes opened.
The graph in the left shows the whole EEG range analyzed from 0-4 Hz to 44-48 Hz. In the graph to the right 0-4 Hz range was
removed to allow better visualization of H differences in the following EEG ranges.

1416

M. Hernán Díaz et al. / Procedia Computer Science 55 (2015) 1410 – 1419

Although it is expected that delta range (0-4 Hz) had high values of H because of the low frequency and
smoother aspect of the EEG trace, what it is not so expected is the sudden decrease when estimating H values
for the following range (4-8 Hz). As the shift toward the following higher frequency range (> 4 Hz) is not a
proportional shift, this non-linear behavior may confirm the existence of specific processes occurring at low
EEG frequencies in the delta range which are substantially different from subsequent ranges of EEG activity.
Compared with synthetically generated data showed in Figure 3, it is clear that EEG behaves in a different way.

Fig. 3. EEG bands traces comparison (left) with different increasing H values for the same synthetically generated signals (right).

Expressed in terms of the classical EEG bands (Delta, Theta, Alpha, Beta and Gamma), Figure 4 shows the
average H values for these frequency ranges, comparing average differences between left and right brain
hemispheres.

Fig. 4. EEG typical frequency bands comparing average differences between left (L) and right (R) brain hemispheres. Basal condition
with eyes opened. The graph in the left shows the whole EEG range analyzed from Delta to Gamma. In the graph to the right Delta range
was removed to allow better visualization of H differences in the following EEG bands.

3.2. Hurst Exponent and brain asymmetry.
To explore further into individual brain hemispheric H values asymmetry underlying brain processes
occurring at different frequency ranges, Figure 5 depicts these differences for left and right brain hemispheres.

Fig. 5. Individual Hurst Exponent asymmetry by frequency ranges. H from Left (HL) and Right (HR) hemispheres. Left graph shows
whole EEG range. In the graph to the right 0-4 Hz range was removed to allow better visualization of H differences in the following EEG
ranges. Basal condition with eyes opened.

M. Hernán Díaz et al. / Procedia Computer Science 55 (2015) 1410 – 1419

1417

Figure 6 shows H values asymmetry by EEG channels in basal condition, eyes opened.

Fig. 6. Emotiv-Epoc® EEG channels configuration and left and right asymmetry for one individual in basal condition, eyes opened.

3.2. Hurst Exponent during execution of cognitive task (Raven test abbreviated version).
Figure 7 shows an individual representative plot of the variation of Hurst exponents during Raven test
execution for whole brain data.

Fig. 7. Hurst Exponent variation according execution of Raven test. Questions 1 to 15 (Q1 to q15). Whole brain data.

Figure 8 shows a representative plot of the variation of Hurst exponent values during Raven test execution
for brain data clustered in left and right hemispheres to show asymmetric behavior of H during problem solving
processing.

1418

M. Hernán Díaz et al. / Procedia Computer Science 55 (2015) 1410 – 1419

Fig. 8. Hurst Exponent variation according execution of Raven test. Questions 1 to 15 (Q1 to Q15).
Left (L) and right (R) brain hemispheres asymmetry.

Conclusions
Non-linear analysis of the EEG through fractal modeling and chaos theory gives a deeper picture and
understanding of the underlying physical processes that must be involved in the generation of EEG
phenomenology. Our first exploratory results confirm the idea that the rate of chaos and order emerging from
brain functional processing varies according to the difficult of the cognitive task executed, revealing as well
individual particularities in the asymmetric processing of the information that brain performs when is faced to a
cognitive challenge.
Individual differences were also seen in basal resting condition with eyes opened revealing that a default
state of the brain could be setting a background status from where to start processing. This individual default
state should be the result of individual differences stabilized over the years through learning.
Interestingly, alpha EEG band in resting condition resulted in the lower values of H, meaning that at this
frequency the brain functional state is in its more unpredictable fashion, short memory, anti-persistence and
high volatility tendency. By the contrary, while scaling into processing problems with increasing level of
difficulty, H values increase toward the direction of less complexity and more predictability.
As the increase of H values are not perfectly proportional with the increase of EEG frequency range, this
suggests that each range of EEG frequency can be characterized by a different level of self-similarity and
randomness, in relation with the experimental protocol tested.
Above delta band and specially related with those EEG bands presumably involved in cognitive processing
it is expected that H values tend to increase, revealing underlying mechanisms that attract the system to less
chaotic, more ordered, self-similar, fractal and predictable system.
At the range of delta frequencies, it is clear that the brain shows a more structured and predictable dynamics
maybe having to do with task unrelated with perceptual or behavioral performance and more associated with
housekeeping less volatile processes.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by 061317CG DICYT Project at Universidad de Santiago de Chile.

M. Hernán Díaz et al. / Procedia Computer Science 55 (2015) 1410 – 1419

References
[1] Millet, D. 2001. Hans Berger: From Psychic Energy to the EEG. Perspectives in Biology and Medicine 44, Number 4, pp 522-542.
[2] Sack, O. 1985. The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat. Touchstone Books.
[3] Garey L. 2006. Brodmann's Localisation in the Cerebral Cortex. Springer, New York.
[4] Gillin, J. 2001. Recent Advances in Sleep and Chronobiology. Neuropsychopharmacology, Vol 25, No S5.
[5] Carhart-Harris R., Leech R., Hellyer P., Shanahan M., Feilding A., Tagliazucchi E., Chialvo D., and Nutt D. 2014. The entropic brain: a
theory of conscious states informed by neuroimaging research with psychedelic drugs. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 8:20.
[6] Tang, P. 2013. An overview of linear and nonlinear anlysis for alcoholic. International Journal of Digital Content Technology and its
Applications. Vol 7, No 12.
[7] Edrees, M. 2006. Application of fractal dimension. Iraqi Journal of statistical science 10, pp 54-73.
[8] Stam, C., Van Straaten, E. 2012. The organization of physiological brain networks. Clinical neurophysiology. Vol 123, Issue 6, pp10671087.
[9] Buzsaki, G. 2011. Rhythms of the Brain, Oxford University Press.
[10] Joseph, P, Kannathal N., Sadasivan K., Rajendra A, Ng' E. 2007. Complex electroencephalogram dynamics during meditation. Journal
of chinese clinical medicine. Vol 2, No 4.
[11] Borg, F., Gerd L. 2010. Entropy of balance - some recent results. Journal of Neuroenginnering and Rehabilitation. 7:38.
[12] Samorodnitsky, G. 2006. Long range dependence. Foundations and Trends in Stochastic Systems, Vol. 1, No 3, pp 163-257.
[13] Dìaz, H., Cordova, F. 2013. Harmonic Fractals in the Brain: Transient Tuning and Synchronic Coordination in the Quasi-Chaotic
Background of Ongoing Neural EEG Activity. Procedia computer science. Volume 17, 2013, Pages 403–411.
[14] Hurst, H., Phillips, P. 1933. The Nile Basin. Govt. Press.- Nature.
[15] Mandelbrot, B. 1983. The Fractal Geometry of Nature. San Francisco: W.H. Freeman.
[16] Baillie, R. 1996. Long memory processes and fractional integration in econometrics. J. Economet., 73:5-59.
[17] Gilden, D., Thornton, T., Mallon, M. 1995. 1/f noise in human cognition. Science, 267:1837--1839.
[18] Lauk, M., Chow, C., Pavlik, A., Collins, J. 1998. Human balance out of equilibrium: Nonequilibrium statistical mechanics in posture
control. Phys. Rev. Lett., 80:413--416.
[19] Linkenkaer-Hansen, K., Nikouline, V., Palva, J.. Ilmoniemi, R. 2001. Long-range temporal correlations and scaling behavior in human
brain oscillations. J. Neuroscience, 21:1370-1377.
[20] West B., Shlesinger, M. 1990. The noise in natural phenomena, American Scientist, 78:40-45.
[21] Gontis, V., Kaulakys, B. 2007. Modeling long-range memory trading activity by stochastic differential equations. Physica A,
382(1):114-120.
[22] Mitra, S. 2012. Is Hurst Exponent Value Useful in Forecasting Financial Time Series? Asian Social Science Vol. 8, No. 8.
[23] Osorio, I., Frei, M. 2007. Hurst parameter estimation for epileptic sizure detection. Communication in Information and Systems. Vol.
7, No 2, pp 167-176.
[24] Lutzenberger, W., Elbert, T., Birbaumer, N., Ray; W., Schupp, H. 1992. The scalp distribution of the Fractal Dimension of the EEG
and its variation with mental tasks. Brain Topography Vol 5, pp 27-34.
[25] Raven, J. 2000. The Raven’s Progressive Matrices: Change and Stability over Culture and Time. Cognitive Psychology 41, 1-48.
[26] Badcock, N., Mousikou, P., Mahajan, Y., De Lissa, P., Thie, J., McArthur, G. 2013. Validation of the Emotiv EPOC ® EEG gaming
system for measuring research quality auditory ERPs. PeerJ 1:e38.
[27] Mognon, A., Jovicich, J., Bruzzone, L., Buiati, M. 2010. ADJUST: An automatic EEG artifact detector based on the joint use of
spatial and temporal features. Psychophysiology 1–12.
[28] Ramírez J, .Echeverria, J., Rodríguez, E. 2008. Performance of a high-dimensional R/S method for Hurst exponent estimation. Physica
A 387. pp 6452–6462.

1419

