This article was downloaded by: [Florida State University]
On: 19 July 2015, At: 10:35
Publisher: Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: 5 Howick Place,
London, SW1P 1WG

Journal of Clinical Child & Adolescent Psychology
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/hcap20

Combining Neural and Behavioral Indicators in the
Assessment of Internalizing Psychopathology in
Children and Adolescents
a

a

b

Jason S. Moser , C. Emily Durbin , Christopher J. Patrick & Norman B. Schmidt
a

b

Department of Psychology , Michigan State University

b

Department of Psychology , Florida State University
Published online: 31 Jan 2014.

Click for updates
To cite this article: Jason S. Moser , C. Emily Durbin , Christopher J. Patrick & Norman B. Schmidt (2015) Combining Neural
and Behavioral Indicators in the Assessment of Internalizing Psychopathology in Children and Adolescents, Journal of Clinical
Child & Adolescent Psychology, 44:2, 329-340, DOI: 10.1080/15374416.2013.865191
To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15374416.2013.865191

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE
Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the “Content”) contained
in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no
representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the
Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors, and
are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and
should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for
any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever
or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of
the Content.
This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic
reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any
form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://
www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions

Journal of Clinical Child & Adolescent Psychology, 0(0),
20142015
44(2),1–12,
329–340,
Copyright © Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
ISSN: 1537-4416 print/1537-4424 online
DOI: 10.1080/15374416.2013.865191

Combining Neural and Behavioral Indicators
in the Assessment of Internalizing Psychopathology
in Children and Adolescents
Jason S. Moser and C. Emily Durbin
Department of Psychology, Michigan State University

Downloaded by [Florida State University] at 10:35 19 July 2015

Christopher J. Patrick and Norman B. Schmidt
Department of Psychology, Florida State University

Anxiety and mood disorders are among the most prevalent mental health problems affecting
our youth. We propose that assessment and treatment efforts in this area can benefit from a
focus on developmentally sensitive neurobehavioral trait constructs, that is, individual difference constructs with direct referents in both neurobiology and behavior across the lifespan. This approach dovetails with the National Institute of Mental Health’s Research
Domain Criteria initiative, which aims to improve classification and treatment of psychopathology by delineating dimensions of functioning that transcend measurement domains and
traditional diagnostic categories. We highlight two neurobehavioral dimensions with clear
relevance for understanding internalizing problems at differing ages: (a) defensive reactivity
and (b) cognitive control. Individual differences in defensive reactivity are posited to reflect
variations in sensitivity of the brain’s negative valence systems, whereas differences in cognitive control are theorized to reflect variations in neural systems dedicated to regulating
behavior and affect. Focusing on these target constructs, we illustrate a psychoneurometric
approach to assessment of internalizing psychopathology entailing use of neural, selfreport, and behavioral indicators. We address the feasibility of the psychoneurometric
approach for clinical application and present results from a pilot study demonstrating
expected associations for neural, parent-report, and behavioral measures of defensive reactivity and cognitive control with internalizing symptoms in preschoolers. Together, our conceptual and empirical analyses highlight the promise of multimethod, dimensional
assessment of internalizing psychopathology in the lab and in the clinic.

Anxiety and depression represent the most common
psychological problems reported across the lifespan
(Beesdo, Knappe, & Pine, 2009; Costello, Mustillo,
Erkanli, Keeler, & Angold, 2003; Kessler, Chiu, Demler,
& Walters, 2005; Lewinsohn, Hops, Roberts, Seeley,
& Andrews, 1993). Indeed, anxiety problems are the primary reason for referral of children and adolescents for
mental health services (Beidel, 1991). Fifteen to 20% of
our youth in the United States are estimated to suffer
from an anxiety disorder (Beesdo et al., 2009), and nearly
Correspondence should be addressed to Jason S. Moser, Department
of Psychology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824.
E-mail: jmoser@msu.edu

20% are expected to experience a major depressive
episode by age 18 (Lewinsohn et al., 1993). These internalizing (anxiety and depressive) problems are associated with a range of impairments in adaptive functioning
in children and adolescents, including social and academic problems as well as increased risk for suicide and
comorbid conditions (Gould et al., 1998; Rohde,
Lewinsohn, & Seeley, 1994). Their co-occurrence, which
is extremely common (Sørensen, Nissen, Mors, &
Thomsen, 2005; Stark & Laurent, 2001), is even more
problematic, as youth suffering from both anxiety and
depressive problems show greater chronicity, higher rates
of recurrence and suicide, greater functional impairment, poorer treatment outcomes, and greater utilization

Downloaded by [Florida State University] at 10:35 19 July 2015

330
2

MOSER
MOSER
ET ET
AL.AL.

of mental health care (Birmaher et al., 1996). Of
importance, internalizing problems in childhood and
adolescence appear to set the stage for continued adjustment problems into adulthood (Rohde et al., 1994;
Weissman et al., 1999). Given the impact of anxiety and
depression across the lifespan, it is critical to identify
those at risk early.
Our aims in this article are to describe risk identification using a multimethod developmental approach and
to discuss the clinical feasibility of adopting this
approach. To move the assessment of internalizing problems toward a multilevel analytic framework, it will be
critical to focus systematic investigative effort on constructs that can bridge clinical problems with neurobiological systems. That is, neural systems need to be
understood not just unto themselves but as they relate to
the development and maintenance of behavior problems,
and to strategies for preventing and ameliorating such
problems (cf. Cuthbert & Insel, 2010; Sanislow et al.,
2010).
We propose a psychoneurometric approach (Patrick,
Durbin, & Moser, 2012; Patrick et al., 2013) that reconceptualizes clinical disorders in terms of dispositional
constructs that can be linked to neurobiological systems
and measures. Rather than focusing on discrete diagnostic conditions as targets for neurobiological analysis, the
psychoneurometric approach focuses on clinically relevant neurobehavioral traits (i.e., hypothesized dispositions with direct referents in neurobiology and behavior)
as bridging constructs. Self-report or behavioral measures of these target constructs serve as initial referents
for identifying reliable indicators in the domain of neurophysiology. Our objective in this review is to describe
how this approach can contribute to the assessment of
anxiety and depressive disorders in a developmental
context.
Operating from this perspective, we highlight two constructs of central importance to internalizing psychopathology that have well-established referents in
developmental psychology and known biomarkers:
defensive reactivity and cognitive control. Individual differences in defensive reactivity are posited to reflect variations in sensitivity of the brain’s negative valence
systems, whereas differences in cognitive control are theorized to reflect variations in neural systems dedicated to
regulating behavior and affect. These constructs are relevant to multiple internalizing disorders, and understanding them in neurobiological and developmental terms
will be crucial to a complete account of internalizing psychopathology. Important to the aims of this special issue,
we address the feasibility of assessing these neurobehavioral constructs in children and adolescents in the clinic.
Furthermore, we provide an empirical demonstration of
this psychoneurometric approach in preschool-aged
children.

DEFENSIVE REACTIVITY AND COGNITIVE
CONTROL AS CORE NEUROBEHAVIORAL
CONSTRUCTS OF RELEVANCE TO
INTERNALIZING PROBLEMS
The emotional state of fear has been conceptualized in
terms of reactivity of the brain’s defensive motivational
system, which functions to prime evasive action in the
presence of threat cues (Davis, 1992; Fanselow, 1994;
Lang, 1995; LeDoux, 1995). The idea of constitutional
variations in general fearfulness is plausible from a biological-evolutionary perspective, insofar as tendencies
toward greater versus lesser defensive reactivity have differing adaptive value across alternative environmental
contexts (cf. Lykken, 1995). Individual differences in fear
have been featured prominently in theories of temperament. Timidity (i.e., lack of approach and presence of
withdrawal) in novel situations, as well as arousal in
response to novel stimuli, and social reticence are central
to Kagan’s (1994) concept of behavioral inhibition in
children, which he viewed as a risk factor for the development of anxiety disorders. Kochanska (1997) also
emphasized variations in dispositional fear as an important moderator of the effect of socialization processes on
conscience development (Kochanska, Gross, Lin, &
Nichols, 2002).
Other theorists have focused on placing fear proneness
within broader structural models of temperament, often
as part of a higher order Negative Emotionality factor
that typically also includes dispositional anger- and sadness-proneness (Shiner, 1998). For example, Goldsmith
and Campos (1982) characterized fearfulness as one of
five basic dimensions of temperament, and Buss and
Plomin (1984) identified fear proneness as one of two
basic trait expressions of negative emotional reactivity
(the other being anger) that emerge within the 1st year of
life.
The content domain of dispositional fear, and the
extent to which it has primarily been treated as a lower
order manifestation of a more general distress-proneness
dimension (Negative Emotionality [NE]), or alternatively
in the form of narrower constructs such as behavioral inhibition (BI) or shyness, has varied somewhat in the literature. Various models derived from parent-report methods
have emphasized differing manifestations of trait fear
within the broader domain of NE (e.g., specific fears of
situations or animals vs. social anxiety/social reticence);
thus, each may be emphasizing somewhat different components of a broader dispositional fear construct. However,
even conceptions that focus on narrower constructs, such
as BI or shyness, appear to represent complex configurations of traits. BI includes elements of both high NE and
low positive emotionality (Laptook et al., 2008), and shy
behavior can reflect high anxiety (social-evaluative shyness), isolation emerging from peer rejection, or low social

Downloaded by [Florida State University] at 10:35 19 July 2015

ASSESSMENT
OF OF
INTERNALIZING
PSYCHOPATHOLOGY
ASSESSMENT
INTERNALIZING
PSYCHOPATHOLOGY

interest (Asendorpf, 1993). To provide a more coherent
target for linkage with neurobiological constructs, it will be
important to understand the nature and structure of
dimensions underlying fear proneness, taking into account
developmentally appropriate manifestations of fear.
It remains to be seen whether parsing the construct of
trait fear into these lower order traits will result in greater
predictive validity to distinct neurophysiological indices
or improved discriminant validity with respect to differing
internalizing disorders. Evidence from structural analyses
of internalizing disorder diagnoses and symptoms in
youngsters (Higa-McMillan, Smith, Chorpita, & Hayashi,
2008; Lahey et al., 2008) generally supports the distinction between “fear” and “distress” disorders documented
in the adult literature (e.g., Krueger, 1999; Watson, 2005).
The evidence for this distinction across ages suggests that
elements of worry and perhaps shyness and social-evaluative concerns may cluster together with depressive disorders and generalized anxiety disorder, whereas other
fearful tendencies such as physical caution and object fear
may relate more strongly to phobic disorders.
Regarding the concept of cognitive control, theorists
since the earliest days of psychology have recognized a
broad dimension of human variation encompassing tendencies toward behavioral restraint versus disinhibition.
William James (1890) noted in his classic Principles of
Psychology that “there is a type of character in which
impulses seem to discharge so promptly into movements
that inhibitions get no time to arise” (p. 1144). Along
similar lines, contemporary theorists in the domains of
personality and psychopathology have identified individual difference constructs ranging from “ego control”
(Block & Block, 1980) to “constraint” (Tellegen, 1985) to
“novelty seeking” (Cloninger, 1987) to “syndromes of
disinhibition” (Gorenstein & Newman, 1980). The concept of behavioral restraint versus impulsivity is also featured prominently in developmental theories of
temperament (e.g., Buss & Plomin, 1975; Kochanska,
1997; Rothbart & Ahadi, 1994).
In adults, low cognitive control has been considered in
theories of both internalizing and externalizing, that is,
as a factor contributing to difficulty inhibiting impulses
and overlearned responses, including tendencies toward
aggression and impulsivity, and to negative emotional
dysregulation characteristic of internalizing (Carver,
Johnson, & Joormann, 2008). In youth, low levels of cognitive control have been repeatedly associated with externalizing problem behavior, and in some studies to
internalizing (e.g., Eisenberg et al., 2009). The link
between internalizing and cognitive control in children is
less clear, however. As in adults, high cognitive control
may enable children to effectively regulate negative emotion, thus reducing internalizing risk. Alternatively, given
links between high effortful control and tendencies
toward guilt/shame in children (Rothbart, Ahadi,

3
331

& Hershey, 1994) high cognitive control may in fact
predispose to internalizing problems during some periods in development.
In addition, the relationship of cognitive control to
internalizing may vary as a function of fear proneness at
certain points in development. For example, neurobehavioral models suggest that protracted development of neural capacity for cognitive control may couple with
peripubertal increases in neural sensitivity to fear to
increase risk for internalizing problems at the transition
to adolescence (Casey et al., 2010). This is supported by
work showing that low effortful control interacts with
high fear proneness to predict internalizing symptoms in
late childhood/early adolescence (Muris, Meesters,
& Blijlevens, 2007; Oldehinkel, Hartman, Ferdinand,
Verhulst, & Ormel, 2007).
BEHAVIORAL ASSESSMENT OF DEFENSIVE
REACTIVITY AND COGNITIVE CONTROL
Laboratory task paradigms may be particularly useful
for formulating bottom-up models of core mechanisms
underlying variations in defensive reactivity/fear proneness. Laboratory methods have significant incremental
advantages beyond parent report measures (Durbin,
2010) because (a) they circumvent biases in parent report
associated with parental psychopathology (e.g., Durbin
& Wilson, 2012; Richters, 1992); (b) they circumvent limitations in parental knowledge/awareness of children’s
fearful tendencies (e.g., due to constraints on observation
resulting from parents’ tendency to keep children away
from threatening stimuli); and (c) they define constructs
of interest at the level of specific observable patterns of
behavior (rather than inferences about subjective state),
allowing for closer comparison with constructs assessed
in the animal literature such as freezing, withdrawal, and
exploration. Thus, they provide an important link to neuroscience on the biological bases of fearful temperament
in other animals.
Existing research utilizing batteries of laboratory tasks
(e.g., Durbin, 2010; Durbin, Hayden, Klein, & Olino,
2007; Durbin, Klein, Hayden, Buckley, & Moerk, 2005;
Hayden, Klein, Durbin, & Olino, 2006; Olino, Klein,
Dyson, Rose, & Durbin, 2010) has covered a range of
manifestations of traits related to fear/fearlessness and
inhibitory control. Tasks used for assessing fear proneness
include contact-with-stranger tasks, performance tasks
involving presentation of negative feedback or in which
concerns about social scrutiny are heightened, exposure
to typically fear-eliciting stimuli (e.g., scary objects, animals) or ambiguous/novel stimuli, or instructed engagement in acts that tend to elicit physical caution (such as
walking across a balance beam). Procedures for assessing
inhibitory control include tasks involving turn-taking,

Downloaded by [Florida State University] at 10:35 19 July 2015

332
4

MOSER
MOSER
ET ET
AL.AL.

delay of gratification, and temptation to engage in
impulsive behavior. Individual differences in responses
within these tasks have been linked to teacher- and parentreported internalizing and externalizing problems (Dougherty
et al., 2011; Hayden, Klein, & Durbin, 2005), and family
history of mood disorders (Durbin et al., 2005; Olino
et al., 2010). Other researchers have employed tasks focusing on motor slowing, inhibition of dominant behaviors,
and patience in response to delays as indicators of effortful control (e.g., Kochanksa, Murray, Jacques, Koenig, &
Vandegeest, 1996), or measures from cognitive psychology designed to tap executive functioning skills (e.g.,
Diamond & Taylor, 1996; Hongwanishkul, Happaney,
Lee, & Zelazo, 2005).
Lab measures of fear proneness in preschoolers have
been linked to familial risk for internalizing disorders (e.g.,
Olino et al., 2010), child anxiety disorders (e.g., Dougherty
et al., 2011), and genetic polymorphisms (Hayden et al.,
2007). Moreover, laboratory research on dispositional fear
(e.g., Dyson, Olino, Durbin, Goldsmith, & Klein, 2012)
indicates that this construct is differentiable from individual differences in other negative emotions. The use of
laboratory tasks is also helpful for defining narrower fear
phenotypes that may have differential associations with
neurobiological or psychopathological constructs.
NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT
OF DEFENSIVE REACTIVITY AND
COGNITIVE CONTROL
Extant research provides a strong base for incorporating
neurophysiological measures of defensive reactivity and
cognitive control into the study of internalizing psychopathology across development. Fear-potentiated startle
and right-sided asymmetric brain activation are welldocumented indices of dispositional defensive reactivity.
The error-related negativity component of the human
event-related potential, on the other hand, appears to provide a reliable index of individual differences in cognitive
control processes relevant to learning and performance.
Fear-Potentiated Startle (FPS)
FPS, defined as the potentiation of the startle eyeblink
reflex during aversive stimulation, is thought to index
activity of the brain’s defensive motivational system
(Lang, Bradley, & Cuthbert, 1990, 1997). A substantial
body of animal research demonstrates that startle potentiation is mediated by the brain’s fear/defense circuit, centered in the amygdala (Davis, 2000; Davis, Antoniadis,
Amaral, & Winslow, 2008; LeDoux & Schiller, 2009). In
humans, FPS is reliably observed during exposure to a
range of aversive stimuli, including images of unpleasant
scenes such as those involving threat to oneself or injury

to others (Bradley, Codispoti, Cuthbert, & Lang, 2001).
As in animals, aversive visual cuing is known to elicit activation of the brain’s fear/defense circuit, including the
amygdala (Sabatinelli, Bradley, Fitzsimmons, & Lang,
2005), and it is this circuitry activation that is theorized to
potentiate the startle reflex (Lang et al., 1990). Consistent
with the conceptualization of FPS as an index of defensive reactivity, enhanced FPS has been demonstrated in
adolescents at risk for anxiety disorders (Grillon, Dierker,
& Merikangas, 1998), adult phobic patients (McTeague &
Lang, 2012), and individuals high on scale measures of
trait fear (Vaidyanathan, Patrick, & Bernat, 2009).
Elicitation of FPS in young children (<10 years) has
been inconsistent, primarily because of problems identifying age-appropriate stimuli. Children also have smaller
muscles around their eyes that can lead to poor signal
strength, and retention of data can be challenging
because of excessive movement artifacts and noncompliance with task procedures that are more common in children (Balaban & Berg, 2007). In response to these
concerns, Quevedo, Smith, Donzella, Schunk, and
Gunnar (2010) developed a task using child appropriate
film clips that was successful in producing comparable
FPS across a wide age range of individuals, from early
childhood (3 years of age) to adulthood (M age 2 years).
The film clips were chosen to be more engaging for the
children and displayed child-centered content (e.g.,
Disney characters and themes). It is yet unclear whether
FPS recorded in this task relates to internalizing psychopathology. Nonetheless, existing data support the utility
of FPS as a measure of defensive reactivity with relevance
for the expression of internalizing across the lifespan.
Resting EEG Asymmetry
Right-lateralized brain activation, measured by resting
electroencephalogram (EEG) activity, has also been
implicated as an index of defensive reactivity across the
lifespan. Right parietal regions are involved in vigilance
and threat detection (Compton et al., 2003; Corbetta
& Shulman, 2002), and enhanced right versus left parietal activation has been linked to individual differences in
fear proneness (indexed behaviorally) in children.
Likewise, enhanced right parietal activity appears to
characterize adults high in fear-related symptoms
(Nitschke, Heller, Palmieri, & Miller, 1999). Thus, across
the lifespan, right-lateralized parietal brain activation
operates as an indicator of defensive reactivity.
Error-Related Negativity (ERN)
Cognitive control involves engagement of processes in
frontal brain regions (Miller & Cohen, 2001), including
the anterior cingulate cortex, which has been found to
signal conflict from competing response options and

Downloaded by [Florida State University] at 10:35 19 July 2015

ASSESSMENT
OF OF
INTERNALIZING
PSYCHOPATHOLOGY
ASSESSMENT
INTERNALIZING
PSYCHOPATHOLOGY

errors to coordinate a distributed frontal network for
cognitive control implementation, thereby optimizing the
flexible adjustment of behavior (Botvinick, 2007;
Ridderinkhof, Ullsperger, Crone, & Nieuwenhuis, 2004).
Brain event-related potential (ERP) studies have identified the ERN as a robust marker of anterior cingulate
cortex–mediated cognitive control processes invoked by
performance errors (Holroyd & Coles, 2002; Yeung,
Botvinick, & Cohen, 2004). The ERN is clearly evident
in adolescents as well as adults (Davies, Segalowitz, &
Gavin, 2004) and, more recently, has been observed in
young children (i.e., ages 5–11; Kim, Iwaki, Imashioya,
Uno, & Fujita, 2007; Torpey, Hajcak, Kim, Kujawa,
& Klein, 2012; Wiersema, van der Meere, & Roeyers,
2007). The ERN thus represents a neurophysiological
marker of cognitive control across development.
Enhanced ERN characterizes both anxious children
(i.e., age 8–17; Hajcak, Franklin, Foa, & Simons, 2008;
Ladouceur, Dahl, Birmaher, Axelson, & Ryan, 2006) and
adults (Olvet & Hajcak, 2008), suggesting exaggerated
neurophysiologic-mediated cognitive control functions.
Of importance, however, recent work suggests that the
association between the ERN and internalizing may
change across development. Specifically, Meyer,
Weinberg, Klein, and Hajcak (2012) demonstrated, as in
adults, enhanced ERN for anxious versus nonanxious
older children (11–13 years), whereas somewhat smaller
ERN was evident for anxious versus nonanxious younger
children (8–10 years). In a recent follow-up study (Torpey
et al., 2013), this research group showed that children
even younger in age (6 years) characterized as highly
fearful showed reduced ERN in comparison with typically developing less fearful peers. In turn, this finding of
decreased cognitive control function as indexed by ERN
in fearful children coincides with evidence from selfreport research indicating that youth with internalizing
problems are characterized by low cognitive/effortful
control (e.g., Eisenberg et al., 2009).
This age-related change in the direction of association
between ERN and internalizing may reflect differential
developmental trajectories of defensive reactivity and
cognitive control. As previously mentioned, neurobehavioral models suggest that protracted development of neural capacity for cognitive control may couple with
peripubertal increases in neural sensitivity to fear to
increase risk for internalizing problems at the transition
to adolescence (Casey et al., 2010). Indeed, mean levels
of cognitive/effortful control increase from adolescence
to early adulthood (Donnellan, Conger, & Burzette,
2007; Roberts, Caspi, & Moffitt, 2001), whereas fearful
tendencies, particularly in female individuals, tend to
peak at peri-puberty (Durbin et al., under review), before
cognitive/effortful control is fully developed. The observation of reduced ERN in highly fearful children is consistent with the possibility that weak cognitive control

5
333

may increase proneness to anxiety in early development.
By contrast, enhanced ERN in older anxious youth may
reflect either a shift in core capacity for cognitive control
(from lower to higher) or, alternatively, neurophysiologic
compensation for insufficient capacity for cognitive control in anxious youth at later stages of development.
CLINICAL FEASIBILITY OF MEASURING
NEUROBEHAVIORAL CONSTRUCTS OF
RELEVANCE TO INTERNALIZING
PSYCHOPATHOLOGY
Although we have argued for a multimethod approach to
the assessment of internalizing problems using self- and
informant-reports, behavioral observation, and neurophysiology (e.g., FPS & EEG/ERP), we acknowledge the
barriers to employing such a battery of tests. In particular, the costs associated with collecting neurophysiological data include purchase and maintenance of recording
equipment and time and expenses for training in appropriate use. However, purchase prices for neurophysiological data collection systems have decreased in recent years,
and cost-effective systems are readily available from several companies such as BIOPAC and Emotiv. Many such
systems do not require specially shielded rooms and can
thus yield quality data in a variety of settings. In fact,
recent efforts have been devoted to creating low-cost systems suitable for recording neurophysiology in various
real-world settings, including ambulatory systems for
monitoring activity while walking outdoors (Debener,
Minow, Emkes, Gandras, & Vos, 2012). The technology
is thus becoming more affordable and more flexible for
application in clinical settings.
Of importance, recording of measures such as FPS,
resting EEG asymmetry, and ERN can also be achieved
quite efficiently. Recording FPS involves application of
only two electrodes beneath one eye (Blumenthal et al.,
2005). EEG asymmetry and ERN can be recorded with
just two lateral/parietal scalp electrodes (P3 and P4; e.g.,
Nitschke et al., 1999) and one fronto-central electrode
(FCz; e.g., Weinberg, Olvet, & Hajcak, 2010), accompanied by a small number of other additional reference electrodes for electrical grounding and artifact detection
purposes. With electrode positioning provided by a spandex or stretch-lycra cap, recording these three measures
could be done at a low cost and with minimal setup time.
Two desktop computers or laptops—one for stimulus presentation and another for data collection—would be
required and could be stationed in a single room or two
adjacent rooms. These computers could also be placed on
rollaway carts to provide for recording in alternative locations, with easy storage when not in use. With this straightforward system, only one clinician or support staff
member would be needed to conduct the assessment.

Downloaded by [Florida State University] at 10:35 19 July 2015

334
6

MOSER
MOSER
ET ET
AL.AL.

Collecting neurophysiological data is also quite
noninvasive and generally well tolerated by patients
across the lifespan, as evidenced by the exponential
increase in psychopathology studies examining neurophysiology over the past several decades. These attributes
also make EEG/ERP data collection more feasible for
clinicians. EEG is already commonly collected in hospitals for testing seizure-related conditions and may serve
as a natural bridge to using such methods with mental
health patients. In fact, EEG/ERP has been utilized
extensively in some of the most complex clinical cases,
including paralyzed and “locked-in” patients, to provide
such patients with a means for communicating through
brain–computer interfaces (e.g., Birbaumer, 2006). With
respect to internalizing problems in particular, there is a
wealth of data, previously reviewed, to suggest that EEG/
ERP and FPS measures are clinically feasible with this
population across the lifespan.
With regard to behavioral observations, assessments
of this type are already commonly utilized by clinicians
engaged in parent training and family therapy, as well as
in some assessment contexts (such as classroom observations or exposure-based treatments for social anxiety).
Many emotionally evocative lab tasks could easily be
conducted within a clinical setting, as most do not require
expensive equipment or additional personnel. For example, social-evaluative concerns can be elicited readily
using performance tasks employing simple stimuli (such
as games, puzzles, or cognitive tasks). Individual differences in cognitive control can be assessed using delay
tasks and simple games such as Simon Says that are easily administered in an individual or group therapy session. We anticipate that future clinicians will have
neurophysiological and behavioral observation methods
more readily at their disposal to help advance assessment
and treatment of internalizing problems across
development.
Translating this model to intervention, the aforementioned neurobehavioral traits would serve as the targets
for treatment rather than broad and heterogeneous diagnostic categories. Treatment would thus become transdiagnostic in nature, with applications to a range of
individuals suffering from internalizing-related problems.
Because our approach is multimethod, treatment
response would not be constrained to diagnostic status
but, rather, would be indexed by changes across selfreport, neurophysiology, and behavior. Our dimensional
approach also allows for interventions to be preventative
for those at risk as well as ameliorative for those suffering
from active impairments.
Treatments targeting core mechanisms already exist
for internalizing psychopathology. For instance, attention bias modification procedures that direct attention to
emotionally neutral versus threatening stimuli have been
developed for internalizing problems such as social

phobia (e.g., Amir et al., 2009). However, rather than
applying modification procedures based on diagnostic
status, our approach suggests that individuals could be
selected into treatment at differing extremes along the
dimension of defensive reactivity. We also suggest that
FPS, rather than self-report, could be used to determine
the most fear-evoking visual or imaginal cues for use in
vivo or imaginal exposure exercises with individuals high
in defensive reactivity, for example, in a computerized
habituation procedure using images from the
International Affective Picture System (Lang, Bradley, &
Cuthbert, 1999). Changes across all measures of defensive reactivity—FPS, EEG asymmetry, self-report, and
behavior—could then be tracked as indicators of treatment success.
As for cognitive control, cognitive training/remediation programs designed to improve cognitive functions
and reduce symptoms would be natural interventions to
use to target our neurobehavioral trait constructs. For
example, Siegle, Ghinassi, and Thase (2007) demonstrated the promise of cognitive training in depression;
following from this, our focus would be on selecting individuals based on neurobehavioral cognitive-control metrics rather than diagnosis. Similar sorts of cognitive
training paradigms have recently been suggested for anxiety-related problems, with some specifically targeting
error-related processes (Sylvester et al., 2012), which can
be operationalized using ERN. Finally, better understanding the normative development of these neurobehavioral constructs would help to identify critical periods
of development in which intervention or prevention
strategies can produce optimal impact on these dispositions and affiliated risk for internalizing problems.
EMPIRICAL DEMONSTRATION
In this next section, we present pilot data from a collaborative project involving three of the four authors (JSM, CED,
CJP) in which we have begun to apply the psychoneurometric approach to the study of internalizing psychopathology in preschool-aged children (ages 3–7). Our focus
on young children is motivated by the importance of identifying core liabilities relevant to internalizing psychopathology prior to the onset of manifest disorder so as to
distinguish between processes that are etiologically relevant
(i.e., causes) and those that are the outcome of emergent
psychopathology. This distinction is critical for theoretical
models of the role of these trait processes in the development of risk. However, even dimensions that reflect outcomes of pathological processes (rather than their causes)
may still be useful targets for treatment. Second, our model
presumes that behavioral measures may provide closer phenotypic targets for neurophysiological measures (as compared to questionnaires), and empirical research on child

ASSESSMENT
OF OF
INTERNALIZING
PSYCHOPATHOLOGY
ASSESSMENT
INTERNALIZING
PSYCHOPATHOLOGY

temperament has produced a range of laboratory methods
for eliciting and assessing individual differences in behaviors reflecting fear proneness and cognitive control. Many
of these methods focus on the identification of behavioral
phenotypes similar to those employed in the animal literature (e.g., freezing as an index of fear). By contrast, such
measures are largely lacking for adolescents and adults.
Thus, for both theoretical and methodological reasons, we
believe that early developmental periods can serve as an
important starting point and continuing referent for work
of this kind. However, the real power of this approach will
be revealed to the extent that it can be applied in future
studies across the lifespan.

Downloaded by [Florida State University] at 10:35 19 July 2015

Sample
Children and their parents undergo extensive diagnostic,
psychometric, observational, and neurophysiologic
assessments as part of a larger ongoing project examining the development and familial transmission of anxiety
and depressive problems. We focus here on associations
between neurophysiological measures and behavioral lab
task and self-report measures showing the most promise
in the children. Thirty-one children (13 female;
M age = 5.73 years, SD = 1.38) completed at least one of
the neurophysiological tasks and had data available from
the laboratory behavioral assessment. Most children
(91.3%) came from families with annual household
incomes equal to or less $60,000. Most mothers (66.7%)
had an associates degree or less, and most fathers (56.3%)
had attended some college or less. Data submitted to
each analysis were from a subset of the total sample, as
some data were lost due to of excessive artifacts, poor
behavioral performance on the ERN task, or because the
child did not complete one of the neurophysiological
tasks (e.g., time constraints, task not yet available). Thus,
sample sizes vary for the differing associations reported
on next. Significant as well and nonsignificant effects of
moderate to large size are reported to illustrate the
potential of our novel approach.
Laboratory Behavioral Assessment
We employed a battery of 15 tasks designed to tap individual differences in defensive reactivity, cognitive control, and near-neighbor constructs, drawn from prior
investigations of child temperament (e.g., Durbin, 2010;
Durbin et al., 2007; Durbin et al., 2005) or specifically
designed for this study. Tasks were selected because they
have been shown to be sensitive to risk for internalizing
disorders (Durbin et al., 2005), capable of assessing stable
elements of these traits (Durbin et al., 2007), or (for new
tasks) because of their theoretical relevance to the constructs of interest. For example, fear-eliciting tasks
included contact with a stranger, performance procedures

7
335

involving receipt of negative feedback or heightened
social scrutiny concerns, exposure to typically fear-eliciting
stimuli (e.g., scary objects, animals, ambiguous stimuli),
and instructed engagement in acts that elicit physical caution, such as walking across a balance beam. Trained raters coded each task for every instance of facial, vocal, and
bodily indicators of fear; these were weighted by their
intensity (low, moderate, high) and summed, and an overall composite was computed as the weighted sum across
all 15 tasks. Prior studies using this coding scheme
(Durbin, 2010; Durbin et al., 2007; Durbin et al., 2005)
have demonstrated good to excellent interrater reliability
for traits assessed using this approach.
Further evidence for the value of these behavioral measures comes from data demonstrating their effectiveness in
predicting later emergence of internalizing problems in a
sample of 70 children aged 3 to 6½. Lab-assessed fear
proneness was measured at baseline, and mothers completed Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL) ratings 6 months
later. Baseline fear proneness in response to the lab tasks
predicted higher CBCL anxious/depressed scores at
6-month follow-up (r = .32, p < .01). This effect was significant and of similar magnitude across a variety of methods
for quantifying internalizing problems based on CBCL
ratings (i.e., withdrawn/depressed: r = .31, p < .01; DSM
anxiety scale: r = .42, p < .001; Internalizing: r = .31, p < .01).
Moreover, in a hierarchical regression analysis, lab-assessed
fear proneness (entered in the second step) remained a significant predictor of CBCL anxious/depressed scores at
6-month follow-up after controlling for baseline CBCL
scores (p < .05; entered in the first step of the regression).
FPS
Based on difficulties with eliciting FPS in children using
still visual images, as previously reviewed, we used the
Quevedo et al. (2010) study as the basis for selecting 12 film
clips (four pleasant, four unpleasant, four neutral) developed in our laboratory for use with children in this age
range as affective foreground stimuli. Film clips were
drawn from a range of live actor and cartoon movies produced for children and adolescents (e.g., Harry Potter, The
Incredibles). Each film clip lasted approximately 1 min,
during which time white noise bursts were presented
through headphones at random points. The startle blink
response was recorded from under the left eye, time-locked
to the presentation of the noise bursts. The difference in
startle response elicited by negative as compared to neutral
film clips served as the primary FPS measure of interest.
Resting EEG Asymmetry
EEG was recorded during four consecutive 1-min periods of rest, alternating between eyes open and eyes closed
(Towers & Allen, 2009). Parietal alpha asymmetry scores

336
8

MOSER
MOSER
ET ET
AL.AL.

reflecting relative power of activity within the alpha frequency band over left versus right recording sites were
extracted. Lower alpha values are indicative of greater
relative brain activity; thus, in what follows, higher asymmetry scores reflect greater right-sided activation
(Shankman et al., 2011).

Downloaded by [Florida State University] at 10:35 19 July 2015

ERN
The ERN was measured using a developmentally appropriate version of the Eriksen flanker task (Eriksen &
Eriksen, 1974), known as the “fish” flanker task (Rueda,
Posner, Rothbart, & Davis-Stober, 2004), in which stimuli consisted of yellow cartoon fish swimming to the left
and right on a blue, ocean-like background. Analyses of
the ERN focused on 5- to 7-year-olds because younger
children have difficulty performing the task successfully.
Children were instructed to respond to the central target
stimulus while ignoring flanking stimuli as quickly and as
accurately as possible. The ERN was then extracted from
EEG activity over the fronto-central recording sites timelocked to the execution of an incorrect response.
Questionnaires
To index traits and symptoms relevant to internalizing
psychopathology, we administered the informant-based
Child Behavior Questionnaire (CBQ; Rothbart, Ahadi,
Hershey, & Fisher, 2001) and Child Behavior Checklist
(CBCL; Achenbach & Rescorla, 2009) to parents;
mother-reports are the focus of analyses reported here, as
fewer fathers returned these measures. CBQ scales have
demonstrated adequate internal consistency and good
test–retest reliability (Rothbart et al., 2001). For purposes
of the current presentation, we report results from the
Fear scale of the CBQ and the Anxiety/Depression scale
from the CBCL. The CBCL in particular has received
significant empirical attention, and it is also commonly
used in practice. For these reasons, we demonstrate its
relationship to neurophysiological and behavioral lab
task indicators that have real potential to be implemented
in the clinical context.
Results
Table 1 displays preliminary findings from our lab-based
assessment battery. Although nonsignificant due to small
sample size, the relationship between individual differences in fear proneness as assessed by lab tasks and by
FPS was in the predicted direction and of moderate magnitude. Likewise, associations between the CBQ fear
score and CBCL anxious/depressed scores and FPS were
nonsignificant but in the expected direction and of comparable size. All correlations indicated that higher fear
behaviors were associated with larger FPS magnitude.

TABLE 1
Associations Between Neural and Behavioral Measures
in The Pilot Study

FPS
ASYM
ERN
Lab
CBQ
CBCL

ASYM

ERN

Lab

CBQ

CBCL

.13 (13)

.30 (6)
.73* (9)

.31 (10)
.37 (12)
.60* (13)

.38 (17)
.52* (15)
.22 (10)
.12 (15)

.34 (17)
.38 (15)
.40 (10)
.05 (15)
.23 (24)

Note: Sample sizes are presented within parentheses. FPS = Fear
Potentiated Startle; ASYM = Parietal asymmetry; ERN = Error-Related
Negativity; Lab = Behavioral laboratory assessment; CBQ = Child
Behavior Questionnaire; CBCL = Child Behavior Checklist.
*p < .05.

The association between lab-assessed fear proneness
and right parietal asymmetry score was in the expected
direction and of moderate magnitude, suggesting that
greater right parietal activity was associated with higher
fear behaviors. The association between CBQ fear score
and right parietal asymmetry was also in the expected
direction, statistically significant, and represents a large
effect. Similarly, the association between the CBCL indicator of anxious and depressive psychopathology was in
the expected direction, and of moderate magnitude. All
relationships confirm that fear- and anxiety-related traits
and symptoms are associated with overactive right
parietal resting activation.
The association between individual differences in labassessed fear proneness and ERN amplitude was in the
expected direction, statistically significant, and large,
indicating smaller ERN response for high versus low fear
children. (The ERN is a negative going ERP component
and thus a positive association indicates a negative relationship.) The association between ERN amplitude and
the CBQ fear score was, on the other hand, nonsignificant and small. The ERN’s relationship to the CBCL
indicator of anxious and depressive symptoms was in the
expected direction and moderate in size. All of these correlations indicated that children exhibiting higher fear
and greater internalizing tendencies were characterized
by reduced cognitive control function.
Across neurophysiological measures, smaller ERN
was strongly associated with greater right parietal asymmetry scores. Smaller ERN was also moderately associated with FPS. Thus, the neurophysiologic indicator
of cognitive control—ERN—covaried with both of the
two neurophysiologic indicators of defensive reactivity
suggesting that reduced frontal control function was
associated with enhanced defensive reactivity. Of interest, however, the two proposed indicators of defensive
reactivity—FPS and right parietal asymmetry—were
only modestly associated with one another.

Downloaded by [Florida State University] at 10:35 19 July 2015

ASSESSMENT
OF OF
INTERNALIZING
PSYCHOPATHOLOGY
ASSESSMENT
INTERNALIZING
PSYCHOPATHOLOGY

Together, the current preliminary findings provide an
effective illustration of how neurobehavioral constructs
relevant to internalizing-related problems can be assessed
across domains of behavior, physiology, and informant
report. Although many of the effects were nonsignificant
due to small sample size, the magnitude and direction of
the effects are promising, especially given that most of
the reported relationships span measurement domains
(e.g., behavioral observation and neurophysiology), and
thus are expectedly modest because of inherent issues
related to method variance. Our aim for this ongoing
work is to substantially expand the sample to enhance
power for detecting the predicted associations thereby
allowing us to more fully realize the promise of our psychoneurometric approach. Specifically, we will evaluate
how composites of neurophysiological measures can be
assembled to improve convergence with behavioral measures and informant report. Moreover, we will examine
how neurophysiological measures can be combined with
behavioral and informant measures to enhance prediction across domains, and potentially to improve prospective prediction of internalizing symptoms (see Patrick
et al., 2012, and Patrick et al., 2013, for more fully developed examples applied to adult externalizing problems).
Future data collection in our lab will continue to focus on
determining the predictive validity of these early measurements, and, in particular, to evaluate the predictive
validity of the neurophysiological measures and their
incremental validity relative to lab-task or parent-report
measures alone.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUDING REMARKS
In acknowledging the need to advance assessment and
treatment of internalizing psychopathology for our
youth, we have proposed a psychoneurometric approach
the objective of which is to integrate information across
behavioral, neurophysiological, and self-report assessments. This tactic has a number of notable features. First,
it addresses the issue of diagnostic comorbidity by focusing on broad dispositional variables that differing disorders share. Second, it addresses the conceptual gap
between diagnostic phenotypes and biological systems by
placing investigative emphasis on neurobehavioral trait
constructs rather than disorders. Finally, it provides a
two-way path along which behavioral conceptions can
guide efforts to identify clinically relevant neurobiological circuits or processes and reciprocally along which
knowledge gained about relevant neurobiological circuits/processes can feed back into behavioral conceptions
of clinical disorders.
To realize the promise of this approach, moderate to
large sample studies will be needed to establish reliable
neurobehavioral indicators of constructs such as defensive reactivity and cognitive control with relevance to

9
337

internalizing psychopathology. For reasons of practicality,
we encourage the use of lower cost, less invasive technologies such as EEG/ERP or visceral–somatic measures (e.g.,
skin conductance, startle blink) that are widely accessible
to investigators in the field. Such methods are more likely
to be implemented in clinical contexts as well. Regarding
treatment implications, in particular, our approach provides a framework for generating and testing more targeted interventions aimed at addressing underlying
mechanisms directly, in contrast to relying on extant
treatment packages for diffuse disorder categories.
In closing, we emphasize that the methodological
approach we proposed is intended as a complement to,
rather as a substitute for, other available research strategies. Specifically, we view the psychoneurometric
approach as a paradigm for linking clinical disorders to
neurobehavioral systems, rather than as a prescription
for a specific program of research. Although representing only one approach to the multimethod assessment of
internalizing psychopathology in youth, we hope it can
serve as a model for more fully appreciating our most
common mental health problems.
REFERENCES
Achenbach, T., & Rescorla, L. (2009). Child Behavior Checklist
(CBCL/1.5-5 and CBCL/6-18). In Handbook of psychiatric measures
(pp. 296–301). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Publications.
Amir, N., Beard, C., Taylor, C. T., Klumpp, H., Elias, J., Burns, M.,
& Chen, X. (2009). Attention training in individuals with generalized
social phobia: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 77, 961.
Asendorpf, J. B. (1993). Abnormal shyness in children. Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry, 34, 1069–1083.
Balaban, M. T., & Berg, W. K. (2007). Measuring the electromyographic
response: Development issues and findings. In L. A. S. McMaster
& S. J. S. Brock (Eds.), Developmental psychophysiology theory, systems and methods (pp. 257–285). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Beesdo, K., Knappe, S., & Pine, D. S. (2009). Anxiety and anxiety
disorders in children and adolescents: developmental issues and
implications for DSM–V. The Psychiatric Clinics of North America,
32, 483.
Beidel, D. C. (1991). Social phobia and overanxious disorder in
school-age children. Journal of the American Academy of Child
& Adolescent Psychiatry, 30, 545–552.
Birbaumer, N. (2006). Breaking the silence: Brain–computer interfaces
(BCI) for communication and motor control. Psychophysiology, 43,
517–532.
Birmaher, B., Ryan, N. D., Williamson, D. E., Brent, D. A., Kaufman, J.,
Dahl, R. E., & Nelson, B. (1996). Childhood and adolescent depression: A review of the past 10 years. Part I. Journal of the American
Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 35, 1427–1439.
Block, J., & Block, J. H. (1980). The role of ego-resiliency and
ego-control in the organization of behavior. In W. A. Collins (Ed.),
Minnesota Symposium on Child Psychology (Vol. 13, pp. 39–101).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Blumenthal, T. D., Cuthbert, B. N., Filion, D. L., Hackley, S., Lipp, O. V.,
& Van Boxtel, A. (2005). Committee report: Guidelines for human
startle eyeblink electromyographic studies. Psychophysiology,
42, 1–15.

Downloaded by [Florida State University] at 10:35 19 July 2015

338
10

MOSER
ET
AL.
MOSER
ET
AL.

Botvinick, M. M. (2007). Conflict monitoring and decision making:
reconciling two perspectives on anterior cingulate function.
Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience, 7, 356–366.
Bradley, M. M., Codispoti, M., Cuthbert, B. N., & Lang, P. J. (2001).
Emotion and motivation I: defensive and appetitive reactions in picture processing. Emotion, 1, 276.
Buss, A. H., & Plomin, R. (1975). A temperament theory of personality
development. New York, NY: Wiley.
Buss, A. H., & Plomin, R. (1984). Temperament: Early developing
personality traits. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Carver, C. S., Johnson, S. L., & Joormann, J. (2008). Serotonergic
function, two-mode models of self-regulation, and vulnerability to
depression: What depression has in common with impulsive
aggression. Psychological Bulletin, 134, 912.
Casey, B., Jones, R. M., Levita, L., Libby, V., Pattwell, S. S.,
Ruberry, E. J., & Somerville, L. H. (2010). The storm and stress of
adolescence: Insights from human imaging and mouse genetics.
Developmental Psychobiology, 52, 225–235.
Cloninger, C. R. (1987). A systematic method for clinical description
and classification of personality variants. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 44, 573–588.
Compton, R. J., Banich, M. T., Mohanty, A., Milham, M. P.,
Herrington, J., Miller, G. A., & Heller, W. (2003). Paying attention to
emotion: An fMRI investigation of cognitive and emotional Stroop
tasks. Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience, 3, 81–96.
Corbetta, M., & Shulman, G. L. (2002). Control of goal-directed and
stimulus-driven attention in the brain. Nature Reviews Neuroscience,
3, 201–215.
Costello, E. J., Mustillo, S., Erkanli, A., Keeler, G., & Angold, A.
(2003). Prevalence and development of psychiatric disorders in
childhood and adolescence. Archives of General Psychiatry, 60, 837.
Cuthbert, B. N., & Insel, T. R. (2010). Toward new approaches to psychotic disorders: The NIMH Research Domain Criteria project.
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 36, 1061–1062.
Davies, P. L., Segalowitz, S. J., & Gavin, W. J. (2004). Development of
response-monitoring ERPs in 7-to 25-year-olds. Developmental
Neuropsychology, 25, 355–376.
Davis, M. (1992). The role of amygdala in conditioned fear. In
J. Aggleton (Ed.), The amygdala: Neurobiological aspects of emotion,
memory and mental dysfunction (pp. 255–305). New York, NY: Wiley.
Davis, M. (2000). The role of the amygdala in conditioned and unconditioned fear and anxiety. In J. Aggleton (Ed.), The amygdala:
A functional analysis (Vol. 2, pp. 213–287). Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press.
Davis, M., Antoniadis, E. A., Amaral, D. G., & Winslow, J. T. (2008).
Acoustic startle reflex in rhesus monkeys: a review. Reviews in the
Neurosciences, 19, 171–186.
Debener, S., Minow, F., Emkes, R., Gandras, K., & Vos, M. (2012).
How about taking a low-cost, small, and wireless EEG for a walk?
Psychophysiology, 49, 1617–1621.
Diamond, A., & Taylor, C. (1996). Development of an aspect of effortful control: Development of the abilities to remember what I said
and to “Do as I say, not as I do”. Developmental Psychobiology, 29,
315–334.
Donnellan, M. B., Conger, R. D., & Burzette, R. G. (2007). Personality
development from late adolescence to young adulthood: Differential
stability, normative maturity, and evidence for the maturity-stability
hypothesis. Journal of Personality, 75, 237–264.
Dougherty, L. R., Bufferd, S. J., Carlson, G. A., Dyson, M., Olino, T.
M., Durbin, C. E., & Klein, D. N. (2011). Preschoolers’ observed
temperament and psychiatric disorders assessed with a parent diagnostic interview. Journal of Clinical Child & Adolescent Psychology,
40, 295–306.
Durbin, C. E. (2010). Modeling temperamental risk for depression
using developmentally sensitive laboratory paradigms. Child
Development Perspectives, 4, 168–173.

Durbin, C. E., Hayden, E. P., Klein, D. N., & Olino, T. M. (2007).
Stability of laboratory-assessed temperamental emotionality traits
from ages 3 to 7. Emotion, 7, 388.
Durbin, C. E., Hicks, B. M., Blonigen, D. M., Johnson, W., Iacono, W. G.,
& McGue, M. (under review). Personality trait change across late
childhood to young adulthood: Evidence for nonlinearity and sex differences in change. Manuscript under review.
Durbin, C. E., Klein, D. N., Hayden, E. P., Buckley, M. E., & Moerk,
K. C. (2005). Temperamental emotionality in preschoolers and
parental mood disorders. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 114, 28.
Durbin, C. E., & Wilson, S. (2012). Convergent validity of and bias in parent reports of child emotion. Psychological Assessment, 24, 647–660.
Dyson, M. W., Olino, T. M., Durbin, C. E., Goldsmith, H. H., & Klein,
D. N. (2012). The structure of temperament in preschoolers: A twostage factor analytic approach. Emotion, 12, 44.
Eisenberg, N., Valiente, C., Spinrad, T. L., Cumberland, A., Liew, J.,
Reiser, M., & Losoya, S. H. (2009). Longitudinal relations of children’s effortful control, impulsivity, and negative emotionality to
their externalizing, internalizing, and co-occurring behavior problems. Developmental Psychology, 45, 988.
Eriksen, B. A., & Eriksen, C. W. (1974). Effects of noise letters upon the
identification of a target letter in a nonsearch task. Perception &
Psychophysics, 16, 143–149.
Fanselow, M. S. (1994). Neural organization of the defensive behavior
system responsible for fear. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 1,
429–438.
Goldsmith, H. H., & Campos, J. J. (1982). Toward a theory of infant
temperament. In R. N. Emde & R. J. Harmon (Eds.), The development of attachment and affiliative systems (pp. 161–193). New York,
NY: Plenum.
Gorenstein, E. E., & Newman, J. P. (1980). Disinhibitory psychopathology: A new perspective and a model for research. Psychological
Review, 87, 301.
Gould, M. S., King, R., Greenwald, S., Fisher, P., Schwab-Stone, M.,
Kramer, R., & Shaffer, D. (1998). Psychopathology associated with
suicidal ideation and attempts among children and adolescents.
Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry,
37, 915–923.
Grillon, C., Dierker, L., & Merikangas, K. R. (1998). Fear-potentiated
startle in adolescent offspring of parents with anxiety disordersf.
Biological Psychiatry, 44, 990–997.
Hajcak, G., Franklin, M., Foa, E., & Simons, R. (2008). Increased
error-related brain activity in pediatric obsessive-compulsive disorder before and after treatment. American Journal of Psychiatry, 165,
116–123.
Hayden, E. P., Dougherty, L. R., Maloney, B., Durbin, C. E., Olino, T. M.,
Nurnberger, J. I., Jr., & Klein, D. N. (2007). Temperamental fearfulness in childhood and the serotonin transporter promoter region
polymorphism: A multimethod association study. Psychiatric
Genetics, 17, 135–142.
Hayden, E. P., Klein, D. N., & Durbin, C. E. (2005). Parent reports and
laboratory assessments of child temperament: A comparison of their
associations with risk for depression and externalizing disorders.
Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment, 27, 89–100.
Hayden, E. P., Klein, D. N., Durbin, C. E., & Olino, T. M. (2006).
Positive emotionality at age 3 predicts cognitive styles in 7-year-old
children. Development and Psychopathology, 18, 409.
Higa-McMillan, C. K., Smith, R. L., Chorpita, B. F., & Hayashi, K.
(2008). Common and unique factors associated with DSM–IV–TR
internalizing disorders in children. Journal of Abnormal Child
Psychology, 36, 1279–1288.
Holroyd, C. B., & Coles, M. G. (2002). The neural basis of human error
processing: reinforcement learning, dopamine, and the error-related
negativity. Psychological Review, 109, 679.
Hongwanishkul, D., Happaney, K. R., Lee, W. S., & Zelazo, P. D.
(2005). Assessment of hot and cool executive function in young

Downloaded by [Florida State University] at 10:35 19 July 2015

ASSESSMENT
OF
INTERNALIZING
PSYCHOPATHOLOGY
ASSESSMENT
OF
INTERNALIZING
PSYCHOPATHOLOGY
children: Age-related changes and individual differences.
Developmental Neuropsychology, 28, 617–644.
James, W. (1890). Principles of psychology. New York, NY: Holt.
Kagan, J. (1994). Galen’s prophecy: Temperament in human nature. New
York, NY: Basic Books.
Kessler, R. C., Chiu, W. T., Demler, O., & Walters, E. E. (2005).
Prevalence, severity, and comorbidity of 12-month DSM–IV disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 62, 617.
Kim, E. Y., Iwaki, N., Imashioya, H., Uno, H., & Fujita, T. (2007).
Error-related negativity in a visual go/no-go task: Children vs. adults.
Developmental Neuropsychology, 31, 181–191.
Kochanska, G. (1997). Multiple pathways to conscience for children
with different temperaments: From toddlerhood to age 5.
Developmental Psychology, 33, 228.
Kochanska, G., Gross, J. N., Lin, M. H., & Nichols, K. E. (2002). Guilt
in young children: Development, determinants, and relations with a
broader system of standards. Child Development, 73, 461–482.
Kochanska, G., Murray, K., Jacques, T. Y., Koenig, A. L., &
Vandegeest, K. A. (1996). Inhibitory control in young children and
its role in emerging internalization. Child Development, 67, 490–507.
Krueger, R. F. (1999). The structure of common mental disorders.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 56, 921.
Ladouceur, C. D., Dahl, R. E., Birmaher, B., Axelson, D. A., &
Ryan, N. D. (2006). Increased error-related negativity (ERN) in
childhood anxiety disorders: ERP and source localization. Journal of
Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 47, 1073–1082.
Lahey, B. B., Rathouz, P. J., Van Hulle, C., Urbano, R. C., Krueger,
R. F., Applegate, B., & Waldman, I. D. (2008). Testing structural
models of DSM–IV symptoms of common forms of child and adolescent psychopathology. Journal of abnormal child psychology, 36,
187–206.
Lang, P. J. (1995). The emotion probe: Studies of motivation and attention. American Psychologist, 50, 372.
Lang, P. J., Bradley, M. M., & Cuthbert, B. N. (1990). Emotion, attention, and the startle reflex. Psychological Review, 97, 377.
Lang, P. J., Bradley, M. M., & Cuthbert, B. N. (1997). Motivated attention: Affect, activation, and action. In P. J. Lang, R. Simons, & M. T.
Balaban (Eds.), Attention and orienting: Sensory and motivational
processes (pp. 97–135). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lang, P. J., Bradley, M. M., & Cuthbert, B. N. (1999). International
affective picture system: Instruction manual and affective ratings
(Technical Support A-4). Gainsville, FL: The Center for Research in
Psychophysiology, University of Florida.
Laptook, R. S., Klein, D. N., Durbin, C. E., Hayden, E. P., Olino, T. M.,
& Carlson, G. (2008). Differentiation between low positive affectivity
and behavioral inhibition in preschool-age children: A comparison
of behavioral approach in novel and non-novel contexts. Personality
and Individual Differences, 44, 758–767.
LeDoux, J. E. (1995). Emotion: Clues from the brain. Annual Review of
Psychology, 46, 209–235.
LeDoux, J. E., & Schiller, D. (2009). What animal fear models have
taught us about human amygdala function? In P. J. Whalen
& E. A. Phelps (Eds.), The human amygdala (pp. 43–60). New York,
NY: Guilford.
Lewinsohn, P. M., Hops, H., Roberts, R. E., Seeley, J. R., & Andrews, J. A.
(1993). Adolescent psychopathology: I. Prevalence and incidence of
depression and other DSM–III–R disorders in high school students.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 102, 133.
Lykken, D. T. (1995). The antisocial personalities. Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
McTeague, L. M., & Lang, P. J. (2012). The anxiety spectrum and the
reflex physiology of defense: from circumscribed fear to broad distress. Depression and Anxiety, 29, 264–281.
Meyer, A., Weinberg, A., Klein, D. N., & Hajcak, G. (2012). The development of the error-related negativity (ERN) and its relationship

11
339

with anxiety: Evidence from 8 to 13 year-olds. Developmental
Cognitive Neuroscience, 2(1), 152.
Miller, E. K., & Cohen, J. D. (2001). An integrative theory of prefrontal
cortex function. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 24, 167–202.
Muris, P., Meesters, C., & Blijlevens, P. (2007). Self-reported reactive
and regulative temperament in early adolescence: Relations to internalizing and externalizing problem behavior and “Big Three” personality factors. Journal of Adolescence, 30, 1035–1049.
Nitschke, J. B., Heller, W., Palmieri, P. A., & Miller, G. A. (1999).
Contrasting patterns of brain activity in anxious apprehension and
anxious arousal. Psychophysiology, 36, 628–637.
Oldehinkel, A. J., Hartman, C. A., Ferdinand, R. F., Verhulst, F. C., &
Ormel, J. (2007). Effortful control as modifier of the association
between negative emotionality and adolescents’ mental health problems. Development and Psychopathology, 19, 523–539.
Olino, T. M., Klein, D. N., Dyson, M. W., Rose, S. A., & Durbin, C. E.
(2010). Temperamental emotionality in preschool-aged children and
depressive disorders in parents: Associations in a large community
sample. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 119, 468.
Olvet, D. M., & Hajcak, G. (2008). The error-related negativity (ERN)
and psychopathology: Toward an endophenotype. Clinical
Psychology Review, 28, 1343–1354.
Patrick, C. J., Durbin, C. E., & Moser, J. S. (2012). Reconceptualizing
antisocial deviance in neurobehavioral terms. Development and
Psychopathology, 24, 1047.
Patrick, C. J., Venables, N. C., Yancey, J. R., Hicks, B. M., Nelson, L. D., &
Kramer, M. D. (2013). A construct-network approach to bridging diagnostic and physiological domains: Application to assessment of externalizing psychopathology. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 122, 902.
Quevedo, K., Smith, T., Donzella, B., Schunk, E., & Gunnar, M.
(2010). The startle response: Developmental effects and a paradigm
for children and adults. Developmental Psychobiology, 52, 78–89.
Richters, J. E. (1992). Depressed mothers as informants about their
children: a critical review of the evidence for distortion. Psychological
Bulletin, 112, 485.
Ridderinkhof, K. R., Ullsperger, M., Crone, E. A., & Nieuwenhuis, S.
(2004). The role of the medial frontal cortex in cognitive control.
Science, 306, 443–447.
Roberts, B. W., Caspi, A., & Moffitt, T. E. (2001). The kids are alright:
Growth and stability in personality development from adolescence
to adulthood. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81, 670.
Rohde, P., Lewinsohn, P. M., & Seeley, J. R. (1994). Are adolescents
changed by an episode of major depression? Journal of the American
Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 33, 1289–1298.
Rothbart, M. K., & Ahadi, S. A. (1994). Temperament and the development of personality. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 103, 55.
Rothbart, M. K., Ahadi, S. A., & Hershey, K. L. (1994). Temperament and
social behavior in childhood. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 1982, 21–39.
Rothbart, M. K., Ahadi, S. A., Hershey, K. L., & Fisher, P. (2001).
Investigations of temperament at three to seven years: The Children’s
Behavior Questionnaire. Child Development, 72, 1394–1408.
Rueda, M. R., Posner, M., Rothbart, M., & Davis-Stober, C. (2004).
Development of the time course for processing conflict: An eventrelated potentials study with 4 year olds and adults. BMC
Neuroscience, 5, 39.
Sabatinelli, D., Bradley, M. M., Fitzsimmons, J. R., & Lang, P. J. (2005).
Parallel amygdala and inferotemporal activation reflect emotional
intensity and fear relevance. Neuroimage, 24, 1265–1270.
Sanislow, C. A., Pine, D. S., Quinn, K. J., Kozak, M. J., Garvey, M. A.,
Heinssen, R. K., & Cuthbert, B. N. (2010). Developing constructs for
psychopathology research: research domain criteria. Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 119, 631.
Shankman, S. A., Klein, D. N., Torpey, D. C., Olino, T. M., Dyson, M. W.,
Kim, J., & Tenke, C. E. (2011). Do positive and negative temperament
traits interact in predicting risk for depression? A resting EEG study of
329 preschoolers. Development and Psychopathology, 23, 551.

Downloaded by [Florida State University] at 10:35 19 July 2015

340
12

MOSER
ET
AL.
MOSER
ET
AL.

Shiner, R. L. (1998). How shall we speak of children’s personalities in
middle childhood? A preliminary taxonomy. Psychological Bulletin,
124, 308.
Siegle, G. J., Ghinassi, F., & Thase, M. E. (2007). Neurobehavioral
therapies in the 21st century: Summary of an emerging field and an
extended example of cognitive control training for depression.
Cognitive Therapy and Research, 31, 235–262.
Sørensen, M. J., Nissen, J. B., Mors, O., & Thomsen, P. H. (2005). Age
and gender differences in depressive symptomatology and comorbidity: An incident sample of psychiatrically admitted children. Journal
of Affective Disorders, 84, 85–91.
Stark, K. D., & Laurent, J. (2001). Joint factor analysis of the children’s
depression inventory and the revised children’s manifest anxiety
scale. Journal of Clinical Child Psychology, 30, 552–567.
Sylvester, C., Corbetta, M., Raichle, M., Rodebaugh, T., Schlaggar, B.,
Sheline, Y., & Lenze, E. (2012). Functional network dysfunction in
anxiety and anxiety disorders. Trends in Neurosciences, 35, 527–535.
Tellegen, A. (1985). Structures of mood and personality and their relevance to assessing anxiety, with an emphasis on self-report. In A. H.
Tuma & J. D. Maser (Eds.), Anxiety and the anxiety disroders (pp.
681–706). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Torpey, D. C., Hajcak, G., Kim, J., Kujawa, A. J., Dyson, M. W., Olino,
T. M., & Klein, D. N. (2013). Error-related brain activity in young
children: Associations with parental anxiety and child temperamental negative emotionality. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry,
54, 854–862.

Torpey, D. C., Hajcak, G., Kim, J., Kujawa, A., & Klein, D. N. (2012).
Electrocortical and behavioral measures of response monitoring in
young children during a Go/No-Go task. Developmental
Psychobiology, 54, 139–150.
Towers, D. N., & Allen, J. J. (2009). A better estimate of the internal
consistency reliability of frontal EEG asymmetry scores.
Psychophysiology, 46, 132–142.
Vaidyanathan, U., Patrick, C. J., & Bernat, E. M. (2009). Startle reflex
potentiation during aversive picture viewing as an indicator of trait
fear. Psychophysiology, 46, 75–85.
Watson, D. (2005). Rethinking the mood and anxiety disorders: A
quantitative hierarchical model for DSM–V. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 114, 522.
Weinberg, A., Olvet, D. M., & Hajcak, G. (2010). Increased errorrelated brain activity in generalized anxiety disorder. Biological
Psychology, 85, 472–480.
Weissman, M. M., Wolk, S., Wickramaratne, P., Goldstein, R. B.,
Adams, P., Greenwald, S., & Steinberg, D. (1999). Children with
prepubertal-onset major depressive disorder and anxiety grown up.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 56, 794.
Wiersema, J. R., van der Meere, J. J., & Roeyers, H. (2007).
Developmental changes in error monitoring: An event-related potential study. Neuropsychologia, 45, 1649–1657.
Yeung, N., Botvinick, M. M., & Cohen, J. D. (2004). The neural basis
of error detection: Conflict monitoring and the error-related
negativity. Psychological Review, 111, 931.

