Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

ScienceDirect
Procedia Computer Science 91 (2016) 813 – 822

Information Technology and Quantitative Management (ITQM 2016)

Specialized brains performing specialized tasks: Beta/Gamma
EEG non-linear analysis reveals discriminative differences
between the chaos/no-chaos content of specialized brain’s
dynamics.
Hernán Díaz M.a,e*, Gustavo Rivasb, Felisa M. Córdovac, Fredi Palominose, Lucio
Cañeted, Natalia Troncosob.
a
ILPA Naturopathic Institute Research Program
Department of Industrial Engineering, Faculty of Engineering
c
School of Engineering, Faculty of Engineering and Business, University Finis Terrae
d
Faculty of General Technologies
e
Department of Mathematics and Computer Sciences
University of Santiago de Chile. Av. Ecuador 3469, Santiago 9170124, Chile.
b

Abstract
We studied and compared different non-linear features of the human EEG in the context of the search and characterization
of specific functional fingerprints of the EEG dynamics that allow differentiating behaviorally recognized specialized
professional activities. Sets of EEG data obtained from two groups of professional performers, a group of 10 professional
modern dancers and a group of 12 professional chopper pilots, were compared while executing a mental-cognitive task
related to their professional specialty. Dancers were asked to use mental imagination to plan choreographic movements and
pilots were asked to solve a reduced version of the Raven’s matrices visual intelligent test. Both tasks were analyzed during
the first two minutes while EEG activity was recorded from 14 mastoid bone referenced electrodes using the braincomputer interface Emotiv® Epoc Research Edition, sampling at 128 Hz rate. Dancers and pilots were then compared in
term of their long- and short-term Hurst (H) exponent estimation for beta and gamma EEG ranges. We found that non-linear
estimation of chaos in the EEG time series allows differentiating between the brain functional strategies employed by
differently specialized groups of performers. The group of pilots showed higher estimated H values for the beta band than
for gamma band, contrary to what we found for dancers in which estimated H for gamma band showed higher values than
for beta range.
© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Selection and/or
under
responsibility
of the organizers
of ITQM
Peer-review
underpeer-review
responsibility
of the
Organizing Committee
of ITQM
2016 2016
Keywords: Brain non-linear dynamics; Chaos/no-chaos; Brain specialization; Groups EEG differences; EEG phenomenology

* Hernán Díaz M. Tel.: +56-2-23260268; fax: +56-2-23260268.
E-mail address: Hernan.diaz@usach.cl.

1877-0509 © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Peer-review under responsibility of the Organizing Committee of ITQM 2016
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.07.086

814

M. Hernán Díaz et al. / Procedia Computer Science 91 (2016) 813 – 822

1. Introduction
When we think about in to change our lifestyle and adopt a new specialization like turning into a
professional performer of a particular practice or a well-trained player in a particular activity it is assumed that
in some extent and in concordance with this achievement, a long-term process of development and change
needs to occur during the time of training and specialization. It is also assumed and expected that could be
possible to read in our bodies some embodied marks after that time of training and specialization, in agreement
to the change of the shapes and manners that allow the behavioral expression of the specific specialized
knowledge.
The same rationale can be applied to the brain whose concomitant learning and memory processes are
formed around the contextual repetition and assimilation of short- and long-term neural processes that involve
modulated (quasi-controlled) patterns of electric activity. Recurrent serial or coincident concomitance between
stimulus, sensation, perception, context, response processing, response behavior, and recursive feedback, build,
shape and stabilize patterns of neuro-behavioral (brain-bodied) functional attractors which are put in motion
every time when task performing is required.
Among a lot of professional activities and the variety of specializations and trained performers, one could
ask if it is possible to detect and characterize some aspects of the brain activity that co-exists and
distinguishable stays along with this brain specialization.
To start exploring this issue we selected two kinds of extreme different specialized testing groups and gave
them the task to perform an activity akin to their respective training and specialization.
We assumed that a long-term period of training and specialization shapes and modifies originally common
characteristics of the people engaged in such a body and mind changing process and we expect to find different
functional processing strategies in the brain when performing different specialized tasks made by specialized
people.
The Hurst exponent (H) estimates the rate of the chaos in the time series analyzed. It renders information
about the degree of organization and amount of information embedded in the signal through the search of
persistent or anti-persistent tendencies in the way the signal oscillates in time [1].
In trying to find differences at a more intrinsic level of the brain processing, we used non-linear approach to
ask about the chaos/no-chaos content of the EEG signal by estimating the Hurst exponent of the time series
generated by the brain electrical activity. The presence (or absence) of structured tendencies relates to the
presence (or absence) of local fractal structures recurrently appearing along the signal manifestation. When the
number of fractal structures is high inside a chaotic surrounding it contributes to order into the chaos. When
this happen fractal dimension decrease locally and H exponent globally increase toward positive correlations
and persistent, long-memory behavior. Put in linear terms, D and H are respectively analogous to variance and
mean which, in a chaotic or quasi-chaotic time series, are not constant values.
. For assumed self-similar (or self-affinity) processes, such as those occurring in living systems, fractal
dimension decrease inversely with respect to H according to the formula D + H = n + 1, for n-dimensional
space. Fractal dimension is a local property while Hurst exponent estimates a global tendency. The more the
fractal dimension is, the less persistent structures are found in it (lower H values and higher D values). H values
are attracted to more central tendency value than to any other possible trend.
Out of H = 0.5 (brown noise), fractal or pink noise range allows evaluating the order ļ chaos tendency and
fractal characteristics of the process being studied. For self-affinity systems, Hurst exponent and fractal
dimension are related by the formula D = 2 – H, so when H = 0.5 for brown noise, the fractal dimension D =
1.5, half away from 1 {the dimension of a line) and 2 (the dimension of a plane).
1.1. EEG rhythms: Beta and Gamma brain oscillations
The EEG characterizes the temporal variation of the intensity of the brain´s electrical activity. By mean of a
fast Fourier transform (FFT), it is possible to obtain more detailed information of the data recorded from the
scalp. FFT transforms the original intensity vs time signal, into a three-dimensional plot which, besides the
original information concerning intensity and time, it contains the information about the frequency components
of the signal that coexist in the whole recorded EEG time series.

M. Hernán Díaz et al. / Procedia Computer Science 91 (2016) 813 – 822

Subdivided by frequency, it is possible to study the energy distribution of the signal along the whole
frequency range, revealing which oscillations have more relative power than others during the realization of
any task or during a mental state.
Traditionally, five types of brain waves has been described. Starting at the low frequencies oscillations
(delta waves 0.5-4 Hz), and climbing up to the higher gamma oscillations (>30 Hz). Low-frequency high
amplitude oscillations characterize highly coupled synchronized activity states reflecting phase-locked
oscillations. They use to be associated with wide range distributed activity in the brain which is mainly
understood as performing a similar cooperative task or function.
When perception processing or cognitive load is imposed brain waves change, some of them desynchronize,
while others synchronize and temporally localize in less widely distributed areas. Amplitude or relative power
decrease when desynchronization occurs and it is understood that this happens when different parts of the brain
decouple and start performing different and independent tasks.
From a biological functional perspective, at the nervous system level, the EEG activity measured from the
scalp occurs because of the activation of the reticular system, which modulates the activity of the thalamic
connections that can cause desynchronization of the brain cortex by inhibitory inputs coming from pyramidal
interneurons [2].
At the neurotransmitter level, for the relationship between alpha and delta rhythms it has been hypothesized
an interconnected and interdependent balance between the monoaminergic (serotonin, dopamine, and
norepinephrine) neurotransmitters; and cholinergic (acetylcholine –Ach–) neurotransmitters, dependent on the
muscarinic receptors´ allocation and activity [2].
Until now, almost all of the parameters used to evaluate the role and the differential involvement in the EEG
generation and its relation to mental states has considered energy relative intensity or power distribution over
the range of EEG frequencies. This linear thinking model says us nothing about the underlying organization of
the system which is performing the task and that at the same time is expressing a particular resources’
management in relationship with the amount of energy (O2 consumption) involved in the process.
To aboard these aspects of the phenomena, the non-linear thinking model provides estimations of relevant
parameters that indicate the degree of organization, information content and predictability of the internal selforganized self-affine process from which EEG appears as an expression of it.
Low beta waves (13-20 Hz) are the typical oscillation that predominates while we are awake and performing
daily based tasks; solving problems; and/or facing simple and complex cognitive challenges [3]. An excess of
the beta activity power in the upper range of this band (20-30 Hz) has been associated with stressful states and
anxiety [4].
Gamma band contains high-frequency oscillations and it has been much less studied than any other
brainwave. It is commonly associated with higher states of consciousness [5], meditative practices [6], and
body-centered attention [7].
2. Method
We used two EEG datasets from different specialized groups of professional people performing a task
related to their specific job. The first group was composed of 10 specialized chopper pilots, in the context of a
training program of advanced skills. The second group was composed of 10 professional dancers specialized in
modern dance, during a training course about dance and meditation. The mental task for the group of pilots was
to solve an abbreviated version of 15 questions of the Raven’s matrices test, which consist in to find the
missing piece of a visual pattern of forms and shapes by choosing the answer from a set of available choices.
The task for the group of dancers consisted in the mental visualization and imagination of a sequence of steps
and choreographic movements to be represented in the near future as part of the final evaluation exam of the
training course. All subjects ranged from 25 to 35 years old, healthy and fit. The group of pilots was composed
by 10 men and 2 women. The group of dancers was composed by 3 men and 7 women.
Tasks performing were recorded during 2 minutes with Emotiv Research Edition EEG headset recorder [8]
to obtain the signals of 14 channels from the scalp of the subjects according to the position of the standard

815

816

M. Hernán Díaz et al. / Procedia Computer Science 91 (2016) 813 – 822

10/20 location system. Basal previous states were also recorded during opened and closed eyes in relaxed
awake conditions. EEG signal was recorded at 128 Hz sampling rate and we choose beta (13-30 Hz) and
gamma (30-64 Hz) ranges to search for differences in the chaotic content of the signals and its relation to the
performers and the specialized performance. The EEG pre-processing, filtering and artifact cleaning was
performed with EEGLAB and ADJUST [9] toolboxes running in MATLAB 2008a.
We evaluated and compared H estimation for short- and a long-term timescale ranges allowing obtaining
information about two possible ways to be in a modulatory control mode over aspects of brain processes that
may be occurring at different time scales. In the standard approach to estimate H, the rescaled range analysis
renders the slope value of a log-log plot to approximate the tendency to order or chaos of the whole time series.
For our 2 minutes experiment (15360 data points) we call this H estimation the long-term approximation
because it takes the whole content of points of the whole time series. By contrast, we call the short-term
estimation to the H calculated from averaging 120 1-second duration short-term H values. Each of the 120
datasets from which short-term Hs was obtained is made of 128 data points, corresponding to 1 second of the
experiment.
We use our approach to define two temporal scales available to modulate EEG brain ongoing activity. The
first one refers to the general or global (long-term) subsurface trend or tendency of the system´s dynamic. The
second one refers to a fine-tuning modulation expressed in shorter H values estimations reflecting the chaos ļ
no-chaos tendency at a shorter time scale inside the long-term tendency.
We compare the differences of these two H estimations for dancers and pilots considering beta and gamma
brain activity bands.
3. Results
3.1. Dancers’ H long-term vs short-term estimation for beta and gamma bands.
Figure 1 shows the comparison between long- and short-term H estimation for the EEG beta and gamma
ranges in the group of dancers.
In all beta band cases, short-term H values were higher than long-term H estimation. This difference
indicates a higher short-term tendency to be less anti-persistent than the long-term anti-persistent trend.
In a dynamic system as the brain, it can be interpreted as a collaborative tendency to diminish inhibitory
(anti-trend) components made in the short-term of 1 sec window. At the same time, this is occurring while
immersed in a more central-tendency predictable attractor characterized by lower H values.
For gamma band, the opposite pattern of long/short-term contribution is observed. In all cases, long-term H
values overpass short-term H estimations. For dancers, long-term gamma modulation shows a strong tendency
to anti-persistency with lower H values. In this case, the whole average of H values for EEG gamma band
renders higher H average than EEG beta band H values (0.31 vs 0.22 respectively).
Hurst Dancers long-term vs short-term
Gamma Range (30-64 Hz)
0.52
0.47
0.42
0.37

H 0.32
0.27

long-term

0.22

short-term

0.17

Subjects

Figure 1 Long- and short-term H comparisons for beta band for dancers.

PL

RA

MP

MB

LC

LO

IG

FH

FA

CT

0.12

M. Hernán Díaz et al. / Procedia Computer Science 91 (2016) 813 – 822

3.2. Dancers’ H long-term and short-term estimation for beta and gamma band.
Figure 3 shows the comparison between beta and gamma band for the short-term and long-term estimation
of H for dancers. Differences between beta and gamma for the short- and long-term evaluation are very much
bigger for the latter comparison.

Figure 2 Long- and short-term H comparisons for beta and gamma bands for dancers.

When comparing H estimation for beta vs gamma band in the long-term modality, a strong predominance of
gamma contribution over beta is observed.
Average H long-term values for gamma band are close to H = 0.35 with a high inter-subjects variability. H
values for beta band render values between 0.15 and 0.2 with lower inter-subjects variability.
With the exception of one individual (MB) in the short-term band´s comparison, there are no great
differences in the beta and gamma band chaos ļ no-chaos anti-persistent contribution. H values border 0.250.3, half away from maximal anti-persistent behavior (H=0) and random walk (H=0.5).
3.3. Pilots’ H long-term vs short-term estimation for beta and gamma band.
Figure 3 shows the comparison between long- and short-term H estimation for the EEG beta and gamma
ranges in the group of pilots.
For pilots, in 11 out of 12 beta band cases, short-term H values were higher than long-term whole data H
estimation. Compared with dancers, it is found a similar range of H values as observed in Fig. 1 (Ranges 0.130.27 for dancers and 0.17-0.37 for pilots), but with fewer differences between long- and short-term H values for
pilots. So it looks like a similar collaborative contribution of both long- and short-term temporal scale to keep
anti-persistent behavior around H=0.24.

Figure 3 Long- and short-term H comparisons for beta band pilots.

This rather low and similar central H values for both timescales indicates a long- and short-term tendency to
be more anti-persistent.
In a similar way, as we did for dancers, it can be interpreted as a collaborative tendency to increase
inhibitory (anti-trend, less synchronized) components in the long- and the short-term time scales.

817

818

M. Hernán Díaz et al. / Procedia Computer Science 91 (2016) 813 – 822

3.4. Pilots’ H long-term and short-term estimation for beta and gamma band.
Figure 4 shows the comparison between beta and gamma band for the short- and long-term estimation of H.
Differences between beta and gamma for the short- and long-term evaluation are much lesser for the latter.
Global differences between beta and gamma H values for the short- and long-term evaluation are rather
similar but long-term estimation reveals more inter-subjects differences than the more regular pattern expressed
in the short-term evaluation.
. When comparing H estimation for beta vs gamma band in the long-term modality, dominance (not as
strong as in dancers) of gamma over beta is observed.
Average H long-term values for gamma band are close to H = 0.25 (Hdancers = 0.35) with a similar intersubjects variability for beta and gamma bands. Averaging H values for beta band renders values around 0.25
(between 0.15 and 0.2 for Hdancers), and a similar inter-subjects variability for beta and gamma oscillations.
For short-term time scale, beta presented higher H values than gamma. And for long-term time scale,
gamma band showed higher H values.

Figure 4 Beta vs gamma band H short-term vs long-term comparison.

3.5. Dancers and pilots altogether
3.5.1. EEG Beta band
To have a better visualization of differences and similarities of the H estimations between the two groups,
Figure 5 reunites dancers and pilots under the long- and short-term estimation of the beta band. Besides the
expected individual variability, a clear distinction appears separating pilots to the right and dancers to the left.

Figure 5 Dancers and Pilots H long-term and short-term for beta band comparison.

For beta band in both cases (long- and short-term time scales) H estimation differentiates dancers from
pilots by presenting higher values of H for the latter. H for short-term scale results in a slightly better grouping
estimator than using long-term timescale.

M. Hernán Díaz et al. / Procedia Computer Science 91 (2016) 813 – 822

3.5.2. EEG Gamma band
When comparing the two timescales in the gamma band (Figure 6) we found that in the long-term timescale
estimation, dancers occupies the right side of the graph with higher values of H. The opposite pattern found for
the beta band.

Figure 6 Dancers and Pilots H long-term for gamma band comparison.

For gamma band in both cases (long- and short-term timescales) H differentiates pilots from dancers by
presenting higher values of H for the latter. H for short-term timescale is a slightly better grouping estimator
than using long-term timescale but, definitely, the four comparative scenarios reveal a tendency to separate
fairly different ways to organize specialized contextual functionality of the brain.
4. Discussion
The purpose of the present exploratory study was the search for distinctive components in the people’s
characteristics that correlate with individuality and that, at the same time, marks his/her belonging to a major
set of people specialized in the same professional area. Figuratively, we called these elements brainbodied
because they are the intertwined coordination of brain and body in a concomitant history of change and
adaptation.
The strategy sets as the alternative hypothesis the existence of distinctive elements in the characteristics of
the people that allow classify and distinguish them from other groups of people with different professional
specializations.
These searched distinctive elements were evaluated through the Hurst exponent (H) estimation for the
tendency toward order and chaos of the time series obtained from the EEG recordings from subjects while
performing tasks related to their professional specializations.
We compared neurophysiological variables (beta and gamma bands of the EEG for 14 channels) evaluated
according to the Hurst exponent H (short and long-term timescales) against the professional specialization
(pilot or dancer).
The physiological variable involved in the study was the relative voltage variation of the
electroencephalographic signal, recorded during two minutes, for the beta (13-30 Hz) and gamma (30-64 Hz)
bands.
The variable related with the tendency chaos ļ no-chaos of the EEG signal was the value of H, estimated
by the method of re-scaled ranges (R/S) to render a value of a slope of a log-log plot for the tendency
(chaos/no-chaos balance) of the signal. The value of this slope is H and estimates the degree of randomness in
the persistence or anti-persistency of the internal functioning of the system under scrutiny. H moves in a range
between 0 and 1 and estimates the tendency to order (predictability) or chaos (unpredictability) of the series of
successive historically-related events.
H was evaluated in two timescales depending on the number of data points the time series was defined.
When using the whole original EEG data points for the total 2 minutes length of the experiment, we refer to it
as the H long-term estimation.
When we used the average of successive 1 second Hs (120 chunked sets of 128 data points each for atime

819

820

M. Hernán Díaz et al. / Procedia Computer Science 91 (2016) 813 – 822

series of 1-second length), we refer to it as H short-time estimation..
In the brain, we can figure out the concepts of order and chaos as the extremes of a system that permanently
oscillates between these two attraction states without being one better than the other. In each transient moment,
the system oscillates with some tendency. In some cases, it will reflect nothing more than being constantly
behaving as a random walk noise, stochastic and unpredictable. But in other occasions, it will keep going on for
a while in a particular direction with a tendency to be recurrently repeated in time (persistently approaching to
organized self-similarity, information-rich, local, and transient organization); or to be recurrently avoiding
persistent structure or memory (anti-persistent) being attracted to a central tendency value.
The interpretation of H must be done in terms of the internal sub-surface operation of the whole system
measured. As, in this case, our starting point is the EEG signal as a proxy indicator of the whole system (the
brain) the application of non-linear methods minimize the intrinsic weakness of a proxy approach by increasing
knowledge of the internal subsurface organization of the system. In the brain, this sub-surface organization may
reflect the, cooperative and counteracting balancing forces between opposite homeostatic values.
. The amount of transient fractal organized structures, the duration of the recurrence and the transient
predictability that shows the signal, will be dependent on the nature of the executing task. In such a way, it is
understood, for example, that a complex task of artistic cognitive nature (like mentally planning a sequence of
movements in a dancing choreography) will have a special and specialized procedural treatment which will be
different from the one performed during a test of analytic cognitive nature (like finding missing geometric
patterns to complete a complex but logic visual composition).
By extension, it is reasonable to state that as any transient moment has its own balance between all the
relevant physiological homeostatic counteractions, they must result in a particular global rendered composition
of chaos ļ no-chaos contribution.
To master a particular motor-cognitive skill implicates to force a specific recurrence of processes for quite a
long time (~10.000 h) to be considered an expert in a discipline. For a full-time dedication (8h/day) it means
near 5 years fully dedicated to a single specialized activity.
For a mental state afforded during meditation, an acknowledged favorable state for introspection, selfknowledge, and creativity, the mind is not being forced to think, but to stay calm letting move the attention in a
quasi-controlled fashion. It is generally associated with alpha wave oscillation (8-12 Hz) and can be evoked
while resting and being relaxed awake with closed eyes. When we estimating H for this alpha range in awaked
basal conditions, we found values of H = 0.17, the lowest value for the whole brain frequency ranges. Theta
band showed H = 0.21 similar to beta with H = 0.20 [10].
From alpha to gamma, following the axis of complex attention and workload mental processing, values of
H increase gradually from alpha to values close to 0.3.
Our previous works show that while awake delta band is the only wave that expresses very high values of H
= 0.7-0.8 [10], suggesting that in wakefulness delta band may act as a general overall controller of the whole
level of organization and positive persistence of long-memory processing of the brain.
This observed gradient of H values rising from alpha to gamma may correlates with the level of complexity,
or resources needed, to solve problems in the beta and higher EEG frequency ranges.
Our results are consistent with other similar non-linear evaluation of the chaotic properties of the EEG
during sleep and awaked stages [11] as depicted in Figure 7.
Figure 7 represents the non-linear parameter dependence of 5 brain states: Awake, Sleep1, Sleep2, Sleep3,
Sleep4 and Sleep5. The graph represents non-linear parameter values for Fractal Dimension (FD),
Approximated Entropy (AppEn), Largest Lyapunov Exponent (LLE) and Hurst exponent (H).
While getting into deeper sleep stages from Awake ĺ NREM1 ĺ NREM2 ĺ NREM3 ĺ NREM4, H and
AppEn decrease very well correlated with each other, while fractal dimension (FD) progressively increases. An
increase of the values of H and AppEn in Stage2 (NREM2) could be related to the presence of K-complexes
and sleep spindles characteristic of this sleep stage. As expected, awake and REM sleep stages have higher H
values [11].

M. Hernán Díaz et al. / Procedia Computer Science 91 (2016) 813 – 822

821

Figure 7 Non-linear analysis of EEG signals at various sleep stages.
Sleep1 to Sleep 4 represent the four stages of the non-rem (NREM) sleep, while Sleep5 represent rapid eye movement
(REM) sleep. (Acharya et.al. (2005) Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 80, 37-45).

From inside each EEG frequency band, H estimation renders information about the underlying intrinsic
modulation that a band is generating or being subjected to. It can be moved i) toward anti-persistent, shortmemory and more volatile activity; ii) toward persistent, long-memory and more predictable processes; or iii)
toward just random walk or Gaussian noise oscillation, a kind of activity with no information relevance.
5. Conclusions
Our comparative study showed that it does exist distinguishable group’s tendencies and individual
differences in the Hurst exponent estimation of the EEG activity that allow classification of differently
specialized brains (subjects).
We first compared differences between short- and long-term estimation of H and found that for the beta
range both, dancers and pilots have Hshort ȕ > Hlong ȕ. Doing the same comparison but using gamma band as the
estimator of the data source we found quite the opposite, Hshort Ȗ < Hlong Ȗ.
The different degree of organization that we found when comparing Hshort vs Hlong for beta and gamma
bands may indicate differences in the EEG band contribution to short and/or long-term executive memory
processing associated with the task in execution.
For the beta band, the world is pragmatic, concrete, immediate and present. There is a problem to solve here
and now, so it will be a reasonable expectation to have a stronger contribution to persistence and transient order
(higher H values) made by short-term attention and memory processing.
This reasoning finds support when estimating Hshort vs Hlong for the gamma band in which both groups,
dancers and pilots, shows higher values of H for the long-term time scale estimation.
Being gamma band a kind of oscillation traditionally more associated with higher states of consciousness
with a focus on the transcending self, it seems reasonable to think about this processing as using a long-term
memory expectation. For gamma band, the world may be something not so strictly immediate, present or
urgent but rather a long-term interconnected and modulated process.
When comparing H values (short and long) for the beta band, considering all the participants, results showed a
clear grouped distribution classifying mainly pilots to the right (higher H values) and dancers to the left (lower
H values).
By doing the same analysis for the gamma band, results showed again quite the opposite distribution
grouping dancers to the right (higher H values) and pilots to the left (lower H values). In both comparisons,
Hshort resulted to be a better classifier.
Results indicate that after to learn a task through a repetitive practice during the time of specialization or

822

M. Hernán Díaz et al. / Procedia Computer Science 91 (2016) 813 – 822

learning and memory consolidation it is possible to detect and measure a fingerprint or a common pattern of
organization that co-exists at the brain level in specialized groups of people. In this exploratory and
comparative study, the clearest functional brain fingerprint for pilots was to have consistently higher values of
H(short) in beta than dancers while for dancers the most prominent functional brain fingerprint was to have
higher values of H(short) in gamma.
In general, it is agreed that some elements associated with the gamma band oscillation (30-64 Hz) may have
relation with states of attention of spiritual or transcendental nature [12-13], a more abstract and less concrete
experience, a type of voluntary absence of the sense of space and time. Contrasting with this, beta band
oscillation (13-30 Hz) refers to normal daily-life awaked activities with active attention solving different kinds
of cognitive challenges. In front a rise of the complexity of the task performed, beta band responds minimizing
inter-channel correlation across the brain cortex channel locations, maybe to allocate new and more specific
processes to deal with a complexity increasing cognitive task [14].
We also found intra-groups inter-individual differences with some interesting peculiarities of few subjects
from one group but with parameters more closely related to the other group.
Results are encouraging to continue opening this research field because of the potential applications that can
be projected in a variety of fields interested in to have a better diagnosis and understanding of the differences
and similarities between people and groups of people, allowing differentiate distinctive characteristics or
brainbodied fingerprint of his/her brain and body’s functional organization enactment.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by 061317CG DICYT Project at Universidad de Santiago de Chile and the
ILPA (In Honor to Linus Pauling) Naturopathic Institute Research Program.

References
[1] Cajueiro, D., Tabak, B. 2005 The rescaled variance statistic and te determination of the Hurst exponent. Mathematics and Computers
in Simulation 7(2005) 172-179.
[2] Vakalopoulos, C. 2014 The EEG as an index of neuromodulator balance in memory and mental illness. Frontiers in Neuroscience.
Hypothesis and Theory article. April 2014, Volume 8, Article 63-1.
[3] Fernandez, T., Harmony, T., Rodriguez, M., Bernal, J., Silva, J. Reyes, A. Marosi, E. 1995 EEG activation patterns during the
performance of tasks involving different components of mental calculation. Electroencephalography and clinical Neurophysiology 94
(1995) 175-182.
[4] Fingelkurts, A., Fingelkurts, A. 2014 EEG Oscillatory States: Universality, Uniqueness and Specificity across Healthy-Normal,
Altered and Pathological Brain Conditions. Plos One February 2014, Volume 9, Issue 2, e87507.
[5] Keil, A., Müller, M., Ray, W., Gruber, T.and Elbert, T. 1999 Human Gamma Band Activity and Perception of a Gestalt. The Journal of
Neuroscience, August 15, 1999, 19(16):7152–7161
[6] Berkovich-Ohana A., Glicksohn, J., Goldstein, A. 2011 Mindfulness-induced changes in gamma band activity – Implications for the
default mode network, self-reference, and attention. Clin Neurophysiol (2011), doi:10.1016/j.clinph.2011.07.048.
[7] Fred Travis, F., Shear, J. 2010 Focused attention, open monitoring and automatic self-transcending: Categories to organize meditations
from Vedic, Buddhist, and Chinese traditions. Consciousness and Cognition (2010), doi:10.1016/j.concog.2010.01.007.
[8] Badcock, N., Mousikou, P., Mahajan, Y., De Lissa, P., Thie, J., McArthur, G. 2013. Validation of the Emotiv EPOC® EEG gaming
system for measuring research quality auditory ERPs. PeerJ 1:e38.
[9] Mognon, A., Jovicich, J., Bruzzone, L., Buiati, M. 2010. ADJUST: An automatic EEG artifact detector based on the joint use of spatial
and emporal features. Psychophysiology 48(2):229-40. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-8986.2010.01061.x.
[10] Díaz, H., Córdova, F., Cañete, L., Palominos, F., Cifuentes, F., Sánchez, C., Herrera, M. 2015 Order and chaos in the brain: fractal
time series analysis of the EEG activity during a cognitive problem-solving task. Procedia Computer Science 55 (2015) 1410-1419.
[11] Rajendra A., Faust, O., Kannathal, N., TjiLeng Ch., Laxminarayan S. 2005. Nonlinear analysis of EEG signals at various sleep

stages. Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 80, 37-45.
[12] Berkovich-Ohana A., Glicksohn, J., Goldstein, A. 2011 Mindfulness-induced changes in gamma band activity – Implications for the
default mode network, self-reference, and attention. Clin Neurophysiol (2011), doi:10.1016/j.clinph.2011.07.048.
[13] Fred Travis, F., Shear, J. 2010 Focused attention, open monitoring and automatic self-transcending: Categories to organize meditations
from Vedic, Buddhist, and Chinese traditions. Consciousness and Cognition (2010), doi:10.1016/j.concog.2010.01.007.
[14] Díaz, H., Cordova, F., Cañete. L., Palominos, F., Cifuentes, F., Rivas, G., 2015 Interchannel correlation in the EEG activity during a
cognitive problem-solving task with an increasing difficulty questions progression. Procedia Computer Scvence 55(2015):1420-1425.

