Computers in Human Behavior 51 (2015) 610–617

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Computers in Human Behavior
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/comphumbeh

Emotions ontology for collaborative modelling and learning of emotional
responses
Rosa Gil a, Jordi Virgili-Gomá a, Roberto García a,⇑, Cindy Mason b
a
b

Universitat de Lleida, Spain
Computer Science Department, Stanford University, USA

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Available online 6 March 2015
Keywords:
Emotion
Ontology
Collaborative learning
Social networks
Knowledge representation
Affective computing

a b s t r a c t
Emotions-aware applications are getting a lot of attention as a way to improve the user experience, and
also thanks to increasingly affordable Brain–Computer Interfaces (BCI). Thus, projects collecting emotionrelated data are proliferating, like social networks sentiment analysis or tracking students’ engagement to
reduce Massive Online Open Courses (MOOCs) drop out rates. All them require a common way to
represent emotions so it can be more easily integrated, shared and reused by applications improving user
experience. Due to the complexity of this data, our proposal is to use rich semantic models based on
ontology. EmotionsOnto is a generic ontology for describing emotions and their detection and expression
systems taking contextual and multimodal elements into account. The ontology has been applied in the
context of EmoCS, a project that collaboratively collects emotion common sense and models it using
the EmotionsOnto and other ontologies. Currently, emotion input is provided manually by users.
However, experiments are being conduced to automatically measure users’s emotional states using
Brain–Computer Interfaces.
Ó 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

1. Introduction
The emotional dimension of the interaction of humans with
computers was considered for a long time a marginal factor
(Brave & Nass, 2002). However, human beings are eminently emotional, as their social interaction is based on the ability to communicate their emotions and to perceive the emotional states of
others. In this sense, emotions must be taken into account when
implementing computing systems as a mechanism to improve
the user experience.
Consequently, the study of emotion as a key faction in Human–
Computer Interaction has gained a lot of traction resulting in wellestablished research and applications areas like affective computing. This paradigm deals with detecting, interpreting and responding to user’s emotions when developing systems and devices
(Picard, 2000).
Interest in this area is driven by a wide spectrum of promising
applications, such as virtual reality, smart surveillance or perceptual interfaces (Tao & Tan, 2005). More recently, emotion-awareness
has been highlighted as a key issue in online learning environments, especially in Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs). In this
⇑ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: rgil@diei.udl.cat (R. Gil), rgarcia@diei.udl.cat (J. Virgili-Gomá),
jordi@virgili.org (R. García), cmason@steam.stanford.edu (C. Mason).

case, massiveness makes it impossible to maintain a direct contact
between instructors and learners that facilitates adapting the
learning experience to learners needs while keeping their
engagement.
This, among others factors, seem to explain the big dropout rate
of most MOOCs, usually above 90% (Yang, Sinha, Adamson, & Rosé,
2013). Therefore, techniques like sentiment analysis have been
applied to try to anticipate students’ dropout (Wen, Yang, & Rosé,
2014). However, it is not enough to anticipate it, mechanisms
should be provided to improve engagement and minimise it.
Therefore, the objective, in the case of MOOCs but also other
Human–Computer interactions, should be to model, track and
inﬂuence emotion through the concept of ‘‘emotional affordance’’
(Cheng, 2014), deﬁned as the characteristics of a situation that
inﬂuence emotions, as perceived by the people in that situation.
However, there are a great variety of theoretical models of emotions and there are different technologies that can be used for their
implementation. Although there are many common properties,
emotions are not universal: they are differently expressed in different cultures and languages, while many emotional properties are
individual.
There is rarely a one-size-ﬁts-all solution for the growing variety
of computer users and interactions (Obrenovic, Garay, López,
Fajardo, & Cearreta, 2005). Therefore, emotion-aware applications
should be designed in a ﬂexible way so a wider class of users can

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2014.11.100
0747-5632/Ó 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.
This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

R. Gil et al. / Computers in Human Behavior 51 (2015) 610–617

use them. In this way, personalisation is necessary for more efﬁcient
interaction, better tuning and acceptation of developed systems.
There is a broad terminology related to affective states in
human beings. The term ‘‘emotion’’ tends to be used in a broad
sense, especially in technological contexts. Scherer (Scherer,
2000) proposed a number of taxonomies for these affective states.
The original list was later modiﬁed and redeﬁned in Douglas-Cowie
and et al. (2006). This new list includes: Attitudes, Established
emotion, Emergent Emotion (full-blown), Emergent Emotion (suppressed), Moods, Partial emotion (topic shifting), Partial emotion
(simmering), Stance towards person, Stance towards object/situation, Interpersonal bonds, Altered state of arousal, Altered state
of control, Altered state of seriousness and Emotionless.
This paper focuses on Emergent Emotion (full-blown), instead
of a global taxonomy of affective states. This is made to reduce
the complexity of proposed domain so it is easier to deal with.
Besides, for the same reason, focus is mainly devoted to emotion
detection and expression systems instead of modelling internal
emotion processing in humans.
In Douglas-Cowie et al. (2006), Emergent Emotion (full-blown)
is deﬁned as ‘‘states where the person’s whole system is caught up
in the way they react to a particular person or situation’’. It
involves aspects such as:
 Distinctive positive or negative feelings about the people or
situations involved.
 Impulses to act or express yourself in particular ways and avoid
others.
 Distinctive changes in your body, for instance in your heart rate
or tendency to sweat.
 Emotion does not last very long – it comes on quite quickly, and
dies down reasonably soon (unless there is something very
unusual happening).
Our contribution is to overcome the above mentioned limitations referring to the lack of ﬂexibility when personalising affective
computing applications by providing a generic ontology for
describing detection and expression systems related with emotions, while taking contextual and multimodal elements into
account. The ontology is proposed as a way to develop an easily
implementable formal model, as it is based on the Web Ontology
Language (OWL) standard (W3C OWL Working Group, 2012).
However, the knowledge about emotions in the ontology can be
used by affective computing applications with independence of
underneath technology.
The proposed ontology in this paper is based on a generic model
geared towards capturing the entities that take part in the
Emergent Emotion process (López, Gil, García, Cearreta, & Garay,
2008). The model is presented in Section 3 and it has been formalised as an ontology following a classical ontology engineering
methodology (García, 2006). The ontology has been developed to
be as agnostic as possible regarding existing emotion theories.
This way, developers of affective resources are not tied to a given
theoretical approach.
In this sense, developers can use different theoretical approaches in the same ontological and technological framework. For
instance, the categorical theory of emotions (Ekman, 1984), the
dimensional one (Lang, 1979) or the one based on appraisal
(Scherer, 1999).
Consequently, the ontology can help implementing emotionaware applications based on a wider range of theoretical approaches. This ﬂexibility and wide applicability of EmotionsOnto is in
great part due to the fact that it is capable of modelling contexts.
In order to do that, the DOLCE upper ontology (Gangemi,
Guarino, Masolo, Oltramari, & Schneider, 2002) is reused and
extended, particularly the Description and Situation concepts.

611

Descriptions correspond to the representations for the situations, which then trigger and are associated with emotions.
Moreover, in order to cope with the enormous range of different
situations that might need to be associated with emotions, they
are modelled using the building blocks provided by FrameNet
(Scheffczyk, Baker, & Narayanan, 2008). It is a big lexical database,
with more than 10,000 word senses, structured following Frame
Semantics (Fillmore, 2006). Frames ﬁt really well with situations
modelling as they try to explain words meaning by building a
description of a type of event, relation, or entity and the participants in it.
The resulting ontology, EmotionsOnto, is validated in a realworld application that manages affective information, the
Emotions Common Sense (EmoCS) initiative. It is inspired by the
Open Mind Common Sense1 initiative, but integrating emotional
feedback together with the common sense sentences contributed
by users. In order to help understanding and automatising users
input to guide emotions-aware applications, EmoCS provides
dynamic forms with autocomplete features that guide the user while
building structured descriptions of the situations to be associated
with emotions, as detailed in Section 4. Moreover, we have started
to explore the use of Brain–Computer Interfaces to automate emotional input gathering, as also reported in Section 4.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. The next section
presents several theories and concepts relevant for describing
emotions, together with several topics related to ontologies and
emotions. Then, the conceptual model underlying the proposed
EmotionsOnto is introduced in Section 3. Then, the EmoCS application scenario is presented in Section 4. Finally, conclusions and
future work conclude this paper in Section 5.

2. Related work
Emotion is a complex topic and ﬁndings of different areas, such
as anthropology, psychology, and biology, are included in its wideranging discussion. In the ﬁeld of psychology, deﬁnitions of emotion have been proposed with different theoretical orientations.
In this sense, theories of emotions proposed by cognitive psychology are a useful starting point in order to describe emotion.
Although several cognitive models of emotions exist, the most
commonly ones used in affective computing area are the categorical (Ekman, 1984), dimensional (Lang, 1979) and appraisal
(Scherer, 1999).
Lang (1979) also proposed analysing emotions according to
three systems involved in their expression and detection:
Subjective or verbal information (i.e. reports about perceived emotions described by users), Behavioural (i.e. facial and postural
expressions,
speech
paralinguistic
parameters),
and
Psychophysiological answers (such as heart rate, galvanic skin
response –GSR–, and electroencephalographic response).
The subjective, behavioural and physiological correlates of emotions should be taken into account when possible. The correlations
among the three systems could help computers to interpret
ambiguous emotions. In that sense, more speciﬁc models or classiﬁcations that describe the components of each system of expression can be found in the literature and selected according to the
particular case. These examples include acoustic correlates of
speech (Scherer, 1986), verbal (Bradley, Lang, & Cuthbert, 1997)
or facial expressions (Lang, 1979).
The emotional memory arisen from the experience of the individual and the cultural surroundings (also called socialised emotion) also has an inﬂuence on affective states in humans as well.
Sociology of emotions has typically examined how affect arises,
1

Open Mind Common Sense, http://commons.media.mit.edu.

612

R. Gil et al. / Computers in Human Behavior 51 (2015) 610–617

linking emotions to particular types of interactions (Goffman,
1956). Besides, as the emotional answer is often socialised, it does
not necessarily correspond to a pure emotional answer and it can
mask real affective states.
It is noteworthy that, generally speaking, research has paid little
attention to context in affective computing area (Cowie, DouglasCowie, & Cox, 2005). Context is inescapably linked to modality,
and emotion is strongly multimodal as emotional cues may appear
in various different channels. However, not all types of emotional
cues tend to be available together, as context can affect relevant
or accessible emotional cues.
For instance, Devillers, Abrilian, and Martin (2005) explained
that emotional behaviour models require representing multiple
levels involved in emotional processes: the emotional context,
the emotion itself and associated multimodal behaviours. In that
work, some appraisal descriptors derived from the appraisal model
(Scherer, 1999) such as time-of-event were added in the context
part of the proposed scheme.
On the other hand, (Baldauf, Dustdar, & Rosenberg, 2007) proposed that context aware systems are those that adapt their behaviour according to context and that this context (location, time,
activity, devices and person) also includes user’s affective state.
Regarding the use of emergent emotion in real world applications,
Lim and Aylett (2009) describe a novel emergent emotion model
for a context-aware guide with emotions and personality that
accompanies visitors touring an outdoor attraction.
2.1. Ontologies related with emotion modelling
Different ontologies have been proposed in literature with the
aim of modelling emotion and affect related issues. These ontologies are normally focused on analysing concrete areas. For
instance, in text analysis area, Mathieu (2005) presented a semantic lexicon in the ﬁeld of feelings and emotions. This lexicon is
described with an ontology. Words in the lexicon are emotionally
labelled as positive, negative and neutral.
Emotional annotation has also been used in WordNet ontology
(Fellbaum, 1998), producing the WordNetAffect extension
(Strapparava & Valitutti, 2004). With the support of ontology technologies, users can retrieve information in a semantic manner (Chi,
Peng, & Yang, 2007). A primary course of ontology building is related to concept development. Focusing on speech, Galunov, Lobanov,
and Zagoruiko (2004) present an ontology for speech signal recognition and synthesis where emotion is taken into account. On the
other hand, focusing on the context, Benta, Rarău, and Cremene
(2007) present an ontology based representation of the affective
states for context aware applications which allows expressing
the complex relations that are among the affective states and
between these and the other context elements.
Although these kinds of unimodal approaches have relevance in
their respective ﬁelds, they lack properly expressing the multimodal nature of human emotions. In this sense, multimodal
ontologies for describing emotion have been proposed. For
instance, Obrenovic et al. (2005) describes an ontology based on
emotional cues that uses media properties from different sources
to model emotion.
3. Contribution
The proposed ontology in this paper is based on a generic model
geared towards capturing the entities that take part in the
Emergent Emotion process. The model is summarised in Fig. 1.
This model has been formalised as an ontology following a classical
ontology engineering methodology (García, 2006). The ontology,
and the model it is based on, tries to be as emotions-theory

agnostic as possible. The objective is to develop an ontology ﬂexible enough to accommodate existing emotions theories, such as
the ones presented in the literature review.
The underlying Emergent Emotion model is formalised using
Semantic Web tools (Lytras & García, 2008), more concretely the
Web Ontology Language (OWL) (Lacy, 2005). OWL makes it possible to attain a great level of expressivity while producing a web
ontology that can be easily shared through the web and thus be
opened to third party extensions.
The different parts of the model have been developed using the
primitives provided by OWL. The main building blocks are classes,
which represent concepts in the model, and properties, which represent the relations among the concepts. The ﬁrst step has been to
model all the ovals in Fig. 1 as OWL classes. Therefore, there are
classes such as EmergentEmotion, Description, Memory,
Perception, and Sensor. For the relations among these concepts in
the model, OWL object properties have been generated, i.e.
hasInput, hasOutput, triggers, etc.
The ontology is completed with some axioms that restrict the
kind of things that these properties can link. In OWL, these axioms
are called OWL Restrictions and, in the context of a class, they specify to objects of what class does that property link to when
applied to objects of the source class. For instance, the ontology
contains a restriction that speciﬁes that the triggers property when
applied to the class Description points to objects of type
EmergentEmotion.
The
speciﬁcation
of
the
ontology
(EmotionsOnto henceforth) in OWL format is available online.2
The previous formalisation of the Emergent Emotion model
helps building an ontology that facilitates computerised emotions
management. However, it provides little semantics apart from
those explicitly present in the model. For instance, the ontology
provides just some information about what a Sensor is. In order
to enrich the ontology, we have taken existing upper ontologies
into account.
Upper ontologies are very generic ontologies, about concepts
like object or process, that settle down the ontological foundations
about what is there in the world (Sowa, 1999). Consequently, they
provide very basic and fundamental semantics about the kind of
things that a more specialised ontology, like the one proposed in
this work, can deal with. Building an upper ontology is a very complex process and thus it is recommended to reuse existing upper
ontologies instead of elaborating a full conceptualisation for the
concepts in a specialised ontology.
In order to do so, DOLCE (Gangemi et al., 2002) has been chosen,
that stands for Descriptive Ontology for Linguistic and Cognitive
Engineering, because it ﬁts really well with the underlying considered cognitive aspects. in order to build the conceptual model. In
fact, the Description and Situation concepts in this ontology have
been reused from DOLCE and extended. These concepts provide a
framework for representing contexts, which are the entities associated to EmergentEmotions in our model.
DOLCE also provides generic concepts that have been used in
order to contextualise those in EmotionsOnto. First of all, there is
Event that generalises any occurring thing in our model. There
are some concretisations, i.e. Process, an event considered in its
evolution, and Action, an event with at least one agent that participates in it.
On the other hand, there are objects. PhysicalObject has been
used in order to contextualise concepts like Sensor, which we have
detailed further in the ontology with artiﬁcial and biological sensors, and more speciﬁcally with human-like senses. SocialObject
is the generalisation for Description and Situation, but also for

2
Emergent Emotion Ontology (EmotionsOnto), http://rhizomik.net/ontologies/
emotionsonto/.

R. Gil et al. / Computers in Human Behavior 51 (2015) 610–617

613

Fig. 1. Emergent emotion and human information processing systems.

Verbal, a kind of EmotionExpressionSystem together with
Behavioural systems that have been speciﬁed as Actions.
All these relationships among EmotionsOnto and DOLCE concepts are shown in Fig. 2, where DOLCE concepts are coloured in
grey. Moreover, the ﬁgure also shows additional concepts, apart
from those shown in the model, that concretise concepts like
EmotionExpression System or Sensor. Additionally, the ontology
also includes the different kinds of Context identiﬁed during
the conceptualisation process. SocialContext and EnvironmentalContext are modelled using Situation. On the other hand,
PersonalContext is based on the Interface concept that includes
both the EmotionExpressionSystem and the Sensor concepts.
Although DOLCE provides the building block for modelling context, i.e. Description and Situation, concrete means that allow modelling the descriptions for the situations that trigger and are
associated with emotions are necessary. However, to develop an
ontology capable of dealing with the huge range of situations that
might be associated with emotions is out of the scope of the ontology. Consequently, we have selected an existing ontology that provides such a wide scope called FrameNet (Scheffczyk et al., 2008).
FrameNet has been selected because it is better suited for modelling context as situations. FrameNet is based on the frame-modelling paradigm. A frame is a schematic representation of a typical
situation (e.g. eating, removing, classifying, etc.) together with a
list of the kinds of participants, properties and other conceptual
roles that are seen as components of that situation.3 Moreover, it
can be easily connected with DOLCE, as it can be noted in Fig. 2,
where the concept Frame appears as a subclass of Description.
Consequently, we can accomplish a smooth integration of DOLCE
and FrameNet in the context of EmotionsOnto.
For instance, in order to model the situation ‘‘John enters the
room’’ using FrameNet, it is possible to use the ‘‘enter.v’’ lexical
unit, which belongs to the ‘‘Arriving’’ frame. This frame deﬁnes a
set of Frame Elements (FEs) and some of them might be used in
order to model the participants and properties of this situation.
The Frame Element ‘‘Theme’’ is associated with the object that
moves, in this case ‘‘John’’. On the other hand, the FE ‘‘Goal’’ is associated with where the Theme ends up as a result of the motion, in
this case ‘‘the room’’.

4. Evaluation
The EmotionsOnto has been applied in the context of the
Emotions Common Sense project (EmoCS), inspired by the Open
Mind Common Sense (OMCS) initiative (Speer, 2007). OMCS aims
to collaboratively build a database of common sense, while
EmoCS does the same but for emotional common sense. This is
done by providing a user interface that captures emotional input
from users, who can associate common sense sentences, images
and audio ﬁles to a set of predeﬁned emotional states.
Another important difference between EmoCS and OMCS is
that, while OMCS tries to capture common sense knowledge from
user input that is basically unrestricted sentences, EmoCS restricts
user input to structured representations based on FrameNet and
associated emotional input. The main objective is to increase the
functionality of the current OMCS website by including emotional
aspects in its design. Moreover, an additional objective has been to
facilitate processing users input. This is why, in EmoCS, users are
required to provide structured input, which is based on
FrameNet and linked to the EmotionsOnto.
As shown in Fig. 3, and as it can be observed in the EmoCS site,4
the user input form includes an autocomplete feature that guides the
user. Once the user start typing about the kind of action she or he is
willing to talk about, the autocomplete feature checks against the
FrameNet ontology for candidates. When the user picks the desired
action, the corresponding FrameNet frame is explored to detect the
relevant frame elements and complete the form so it is shaped following the frame structure.
Finally, the user provides the emotional input using the slider in
the right part of Fig. 3. Overall, when the form is submitted, a representation like the one in Fig. 4 is generated and associated to a
set of emergent emotions. The FrameNet-based description and
the emotional input can be also associated to uploaded images or
referenced through an URL. In this case the image constitutes the
situation and the description is about what is shown in the image.
The input is stored in a RDF5 store capable of mixing Web
ontologies and RDF-based facts that also provides reasoning and

4
3

FrameNet, http://framenet.icsi.berkeley.edu.

5

EmoCS, http://rhizomik.net/emocs (currently working just with Firefox).
Resource Description Framework, http://www.w3.org/RDF.

614

R. Gil et al. / Computers in Human Behavior 51 (2015) 610–617

Fig. 2. EmotionsOnto core in the context of the DOLCE upper ontology.

Fig. 3. EmoCS input form.

query answering. It can be used then to feed emotional-aware
applications.
First, the application models emotional responses using
EmotionsOnto so, afterwards, the systems based on the collected
emotional knowledge are capable of responding to user emotional
changes. For instance, if it is detected sadness, an emotion-aware
system might respond by playing songs and displaying images that
have been associated to a happy user response, as shown in Fig. 5.
It is important to note that the ontology does not help the system recognise the emotional responses, but to model the emotions
and associate them to descriptions of situations and other parts of
the Emergent Emotion Model. However, though this can be learnt
from user interaction, our experience shows that the system
requires some bootstrapping emotional knowledge that makes it
useful and thus motivates user to continue using it. This is why

Fig. 4. FrameNet based description of a situation generated from EmoCS input.

R. Gil et al. / Computers in Human Behavior 51 (2015) 610–617

615

Fig. 5. Representations based on EmotionsOnto for the TUI scenario.

we have started exploring automated ways of annotating situation
descriptions based on Brain–Computer Interfaces, like detailed in
the next section.

4.1. Brain computer interface for emotion sensing
Brain Computer Interface (BCI) is a discipline that mainly came
into common use with disabled users. Currently BCI is used in
many different areas from marketing to learning systems through
control robots, games or emotion detection (Gürkök & Nijholt,
2012).
Electroencephalography (EEG) provides a means of accessing
and recording neural activity, allowing a computer to retrieve
and analyse information from the brainwave patterns produce by
thought. EEG has a much greater temporal resolution (allows millisecond-accuracy), however functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) provides a much ﬁner spatial resolution.
The most commercially widespread devices are Emotiv EEG6
and Neurosky.7 We have chosen Emotiv EGG because it features
more sensors and thus provides more EEG data. Emotiv’s EEG
Neuroheadset, shown in Fig. 6, is equipped with 14 saline sensors
for the following EEG 10–20 standard scalp locations: AF3, AF4, F3,
F4, F7, F8, FC5, FC6, P3 (CMS), P4 (DRL), P7, P8, T7, T8, O1 and O2
(Stern, 2013).
Prior to use, all felt pads on top of the sensors have to be moisturised with a saline solution. Emotiv headset is aimed at the gaming market and it is not classiﬁed as a medical device. It comes with
some processing tools that can detect facial movements, emotional
states and imagined motor movement (Emotiv’s Expressiv, Affectiv
and Cognitiv suites respectively).
The Affective Suite has been used to monitor users’ emotional
states while they were shown pictures or videos illustrating different situations, previously annotated using EmotionsOnto. The
emotional states detected by Emotiv headset are then also modelled using EmotionsOnto, concretely as the emergent emotions
triggered by the descriptions associated to the situations shown
to users.

Unfortunately, as shown in Fig. 7, the output generated by
Emotiv Affectiv Suite is not available outside the provided SDK.
Therefore, emotional annotations based on the headset where generated manually after analysing the Affectiv Suite screen output.
Moreover, the emotion output is constrained to just 4 measures
that do not conform to any established categorisation of emotions.
The affective suite has four emotional states that are calculated
depending on the frequency of the different brainwaves:
‘‘Excitement’’, ‘‘Frustration’’, ‘‘Meditation’’ and ‘‘Engagement/
Boredom’’. Emotiv admits that the names of the emotional states
may not accurately reﬂect an emotion. For instance, the
‘‘Excitement’’ measure might increase both if the user feels fear o
surprise. Therefore, it is not easy to distinguish them.
Fortunately, communities like OpenVibe8 or OpenEEG9 have
emerged and provide more data rich software and applications suitable for research purposes. Data is sent from Emotiv EEG headset in
encrypted form via Bluetooth. However, raw data can be unencrypted and collected by a Python library for Emotiv EEG.10
Currently, our focus is on processing this raw data to at least
detect the 6 emotions identiﬁed by Ekman: anger, disgust, fear,
happiness, sadness and surprise (Ekman, 1984). This is work in
progress that is detailed next, in the conclusions and future work
section.
5. Conclusions and future work
Affectivity in human beings is a very complex term where a lot
of multidisciplinary research has been performed from different
ﬁelds. Providing a computerised basis to perform a knowledge base
that allows dealing with affective related concepts such as emotions requires a ground. Performed work tries to provide such
ground. In this paper we present a generic model for describing
emotions and their detection and expression systems taking contextual and multimodal elements into account. The model is formalised as an easily computerised ontology.
The ontology has been developed to be as totally agnostic as
possible regarding existing emotion theories. Although this fact
8

6
7

http://emotiv.com.
http://neurosky.com.

9
10

http://openvibe.inria.fr.
http://openeeg.sourceforge.net/doc/.
http://hackaday.com/2010/09/13/python-library-for-emotiv-eeg/.

616

R. Gil et al. / Computers in Human Behavior 51 (2015) 610–617

Fig. 6. Emotiv EEG Neuroheadset.

Fig. 7. Emotiv Affectiv Suite output.

can seem to be surprising, it is made due to allow independence
from theoretical approaches, so developers of affective resources
are not tied to a given theoretical approach. In this sense, different
theoretical approaches can be used by the developers.
Thus, it makes the ontology valid for a wide range of proposed
theoretical approaches and applications domain, like students’
engagement in MOOCs. It is remarkable that context has received
little attention regarding emotion-aware application development.
This work takes this concept into consideration as a necessary
component for modelling emotion. In this sense, proposed ontology is based on the deﬁnition of relevant contextual elements.
Proposed ontology does also have implications regarding emotion-aware applications development. On the one hand, it allows
integrating emotion-related context and multimedia elements.
On the other hand, deﬁning sensors in the way performed allows

making use of them as user interface elements for inputs (such
as text through the keyboard, utterances through the microphone)
and outputs (such as emotional pictures in user interfaces, text
output on the screen or embodied avatars).
They can be linked with emotion expression and recognition
systems. This approach has proven to be very useful for describing
how emotion-aware applications work. Finally, it must be highlighted that being performed ontology developed using standards
like OWL, it is also valid for a wide range of software development
technologies and environments and thus can be used as a basis to
engineer emotion-aware applications.
The ontology has been applied in the context of the Emotions
Common Sense project, inspired by MIT’s Open Mind Common
Sense. It enriches that initiative by providing also emotional
input and by providing more structured user input based on

R. Gil et al. / Computers in Human Behavior 51 (2015) 610–617

EmotionsOnto and other ontologies that can be more easily put
into practice to build emotions-aware applications.
Future work from the EmotionsOnto perspective focuses on
extending the ontology beyond Emergent Emotion. The ﬁrst extension considered is to model affective states in humans in order to
make the ontology capable of modelling more complex aspects of
human affectivity. This will make possible to model users bearing
above-mentioned affective states in mind. These enriched user
models enable including aspects related with user disabilities
and developing applications even more adapted to their needs.
Finally, the inclusion of social context in the ontology allows
exploring emotion in computerised social environments such as
social networks.
On the other hand, from the evaluation of EmotionsOnto in the
context of EmoCS, future work aims to provide automatic emotion
annotations for situation descriptions based on the data collected
by the Emotiv EEG neuroheadset. Currently, we are collecting
raw data from EEG sensors and processing it. Training sets, associating situations to expected emotions and direct user feedback, are
being user together with machine learning algorithms to train a
system capable of producing Ekman emotions out of the EEG data.
Moreover, neuroheadset measurements are going to be complemented with other kinds of sensor to increase robustness. A preliminary study of the state of the art shows that measuring skin
conductance gives a quite reliable measure of stress that can complement EEG readings to better categorise the corresponding emotions (Ekman, 1992).
Acknowledgements
This work has been partially supported by the research
project InDAGuS (Spanish Government TIN2012-37826-C02)
Infrastructures for Sustainable Open Government Data with
Geospatial Features.
References
Baldauf, M., Dustdar, S., & Rosenberg, F. (2007). A survey on context-aware systems.
International Journal of Ad Hoc and Ubiquitous Computing, 2(4), 263–277.
Benta, K. L., Rarău, A., & Cremene, M. (2007). Ontology based affective context
representation. In Proceedings of the 2007 Euro American conference on telematics
and information systems (EATIS’07). Faro, Portugal.
Bradley, M. M., Lang, P. J., & Cuthbert, N. B. (1997). Affective norms for English words
(ANEW). NIMH center for the study of emotion and attention. US: University of
Florida.
Brave, S., & Nass, C. (2002). Emotion in human–computer interaction. In The human–
computer interaction handbook: Fundamentals, evolving technologies and
emerging applications (pp. 81–96). Florida, USA: CRC Press.
Cheng, J. C. Y. (2014). An exploratory study of emotional affordance of a massive
open online course. European Journal of Open, Distance and E-Learning, 2014, 1.
Chi, Y-L., Peng, S-Y., & Yang, C-C. (2007). Creating Kansei engineering-based
ontology for annotating and archiving photos database. In J. Jacko (Ed.), Human–
computer interaction, Part I, HCII 2007. LNCS (Vol. 4550, pp. 701–710). Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer.
Cowie, R., Douglas-Cowie, E., & Cox, C. (2005). Beyond emotion archetypes:
Databases for emotion modelling using neural networks. Neural Networks, 18,
371–388.
Devillers, L., Abrilian, S., & Martin, J. (2005). Representing real life emotions in
audiovisual data with non basic emotional patterns and context features. In
Proc. 1st international conference on affective computing and intelligent interaction
(ACII’2005). Beijing, China.
Douglas-Cowie, E., et al. (2006). HUMAINE deliverable D5g: Mid term report on
database exemplar progress. <http://emotion-research.net/deliverables/D5g%
20ﬁnal.pdf>.

617

Ekman, P. (1992). Are there basic emotions? Psychological Review, 99(3), 550–553.
Ekman, P. (1984). Expression and nature of emotion. In K. Scherer & P. Ekman (Eds.),
Approaches to emotion. Hillsdale, New Jersey: Erlbaum.
Fellbaum, C. (1998). WordNet: An electronic lexical database. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Fillmore, C. J. (2006). Frame semantics. Cognitive Linguistics: Basic Readings, 34, 373.
Galunov, V. I., Lobanov, B. M., & Zagoruiko, N. G. (2004). Ontology of the subject
domain. In Proceedings of the speech signals recognition and synthesis, SPECOM’04.
9th conference speech and computer. Saint-Petersburg, Russia (pp. 20–22).
Gangemi, A., Guarino, N., Masolo, C., Oltramari, A., & Schneider, L. (2002).
Sweetening ontologies with DOLCE. In Proceedings of the 13th international
conference on knowledge engineering and knowledge management. Ontologies and
the semantic web (EKAW’02). In A. Gomez-Perez & V. R. Benjamins (Eds.). Lecture
notes in computer science (Vol. 2473, pp. 166–181). Heidelberg, DE: Springer.
García, R. (2006). Methodology In A semantic web approach to digital rights
management. PhD thesis (pp. 116–120). Spain: Universitat Pompeu Fabra.
Retrieved from <http://rhizomik.net/~roberto/thesis/html/Methodology.html>.
Goffman, E. (1956). Embarrassment and social organization. American Journal of
Sociology, 62, 264–274.
Gürkök, H., & Nijholt, A. (2012). Brain–computer interfaces for multimodal
interaction: A survey and principles. International Journal of Human–Computer
Interaction, 28(5), 292–307.
Lacy, L. W. (2005). OWL: Representing information using the web ontology language.
Victoria, CA: Trafford Publishing.
Lang, P. J. (1979). A bio-informational theory of emotional imagery.
Psychophysiology, 16, 495–512.
Lim, M. Y., & Aylett, R. (2009). An emergent emotion model for an affective mobile
guide with attitude. Applied Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 23(9), 835–854.
López, J. M., Gil, R., García, R., Cearreta, I., & Garay, N. (2008). Towards an ontology
for describing emotions. In Procs. of the 1st world summit on the knowledge
society. LNCS/LNAI (Vol. 5288, pp. 96–104). Springer.
Lytras, M., & García, R. (2008). Semantic web applications: A framework for industry
and business exploitation – What is needed for the adoption of the semantic
web from the market and industry. International Journal of Knowledge and
Learning, 4(1), 93–108.
Mathieu, Y. (2005). Annotation of emotions and feelings in texts. In J. Tao, T. Tan, &
R. W. Picard (Eds.), Proceedings of ACII 2005. LNCS (Vol. 3784, pp. 350–357).
Heidelberg: Springer.
Obrenovic, Z., Garay, N., López, J. M., Fajardo, I., & Cearreta, I. (2005). An ontology for
description of emotional cues. In J. Tao, T. Tan, & R.W. Picard (Eds.), LNCS (Vol.
3784, pp. 505–512).
Picard, R. (2000). Perceptual user interfaces: Affective perception. Communications
of the ACM, 43(3), 50–51.
Scheffczyk, J., Baker, C. F., & Narayanan, S. (2008). Ontology-based reasoning about
lexical resources. In N. Calzolari, A. Gangemi, A. Lenci, A. Oltramari, & L. Prévot
(Eds.), Ontologies and lexical resources for natural language processing. Cambridge,
MA: Cambridge University Press.
Scherer, K. R. (1986). Vocal affect expression: A review and a model for future
research. Psychological Bulletin, 99, 143–165.
Scherer, K. R. (2000). Psychological models of emotion. In Joan C. Borod (Ed.), The
neuropsychology of emotion (pp. 137–162). New York: Oxford University Press.
Scherer, K. R. (1999). Appraisal theory. In T. Dalgleish & M. J. Power (Eds.), Handbook
of cognition and emotion (pp. 637–663). New York: Wiley.
Sowa, J. F. (1999). Knowledge representation. Logical, philosophical and computational
foundations. Paciﬁc Grove, CA, USA: Brooks Cole Publishing Co..
Speer, R. (2007). Open mind commons: An inquisitive approach to learning
common sense. In Workshop on common sense and intelligent user interfaces.
Stern, J.M. (2013). Atlas of EEG patterns. Wolters Kluwer Health.
Strapparava, C., & Valitutti, A. (2004). WordNet-affect: An affective extension of
WordNet. In Proceedings of 4th international conference on language resources and
evaluation (LREC 2004), Lisbon (pp. 1083–1086).
Tao, J., & Tan, T. (2005). Affective computing: A review. In J. Tao, T. Tan, & R. W.
Picard (Eds.), Proceedings of the ﬁrst international conference on affective
computing & intelligent interaction (ACII’05 (pp. 981–995). Beijing, China:
Springer.
W3C OWL Working Group (2012, December). OWL 2 web ontology language
document overview. W3C recommendation. Retrieved from <http://www.w3.
org/TR/owl2-overview>.
Wen, M., Yang, D., & Rosé, C. P. (2014). Sentiment analysis in MOOC discussion
forums: What does it tell us? In Proceedings of educational data mining.
Yang, D., Sinha, T., Adamson, D., & Rosé, C. P. (2013). Turn on, tune in, drop out:
Anticipating student dropouts in massive open online courses. In Proceedings of
the 2013 NIPS Data-driven education workshop.

