Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

ScienceDirect
Procedia Manufacturing 4 (2015) 471 – 477

Industrial Engineering and Service Science 2015, IESS 2015

The effectiveness of in-vehicle peppermint fragrance to maintain car
driver’s alertness
Manik Mahachandraa*, Yassierlib, Erdo D. Garnabyc
a,b,c

Industrial Engineering, Faculty of Industrial Technology, Institut Teknologi Bandung (ITB), West Java, Indonesia

Abstract

The numbers of the traffic accidents related to human factors are increasing rapidly. Among all contributing factors
to the accident, fatigue and sleepiness on wheel are the most common reasons. Both conditions decrease drivers’
alertness, resulting in performance decrement and accident risk increment. The alertness degradation is usually not
well recognized by the drivers. Peppermint fragrance is commonly known on its freshness as medicine or
aromatherapy. This research was conducted to examine the effectiveness of peppermint as a car freshener in order to
maintain drivers’ alertness level. A within-subject design experiment was carried out in a car-driving simulator
laboratory engaging twelve male participants. There were two driving conditions: with placebo and with peppermint
fragrance. Placebo and peppermint fragrance was released continuously using an electric vaporizer. The participants’
alertness level was monitored via brainwave activities using electroencephalograph (EEG) along 30 minutes of
driving. Frequency analysis on EEG data was conducted to determine the alpha, theta, and beta power band on F3 and
F4 of lobus frontal to generate the (α+θ)/β ratio. Results of this study demonstrated that the application of the
peppermint car freshener resulted in lower slope of (α+θ)/β ratio rather than placebo condition (0.018 vs. 0.026),
though the difference was not significant (p = 0.216). The results suggest that the peppermint is promising to be
applied as in-vehicle fragrance in order to maintain drivers’ alertness. Further research can be conducted to test various
method of fragrance exposure to get more substantial increase of alertness level.
© 2015
2015Published
The Authors.
Published
Elsevier
B.V.access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
©
by Elsevier
B.V.by
This
is an open
Peer-review under responsibility of the organizing committee of the Industrial Engineering and Service Science 2015 (IESS
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Peer
review under responsibility of the organizing committee of the Industrial Engineering and Service Science 2015 (IESS 2015)
2015).
Keywords: Driver, alertness, intervention, peppermint

1. Introduction
In recent years, traffic accidents have become the third largest killer in Indonesia, after coronary heart disease
and tuberculosis, as published by [1]. As many as 67% of traffic accident victims are in the productive age, i.e.

2351-9789 © 2015 Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Peer review under responsibility of the organizing committee of the Industrial Engineering and Service Science 2015 (IESS 2015)
doi:10.1016/j.promfg.2015.11.064

472

Manik Mahachandra et al. / Procedia Manufacturing 4 (2015) 471 – 477

22-50 years. There are about 400,000 victims under the age of 25 years who died on the highway, with an average
mortality of 1,000 people every day. Traffic accidents are also the leading cause of death of people aging between
10 to 24 years old in the world. In Indonesia, statistical data recorded 2,246 accidents per 100,000 populations.
The prevalence of the accident is significantly higher than that of Japan, which only 4 accidents per 100,000
populations. The high number of traffic accidents is indeed worrying.
A study by [2] suggests that there are three factors that cause traffic accidents, i.e. road, human (road users),
and vehicles. According to [3], human factor is the main factor of traffic accidents. The causes include sleepiness,
fatigue, breaking the speed limit, not keeping distance, alcohol or drugs, illness, cell phone or electronic device
usage, etc. Among these conditions, sleepiness and fatigue are the most common and unique factors [3]. Both
arise from human activities which incompatible with the biological rhythm of the human body. Disruption on
circadian rhythms can lead to short-term disturbances such as sleepiness at inappropriate times and long-term
health problems such as depression, as stated by [4]. There is a need for technological intervention in maintaining
drivers’ alertness level.
There are some active and passive stimuli which are considered to be able to maintain the driver's alertness.
Active stimulus requires awareness of the driver to do so, such as drinking coffee, smoking, chewing, doing sports,
and singing [5]. Unfortunately, these active stimuli are known to be less effective to countermeasure sleepiness,
as mentioned by [6] suggesting that humans have incapacity to detect or predict their sleepiness status. Therefore,
passive stimuli seem to be more advisable to maintain vigilance, by manipulating the environment inside the
cabin. Light, alarm, music, air, caffeine, candy, and fragrance are example of passive stimuli. Studies found that
cold air and radio were only effective to countermeasure sleepiness in short period of time [7], whilst caffeine and
napping could act longer [8].
Among the passive methods, aroma exposure showed good results in maintaining alertness in comparison with
light and alarm [5]. Furthermore, peppermint scent were proven to significantly increase alertness in activities
that require continuous attention [9], on athletic performance [10], while administered on cognitive tests [11] [12],
or to prevent drowsiness [13]. Nonetheless, the empirical evidence of the peppermint aroma effectiveness in
maintaining drivers’ alertness was not conclusively known. Therefore, this research was conducted to examine
the effectiveness of the peppermint as a car freshener to maintain drivers’ alertness.
2. Method
To test the effectiveness of the peppermint, a study was conducted in laboratory experiments, using a car-driving
simulator of the Laboratory for Work System Design and Ergonomics, ITB. A laboratory experiment was chosen as
the test method since the participants can still be given intervention during driving and do not pose a risk of traffic
accidents, as when experiments are done in the field (highway).
2.1. Participants
Twelve male participants with a minimum of one year driving experience were voluntarily involved as participants.
They were all healthy men, with no experience in any traffic accident related to sleepiness. All of them are students
of Institut Teknologi Bandung.
2.2. Apparatus
Electronic vaporizer aroma, as shown by Fig. 1, was used to emit continuous fragrance during driving, either in
peppermint exposure or non-fragrance situation. Peppermint oil utilized in this study was contained 30.70% of LMenthol, 27.08% of L-Methone, 4.95% of Menthyl Acetate, 4.35% of Iso-Menthone, 4.79% of Mentha Furan, and
5.76% of Cineol. The aroma strength was justified by two random participants until they could smell the peppermint
[14].
Electroencephalograph (EEG) was utilized to get brainwave data to monitor participants’ alertness level. EEG by
Emotiv with gold electrodes was chosen, because of the flexible and portable feature. Brainwave data transmission
was conducted wirelessly with a receiver mounted on the laptop. Two area of the frontal lobe, i.e. F3 and F4, were

Manik Mahachandra et al. / Procedia Manufacturing 4 (2015) 471 – 477

chosen to show consciousness and alertness function, and monitored continuously while driving. Each of the
electrodes was referenced and grounded to the ear lobes (A1 and A2). The sampling frequency was 128 Hz.
The car-driving simulator used in the study was built in a real Toyota Innova, using additional apparatus. There was
a software displayed highway condition in a close-loop circuit in front of the car. More detail discussions about the
hard and soft apparatus as well as its usability component are available in [15].

2.3. Data collection procedure
In order to investigate the effectiveness of the peppermint, driving condition under peppermint fragrance exposure
needed to be compared with non-fragrance condition, called placebo. Applying within subject design, two experiments
were carried out to examine the difference between placebo and peppermint fragrance effect on drivers’ alertness. A
counterbalancing (also known as ABBA method) was applied in treatment sequence setting to minimize bias. Each
experiment was carried out at night, started at 11 pm, to ensure decrement in participants’ alertness. Placebo and
peppermint fragrance was released continuously using electric vaporizer.
Alertness level was monitored via brainwave activity using electroencephalograph (EEG) along 30 minutes of
driving. The brainwave measured were theta (4-8 Hz), alpha (8-13 Hz), and beta (13-30 Hz). These waves were chosen
to show active condition (beta wave), as well as drowsiness, eyes closed, and sleepy situation (alpha and theta waves).
Comparison of these waves as (D+T)/E ratio were then computed to measure the participants' level of alertness, as
practiced by [15].

Fig. 1. Electronic vaporizer aroma.

2.4. Data processing procedure
Brainwave data processing was executed using Matlab 7.8.0 in order to sort through the raw waves of EEG.
Treatment with the software performed consecutively to exclude artifacts and noise, normalize the data, perform data
transformation from time-based to the frequency-based using Fast Fourier Transform algorithm, and calculate the
Power Spectral Density (PSD) of each wave per one minute of observation. Ratio (D+T)/E were then calculated for
each participant, and continued with statistical test using SPSS 15.0 software. The test was performed in slope data
using paired Student’s t-test to evaluate the difference of placebo and peppermint effect on the ratio.
3. Result and discussion
3.1. Data collected
Brainwave was monitored on theta, alpha, and beta waves, as stated before. Ratio of (D+T)/E was then calculated
for each 60 s duration. Fig. 2 shows an example of the calculated ratio for one participant.
Slopes were then calculated for both data in placebo and peppermint environment. Linear regression was applied
to compute the value. This number illustrates the changes in alertness level. An increment in the ratio, showed by
positive slope, implies decrement in alertness.
Slope of the PSD of each wave for each participant mostly indicates an increment in alpha, theta, and beta, as shown
in Fig. 3. Slope of (D+T)/E ratio in Fig. 4 also mainly shows positive value, denotes an increase in the ratio from time

473

474

Manik Mahachandra et al. / Procedia Manufacturing 4 (2015) 471 – 477

to time. This increment, however, suggest an alertness decrease or more sleepy/fatigue circumstances. Such condition
might be because of the experiment carried out at night when circadian rhythm is commonly on lowest position (sleepy
condition). Further analyses should take into account to check whether the peppermint exposure could prevent
alertness decrement better than non-fragrance situation. Hereafter, further analyses take all participants into account.

Fig. 2. Example of data collected for participant number 1.

Fig. 3. Slope of alpha, theta, and beta waves for each participant.

Manik Mahachandra et al. / Procedia Manufacturing 4 (2015) 471 – 477

475

Fig. 4. Slope of (D+T)/E ratio for each participant.

3.2. Comparison result
Comparison of mean slope of (D+T)/E ratio of all participant is shown in Fig. 5. The two-tailed paired t-test was
resulted in 0.216 significance level (t = -1.313, df = 11). It indicates no significant difference between the two
conditions, which infers that both placebo and peppermint generate almost similar effect to the drivers.
Nonetheless, lower mean of the slope ratio was found when participants exposed by peppermint, compared than
placebo situation (0.018 vs. 0.026). Lower value of (D+T)/E ratio denotes higher level of alertness. Hence, this
comparison indicates that peppermint fragrance is somewhat effective to maintain drivers’ alertness.
Aroma stimulus is effective because it has a direct effect to the central nervous system in humans, as stated by
[17]. The research found that there were changes in the brain wave pattern when given aroma. Lower slope ratio
denotes decrease in alpha and theta waves, as well as increase in beta wave. Similarly, according to [18],
peppermint fragrance exposed when doing something monotonous work provides increased beta waves in the
brain significantly, because it stimulates the brain to remain active and vigilant.
However, result indicates that peppermint is effective to be applied as in-vehicle fragrance, as it ends up in higher
state of drivers’ alertness, although the difference with non-fragrance situation was not significant. The minor
difference between the two conditions is possibly affected the exposure method of the fragrance. In this study,
peppermint fragrance was given continuously during the driving. In addition, [10], [11], and [19] also administered
continuous method of contact. Moreover, other researches applied intermittent method, such as [9] and [13]. This
method can be employed as an alternative in exposing the peppermint inside drivers’ cabin.
Other interesting issue to be tested in the future is duration of exposure. This study only monitor the first 30 minutes
after continuous contact of fragrance, adapted from [13]. Less dosage could result in nothing, whilst longer exposure
might end up in drivers’ immunity. With intermittent method of exposure, ones must make sure that the duration still
results in alertness rise.

476

Manik Mahachandra et al. / Procedia Manufacturing 4 (2015) 471 – 477

Fig. 5. Comparison of (D+T)/E ratio between placebo and peppermint exposure.

Since it was proven to be somewhat effective, peppermint application as in-vehicle fragrance will be valuable to
transportation authority and public as well to help minimizing traffic accident risk that related to drivers’ fatigue and
sleepiness. Further research can be conducted to test various method of fragrance exposure to get higher increase of
alertness level.

4. Conclusion
Peppermint, as one of passive stimulus on sleepiness/fatigue, is promising to be applied as in-vehicle fragrance to help
maintain drivers’ alertness. The effectiveness was shown by higher alertness level produced in the peppermint
exposure, although the difference was not significant compared to non-fragrance situation. More substantial increase
of alertness level might be obtained by applying different method of fragrance exposure in the future study.

Acknowledgements
This study was fully funded by the research grant from Institut Teknologi Bandung, under the scheme of Research
and Innovation of Research Group B (Riset dan Inovasi Kelompok Keahlian B, RIK-B). Authors also thank to all
participants involved in the experiments.
References
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]

National Intelligence Agency (Badan Intelijen Nasional), “Kecelakaan Lalu Lintas Menjadi Pembunuh Terbesar Ketiga,”
2001. http://www.bin.go.id/awas/detil/197/4/21/03/2013/kecelakaan-lalu-lintas-menjadi-pembunuh-terbesar-ketiga
L. Evans, “Traffic Safety,” Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York, 1991.
Korlantas, “Faktor Penyebab Kecelakaan Lalu Lintas,” 2012. http://ntmc-korlantaspolri.blogspot.com/2012/04/faktorpenyebab-kecelakaan-lalu-lintas.html
M. H. Vitaterna, J. S. Takahashi, and F. W. Turek, “Overview of Circadian Rhythms,” Alcohol Research & Health, Vol. 25,
No. 2, 2001, pp. 85-93.
T. Nakagawa, T. Kawachi, S. Arimitsu, M. Kanno, K. Sasaki, and H. Hosaka, “Drowsiness Detection Using Spectrum
Analysis of Eye Movements and Effective Stimuli to Keep Drivers Awake,” Proceedings of Smart Systems 2006 & ICMA
2006, Seinäjoki, FINLAND, 7-8 June 2006, Vol. 12, No. 1, pp. 113-119.
K. A. Kaplan, A. Itoi, and W. C. Dement, “Awareness of Sleepiness and Ability to Predict Sleep Onset: Can Drivers Avoid
Falling Asleep At the Wheel?” Sleep Medicine, Vol. 9, No. 1, 2007, pp. 71-79.
L. A. Reyner and J. A. Horne, “Evaluation of ‘In-Car’ Countermeasures to Sleepiness: Cold Air and Radio,” SLEEP, Vol.
21, No. 1, 1998, pp. 46-51.
L. A. Reyner and J. A. Horne, “Vehicle Accidents Related to Sleep: A Review,” Occupational and Environmental Medicine,
Vol. 56, No. 5, 1999, pp. 289-294.

Manik Mahachandra et al. / Procedia Manufacturing 4 (2015) 471 – 477

[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]

J. S. Warm, W. N. Dember, and R. Parasuraman, “Effects of Olfactory Stimulation on Performance and Stress in A Visual
Sustained Attention Task,” Journal of the Society of Cosmetic Chemists, Vol. 42, 1991, pp. 199-210.
B. Raudenbush, N. Corley, and W. Eppich, “Enhancing Athletic Performance Through the Administration of Peppermint
Odor,” Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2001, pp. 156-160.
P. R. Zoladz and B. Raudenbush, “Cognitive Enhancement Through Stimulation of the Chemical Senses,” North American
Journal of Psychology, Vol. 7, No. 1, 2005, pp. 125-140.
M. Moss, S. Hewitt, L. Moss, and K. Wesnes, “Modulation of Cognitive Performance and Mood by Aromas of Peppermint
and Ylang-Ylang,” International Journal of Neuroscience, Vol. 118, No. 1, 2008, pp. 59-77.
M. Yoshida, C. Kato, Y. Kakamu, M. Kawasumi, H. Yamasaki, S. Yamamoto, T. Nakano, and M. Yamada, “Study on
Stimulation Effects for Driver Based on Fragrance Presentation,” Proceeding of MVA2011 IAPR Conference on Machine
Vision Applications, Nara, JAPAN, 13-15 June 2011, pp. 332-335.
M. I. K. Norrish and K. L. Dwyer, “Preliminary Investigation of the Effect of Peppermint Oil on an Objective Measure of
Daytime Sleepiness,” International Journal of Psychophysiology, Vol. 55, No. 3, pp. 291–298.
M. Mahachandra and Yassierli, “Usability Evaluation of Car-Driving Simulator,” Proceeding of the 10th Asia Pacific
Industrial Engineering & Management Systems Conference, Kitakyushu, JAPAN, 14-16 December 2009.
E. R. Kandel, J. H. Schwartz, and T. M. Jessell, “Principles of Neural Science,” 5th edition, McGraw Hill Professional, New
York, 2013.
G. Kobal and C. Hummel, “Cerebral Chemosensory Evoked Potentials Elicited by Chemical Stimulation of the Human
Olfactory and Respiratory Nasal Mucosa,” Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, Vol. 71, No. 4, pp. 241250.
M. Kimura, T. Mori, H. Suzuki, S. Endo, and K. Kawano, "EEG Changes in Odor Effects After the Stress of Long
Monotonous Work," Journal-International Society of Life Information Science, Vol. 19, No. 2, 2001, pp. 271-279.
J. L. Millot, G. Brand, and N. Morand, "Effects of Ambient Odors on Reaction Time in Humans," Neuroscience Letters, Vol.
322, No. 2, 2002, pp. 79-82.

477

