bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Crowdsourcing neuroscience: inter-brain coupling during face-to-face
interactions outside the laboratory

Suzanne Dikker *,†,1,2, Georgios Michalareas †,3, Matthias Oostrik, Amalia Serafimaki 4, Hasibe
Melda Kahraman 2, Marijn E. Struiksma 1, David Poeppel 2,3

1

Department of Language and Communication, Utrecht University, 3512 JK Utrecht, The Netherlands.
2
3
4

Department of Psychology, New York University, New York, NY 10003, USA.

Max Planck Institute for Empirical Aesthetics, 60322 Frankfurt am Main, Germany.

The American College of Greece, Gravias Street GR-153 42 Aghia Paraskevi Athens, Greece

*Correspondence to sdikker@gmail.com
†These authors contributed equally to this work.
Author contributions SD and MO designed the research; AS and MS led data collection; GM, SD,
and HK performed data analysis; SD, GM, HK and DP wrote the paper.
Keywords
Hyperscanning, real-world neuroscience, inter-brain coupling, brain-to-brain synchronization,
oscillations
Acknowledgements This research was supported by the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research
Award 275-89-018. The Mutual Wave Machine was made possible with support by Creative Industries Fund NL,
TodaysArt, Marina Abramovic Institute, de Hersenstichting, Lowlands Science, Utrecht University, and NEON.
Design, tech & production: Peter Burr, Danielle Boelling, Diederik Schoorl, Jean Jacques Warmerdam, Matthew
Patterson Curry, Pandelis Diamantides; Data collection and management: Annita Apostolaki, Dana Bevilacqua,
Shaista Dhanesar, Imke Kruitwagen, Eletta Daemen, Orsa Rebouskou, Stella Papazisi, Aspa Papazisi, Karlijn
Blommers, Sascha Couvee, Ella Bosch, Jorik Geutjes, Chris van Run.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

ABSTRACT
When we feel connected or engaged during social behavior, are our brains in fact “in sync” in a
formal, quantifiable sense? Most studies addressing this question use highly controlled tasks
with homogenous subject pools. In an effort to take a more naturalistic approach, we
collaborated with art institutions to crowd-source neuroscience data: Over the course of 5
years, we collected electroencephalogram (EEG) data from thousands of museum and festival
visitors who volunteered to engage in a 10-minute face-to-face interaction. Pairs of participants
with various levels of familiarity sat inside the Mutual Wave Machine—an artistic
Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) installation that translates real-time correlations of each pair’s
EEG activity into light patterns. Because such inter-participant EEG correlations are prone to
noise contamination, in subsequent offline analyses we computed inter-brain synchrony using
Imaginary Coherence and Projected Power Correlations, two synchrony metrics that are
largely immune to instantaneous, noise-driven correlations. When applying these methods to
two subsets of recorded data with the most consistent protocols, we found that pairs’ trait
empathy, social closeness, engagement, and social behavior (joint action and eye contact)
consistently predicted the extent to which their brain activity became synchronized, most
prominently in low alpha power (~7-10 Hz) and beta oscillations (~20-22 Hz). These findings
support an account where shared engagement and joint action drive coupled neural activity
and behavior during dynamic, naturalistic social interactions. To our knowledge, this work
constitutes a first demonstration that an interdisciplinary, real-world, crowd-sourcing
neuroscience approach may provide a promising method to collect large, rich datasets
pertaining to real-life face-to-face interactions. Additionally, this work is a demonstration of how
the general public can participate and engage in the scientific process outside of the
laboratory. Institutions such as museums, galleries, or any other organization where the public
actively engages out of self-motivation, can help facilitate this type of “citizen science”
research, and support the collection of large datasets under scientifically controlled
experimental conditions. To further enhance the public interest for this type of out-of-the-lab
experimental approach, the data and results of this study are disseminated through a website
tailored to the general public (wp.nyu.edu/mutualwavemachine)
2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

INTRODUCTION
Laboratory research is widely assumed to provide foundational insights into how our brains
process information on an everyday basis. However, this model has not been systematically
tested: we rarely, if ever, conduct our research in real-world, everyday contexts (Matusz,
Dikker, Huth, & Perrodin, 2019; Shamay-Tsoory & Mendelsohn, 2019). At the same time, an
increasing number of studies emphasize the importance of face-to-face social interaction to
our physical and mental wellbeing (e.g., Kross et al., 2013). For example, eye contact has long
been recognized as a vital aspect of healthy cognition and cognitive development (e.g.,
Tomasello & Others, 1995), by highlighting cues that allow people to coordinate social behavior
(Sebanz, Bekkering, & Knoblich, 2006). To arrive at a more comprehensive understanding of
the brain basis of social interaction, then, measuring communication ‘live’ is vital: realistic
human interactions are more complex and more richly coupled across participants/brains than
can be captured in canonical laboratory experiments.
Here, we aimed to identify neural correlates of real-world face-to-face social interactions in a
large population of participants recruited outside of the traditional research subject pool
(typically university undergraduate students). The homogeneity of scientific study participants
is increasingly considered problematic with respect to the generalizability of research findings
(Falk et al., 2013; Henrich, Heine, & Norenzayan, 2010; LeWinn, Sheridan, Keyes, Hamilton, &
McLaughlin, 2017). One option is to make more of an effort to bring participants from the
general public to the laboratory; another possible solution is to bring the laboratory to the
public. In this work, we provide a methodological proof of concept for the second model: we
show that it is feasible to conduct large-scale neuroscience research ‘in the wild’ while
maintaining rigor in terms of both analysis and interpretation.
3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

We capitalized on recent real-world social neuroscience research (Dikker et al., 2017;
Bevilacqua et al., 2019; Bhattacharya, 2017; Dikker, Montgomery, & Tunca, 2019; Matusz,
Dikker, Huth, & Perrodin, 2019; Parada & Rossi, 2017), mobile electroencephalography (EEG)
technology (Debener, Minow, Emkes, Gandras, & de Vos, 2012; Gwin, Gramann, & Makeig,
2010), brain-computer-interfaces (Brunner et al., 2015; Minguillon, Lopez-Gordo, & Pelayo,
2017), and the so-called “interactive turn” in social neuroscience (De Jaegher, Di Paolo, &
Gallagher, 2010). In recent years, there has been a surge of studies that compare brain activity
between participants instead of using a stimulus-brain approach (e.g., Dumas, Nadel,
Soussignan, Martinerie, & Garnero, 2010; Hasson, Nir, Levy, Fuhrmann, & Malach, 2004; for
reviews see e.g., Babiloni & Astolfi, 2014; Hasson, Ghazanfar, Galantucci, Garrod, & Keysers,
2012; Liu et al., 2018; Sänger, Lindenberger, & Müller, 2011). Concretely, we used a
‘crowdsourcing neuroscience’ approach in which, over the course of five years, museum and
festival visitors were invited to participate in research as part of their audience experience. We
identified a set of characteristics that were deemed socially relevant (social closeness, social
behavior, mental states, and personality traits) and asked whether these attributes affected
inter-brain synchrony between two people during naturalistic face-to-face interaction. Crucially,
we not only sought to identify such factors, but also whether they can be dissociated at the
neural level, specifically with respect to different characteristics of brain oscillations. Our
experimental question was made tangible and enticing to the audience as follows: “When are
your brainwaves literally “on the same wavelength”?”

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

Figure 1. Different possible sources of inter-brain synchrony
(A) External non-social stimuli (top) and (E) social behavior (bottom) provide exogenous sources of
shared stimulus entrainment and interpersonal social coordination, respectively, leading to similar brain
responses, i.e., inter-brain synchrony. (B) Both individuals’ social closeness and personality traits (e.g.,
affective empathy) are expected to affect their social engagement during the interaction, and thus the
extent to which their brain responses become synchronized. (C) participants’ mental states (e.g., focus)
are similarly expected to affect participants’ engagement with each other, intrinsically (endogenously)
motivate participants to make an effort to connect to each other. (D) Such engagement can be
“boosted” via extrinsic motivation, which should subsequently lead to increased inter-brain synchrony.

Recent research has identified a number of predictors of inter-brain synchrony (e.g., Astolfi et
al., 2010; Bevilacqua et al., 2018; Dikker, Silbert, Hasson, & Zevin, 2014; Dikker et al., 2017;
Hasson et al., 2004; Konvalinka et al., 2014; Nummenmaa et al., 2012; Parkinson, Kleinbaum,
& Wheatley, 2018; Pérez, Dumas, Karadag, & Duñabeitia, 2018; Stephens, Silbert, & Hasson,
2010). Figure 1 illustrates the factors under investigation here.

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

First, brain activity becomes synchronized between people when they listen to or watch the
same stimulus (Figure 1a). Stimulus-induced synchrony, however, need not have social
sources. In the analysis described below, we removed any instantaneous co-variations in pairs’
brain recordings before further analysis, with the rationale that this would allow us to evaluate
whether social and interpersonal factors can explain inter-brain synchrony above and beyond
stimulus-elicited entrainment: “Social” factors (Figure 1b-e) arguably involve high-level
inferences and should correlate with induced brain activity in higher brain areas, remote from
the stimulus-evoked responses of sensory cortex, which are more time-locked to the stimulus
and thus also between participants. This rationale is supported by recent work in fMRI showing
that meaningful inter-brain correlations operate at different timescales in high vs. low-level
brain areas, which raises the possibility to use different synchrony metrics as tools to
distinguish the inter-subject convergence of low vs. high-level representations, where
socially-relevant representations are arguably a subcategory of the latter.
Socially-induced behavioral synchrony (Figure 1e) is prevalent throughout our everyday
interactions: consider pedestrians navigating sidewalk traffic, conversations, a tango dance, a
musical duet. Face-to-face interactions require tight spatio-temporal coordination between their
participants at cognitive (Pickering & Garrod, 2013), perceptual (Kang & Wheatley, 2017), and
motoric levels (Richardson, Dale, & Tomlinson, 2009). Such interpersonal rhythmic
coordination occurs spontaneously (Richardson, Marsh, Isenhower, Goodman, & Schmidt,
2007) and is subject to individual differences: people with a prosocial orientation tend to
synchronize more (Lumsden, Miles, Richardson, Smith, & Macrae, 2012), and children with
Autism Spectrum Disorder do not engage in spontaneous rhythmic movement synchronization
with others (Marsh et al., 2013). Perhaps most importantly, synchronized joint action is
6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

predictive of how the interaction is experienced. For example, therapists and patients who
exhibit more synchronized motion during a therapy session, report higher therapeutic
satisfaction (Koole & Tschacher, 2016; Ramseyer & Tschacher, 2011). Synchronous biological
rhythms have also been linked to social behavior in a meaningful way, ranging from heart rate
and respiration (Müller & Lindenberger, 2011; Noy, Levit-Binun, & Golland, 2015; Thorson,
West, & Mendes, 2018; Waters, West, Karnilowicz, & Mendes, 2017), to brain responses: For
example, synchronous resting state fMRI activity between children and their caregivers is
predictive of their relationship (Lee, Miernicki, & Telzer, 2017), and friends show more similar
neural responses to video clips (Parkinson et al., 2018).
We expected both participants’ social personality traits (e.g., affective empathy) and pairs’
social closeness to affect their mutual social engagement, and thus the extent to which their
brain responses become synchronized. Past research has already demonstrated that
interpersonal factors affect inter-brain synchrony. For example, collaborative attitudes lead to
higher inter-brain synchrony than competitive behavior (Cui, Bryant, & Reiss, 2012) as do
social closeness and empathic personality (e.g., Bevilacqua et al., 2019; Dikker et al., 2017;
Goldstein, Weissman-Fogel, Dumas, & Shamay-Tsoory, 2018; Kinreich, Djalovski, Kraus,
Louzoun, & Feldman, 2017).
Mental states such as engagement/focus level (Figure 1c) have also been shown to affect
inter-brain synchrony (Bevilacqua et al., 2019; Dalton et al., 2005; Dikker et al., 2017; Dumas,
Chavez, Nadel, & Martinerie, 2012; Goldstein et al., 2018; Kylliäinen et al., 2012; Petroni et al.,
2017; Scott-Van Zeeland, Dapretto, Ghahremani, Poldrack, & Bookheimer, 2010). Such
engagement can arguably be “boosted” via extrinsic motivation (Figure 1d), which should
subsequently lead to increased inter-brain synchrony.
7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

We manipulated extrinsic motivation using the Mutual Wave Machine (Dikker, Montgomery &
Tunca, 2019), a dome-like BCI/neurofeedback environment that immerses participants in a
real-time audio-visual (AV) reflection of the extent to which their EEG signals are
instantaneously correlated in one or more frequency bands (Figure 2). We hypothesized that
this would motivate participants to remain socially engaged with each other for the duration of
the interaction (Figure 1d). To test this, we asked whether explicitly informing participants that
the audio-visual (A/V) environment reflected their ongoing correlated EEG signal resulted in a
“self-fulfilling prophecy” of sorts: If you think you are receiving real-time audio-visual feedback
about how in sync you are with your partner, will that actually positively affect your ongoing
inter-brain synchrony?
As detailed in the Methods, it is important to note that ‘brain synchrony’ as reflected in the
Mutual Wave Machine is likely very prone to noise contamination, rendering it difficult to draw
meaningful conclusions about participants’ veridical brain synchrony based on their real-time
A/V environment. Participants were explicitly informed of this limitation and were told that a
subsequent offline scientific analysis would be applied to their data. A second limitation is that
the real-time brain synchrony involved the computation of instantaneous correlations between
narrow-band versions of short portions of the EEG recorded signals. As a result, high
correlation values due to chance are more likely than when broadband signal correlations are
used (see Methods for a more detailed description).
To circumvent these issues, we used two different metrics to compute non-instantaneous
inter-brain synchrony: projected power correlations and imaginary coherence. While imaginary
coherence provides a quantitative characterization of whether oscillations within specific
frequency ranges show consistent phase relationships between pairs of participants; projected
8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

power correlations quantify the extent to which power in a specific frequency co-fluctuates
between pairs. Second, as explained in detail in the Methods, projected power correlations and
imaginary coherence are especially suited for noisy recording environments, such as
museums (Cruz-Garza et al., 2017), because the common signal between individual
recordings (or: instantaneous co-fluctuations) is removed before computing brain synchrony. In
other words, any electrical noise or sensory cortex activity driven by strong audio-visual input
can only minimally affect the estimated brain synchrony. This is especially important in the
current setup because participants were surrounded by electronic equipment and strong
audio-visual stimulation originating from the art exhibition. We additionally circumvented
spurious effects of environmental noise on brain synchrony by adopting a strict brain-behavior
correlational analysis approach.
To summarize, in this study, pairs of participants interacted semi-naturally while seated
facing each other, allowing us to investigate how the extent to which brain activity becomes
synchronized between dyads during face-to-face social interaction relates to participants’ (a)
relationship (relationship duration and social closeness; Aron, Aron, & Smollan, 1992), (b)
affective personality traits (Personal Distress and Perspective Taking; Davis & Others, 1980),
(c) mental states (positive affect, negative affect, and focus; (Watson & Clark, 1994), and (d)
motivation (real-team audio-visual brain synchrony feedback; Dikker, Montgomery, & Tunca,
2019), To address these questions, we used an interactive art/science experience that allowed
us to collect neural activity using portable electroencephalography (EEG) from large numbers
of museum and festival visitors at a wide range of recording sites (see Table S1 for a list of
recording sites and the number of participants for each site). This interactive art/science BCI

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

setup allowed us explore the limits and opportunities afforded by conducting human social
neuroscience research outside of the traditional laboratory context.

METHODS
Pairs of participants sat inside the Mutual Wave Machine (Figure 2b) while we recorded their
brain activity using 14-channel portable EMOTIV EPOC wireless EEG headsets (see Figure 2a
for specifications, and e.g., Debener et al., 2012; Dikker et al., 2017, for a validation).
‘Brainwave synchrony’ (in this case, instantaneous band-limited correlations, described below)
was translated into light patterns that were projected onto the surface of the installation (Figure
2b-d, see wp.nyu.edu/mutualwavemachine for footage of the installation/setup) using
custom-software developed in the C++ based OpenFrameworks library (openframeworks.cc).
The exact data processing pipeline that was used to compute the inter-EEG correlations
that fed into the visualizations varied between the locations listed in Table S1. For the BENAKI
and LOWLANDS datasets described here, the following protocol was used. A moving-window
of 6 seconds of data (6 * 128 samples) was selected for real-time analysis approximately 30
times per second (the exact window-step size varied slightly as a function of the buffer size of
incoming samples, which typically ranged between 4-8 samples per buffer). EEG data streams
from the two participants’ headsets were synchronized using a 5-second window, based on the
time that samples were received by the analysis computer, and then filtered into typical
frequency bands using FFTW (www.fftw.org; delta: 1-4 Hz; theta: 4-7 Hz; alpha: 7-12 Hz; beta:
12 -30 Hz). Within each frequency range, a sub-window was used to calculate Pearson
correlation coefficients for each pair of sensors between headsets (n x n sensors; delta: 3 *
128 window, 0.7 * 128 offset; theta: 2 * 128, 0.6 * 128 offset; alpha: 1.1 * 128 window, 0.5 * 128
10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

offset; beta: 0.6 * 128 window, 0.4 * 128 offset). Both the average across all r-values for all
sensor pairs and the highest r-value among all sensor pairs contributed to the correlation value
for each frequency band (50/50). The four scores were then fed into a visualization algorithm in
which four separate moiré patterns were created, growing in a circular motion from the center
of each sphere as a function of the synchrony value in each frequency band, ranging between
0-1: a score of 1 was screen filling (Figure 2d-ii) and no visuals were projected if the value was
0 (Figure 2d-iii).
Although this setup makes “brain synchrony” intuitive to the general public, it is highly
unlikely that these instantaneous band-limited correlations map onto inter-brain synchrony
between the participants in a meaningful way. The main reason is that in a noisy environment,
such as a museum, instantaneous band-limited correlations between the 2 EEG devices are
likely to be dominated by shared noise rather than shared social events. Additionally, when
correlating 2 short narrow-band signals, correlation values can be artificially inflated because
of pure chance.
As described in the Procedure, participants were made aware of the caveats and limitations
of the visualization and were discouraged to draw any meaningful conclusions based on their
experience. Instead, they were told that for analysis, their brain synchrony would be
recomputed later, offline, after removing motion artifacts and bad channels. They were told that
once the analysis is done, findings would be made available on a public website.

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

Figure 2. The Mutual Wave Machine
(A) Hardware specifications of the EMOTIV EPOC EEG headset, an image of the EMOTIV EPOC headset (side
view), and a top-view of the electrode locations (note that electrode placement may vary considerably between
participants, see e.g., Dikker et al., 2017); (B) A pair of participants inside the Mutual Wave Machine
experiencing real-time inter-brain synchrony A/V feedback. (C/D) Inter-brain correlations between two
participants wearing wireless EEG headsets were computed in real time. Higher inter-brain correlation values
correspond to more light projected on each of the surfaces, with the focus point behind each participant’s head.
(See text for details).

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

Participants & locations
EEG and questionnaire data were collected from a total of 4,800 people across 14 different
sites (see Table S1). For the purposes of this paper, data were analyzed only from two sites.
The Benaki Art Museum (BENAKI; Athens, Greece), where the Mutual Wave Machine was set
up as part of the Marina Abramovic Institute exhibition AS ONE
(mai.art/as-one-content/2016/2/29/presenting-as-one), provided our most comprehensive and
consistent dataset (1,568 participants) and provided the best recording conditions: the Mutual
Wave Machine was exhibited for 2 months in the same location, the data were collected by a
well-trained and dedicated group of facilitators (see Acknowledgments), and there was minimal
environmental distraction (at some of the other sites, the installation was placed in a crowded
environments with a lot of environmental noise and distractions for both participants and
experimenters). The second recording site included here is Lowlands Science (LOWLANDS),
where 230 participants took part in the Mutual Wave Machine.

Experimental procedure
Participants signed up for timeslots in advance, either individually or in pairs. EEG headsets
were applied while participants completed a consent form (following Utrecht University Institute
of Linguistics study protocol) and pre-experiment questionnaire (see below for details). After
setup, participants were led to the Mutual Wave Machine, where they received further
instructions.
In the BENAKI dataset, a subset of participants (n = 534) was explicitly told that the light
patterns reflected brain-to-brain synchrony (explicit synchrony A/V), while another group (n =
498) was not (non-explicit synchrony A/V). In the LOWLANDS dataset, all pairs were told the
13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

purpose of the work was to investigate the relationship between inter-brain synchrony and
“feeling in sync”, but half of the participants were assigned to a sham A/V condition. For the
latter group, the visualizations were randomly generated instead of reflecting the true
correlated EEG signal. An additional difference in the LOWLANDS dataset was that, after the
experience, participants were asked to list which "strategies" they used to try to connect to
each other and increase brain synchrony.
Participants were encouraged to be mindful of their movements and were told that too much
movement would create motion artifacts that could distort the signal and make it impossible to
detect actual brainwaves in the EEG signal. To illustrate this, participants were shown the
effects of jaw clenching, laughing, and blinking in their own raw EEG trace during setup.
After the experience, participants were led back to the setup station to fill out an additional
set of questions. They were told that their data would be scientifically analyzed offline and that
results would be made available on a publicly accessible web page
(wp.nyu.edu/mutualwavemachine). The experiment took approximately 20 minutes including
setup and debriefing.

Materials
To investigate which factors drive brainwave synchrony during spontaneous face-to-face
interaction, participants were asked to fill out a series of questions designed to address their
(a) relationship to each other, (b) affective personality traits, and (c) affective mental states.
(a) Relationship metrics were administered before the experience only, and included four
variables. (i) As an index of Relationship Duration (a trait measure), participants were given
6 choices to indicate how long they knew each other (varying from 1 = Strangers to 6 = 10+
14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

years). (ii) Social Closeness (a state measure) between pairs was measured using the
Inclusion of the Other in the Self Scale (Aron et al., 1992), in which participants are presented
with 6 Venn diagrams where circles ‘Self’ and ‘Other’ overlap to varying degrees, and are
asked which best applies to his/her relationship to the other.
(b) To quantify socially relevant affective personality traits, participants completed a
revised version of the Interpersonal Reactivity Index during setup (IRI; Davis, 1980), including
the subscales Perspective Taking (e.g., “When I'm upset at someone, I usually try to "put
myself in his shoes" for a while.”), and Personal Distress (e.g., “When I see someone who
badly needs help in an emergency, I go to pieces”). The questionnaire consisted of 14-items
answered on a five-point Likert scale ranging from “Does not describe me well” to “Describes
me very well”.
(c) Mental state metrics were measured both before and after the experience (Pre and Post)
using a shortened version of the Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS-X; Watson &
Clark, 1994). The questionnaire consisted of 20 items, with 10 items measuring Positive Affect,
of which three items measured Focus (e.g., attentive, alert). The items were rated on a
five-point Likert Scale, ranging from 1 = Very Slightly or Not at all to 5 = Extremely.

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

Analyses

Preprocessing pipeline
The initial pool of data consisted of EEG recordings of 1,568 participants in the BENAKI
dataset, and 230 participants in the LOWLANDS dataset (see above and Table S1).
First, raw datasets with problems due to headset or recording software malfunction were
identified and discarded. For the BENAKI dataset, 28 pairs were rejected because for one or
both participants, less than 5 minutes of raw data were available, likely due to false starts or
other recording issues (out of 10 minutes total; mean duration of all pairs = 551.6 s). An
additional 117 pairs were rejected because of intermittent data loss (93 pairs), data repetition
(34 pairs), or drift between the two headsets (3 pairs), factors that would render inter-brain
synchrony analyses unreliable.
Next, we identified physiological artifacts or channel specific hardware artifacts. The EEG
headset provides binary variables, sampled at the same rate as the data, which mark blinks or
vertical/horizontal eye movements. All the instances for which these three flag variables were
true were marked as artifacts, as well as 50 msec before and 250 msec after such instances.
Subsequently, four different types of artifacts were identified using the Fieldtrip toolbox
(Oostenveld, Fries, Maris, & Schoffelen, 2011). Signal Jumps are sudden (step-like) increases
or decreases in the recorded electric field, usually attributed to the amplifier electronics.
EOG-like Artifacts (electrooculography) were identified based on their typical band–limited
characteristics (no EOG was recorded during the experiment). For the purpose of removing
EOG-like artifacts, the EEG channels were band-passed by a Butterworth filter in the
frequency range [1-15 Hz], then envelope time-series were derived through the Hilbert
16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

transform, and times when this envelope exceeded 4 standard deviations from its mean were
marked as potential EOG artifacts. Clipping Artifacts are periods when data in one or more
channels remain constant at a given value and is usually caused by short-term problems in the
electronics. Head Movements were identified through a 2-axis gyroscope built into the EEG
headset, providing information about the orientation of the head at each data sample.
Significant head movements are manifested as large changes on the accelerometer data.
Instances with such changes, above 5 standard deviations from the mean change, were
identified as head movement artifacts. Data instances with any of the above artifacts
characteristics were marked as “bad” segments.
The EEG headset provides, at the same sampling frequency as the data, a quality flag for
each of the data channels. This data quality flag is a measure of contact quality of a given
electrode on the scalp during a recording, ranging from 0 to 4. Any channel with an average
quality lower than 1 was identified as a noisy, “bad” channel and discarded from further
analysis (still preserving some useful information).
After the bad channels were discarded from a dataset, the raw data were segmented into
pseudo-trials of 1 second duration each, and all the pseudo-trials that coincided with “bad”
segments, as described above, were completely removed from the data. This pseudo-trial
representation was used so that in subsequent time-frequency and band-limited connectivity
analysis data segments surrounded by discarded artifacts would have a duration of an integer
number of seconds.
Once bad channels and bad segments were removed, one last automated preprocessing
procedure was applied to further reduce the potential data contamination by artifacts. Given
the nature of the electric signals emanating from the brain and measured on the scalp, the
17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

variance of the recorded data should be similar across the different channels. Channels with
consistently higher variance compared to the other channels across the whole recording are
most likely to contain higher noise, likely due to electrical noise and not due to environmental
noise (the latter would affect all channels similarly). In order to investigate such cases, each
dataset was divided into 10 equally sized segments and the variance of each channel was
computed for each segment. If, across most of the 10 segments, a channel was found to
consistently have a variance higher than 2 standard deviations from the average variance over
all channels, it was flagged as a “bad” channel. We also examined if specific trials showed
much higher variance than the average variance across all trials. As the paradigm employed
here did not include any specific stimulus presentation, the variance was expected to not have
big fluctuations across time but stay within relative stable boundaries. Periods of higher
variance are indicative of muscle or movement artifacts. So as a first step, all trials with a
variance of larger than 3 standard deviations above the average variance across the recording
in a channel were marked as artifacts. In addition to this channel-specific “bad” segment
identification, a final similar analysis was performed, but this time the variance for each trial
was averaged across channels. This reflected trials that have high variance consistently
across all channels, probably due to higher environmental noise. Again, pseudo-trials with a
variance larger than 3 standard deviations from the mean variance across the recording were
marked as “bad” segments.
These “bad-channel” and “bad-segment” procedures were applied to the recordings of each
of the participants in a given pair. This resulted in a cleaned dataset for each participant,
comprising a set of 1-sec long pseudo-trials with gaps in the places where potential artifacts
were identified. Only trials for which data were available for both participants (aligned trials)
18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

were kept for further synchrony analysis. 331 pairs had missing or incomplete questionnaire
data (due to internet connectivity issues at the museum; the questionnaires were administered
using an internet-based platform), leaving 307 pairs for further analysis.
The same preprocessing procedure was applied to the LOWLANDS dataset and resulted in
a total of 53 pairs (out of 115) to be included for further analysis.

Time-frequency analysis
The raw continuous data was first demeaned and high-pass filtered at 0.5 Hz in order to
remove slow fluctuations. Then all the “bad” channels and “bad” segments, defined through the
methodology described above, were removed. Time-frequency analysis was performed using a
Hanning-taper transformation based on multiplication in the frequency domain (Maris &
Oostenveld, 2007). The investigated frequencies were between 1 and 40 Hz, in steps of 1 Hz.
The time-frequency analysis was performed for all time points of the data. For each time point
and given frequency, the spectral complex coefficient was computed from a data window
centered at that timepoint. The length of the window was selected to be 5 periods of the
frequency in question unless this exceeded 500 msec, in which case the window length was
set to this maximum value. The different window lengths with regard to frequency created a
frequency resolution different from the desired 1 Hz. In order to achieve this resolution,
zero-padding was employed. This analysis resulted in a series of complex coefficients for each
channel and frequency, with gaps where artifacts had been removed and when not enough
data samples where available to fill the time-frequency window. These results were stored and
used in the following connectivity analysis.

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

Inter-brain functional connectivity analysis
Inter-brain synchrony can be measured in various ways. Here, it was quantified using two
metrics: imaginary coherence and projected power correlations. This choice was motivated not
only because of the proposed mechanisms they are argued to capture, but also because of the
recording conditions. Specifically, synchrony can be manifested in the fluctuations of the
recorded electrical signals themselves or in the fluctuations of the power envelopes of these
signals. Coherence is the most typical functional connectivity metric employed to study the
former type of synchrony, and power correlations are most often used for the latter. However,
both metrics, especially when applied to EEG and MEG measurements, are highly
contaminated by environmental noise, which is manifested as common signals with 0 phase
difference across sensors and headsets. In the current study, such noise-induced zero-lag
signals are even more pronounced, since the museum environment has higher noise than a
typical EEG lab (e.g., via light installations on the ceiling as well as audio and video electronic
equipment in the vicinity of the measurements).
To avoid such instantaneously synchronized EEG signals within pairs, which have no
relevant neurocognitive interpretation, Imaginary Coherence (IC; synchrony in EEG signal
fluctuations; (Nolte et al., 2004) and Projected Power Correlations (PPC; synchrony in the
signal envelopes after the projection of one signal on the other has been removed; Hipp,
Hawellek, Corbetta, Siegel, & Engel, 2012) were employed instead (schematic in Figure 2e).
Assume there are two EEG channel recordings (t) , y (t) whose time-frequency spectral
coefficients series are X (t, f ) and Y (t, f ) . Imaginary coherence takes two series of complex
spectral coefficients and computes the cross spectral density S yy (f ) between them (eq. 1.3)
and the auto spectral density (power) of each of them, S xx (f ) , S yy (f ) (eq. 1.1 and 1.2). From
20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

these, it computes the Coherency C xy (f ) (eq.1.4), a complex number whose phase describes
the average phase difference between the two series and whose magnitude describes how
consistent this phase difference is. This complex number is decomposed in a real and an
imaginary part. The real part represents how much of the magnitude is driven by instantaneous
interactions and the imaginary part represents how much by lagged interactions. Imaginary
Coherence I C (f ) is the absolute value of the imaginary part, thus represents only lagged
interactions (Nolte et al., 2004). Imaginary coherence in the frequency range investigated here
(1 to 40 Hz) captures phase differences between signal fluctuations in the range of tens of
milliseconds.

The Projected Power Correlation P P C(f ) , as it is called in this paper for convenience, takes
two series of complex spectral coefficients and computes the correlation between their
magnitudes (envelopes) after first removing the projection of one series on the other, so that all
instantaneous signal fluctuations are removed before the envelope is extracted (Hipp et al.,
2012). So first the projection of Y (t, f ) on X (t, f ) is removed, leaving only the signal
orthogonal to it Y ┴X (t, f ) (eq. 1.6; Hipp et al., 2012). Then the correlation between || Y ┴X (t, f ) ||
and |X (t, f )| is computed across time. The same is done also between || X ┴Y (t, f ) || and
|Y (t, f )| (eq. 1.7). Note that ê┴Y and ê┴X are unit vectors representing the phases of the
21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

complex numbers and do not influence the magnitudes. Here is must be clarified that although
instantaneous fluctuations of the signals are removed, the fluctuations of the envelopes of the
remaining signals can still have zero phase difference, but this will not be due to a common
signal present in both signals. Projected Power Correlation in the frequency range investigated
here captures envelope fluctuations in the range of hundreds of milliseconds. So this analysis
captures much slower processes than Imaginary Coherence.

The computation of the above metrics was performed as follows. A moving window of 2-sec
duration was employed to move along the series of complex spectral coefficients that were
computed in the time-frequency analysis (Figure 3a). The time step this window moved at
every iteration was 10 data samples (10* 1/128Hz = 70.81 msec; Figure 3b). At each iteration,
all the spectral coefficients that fell within the window were selected from each matched
electrode of the two headsets used in a given pair. These two time-series of spectral
coefficients were then used in the computations of the connectivity metrics, and each
connectivity metric was averaged across channels (Figure 3c). This was repeated for each
step iteration of the moving window, so that at the end of all iterations a series of connectivity
metric values across time were computed. Then the average connectivity across time was
computed. This process resulted in a single value for each connectivity metric per frequency
per pair (Figure 3d).

22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

The same process was also performed in the early and late halves of the data in order to
investigate if engagement of the participants in the experiment increased or decreased
inter-brain connectivity and if such gradients correlated with behavior.

Correlation of inter-brain connectivity with behavioral data
Once the two connectivity metrics were computed for each pair and frequency, the next step
was their correlation with behavioral metrics derived from the questionnaires (see Materials).
This was quantified by computing Pearson correlation coefficients between a given
connectivity metric and a given behavioral variable for a given frequency across all pairs,
accompanied by the p-value of the Pearson’s coefficient. This was repeated for all 40
frequencies for which the connectivity metric was computed. Correction for multiple
comparisons was implemented as follows. With the typical significance p-value threshold of
0.05 and 40 frequencies, traditional correction approaches such as Bonferroni and False
Discovery rate are very conservative, highly insensitive, and fail to incorporate the fact that
significant effects tend to occur in clusters along the frequency axis. Cluster-based
nonparametric statistical tests based on random permutations68 solve the multiple comparison
problem while preserving sensitivity. These non-parametric tests were used as follows. The
Pearson correlation coefficient was initially computed between connectivity metric M (f ) at
frequency f and behavioral variable B . This was repeated across all frequencies. Then
correlation significance thresholds T hupper and T hlower were selected at the 5% and 95%
percentiles of the correlation distribution for all frequencies, respectively. Then the random
permutation procedure took place. The order of the behavioral variable values was randomly
shuffled and the correlation with the connectivity metric was repeated. All correlation values
23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

exceeding thresholds T hupper and T hlower were marked as significant and it was investigated if
they formed clusters in adjacent frequencies. For each of these randomly significant clusters, a
cluster statistic was computed. Different options were available for this average cluster
statistic, such as the maximum correlation value, the average correlation value, or the size of
the cluster. The extend of the cluster was chosen here because typical intrinsic oscillatory
phenomena in the brain span a range of frequencies rather than single frequencies, and this
should be a prominent feature in this correlational analysis too. So the randomly significant
cluster with the maximum size was found and its size was stored. This random permutation
procedure was repeated 500 times. At the end of this procedure, a distribution of the 500
largest random cluster sizes was formed against which all the clusters from the actual data
correlation, performed at the very beginning, were compared. If an actual data cluster had a
size larger than the 95% threshold of the random distribution, it was marked as significant
(Figure 3f). This procedure was applied to each connectivity metric and each behavioral
variable.

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

Figure

3. Inter-Brain functional connectivity

measures.
(A) A 2-second moving window was used along
each of the time-series ( x(t) and y (t) correspond to
the 2 different participants of a pair) of EEG
recordings in order to compute the time-series of
spectral coefficients X (ti , f ), Y (ti , f ) (one spectral
coefficient per time-window i , per frequency f and
participant). (B) These spectral coefficients for the 2
different participants can be visualized as pairs of
vectors X (ti , f ), Y (ti , f ) at each time instance i (and
frequency f ). These vector pairs are then used to
compute the complex coherency C xy (f ) , which
reflects how consistent is the phase difference
(angle) between the 2 participants, i.e across all
spectral coefficient pairs X , Y (across time).
Imaginary coherence constitutes only the imaginary
part of coherency, reflecting only non-instantaneous
phase relations (other than 0). (C) Projected Power
Correlation: the vector of a spectral coefficient from
one participant X (ti , f ) can be decomposed into 2 orthogonal projections. One projection parallel to the vector
Y (ti , f ) of spectral coefficient of the other participant, X ∥Y (ti , f ) and one projections perpendicular to it, X ⊥Y (ti , f ) .
The parallel projection represents the part of the signal that is common between the 2 participants; as this reflects
instantaneous co-fluctuations, it is removed before computing power correlations between the 2 participants. (D)
Projected Power Correlation: The perpendicular projection X ⊥Y (ti , f ) is the part of X (ti , f ) that is used to compute
power correlations with Y (ti , f ) . (E) Conceptual depiction of the features that are captured by imaginary
coherence and projected power correlation, computed between the EEG signals of 2 different brains X and Y.
Imaginary coherence describes how consistent the phase difference is between the 2 EEG signals (EEG signals
are depicted with blue). Projected power correlation describes how correlated the fluctuations are of the
Envelopes of the 2 EEG signals (signal envelopes are depicted by red). (F) Imaginary Coherence and Projected
power correlations between participants were computed at each frequency from 1 – 40 Hz and were subsequently
correlated with one of the behavioral variables of interest ( here termed Z ); a cluster analysis was used to
determine significant clusters of at least 2 consecutive frequencies (dark red/blue). See text for detailed
description.

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

RESULTS
The results below quantify correlations between behavioral variables and inter-brain synchrony
in the BENAKI dataset, unless indicated otherwise. All reported p-values survived correction
for multiple comparisons using a False Discovery Rate approach (FDR; Benjamini &
Hochberg, 1995).
Socially relevant trait measures, including pairs’ relationship (Aron et al., 1992) and
affective personality traits (Davis, 1980), were correlated with brain synchrony averaged
across the entire 10-minute experience. For pairs’ focus and motivation, we instead examined
changes in inter-brain synchrony: the difference between the average inter-brain synchrony
during the second half of the experience and the first half of the experience was correlated with
these state measures. Inter-brain synchrony was quantified in two different ways. First,
Projected Power Correlations capture band-limited power fluctuations at different oscillatory
frequencies. These power fluctuations represent relatively slow processes (on the order of
seconds) and represent the overall strength of neural activation. With "overall strength of
neural activation" at a particular frequency, we mean greater number of neurons firing
synchronously at a particular frequency. The larger the number of neurons firing synchronously
at that frequency, the larger the magnitude of the measured electric field at this frequency and
the higher the power. Note, however, that projected power correlation quantifies the level of
co-fluctuation of this magnitude across time between two signals and not of the phase of firing.
In addition to power fluctuation synchrony, we also examined the consistency of phase
alignment between oscillations in the brains of the two participants in each pair (Imaginary
Coherence). This metric represents much faster processes, on the order of tens of
milliseconds, and is independent of the strength of neural activity. Mindful of the data quality
26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

disadvantage when conducting neuroscience research in a non-laboratory context, we took
advantage of the large size of our dataset to adopt strict inclusion criteria. First, we decided to
focus our analysis on only one recording site (1,568 people) for consistency purposes, which
was further reduced to a group of 614 datasets that met a high data quality threshold.
Furthermore, as discussed in the Introduction and described in the Methods, our synchrony
metrics were chosen so that the effect of instantaneous brain signal co-fluctuations is
minimized, circumventing contamination by environmental electrical noise present in the
museum environment.

Intrinsic motivation: relationship and personality traits predict inter-brain synchrony
We first explored whether properties of pairs’ relationship predicted the average inter-brain
synchrony across the 10-minute experience (cf. Figure 1b). Cluster statistics revealed
significant effects of both relationship duration (a trait measure) and social closeness (a state
measure; Aron et al., 1992). People who knew each other longer showed stronger inter-brain
synchrony in the lower frequency ranges (Figure 4a, projected power correlations at 8 Hz;
r(302) = .1776; p = .0019). Pairs who on average felt closer to each other also showed more
inter-brain synchrony with each other during the experience, in the beta-frequency range
(Figure 4b; imaginary coherence at 21-22 Hz; r(307) = .1552, p = .005). Note that there was no
difference in synchrony between strangers and pairs who already knew each other, in contrast
to previous findings (Kinreich et al., 2017).
Figure 4c shows the correlation plots for affective personality traits (Davis, 1980) and
inter-brain synchrony. Perspective Taking did not affect the average inter-brain synchrony
across the experience (dashed line), but Personal Distress did (solid line): At ~15-16 Hz, there
27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

was a negative correlation between pairs’ average Personal Distress and their projected power
correlations (r(300) = -0.1757, p = .0023), indicating that less emotionally self-oriented pairs
(as measured through less Personal Distress), showed more synchrony overall.

Figure 4. Inter-brain synchrony is correlated with pairs’ relationship and with their affective
personalities
Inter-brain synchrony was significantly correlated with (A) relationship duration (projected power correlations at
7-8 Hz; r(302) = 0.1776; p = 0.0019) and (B) social closeness (imaginary coherence at 21-22 Hz; r(307) = 0.1552, p
= 0.005). (C) A significant negative correlation was found between Personal Distress and inter-brain synchrony
(projected power correlations at 14-15 Hz; r(300) = 0.1757; p = 0.0023). No significant correlation between
Perspective Taking and inter-brain synchrony was found. Values are max-min normalized for presentation
purposes and correlation plots show the average for each significant cluster.

Pairs’ changes in focus predict inter-brain synchrony
Next, we asked whether changes in pairs’ mental state, in particular focus level (Watson &
Clark, 1994) was associated with changes in inter-brain synchrony (cf. Figure 1c). When
comparing participants’ self-reported focus before and after the experience, we saw that 182
28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

pairs showed a decrease in self-reported focus over time, while 84 pairs reported an increase
in focus (all participant pairs Focus Pre vs. Focus Post: t(1, 452) = 6.8747, p < .0001; Focus
Pre: M = 3.3392, SD = 0.6272; Focus Post: M = 3.1428, SD = 0.7224). For the group of pairs
whose focus decreased, a smaller decrease was associated with a higher increase in
projected power correlations at 6-7 Hz for the second compared to the first half of the
experience (r(182) = 0.189, p = 0.0106). For the group who reported to be more focused after
than before the experience, a higher increase in focus was associated with a higher increase
in imaginary coherence (r(84) = 0.2975, p = 0.006). In other words: maintaining focus led to an
increase in inter-brain synchrony over time.

Changes in low frequency synchrony are paired with changes in high frequency
synchrony
Interestingly, both pairs’ self-reported focus and the nature of their relationship were correlated
with projected power correlations at 7-8 Hz and imaginary coherence at 20-21 Hz respectively.
We thus explored the relationship between the two inter-brain synchrony measures at these
two frequency ranges and found them to be coupled: changes in lower frequency projected
power correlations at 7-8 Hz were positively correlated with changes in imaginary coherence at
20-21 Hz (Figure 5B: (r(73) = .2776, p = .0174).

29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

Figure 5. Inter-brain synchrony is correlated with pairs’ focus level, and low frequency inter-brain
synchrony predicts high frequency inter-brain synchrony
(A-left) Pairs with a smaller decrease in focus and (A-right) pairs with a relatively higher increase in focus
exhibited a relatively higher increase in inter-brain synchrony in the second than the first half of the experience,
in projected power correlations at 6-7 Hz (r(182) = 0.1889, p = 0.0106) and imaginary coherence at 20-21 Hz
(r(84) = 0.2975, p = 0.006) respectively. (B) Changes in 7-8 Hz projected power correlations were positively
associated with changes in imaginary coherence when comparing inter-brain synchrony during the first half and
the second half of the experience (r(73) = 0.2776, p = 0.0174). Pairs with negative projected power correlations
are excluded. Values are max-min normalized for presentation purposes and correlation plots show the average
for each significant cluster.

Extrinsic motivation: inter-brain synchrony is enhanced by explicit “synchrony” A/V
So far, we have shown that affective traits as well as mental states predict (changes in) brain
synchrony during face-to-face interaction. We next asked whether pairs that were more
motivated to connect also synchronized more (cf. Figure 1d). As described in the Methods,
pairs from the BENAKI dataset were divided into two groups: one group was explicitly told that

30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

the visuals were derived from their correlated EEG signal (explicit synchrony A/V), while the
other group did not (non-explicit synchrony A/V). We hypothesized that the feedback
instructions would function as a motivational factor to remain focused on the other. Indeed,
pairs in the explicit feedback group showed an increase in inter-brain synchrony for the second
vs. the first half of the experience (Figure 6; Half 1 vs. Half 2 projected power correlations at
18-21 Hz: t(1, 138) = 2.7049, p = 0.0077, M = 0.037, SD = 0.1619). One plausible explanation
for this discrepancy is that the “explicit feedback” group was more motivated to maintain
focused, or engaged with the other person throughout the 10-minute experience: the visual
environment functioned as a constant reminder of the task, namely to connect to the person
directly opposite.

Figure 6. Extrinsic motivation to connect leads to an increase in inter-brain synchrony
Pairs who received no explicit explanation of the relationship between the A/V environment and inter-brain
correlations showed no significant changes in inter-brain synchrony over time; Pairs in the explicit feedback
group exhibited higher inter-brain synchrony for the second vs. the first half of the experience (projected power
correlations at 18-21 Hz: t(1, 138) = 2.7049, p = 0.0077, M = .037, SD = .1619). Values are max-min normalized for
presentation purposes. Error bars reflect standard errors of the mean.

31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

Indirect support for such a shared engagement account of inter-brain synchrony comes from
the following set of observations in our data. First, while the “no explicit feedback” group
exhibited a decrease in focus (t(1, 209) = 3.1647, p = 0.0018, SD = .1499) for the post vs. pre
questionnaire, the “explicit feedback” group showed no significant changes in focus. A second,
related, observation is that self-reported focus did not predict changes in inter-brain synchrony
when restricting the analyses reported in Figure 5a to the “explicit feedback” group alone.
Importantly, the relationship between inter-brain synchrony and pairs’ relationship or
personality traits was unaffected by the instructions pairs’ received about the task and A/V
environment (See supplemental Figure S1 for details). Thus, manipulating pairs’ extrinsic
motivation to socially engage appeared to exclusively override the effect of self-reported focus
on inter-brain synchrony.
A final piece of evidence in support of the proposed role of shared engagement in inter-brain
synchrony comes from the finding that participants’ inter-brain synchrony changes were not
affected if they were presented with a sham A/V environment. Recall that half the pairs in the
LOWLANDS dataset saw visuals that were randomly generated rather than being controlled by
true inter-brain synchrony values. Importantly, all pairs in the LOWLANDS dataset were explicit
told that the A/V environment was related to their ongoing inter-brain synchrony. As shown in
Figure S2, in contrast to the BENAKI pairs, where only the “explicit feedback” group showed
an increase in inter-brain synchrony for the second compared to the first half of the experience,
in the LOWLANDS dataset inter-brain synchrony increased over time for all pairs irrespective
of whether the inter-brain synchrony environment was true or sham (projected power
correlations at 16-18 Hz: t(1,55) = 3.2379, p = 0.002, SD = 0.0193; i.e., in the same
frequency range as for the BENAKI data shown in Figure 6). This suggests that believing that
32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

the visuals were directly related to the success of the interaction motivated participants to
remain socially engaged, irrespective of the actual relationship between inter-brain synchrony
and the visual environment.
Importantly, no other differences were observed between the two datasets: with the
exception of social closeness, all findings reported in Figures 4 and 5 for the BENAKI dataset
were replicated in the LOWLANDS dataset (See Figure S2 for details). A further minor
difference was that the frequency ranges of the projected power correlations were a bit higher
for the LOWLANDS dataset (~10 Hz as opposed to 8 Hz). This could be due to age differences
between the two groups: Alpha peak frequency is typically lower for older than for younger
adults (e.g., Duffy, McAnulty, & Albert, 1993) and while no age information available for the
BENAKI participants, the music festival Lowlands is known to attract a younger demographic
than the Benaki art museum.

Social behavior as an exogenous synchronizer
Finally, we asked whether the type of social behavior that pairs engaged in during the social
interaction was predictive of their inter-brain synchrony (Cf. Figure 1e; LOWLANDS dataset
only). Participants listed a number of different strategies they used to try to synchronize with
one another, which included “no strategy” (10.7% of pairs), and “stimulus entrainment”
(focusing on the visuals: 37.5% of pairs), in addition to three main categories of social
behavior: “eye contact” (71.4% of pairs), “joint action” (performing the same physical action
such as smiling or having a conversation, playing hand games: 25% of pairs), and “joint
thought” (thinking about the same object, event, or each other: 32 % of pairs). As can be seen
in Figure 7a-b, “eye contact” and “joint action” were positively associated with inter-brain
33

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

synchrony (eye contact: projected power correlations at 9-11 Hz (r(56) = 0.3786, p = 0.0040)
and 26-30 Hz (r (56) = 0.3509, p = 0.008); joint action: imaginary coherence at 18-21 Hz (r(56)
= 0.3651, p = 0.0057), but “joint thought” was not predictive of inter-brain synchrony (Figure
7c).

Figure 7. Synchronizing “strategies” predict inter-brain synchrony in the Lowlands dataset
Using (A) “eye contact” or (B) “joint action” as strategies to connect was positively associated with inter-brain
synchrony (eye contact: projected power correlations at 9-11 Hz (r(56) = 0.3786, p = 0.0040) and 26-30 Hz (r (56)
= 0.3509, p = 0.008); joint action: imaginary coherence at 18-21 Hz (r(56) = 0.3651, p = 0.0057), but (C) “joint
thought” strategies were not. See main text for a description of the categories. Values are max-min normalized
for presentation purposes.

DATA AND RESULTS DISSEMINATION
All data is made publicly available at https://osf.io/hpgkt/ and the results are disseminated to
participants and the general public via wp.nyu.edu/mutualwavemachine

34

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

DISCUSSION
In an effort to explore the neural correlates of real-world social behavior, we present data
acquired in a novel context departing from laboratory-constrained cognitive neuroscience.
Building on recent technical and analytic advances in recording neural data from groups in
natural settings, we extended such data acquisition approaches in a new direction, recording
EEG from a very large number of people, recruited from the general public, as they engaged in
naturalistic face-to-face interaction. Specifically, we created an interactive neurofeedback art
experience, the Mutual Wave Machine, which allowed us to ask how pairs’ relationship,
personality traits, mental states, and social behavior predicted inter-brain synchrony during
face-to-face interactions, extending ongoing laboratory research on neuronal oscillations and
their role in perception and cognition, as well as previous EEG hyperscanning studies (Babiloni
et al., 2007; Dumas et al., 2010; Kinreich et al., 2017; Pérez et al., 2018; Sänger, Müller, &
Lindenberger, 2012; and many others). We employed a ‘crowdsourcing’ neuroscience
approach, recruiting museum visitors and festival goers to help us explore our research
questions. For example, we asked participants to indicate what kind of behavior they thought
had helped them synchronize their brain activity.
In a subgroup of 726 participants whose data survived rigorous criteria licensing further
analyses, we found that inter-brain synchrony was positively related to pairs’ social closeness,
personality traits, focus level, and motivation to connect. Further, modulations in alpha
synchrony (projected power correlations) co-varied with changes in beta coherence (at 21-22
Hz), suggestive of a relationship between lower and higher frequency inter-brain synchrony.

35

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

Shared attention and engagement
In line with previous work, our findings invite an interpretation based on shared attention, or
shared engagement (Cohen, Henin, & Parra, 2017; Dikker et al., 2017; Ki, Kelly, & Parra,
2016), illustrated in Figure 8.

Figure 8. Shared engagement facilitates the formation of shared internal models
A schematic model showing how two people who have more instances in shared attention (‘moments of
meeting’) can be measured as similar low frequency power changes, which in turn enables the tuning of shared
internal models.

Projected power correlations, by hypothesis, would capture whether pairs show concurrent
changes in attentive states, with positive correlations indicating that they are (in)attentive at the
same time and low correlations or negative correlations indicating that they do not often share
the same attentional state during the experience. ‘Synchrony’, thus, does not imply that pairs
maintain a high focus level throughout the experience, just that their in-and-out of attention
states co-fluctuate. Pairs who are more often in an attentive state together (similar alpha power
36

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

changes) are more likely to simultaneously pay attention to each other’s actions or other cues
from the surrounding environment, resulting in more similar neural representations or
predictions (Arnal & Giraud, 2012). In other words, shared attention states facilitate
interpersonal brain synchrony at the oscillatory phase level (beta synchrony).
Inter-brain synchrony in the beta band as a function of (social) attention converges with
research showing that joint action is supported by oscillatory activity in the beta frequency
range. Beta/mu rhythms, typically measured over sensorimotor areas (Hari, 2006; Pineda,
2005), have been associated with attention (Anderson & Ding, 2011), motor control and motor
simulation (Pfurtscheller & Lopes da Silva, 1999), as well as prediction of another person’s
actions (Sebanz et al., 2006). Changes in beta/mu are observed both when people perform an
action and when they watch someone perform a similar action (Nishitani & Hari, 2000).
Crucially, beta activity during action perception varies as a function of social evaluation
(Koelewijn, Van Schie, Bekkering, Oostenveld, & Jensen, 2008) as well as social traits such as
empathic concern (Perry, Troje, & Bentin, 2010) and, in line with our findings, Personal
Distress (Saarela et al., 2007; Yang, Decety, Lee, Chen, & Cheng, 2009). Our work also links
to previous EEG studies comparing neural oscillations between people during interpersonal
coordination tasks (Babiloni & Astolfi, 2014; Dumas et al., 2010; Sänger et al., 2012;
Szymanski et al., 2017). For example, recent work by Novembre and colleagues (Novembre,
Knoblich, Dunne, & Keller, 2017) showed that dual in-phase 20 Hz brain stimulation enhanced
interpersonal movement synchrony between two participants performing a finger-tapping task.
We expand on these findings by showing that brain-to-brain synchrony in the beta frequency
range is sensitive to interpersonal factors such as affective personality traits during real-world
face-to-face social interaction, which can further be linked to research that has associated beta
37

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

oscillations with endogenous content representations and expectations (Arnal & Giraud, 2012;
Spitzer & Haegens, 2017).
In sum, we propose an account wherein shared attention (Dikker et al., 2017; Kang &
Wheatley, 2017; Ki et al., 2016; Leong, Byrne, & Clackson, 2017), measured via an increase in
projected power correlations in the alpha frequency range, provides ‘temporal windows of
opportunity’ to establish shared (motor, perceptual, cognitive) representations, measured via
an increase in imaginary coherence at 20 Hz.

On conducting “neuroscience in the wild”
Carrying out “crowdsourcing” neuroscience research outside of the laboratory comes with
many benefits, but also a number of challenges. First, it is near-impossible to obtain full
experimental control in public spaces, and this project was especially challenging in this
regard. For example, the LOWLANDS dataset was collected during a music festival, which
required extra care with respect to noise contamination from surrounding events. Further, due
to the sheer number of participants as well as other logistical and privacy-related
considerations, we were unable to keep a close record of participant behavior during the
interaction. As a result, we had to rely on participant self-report (see Figure 7), which provided
us with information to assess the brain-behavior relationship during the social interactions, but
of course this information was incomplete.
Another challenge was the hybrid art/science/tech nature of the Mutual Wave Machine.
While participants took their roles seriously in both BENAKI and LOWLANDS, for a few other
sites listed in Table S1, visitors did not treat the experience as a scientific experiment but
rather as a curiosity (e.g., taking selfies instead of interacting with each other). People were
38

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

also often waiting in line to participate, sometimes even getting impatient, jeopardizing the
setup and reliability of their questionnaire responses. At these sites, the experience was
shortened to 6 minutes or less. For these and other reasons, we only analyzed datasets that
were collected during multiple days and where 20-minute timeslots were assigned with 5- to
10-minute buffers on each side. At BENAKI, participants further self-selected by signing up in
advance via an online portal.
Another challenge relates to equipment. The EEG devices used here (EMOTIV) were very
suitable for our purposes because they are sturdy, fast to apply, easy to handle, and
affordable. However, data quality may be lower compared to laboratory-grade equipment
(Krigolson, Williams, Norton, Hassall, & Colino, 2017). As discussed in the Methods, we took
various steps to ensure that our data met rigorous standards despite these limitations.
On the flipside, the benefits of conducting neuroscience research outside of traditional
laboratory environments are clear. First, using a citizen science approach affords researchers
the opportunity to collect data from large numbers of people with a more varied demographic
profile than the typical participant population of laboratory neuroscience research. Further,
actively involving the general public in research has a number of benefits beyond constituting a
rich opportunity for neuroscience outreach and education: While it is common to view
interactions between scientists and the general public as merely unilateral (scientists educate
the public about their work), we would like to argue that interactions with artists, educators, and
the general public can inform scientific inquiry in a fruitful way: non-specialists may force
scientists to remain aware of any translational value of their work to everyday practice,
challenge methodological approaches that are taken for granted, and inspire research
questions that may inform laboratory research. To close with an emphasis on the latter point:
39

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

while the field may be ‘ready’ for real-world neuroscience (Matusz, Dikker, Huth, Perrodin,
2019), in our opinion it will flourish only if paired with rigorous laboratory-based work and solid,
careful methodology.

CONCLUSION
A large group of museum and festival visitors engaged in dynamic face-to-face interactions
while their brain activity was recorded using EEG. This setup made it possible to explore the
limits and opportunities afforded by conducting human social neuroscience research outside of
the traditional laboratory context. Drawing on our two most comprehensive datasets to date,
we were able to evaluate how intra- and interpersonal factors predict the extent to which brain
activity becomes synchronized between people during face-to-face interaction. Pairwise
synchronized brain activity was related to people’s relationship, affective personality traits,
mental states, as well as their motivation and strategy to connect to the other person. We
propose an account for brain-to-brain synchrony in which shared engagement provides a
vehicle for synchronous brain activity (measured in the alpha and beta frequencies,
respectively), and joint action is used to mutually adapt neural and behavioral representations.
Taken together, we demonstrate that an unconventional, ‘crowdsourcing neuroscience’
approach can provide valuable insights into the brain basis of dynamic real-world social
behavior.

Competing Interest Statement
The authors have no competing interests to declare.

40

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

References
Anderson, K. L., & Ding, M. (2011). Attentional modulation of the somatosensory mu rhythm.
Neuroscience, 180, 165–180.
Arnal, L. H., & Giraud, A.-L. (2012). Cortical oscillations and sensory predictions. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 16(7), 390–398.
Aron, A., Aron, E. N., & Smollan, D. (1992). Inclusion of other in the self scale and the structure of
interpersonal closeness. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 63(4), 596.
Astolfi, L., Cincotti, F., Mattia, D., De Vico Fallani, F., Salinari, S., Vecchiato, G., … Babiloni, F. (2010).
Imaging the social brain: multi-subjects EEG recordings during the “Chicken’s game.” 2010 Annual
International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology, 1734–1737.
ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Babiloni, F., & Astolfi, L. (2014). Social neuroscience and hyperscanning techniques: past, present and
future. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 44, 76–93.
Babiloni, F., Astolfi, L., Cincotti, F., Mattia, D., Tocci, A., Tarantino, A., … De Vico Fallani, F. (2007).
Cortical activity and connectivity of human brain during the prisoner’s dilemma: an EEG
hyperscanning study. Conference Proceedings: ... Annual International Conference of the IEEE
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society. IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society.
Conference, 2007, 4953–4956.
Benjamini, Y., & Hochberg, Y. (1995). Controlling the False Discovery Rate: A Practical and Powerful
Approach to Multiple Testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B, Statistical
Methodology, 57(1), 289–300.
Bevilacqua, D., Davidesco, I., Wan, L., Chaloner, K., Rowland, J., Ding, M., … Dikker, S. (2019).
Brain-to-Brain Synchrony and Learning Outcomes Vary by Student–Teacher Dynamics: Evidence
from a Real-world Classroom Electroencephalography Study. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,

41

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

31(3), 401–411.
Bevilacqua, D., Davidesco, I., Wan, L., Oostrik, M., Chaloner, K., Rowland, J., … Dikker, S. (2018).
Brain-to-Brain Synchrony and Learning Outcomes Vary by Student--Teacher Dynamics: Evidence
from a Real-world Classroom Electroencephalography Study. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
1–11.
Bhattacharya, J. (2017). Cognitive Neuroscience: Synchronizing Brains in the Classroom. Current
Biology, Vol. 27, pp. R346–R348. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2017.03.071
Brunner, C., Birbaumer, N., Blankertz, B., Guger, C., Kübler, A., Mattia, D., … Others. (2015). BNCI
Horizon 2020: towards a roadmap for the BCI community. Brain-Computer Interfaces, 2(1), 1–10.
Cohen, S. S., Henin, S., & Parra, L. C. (2017). Engaging narratives evoke similar neural activity and
lead to similar time perception. Scientific Reports, 7(1), 4578.
Cruz-Garza, J. G., Brantley, J. A., Nakagome, S., Kontson, K., Megjhani, M., Robleto, D., &
Contreras-Vidal, J. L. (2017). Deployment of Mobile EEG Technology in an Art Museum Setting:
Evaluation of Signal Quality and Usability. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 11, 527.
Cui, X., Bryant, D. M., & Reiss, A. L. (2012). NIRS-based hyperscanning reveals increased
interpersonal coherence in superior frontal cortex during cooperation. NeuroImage, 59(3),
2430–2437.
Dalton, K. M., Nacewicz, B. M., Johnstone, T., Schaefer, H. S., Gernsbacher, M. A., Goldsmith, H. H.,
… Davidson, R. J. (2005). Gaze fixation and the neural circuitry of face processing in autism.
Nature Neuroscience, 8(4), 519–526.
Davis, M. H., & Others. (1980). A multidimensional approach to individual differences in empathy.
Retrieved from https://www.uv.es/friasnav/Davis_1980.pdf
Debener, S., Minow, F., Emkes, R., Gandras, K., & de Vos, M. (2012). How about taking a low-cost,
small, and wireless EEG for a walk?: EEG to go. Psychophysiology, 49(11), 1617–1621.
De Jaegher, H., Di Paolo, E., & Gallagher, S. (2010). Can social interaction constitute social cognition?

42

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 14(10), 441–447.
Dikker, S., Montgomery, S., & Tunca, S. (2019). Using synchrony-based neurofeedback in search of
human connectedness. In A. Nijholt (Ed.), Brain Art: Brain-Computer Interfaces for Artistic
Expression.
Dikker, S., Silbert, L. J., Hasson, U., & Zevin, J. D. (2014). On the Same Wavelength: Predictable
Language Enhances Speaker–Listener Brain-to-Brain Synchrony in Posterior Superior Temporal
Gyrus. The Journal of Neuroscience: The Official Journal of the Society for Neuroscience, 34(18),
6267–6272.
Dikker, S., Wan, L., Davidesco, I., Kaggen, L., Oostrik, M., McClintock, J., … Poeppel, D. (2017).
Brain-to-Brain Synchrony Tracks Real-World Dynamic Group Interactions in the Classroom.
Current Biology: CB, 27(9), 1375–1380.
Dikker, S., Wan, L., Davidesco, I., Kaggen, L., Oostrik, M., McClintock, J., … Poeppel, D. (2017).
Brain-to-Brain Synchrony Tracks Real-World Dynamic Group Interactions in the Classroom.
Current Biology: CB, 27(9), 1375–1380.
Duffy, F. H., McAnulty, G. B., & Albert, M. S. (1993). The pattern of age-related differences in
electrophysiological activity of healthy males and females. Neurobiology of Aging, 14(1), 73–84.
Dumas, G., Chavez, M., Nadel, J., & Martinerie, J. (2012). Anatomical connectivity influences both
intra- and inter-brain synchronizations. PloS One, 7(5), e36414.
Dumas, G., Nadel, J., Soussignan, R., Martinerie, J., & Garnero, L. (2010). Inter-brain synchronization
during social interaction. PloS One, 5(8), e12166.
Falk, E. B., Hyde, L. W., Mitchell, C., Faul, J., Gonzalez, R., Heitzeg, M. M., … Schulenberg, J. (2013).
What is a representative brain? Neuroscience meets population science. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 110(44), 17615–17622.
Goldstein, P., Weissman-Fogel, I., Dumas, G., & Shamay-Tsoory, S. G. (2018). Brain-to-brain coupling
during handholding is associated with pain reduction. Proceedings of the National Academy of

43

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

Sciences of the United States of America, 115(11), E2528–E2537.
Gwin, J. T., Gramann, K., & Makeig, S. (2010). Removal of movement artifact from high-density EEG
recorded during walking and running. Journal of. Retrieved from
https://www.physiology.org/doi/abs/10.1152/jn.00105.2010
Hari, R. (2006). Action–perception connection and the cortical mu rhythm. In C. Neuper & W. Klimesch
(Eds.), Progress in Brain Research (Vol. 159, pp. 253–260). Elsevier.
Hasson, U., Ghazanfar, A. A., Galantucci, B., Garrod, S., & Keysers, C. (2012). Brain-to-brain coupling:
a mechanism for creating and sharing a social world. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 16(2),
114–121.
Hasson, U., Nir, Y., Levy, I., Fuhrmann, G., & Malach, R. (2004). Intersubject synchronization of cortical
activity during natural vision. Science, 303(5664), 1634–1640.
Henrich, J., Heine, S. J., & Norenzayan, A. (2010). The weirdest people in the world? The Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 33(2-3), 61–83.
Hipp, J. F., Hawellek, D. J., Corbetta, M., Siegel, M., & Engel, A. K. (2012). Large-scale cortical
correlation structure of spontaneous oscillatory activity. Nature Neuroscience, 15(6), 884–890.
Kang, O., & Wheatley, T. (2017). Pupil dilation patterns spontaneously synchronize across individuals
during shared attention. Journal of Experimental Psychology. General, 146(4), 569–576.
Ki, J. J., Kelly, S. P., & Parra, L. C. (2016). Attention Strongly Modulates Reliability of Neural
Responses to Naturalistic Narrative Stimuli. The Journal of Neuroscience: The Official Journal of
the Society for Neuroscience, 36(10), 3092–3101.
Kinreich, S., Djalovski, A., Kraus, L., Louzoun, Y., & Feldman, R. (2017). Brain-to-Brain Synchrony
during Naturalistic Social Interactions. Scientific Reports, 7(1), 17060.
Koelewijn, T., van Schie, H. T., Bekkering, H., Oostenveld, R., & Jensen, O. (2008). Motor-cortical beta
oscillations are modulated by correctness of observed action. NeuroImage, Vol. 40, pp. 767–775.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2007.12.018

44

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

Konvalinka, I., Bauer, M., Stahlhut, C., Hansen, L. K., Roepstorff, A., & Frith, C. D. (2014). Frontal alpha
oscillations distinguish leaders from followers: multivariate decoding of mutually interacting brains.
NeuroImage, 94, 79–88.
Koole, S. L., & Tschacher, W. (2016). Synchrony in Psychotherapy: A Review and an Integrative
Framework for the Therapeutic Alliance. Frontiers in Psychology, 7, 755.
Krigolson, O. E., Williams, C. C., Norton, A., Hassall, C. D., & Colino, F. L. (2017). Choosing MUSE:
Validation of a Low-Cost, Portable EEG System for ERP Research. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 11,
109.
Kross, E., Verduyn, P., Demiralp, E., Park, J., Lee, D. S., Lin, N., … Ybarra, O. (2013). Facebook use
predicts declines in subjective well-being in young adults. PloS One, 8(8), e69841.
Kylliäinen, A., Wallace, S., Coutanche, M. N., Leppänen, J. M., Cusack, J., Bailey, A. J., & Hietanen, J.
K. (2012). Affective--motivational brain responses to direct gaze in children with autism spectrum
disorder. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, and Allied Disciplines, 53(7), 790–797.
Lee, T.-H., Miernicki, M. E., & Telzer, E. H. (2017). Families that fire together smile together: Resting
state connectome similarity and daily emotional synchrony in parent-child dyads. NeuroImage,
152, 31–37.
Leong, V., Byrne, E., & Clackson, K. (2017). Speaker gaze increases information coupling between
infant and adult brains. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
LeWinn, K. Z., Sheridan, M. A., Keyes, K. M., Hamilton, A., & McLaughlin, K. A. (2017). Sample
composition alters associations between age and brain structure. Nature Communications, 8(1),
874.
Liu, D., Liu, S., Liu, X., Zhang, C., Li, A., Jin, C., … Zhang, X. (2018). Interactive Brain Activity: Review
and Progress on EEG-Based Hyperscanning in Social Interactions. Frontiers in Psychology, 9,
1862.
Lumsden, J., Miles, L. K., Richardson, M. J., Smith, C. A., & Macrae, C. N. (2012). Who syncs? Social

45

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

motives and interpersonal coordination. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 48(3),
746–751.
Marsh, K. L., Isenhower, R. W., Richardson, M. J., Helt, M., Verbalis, A. D., Schmidt, R. C., & Fein, D.
(2013). Autism and social disconnection in interpersonal rocking. Frontiers in Integrative
Neuroscience, 7, 4.
Matusz, P. J., Dikker, S., Huth, A. G., & Perrodin, C. (2019). Are We Ready for Real-world
Neuroscience? Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 31(3), 327–338.
Minguillon, J., Lopez-Gordo, M. A., & Pelayo, F. (2017). Trends in EEG-BCI for daily-life: Requirements
for artifact removal. Biomedical Signal Processing and Control, 31, 407–418.
Müller, V., & Lindenberger, U. (2011). Cardiac and respiratory patterns synchronize between persons
during choir singing. PloS One, 6(9), e24893.
Nishitani, N., & Hari, R. (2000). Temporal dynamics of cortical representation for action. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 97(2), 913–918.
Nolte, G., Bai, O., Wheaton, L., Mari, Z., Vorbach, S., & Hallett, M. (2004). Identifying true brain
interaction from EEG data using the imaginary part of coherency. Clinical Neurophysiology: Official
Journal of the International Federation of Clinical Neurophysiology, 115(10), 2292–2307.
Novembre, G., Knoblich, G., Dunne, L., & Keller, P. E. (2017). Interpersonal synchrony enhanced
through 20 Hz phase-coupled dual brain stimulation. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience.
https://doi.org/10.1093/scan/nsw172
Noy, L., Levit-Binun, N., & Golland, Y. (2015). Being in the zone: physiological markers of togetherness
in joint improvisation. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 9, 187.
Nummenmaa, L., Glerean, E., Viinikainen, M., Jääskeläinen, I. P., Hari, R., & Sams, M. (2012).
Emotions promote social interaction by synchronizing brain activity across individuals. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 109(24), 9599–9604.
Oostenveld, R., Fries, P., Maris, E., & Schoffelen, J.-M. (2011). FieldTrip: Open source software for

46

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

advanced analysis of MEG, EEG, and invasive electrophysiological data. Computational
Intelligence and Neuroscience, 2011, 156869.
Parada, F. J., & Rossi, A. (2017). Commentary: Brain-to-Brain Synchrony Tracks Real-World Dynamic
Group Interactions in the Classroom and Cognitive Neuroscience: Synchronizing Brains in the
Classroom. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, Vol. 11. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2017.00554
Parkinson, C., Kleinbaum, A. M., & Wheatley, T. (2018). Similar neural responses predict friendship.
Nature Communications, 9(1), 332.
Pérez, A., Dumas, G., Karadag, M., & Duñabeitia, J. A. (2018). Differential brain-to-brain entrainment
while speaking and listening in native and foreign languages. Cortex; a Journal Devoted to the
Study of the Nervous System and Behavior. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2018.11.026
Perry, A., Troje, N. F., & Bentin, S. (2010). Exploring motor system contributions to the perception of
social information: Evidence from EEG activity in the mu/alpha frequency range. Social
Neuroscience, 5(3), 272–284.
Petroni, A., Cohen, S. S., Ai, L., Langer, N., Henin, S., Vanderwal, T., … Parra, L. C. (2017). Age and
sex modulate the variability of neural responses to naturalistic videos (p. 089060).
https://doi.org/10.1101/089060
Pfurtscheller, G., & Lopes da Silva, F. H. (1999). Event-related desynchronization. Handbook of
Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, revised series (Vol. 6). Amsterdam:
Elsevier.
Pickering, M. J., & Garrod, S. (2013). An integrated theory of language production and comprehension.
The Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 36(4), 329–347.
Pineda, J. A. (2005). The functional significance of mu rhythms: Translating “seeing” and “hearing” into
“doing.” Brain Research Reviews, 50(1), 57–68.
Ramseyer, F., & Tschacher, W. (2011). Nonverbal synchrony in psychotherapy: coordinated body
movement reflects relationship quality and outcome. Journal of Consulting and Clinical

47

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

Psychology, 79(3), 284–295.
Richardson, D. C., Dale, R., & Tomlinson, J. M. (2009). Conversation, gaze coordination, and beliefs
about visual context. Cognitive Science, 33(8), 1468–1482.
Richardson, M. J., Marsh, K. L., Isenhower, R. W., Goodman, J. R. L., & Schmidt, R. C. (2007). Rocking
together: dynamics of intentional and unintentional interpersonal coordination. Human Movement
Science, 26(6), 867–891.
Saarela, M. V., Hlushchuk, Y., Williams, A. C. de C., Schürmann, M., Kalso, E., & Hari, R. (2007). The
compassionate brain: humans detect intensity of pain from another’s face. Cerebral Cortex , 17(1),
230–237.
Sänger, J., Lindenberger, U., & Müller, V. (2011). Interactive brains, social minds. Communicative &
Integrative Biology, 4(6), 655–663.
Sänger, J., Müller, V., & Lindenberger, U. (2012). Intra- and interbrain synchronization and network
properties when playing guitar in duets. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 6, 312.
Scott-Van Zeeland, A. A., Dapretto, M., Ghahremani, D. G., Poldrack, R. A., & Bookheimer, S. Y.
(2010). Reward processing in autism. Autism Research: Official Journal of the International Society
for Autism Research, 3(2), 53–67.
Sebanz, N., Bekkering, H., & Knoblich, G. (2006). Joint action: bodies and minds moving together.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 10(2), 70–76.
Shamay-Tsoory, S. G., & Mendelsohn, A. (2019). Real-Life Neuroscience: An Ecological Approach to
Brain and Behavior Research. Perspectives on Psychological Science: A Journal of the
Association for Psychological Science, 14(5), 841–859.
Spitzer, B., & Haegens, S. (2017). Beyond the Status Quo: A Role for Beta Oscillations in Endogenous
Content (Re)Activation. Eneuro, Vol. 4, pp. ENEURO.0170–17.2017.
https://doi.org/10.1523/eneuro.0170-17.2017
Stephens, G. J., Silbert, L. J., & Hasson, U. (2010). Speaker–listener neural coupling underlies

48

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/822320. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder. It
is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
Dikker*, Michalareas*, Oostrik, Serafimaki, Kahraman, Struiksma, Poeppel. Crowdsourcing Neuroscience

successful communication. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America, 107(32), 14425–14430.
Szymanski, C., Pesquita, A., Brennan, A. A., Perdikis, D., Enns, J. T., Brick, T. R., … Lindenberger, U.
(2017). Teams on the same wavelength perform better: Inter-brain phase synchronization
constitutes a neural substrate for social facilitation. NeuroImage, 152, 425–436.
Thorson, K. R., West, T. V., & Mendes, W. B. (2018). Measuring physiological influence in dyads: A
guide to designing, implementing, and analyzing dyadic physiological studies. Psychological
Methods, 23(4), 595–616.
Tomasello, M., & Others. (1995). Joint attention as social cognition. Joint Attention: Its Origins and Role
in Development, 103130. Waters, S. F., West, T. V., Karnilowicz, H. R., & Mendes, W. B. (2017).
Affect contagion between mothers and infants: Examining valence and touch. Journal of
Experimental Psychology. General, 146(7), 1043–1051.
Watson, D., & Clark, L. A. (1994). The Panas-X. Manual for the Positive and Negative Affect
Schedule-Expanded Form. The University of Iowa.
Yang, C.-Y., Decety, J., Lee, S., Chen, C., & Cheng, Y. (2009). Gender differences in the mu rhythm
during empathy for pain: an electroencephalographic study. Brain Research, 1251, 176–184.

49

