Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

ScienceDirect
Procedia Computer Science 21 (2013) 174 – 182

The 4th International Conference on Emerging Ubiquitous Systems and Pervasive
Networks (EUSPN-2013)

Electroencephalograms for Ubiquitous Robotic Systems
David Swordsa,1,2 , Anara Sandygulovaa , Sameh Abdallaa , Gregory M.P. O’Harea
a School

of Computer Science and Informatics, University College Dublin, Belﬁeld, Dublin 4, Ireland

Abstract
Ubiquitous robotics augments the capabilities of one or more robots by leveraging ubiquitous computational and/or sensorial resources. Augmentation complements and/or enhances the capabilities of one or more robots while such robots
can simultaneously serve as intermediaries to ubiquitous services. Electroencephalograms (EEG) are Brain-Computer
Interfaces that consist of a series of conductors placed on the scalp. These conductors measure voltage ﬂuctuations in
the brain, and using machine learning techniques can be classiﬁed and used to command ubiquitous robotic systems.
The purpose of our work is to increase the collaboration between humans and surrounding robotic components while
fulﬁlling a certain goal or requirement. We aim to do that by granting humans more precise manipulation, (i.e., braindriven), over part or all of the involved robotic components. This paper presents our approach on the integration and
beneﬁts of an EEG interface within ubiquitous robotic systems.
c 2011

by Elsevier
Ltd.
©
2013 Published
The Authors.
Published
by Elsevier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selectionand/or
and peer-review
Shakshuki
Selection
peer-reviewunder
underresponsibility
responsibilityofofElhadi
[name M.
organizer]
Keywords: Brain-computer Interfaces, Ubiquitous Robotics, Electroencephalograms

1. Introduction
Ubiquitous Computing (UC) is a model of Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) within which computational resources are available through everyday objects. A user can have tasks carried out simultaneously
on the surrounding objects without their awareness. Ubiquitous Robotics (UR) is a model of Human-Robot
Interaction (HRI) within which robots harness the pervasive computational resources of UC in order to complement or enhance their functionality. Brain-Computer Interfaces (BCIs) allow for asynchronous communication between the brain and a computer Electroencephalograms (EEGs) are a nonintrusive form of BCI.
EEGs consist of a series of conductors placed on the scalp to measure discrete voltage ﬂuctuations across the
brain. These ﬂuctuations are then applied to machine learning algorithms to classify brain activity, which
can then be used to control a computer.
EEGs present a number of beneﬁts over classical HCIs, especially, but not exclusive to assistive tools for
the disabled, providing a noninvasive means of communication. EEGs allow for the transmission of actions
wirelessly while allowing the user to perform other tasks, removing the need for buttons, vocal commands
1 Tel.:

+353831105716
address: david.p.swords@gmail.com

2 Email

1877-0509 © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of Elhadi M. Shakshuki
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2013.09.024

David Swords et al. / Procedia Computer Science 21 (2013) 174 – 182

or gestures. In addition to this, EEGs allow for the detection of facial expressions and blinking, even before
the user has made them. EEGs also allow for the transmission of emotional states, such as fatigue, focus
and happiness. And with recent advances wireless EEGs headsets present a cost eﬀective BCI.
This paper presents the application of EEGs headsets to the area of UR with a series of scenarios including UR Service Activation, UR Emotional State Adaption, UR User Satisfaction Detection and UR
Emergency Medical Intervention.
2. Related Work
Ubiquitous Computing (UC) is a method of enhancing Human-Computer Interfaces (HCIs) by making
many computers available throughout the physical environment, but making them eﬀectively invisible to
the user. The notion of UC ﬁrst came to the forefront with a 1991 Scientiﬁc American article by Mark
Weiser called ”The Computer for the 21st Century” [1]. [1] presented the notion of computation weaving
its way into daily life until it becomes indistinguishable. The seminal work of [1], paved the way for a
broad spectrum of computer science problems [2], associated with hardware components, network protocols,
interaction substrates, applications, privacy and computational methods. Many authors capitalized on the
outstanding issues presented in [2] and experimental intelligent environments started to appear in order to
confront those issues. The EasyLiving Project [3] undertaken by Microsoft looked to develop the underlying
architecture and technologies. The focus of [3] being to aggregate diverse devices into a coherent user
experience. The result garnered advances in middleware, geometric world modelling, perception and service
description. The work of [4] introduces the notion of cooperative buildings and roomware, including an
interactive electronic wall, table, augmented chairs, with each of these also having virtual representations
for multi-modal interactions. After the introduction of multiple approaches, [5] proposed a common model,
stating that it would be more eﬀective from an economic and scientifc perspective. This model proposed
levels of abstraction in regards to embedded and mobile devices, with a focus on distributed, collective and
cooperative perception systems.
There are many examples of SW being used in UC middlewares, one of which is [6]. [6] propose a
Ubiquitous Semantic Space (USS), in an eﬀort to provide a common solution to both communication and
context-awareness in UC, resulting in a middleware framework. [6] use OWL [7] to describe services, then
describe system behaviors using the Semantic Web Rule Language (SWRL) [8]. These SWRL [8] behaviors
are then executed using the JESS reasoner engine. Similarly, [9] propose a semantic location-aware model,
again using OWL [7], SWRL [8] and the JESS reasoner. Entities like users, devices, service providers and
computing agents are included in the model. With this model and with the use of JESS speciﬁcally, the
location of users can be inferred. With the use of semantic web technology providing a robust method for
service composition and execution, some started to investigate Quality of Service (QoS) models. Citing
the mobile and resource-constrained nature of ubiquitous computing being the incentive, [10] propose their
own hierarchical model. With the addition of a QoS model, context reasoning can be improved, guiding
the selection of services with higher reliability. They do this through ﬁrst-order and fuzzy logic evaluation,
along with quantitive methods to quantify the quality factors. Similarly, [11] propose their own QoS model,
while using OWL [7] for service description, they diverge from the status-quo with a genetic algorithmbased optimization for service selection.
While [12][13][14][15][16][17] focused on the integration of robotic systems with sensor networks,
proceeding work focused on fusing distributed sensor data, as well as the dynamic integration and removal
of sensing/actuation elements. The work of [18] proposes a distributed multiagent system also consisting
of intelligent sensors and actuators distributed both onboard robots and throughout the environment. The
robots, sensors and actuators are handled by real-time software agents which exchange information on a
distributed blackboard. Three diﬀerent software agents are presented, simple reﬂex agents, agents that keep
track of the world, and goal-based agents.
Identically to UC, approaches to UR have been developed using SW technologies. [19] introduce the
Ubiquitous Robotic Companion (URC), or speciﬁcally the service framework supporting it, called Serviceoriented Ubiquitous Robotic Framework (SURF). [19] claim that SURF allows for automated integration of
networked robots into UC environments using SW. As with [6][9] in UC environments, system knowledge

175

176

David Swords et al. / Procedia Computer Science 21 (2013) 174 – 182

3UHSURFHVVLQJ

)HDWXUH
([WUDFWLRQ

6LJQDO
$FTXLVLWLRQ

%UDLQ
6LJQDO

&ODVVLILFDWLRQ

$SSOLFDWLRQ
,QWHUIDFH

%UDLQFRPSXWHU
,QWHUIDFH %&,

+XPDQ
%UDLQ

&RQWURO
6LJQDO

$SSOLFDWLRQ

9LVXDO$XGLR
RU+DSWLF
)HHGEDFN

Fig. 1. Schematic of the main BCI components, signal acquisition, preprocessing, feature extraction, classiﬁcation, application interface
and application [23]

is described using the OWL-S [7] ontology, after which a SURF agent can automatically discover required
knowledge and compose service plans. Interaction between robots, sensors and devices is supported by
the Simple Object Access Protocol (SOAP). [20] also propose a SW framework for robotic services and
propose three conceptual spaces: physical, semantic and virtual, which is then collectively referred to as a
UR space. The physical space consists of wireless sensor networks and localization networks. The semantic
space consists of Context-aware Service Execution (CASE) and Dynamic Reconﬁguration DR. CASE is
used to understand current situations, while DR handles the adding or removing of ubiquitous services. The
virtual space provides the user with a graphical representation of the UR system. The work of [21] also
introduces a Semantic Robotic Space, with a high-level model providing context-aware service execution.
[21] claim with the use of semantic web technology, they were able to establish a public registry-based
system, allowing easier installation and maintenance. Finally, minor work has been performed into QoS
within UR, and this is outlined in part with the work of [22]. With the use of SW technologies [22] can
provide a UR system with the ability to dynamically compose and deliver ubiquitous services and monitor
their execution. [22] also propose a means to estimate QoS within these dynamic environments, and also a
Bayesian learning model in an attempt to predict the removal and addition of services.
Brain-Computer Interfaces (BCIs) have been studied during the previous decade as a means of providing HCIs for the disabled. BCIs provide a means to classify brain activity, instead of peripheral muscle
movements, to control computer applications. The Electroencephalograph (EEG) is used to measure electrical activity along the scalp. Consists of a series of strategically placed electrical conductors. Through
these conductors measurements are taken of the voltage ﬂuctuations from neurons in the brain. Using machine learning classiﬁcation techniques, speciﬁc brain activity can be recognised and harnessed for thought
recognition, emotional state, fatigue, sleep disorder, coma, tumors and stroke diagnosis. [23] reviews a
number of applications areas for BCIs, aside from EEGs. [23] stresses the importance of BCIs as a means
to provide rich information on the user’s state, potentially providing personal mental information such as
task engagement, cognitive workload, surprise, satisfaction or even frustration. [23] continues by stating
that this information could be used to design context sensitive systems that adapt themselves for optimal
user support, the connection between this and UR is clear. [23] presents a schematic of BCI components,
adapted and included in Figure 2.
Classical BCIs provide detailed, single-neuron activity from microelectrodes implanted in the brain [24].
The use of invasive techniques allows for direct connection to the motor, premotor, and posterior parietal

David Swords et al. / Procedia Computer Science 21 (2013) 174 – 182

cortex to allow for classiﬁcation of hand and arm movements reliably. However, in a domestic or research
setting the invasive method is not preferable due to health risks and ethical implications, and it is for these
reasons EEGs are preferable.
Within the area of robotics, the focus of EEGs has been for the control of aids for the disabled. The
standard application developed has been an electric wheelchair [25] [26]. [26] states that EEGs have been
determined to be too slow for ﬁne/rapid actuation tasks, however they present a system that allows the
navigation of a robot between rooms with a performance comparable to manual control. [25] also presents
a system applied to a wheelchair in the same year. Other examples of EEGs in concert with robotics include
wheeled, quadruped [27], bi-pedal [28], quadrotor and medical [29].
The work of [23], ﬁrst suggested the notion of EEGs being incorporated into intelligent spaces. The
incorporation of EEGs into UC environments have created a series of challenges, as outlined in [30]. Those
challenges lie in the development of mobile and user-friendly devices, which are entirely wearable and
noninvasive. In addition this, the automation of processing techniques for the rapid learning of brain patterns
and their transmission. [30] maintains that the inclusion of EEGs in UC environments as a promising method
to obtain information, and express an interest of pursuing this further with the development of data fusion
methods for electromyograms (EMGs), electrocardiograms and EEGs. [30] have also expressed an interest
in exploring the role of EEGs in daily life. Finally, the work of [31] describes using EEGs a security tool
within UC environments, one which could be used in place of ﬁngerprint or iris solutions.
3. Applications
The use of EEGs within UR provides many interesting research opportunities. In addition with the introduction of consumer-level EEG headsets the possibility of practical application to domestic, industrial and
commercial settings is a reality. One such consumer-level headset is the Emotiv EPOC, a high resolution,
multi-channel, wireless neuroheadset. The Emotiv EPOC uses a set of 14 conductors placed over the prefrontal cortex to allow the detection of thoughts, emotions and facial expressions in real-time. In addition
to this, the Emotive EPOC includes a gyroscope to measure the users head orientation and motion. In this
section, a number of UR applications utilizing the Emotiv EPOC’s functionality are proposed. They are Service Activation, Service Emotion Adaption, Reinforcement Learning & QoS Evaluation, Medical Emergency
Intervention and User Identiﬁcation.
3.1. Service Activation
Within UR, the activation of services is usually performed via a manual interface, like a PC, tablet or
phone. More intuitive approaches using voice control or gestures have also been proposed. With an EEG
headset it is possible to go right to the source of the activation command, the brain. With an EEG headset,
the user has the freedom to perform other bodily functions, as well as converse freely while also activating
UR services.
Figure 3.1, describes the action ﬂow from the brain to the UR services within a hypothetical UR system.
Initially, the user has trained the BCI to classify 4 thought patterns. When the user focuses on a prelearned
state of mind, the neural signals are read by the EEG headset. Signals from the EEG headset are then passed
wirelessly to the pattern classiﬁcation software of the BCI, running on a central system. After classiﬁcation,
the signal is represented using the associated UR middleware and onto the Service Ontology. The associated
service is then selected, at which time the service orientated subsystems, such as discovery and planning,
compose the intended service, after which it is carried out by the UR system. The user will know if the
intention was correctly registered through the apparent activation of the service and whatever form it might
take.
In order to illustrate this concept further, the following scenario is presented. A user is bedridden and
would like a refreshment from the kitchen. The user has a number of trained services for their EEG headset.
They are, 1) request the presence of a Turtlebot, 2) request the presence of another Turtlebot 3) actuation
of the curtains and 4) turning on/oﬀ of the bedroom light switch. The user ﬁrst requests the presence of
a Turtlebot, using wireless arbitrary sensors throughout the home, the Turtlbot locates the user in their

177

178

David Swords et al. / Procedia Computer Science 21 (2013) 174 – 182

+XPDQ%UDLQ

((*+HDGVHW

%UDLQFRPSXWHU
,QWHUIDFH %&,
9LVXDO$XGLRRU
+DSWLF
)HHGEDFN

85*DWHZD\

6HUYLFH2QWRORJ\

856HUYLFH

856HUYLFH

856HUYLFH

856HUYLFH

Fig. 2. Schematic of the proposed components of a EEG-UR bridge for UR service activation

bedroom. Using path-ﬁnding tools, the Turtlebot will travel to the bedroom, once there scan the room for
the user using facial recognition, once found will move to within arms reach of the user. The user then uses
a manual interface on the Turtlebot as well as its display actuate a second Turtlebot to acquire a can of soda.
Using the second trained behavior, the user requests the presence of the second Turtlebot, with can of soda
in tow. While waiting for the second Turtlebot to arrive, the user commands the actuation of the curtains
and turns oﬀ the lights in the bedroom, both of which are done so by localising the user to a speciﬁc room,
allowing for ﬂexibility of trained commands to be location speciﬁc. The work of [9] mentions the need for
user context-data, and shaping services around location data.
While the previous scenario featured thought-based activation, the Emotiv EPOC will also detect facial
expressions and blinking. This opens the possibility of either extending the number of available UR services
to activate, or rely solely on facial expression or blinking to activate the UR services.
3.2. Emotion Adaption
As stated previously from [23], BCIs provide a means to design context sensitive systems that adapt
themselves for optimal user support. In order for a UR system to passively recognise the mood of a user,
it relies on external visual systems and facial recognition software. This approach is constrained by the
orientation of the user to the camera and lighting levels. In addition this, some emotional states are not even
registered facially. The Emotiv EPOC unit has the functionality to detect the users emotional state, even
to detect facial expressions before the user makes them. This opens up the emotional state of the user in a
reliable way, for the UR system to then react in an appropriate way.
Figure 3.2 depicts an expansion over the previously proposed action ﬂow of Figure 2. Figure 3 now
includes a contingency for an emotion speciﬁc UR service domain, with a distinct UR service domain for
thought directed actions. The has trained the BCI to classify 3 thought patterns, the action ﬂow of which is
mirrored with that of the Service Activation described previously. When the message has reached the Service
Ontology module, there is a divergence, with only a set of 3 UR services available to perform. The associated
thought-based service is selected, and the service is carried out by the UR system. While there is a now a
Thought Activation domain, there is also a Emotion Activation domain also. This domain is responsible
solely for carrying out UR services corresponding to the users emotional state, these are intended to be
passive UR serivces.

David Swords et al. / Procedia Computer Science 21 (2013) 174 – 182

+XPDQ%UDLQ

((*+HDGVHW

9LVXDO$XGLRRU
+DSWLF
)HHGEDFN

%UDLQFRPSXWHU
,QWHUIDFH %&,
856HUYLFH

85*DWHZD\

7KRXJKW
7KRXJKW
$FWLYDWLRQ

856HUYLFH
856HUYLFH

6HUYLFH2QWRORJ\

856HUYLFH

(PRWLRQ
(PRWLRQ
$FWLYDWLRQ

856HUYLFH
856HUYLFH

Fig. 3. Schematic of the proposed components of a EEG-UR bridge for UR service activation

As with the previous section, to illustrate this concept further, a scenario is presented. The UR has two
behaviors in place for the emotional state of a user. The ﬁrst is for anger, the second is for fatigue. In the
ﬁrst scenario, the user has received a phone call, and has received news that has greatly angered them. The
angry state of mind is registered and passed on the UR system. Using this context-data the system moves to
perform the appropriate predeﬁned action. In this case, that action is for the immediate return of all mobile
robots to their charging stations. If return is not possible, due to the user as an obstruction, ﬁnd an empty
room and wait. These actions are performed to ensure not only the safety of the robots in the UR system, but
also that of the user. In addition to the robot maneuvers, soothing classical music is now played throughout
the user’s home.
3.3. User Conﬁrmation and Evaluating QoS
Some UR systems consist of learning functionality, adapting themselves to the habits of the user. The
work of Project RUBICON [32] features self-sustaining and learning solutions. An outstanding issue of
[32] has been the need of a conﬁrmation signal to the ecology to bootstrap the wirelessly distributed reinforcement learning for autonomous service selection. An EEG headset could provide a binary feedback to
the ecology, trained on a brain pattern the user knows to perform when the ecology performs suﬃciently or
not. This would provide a passive interface to the ecology, removing the need for a button, or vocal cue. The
EasyLiving Project [3], describes the reliance on having badges, cameras or buttons in order to get context
from users. The work of [33] describes sensing context information and providing personalised services
according to current context and user’s requirements as a crucial issue.
Figure 3.3 depicts an addition to the Project RUBICON architecture, which now includes a BCI on the
Sensing and Actuation Layer. On the execution of a service within the RUBICON system, the failure of
success of a service, as in its mechanical success, is fed into the Learning Layer, as a training signal to be
associated with the same service execution strategy. The Learning Layer then informs the Control Layer and
Cognitive Layer on service execution strategies in the future. The role of the BCI component is to enhance
the Sensing and Actuation Layer to encompass the user’s emotional response to service execution strategies.
In order to illustrate the role of BCI-based user conﬁrmation, the following scenario is presented. The
BCI component has been conﬁgured to recognise frustration in the user. The user returns home during

179

180

David Swords et al. / Procedia Computer Science 21 (2013) 174 – 182

/HDUQLQJ

&RJQLWLYH

&RQWURO

6HQVLQJDQG$FWXDWLRQ
%&,

Fig. 4. Schematic of the proposed role of a BCI within Project RUBICON

the night, as routine, the user moves through the house and turns on the lights. The Cognitive Layer of
the RUBICON system detects the novelty and repetition of this behavior, and decides to intervene the next
night by turning on the lights. The next night, the user returns and ﬁnds that the lights are turning on as
they move through the house, however they unceremoniously turnoﬀ 10 minutes later. The user wearing the
EEG headset feels frustration at having to now move through the house to turn back on the lights. The user’s
frustration is registered by the central BCI component, which is linked to the Sensing and Actuation Layer
of the RUBICON system, which then passes the negative signal to the Learning Layer. The next night, the
lights stay on for a longer period of time.
The previously mentioned BCI conﬁrmation signal, serves as one aspect of describing QoS in a UR
system. The work of [10], proposes the need for a QoS model within UC. The related work of [22], proposes
a QoS model for UR based on arbitrary metrics, extension of this work to include conﬁrmation of QoS from
the user could close the loop.
Another issue within UR systems is getting a conﬁrmation of attention from the user. In situations where
the user is approached by a robot and presented with information, in order for the UR system to know that
the user has paid attention, a conﬁrmation signal could be set for that scenario. This would remove the need
for voice recognition, or manual conﬁrmation. If this was combined with face tracking, a robust method
for user perception could be established. Work on the area of attention recognition with EEGs has been
investigated by [34].
3.4. Medical Intervention
The work of [35] points to the ability of EEGs to predict the onset of seizures, speciﬁcally performing
time series analysis on the EEG dynamics to search for similar patterns prior to a event. Directly connected
to UC, [30] have proposed a system called Online Predictive Tools for Intervention in Mental Illness (OPTIMI). The role of a ubiquitous robotic system could be as simple as notifying the emergency services and
opening the door to allow them entry to the premises, to act on the individual to place them in a recovery
position, conversely the protection of the user by removing the robots from the environment while the person
has an event.
The detection of such brain activity may very well be beyond the capabilities of the Emotiv EPOC
headset, and only be feasible with a medical-level EEG.
3.5. User Identiﬁcation
The idea of identifying users in a ubiquitous robotic space by using just the headset. Using their brain
patterns as a means to describe the user. The work of [31] describes using EEGs a security tool within
UC environments, one which could be used in place of ﬁngerprint or iris solutions. The headset being wiﬁ
enabled, in addition to having accelerometers, could provide a ubiquitous robotic system with invaluable

David Swords et al. / Procedia Computer Science 21 (2013) 174 – 182

information about the users location within the environment. Such information would also for the system
to adapt the availability of services depend on their location, possibly deactivating unnecessary services in
other locations to be more power eﬃcient.
4. Conclusions & Future Work
In this paper, a new mode of interaction with UR systems is introduced, which the user of EEGs. A
series of proposals for integration with current UR models are presented. The ﬁrst being Service Activation,
replacing the need for manual interfaces, like a PC, tablet or phone. In addition, eliminates the need for
voice recognition tools, and gesture recognition. Allowing the user the freedom to perform other tasks unencumbered. The second being Emotional Adaption, allowing UR systems to adapt to the mood of the user,
carrying out services that can elevate negative emotions or fatigue, in an attempt at maintaining comfort.
The third being User Conﬁrmation, again replacing the need for manual interfaces, but focused on establishing the users preferences in regards to the UR services. Finally, Emergency Medical Assistance, allowing
for home monitoring of a user susceptible to brain related medical issues, such as a disposition to seizures.
Allowing a UR system to come to the assistance of the user in an emergency.
Under consideration for future work, is the exploration of each of the above integration and beneﬁts of
EEGs within UR systems. Developing the architecture to support EEGs within a dynamic UR testbed.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the EU FP7 RUBICON project (contract n. 269914), in conjunction with
funding from the Irish Research Council Embark Initiative and Science Foundation Ireland (SFI) under
grant 07/CE/l1147.
References
[1] M. Weiser, The Computer for the 21st Century, Scientiﬁc American 265 (3) (1991) 66–75.
[2] M. Weiser, Some Computer Science Issues in Ubiquitous Computing, SIGMOBILE Mob. Comput. Commun. Rev. 3 (3) (1999)
12–.
[3] B. Brumitt, B. Meyers, J. Krumm, A. Kern, S. A. Shafer, EasyLiving: Technologies for Intelligent Environments, in: Proceedings
of the 2nd international symposium on Handheld and Ubiquitous Computing, HUC ’00, Springer-Verlag, London, UK, UK, 2000,
pp. 12–29.
[4] N. A. Streitz, J. Geißler, T. Holmer, Roomware for Cooperative Buildings: Integrated Design of Architectural Spaces and Information Spaces, in: Proceedings of the First International Workshop on Cooperative Buildings, Integrating Information, Organization, and Architecture, Springer, 1998, pp. 4–21.
[5] F. Michahelles, S. Antifakos, A. Schmidt, B. Schiele, M. Beigl, Towards Distributed Awareness - An Artifact-based Approach,
in: Mobile Computing Systems and Applications, 2004. WMCSA 2004. Sixth IEEE Workshop on, 2004, pp. 82 – 91.
[6] R. Sudha, M. Rajagopalan, M. Selvanayaki, S. Selvi, Ubiquitous Semantic Space: A Context-aware and Coordination Middleware for Ubiquitous Computing, in: Communication Systems Software and Middleware, 2007. COMSWARE 2007. 2nd
International Conference on, 2007, pp. 1 –7.
[7] P. F. Patel-Schneider, P. Hayes, I. Horrocks, OWL Web Ontology Language Semantics and Abstract Syntax, Tech. rep., W3C
(2004).
[8] I. Horrocks, P. F. Patel-Schneider, H. Boley, S. Tabet, B. Grosof, M. Dean, SWRL: A Semantic Web Rule Language Combining
OWL and RuleML, W3c member submission, World Wide Web Consortium (2004).
[9] Y. Li, F. Pu, Q. Cao, Semantic Location-Aware Model for Ubiquitous Computing, in: Information Science and Engineering,
2008. ISISE ’08. International Symposium on, Vol. 2, 2008, pp. 467 –470.
[10] Y. Zhang, S.-S. Zhang, S.-Q. Han, Context-based QoS Model and its Application in Ubiquitous Computing, in: Machine Learning
and Cybernetics, 2006 International Conference on, 2006, pp. 1517 –1521.
[11] Q. Lv, F. Yang, Q. Cao, A General QoS-Aware Service Composition Model for Ubiquitous Computing, in: Intelligent Systems
and Applications, 2009. ISA 2009. International Workshop on, 2009, pp. 1 –4.
[12] J. Kim, Y. Kim, K. Lee, The Third Generation of Robotics: Ubiquitous Robot, in: Proc of the 2nd Int Conf on Autonomous
Robots and Agents, Palmerston North, New Zealand, 2004, pp. 29–36.
[13] J.-H. Kim, K.-H. Lee, Y.-D. Kim, N. S. Kuppuswamy, J. Jo, Ubiquitous Robot: A New Paradigm for Integrated Services, in:
ICRA, 2007, pp. 2853–2858.
[14] D. Baker, G. McKee, P. Schenker, Network Robotics: A Framework for Dynamic Distributed Architectures, in: Intelligent Robots
and Systems, 2004. (IROS 2004). Proceedings. 2004 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on, Vol. 2, 2004, pp. 1768 – 1773 vol.2.

181

182

David Swords et al. / Procedia Computer Science 21 (2013) 174 – 182
[15] T. Akimoto, N. Hagita, Introduction to a Network Robot System, in: Intelligent Signal Processing and Communications, 2006.
ISPACS ’06. International Symposium on, 2006, pp. 91 –94.
[16] T. Sato, T. Harada, T. Mori, Environment-type Robot System ”Robotic Room” featured by Behavior Media, Behavior Contents,
and Behavior Adaptation, Mechatronics, IEEE/ASME Transactions on 9 (3) (2004) 529 –534.
[17] S. Sugano, Y. Shirai, Robot Design and Environment Design - Waseda Robot-House Project, in: SICE-ICASE, 2006. International Joint Conference, 2006, pp. I–31 –I–34.
[18] A. Sgorbissa, R. Zaccaria, The Artiﬁcial Ecosystem: A Distributed Approach to Service Robotics, in: Robotics and Automation,
2004. Proceedings. ICRA ’04. 2004 IEEE International Conference on, Vol. 4, 2004, pp. 3531 – 3536 Vol.4.
[19] Y.-G. Ha, J.-C. Sohn, Y.-J. Cho, Service-oriented Integration of Networked Robots with Ubiquitous Sensors and Devices using
the Semantic Web Services Technology, in: Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2005. (IROS 2005). 2005 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on, 2005, pp. 3947 – 3952.
[20] W. Yu, J.-Y. Lee, Y.-G. Ha, M. Jang, J.-C. Sohn, Y.-M. Kwon, H. sung Ahn, Design and Implementation of a Ubiquitous Robotic
Space, Automation Science and Engineering, IEEE Transactions on 6 (4) (2009) 633 –640.
[21] M. Jang, J.-C. Sohn, Y. Cho, Building Semantic Robot Space based on the Semantic Web, in: Robot and Human interactive
Communication, 2007. RO-MAN 2007. The 16th IEEE International Symposium on, 2007, pp. 499 –504.
[22] A. Yachir, K. Tari, Y. Amirat, A. Chibani, N. Badache, QoS-based Framework for Ubiquitous Robotic Services Composition, in:
Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2009. IROS 2009. IEEE/RSJ International Conference on, 2009, pp. 2019 –2026.
[23] A. Nijholt, D. Tan, G. Pfurtscheller, C. Brunner, J. d. R. Millán, B. Allison, B. Graimann, F. Popescu, B. Blankertz, K.-R. Müller,
Brain-Computer Interfacing for Intelligent Systems, IEEE Intelligent Systems 23 (3) (2008) 72–79. doi:10.1109/MIS.2008.41.
[24] J. R. Wolpaw, N. Birbaumer, D. J. McFarland, G. Pfurtscheller, T. M. Vaughan, Brain-computer Interfaces for Communication
and Control, Clinical Neurophysiology 113 (6) (2002) 767 – 791.
[25] F. Gal’an, M. Nuttin, E. Lew, P. W. Ferrez, G. Vanacker, J. Philips, H. van Brussel, J. d. R. Millán, An Asynchronous and noninvasive brain-actuated wheelchairon-invasive Brain-actuated Wheelchair, in: Proceedings of the 13th International Symposium
on Robotics Research, Vol. 128, Hiroshima, Japan, 2007, pp. 62–72.
[26] J. Millan, F. Renkens, J. Mourino, W. Gerstner, Noninvasive brain-actuated control of a mobile robot by human EEG, Biomedical
Engineering, IEEE Transactions on 51 (6) (2004) 1026 –1033.
[27] W. Jia, D. Huang, X. Luo, H. Pu, X. Chen, O. Bai, Electroencephalography(EEG)-based Instinctive Brain-control of a Quadruped
Locomotion Robot, in: Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), 2012 Annual International Conference of the
IEEE, 2012, pp. 1777 –1781.
[28] Y. Chae, J. Jeong, S. Jo, Toward brain-actuated humanoid robots: Asynchronous direct control using an eeg-based bci, Robotics,
IEEE Transactions on 28 (5) (2012) 1131 –1144. doi:10.1109/TRO.2012.2201310.
[29] A. Eleni, Control of medical robotics and neurorobotic prosthetics by noninvasive Brain-Robot Interfaces via EEG and RFID
Technology, in: BioInformatics and BioEngineering, 2008. BIBE 2008. 8th IEEE International Conference on, 2008, pp. 1 –4.
[30] B. Hu, D. Majoe, M. Ratcliﬀe, Y. Qi, Q. Zhao, H. Peng, D. Fan, F. Zheng, M. Jackson, P. Moore, Eeg-based cognitive interfaces for ubiquitous applications: Developments and challenges, Intelligent Systems, IEEE 26 (5) (2011) 46 –53.
doi:10.1109/MIS.2011.58.
[31] B. Hu, Q. Liu, Q. Zhao, Y. Qi, H. Peng, A real-time electroencephalogram (eeg) based individual identiﬁcation interface for
mobile security in ubiquitous environment, in: Services Computing Conference (APSCC), 2011 IEEE Asia-Paciﬁc, 2011, pp.
436 –441. doi:10.1109/APSCC.2011.87.
[32] M. Dragone, S. Abdel-Naby, D. Swords, G. M. P. O’Hare, Robotic ubiquitous cognitive networks, ERCIM News 2011 (87).
[33] F. Jiang, J. Li, Z. Zhu, A Service Provision Model Based on Context Awareness for Ubiquitous Computing, in: Parallel and
Distributed Computing, Applications and Technologies, 2007. PDCAT ’07. Eighth International Conference on, 2007, pp. 155
–156.
[34] X. Li, B. Hu, Q. Dong, W. Campbell, P. Moore, H. Peng, Eeg-based attention recognition, in: Pervasive Computing and Applications (ICPCA), 2011 6th International Conference on, 2011, pp. 196 –201. doi:10.1109/ICPCA.2011.6106504.
[35] B. Schelter, M. Winterhalder, T. Maiwald, A. Brandt, A. Schad, A. Schulze-Bonhage, J. Timmer, Testing statistical signiﬁcance
of multivariate time series analysis techniques for epileptic seizure prediction., Chaos 16 (1) (2006) 013108.

