Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

ScienceDirect
Procedia Computer Science 84 (2016) 115 – 122

7th International conference on Intelligent Human Computer Interaction, IHCI 2015

Playing Action Video Games a Key to Cognitive Enhancement
Sushil Chandraa,*, Greeshma Sharmaa, Amritha Abdul Salamb, Devendra Jhac, Alok
Prakash Mittald
a
b

Bio Medical Engineering Department, Institute of Nuclear Medicine and Allied Science, DRDO, Delhi, India
Bio Medical Engineering Department, Manipal Institute of Technology, Manipal University, Karnataka, India
c
Scientific Analysis Group, DRDO, Delhi, India
d
Instrumentation and Control Engineering Department, Netaji Subhas Institute of Technology, Delhi, India

Abstract
In this paper, we aim to analyse the impact of training on improvement in cognitive abilities and performance of the subjects
playing single player action video game. Recent research indicates that playing Action video games improve cognitive abilities.
However no study has exploited the novel technique, Empirical Mode Decomposition in the field of action video games.
Empirical mode decomposition was used to extract various features by decomposing EEG data into intrinsic mode functions.
Intrinsic mode functions were used to calculate linear features like standard deviation, phase and energy. K- Nearest Neighbour
& Linear Discriminant Analysis classifiers were used to classify the subject based on the changes in features extracted due to the
impact of training. Psychological tests conducted before and after the training, positively affirm that training improves cognitive
abilities like reaction time and reduces stress level.
© 2016
2015The
TheAuthors.
Authors.
Published
Elsevier
©
Published
by by
Elsevier
B.V.B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Peer-review under responsibility of the Scientific Committee of IHCI 2015.
Peer-review under responsibility of the Organizing Committee of IHCI 2015
Keywords: Video gaming; EEG; ICA, EMD; IMF; K Nearest Neighbor; Linear Discriminant Analysis

1. Introduction
We live in an era of information and technology. Technologies like Action Video Game (AVG) have become
very popular among the young generation. The researchers and neuroscientists around the world have been trying to
explore the impact created by technologies like Action video games on human brain and its cognitive functions.
Recent studies have shown that playing AVG augment a person’s ability to perform multitasking [18,19], exhibit
better attention across space and time [15,17], improves attention blink [11], multiple object tracking [11,12] and
faster reaction time [16]. A recent study (Green et al. 2010) demonstrated the increasing speed of processing with
AVG [21]. Further studies have also found evidence for greater speed of processing and enhanced visual short-term
memory in AVGPs (action video game players) when compared to NVGP (non video game players) [22]. Our
research has shown that AVG players have faster reaction time and reduced stress level, although no significant
* Corrosponding Author. Phone: +91 11 23905222, Fax: +91 11 23919509
E mail address: sushil.inmas@gmail.com

1877-0509 © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Peer-review under responsibility of the Organizing Committee of IHCI 2015
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.04.074

116

Sushil Chandra et al. / Procedia Computer Science 84 (2016) 115 – 122

change was found in the memory of trained AVG players when compared to players without any training.
Enhancement in psychomotor skills like hand eye coordination was also observed during psychological assessment
tests conducted for cognitive abilities.
The measurement of the electrical potential from the scalp using electroencephalography (EEG) opened up new
possibilities in studying brain function in normal subjects. EEG, a noninvasive and safe technique is employed in
this study to record the potentials from brain while participants played AVG. Electrodes were placed according to
internationally recognized 10–20 system of electrode placement. Artifacts corrupt EEG signals with noise. Artifact
caused by impedance of the system, eye blink artifacts, movement artifacts, are common artifacts, which
contaminate EEG signals. Independent Component Analysis (ICA) is a computational method used to remove eye
blink artifacts and muscle artifacts from EEG signals. ICA is a blind source separation technique. The EEG is
composed of electrical potentials arising from several sources. Hilbert-Huang transform (HHT) has been used in the
field of biomedical signal processing [20] for EEG analysis since brain waves are non-linear and non-stationary in
nature. Recently HHT have become a suitable tool in signal processing of biomedical signals, which can be used to
obtain various features when compared to conventional tools like wavelet transform and Fast Fourier Transform
(FFT). Hilbert-Huang transform (HHT) is an analytic proposed by Huang et al. [3] for the non-linear and nonstationary signal processing. Empirical Mode Decomposition (EMD) is a time-frequency based method, which
decomposes signals into a number of intrinsic mode functions (IMF), which are oscillatory components [2]. EMD is
adaptive and therefore is a highly efficient method. EMD decomposes complex signals into high frequency and low
frequency components. The process of decomposition is called sifting which generate components called IMF. The
instantaneous frequency and amplitude of each IMF is derived by Hilbert transformation. Then the instantaneous
responses of the IMFs are arranged to construct the Hilbert spectrum HS i.e. time-frequency space corresponding to
the time domain signals [1].
Linear features like energy, phase and standard deviation were calculated from the IMF’s. Linear discriminant
analysis (LDA) and K nearest neighbor (KNN) classification techniques were used to classify the experimental
group as trained (pre session) and untrained groups (post session) and the features that we have extracted reflected
this difference. Linear discriminant Analysis searches for a linear combination of variables/ predictors that best
separates two classes/ targets. Classification is based on covariance matrix. LDA is a dimensionality reduction
technique that reduces the number of predictors while preserving class discrimination. KNN algorithm is a simple
algorithm that classifies based on similarity measures. Similarity measure is simply a distance function. A data is
assigned to a class which is most common amongst its K nearest neighbors based on distance measurement. A
decision rule is devised by comparing a test data with the training data and by assigning the unknown test data to
most frequently appearing training data in the neighborhood.
In this study we chose the action game ‘Tom Clancy's Rainbow Six: Vegas 2’ a first-person shooter video game,
which demands players to have skills like strategic planning, concentration, and coordination. The aim of our study
was to examine the effect of training on the performance of the subject. In young adults, several studies have shown
that video game playing enhances attention resources leading to better performance on a number of attention
demanding visual tasks (Castel et al., 2005; Feng, Spence, & Pratt, 2007; Green & Bavelier, 2003, 2006a, 2006b,
2007). No studies have explored novel techniques like EMD to study the impact of video game training.
Neuropsychological tests are employed in our study as an attempt to measure cognitive functioning of individuals.
Reaction time, memory and stress levels were analyzed using various tools like PEBL, VISGED etc. that are
explained in detail in the following sections. The psychological tests accurately established the enhanced cognitive
abilities after training.
2 Hypothesis
The participant’s performance after training should be better than that of the control group who does not undergo
training. The time spent on training game will affect their overall performance and cognitive abilities [11-19] like
speed of processing leading to faster reaction time and reduced stress levels.

Sushil Chandra et al. / Procedia Computer Science 84 (2016) 115 – 122

3. Methodology
3.1. Experimental Setup & EEG Data Acquisition
Five healthy subjects (all male, age range 20 – 27 years) with no history of mental illness, brain injury, and
psychiatric disorders with normal or corrected to normal vision participated in this study. Four subjects were put
under the experimental group and 1 subject as the control group. The Experimental Group went through a Pre
Testing and then through Post Testing session after a span of 2 months in which they played action video game
(Tom Clancy's Rainbow Six: Vegas 2) while the Control Group went through the Pre Testing and then through Post
Testing after a span of 1 month. The experimental group was given video game training during the span of two
months before post testing was performed whereas the control group did not undertake any training. The
experimental group underwent a total of 50 hours of training in this period of time with not more than 1 hour of
training per day. Due to the extensive duration of training we had to limit our study with only 5 subjects who were
willing to participate till the completion of experiment. We selected more participants in experimental group since
our study aimed to analyze the impact of training using AVG.
In this study, Emotiv EPOC a 14-channel data acquiring system is used to acquire EEG signals from AF3, F7, F3,
FC5, T7, P7, O1, O2, P8, T8, FC6, F4, F8, and AF4 channels at a sampling rate of 128 Hz. The software used for
acquiring the data is Test Bench. The Emotiv is a wireless portable EEG system. The subjects played three levels of
action video game: (i) Difficulty level1, (ii) Difficulty level 2, (iii) Difficulty level 3 during which EEG was
recorded in pre testing and post testing sessions.
3.2. Test for Cognitive Assessment
The psychological assessment was conducted using Vienna Test System (VTS) and Psychology Experiment
Building Language (PEBL). VTS is a powerful psychological assessment tool containing numerous tests out of
which we have selected three tests. Visual Memorization test VISGED was used to analyse the memory. The
memorization and recalling of visual information of positions of symbols on a map was used to analyse the capacity
of visual memory. Determination Test (DT): DT is scientifically approved assessment test battery. It is highly
accurate and has three modes viz. 1. Adaptive mode 2.Action mode 3. Reaction mode. It has different test forms
namely S1 which is adaptive and short in length, S2 which is adaptive and longer while S3-S6 and S16 forms vary in
their reaction mode, length or stimulus material . For this study form S1 was chosen. It measures the reactive stress
tolerance, attention and reaction speed of an individual. PEBL was used to measure the reaction time by clicking as
quickly as possible when red light turns green. This in turn requires improvement in psychomotor skills like hand
eye coordination.
3.3. Preprocessing
Signals were preprocessed to remove artifacts. A notch filter was used to remove 50 Hz power line noise. A 4th
order Butterworth band pass filter with a cut off frequency of 0.2 to 45 Hz was used to get the frequency of interest.
In [4-5] blind source separation approaches ICA was used to remove EEG artifacts. EEGLAB, an interactive Open
Source Matlab toolbox was used to run ICA [24].
3.4. Feature Extraction
The data from 14 channels were preprocessed followed by artifact removal using ICA and decomposition using
empirical mode decomposition. IMF’s were used to calculate linear features like standard deviation, phase and
energy. Here the input signals for the EMD algorithm are the EEG signals and the output is the IMF through which
we calculated the required linear features.

117

118

Sushil Chandra et al. / Procedia Computer Science 84 (2016) 115 – 122

3.5. The Algorithm for EMD:
Given a signal x(t), the effective algorithm of EMD can be summarized as follows:
(a) Find all the local maxima, Mi ;i = 1; 2; . . . ; and minima, mk, k = 1, 2; . . . ; in x(t).
(b) Compute the corresponding interpolating signals M(t) = fM(Mi,t) and m(t) = fm(mk,t) These signals are the
upper and lower envelopes of the signal.
(c) Let c(t) = (M(t) + m(t))/2.
(d) Subtract c(t) from the signal: x(t) = x(t)-c(t).
(e) Return to step (a)—stop when x(t) remains nearly unchanged. The IMF thus obtained is the first IMF h(t).
(f) Once we obtain an IMF h(t), remove it from the signal x(t) = x(t) - h(t) and return to (a) if x(t) has more than
one extremum (neither a constant nor a trend).
The interpolating function is a cubic spline [20]. By construction, the number of extrema should decrease when
going from one IMF to the next. The whole decomposition is expected to be complete with a finite number of IMFs.
The same procedure is repeated again and again until it satisfies the conditions for IMF. The IMF’s thus obtained
from the data are used to calculate linear features like energy, phase and standard deviation. Various researches show
that the energy of an EEG signal has a direct relation to the mental workload a person experiences while performing
a task i.e. EEG energy increases if the workload experienced by the subject increases [6]. A heavy cognitive load
typically creates error or some kind of interference in the task at hand [9, 10]. High level of mental workload leads to
decreases in information processing speed, which leads to chances of errors, confusions and mistakes. The phase can
be calculated using Hilbert transform of the signal as the signal is represented as:
ua(t) = u(t) + i.H(u)(t)

(1)

The Hilbert transform is a linear operator which takes a function, u(t), and produces a function, H(u)(t), with the
same domain. The Hilbert transform is important in the field of signal processing where it is used to derive
the analytic representation of a signal u(t).

Fig.1. Energy per channel in pre testing session from
channel 1-14 at first, second and third difficulty levels

Fig.2. Energy per channel in post testing session from
channel 1-14 at first, second and third difficulty level

Sushil Chandra et al. / Procedia Computer Science 84 (2016) 115 – 122

3.6. Classification
Researchers have used SVM [25] and ANN [26] classifiers to classify EMD signals. In this study we applied a
novel approach of using LDA-KNN classifier together to classify EMD features. LDA is used to reduce high
dimension features extracted from Hilbert Huang transform (HHT) to feature subspace. Then the coefficient vector
in the subspace is taken as the input of KNN algorithm. This hybrid classification method was adopted to attain
vigorous classification. The programs for LDA-KNN classification and accuracy of classification were developed
using MATLAB. Accuracy is the proportion of the total number of classifications that were correct. Three features
of HHT which includes energy of the IMF, standard deviation of the amplitude and the standard deviation of the
phase of the Hilbert transform were used as the indices for LDA classification. LDA provides extremely fast
evaluations of unknown inputs performed by distance calculations between a new sample and mean of training data
samples in each class weighed by their covariance matrices [23]. Based on similarity measure KNN was used to
classify the experimental subjects as before training and after training group. The accuracy of classification was
measured. Based on the features extracted we have found the reliability of LDA and KNN classifiers to classify the
subjects in experimental group as pre (before training) and post (after training) groups. The accuracy of the classifier
was relatively low. The accuracy of classification measures the percentage of accuracy with which a subject before
training can be classified in pre group and after training can be classified in post group.
Table 1. Accuracy of Classification
Subjects

Pre (in %)

Post (in %)

1

61.53846

88.46154

2

42.30769

80.769

3

50

65.38462

4

53.84615

76.92308

4. Results
The experimental group after training showed a consistency in energy whereas the control group showed increase
in energy/workload as the player moved from one level of difficulty to the next level in the game. Fig.1 & Fig.2
illustrates energy per channel starting from channel 1 to 14 during pre-testing and post testing sessions with three
levels of difficulty starting from level 1 to level 3 of the action video game. In Fig 1 and Fig 2 channels 1 – 14
represents data from channel AF3, F7, F3, FC5, T7, P7, O1, O2, P8, T8, FC6, F4, F8, and AF4. Energy of these 14
channels with three levels of difficulty i.e. level 1, level 2 and level 3 are shown in figure 1 in pre training session.
Similarly it is shown in Fig 2. for the post training session. In Fig.1 we can observe a similar pattern of energy
distribution in experimental and control group whereas Fig.2 clearly depicts the impact of training in experimental
group. The accuracy of the classifier is given in Table I. The experimental group was classified as pre group and post
group i.e. (before training and after training group) using LDA and KNN classifier. The highest classification
accuracy was obtained in subject-1. Subject-1 before attaining training can be classified in pre group with a
classification accuracy of 61.53% and the same subject after training can be classified in post group with an accuracy
of 88.46%. The classification accuracy was higher in post group when compared to pre group. The phase of pre
experimental and pre control group has a significant value (t = 3.83, p = .0001) in paired sample t – test. The phase
of post experimental and post control group also has a significant value (t = 3.13, p = .002). The standard deviation
in pre experimental and pre control group has a significant value (t = -5.1, p = .0005) and the standard deviation in
post experimental and post control group also shows a significant value (t = -5.9, p = .0001). The phase and standard

119

120

Sushil Chandra et al. / Procedia Computer Science 84 (2016) 115 – 122

deviation is expected to vary and show a significant mean difference as obtained in the results since EEG signals are
non-stationary and complex in nature.
4.1. Psychological Test Results
Paired sample t- test was calculated for pre and post psychological assessment of cognitive abilities using SPSS
software for experimental group. The PEBL test for reaction time for subjects who underwent training showed a
mean decrease of 9.875 in reaction time after training with a significant value (t = 4.338, p = 0.023) whereas the
control group did not show any change in reaction time. The memory test with VISGED did not show any
significant change for experimental group as well as control group. The determination test also showed a mean
decrease of 23 in stress level due to training in AVG (t = 7.597, p = .005) whereas the control group showed an
increase in stress level.
5. Discussion
The objective of this study was to analyze the impact of AVG training on the performance of participants. The
game presented numerous unexpected challenges that demanded quick response from player. After the training for
AVG, the experimental group showed enhancement in cognitive abilities. The novel idea of using EMD on action
video game to characterize the changes in cognitive workload was the highlight of our study. There was a notable
increase in energy as the control group moves from one level to next level of difficulty in action video game, which
depicts higher level of workload to brain whereas the trained group does not show such inconsistency in energy
level. In difficulty level 3 we observe the highest increase in energy for control group, which shows their mental
workload is extremely high while encountering higher challenges, which leads to more errors and confusion. EEG
recording during three levels of difficulty pointed out the impact of complexity of game on brain activity.
Psychological assessments used in this study serves to emphasize on enhancement of cognition abilities by playing
AVG. It supports our hypothesis that training in action video games improves reaction time, processing speed and
reduces stress level. Progressive attainment of skills in psychomotor domain was seen due to training effects. The
faster reaction time implies a progressive attainment of hand eye co-ordination after training. LDA and KNN
classifier could classify experimental group as before training (pre) and after training (post) group. But the accuracy
of classification obtained was not high. Hence we suggest, large training data sample may be used for classification
in future studies to obtain high level of accuracy in classification. Brain has unlimited potential to learn. Tapping the
capacity of brain to learn and rejuvenate with the help of popular computer technologies is a way to integrate brain
and computer to bring out the positive aspects of technologies to enhance man’s cognitive abilities. Together these
findings may bring to light the effect of training mechanisms and improvement of cognition abilities due to playing
action video games, which may pave path for further studies and improvement in this field.
6. Conclusion
In this work, we examined the possibility of exploring a novel technique EMD and classification based on LDA
and KNN classifier in the field of action video gaming and cognitive enhancements. The psychological assessment
showed an improvement in processing speed, better hand eye co-ordination, faster reaction time and reduced stress
level in the participants due to training. The evaluated results show the effectiveness of the methods proposed to
examine the increase in cognitive abilities and performance after training.
7. Future Scope
Here in this study, we focused on three psychological assessment tests to verify the changes in cognitive abilities.
However this research should be extended with more psychological test and different types of games with different
features and traits to analyze the improvement in performance. Here we had a limited number of subjects. With more
number of subjects it would be feasible to choose a specific game and vary different traits and narrow down which
factor is responsible for the improvement of subject’s performance. Better virtual reality environments can also be

Sushil Chandra et al. / Procedia Computer Science 84 (2016) 115 – 122

created to enhance the cognitive abilities and improve the level of attentiveness, decision-making, processing speed,
accuracy and reaction time of the subjects.
References
1

2

3

4

5
6
7
8

9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

Riaz, F., Hassan,A.,Rehman,S., Niazi,I.K., & Dremstrup,K. EMD based Temporal and Spectral Features for the
Classification of EEG Signals Using Supervised Learning. Neural System and Rehabilitation Engineering,
2015.
Molla, M.K.I., Shaikh,M., Hirose ,K.. Time-frequency representation of audio signals using Hilbert spectrum
with effective frequency scaling. In:Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Computer and
Information Technology- ICCIT 2008.IEEE; 2008.
Huang, N. E., Shen, Z., Long, S. R., Wu, M. C., Shih, H. H., Zheng, Q., Yen,N.,Tung,C.C., Liu, H. H..The
empirical mode decomposition and the Hilbert spectrum for nonlinear and non- stationary time series analyses.
In: Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. The Royal Society;1998.
Delsanto, S., Lamberti, F., Montrucchio, B.. Automatic ocular artifact rejection based on independent
component analysis and eye blink detection. In: Proceedings of Neural Engineering, First International IEEE
EMBS Conference. IEEE;2003.
Li, Y., Ma, Z., Lu, W., & Li, Y.. Automatic removal of the eye blink artifact from EEG using an ICA-based
template matching approach . Physiological measurement 2006;27: p. 425–436
Omerhodzic, I., Avdakovic, S., Nuhanovic, A., Dizdarevic, K.. Energy distribution of EEG signals: EEG signal
wavelet-neural network classifier. arXivPrepr. arXiv 2013.
Kizhner, S., Blank, K., Flatley, T., Huang, N. E., Petrick, D., & Hestnes, P..On Certain Theoretical
Developments Underlying the Hilbert-Huang Transform. In: IEEE Aerospace Conference.IEEE;2006.
Lu, T. C., Chen, P. Y., Yeh, S. W., & Van, L. D..Multiple Stopping Criteria and High-Precision EMD
Architecture Implementation for Hilbert-Huang Transform. In: Biomedical Circuits and Systems Conference
(BioCAS). IEEE.;2014, p. 200- 203.
Longo, L.. Formalising Human Mental Workload as a Defeasible Computational Concept. Diss. Trinity
College; 2014.
Moreno, R.,Mayer, R. E.. Cognitive principles of multimedia learning: The role of modality and
contiguity. Journal of educational psychology 1999;91(2): p.358.
Green, C. S., Bavelier, D..Enumeration versus multiple object tracking: the case of action video game players.
Cognition 2006;101(1): p. 217-245.
Green, C.S., Bavelier, D.. Effect of action video games on the spatial distribution of visuospatial
attention. Journal of experimental psychology: Human perception and performance 2006;32(6);p. 1465.
Green, C.S., Bavelier, D.. Action-video-game experience alters the spatial resolution of vision. Psychological
Science 2007; 18(1): p. 88-94.
Feng, J., Spence, I., & Pratt, J..Playing an action video game reduces gender differences in spatial cognition.
psychological Science 2007: p. 850-855.
Green, C.S., & Bavelier, D.. Action video game modifies visual selective attention. Nature 2003; 423(6936): p.
534-537.
Castel, A. D., Pratt, J., & Drummond, E..The effects of action video game experience on the time course of
inhibition of return and the efficiency of visual search. Acta psychologica 2005;119(2); p.217-230.
Green, C.S., Bavelier, D.. The cognitive neuroscience of video games. Digital media: Transformations in
human communication 2006:p.211-223.
Green, C. S., Sugarman, M. A., Medford, K., Klobusicky, E., & Bavelier, D.. The effect of action video game
experience on task-switching. Computers in human behavior 2012;28(3): p. 984-994.
Strobach, T., Frensch, P. A., & Schubert, T..Video game practice optimizes executive control skills in dual-task
and task switching situations. Acta psychologica 2012;140(1):p.13-24.
Chang, N. F., Chiang, C. Y., Chen, T. C., & Chen, L. G..Cubic spline interpolation with overlapped window
and data reuse for on-line hilbert huang transform biomedical microprocessor. In: Proceedings of the Annual
International Conference of Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society( EMBC-2011). IEEE;2011.

121

122

Sushil Chandra et al. / Procedia Computer Science 84 (2016) 115 – 122

21 Dye, M. W., Green, C. S., & Bavelier, D..Increasing Speed of Processing With Action Video Games. Current
directions in psychological science 2009;18(6): p. 321-326.
22 McDermott, A. F., Bavelier, D., & Green, C. S..Memory abilities in action video game players. Computers in
Human Behavior 2014; 34: p. 69–78.
23 Murugappan, M., Ramachandran, N., & Sazali, Y. Classification of human emotion from EEG using discrete
wavelet transform.Journal of Biomedical Science and Engineering 2010;3:p. 390.
24 EEGLAB – Open Source Matlab Toolbox for Electro-physiological Research’. Sccn.ucsd.edu.
25 Li, S., Zhou, W., Yuan, Q., Geng, S., & Cai, D..Feature extraction and recognition of ictal EEG using EMD and
SVM.Computers in biology and medicine 2013;43:p. 807-816.
26 Alam, S. M., & Bhuiyan, M. I. H..Detection of seizure and epilepsy using higher order statistics in the EMD
domain. Biomedical and Health Informatics, IEEE Journal of 2013;17(2):p. 312-318.

