Downloaded from orbit.dtu.dk on: Dec 18, 2017

EEG in the classroom: Synchronised neural recordings during video presentation

Poulsen, Andreas Trier; Kamronn, Simon Due; Dmochowski, Jacek; Parra, Lucas C.; Hansen, Lars Kai
Published in:
Scientific Reports
Link to article, DOI:
10.1038/srep43916
Publication date:
2017
Document Version
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record
Link back to DTU Orbit

Citation (APA):
Poulsen, A. T., Kamronn, S. D., Dmochowski, J., Parra, L. C., & Hansen, L. K. (2017). EEG in the classroom:
Synchronised neural recordings during video presentation. Scientific Reports, 7, [43916]. DOI:
10.1038/srep43916

General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
• Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
• You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
• You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately
and investigate your claim.

www.nature.com/scientificreports

OPEN

received: 26 April 2016
accepted: 01 February 2017
Published: 07 March 2017

EEG in the classroom: Synchronised
neural recordings during video
presentation
Andreas Trier Poulsen1,*, Simon Kamronn1,*, Jacek Dmochowski2,3, Lucas C. Parra3 &
Lars Kai Hansen1
We performed simultaneous recordings of electroencephalography (EEG) from multiple students in
a classroom, and measured the inter-subject correlation (ISC) of activity evoked by a common video
stimulus. The neural reliability, as quantified by ISC, has been linked to engagement and attentional
modulation in earlier studies that used high-grade equipment in laboratory settings. Here we reproduce
many of the results from these studies using portable low-cost equipment, focusing on the robustness
of using ISC for subjects experiencing naturalistic stimuli. The present data shows that stimulusevoked neural responses, known to be modulated by attention, can be tracked for groups of students
with synchronized EEG acquisition. This is a step towards real-time inference of engagement in the
classroom.
Engagement and attention are important in situations of learning, but most methods for measuring of attention
or engagement are intrusive and unrealistic in everyday situations1–3. Recently, inter-subject correlation (ISC) of
electroencephalography (EEG) has been proposed as a marker of attentional engagement4–6 and we ask in this
work whether it can be recorded robustly with commercial-grade wireless EEG devices in a classroom setting.
Furthermore, we address two other issues related to the robustness of the signal: The potential neurophysiological
origin of the measure and the robustness of the detection scheme to inter-subject variability in spatial alignment.
User engagement has been defined as ‘…​the emotional, cognitive and behavioural connection that exists,
at any point in time and possibly over time, between a user and a resource’7. Traditional approaches to measuring engagement are based on capturing user behaviour via user interfaces, self-report, or manual annotation8.
However, tools from cognitive neuroscience are increasingly being employed9. Recent efforts in neuroscience
aim to elucidate perceptual and cognitive processes in a more realistic setting and using naturalistic stimuli4,10–14.
From an educational perspective such quantitative measures may help identify mechanisms that make learning
more efficient9, align services better with students needs7, or monitor critical task performance15. The potential uses of engagement detection in the classroom are numerous, e.g., real-time and summary feedback for the
teacher, motivational strategies for increased student engagement, and screening for impact of teaching materials.
Before the findings of tracking attentional responses with neural activity4–6 can be employed in a real-time classroom scenario, several issues must be addressed first, including: (1) Is it possible to reproduce the ISCs to naturalistic stimuli under the adverse conditions of a classroom? (2) Are the ISCs robust to inter-student variability of the
spatial information processing networks? And (3) can ISCs be recorded with equipment that is both comfortable
and affordable enough to make it a realistic technology for schools?
Here we investigate the feasibility of recording such neural responses from students who are viewing videos.
We use an approach developed by Dmochowski et al.4 that uses inter-subject correlation (ISC) of EEG evoked
responses. The basic premise is that subjects who are engaged with the content exhibit reliable neural responses
that are correlated across subjects and repetitions within the same subject. In contrast, a lack of engagement
manifests in generally unreliable neural responses6. ISC of neural activity while watching films have been shown
to predict the popularity and viewership of TV-series and commercials5, and shows clinical promises as a measure
of consciousness levels in non-responsive patients16 (fMRI study). We argue here that the neural reliability of
students indeed may be quantified on a second-by-second basis in groups and in a classroom setting, and we seek
1

Technical University of Denmark, DTU Compute, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark. 2Stanford University, Department of
Psychology, Palo Alto, USA. 3City College of New York, Department of Biomedical Engineering, New York, USA.
*
These authors contributed equally to this work. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
A.T.P. (email: atpo@dtu.dk)
Scientific Reports | 7:43916 | DOI: 10.1038/srep43916

1

www.nature.com/scientificreports/

Figure 1. Experimental setup for joint viewings. (Left) 9 subjects where placed on a line to induce a cinemalike experiences. (Right) Subjects seen from the back, watching films projected onto a screen. Tablets recording
EEG are resting on the tables behind the subjects. The signal is transmitted wirelessly from each subject.

to investigate the robustness of measuring it with electroencephalography (EEG) responses during exposure to
media stimuli.
To enable correlations between multi-dimensional EEG, correlated component analysis (CorrCA) was introduced4. CorrCA finds multiple spatial projections that are shared amongst subjects, such that their components
are maximally correlated across time. Here we are interested in the reproducibility of using CorrCA as a measure
of inter-subject correlation, and will focus predominantly on the first component, which captures most of the
neural responses shared across students.
The main goal of the present work is to determine whether student neural reliability can be quantified in a
real-time manner based on recordings of brain activity in a classroom setting using a low-cost, portable EEG system – the Smartphone Brain Scanner17. With regard to the robustness of the detection scheme, we report on both
theoretical and experimental investigations. First, we show that ISC evoked by rich naturalistic stimuli is robust
enough to be reproduced with commercial-grade equipment, and to be recorded simultaneously from multiple
subjects in a classroom setting. This opens up for the possibility of real-time estimation of student attentional
engagement. Secondly, we show mathematically that the CorrCA algorithm is surprisingly robust to variations
in the spatial patterns of brain activity across subjects. Finally, we demonstrate that the level of ISC is related to a
very basic visual response that is modulated by narrative coherence of the video stimulus.

Results

To monitor neural reliability we used video stimuli as they provide a balance between realism and reproducibility11.
We recorded EEG activity using the Smartphone Brain Scanner while subjects watched short video clips of
approximately 6 minutes duration, either individually or in a group setting (Fig. 1). To measure reliability of EEG
responses, we used correlated components analysis (CorrCA, see Methods) to extract maximally correlated time
series with shared spatial projection across repeated views within the same subject (inter-viewing correlation,
IVC), or between subjects (inter-subject correlation, ISC).
One of our main points of interest is to investigate the robustness of ISC from EEG recorded in a classroom
through comparisons with results previously measured in a laboratory setting4. We therefore employed similar
methods of analysis and calculated ISCs and IVCs in 5 second windows with 80% overlap to investigate their
temporal development in a 1-second resolution. We chose to analyse the EEG with CorrCA in a broad frequency
band (0.5 and 45 Hz), instead of investigating specific frequency bands, to keep the analysis methods comparable
with the prior lab-based study. Moreover, CorrCA is a method used for robustly measuring ISC with low computational costs; hence making it a good candidate for long term real-time analyses on small devices in a classroom
setting.
The subjects watched three video clips, which were presented twice in random order. The first video was a
suspenseful excerpt from the short film, Bang! You’re Dead, directed by Alfred Hitchcock. It was selected because
it is known to effectively synchronize brain responses across viewers4,18. The second video was an excerpt from
Sophie’s Choice, directed by Alan J. Pakula (1982), and the third was an uneventful baseline video of people
silently descending an escalator. For both the joint and individual recording scenarios, the time course of the
ISC, based on the first CorrCA component from subjects watching the film, closely reproduces results obtained
previously in a laboratory setting (Fig. 2a and Table 1).
An indication of the stability of the technique is provided by the spatial patterns of the neural activity that
drives these reproducible responses. Similar to other component extraction techniques, such as independent
component analysis or common spatial patterns19,20, CorrCA reduces the signal of multiple electrodes to a few
components. The ISC is then computed for the first few components, which capture most of the correlation
between recordings. The strongest three correlated components show a stable pattern of activity across the different groups and recording conditions (Fig. 2b), all three obtaining significant spatial correlations between
groups (rcomp1 =​  0.97, rcomp2 =​  0.91, rcomp3 =​ 0.79, all with p <​ 0.002 for uncorrected permutation test), for Bang!
You’re Dead. The robustness to recording conditions is also apparent for the second film clip from Sophie’s Choice
(rcomp1 =​  0.51, p <​  0.002; rcomp2 =​  0.48, p =​  0.008; rcomp3 =​  0.36, p =​ 0.033), albeit with a lower average correlation,
which for the first two components may be due to noisy scalp maps for the Joint 1 group and Individual group,
Scientific Reports | 7:43916 | DOI: 10.1038/srep43916

2

www.nature.com/scientificreports/

Figure 2. ISC of neural responses to naturalistic stimuli are robust across different groups of subjects and
reproducible in a classroom setting. (a) Comparison between the ISC obtained by Dmochowski et al.4 and the
present study for the first CorrCA component and the first viewing of Bang! You’re Dead. The ISC is calculated
with a 1-second resolution (5 s windows, 80% overlap). The grey area indicates chance levels for ISC (p >​  0.01
estimated with time-shuffled surrogate data, uncorrected for multiple comparisons). (b) The corresponding
scalp projections of the first three components obtained from the correlated component analysis (CorrCA)
of each of the four subject groups watching Bang! You’re Dead the first time. For each component, CorrCA
finds one shared set of weights for all subjects in the group. Four distinct groups of subjects watched videos in
different scenarios: individually on a tablet computer (Individual), individually with order of scenes scrambled
in time (Scrambled), and jointly in a classroom as seen in Fig. 1 (Joint 1 and Joint 2). For each projection, the
polarity was normalized so the value at the Cz electrode is positive.
ISC v1

ISC v2

IVC

Individual

0.64**

0.33**

0.49**

Joint group 1

0.51**

0.15**

0.44**

Joint group 2

0.61**

0.28**

0.54**

Table 1. Correlation coefficients between the ISC time courses obtained in a laboratory setting4 and
those obtained in the present study (groups Individual, Joint 1 and Joint 2). Inter-subject correlation (ISC)
measures similarity of responses between subjects for the first and second viewings (v1, v2), and the interviewing correlation (IVC) measures similarity within-subject between the two views. Coefficients are calculated
for the first CorrCA component recorded while watching Bang! You’re dead. **p <​  0.01.

respectively (see Supplementary Fig. S1). For the baseline video, only the first component achieved significant
average correlation between groups (rcomp1 =​  0.46, p =​ 0.014). The lower stability in the scalp maps obtained for
Sophie’s Choice and the baseline video could be explained by the lower ALD of these stimuli (see below), since
these films obtain lower average IVC compared to Bang! You’re Dead for all groups (Fig. 3).
Previous research has indicated the potentials of ISC as a marker of engagement of conscious processing4,5,6,12,16.
To further investigate this, we asked subjects post-experiment to describe the film segments (or “scenes”) that
made the biggest impact on them. We quantified their answers by assigning each answer to one of eight general
scene descriptions. Table 2 shows that the scenes most frequently mentioned are “Boy pointing gun at mother”
or “Boy pointing gun at people”, and 29 out of 30 subjects mentioned one or both of the scenes as having had
high impact on them. The most frequently mentioned scene occurs around 2:25, where a peak in the ISC can be
seen (Fig. 2a). The high impact of this particular scene was confirmed by the suspense ratings presented in Naci
et al.16. See Dmochowski et al.4 for additional descriptions and examples of scenes eliciting high ISC in Bang!
You’re Dead.
To determine if the portable equipment, which uses only 14 channels, can detect varying levels of neural reliability, a second group of subjects watched the same two film clips individually, but now with scenes scrambled
in time. This intervention is a widely used tool to create a baseline with similar low-level stimuli, yet reduced
engagement4,18,21,22. See Methods for more information on the definition and time scales of the scrambled scenes.
Despite using consumer-grade EEG we find that IVC is significantly above chance for a large fraction of the
original engaging clip, but drops dramatically when the scenes are scrambled in time (mean IVC, Fig. 3, p <​  0.01,
for Bang! You’re Dead). Also the baseline video, which subjects reported not to engage them at all, only obtained
significant ISC (p <​ 0.01, uncorrected) in 2.3% of the 354 tested time windows, compared to the 54.1% significant
windows obtained for Bang! You’re Dead.
For experiments conducted in less controlled, everyday settings as in this study, it is important to assess
across-session reproducibility. To test this, we recorded a second group of subjects in a classroom setting who
watched the material together (Joint 1 and 2). These two groups obtained mean IVCs comparable to the individual recordings (Fig. 3, Bang! You’re Dead: p >​  0.49, Sophie’s Choice: p >​ 0.26), and also showed reproducibility
between the groups of simultaneous recordings (Fig. 3, Bang! You’re Dead: p >​  0.49, Sophie’s Choice: p >​  0.08).

Scientific Reports | 7:43916 | DOI: 10.1038/srep43916

3

www.nature.com/scientificreports/

Figure 3. Distribution and mean of IVC calculated from the first CorrCA component for subject groups
and films. Violin plots show distributions of IVC estimated using a squared exponential (normal) kernel with
bandwidth of 0.00541. Horizontal black bars denote distribution means. For visualisation purposes, the extreme
2.5% values at either end of the distributions were left out of the violin plots (but were kept for estimating mean
and p-values). A block permutation test (block size B =​  25 s) was employed to estimate statistical significant
differences in the mean IVC between viewing conditions (uncorrected for multiple comparisons). For both
films there were significant differences in mean IVC between groups with normal narrative and the Scrambled
group (Bang! You’re Dead: pIndividual =​  0.006, pJoint1 =​  0.033, pJoint2 =​  0.004; Sophie’s Choice: pIndividual =​  0.059,
pJoint1 =​  0.37, pJoint2 =​ 0.012). However, there were no significant differences between groups with the original,
unscrambled narrative. Note that the Scrambled group did not watch the baseline video.

Scene
The boy shoots (or points gun at) mother

Approx. times

No of times
mentioned (%)

2:25 and 3:00

16 (53%)

2:10, 3:30 and 5:30

15 (50%)

The boy loads another bullet into gun

6:10

8 (27%)

The uncle discovers his gun is gone

4:35

4 (13%)

0:25 and 1:40

4 (13%)

0:40, 1:50 and 5:25

4 (13%)

When the father did not run after the boy

3:00

1 (3%)

The abrupt ending

6:14

1 (3%)

The boy shoots (or points gun at) at people

The boy finds and loads gun
The boy points at mirror or shoot towards camera

Table 2. Scenes described by the subjects as having the strongest impression on them. Based on the 30
subjects which saw Bang! You’re Dead with uninterrupted narrative. In a post-experiment questionnaire,
subjects were asked to describe the scenes that made the strongest impression on them. Their answers were
collected in the eight groups. The subjects each mentioned 1.77 scenes on average (0.77 std.). 29 subjects (97%)
mentioned either scenes where the boy points the gun at his mother or at other people.
Robustness to inter-subject variations in the spatial brain structure is a basic question when applying CorrCA
to classroom data. CorrCA is derived under the assumption that the spatial networks of subjects are identical.
This assumption could be challenged by inter-individual differences, however, it turns out to be surprisingly
robust to such variability23. To demonstrate this, we briefly analyse a ‘worst case’ scenario in which the true mixing weights of two subjects form a pair of orthogonal vectors. The observations are assumed to consist of a single
true signal, z, mixed into D dimensions with additive Gaussian noise; X1 =​  a1z⊤ +​  ε, X2 =​  a2z⊤ +​  ε. Given a large
sample, the covariance matrices are given as R11 = P ⋅ a1a1 + σ 2I, R12 = P ⋅ a1a 
2 , where P is the variance of z
and σ2 signifies the noise variance. For simplicity the weight vectors are assumed to be unit length. The two matrices in Eq. (3) can then be written as
−1

−1

(R11 + R22)



 a 
 a 
1
2σ 2 
=  [a1 a2]  1 +
I ; R12 + R21 = P ⋅ [a1 a2]  2 ,
P 
P 
 a 2 
 a1 

With a1a2

using block matrix notation.
= 0, a1
two matrices in Eq. (1) can be expressed as

2

= a2

(R11 + R22)−1 (R12 + R21) =

Scientific Reports | 7:43916 | DOI: 10.1038/srep43916

2

(1)

= 1 and the Woodbury identity, the product of the

P
(a1a 2 + a2a1) .
2σ 2 + P

(2)

4

www.nature.com/scientificreports/

Figure 4. The ISC of the first CorrCA component is temporally correlated with the average luminance
differences (ALD) of the film stimulus. ALD is calculated as the frame-to-frame difference in pixel intensity,
smoothed to match the 5 s window of ISC, and mainly reflects the frequency of changes in camera position.
Data computed from the neural responses of subjects watching Bang You’re Dead.

ISC v1

ISC v2

IVC

Bang You’re Dead

0.71**

0.61**

0.56**

Sophie’s Choice

0.50**

0.24**

0.23**

Bang You’re Dead (Scr)

0.54**

0.45**

0.35**

Sophie’s Choice (Scr)

0.42**

0.01

−​0.22**

Table 3. Correlation coefficients between the ALD and the ISC for the two viewings (v1, v2) as well as the
IVC for the first correlated component. The correlation is presented for Bang You’re dead and Sophie’s Choice
for the Individual and Scrambled (Scr) groups. **p <​  0.01.
An eigenvector of matrix (2) takes the form αa1 +​  βa2, with α =​  ±​β and ±

P

2σ 2 + P

as eigenvalues. By applying

this eigenvector to observations, X1 and X2, we see that CorrCA still identifies the relevant time series, z.
For the first CorrCA component, the channels weighted most heavily are the ones positioned over the occipital lobe (see Fig. 2b). To estimate how much of the ISC was driven by basic low-level visual processing, we
analysed the relation between ISC and a measure of frame-to-frame luminance fluctuations (average luminance
difference, ALD; see methods). Note that to avoid synchronised eye artefacts and to ensure that only signals of
neural origin contributed to the measured correlations, we removed independent components related to eye
artefacts from the EEG (see methods).
Figure 4 and Table 3 show that there is a significant correlation between the ISC and the ALD for both Bang!
You’re Dead and Sophie’s Choice for the first CorrCA component. This suggests that this portion of the correlated
activity may indeed be driven by low-level visual evoked responses. However, the degree of engagement, here
represented by narrative coherence, appears to modulate the amplitude of the ISC time course, since even though
the scrambled stimulus was driven by the visual stimulus, it was so to a lesser extent. Previous research has shown
that visual evoked potentials (VEP) are modulated by spatial attention24 and that even feature-specific attention
enhances steady-state VEPs25. We quantify the effect of scrambling the narrative by comparing the sensitivity
(slope) of ISC to ALD in both the normal and scrambled conditions by fitting a simple linear model (Fig. 5). For
both films we found significant reductions of the ISC/ALD slope in the scrambled version (p <​ 0.01; block permutation test, with block size B =​  25 s).

Discussion

We have demonstrated that student neural reliability to media stimuli may be quantified using EEG in a classroom setting. For educational technology cost and robustness are key features, hence, we aimed at establishing
a realistic scenario based on low-cost consumer grade equipment, the Smartphone Brain Scanner, focusing on
several potential sources that could degrade robustness.
We have provided evidence that salient aspects of the neural reliability previously detected with laboratory
grade equipment can be reproduced in a realistic setting. We recorded fully-synchronized EEG with nine subjects
in a real classroom and found that the level of neural response reliability matched prior laboratory results. The
robustness of CorrCA and ISC is granted by the reproducibility between recording conditions, both of the ISC
time-courses throughout the film clips and of the spatial topographies of the first three CorrCA components. For
the film clip from Bang! You’re Dead we saw that seven subjects were enough to obtain stable topographies for all
three components, whereas for Sophie’s Choice and the baseline video the results were more noisy, suggesting that
more subjects are needed to obtain stable results. Previous research shows that ten subjects provided for stable
results in a case involving non-narrative baseline videos or films with lower ISC and IVC in a laboratory setting4.
Mathematically, we have shown that our detection scheme, CorrCA, is robust to inter-subject variability in
spatial configurations of brain networks, or induced by cap misalignment. In the calculations, we assumed two
subjects in a worst case scenario where the subjects’ spatial projections are orthogonal. This result conforms well
with simulations that show that, even for multiple subjects with randomly drawn spatial projections, CorrCA
was able to find the relevant times series23. The simulations also showed that increasing the number of subjects

Scientific Reports | 7:43916 | DOI: 10.1038/srep43916

5

www.nature.com/scientificreports/

Figure 5. Relation between the ISC and the ALD for different conditions. Each point indicates a point in the
ISC time course as seen in Fig. 2a (5 s windows, 80% overlap) and the corresponding ALD calculated from the
visual stimulus. It is evident that time points with higher luminance fluctuations (hight ALD) result in higher
correlation of brain activity across subjects (high ISC). The indicated “slope” is a least squares fit of the slope
of lines passing through (0, 0). The slope indicates the strength of ISC for a given ALD value. For both films
there is a significant drop in the slope (p <​ 0.01: block permutation test with block size B =​ 25 sec), thus the
original narrative (blue) elicits higher ISC than the less engaging scrambled version of the films (red). Note that
brightness of the scenes in Sophie’s Choice is much lower than in Bang! You’re dead, resulting in an ALD that is
lower by almost a factor 10.
decreased the signal-to-noise ratio, presumably due to the estimated common projection not being able to fit with
the different projections of each subject.
We have presented results that further indicate a relationship between changes in ISC and viewer engagement.
Through a basic analysis of questionnaires on scenes of high impact, we found that high ISC indeed is associated
with high impact. We have also showed a relationship between neural responses to luminance fluctuations and
coherence of stimulus narrative. For both the films presented, we saw a significant drop in the average IVC for
subjects watching the film sequences in which the narrative had been temporally scrambled. At the same time no
significant difference was found between the groups watching the film sequences that had not been scrambled,
which further underlines the robustness of the measure.
It may appear surprising that there exists a significant correlation between the raw EEG signals of various
students in the classroom. However, it is well-known that eye scan patterns in a film audience follow a specific
pattern after a scene change, activating the dorsal pathway26. A valid assumption could therefore be that the
correlation is due to synchronised artefacts from eye movements, but this has recently been shown not to affect
attentional modulation of ISC6. Also, it is known that stimuli in the form of flashing images elicit VEPs, which are
modulated in amplitude by the luminance27. When recorded with EEG, the spatial distribution of the early VEP
at 100 ms (P100) is similar to the scalp maps of the first correlated component (C1 in Fig. 2b)24,28.
We investigated whether low-level visual processes could be a driving force behind the measured ISCs by
correlating the ISC with changes in luminance in the video stimuli, as measured by the ALD. We found that luminance fluctuations drive a significant portion of the ISC.
In all four groups of subjects Sophie’s Choice obtained lower IVC compared to Bang! You’re Dead. This difference could be explained by the fact that the film clip also had a much lower ALD. Also, Fig. 4 indicates that the
passage in Bang! You’re dead with the highest and most sustained ISC (around 1:20 to 1:50) coincides with the
interval with the most scene changes. This relationship could, however, also be due to more complex processes, as
fast-paced cutting is a known cinematographic tool used by Hitchcock to induce suspense and thereby increase
the attention of the viewer29.
The strong link between ISC and luminance fluctuations due to scene cuts has also recently been presented in
a fMRI study30. This is something that would be interesting to take into account for future studies investigating the
applicability of ISC. Baseline videos could be created in ways to achieve similar ALD features as the target stimuli.
The baseline video, created for this study, consisted of one continuous scene of people entering and exiting an
escalator in a relaxed manner, which did not produce any significant correlation. Future studies might use a baseline video containing scene cuts of faces and body parts, to also take the effect of editing into account.
To investigate the possibility of higher level processes also being at play, we analysed the linear relationship
between ISC and luminance fluctuations at a given time in the video stimulus. The scrambling operation aimed to
test for a change in attentional engagement while controlling for low level features. The premise was that subjects
would be less attentive to the stimulus, i.e. less “engaged”, if they did not follow the narrative arch of the story.
With that in mind, Figs 4 and 5 suggest that ISC is driven by stimulus-evoked responses that are modulated by
attentional engagement with the stimulus.
We have demonstrated the feasibility of tracking inter-subject correlation in a classroom setting; a measure
that has been related to attentional modulation6. We have shown that ISC is robust to recording equipment and

Scientific Reports | 7:43916 | DOI: 10.1038/srep43916

6

www.nature.com/scientificreports/
conditions, and we have presented evidence that the amplification of ISC in films that have a strong and coherent narrative is due to attentional modulation of visual evoked responses. Thus ISC may be used as an indirect
electrophysiological measure of engagement through an attentional top-down modulation of low-level neural
processes. Recent research has shown that attentional modulation of neural responses takes place in speech perception31,32, which lends credibility to a similar process occurring in the visual system. The evidence that such a
basic and well defined mechanism could be at play further adds to the robustness of the approach in real everyday
scenarios.

Methods

Protocol. Four groups of subjects watched the video stimuli in different scenarios. The first group (N =​  12,
Individual) watched videos individually in an office environment on a tablet computer (Google Nexus 7 tablet,
with a 7″​(17.8 cm) screen) with earphones. The second group (N =​ 12) saw the videos in the same manner, but
the scenes of the film stimulus were scrambled in time resulting in the narrative being lost (Scrambled). The objective of this condition was to demonstrate that the similarity of responses across subjects is not simply the result of
low-level stimulus features (which are identical in the Individual and Scrambled conditions), but instead, is modulated narrative coherence, which presumably engages viewers. Two additional groups (N =​  9, N =​ 9) watched the
original videos on a screen in a classroom (Fig. 1, Joint 1 and Joint 2), with sound projected through loudspeakers.
An attempt was made to create viewing conditions for the subjects in the joint groups, that were similar to the
viewing conditions for the individual group, i.e., lights were dampened and the projected image produced approximately the same field-of-view (see Supplementary materials). The central question was whether the viewing
condition (i.e., in a group versus individually) influences the level of ISC across subjects.
Stimuli. The first video clip was a suspenseful excerpt from the short film Bang! You’re Dead (1961) directed
by Alfred Hitchcock. It was selected because it is known to elicit highly reliable brain activity across subjects in
fMRI11 as well as EEG4. Our second stimulus was a clip from Sophie’s Choice, directed by Alan J. Pakula (1982),
which has been used earlier to study fMRI activity in the context of emotionally salient naturalistic stimuli33. A
third non-narrative control video was recorded in a Danish metro station of several people who were being transported quietly on an escalator. Each video clip had a length of approximately six minutes and was shown twice
to each subject. For each viewing the order of the clips was randomized, while the same random order was used
the second time the clips were shown. A combined video was created for each of the six possible permutations
of the order of the clips, starting with a 10 second 43 Hz tone for use in post processing synchronization, and
20 seconds black screen between each film clip. The total length of the video amounted to 39 minutes. An additional control stimulus (Scrambled) was created by scrambling the order of the scenes in Bang! You’re Dead and
Sophie’s Choice in accordance with previous research4,18. In these studies, scene segments were defined in varying
temporal scales (36 s, 12 s, and 4 s) that consisted of multiple camera positions, “shots”. For this study we defined a
scene as a single shot (i.e. the segment between two scene cuts) with the added rule that a scene must not exceed
250 frames (~10 s) to reduce subjects’ ability to infer the narrative from long scenes. This procedure resulted in 73
scenes lasting between 0.5 and 10 seconds and corresponded to the intermediate to short time-scales employed
in previous studies18.
Subjects.

A total of 42 female subjects (mean age: 22.4 y, age range: 18–32 y), who gave written informed
consent prior to the experiment, were recruited for this study. Non-invasive experiments on healthy subjects
are exempt from ethical committee processing by Danish law34. Among the 42 recordings, nine were excluded
due to unstable wireless communication that precluded proper synchronization of the data across subjects (five
from the Individual group, one from the Scrambled group and three from the two Joint groups). The difference in
the number of recordings in the different groups could give unfair advantages with respect to noise when using
CorrCA or calculating ISC. We therefore decided to randomly choose four subjects from the Scrambled group
and one from Joint 2 group and excluded these from the analyses. This was to ensure that each group had seven
fully synchronized recordings.

Portable EEG – Smartphone Brain Scanner.

Research grade EEG equipment is costly, time-consuming
to set up, and immobile. However, recently consumer grade EEG equipment that is more affordable and has
increased comfort has appeared. Here we use the modified 14 channel system, ‘Emocap’, based on the EEG
Emotiv EPOC headset. For details and validation, see refs 17 and 35. In this study it was implemented on Asus
Nexus 7 tablets. An electrical trigger and associated sound was used to synchronize EEG and video signals in
the individual viewing condition, while a split audio signal (simultaneously feeding into microphone and EEG
amplifiers) was used to synchronize the nine subjects EEG recordings and the video in the joint viewing condition (see Supplementary materials for further information on synchronisation). The resulting timing uncertainty
was measured to be less than 16 ms. The EEG was recorded at 128 Hz and subsequently bandpass filtered digitally using a linear phase windowed sinc FIR filter between 0.5 and 45 Hz and shifted to adjust for group delay.
Eye artefacts were reduced with a conservative pre-processing procedure using independent component analysis
(ICA), removing up to 3 of the 14 available components (Corrmap plug-in for EEGLAB36,37).

Correlated component analysis to measure ISC and IVC.

CorrCA was presented in Dmochowski
et al.4, as a constrained version of Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA). CorrCA seeks to find sets of weights
that maximises the correlation between the neural activity of subjects experiencing the same stimuli. For each
neural component, CorrCA finds one shared set of weights for all subjects in the group.
Given two multivariate spatio-temporal time series (termed “view” in CorrCA), {X1, X2} ∈ D ×N , with
D being the number of measured features (EEG channels) in the two views and N the number of time samples,

Scientific Reports | 7:43916 | DOI: 10.1038/srep43916

7

www.nature.com/scientificreports/
CCA estimates weights, {w1, w2}, which maximize the correlation between the components, y1 = X1w1 and
y2 = X
2 w 2. The weights are calculated using two eigenvalue equations, with the constraint that the components
belonging to each multivariate time series are uncorrelated38. CorrCA is relevant for the case where the views are
homogeneous, e.g., using the same EEG channel positions, and imposes the additional constraint of shared
weights w =​  w1 =​  w2. This assumption can potentially increase sensitivity involving fewer parameters. In CorrCA
the weights are thus estimated through a single eigenvalue problem;
(R11 + R22)−1 (R12 + R21) w = ρ w,
1
X X,
N i j

(3)

where, Rij =
is the sample covariance matrix . To illustrate the spatial distribution of the underlying
physiological activity of the components, we use the estimated forward models (“patterns”) as discussed in refs 39
and 40.
4

Average luminance difference (ALD).

Video clips were converted to grey scale (0–255) by averaging
over the three colour channels. We then calculated the squared difference in pixel intensity from one frame to
the next and took the average across pixels. These signals were non-linearly re-sampled at 1 Hz by selecting the
maximum ALD for each 1 s interval to emphasise the large differences during changes in camera position (see
Figure S2 in Supplementary materials for an comparison between frame-to-frame and smoothed difference).
These values were then smoothed in time by convolving with a Gaussian kernel with a “variance” parameter of
2.5 s2. This down sampling and smoothing was aimed at matching the temporal resolution of the ALD to that of
the time-resolved ISC computation (5 s sliding window with 1 s intervals).

Statistical testing. In order to evaluate the statistical relevance of the correlations, we employed a simple
permutation test (P =​  5000 permutations)4. To test the robustness of the obtained weights for the spatial projections, we calculated the average correlation of all possible pairings of the four conditions groups for a given
component. Again, we employed a permutation test (P =​ 5000 permutations) to evaluate statistical relevance by
randomly permuting the channel order for each group and recalculating the average correlation. When testing
differences in average IVC between conditions, we used a block permutation test (block size B =​  25 s, P =​  5000
permutations) to account for temporal dependencies.

References

1. Robinson, P. Individual differences and the fundamental similarity of implicit and explicit adult second language learning. Language
Learning 47, 45–99 (1997).
2. Cohen, A., Ivry, R. B. & Keele, S. W. Attention and structure in sequence learning. J. Exp. Psychol. [Learn. Mem. Cogn.] 16, 17–30
(1990).
3. Radwan, A. A. The effectiveness of explicit attention to form in language learning. System 33, 69–87 (2005).
4. Dmochowski, J. P., Sajda, P., Dias, J. & Parra, L. C. Correlated components of ongoing EEG point to emotionally laden attention - a
possible marker of engagement? Frontiers in human neuroscience 6, 112 (2012).
5. Dmochowski, J. P. et al. Audience preferences are predicted by temporal reliability of neural processing. Nature Communications 5,
1–9 (2014).
6. Ki, J. J., Kelly, S. P. & Parra, L. C. Attention strongly modulates reliability of neural responses to naturalistic narrative stimuli. The
Journal of Neuroscience 36, 3092–3101 (2016).
7. Attfield, S., Kazai, G., Lalmas, M. & Piwowarski, B. Towards a science of user engagement. In WSDM Workshop on User Modelling
for Web Applications (ACM International Conference on Web Search And Data Mining, 2011).
8. O’Brien, H. L. & Toms, E. G. Examining the generalizability of the user engagement scale (ues) in exploratory search. Information
Processing & Management 49, 1092–1107 (2013).
9. Szafir, D. & Mutlu, B. Artful: adaptive review technology for flipped learning. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, 1001–1010 (ACM, 2013).
10. Ringach, D. L., Hawken, M. J. & Shapley, R. Receptive field structure of neurons in monkey primary visual cortex revealed by
stimulation with natural image sequences. Journal of vision 2, 2–2 (2002).
11. Hasson, U., Nir, Y., Levy, I., Fuhrmann, G. & Malach, R. Intersubject synchronization of cortical activity during natural vision.
science 303, 1634–1640 (2004).
12. Lahnakoski, J. M. et al. Synchronous brain activity across individuals underlies shared psychological perspectives. NeuroImage 100,
316–24 (2014).
13. Lankinen, K., Saari, J., Hari, R. & Koskinen, M. Intersubject consistency of cortical MEG signals during movie viewing. NeuroImage
92, 217–224 (2014).
14. Chang, W.-T. et al. Combined MEG and EEG show reliable patterns of electromagnetic brain activity during natural viewing.
NeuroImage 114, 49–56 (2015).
15. Lin, C.-T., Huang, K.-C., Chuang, C.-H., Ko, L.-W. & Jung, T.-P. Can arousing feedback rectify lapses in driving? Prediction from eeg
power spectra. Journal of neural engineering 10, 056024 (2013).
16. Naci, L., Sinai, L. & Owen, A. M. Detecting and interpreting conscious experiences in behaviorally non-responsive patients.
NeuroImage (2015).
17. Stopczynski, A., Stahlhut, C., Larsen, J. E., Petersen, M. K. & Hansen, L. K. The Smartphone Brain Scanner: A Portable Real-Time
Neuroimaging System. PloS one 9, e86733 (2014).
18. Hasson, U. et al. Neurocinematics: The neuroscience of film. Projections 2, 1–26 (2008).
19. Parra, L. & Sajda, P. Blind source separation via generalized eigenvalue decomposition. The Journal of Machine Learning Research 4,
1261–1269 (2003).
20. Koles, Z. J., Lazar, M. S. & Zhou, S. Z. Spatial patterns underlying population differences in the background eeg. Brain topography 2,
275–284 (1990).
21. Miller, G. A. & Selfridge, J. A. Verbal context and the recall of meaningful material. The American journal of psychology 63, 176–185
(1950).
22. Anderson, D. R., Fite, K. V., Petrovich, N. & Hirsch, J. Cortical activation while watching video montage: An fmri study. Media
Psychology 8, 7–24 (2006).
23. Kamronn, S., Poulsen, A. T. & Hansen, L. K. Multiview Bayesian Correlated Component Analysis. Neural Computation 27,
2207–2230 (2015).

Scientific Reports | 7:43916 | DOI: 10.1038/srep43916

8

www.nature.com/scientificreports/
24. Johannes, S., Münte, T. F., Heinze, H. J. & Mangun, G. R. Luminance and spatial attention effects on early visual processing. Cognitive
Brain Research 2, 189–205 (1995).
25. Müller, M. M. et al. Feature-selective attention enhances color signals in early visual areas of the human brain. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 103, 14250–4 (2006).
26. Unema, P. J., Pannasch, S., Joos, M. & Velichkovsky, B. M. Time course of information processing during scene perception: The
relationship between saccade amplitude and fixation duration. Visual Cognition 12, 473–494 (2005).
27. Armington, J. C. The electroretinogram, the visual evoked potential, and the area-luminance relation. Vision research 8, 263–276
(1968).
28. Sandmann, P. et al. Visual activation of auditory cortex reflects maladaptive plasticity in cochlear implant users. Brain 135, 555–568
(2012).
29. Bordwell, D. Intensified continuity: visual style in contemporary American film. Film Quarterly 55, 16–28 (2002).
30. Herbec, A., Kauppi, J. P., Jola, C., Tohka, J. & Pollick, F. E. Differences in fMRI intersubject correlation while viewing unedited and
edited videos of dance performance. Cortex 71, 341–348 (2015).
31. Mesgarani, N. & Chang, E. F. Selective cortical representation of attended speaker in multi-talker speech perception. Nature 485,
233–236 (2012).
32. Mirkovic, B., Debener, S., Jaeger, M. & De Vos, M. Decoding the attended speech stream with multi-channel EEG: implications for
online, daily-life applications. Journal of Neural Engineering 12, 046007 (2015).
33. Raz, G. et al. Portraying emotions at their unfolding: a multilayered approach for probing dynamics of neural networks. NeuroImage
60, 1448–61 (2012).
34. Den Nationale Videnskabsetiske Komité. Vejledning om anmeldelse, indberetning mv. (sundhedsvidenskablige forskningsprojekter)
(2014).
35. Stopczynski, A. et al. Smartphones as pocketable labs: visions for mobile brain imaging and neurofeedback. International journal of
psychophysiology 91, 54–66 (2014).
36. Delorme, A. & Makeig, S. EEGLAB: An open source toolbox for analysis of single-trial EEG dynamics including independent
component analysis. Journal of Neuroscience Methods 134, 9–21 (2004).
37. Viola, F. C. et al. Semi-automatic identification of independent components representing EEG artifact. Clinical Neurophysiology 120,
868–877 (2009).
38. Hardoon, D. R., Szedmak, S. & Shawe-taylor, J. Canonical correlation analysis; An overview with application to learning methods.
Neural computation 16, 2639–2664 (2004).
39. Parra, L. C., Spence, C. D., Gerson, A. D. & Sajda, P. Recipes for the linear analysis of EEG. NeuroImage 28, 326–41 (2005).
40. Haufe, S. et al. On the interpretation of weight vectors of linear models in multivariate neuroimaging. NeuroImage 87, 96–110
(2014).
41. Hoffmann, H. violin. m-Simple violin plot using matlab default kernel density estimation (2015).

Acknowledgements

We thank the reviewers for their many constructive comments that greatly improved the manuscript. We thank
Ivana Konvalinka, Arek Stopczynski and the DTU Smartphone Brain Scanner team for their assistance and
helpful discussions. This work was supported by the Lundbeck Foundation through the Center for Integrated
Molecular Brain Imaging and by Innovation Foundation Denmark through Neurotechnology for 24/7 brain state
monitoring.

Author Contributions

A.T.P., S.K., J.D., L.P. and L.K.H. designed research; S.K., A.T.P. and L.K.H. performed research; A.T.P., S.K., J.D.,
L.P., and L.K.H. contributed analytical tools; A.T.P., S.K., L.K.H. analysed data; A.T.P., S.K., J.D., L.P., and L.K.H.
wrote the paper.

Additional Information

Supplementary information accompanies this paper at http://www.nature.com/srep
Competing Interests: The authors declare no competing financial interests.
How to cite this article: Poulsen, A. T. et al. EEG in the classroom: Synchronised neural recordings during
video presentation. Sci. Rep. 7, 43916; doi: 10.1038/srep43916 (2017).
Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional affiliations.
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. The images
or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license,
unless indicated otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons license,
users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the material. To view a copy of this
license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
© The Author(s) 2017

Scientific Reports | 7:43916 | DOI: 10.1038/srep43916

9

