Journal Pre-proof
Classifying Creativity: Applying Machine Learning Techniques to Divergent Thinking
EEG Data
Carl E. Stevens, Darya L. Zabelina
PII:

S1053-8119(20)30476-6

DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2020.116990

Reference:

YNIMG 116990

To appear in:

NeuroImage

Received Date: 6 August 2019
Revised Date:

3 April 2020

Accepted Date: 21 May 2020

Please cite this article as: Stevens, C.E., Zabelina, D.L., Classifying Creativity: Applying Machine
Learning Techniques to Divergent Thinking EEG Data, NeuroImage, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.neuroimage.2020.116990.
This is a PDF file of an article that has undergone enhancements after acceptance, such as the addition
of a cover page and metadata, and formatting for readability, but it is not yet the definitive version of
record. This version will undergo additional copyediting, typesetting and review before it is published
in its final form, but we are providing this version to give early visibility of the article. Please note that,
during the production process, errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal
disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
© 2020 Published by Elsevier Inc.

Running Head: EEG MACHINE LEARNING AND DIVERGENT THINKING

Classifying Creativity: Applying Machine Learning Techniques to Divergent Thinking
EEG Data

Carl E. Stevens, Jr. & Darya L. Zabelina

University of Arkansas
Department of Psychological Science
480 Campus Drive
Fayetteville, AR 72701 USA

Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Carl E. Stevens, Jr., Department
of Psychological Science, 480 Campus Drive, Fayetteville, AR 72701. Ph: 479-575-4256. E:
cesteven@uark.edu.

1

EEG MACHINE LEARNING AND DIVERGENT THINKING

2

Abstract
Prior research has shown that greater EEG alpha power (8-13 Hz) is characteristic of more
creative individuals, and more creative task conditions. The present study investigated the
potential for machine learning to classify more and less creative brain states. Participants
completed an Alternate Uses Task, in which they thought of Normal or Uncommon (more
creative) uses for everyday objects (e.g., brick). We hypothesized that alpha power would be
greater for Uncommon (vs. Common) uses, and that a machine learning (ML) approach would
enable the reliable classification data from the two conditions. Further, we expected that ML
would be successful at classifying more (vs. less) creative individuals. As expected, alpha power
was significantly greater for the Uncommon than for the Normal condition. Using spectrally
weighted common spatial patterns to extract EEG features, and quadratic discriminant analysis,
we found that classification accuracy for the two conditions varied widely among individuals,
with a mean of 63.9%. For more vs. less creative individuals, 82.3% classification accuracy was
attained. These findings indicate the potential for broader adoption of machine learning in
creativity research.
Keywords: Alpha, Classification, EEG, Creativity, AUT

EEG MACHINE LEARNING AND DIVERGENT THINKING

3

Classifying Creativity: Applying Machine Learning Techniques to Divergent Thinking
EEG Data
Barring a few early exceptions, (Martindale& Mines, 1975; Martindale & Hasenfus,
1978), the use of electroencephalography (EEG) has only recently become common in creativity
research. The increased interest and utilization of EEG to assess creative cognition – the ability
to generate novel and useful ideas (Sternberg & Lubart, 1996) – is largely attributable to the
EEG’s excellent temporal resolution, which allows investigations of event-related potentials
(ERPs), as well as transient network coherence and phase-locked activity. EEG-based research
has been well-suited for highlighting the complex dynamics of creative cognition, bringing
valuable insights to the field (for review, Stevens & Zabelina, 2019).
EEG and Divergent Thinking
Divergent thinking (DT) tasks are a common and long-standing method for examining
creative idea generation (Guilford, 1967). One standard way to assess DT is with an Alternate
Uses Task (AUT). On the AUT, participants are asked to generate novel uses for common
objects, such as a brick, and their responses are typically scored for fluency (i.e., number of uses
generated) and originality (i.e., uniqueness of responses).
EEG-based work most consistently suggests that better performance on the AUT tasks is
linked with increased alpha-band (8-13 Hz) activity (Benedek, 2018; Fink & Benedek, 2014).
Higher task-related power (TRP) in the alpha range, for example, has been found in the frontal
and parietal regions when greater creative demands are imposed during the AUT (Jauk, Benedek,
& Neubauer, 2012). A positive association between alpha power and creativity has also been
found in other tasks that have novel and normal response conditions (Zhou, Chen, Wang, Zhao,
Zhou, & Lu, 2018). Alpha power was reported to be primarily increased at the beginning of

EEG MACHINE LEARNING AND DIVERGENT THINKING

4

creative idea generation (when participants were asked to think of creative uses for common
objects), dip, then increase again just prior to participants’ responses (Schwab, Benedek,
Papousek, Weiss, & Fink, 2014). This U-shaped alpha effect was found to be particularly true of
more creative individuals (Rominger et al., ,2019). Furthermore, alpha power was found to
decrease over time in an open-ended task involving a change from more strongly divergent, to
more strongly convergent, thinking (Zhou et al., 2018). When participants were asked to provide
novel uses for the same object in four distinct, sequential response phases, both alpha and
creativity ratings increased from the first to the later phases, possibly reflecting the greater
creative demand involved in generating the additional responses (Agnoli, Zanon, Mastria,
Avenanti, & Corazza, in press).
Individual differences have also been reported at the trial level: More creative people
have demonstrated higher alpha-band power than less creative individuals on the AUT (Fink &
Neubauer 2008). Additionally, those who perform better on the AUT have demonstrated greater
duration of increased frontal and parietal alpha power (Camarda, et al., 2018), and show greater
between-condition differences in frontal alpha TRP, compared to less creative individuals (Jauk
et al., 2012).
The relationship between alpha-band power and creativity is thought to be at least
partially attributable to reduced attention to external stimuli in favor of more internally oriented
attention (Benedek, 2018). Specifically, participants might demonstrate greater creativity and
alpha power on the AUT because they successfully inhibit information that is not relevant to the
task at hand. Indeed, when attention is externally (vs. internally) oriented, alpha has been found
to decrease (Benedek, Bergner, Könen, Fink, & Neubauer, 2011). Visual processing can be

EEG MACHINE LEARNING AND DIVERGENT THINKING

5

demanding, and it is perhaps unsurprising that the simple act of closing one’s eyes has been
found to increase AUT performance (Ritter, Abbing, & Van Schie, 2018).
Alpha, however, is not the only frequency band that has been shown to relate to
successful AUT performance. Changes in delta- and theta-band activity have also been reported
(Boot, Baas, Mühlfeld, de Dreu, & van Gaal, 2017; Wokke, Ridderinkhof, & Padding, 2018).
Theta in particular appears to have an interesting relationship with DT, as evidenced by
increased theta fronto-occipital functional connectivity in more (vs. less) creative individuals
(Wokke et al., 2018). Previously, frontal theta was found to be associated with greater cognitive
control (Cavanaugh & Frank, 2014). Given the role of attention (internal vs. external) in DT
(Benedek, 2018), this finding may point to the theta-dependent suppression of visual functions
by frontal executive areas. In other words, theta activity may be an indication of top-down
processing in the service of creative cognition. This view is supported by the implication of the
lower end of the EEG spectrum (i.e., theta) in long-range communication between brain regions
(Clayton, Yeung, & Kadosh, 2015). In light of these findings, it is clear that the relationship
between oscillatory neural activity and creativity is not confined to the alpha frequency band,
though alpha’s relationship to creativity is the most well-supported by current empirical
investigations.
The practice of using machine learning (ML) techniques to understand the nature of EEG
signals has grown substantially in recent years. In creativity research, however, this is a
technique that is novel and ripe for implementation, with unexplored territory extending in every
direction. The purpose of the present study was thus to move into this literature gap and
investigate the extent to which more and less creative brain states can be reliably discerned
according to their EEG characteristics, allowing for unbiased detection of creative thinking.

EEG MACHINE LEARNING AND DIVERGENT THINKING

6

EEG and Machine Learning
The growing use of machine learning in EEG research is at least partially attributable to
the increased availability of code and software packages, as well as the ever-increasing
computational capacity of modern computers, without the need to purchase a machine that can
fill a small room. The purposes of studies of this nature have varied widely, and include attempts
to detect disease (Orrù, Pettersson-Yeo, Marquand, Sartori, & Mechelli, 2012), recognize
emotional states (Giannakaki, Giannakakis, Farmaki, & Sakkalis 2017), and even classify
individuals by learning style (Jawed, Amin, Malik, & Faye, 2019). In the case of brain-computer
interface (BCI) applications, motor cortical patterns have been classified and used to control
virtual and even physical objects (Abiri, Borhani, Sellers, Jiang, & Zhao, 2018). This approach is
of particular interest in fields of research such as stroke, paralysis, and other areas in which
mobility is compromised.
ML is an attractive approach in the field of creativity research for several reasons. An
important one is that, while certain EEG features that are known to be related to creativity can be
specifically targeted in an ML paradigm (e.g., specific frequency band or channels), the “handsoff” nature of the algorithmic process, once it is set in motion, does afford researchers the
possibility of discovering new features that are not expected. In other words, if the information
that is used as ML input is broader in content than what would be assumed to be essential, a
machine would be more likely to detect a previously unknown pattern. Further, while some
features of the creative process are understood, based on the replication of results in studies from
various laboratories (e.g., Benedek, Schickel, Jauk, Fink, & Neubauer, 2014; Jauk et al., 2012;
Schwab et al., 2014), it is still not obvious to assume that, at the individual level, everyone is
creative in precisely the same way. In other words, people may utilize disparate strategies and

EEG MACHINE LEARNING AND DIVERGENT THINKING

7

resources to arrive at analogous creative ideas. Variability among individuals can cause
difficulties for researchers when attempting to determine common functional or anatomical
features among individuals. ML, however, makes it possible to detect EEG features that are
subject-specific under certain experimental conditions, and make predictions about the nature of
new information obtained from that same individual.
ML Types and Procedures
In order to classify EEG data, feature extraction is used to reduce data dimensionality and
select the EEG features that are relevant for classification. Common algorithms include estimates
of power spectral density (PSD), wavelet transform, and common spatial pattern (CSP) analysis.
Once useful features are determined, a decision-making algorithm is used to classify the data.
There are various types of algorithms, including the support vector machine (SVM), k-nearest
neighbors (k-NN), artificial neural networks (ANN), and linear discriminant analysis (LDA)
(Christensen & Abdullah, 2018). Once the decision-making algorithm has made some
determination regarding the nature of the EEG signal, this determination is output for the user.
The success of ML techniques in the classification of brain states can be assessed by
accuracy during training, and by how accurately a trained model can categorize new data, if realtime feedback is desired. Training accuracy is typically assessed using a cross-validation
procedure. Datasets are frequently divided into 10 parts, 9 of which are used for training, while
the one remaining part is used to test the model’s accuracy. This specific process is referred to as
“10-fold cross-validation”. Validation outputs frequently include false-positive, false-negative,
true-positive, and true-negative rates, and/or an overall accuracy rate.
Accuracy can vary considerably across studies, which is not surprising, given the diverse
nature of the questions that are addressed in the literature, and the wide variety of tasks and

EEG MACHINE LEARNING AND DIVERGENT THINKING

8

analytical methodologies that are employed. There are many examples of ML’s ability to classify
mental state EEG data. For example, using an SVM on data from 12 bilateral pairs of electrodes,
4 different musically elicited emotions were correctly classified at an average rate of 82.29%
across participants (Lin, Wang, Jung, Wu, Jeng, Duann, & Chen, 2010). This was slightly better
than the 81.52% accuracy they achieved using a multilayer perceptron. SVM, k-NN, and a leastsquares (LS) classifier were used to classify EEG responses to exciting and relaxing music,
recorded from 27 pairs of bilateral electrodes (Duan, Wang, & Lu, 2012). SVM performed best
in this study, with an average rate of 80.08% accuracy across participants. It is noteworthy that
classification accuracy can vary between individuals. In this study, for example, the lowest
observed rate was 67.47%, while the highest rate was 98.97%.
It is possible to use very few EEG channels and achieve satisfactory results, as was
demonstrated recently (Avinash, Dikshant, & Seema, 2018). Using data from 3 bilateral pairs of
electrodes and only from the theta band, LDA was 90% accurate in the classification of positive
and negative responses to musical stimuli, while k-NN was 100% accurate when using 3
neighbors (k). The potential to classify whether participants liked or disliked music was
investigated using a 14-channel EEG headset (Emotiv EPOC) and 4 different classification
algorithms (SVM, k-NN, and 2 types of discriminant analyses; Hadjidimitriou & Hadjileontiadis,
2012). The best-performing algorithm in this study was found to be k-NN, which achieved an
accuracy rate of 86.52% using the complete dataset from all participants. Somewhat surprisingly,
using only a single EEG channel (Pz-Oz) and a random-forest classifier, 5 sleep stages were
correctly classified at a rate of 88.66% in healthy subjects, though accuracy dropped to 66.96%
in a group with REM behavioral disorder (Boostani, Karimzadeh, & Nami, 2017).

EEG MACHINE LEARNING AND DIVERGENT THINKING

9

ML/EEG has also been used with success in more strictly cognitive studies. In a
schizophrenia study on working memory, task performance (correct or incorrect) was classified
by SVM using five frequency components (high theta, low theta, alpha, beta, and gamma) taken
from four different time periods (during baseline, encoding, retention, and retrieval stages) at
three electrode sites (Fz, Cz, and Oz; Johannesen, Bi, Jiang, Kenney, & Chi-Ming, 2016). The
model successfully classified performance with 84% accuracy in healthy controls, with frontal
gamma during the encoding stage and central theta during retention as the most heavily weighted
features. In the same study, a second model was able to classify healthy controls and
schizophrenia patients with 87% accuracy, with frontal theta during baseline and frontal alpha
during retrieval as the most heavily weighted features. Cognitive load has also been predicted
from EEG features that were extracted from data collected while participants completed the
Raven’s APM Set II, which uses 36 increasingly difficult manipulations of shapes to assess
general intelligence (Friedman, Fekete, Gal, & Shriki, 2019). The approach taken in this study
involved extracting features from band power in delta, theta, alpha, beta, and gamma bands for
each of 62 EEG channels, in addition to measures of neural complexity and connectivity. An
XGB algorithm, which is decision tree-based, was used. Predictably, decreasing the number of
categories by increasing the bin size of difficulty levels (fewer bins, more individual levels in
each) increased prediction results. Interestingly, when considering all channels, the addition of
complexity features did not improve results, while the addition of connectivity features did.
Perhaps more interestingly, prediction quality improved when the number of channels included
in the analysis was restricted between 12 and 30 (r 2 peaks of 0.7 for 12 and 26 electrodes, in the
case of spectral features only), and the inclusion of only 8 channels still yielded 95% of peak

EEG MACHINE LEARNING AND DIVERGENT THINKING

10

performance. In short, the best results were obtained when the number of bins and channels were
limited.
To our knowledge, there is no empirical work in which DT was investigated using
EEG/ML techniques. One study, however, reported in conference proceedings that moments of
intense in-the-moment creativity (ITMC) were accurately discerned from less creative periods at
a rate of 82.98% by an SVM algorithm (Carrol & Latulipe, 2012). These ITMC moments were
determined by external judges who watched participants sketch over the course of 30 minutes via
video. Data analysis was restricted to the alpha and beta bands, and the limited-channel EPOC
headset was used for acquisition. While this is only one study, when considered in combination
with the broader field of EEG/ML research, it does point to the potential of similar
methodologies in the pursuit of new perspectives on creative cognition. This potential is made
more appealing by the results of a human-computer interface study, in which internal and
external attentional states were classified using LDA (Putze, Scherer, & Schultz, 2016).
Researchers used a visual oddball task to heighten external attention, and several different tasks
that require internal attention (mental math, word generation, and episodic memory).
Classification accuracy using only band power features reached 80.4%, and when ERP features
were included, accuracy increased to 81.2%. As previously mentioned, the direction in which
one’s attention is focused can be an indicator of changes in both creativity and alpha power,
further demonstrating the potential for EEG/ML in the creativity field. Recognition of this
potential was the primary motivation for the current study.
Present Study
The present study utilized a computerized version of an Alternate Uses Task (AUT)
(adapted from Jauk et al., 2012). During the task, participants were presented with a common

EEG MACHINE LEARNING AND DIVERGENT THINKING

11

object, such as a “brick,” and were asked to think of an “Uncommon”, or unusual use for each
object (experimental condition), or a “Normal”, or common use for the object (control
condition). Each trial consisted of four phases: 1) a reference phase , which presented
participants with a “jittered” fixation cross; 2) a preparation phase, where participants saw a cue
indicating the kind of use (normal or uncommon) that was required for the current trial; 3) an
idea generation phase, where the name of the object was displayed until participants indicated
they had thought of a response; and 4) a response phase, where participants typed their response.
Prior research on creativity has consistently found between-condition and betweensubject differences in the alpha range and beyond (for review, Stevens Jr. & Zabelina, 2019). It
was predicted that the use of ML would enable the reliable classification of multi-band EEG data
from more and less creative task conditions, and from more and less creative individuals. In
addition to the manipulation of various ML parameters, a priori-based channel selection
(reduction) was explored for the purpose of mitigating computational strain.

Methods
Participants
Thirty healthy individuals participated in the present study (8 males, 21 females, mean
age = 19.55, SD = 1.99). One participant was excluded from all data analyses because the task
instructions were not followed correctly, resulting in a final sample of 29 participants. Most
participants self-identified as White/Caucasian (86.2%). All participants had normal or
corrected-to-normal vision. They were not diagnosed with any psychiatric disorders at the time
and were fluent English speakers. They were not under the influence of excessive caffeine,
unprescribed medication, or alcohol. The study was approved by the local institutional review

EEG MACHINE LEARNING AND DIVERGENT THINKING

12

board. All participants gave written informed consent prior to their sessions and were
compensated with research credits.
Experimental task and procedures
The AUT was used as a measure of creative idea generation. In this task, participants
were presented with 30 different common objects (see Appendix for a list of objects used in this
study). Each object was presented twice – once in the Normal condition, and once in the
Uncommon condition. Order of object presentation, and the order of condition for each object
was computer-randomized for each session. Specifically, each of the 30 items was presented first
in one of the two conditions, then all 30 were presented again, but in the opposite condition to
their first appearance. In the Normal condition, participants were instructed to think of ordinary,
common ways to use the objects. In the Uncommon condition, they were instructed to think of
unusual, creative ways to use the objects. Participants were told they had up to 30 seconds to
respond for each object, at which point the trial would time out. Participants were instructed to
remain as still as possible, and limit eye movement and blinking except in between trials. All
instructions were presented visually, on a computer screen, and verbally, by a researcher.
Each of the 60 trials in the AUT began with the presentation of a fixation cross for a
duration that was randomized between 2 and 5 seconds in 25 millisecond increments (~3.5s).
Next, a cue word, either “Normal” or “Uncommon”, was displayed for 5 seconds. This was
followed by the name of an object, which remained on the screen for up to 30 seconds. To
respond, participants hit the ‘Enter’ key on the computer keyboard. This interrupted the object
presentation and brought up a white text box in which to type. Participants typed their responses,
then hit ‘Enter’ again to record the answer and move on to the next trial (Figure 1). Participants
were told it was okay to move their eyes freely while typing, but to keep them still again once the

EEG MACHINE LEARNING AND DIVERGENT THINKING

13

next fixation cross appeared. Trials were presented in 4 blocks of 15 trials, with a user-defined
break period between blocks. The task typically took about 35 minutes to complete.

Figure 1. Alternate Uses Task (AUT) phases and timing.

The task was custom coded using Presentation® software (Version 20.2,
Neurobehavioral Systems, Inc., Berkeley, CA, www.neurobs.com). Port codes appearing in the
EEG time series files were programmed to identify the occurrence of experimental elements.
These included unique codes to distinguish the presentation of Normal and Uncommon condition
cue words and object names. This allowed models to be trained to classify epochs during which
2 different kinds of thinking occurred.
In order to examine individual differences in creativity, and conduct score-based
creativity classification analysis, 5 independent judges blind to the conditions and the purpose of
the study (all undergraduate psychology students, 1 male, 4 female, M age = 20.2, SD = 1.17)
rated all responses for creativity (“How creative is this response?”). Ratings were made on a
Likert-type scale from 1 (least creative) to 10 (most creative). Raters achieved good inter-rater
reliability (Cronbach’s αs > .80). Two groups (High- and Low-creative) were formed by
selecting the top and bottom 9 participants (middle excluded), based on the ratings.
EEG recording and equipment

EEG MACHINE LEARNING AND DIVERGENT THINKING

14

EEG signals were acquired using the Biosemi ActiveTwo system, with 32 scalp and 4
EOG AG/AgCl electrodes positioned according to the 10/20 system. Linked mastoid electrodes
were used for reference. EEG data were recorded at 2048 Hz using the BioSemi ActiveTwo
biopotential measurement system (BioSemi, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) and ActiView
software (BioSemi). During recording, signals were high-pass filtered at 0.16 Hz. Recordings
were monitored continuously during experimental sessions, and all potentially artifact-producing
events (coughing, sneezing, obvious muscle-based or other noise) were recorded by a researcher.
No subjects had out-of-the-ordinary artifact-producing issues (sneezing or coughing spells, etc.).
Both raw and cleaned data (process described below) were used separately in analyses (i.e.,
transitory events like blinks, muscle twitches, etc, were not removed prior to raw data feature
extraction and classification). This was done with the intent of determining the accuracy that
could be attained with minimal processing.
General Analysis Strategy
ML classification analyses of condition types (Normal and Uncommon) and creative
types (High and Low) were the focus of this study. Between-condition spectral analyses focusing
on the 8-30 Hz frequency range were also performed using cleaned data (see Spectral Analyses
section for details). This was done to provide insight into the effectiveness of the task design to
elicit condition-related changes in brain activity. Classification was performed on EEG data in
two forms – raw and cleaned. This was done to allow a comparison of ML results derived
through a normal offline EEG processing pipeline, and those that might be obtained through realtime processing. In both cases, variations in the following aspects of EEG data selection were
examined: electrode locations/channels, time windows, frequency ranges (see Machine Learning
Analyses section). The variations that were tested were predetermined, and those that are

EEG MACHINE LEARNING AND DIVERGENT THINKING

15

reported here were chosen based on classification performance; although, reporting on the 1-2.5
second window that comprises most results was predetermined (see Machine Learning Analyses
section). Additional analyses were performed to assess the possible influence of artifacts on
classification (see A Smaller, Earlier Analysis Time Window section, and Assessing the
Potential Impact of Artifacts on Classification section).
Data processing
All signal processing occurred in MATLAB R2018b (The MathWorks, Inc., Natick,
Massachusetts, United States) using the EEGLAB (version 14.2.1; Delorme and Makeig, 2004)
and BCILAB toolboxes (developer version; https://github.com/sccn/BCILAB) (Kothe & Makeig,
2013), which are made freely available by the Schwartz Center for Computational Neuroscience.
Additional statistical analyses were carried out using IBM SPSS Statistics for Windows, version
25.
Spectral analyses
EEG signals were high-pass filtered at 1 Hz and low-pass filtered at 58 Hz. Fifty-eight Hz
was above the frequency range of interest, based on the literature, and setting the cutoff at this
point filtered out frequencies in the range of line noise. Channel locations were assigned, and
signals were referenced to the averaged mastoids (M1 and M2). Artifact Subspace
Reconstruction (developed by Christian Kothe as part of BCILAB’s online cleaning, now
available for offline use) was used to identify and reject artifactual principle components. ASR
uses a sliding window (0.5 seconds, 50% overlap) to remove transient, high-amplitude artifacts
(e.g., eyeblinks, muscle twitches, etc.), after which rejected component activity is reconstructed
from surviving components. Infomax ICA (Bell & Sejnowski, 1995) was performed. Multiple
Artifact Rejection Algorithm (MARA) (Winkler, Brandl, Horn, Waldburger, Allefeld, &

EEG MACHINE LEARNING AND DIVERGENT THINKING

16

Tangermann., 2014; Gabard-Durnam, Mendez Leal, Wilkinson, & Levin, 2018), which extracts
6 features from the temporal (1. mean local skewness), spatial (2. range within pattern, 3. current
density norm), and spectral (4. log alpha power, 5. lambda, and 6. fit error) domains, was used to
identify and remove “bad” independent components (ICs). MARA’s default component rejection
threshold of 50% probability – that a component is artifactual – was altered in MATLAB to a
more conservative 80%. Statistical comparisons were carried out using EEGLAB.
Machine learning analyses
Unfiltered EEG data (raw .bdf files), as well as datasets that were processed as noted in
the previous section (cleaned data), were loaded in BCILAB. The continuous data were analyzed
at both the individual and group levels. Data epochs of interest were selected in BCILAB using
EEGLAB functions (BCILAB is designed primarily for real-time processing and will not process
non-continuous, pre-epoched data as the program stands). These were defined as the periods
from 1 to 2.5 seconds after stimulus onset, i.e., the appearances of object names. Additional
latencies during the AUT task were also tested: an earlier, shorter interval immediately following
the beginning of creative ideation (0.75 to 1.75 seconds); from -4 to -1 seconds, in relation to the
onset of ideation (during the 5-second Normal or Uncommon preparation phase); and from -2 to
-0.5 seconds, in relation to response (button press). These other intervals, however, yielded
inferior classification accuracy. Additionally, prior to testing of these other intervals, the 1-2.5
second time period was selected based on a previous AUT study (Schwab et al., 2014), in which
it was found that alpha band task-related power changes at dorsal frontal (F3/F4) and parietal
(P3/P4) sites were greatest in the first of three evenly divided intervals beginning at the onset of
idea generation (from 1-9 seconds post-onset, 2.67 seconds per interval), with no difference in
TRP between hemispheres. Port codes sent from Presentation created event markers in the

EEG MACHINE LEARNING AND DIVERGENT THINKING

17

datasets to indicate these timepoints, as well as the occurrences of other task events. The 2
condition types (Normal and Uncommon) were distinctly identified by these markers.
Channel combinations of different quantities and from different locations on the scalp
were systematically tested in order to find the best possible classification accuracy. These
included a full-scalp combination (all 32 cortical channels), and P4 alone. In all cases,
combinations included P4 (right parietal), given the consensus among studies regarding this
region’s involvement in creative ideation (Benedek, 2018). The locations of other individual
channels that were combined with P4 were Fz, F3, F7, Cz, C3, Pz, P3, P7, T7 and the matching
contralateral channels of each non-midline (z) channel. Channel combinations that were
combined with P4 were as follows: (2 additional channels) F3/F7 (left frontal), F3/C3 (left
frontocentral), C3/P3 (left centroparietal) C3/T7 (left centrotemporal), and the matching
contralateral pairs of each; (3 additional channels) C3/C4/P3 (bilateral centroparietal), and
P3/P7/P8 (bilateral parietal); (4 additional channels) F3/F4/F7/F8 (bilateral frontal),
F3/F4/C3/C4 (bilateral frontocentral). These channel combinations were chosen to provide good
coverage of cortical regions that have either been observed to be differentially responsive to the
demands of the Normal and Uncommon AUT conditions (Jauk et al., 2012), or responsive in the
early stages of creative ideation (Rominger et al., 2019; Schwab et al., 2014). The primary
motivation for attempting classification using mainly smaller channel groups was twofold: 1) to
reduce computational expense, and 2) to potentially enhance the performance of the feature
extraction and classification algorithms by not including data that were unlikely to be helpful for
classification.
EEG features were extracted using 3 iterations of a Spectrally Weighted Common Spatial
Patterns (SpecCSP) algorithm (Ramoser, Muller-Gerking, & Pfurtscheller, 2000). Initial

EEG MACHINE LEARNING AND DIVERGENT THINKING

18

frequency bands of interest were theta (4-8 Hz), low alpha (8-10 Hz), high alpha (10-13 Hz),
beta (13-30 Hz), and gamma (30-42 Hz), though theta and gamma were later excluded to
enhance classification performance. Results therefore are restricted to data from the low-alpha,
high-alpha, and beta bands. The minimum-phase filter frequency specification was set at 6 Hz at
the low end, and 44 Hz at the high end. The number of SpecCSP patterns was set to no greater
than the number of channels selected for a given dataset, i.e., 2 channels = 2 CSP patterns (errors
occur otherwise). To reduce computational load, data were downsampled to 100 Hz at this stage,
in accordance with the Nyquist Theorem (digital sample rate must be >= 2x the highest analog
frequency under analysis).
The types of supervised classification algorithms used were quadratic discriminant
analysis (QDA) and Support Vector Machine (SVM). QDA differs from LDA in that it can learn
quadratic boundaries, as opposed to linear boundaries, and is therefore more flexible. This is
important when data classes are not linearly separable. Also, in contrast to LDA, QDA does not
require that different classes have identical covariance matrices (Bhattacharyya, Khasnobish,
Konar, Tibarewala, & Naga, 2011). The quadratic discriminant function is δk(x) = − 1/2log|Σk| −
1/2(x−μk)TΣ-1k (x−μk) + logπk. SVMs are discriminative classifiers that are very commonly

used in neurophysiological data classification. The purpose of this algorithm is to find a linearly
separable hyperplane, or decision boundary, by which to differentiate classes (Rossi & Villa,
2007). The margin between the plane and the nearest data points on either side, which are known
as support vectors, is maximized. If a decision boundary cannot be found, SVM will search after
transforming the data to a higher dimension. Because of its ubiquity in biosignal classification
analyses, it was deemed important to include SVM in testing on the current dataset. As noted in

EEG MACHINE LEARNING AND DIVERGENT THINKING

19

the results section, however, QDA consistently outperformed SVM in the current study, so the
reported results are restricted to QDA.
For both classifier types, predictive models were trained on SpecCSP-derived features
using a leave-one-out 10-fold cross-validation performance estimation procedure (1 section held
out for testing, 9 sections used for training, repeated for each section; 5 trials around any test trial
excluded from the training set). During the task, distinct event codes marking the onset of
Normal and Uncommon ideation periods were added to the data stream by Presentation. These
were used as target markers (classifiers). For the classification of High- and Low-creative
participants, in-house code was used to modify Uncommon condition event codes for the Highcreative group. This differentiated the intervals of interest for the High- and Low-creative groups
from one another. Performance estimates at the group and individual levels are described in
terms of classification accuracy, as determined by true/false positive and negative rates.
Results
Participants responded faster in the Normal condition (M = 1.99s, SD = 0.83) than in the
Uncommon condition (M = 9.23s, SD = 2.58), t(28) = 16.95, p < 0.001, d = 3.14. This result was
not surprising, given that the Normal responses were obvious in nature, and were expected to be
easier to generate.
Paired t-tests were used to examine between-condition log-transformed power spectral
density (PSD) in EEGLAB. All subjects’ cleaned data were included. For the Uncommon
condition, power was significantly greater than in the Normal condition in a number of
frequency ranges at F4 (Figure 2). This included a continuous range spanning the low- and highalpha bands (8.6-10Hz and 10-11.5Hz), t(28) = 2.35, p = 0. 013, and t(28) = 1.96, p = 0.03,
respectively. Power was also greater in the Uncommon (vs. Normal) condition in numerous

EEG MACHINE LEARNING AND DIVERGENT THINKING

20

ranges of the beta band between 17.5 and 27.6 Hz (ps < 0.05). Power was also greater at P4 for
the Uncommon (vs. Normal) condition, including much of the low- (8.6-10 Hz) and high-alpha
bands (10.3-11.8 Hz), t(28) = 1.75, p = 0.04, and t(28) = 1.74, p = 0.05, respectively). Much like
F4, though over a greater portion of the frequency band, power at P4 was greater in numerous
ranges of the beta band between 12.9 and 20.1 Hz, and at 28 Hz (ps < 0.05) (Figure 2).

Figure 2. Between-condition (Normal versus Uncommon) comparison of spectral power density
at F4 and P4 electrode sites. Black bars along the x-axis indicate frequencies where differences
between conditions are significant at the level of p < 0.05. The topographic map (all channels) at
bottom shows power at 10 Hz (alpha) for the two conditions separately.

EEG MACHINE LEARNING AND DIVERGENT THINKING

21

Though the difference was typically minor, QDA classification in BCILAB outperformed
that of SVM in all cases, so QDA results are reported. Classification accuracy generally
maintained an inverse relationship with the number of channels that were included. Accuracy
was indeed found to be highest when restricting the number of channels to right frontal (F4) and
right parietal (P4). In addition to a reduced number of features and increased accuracy, this
restriction provided the benefit of reduced computational expense. The EEG classification results
reported below are therefore restricted to the F4/P4 channel combination.
Condition Classification Results: Individual Level, All Participants
Ten-fold cross-validation of QDA condition classification for individual participants was
assessed using both raw signals and cleaned data separately. For raw data, individual accuracy
rates ranged from 36.7% to 93.3%, with a mean of 63.9% (SD = 0.15). For cleaned data,
individual accuracy ranged from 39% to 95% with a mean of 62.7% (SD = 0.15).
Condition Classification Results: Whole-Group Level
For whole-group condition classification, all participants’ data were concatenated and
used for model training. Raw and cleaned data were used separately to train and evaluate models.
Score-based (AUT task ratings) classification of more and less creative individuals was also
performed using both raw and cleaned data from the Uncommon condition only, thus minimizing
the impact of fast responses, which were common in the Normal condition. Due to the extremes
in classification accuracy among individuals, whole-group classification accuracy was generally
poorer than individual classification.
Using all participants’ raw data, the condition classification accuracy for QDA was
59.7% (Figure 3). Additionally, when a QDA-derived model was trained on all participants’ raw

EEG MACHINE LEARNING AND DIVERGENT THINKING

22

data, and the model was then applied to individuals, classification accuracy ranged from 40% to
85%, with a mean of 59.2% (SD = 0.12).

Figure 3. Spectrally weighted common spatial patterns (Spec-CSP) found in High- and Lowcreative groups (top), and in whole-group condition classification analyses (bottom). Two EEG
channels (black dots) were used for classification: F4 (right frontal) and P4 (right parietal).
Spectral patterns are shown beneath the topographic maps. Relative to the rest of the spectrum,
frontal patterns (upper and lower left side) exhibit heavily weighted beta (13-30 Hz), and parietal
patterns (upper and lower right side) exhibit heavily weighted alpha (8-13 Hz).

EEG MACHINE LEARNING AND DIVERGENT THINKING

23

Accuracy using all participants’ cleaned data was slightly lower than for raw data.
Condition classification accuracy for QDA was 57.5% (+/-11.8%; folds = 10), and when a QDAderived model that was trained on all participants’ cleaned data was applied to each individual,
predictive accuracy ranged from 47.4% to 88.3%, with a mean of 58.5% (SD = 0.13).
Condition Classification Results: High- and Low-Creative Groups Separately
For raw data classification, High-creative group accuracy was 56.3% (+/-11.7%; folds =
10). Increasing the number of folds decreased accuracy slightly, to 56.1% (+/-13%; folds = 25).
Low-creative group accuracy was slightly better, at 58.1% (+/-11.2%; folds = 10), and 59.2%
(+/-13.7%; folds = 25).
QDA condition classification accuracy was 54.9% for cleaned High-creative group data
(n=9). Increasing the number of folds increased accuracy to 56% (+/-14.8%; folds = 25).
Condition classification accuracy for cleaned Low-creative group data (n=9) was slightly better,
at 56.9% (+/-13.4%; folds = 10). Increasing the number of folds increased accuracy to 58.5%
(+/-14.9%; folds = 25).
Group Classification Results: High- and Low-Creatives
For raw data, between-group creativity classification was 82.3% (+/-12.7%; folds = 10).
For 5 folds, accuracy was 80.6% (+/-11.3%). As was the case for cleaned data, raising the
number of folds to 25 reduced accuracy, compared to using 10 (81.2%, +/-15.7%).
For cleaned data, classification of the High-and Low-creative groups) was 81.3% (+/13.2%; folds = 10) (Figure 3). At only 5 folds, accuracy was 79.6% (+/-10.7%). Raising the
number of folds to 25 did not improve accuracy, but rather reduced it, relative to using 10 folds
(80.7%, +/-16.4%).
A Smaller, Earlier Analysis Time Window

EEG MACHINE LEARNING AND DIVERGENT THINKING

24

There was initial concern on the part of researchers that a time window starting at 0.5
seconds could include stimulus response features that would be non-specific to either condition,
thereby hampering classification. This early period was therefore not included in the original
analysis plan. This thinking is somewhat in line with the earliest analysis window of 1-3.67
seconds used by Schwab et al. (2014). Because of the typically fast reaction times observed in
the Normal condition in this study, however, a window from 0.5 to 1.75 seconds was added to
the analyses. This avoided the mean Normal condition RT of 1.99 seconds, though some
responses are still unavoidably present in this window. For condition classification, accuracy was
lower in the 0.5-1.75s window than in the 1-2.5s window that has been described for raw data (5.5%) and for cleaned data (-5.69%). For creativity-based classification, accuracy was higher in
the 0.5-1.75s window than in the 1-2.5s window for raw data (+5.8%) and for cleaned data
(+3.1%).
Assessing the Potential Impact of Artifacts on Classification
Due to RT-related concerns that response artifacts might have influenced classification
using the 1-2.5s window, additional analyses were conducted to assess their possible influence.
For all subjects, the mean number of Normal epochs (30 total) containing responses was 23.66,
SD = 5.81. Uncommon trials (also 30) contained 4.62 responses on average, SD = 5.08. This
between-condition difference was significant, t(28) = 13.3, p < 0.01. Response-containing
epochs for High-creative (M = 18.89, SD = 7.36) and Low-creative (M = 19, SD = 8.29) groups
were also assessed. When the between-condition difference scores for each group were
compared, no between-group difference was found, t(16) = -0.03, p = 0.49.
Further testing of EEG data for the presence of artifacts was conducted. Using automated
thresholding, cleaned data were tested for abnormal voltage values (+/- 75 µv) and abnormal

EEG MACHINE LEARNING AND DIVERGENT THINKING

25

spectra (for eye movements, +/-50 dB in the 0-2 Hz window; for muscle, +25 or -100 dB in the
20-40 Hz window) in EEGLAB. For all subjects, the number of trials that were exceeded these
thresholds in the Normal condition was 32 (M = 1.1, SD = 3.55); in the Uncommon condition, 45
trials exceeded thresholds (M = 1.55, SD = 4.52). There was not a significant between-condition
difference, t(28) = -1.61, p = 0.12. A further test of between-group (High/Low creativity)
differences in the number of threshold-exceeding trials also revealed no significant difference,
t(16) = 0.61, p = 0.55. Visual inspection of cleaned data also did not reveal typical blink or
lateral eye movement artifacts.
Discussion
The present study utilized an Alternate Uses Task (AUT) on which participants were
presented with a common object and were asked to either think of Uncommon (creative) or
Normal (not creative) ways to use these objects. Participants’ responses were judged by
independent raters for creativity, and two groups (High- and Low-creative) were formed based
on their responses. Prior research found EEG differences between more and less creative
conditions, and between more and less creative individuals (Benedek, 2018), thus we predicted
that a machine learning approach would be able to classify the two task conditions, and the two
groups.
Classification of Uncommon and Normal Responses
Overall, as predicted, the study was successful at classifying the creative states, as well as
creative groups. EEG Spectral comparisons revealed the expected between-condition differences
for the group as a whole. Specifically, right frontal and parietal alpha-band power was greater in
the Uncommon, compared to the Normal condition at the beginning of creative ideation. Other
studies have observed greater alpha TRP in Uncommon, compared to Normal conditions (Jauk et

EEG MACHINE LEARNING AND DIVERGENT THINKING

26

al., 2012), and increased alpha TRP during creative ideation (Benedek et al., 2014), highlighting
the importance of alpha in creativity. Response times in the Uncommon condition were
significantly slower than in the Normal condition. This finding is similar to those of other studies
(Jauk et al., 2012), and provides external validity that participants were more likely to provide
responses that came to mind quickly in the Normal condition. In the Uncommon condition,
participants took longer, likely because they rejected obvious, typical ideas about object use in
favor of less obvious, and thus more creative, ideas.
The most relevant channel combination for accurate classification was right frontal and
parietal electrodes, F4 and P4. This restricted selection was beneficial not only in terms of
classification accuracy, but it also reduced computational expense. This finding bodes especially
well for future studies involving real-time data processing and neurofeedback.
In addition to the main period of 1-2.5 seconds that is reported in results, the general
analysis strategy (subsection in Methods) included testing of several other latencies during the
AUT task. These periods included the 0.75-1.75 second post-stimulus window, a period during
the preparation phase, in which participants were shown the cue word indicating which type of
thinking they were about to do (Normal or Uncommon), and in the period just before responding.
No other time period, however, yielded the accuracy found by selecting the period just after the
name of each object appeared, barring the initial period to process the stimulus. Indeed,
numerous periods just after stimulus onset were also tested, and the period reported here (1-2.5
seconds) yielded the greatest classification accuracy. This finding is corroborated by the results
of a previous study where alpha power increased at the beginning of the creative ideation phase
of a trial, then decreased (Rominger et al., 2019; Schwab et al., 2014). Although this previous
work also found alpha increases just prior to responding, classification of data from this period

EEG MACHINE LEARNING AND DIVERGENT THINKING

27

was not as successful in the current study as data from the beginning of the creative ideation
period.
In terms of classification accuracy, individual models generally worked better than group
models, which is expected, given the individual difference variability in processing styles, task
focus, and other variables. Participants whose models achieved the highest accuracy rates also
demonstrated greater power in the alpha and beta bands at both electrode sites (F4/P4) than those
whose models were less accurate. The most notable differences between High- and Lowaccuracy groups at right frontal and parietal regions resided in both the low- and high-alpha
ranges – primarily 9-12 Hz – though power was generally greater for the High-accuracy group
from about 25 Hz down to the low end of the frequency spectrum. The reason for this difference
is somewhat unclear, though a trend was found for the link between higher creativity scores and
increased classification accuracy. This leaves some ambiguity as to the reason(s) for the
observed differences between High- and Low-accuracy groups, though the decreased signal
power across much of the analyzed spectrum (8-30 Hz) introduces the possibility of a difference
in overall signal quality for Low-accuracy data.
Classification of More and Less Creative Individuals
Prior research has pointed to the differences in the EEG characteristics of more,
compared to less creative people (Beaty, Seli, & Schacter, 2019; Benedek, 2018). In the current
study, more versus less creative participants were successfully classified at a rate of just over
82%, in the case of raw data. This level of between-group classification accuracy is encouraging,
in terms of continued research in this vein. Specifically, there is the possibility of using models
derived from highly creative individuals to provide real-time feedback to other participants in a
training paradigm. Given the outperformance of individualized classification, however,

EEG MACHINE LEARNING AND DIVERGENT THINKING

28

expectations of this nature should be temperate. It is possible that a model derived from highly
creative individuals will simply not provide helpful feedback to those whose EEG features match
it poorly. A more likely benefit of continued research in this area is a richer understanding of
creative thinking through the use of data-driven, ML analyses.
To our knowledge, this is the first ML-based EEG study on divergent thinking, thus
variations in AUT parameters, the use of different types of DT tasks, and the adoption of everemerging and improving ML methods are all potential candidates to be used in this pursuit.
Lastly, the observation that the classification of raw data resulted in accuracy rates that were
essentially equivalent to the rates achieved using cleaned data highlights the possibility of
successfully classifying EEG data in real time without the need for ultra-high-performance
equipment. In other words, if computationally expensive data processing, like ICA, is not
necessary to achieve good results, then research of this kind is not restricted to labs that possess
machines that can perform such computations at break-neck speeds.
Limitations
One potential limitation is unbalanced male/female ration (8 males, 21 females). While it
is possible that sex differences in EEG patterns could be an issue for classification in some
circumstances, it is unclear that such is the case in this study. It was recently found that a deep
learning network was able to classify males and females with 80% accuracy (Putten, Olbrich, &
Arns, 2018), however, researchers used a deep convolutional neural network applied to raw
EEG. Thus, their analysis method differed substantially from that of the current study, so it is not
possible to infer from their results that the current approach would be sensitive to sex
differences. As a precaution, a 2-tailed t-test comparing male and female classification accuracy
was performed, but no no sex differences were found.

EEG MACHINE LEARNING AND DIVERGENT THINKING

29

Another limitation is the use of a 1-2.5 second time period used for classification, given
the 1.99-second mean response time in the Normal condition. This complication was not
anticipated. Given the self-paced task design, it raised the possibility that response-related factors
might have played a role in the observed accuracy rates. The additional analysis of an earlier
interval (0. 5-1.75 seconds) that did not contain the mean response time, however, yielded higher
accuracy rates, despite prior concerns that features related to stimulus onset, not condition type,
could muddy the waters for classification. Additional analyses also revealed that while there was
a highly significant between-condition difference in the number of Normal and Uncommon trials
that contained responses, this difference was the same for both High- and Low-creative groups.
Thus, it seems unlikely that fast response times affected group classification results. Additional
analyses to assess the general influence of artifacts, including on condition classification, showed
a low rate of artifacts in the 1-2.5 second window (4.4%) for all trials, and no difference between
conditions. Altogether, these additional findings seem to indicate that response-related activity
likely had a negligible effect on classification accuracy. This line of thinking is perhaps most
heavily bolstered by the finding that changing the epoch window to 0.5-1.75, which ends 0.24
seconds before mean RT, actually improved accuracy, in the case of between-group
classification. If response-related features had been the driver of this classification, then
including this period would have presumably resulted in superior model performance. That being
said, it is interesting that when the analysis window was changed from 1-2.5s to 0.5-1.75s,
condition classification accuracy decreased. One possible reason for changes in the opposite
direction for condition classification vs. creativity-based classification is that an earlier window
somehow favors creativity-based classification, while a later window somehow favors condition
classification. One possible explanation for this is that individual differences that are present

EEG MACHINE LEARNING AND DIVERGENT THINKING

30

before creative ideation begins in earnest can be discerned algorithmically. In contrast,
condition-based differences are more readily discerned after ideation is well underway. There is
also still the matter of condition differences based on response-related, late-window features, but
the likelihood that such features affected condition classification results in a meaningful way in
this study seems low.
Future Directions
Future research could employ a timed ideation period for both AUT conditions, thereby
avoiding response-related EEG data. The period just prior to response could also be a focus of
analysis, given the changes that occur toward the end of creative ideation (Rominger et al., 2019;
Schwab et al., 2014). Fast responses in the Normal condition in the present study left a very
narrow window between stimulus onset and task response. This meant that many responselocked epochs of interest would contain both stimulus onset and the pre-stimulus period. All
things considered, a longer “forced thinking” period, as used by Schwab et al. (2014) would be
of benefit in future studies.
Further use of ML in creativity research has the potential to identify classification
features that have previously been overlooked, potentially stimulating new lines of research.
Future EEG/ML creativity studies could include measures such as functional connectivity, eventrelated potentials, and others. Real-time ML-based neurofeedback is also an enticing option. This
study is a step in these directions.
Conclusions
In conclusion, the potential value of ML in creativity research is a virtually untapped
resource, and the applications could extend well outside of EEG-focused studies. For example,
future studies could examine if natural language processing can be used to perform consistent,

EEG MACHINE LEARNING AND DIVERGENT THINKING

31

objective assessments of written or verbal creative task responses, or if image processing ML
could do the same for drawings. Certainly, there are other physiological measures to which ML
could be applied. Indeed, ML has been used to make predictions based on fMRI data, and even
gene-brain interactions, both of which are relevant to investigations of creativity (Ren, Yang, &
Qiu, 2019). Considering the growing ubiquity of ML and its successful implementation in
numerous branches of scientific research, it is likely that the field of creativity research would be
well-served by a broader adoption of its use.

EEG MACHINE LEARNING AND DIVERGENT THINKING

32

References
Abiri, R., Borhani, S., Sellers, E. W., Jiang, Y., & Zhao, X. (2018). A comprehensive review of
EEG-based brain-computer interface paradigms. Journal of Neural Engineering, 16(1),
011001.
Agnoli, S., Zanon, M., Mastria, S., Avenanti, A., & Corazza, G. E. (2019). Predicting response
originality through brain activity: An analysis of changes in EEG alpha power during the
generation of alternative ideas. NeuroImage, 116385.
Avinash, T., Dikshant, L., & Seema, S. (2018). Methods of neuromarketing and implication of
the frontal theta asymmetry induced due to musical stimulus as choice
modeling. Procedia Computer Science, 132, 55-67.
Beaty, R. E., Seli, P., & Schacter, D. L. (2019). Network neuroscience of creative cognition:
mapping cognitive mechanisms and individual differences in the creative brain. Current
opinion in behavioral sciences, 27, 22-30.
Bell, A. J., & Sejnowski, T. J. (1995). An information-maximization approach to blind
separation and blind deconvolution. Neural computation, 7(6), 1129-1159.
Benedek, M. (2018). The neuroscience of creative idea generation. In Exploring
Transdisciplinarity in Art and Sciences (pp. 31-48). Springer, Cham.
Benedek, M., Bergner, S., Könen, T., Fink, A., & Neubauer, A. C. (2011). EEG alpha
synchronization is related to top-down processing in convergent and divergent
thinking. Neuropsychologia, 49(12), 3505-3511.
Benedek, M., Schickel, R. J., Jauk, E., Fink, A., & Neubauer, A. C. (2014). Alpha power
increases in right parietal cortex reflects focused internal
attention. Neuropsychologia, 56, 393-400.

EEG MACHINE LEARNING AND DIVERGENT THINKING

33

Bhattacharyya, S., Khasnobish, A., Konar, A., Tibarewala, D. N., & Nagar, A. K. (2011, April).
Performance analysis of left/right hand movement classification from EEG signal by
intelligent algorithms. In 2011 IEEE Symposium on Computational Intelligence,
Cognitive Algorithms, Mind, and Brain (CCMB) (pp. 1-8). IEEE.
Boostani, R., Karimzadeh, F., & Nami, M. (2017). A comparative review on sleep stage
classification methods in patients and healthy individuals. Computer Methods and
Programs in Biomedicine, 140, 77-91.
Boot, N., Baas, M., Mühlfeld, E., de Dreu, C. K., & van Gaal, S. (2017). Widespread neural
oscillations in the delta band dissociate rule convergence from rule divergence during
creative idea generation. Neuropsychologia, 104, 8-17.
Camarda, A., Salvia, E., Vidal, J., Weil, B., Poirel, N., Houde, O., Borst, G., & Cassotti, M.
(2018). Neural basis of functional fixedness during creative idea generation: an EEG
study. Neuropsychologia, 118, 4-12.
Carroll, E. A., & Latulipe, C. (2012, May). Triangulating the personal creative experience: selfreport, external judgments, and physiology. In Proceedings of Graphics Interface
2012(pp. 53-60). Canadian Information Processing Society.
Cavanagh, J. F., & Frank, M. J. (2014). Frontal theta as a mechanism for cognitive
control. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 18(8), 414-421.
Christensen, L. R., & Abdullah, M. A. (2018, May). EEG emotion detection review. In 2018
IEEE Conference on Computational Intelligence in Bioinformatics and Computational
Biology (CIBCB) (pp. 1-7). IEEE.
Clayton, M. S., Yeung, N., & Kadosh, R. C. (2015). The roles of cortical oscillations in sustained
attention. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 19(4), 188-195.

EEG MACHINE LEARNING AND DIVERGENT THINKING

34

Delorme, A., & Makeig, S. (2004) EEGLAB: an open source toolbox for analysis of single-trial
EEG dynamics. Journal of Neuroscience Methods, 134(1), 9-21.
Duan, R. N., Wang, X. W., & Lu, B. L. (2012, November). EEG-based emotion recognition in
listening music by using support vector machine and linear dynamic system.
In International Conference on Neural Information Processing (pp. 468-475). Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg.
Fink, A., & Benedek, M. (2014). EEG alpha power and creative ideation. Neuroscience &
Biobehavioral Reviews, 44, 111-123.
Fink, A., & Neubauer, A. C. (2008). Eysenck meets Martindale: The relationship between
extraversion and originality from the neuroscientific perspective. Personality and
Individual Differences, 44(1), 299-310.
Gabard-Durnam, L. J., Mendez Leal, A. S., Wilkinson, C. L., & Levin, A. R. (2018). The
Harvard Automated Processing Pipeline for Electroencephalography (HAPPE):
standardized processing software for developmental and high-artifact data. Frontiers in
neuroscience, 12, 97.
Giannakaki, K., Giannakakis, G., Farmaki, C., & Sakkalis, V. (2017, June). Emotional state
recognition using advanced machine learning techniques on EEG data. In 2017 IEEE
30th International Symposium on Computer-Based Medical Systems (CBMS) (pp. 337342). IEEE.
Guilford, J. P. (1967). Creativity: Yesterday, today and tomorrow. The Journal of Creative
Behavior, 1(1), 3-14.

EEG MACHINE LEARNING AND DIVERGENT THINKING

35

Hadjidimitriou, S. K., & Hadjileontiadis, L. J. (2012). Toward an EEG-based recognition of
music liking using time-frequency analysis. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical
Engineering, 59(12), 3498-3510.
Jauk, E., Benedek, M., & Neubauer, A. C. (2012). Tackling creativity at its roots: Evidence for
different patterns of EEG alpha activity related to convergent and divergent modes of
task processing. International Journal of Psychophysiology, 84(2), 219-225.
Jawed, S., Amin, H. U. U., Malik, A. S., & Faye, I. (2019). Classification of visual and nonvisual learners using Electroencephalographic alpha and gamma activities. Frontiers in
Behavioral Neuroscience, 13, 86.
Kothe, C. A., & Makeig, S. (2013). BCILAB: a platform for brain–computer interface
development. Journal of neural engineering, 10(5), 056014.
Lin, Y. P., Wang, C. H., Jung, T. P., Wu, T. L., Jeng, S. K., Duann, J. R., & Chen, J. H. (2010).
EEG-based emotion recognition in music listening. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical
Engineering, 57(7), 1798-1806.
Martindale, C., & Hasenfus, N. (1978). EEG differences as a function of creativity, stage of the
creative process, and effort to be original. Biological Psychology, 6(3), 157-167.
Martindale, C., & Mines, D. (1975). Creativity and cortical activation during creative,
intellectual and EEG feedback tasks. Biological Psychology, 3(2), 91-100.
Orru, G., Pettersson-Yeo, W., Marquand, A. F., Sartori, G., & Mechelli, A. (2012). Using
support vector machine to identify imaging biomarkers of neurological and psychiatric
disease: a critical review. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 36(4), 1140-1152.

EEG MACHINE LEARNING AND DIVERGENT THINKING

36

Putze, F., Scherer, M., & Schultz, T. (2016, October). Starring into the void? Classifying Internal
vs. External Attention from EEG. In Proceedings of the 9th Nordic Conference on
Human-Computer Interaction (pp. 1-4).
Ramoser, H., Muller-Gerking, J., & Pfurtscheller, G. (2000). Optimal spatial filtering of single
trial EEG during imagined hand movement. IEEE transactions on rehabilitation
engineering, 8(4), 441-446.
Ren, Z., Yang, W., & Qiu, J. (2019). Neural and genetic mechanisms of creative
potential. Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences, 27, 40-46.
Ritter, S. M., Abbing, J., & Van Schie, H. T. (2018). Eye-closure enhances creative performance
on divergent and convergent creativity tasks. Frontiers in Psychology, 9, 1315.
Rominger, C., Papousek, I., Perchtold, C. M., Benedek, M., Weiss, E. M., Schwerdtfeger, A., &
Fink, A. (2019). Creativity is associated with a characteristic U-shaped function of alpha
power changes accompanied by an early increase in functional coupling. Cognitive,
Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience, 19(4), 1012-1021.
Rossi, F., & Villa, N. (2006). Support vector machine for functional data classification.
Neurocomputing, 69(7-9), 730-742.
Schwab, D., Benedek, M., Papousek, I., Weiss, E. M., & Fink, A. (2014). The time-course of
EEG alpha power changes in creative ideation. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8, 310.
Sternberg, R. J., & Lubart, T. I. (1996). Investing in creativity. American psychologist, 51(7),
677.
Stevens Jr, C. E., & Zabelina, D. L. (2019). Creativity comes in waves: an EEG-focused
exploration of the creative brain. Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences, 27, 154-162.

EEG MACHINE LEARNING AND DIVERGENT THINKING

37

Van Putten, M. J., Olbrich, S., & Arns, M. (2018). Predicting sex from brain rhythms with deep
learning. Scientific reports, 8(1), 1-7.
Winkler, I., Brandl, S., Horn, F., Waldburger, E., Allefeld, C., & Tangermann, M. (2014).
Robust artifactual independent component classification for BCI practitioners. Journal of
neural engineering, 11(3), 035013.
Wokke, M. E., Ridderinkhof, K. R., & Padding, L. (2018). Creative minds are out of control:
Mid frontal theta and creative thinking. bioRxiv, 370494.
Zhou, S., Chen, S., Wang, S., Zhao, Q., Zhou, Z., & Lu, C. (2018). Temporal and spatial patterns
of neural activity associated with information selection in open-ended
creativity. Neuroscience, 371, 268-276.

EEG MACHINE LEARNING AND DIVERGENT THINKING
Appendix
List of objects used in the present study in the Alternate Uses Task (AUT)
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.

Brick
Plate
Rope
Toothbrush
Broom
Fork
Flowerpot
Tire
Shovel
Coffee Cup
Chair
Book
Doormat
Ruler
Belt
Garbage Can
Rake
Curtain
Spoon
Comb
Garden Hose
Pillow
Umbrella
Boots
Magazine
Dustpan
Purse
Hammer
Pencil
Scissors

38

