Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

ScienceDirect
ScienceDirect
Procedia Computer Science 00 (2019) 000–000
ScienceDirect
Procedia Computer Science 00 (2019) 000–000

Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 169 (2020) 235–239

www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia

Postproceedings of the 10th Annual International Conference on Brain-Inspired Cognitive
Architectures
Postproceedings
for Artificial
of theIntelligence,
10th Annual BICA*AI
International
2019
Conference
(Tenth Annual
on Brain-Inspired
Meeting of BICA
Cognitive
Society)
Architectures for Artificial Intelligence, BICA*AI 2019 (Tenth Annual Meeting of BICA Society)

The Influence of Using Different Mental Images as BCI Commands
The Influence of Using
Mental
Images as BCI Commands
onDifferent
the Quality
of Control
on the Quality of Control
Aliona Petrova1, Timofei Voznenko, Alexander Dyumin, Eugene Chepin and Anastasiia
Aliona Petrova1, Timofei Voznenko, Alexander
Dyumin, Eugene Chepin and Anastasiia
Cherepanova
Cherepanova
Institute of Cyber Intelligence Systems,
National Research
University
MEPhI,
Moscow, Russia
InstituteNuclear
of Cyber
Intelligence
Systems,
National Research Nuclear University MEPhI, Moscow, Russia

Abstract
Abstract
Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) is a modern and progressive technology for controlling robotic devices. They are broadly
applicable
in various
fields (BCI)
of robotics
information
technologies,
where alternative
methods
of controlling
electronic
devices
Brain-Computer
Interface
is a and
modern
and progressive
technology
for controlling
robotic
devices. They
are broadly
are used (for
example,
medical
robotics,
of virtual reality
applications,
game industry,
etc.). The
most common
applicable
in various
fields
of robotics
anddevelopment
information technologies,
where
alternative methods
of controlling
electronic
devices
waysused
to implement
BCImedical
control robotics,
commands
are mental ofimages,
andgame
facial
expressions.
Compared
to other
are
(for example,
development
virtualevoked
reality potentials,
applications,
industry,
etc.). The
most common
methods,
mental images
difficult
to perform
becauseimages,
of the need
to perform
an and
intensified
mental activity
and concentrate
ways
to implement
BCI are
control
commands
are mental
evoked
potentials,
facial expressions.
Compared
to other
strongly
their images
execution.
the same
time, mental
images
operator
a promising
to concentrate
control the
methods,on
mental
are At
difficult
to perform
because
of theprovide
need totheperform
anwith
intensified
mentalopportunity
activity and
robot without
performing
physical
movements
(compared
to facial
expressions
and opportunity
without using
additional
strongly
on their
execution. any
At the
same time,
mental images
provide
the operator
with ausage)
promising
to control
the
equipment
for stimuli
representation
(as is
the case of(compared
evoked potentials).
Therefore, itusage)
is necessary
to conduct
on
robot
without
performing
any physical
movements
to facial expressions
and without
usingresearch
additional
various aspects
of working
with mental
such of
as evoked
the use potentials).
of various types
of mental
thetoimpact
on the
work on
of
equipment
for stimuli
representation
(asimages,
is the case
Therefore,
it is images,
necessary
conduct
research
distractions,
the of
operator’s
etc.,
userofexperience
of using
andonthe
various aspects
workingpreliminary
with mentaltraining
images,technique,
such as the
usetoofimprove
variousthe
types
mental images,
thethem
impact
thequality
work of
device control
such waypreliminary
of control. In
this paper,
we consider
mentalthe
images
of differentoftypes
as them
BCI control
distractions,
theviaoperator’s
training
technique,
etc., touse
improve
user experience
using
and thecommands
quality of
— visual,
sound,
these
commands
is involving
various
parts
the brain.
The
of thecommands
operator’s
device
control
viakinesthetic.
such way ofPerforming
control. Inof
this
paper,
we consider
use mental
images
of of
different
types
asquality
BCI control
work
with sound,
these types
of mental
images isofevaluated,
including
the qualityvarious
of mental
recognition
by theofBCI,
well as
—
visual,
kinesthetic.
Performing
these commands
is involving
partsimages
of the brain.
The quality
the as
operator’s
the
time
spent
bytypes
the operator
on images
their execution.
work
with
these
of mental
is evaluated, including the quality of mental images recognition by the BCI, as well as
the time spent by the operator on their execution.
© 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
©
2020
The
Authors.
by Elsevier
B.V.
This
is an
open
accessPublished
article under
the CC BY-NC-ND
license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
©
2019
The
Authors.
Published
by Elsevier
B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
Peer-review
under
responsibility
of
the
scientific
committee
of (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
the 9th Annual International Conference on Biologically Inspired
This
is
an
open
access
article
under
the
CC
BY-NC-ND
license
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee
of the
10th Annual International Conference on Biologically Inspired
Cognitive
Architectures.
Peer-review
under
responsibility
of
the
scientific
committee
of
the 9th Annual International Conference on Biologically Inspired
Cognitive Architectures.
Cognitive Architectures.
Keywords: Mental images; Brain-Computer Interface; Robotics
Keywords: Mental images; Brain-Computer Interface; Robotics

1 Corresponding author.
E-mail address:
1 Corresponding
author. consciencee95@gmail.com
E-mail address: consciencee95@gmail.com
1877-0509 © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open
access
under
the CCby
BY-NC-ND
license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
1877-0509
© 2019
The article
Authors.
Published
Elsevier B.V.
Peer-review
under
responsibility
of the
committee
of the(https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
9th Annual International Conference on Biologically Inspired Cognitive
This
is an open
access
article under
thescientific
CC BY-NC-ND
license
Architectures.
Peer-review
under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 9th Annual International Conference on Biologically Inspired Cognitive
1877-0509 © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Architectures.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 10th Annual International Conference on Biologically Inspired
Cognitive Architectures.
10.1016/j.procs.2020.02.141

236
2

Aliona Petrova et al. / Procedia Computer Science 169 (2020) 235–239
Aliona I. Petrova et al. / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2019) 000–000

1. Introduction
Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) is a promising technology that provides an alternative to control a robotic device
using various physiological measurements of a person, such as brain activity or muscle activity. The most common
BCIs are portable electroencephalographs that have such advantages as accessibility and mobility, but at the same
time allow you to register brain activity in rather low quality. There are two most common ways of such BCI
implementation: brain electric potentials and mental images. Working with mental images is not an easy and intuitive
way to control. In order to efficiently perform mental commands using this method, it is necessary to be highly
concentrated on mental commands during the control process, which is a significant mental workload. It also
requires even greater effort if a person is a novice and has practically no skills of working with them. At the same
time, the execution of various mental commands can involve completely different parts of the brain, which in turn
can affect the quality of work with BCI. In this paper, we consider the differences between using mental images that
affect different brain areas in order to determine whether the choice of a particular type of mental image will
improve a working process with BCI of inexperienced users.
2. Related works
Mental images are one of the basic and popular ways to implement control commands using BCI based on an
analysis of the electrical activity of the brain. In various projects and studies various imaginary objects and actions
are widely used as mental commands, and all of them in one way or another influence the brain wave patterns. For
example, in the study [1] the authors consider imaginary movements (or motor imagery), that often used as mental
commands, in the formation of which the neural process of movement planning is involved. As an alternative to
motor imagery, in the article [2] authors proposed a set of mental images of another nature, which includes the
mental solution of mathematical problems, visualization of letters and the indoor navigation process visualization. In
the paper [3] authors shown the influence of such kind of mental tasks on the brain activity considering them as
distracting factors in the process of execution mental commands by naive subjects. Also, an example of the use of
visual mental images is given in the article [4], and the effect of sound imagery on EEG is considered in article [5].
The influence of such mental images on the brain activity is caused by the usage of the same neural perception
mechanisms in their processing as when processing real stimuli (sounds [6], images [7], and to a much lesser extent odors [8]). In addition to influencing the EEG pattern through the use of various brain structures, such factors can
also affect the general mental condition of a person, for example, by changing the emotional state, as shown in the
article [9], where the authors used mental images based on participants' memories as stimuli. The emotional state of
the operator has a significant impact on the quality of execution of mental commands, as was proved by the authors
in the article [10].
All aspects of working with various mental images - using of differential brain structures, the influence on the
mental state of a person, his emotions, the degree of concentration that is necessary to reproduce this mental image directly affect the EEG and can cause different results when working with different types of mental images.
3. Theory
Various mental commands performed by a person can in different levels involve completely different parts of the
brain when they are executed using different mental images. It depends on how the brain generates and processes
our chosen mental image. A significant number of brain structures responsible for working with various types of
memory, perception, decision making, etc. are involved in the process of working with a mental image. In this paper,
to determine the effect of such differences in mental images on quality of work with mental commands, we will
consider mental images that involve areas of the brain associated with the perception of visual, auditory stimuli and
movements. For our study we selected 4 main types of such mental images: 1) Motor imagery (kinesthetic ) - is the
mental execution of the movement from the first-person perspective (for example, movements with a hand or toes);
2) Visual static imagery - a representation of a static image or object; 3) Visual dynamic imagery - a representation

Aliona Petrova et al. / Procedia Computer Science 169 (2020) 235–239

237

Aliona I. Petrova et al. / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2019) 000–00 3

of a dynamic, moving image; 4) Auditory imagery - mental reproduction of a melody or the reproduction of some
non-musical sound (for example, the sound of a doorbell).

4. Experimental study
To examine this theory, experiments were carried out according to the following scheme. The principle of
working with a BCI was explained to each test subject, and preliminary training of work with mental images was
conducted to familiarize participants with the technology. Each subject was explained what the mental commands
are and how he or she can interact with BCI using them. Then the subject was instructed how to execute mental
command - to imagine the chosen imagery and highly concentrate on it during some time period. Also subject was
instructed not to issue the mental command at the time when it must not be executed and not to think about the
chosen imagery. Then we conducted several training sessions, during each of them the subject tried to execute
mental commands using Emotiv EPOC control panel until she or he would be rather confident working with them
and be ready to execute mental commands during the experimental session. After the training, the subject was
considered ready to undergo a series of experiments, which consisted of the following: the subject sat in the chair in
front of the monitor where two types of pictures were alternately demonstrated: an arrow (Fig. 1.a), which
appearance means the subject should execute a mental command and a cross (Fig. 1.b), at the sight of which the
mental command should not be executed by subject. Images were changed every 5 seconds and displayed in random
order. The mental image signature data, individual for each experimental stage and each subject, was recorded
immediately before the start of each experiment using special software. During the demonstration of pictures, all
events about the triggering of mental commands were recorded in the form of an incoming parameter of the current
executed command intensity ("power", received through the Emotiv BCI API).

Fig. 1. Experimental stimuli pictures (a) an arrow — the subject must execute BCI command when this picture appears on a monitor; (b) a cross
— the subject must not execute BCI command.

The experiments were attended by 20 people (NRNU MEPhI students, 6 females and 14 males) who did not have
much experience working with BCI. Each subject underwent from 2 to 5 experiments according to the abovedescribed scheme. In each experiment various types of mental images were tested - in the first experiment, the
subject himself chose imagery with which he or she will work, for further experiments types of mental images were
proposed by the experimenter. During each experiment, the test subject had to execute a mental command 100 times
in total.

5. Results
The logs obtained as a result of the experiments were subjected to post-processing, which consisted of parsing the
logs, choosing the optimal power intensity threshold, above which the response of the command was taken into
account; calculating on its basis the parameter F1-score, which was chosen as a criterion for comparing the quality
of work with BCI during the experiment with particular mental image type. Fig. 2 shows an F1-score comparison

238
4

Aliona Petrova et al. / Procedia Computer Science 169 (2020) 235–239
Aliona I. Petrova et al. / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2019) 000–000

between different groups of mental images. The average values of the obtained samples are quite similar, which
suggests the idea that they differ slightly from each other.

Fig. 2. Mean F-score values of different tested mental images groups: (Fmean(Motor imagery) = 0.39, Fmean(Visual static) = 0.44, Fmean(Visual
dynamic) = 0.34, Fmean(Auditory imagery) = 0.44).

To check the statistical significance of differences between mental image types, the ANOVA algorithm was used.
Groups of F1-score values corresponding to different mental images were compared in pairs. Each pair of selections
had the same size because F1 values were selected on the condition that the subject had both experiments with the
compared mental images. The comparison results are shown in Table 1.
Table 1. Pairwise-ANOVA results.
Compared mental images types

F-statistics

p-value

N subjects

Motor imagery vs Auditory imagery

2.42

0.14

9

Motor imagery vs Visual static

0.71

0.4

13

Motor imagery vs Visual dynamic

0.02

0.89

9

Auditory imagery vs Visual static

1.6

0.22

9

Except pairwise comparison we applied a one-against-all ANOVA processing and compare each F1-score mental
image group with a set consisted of all another type F1-scores. In this study we take source samples and were not
select the values on the condition of the subject having the experiments with the all compared mental images. The
results are shown in Table 2.
Table 2. One-against-all-ANOVA results.
Compared mental images types

F-statistics

p-value

Motor imagery vs All

0.58

0.45

Visual static vs All

2.07

0.16

Visual dynamic vs All

4.63

0.04

Auditory imagery vs All

1.64

0.21

Large values of the p-value (> 0.05), presented in Table 1, indicate that differences in the work with the
considered types of mental images are really not statistically significant. At the same time, a comparison of mental
images of the Visual dynamic type with the Visual static and Auditory imagery types showed lower p-values

Aliona Petrova et al. / Procedia Computer Science 169 (2020) 235–239

239

Aliona I. Petrova et al. / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2019) 000–00 5

indicating statistical significance (< 0.05), but not presented in the Table 1 due to small number of data samples
(only 4 subjects have the experiments with both these pairs of types). When comparing these types of mental images
in all pair cases, Visual dynamic mental images showed worse F1-score indicators than other mental images that
were compared with them. Due to the fact that the samples for comparing precisely these types of thought images
were rather small due to the limited number of experiments, in this case, the results cannot be considered statistically
significant. At the same time, the results presented in Table 2 show the statistically significant differences of one
group of mental images comparing with another set of values (Visual dynamic, p < 0.05). Nevertheless, they should
be taken into account and in future studies more experiments should be conducted with dynamic mental images to
finally confirm or refute their difference from other types. In the case of other types of mental images, the absence
of statistical significance can be caused by the equal complexity of working with them, as well as the individual
abilities of each test subject, which are not manifested in any way when considering data of all participants together.
6. Conclusion
In this paper, the differences in the use of mental images that involve various brain areas and how they impact the
working process with BCI have been investigated. We have selected mental images that involve the perception
mechanisms of auditory, visual stimuli and various movements, and conducted the experiments to compare them.
The experiments with these types of mental images showed approximately the same values of chosen quality
metrics; no statistically significant differences were found within the group of subjects. Thus, at the initial stages of
mastering the skills of working with mental commands and the choice of the mental image type does not matter.
Nevertheless, any differences in working with different mental images can appear in the process of working with
them, and then develop for particular subject individually. This feature we plan to research in future works. We also
plan to consider other aspects of training to work with BCI using mental commands.

References
[1] Pfurtscheller, Gert, and Neuper, Christa. (2001) “Motor imagery and direct brain-computer communication.” Proceedings of the IEEE 89 (7):
1123–1134.
[2] Chai, Rifai, et al. (2012) “Mental non-motor imagery tasks classifications of brain computer interface for wheelchair commands using genetic
algorithm-based neural network.” The 2012 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), pp. 1–7.
[3] Anastasiia D. Cherepanova, et al. (2019) “The Research of Distracting Factors Influence on Quality of Brain-Computer Interface Usage.”, in
Samsonovich A. (eds) Biologically Inspired Cognitive Architectures 2018 (BICA 2018), pp. 44–49.
[4] Kosmina, Nataliya, Jussi T. Lindgren, and Lécuyer, Anatole . (2018) “Attending to Visual Stimuli versus Performing Visual Imagery as a
Control Strategy for EEG-based Brain-Computer Interfaces.” Scientific reports 8 (1): 13222.
[5] Morooka, Takahiro, Ishizuka, Kazumi, and Kobayashi, Nobuaki. (2018) “Electroencephalographic Analysis of Auditory Imagination to
Realize Silent Speech BCI.” 2018 IEEE 7th Global Conference on Consumer Electronics (GCCE): 683–686.
[6] Timothy L. Hubbard. (2013) “Auditory Aspects of Auditory Imagery”, in Simon Lacey and Rebecca Lawson (eds) Multisensory Imagery,
Springer, New York
[7] Ganis, Giorgio, William L. Thompson, and Stephen M. Kosslyn. (2004) “Brain areas underlying visual mental imagery and visual perception:
an fMRI study.” Cognitive Brain Research 20 (2): 226–241.
[8] Arshamian, Artin and Larrson, Maria. (2014) “Same same but different: the case of olfactory imagery.” Frontiers in psychology 5 (34): 1–8.
[9] Chanel, Guillaume, Ansari-Asl, Karim, and Pun, Thierry. (2017) “Valence-arousal evaluation using physiological signals in an emotion recall
paradigm.”, 2007 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, pp. 2662 – 2667.
[10] Timofei I. Voznenko, et al. (2018) “The Experimental Study of ‘Unwanted Music’ Noise Pollution Influence on Command Recognition by
Brain-Computer Interface.”, Procedia Computer Science 123: 528 – 533.

