International Journal of Computer Theory and Engineering, Vol. 7, No. 1, February 2015

Emotions, Age, and Gender Based Cognitive Skills
Calculations
Sadique Ahmad, Awais Adnan, Gulnawar Khan, and Nasir Mehmood


for speaking, reasoning, problem solving and other decisionmaking activities. In psychology cognition is referred as
individual psychological function to process information. In
social psychology it is a branch to explain the group
dynamics, behavior and attitude. In cognitive engineering,
term “cognition” is a process of brain or mind used to
process information that can be both natural and unnatural,
doing consciously or unconsciously. Cognitive abilities that
are the combination of different brain processes [1] are
analyzed differently in different fields like neurosciences,
psychology, systemic, linguistics, anthropology, philosophy,
psychiatry, and computer science.
There is a general perception that cognitive abilities are
affected inevitably due to aging and nothing can halt this
decline. Some researchers however do not agree with this
claim completely. They argue that although certain abilities
do show a decline with increase, especially in later age,
however some other skills remain stable [2] and this decline
can be slowdown by some intervention [3], [4]. For example
knowledge or experience that can also referred as
“Crystallized” intelligence remains stable with age. Ability
to think and react quickly and ability to perform multitasking that can be referred as “fluid” intelligence go to
decline with increase in age [5]. Similarly event that have
been stored over many years in past as remote memory is
mostly preserved with increase in age while new memory
and tendency to remember current things decrease with age
specially with doing simultaneously. Although vocabulary
and verbal abilities remain same in elder age but choice of
proper words and names in conversion get effected with age
factors. Beside age other factors also affect these cognitive
abilities, both in positive and negative manner. Health
conditions [6], moods and other emotionsalso contribute in
the level of these skills. Cognitive ability can be affected by
the basic human emotions: as happiness, sadness, anger,
fear, disgust, surprise as well as stress. Intensity of emotions
has a great impact on the behavior, attention and decision
making of a human being [7]. This shows that if we
understand the relationship between human and its
environment then we can determine the intensity of emotion
of that specific person.
Emotions have a great impact on cognitive skills because
according to AlZoubi et al. [8] performance of a person not
only depends upon cognitive skills but also depends on
different human emotions and motivations. Emotions can be
of different types. According to Plutchik [9] there can be
eight different emotions as: Fear, Trust, anger, sadness, joy,
disgust, anticipation and surprise. He arranged these in a
graphical shape that is known as Plutchik wheel of emotion
as shown in Fig. 1. Such Categorization of emotions is not
new; in past Aristotle also arrange human emotions as:

Abstract—Cognitive skills play an important role in
performance of any individual. Knowing the level of cognitive
skill, we can predict ones performance in many fields. This
expected performance, using cognitive tools, can be very
helpful especially for critical tasks like fire-fighting, driving of
public transport, flying, and mining etc. Many researchers,
from philosophy and psychology, have established relationship
between expected cognitive skills and different mental and
physical conditions like emotional stability, stress, tiredness,
state of angriness. Different experiments were carried out to
estimate the factors that can affect these skills, for both the
genders, male and female. These experiments conclude that
cognitive ability can be affected largely by the some basic
human emotions i.e. happiness, sadness, anger, fear, disgust,
surprise, and stress. However, no formal formulation could be
established to calculate the expected cognitive skills by
measuring these basic emotions simultaneously. Now we have
many well defined methods in computer sciences, both
supervised and un-supervised, that can be used to establish
such complex relationships. Basic aim of this position paper is
to present the idea of our propose experiment and the expected
outcome. We have also discussed finding of our initial
experiment in this paper and the equation developed from this
experiment.
Index Terms—Cognitive skills, human emotion, data mining,
association rule mining.

I. INTRODUCTION
Cognitive skills, in simple words, can be referred to as
human ability to process, learn new things, or perform
something intelligently. Cognitive skills are concerned with
memory and largely dependent on factor that affects the
short and long term memory. Different factors like anger
and stress temporarily affect such skills while age and
different diseases have long-lasting effect on these skills,
may be different from individual to individual, but are
present in all humans at the time of birth.
Cognition is a process in which inputs gathered by
different input methods are processed, transformed,
consumed, and stored. Different disciplines use this term
differently. According to scientific definition, it is a mental
process that uses working memory and inferring capabilities

Manuscript received February 20, 2014; revised April 22, 2014.
Sadique Ahmad and Awais Adnan are with IM|Sciences Peshawar,
Pakistan
(e-mail:
ahmad01.shah@gmail.com,
awais.adnan@imsciences.edu.pk).
Gulnawar Khan is with the Computer Department, Institute of
Management
Sciences
Peshawar,
Pakistan
(e-mail:
gul_nawar@yahoo.com).
Nasir Mehmood Khan is with MS-Information Technology, Department
of Computer Sciences, Institute of Management Sciences Peshawar,
Pakistan (e-mail: nasirkhan974@yahoo.com).

DOI: 10.7763/IJCTE.2015.V7.934

76

International Journal of Computer Theory and Engineering, Vol. 7, No. 1, February 2015

anger, love, shame, fear, kindness, pity, envy, and
indignation.
In literature different human emotions are divided into
three main categories as pure emotions, basic emotions and
complex emotions. Pure emotions include fear opposite of
security, privacy opposite of togetherness, respect, envy
opposite of appreciation, love opposite of hate, and hope
that is opposite of despair. Other groups of emotions are
called simple emotions that include anger, wonder,
happiness, amusement, courage and pity. Besides these
basic and pure emotions there are some other emotions that
are considered to be complex. This includes pride, stress,
anger, pleasure, shame, modesty, patience etc.

psychology, sociology. There is a struggle to develop social
robots that help us in different areas of society intelligently.
Major challenge here is the barrier between technology and
a human brain, gap between computation and intelligent
behavior. Till now technology could not replicate the
working of human brain, even it is not able to communicate
with brain. Research in BCI tries to solve these issues and
find efficient solutions that overcome such challenges.
Emotion play important role in this area. As emotion
influences human EEG (Electro-Encephalo-Graphy:
Recording of electrical activities inside human brain is
referred to as EEG) signals patterns [11] which show that
brain activities are directly dependent on human emotions.
Cognitive skills also vary with gender. Though controversial
but it is common to understanding that these skills are
stronger in males than in females [12]. Wang et al. [13]
present a psychological experiment and define association
rule mining on 52 emotional colors obtained from CIE lab.
Total twenty subjects including female college students,
were asked to write their emotional response as arousal and
valence while watching different colors. The data set that
was obtained after the experiment was analyzed to find
association rules. Forty-two cases from the dataset were
used to train the classifier for future decision. The result
showed that the classifier was very effective. Because its
prediction rat for arousal was 90% and for valence was 80%.
This research shows that emotions are very sensitive in
nature and can be effected by the environment.
In another experiment Dorner and Gerdes [14] developed
a
model about motivation, emotion and intelligence/
cognitive functions. The author tried to show that the
efficiency or performance of someone is not only depending
on cognitive function but it also dependent one emotion and
motivation. The author showed through experiment that
there is an interaction between emotion, motivation and
cognitive function. As it is a known fact that lack of
motivation brings the performance considerably down so, in
this research relation among emotion, cognition and
motivation is investigated through experiments. The result
of the paper showed that cognitive processes can be affected
by the environment and can be increased through proper
motivation. This paper gives us a good research direction
and motivation to find association among emotions and
cognitive skills.
E.-H. Jang in [15] presented that physiological signal can
be used to classify human emotions by applying SVM
(Support Vector Machine) algorithm. As according to the
author and his result in this paper SVM is the optimal
algorithm to recognize human emotions. SVM algorithm use
physiological signals to recognize human emotion like
happiness, sadness, anger, fear, disgust, surprise and stress.
The author showed that we can take 1 to 11 the effectiveness
ratio of emotions. For example 1 will be least or not happy
and 11 will be most happy. This paper provided basis for the
proposed research because this shows that we can take the
values of basic emotions as well as its effectiveness ratio.
The basic problem for the proposed research was that how
we will take the values of emotion. This paper solved the
problem because now emotion can also be formulated.
In [7] the author states that emotions influence human
Cognitive Skills by influencing human perception, his/her

Fig. 1. Plutchik's wheel of emotions1.

In this paper five different emotions i.e. fear, joy, anger,
stress, and pleasure; along with age and gender are used to
estimate the cognitive skills by constructing association
rules using data mining techniques. This work is based on a
hypothesis that these four attributes are strongly connected
with each other and have a great dependency on one
another. If we know the level of these different emotions,
knowing the gender and age, we can predict the expected
cognition level.
Association rule mining has two parts. One is said to be
antecedent and the other is consequent. When we select any
item set from the data set then it is said to be antecedent and
then any related item set with the previous one is
consequent. The main function and purpose of the
association rule mining is to find the correlation between the
item set sold frequently and it is helpful to reveal and
implement marketing techniques[10].The proposed research
is to identify the association among Emotions, age and
gender that influence human Cognitive Skills.
Remaining portion on the paper can be divided into seven
sections that are organized as follows. Section II presents
the related work. Section III presents research problem.
Section IV present proposed methodologies. Section V
present results and finely section 6concludes the paper.

II. RELATED WORK
Research on Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) started in
1970s and now become an interesting research area that
involves expert from different domains like computer,
1

Source: https://gumroad.com/l/pqvJ

77

International Journal of Computer Theory and Engineering, Vol. 7, No. 1, February 2015

he/she performance has been analyzed.
The results showed that the thinking time interval for all
the users was same but general angular error rate and
average directional error rate was highly different between
different aged users. Children and elderly users’ error rate
was same and high as compared to young adults. This shows
that the performance in spatial and cognitive processing of
elderly and children are relatively low as compared to young
individual. This research was performed on 3 groups but the
proposed research should be performed on young group of
different ages and gender to identify the ratio between
young users of different ages.
In [20] the author declared that the performance of male
and female are different for cognitive tasks. The author
conducted an experiment over 91 adults (53 female and 38
male) having ages from 18 to 25. The subjects were tested
by giving two types of cognitive tasks (one was simple and
other was complex) and back ground music (country music,
jazz music, rock music, traffic and silent) was played.
The result showed that the rock music has affected
(increased) the reaction time of male in adults in simple and
complex tasks. Noise affected the accuracy of male adults in
both simple and complex tasks. Finely the author
hypothesize that men are more quickly and easily influenced
by a stimulus that is irrelevant.
In [21] the author experience important age related
modification in EEG of different individuals. In the
experiment 54 subject’s was tested of different ages
(adolescent, children and young) which shows that aging
seems to be connected with human brain electrical activities.
As according to J. M. Tien in [22] the older we get the
more our perception of environment will be influenced.
According to S. Nasehi Optimal EEG-based Algorithm can
be used to recognize the human emotion by using Gabor
feature.
In [23] research was performed on the assumption that
gender is one of the greatest factors that influences human
EEG results. The results were calculated from Event Related
Potential (ERPs) which shows that female individuals have
larger theta and beta spectral power as compared to male
individuals. Electrical activities of the brain provide main
body structure for Cognitive Skills which is different of both
genders. As in this research gender factor was analyzed
which shows that electrical activities of the brain are
different in male as compared to female candidate and from
the above related work it is clear that electrical activities are
directly proportional on human Cognitive Skills.
In [24] association rule algorithm is applied on sport data
of Indian ODI matches. In this research the association
among factors as home ground, toss wining, batting first and
2nd and match result are analyzed. The result showed that the
performance of Indian cricket team was good enough in last
ten years.
Frequent Pattern Growth algorithm is used to find the
frequent item sets in large databases. F P Growth Algorithm
builds and use frequent pattern tree (F P Tree) to find the
associations between different item sets. It is an efficient
algorithm to find frequent patterns in transaction databases.
This new tree concept was introduced by Han et al. [25],
[26] with a NULL root node at start.
Table I is a tabular representation of the item sold in a

behavior, attention and decision making. The author gives
reference to LRMB [1] in which it is claimed that emotion
influence human Cognitive Skills. In this paper the author
claimed and presented some core effects (Human Emotions)
that human Cognitive functions can be affected by the
alteration in these core effects. This paper gives us
knowledge about relation among emotions and Cognitive
Skills. It claims that Cognitive Skills can highly affected by
different human emotions. According to Sz. L. Tót [16]
human speech contains and reflects information about the
emotions of human being.
G. Garcia-Molina states that Brain Computer Interface
has the advantage to access the brain through EEG that can
give a significant insight in to the human brain electrical
activities that are influenced by human emotions [11]. As
according to the author of this paper BCI can give help
further in the proposed problem. Research is in progress on
BCI to make such type of devices that can interfere in our
brain functions. If researcher become successful then it will
be helpful in different critical areas.
In Brain computer interface V. Vliet. M [17] worked on
video game controlled by human thoughts as there is no
other method to control the game. The system was using
SSVEP (Steady State Visual Evoked Potential) signals.
SSVEP are signals, generated from human brain as a
response to a stimulus. Here in this game the BCI can detect
SSVEP Signal on the Stimulus, generated from brain when
the user focuses to the stimulus.
Emotiv EPOC was used to record the EEG. The game
was tested by 25 users in which 9 successfully control the
game. 13 users claimed that the game was challenging. 3 of
them cannot achieve any control over the game. Here the
author stated that the users that can’t achieve any control
over the game have low Cognitive Skills. The above related
work shows that the Cognitive Skills depend on different
factor as emotions, age and gender. So it will not be a
perfect claim if we say that the person which haven’t
achieve any control over the game have low Cognitive Skills
because it also depend on the emotion of that time when
he/she was playing game.
P. Kaur [18] proposed a theoretical model, to analyze the
cognitive skill of human being by applying data mining
techniques as transferring brain data to a computer system
by EEG. The author proposed that a database can be used to
store all Metadata of the brain and then we can apply
different data mining techniques as classification and
indexing to retrieve meaningful patterns. As according to the
author we can evaluate and determine the Cognitive Skills
of a human being by analyzing this database.
O. AlZoubi [8] classified the brain activities (Recorded by
EEG) in two scenarios, offline and online. In offline
scenario they use a benchmark dataset and in online scenario
they studied BCI by playing computer game. The signal was
processed in real time.
In [19] the impacts of age on spatial processing
(Cognitive Skills) were analyzed through a proper
experiment in which 37 adults (all ages, Children, Young,
and Elder) were tested. The user was asked to play the
Game with 2DOF Manipulandum. The Manipulandum was
a robotic arm through which user can control the Game. The
Game was containing some motors tasks through which
78

International Journal of Computer Theory and Engineering, Vol. 7, No. 1, February 2015

specified sequence. F-P tree for the sequence mentioned in
above table can be shown as Fig. 2.

cases. In next step different situations are created to simulate
specific emotions and again the skills are calculated. To
simulate some emotion different factors can be added in the
environment. Like to add fear in an individual emotion we
can use horror movies and clips.
From a long history of psychology and psychiatry, it can
prove that different conditions induce different types of
fears. Different experiments are done to disturbed the
behavior of an individual by inducing different factors
through exposure of different aberrant conditioning
procedures. In similar pattern it is proposed that these
different emotional conditions are induced and then under
these circumstances, cognitive abilities are measured. Data
collected through this experiment will be used in mining to
investigate the relationship.
To handle the second challenge of measuring cognitive
skills. Different test will be prepared through experts in
psychology. Volunteers participating in this experiment will
be asked to solve certain problems, carefully prepared by the
experts and will be used to estimate their skills.

TABLE I: ITEM BOUGHT
ID
001

{L1, L3, L2, L5, L4}

002

{L1, L3, L2, L5 }

003

{L1, L5}

004

{L3,L5, L4}

001

{L1, L3, L2, L5, L4}

V. DATA TO BE AND ANALYSIS
In our proposed experiment out first relation is the
compare cognition abilities in both gender and change in
these skills with age. Second expected finding from this
proposed experiment is to observe the effect of emotional
condition on these skills. Main goal of this whole
experiment is to find one single formula that can be used to
predict cognitive skills of an individual by knowing the
values of different emotions, age and gender etc.
As a pilot project, we applied this test of 10 members of
our team and obtained initial results with interesting
findings. All of these students belong to department of
computer sciences. Five different tests were prepared in
which two were problem solving activities and three were
simple test to evaluate analytical skills. These tests were
given to them in different environments under different
conditions. Results of the test shows that under fear,
performs goes down. Similarly stress, tiredness and anger
negatively affect the cognitive skills. From this pilot
experiment, we have developed an initial relation among
these different factors. This relation can be summarized as
equation (1)

Fig. 2. FP Tree for product sold.

III. RESEARCH PROBLEM
As it is clear from the review of the literature and there is
an understanding that different emotions and age play
important role in cognition, which is different for the two
genders. Now we have well developed mining techniques
that, if proper data is available with outcome, can construct
relation between input parameters and output. Main
question here in this research is, can we develop such
association between different emotions and expected level
of cognitive abilities? Can we develop a formula that can be
used to calculate the expected cognitive skills for different
emotional conditions? Is there a way to generalize this
formula?

IV. PROPOSED MODEL
This proposed model is based on the work of Jang et al.
[15] in which author says that there is a positive correlation
between emotion and cognitive abilities of an individual. In
their model they divide different emotions like happiness,
sadness, anger, fear, disgust, and surprise into 11 different
levels. In this scale, 1is the lowest value for the said emotion
while 11 is the highest sate of the emotion.
In our proposed model, we will calculate cognition skills
in different individuals under different conditions. These
fifty volunteers will be used from different age groups, with
equal representation of both genders.
There are two important challenges in this experiment.
First how to measure state of different emotions and second
how to test their cognitive abilities. Some of the emotions
like anger, sadness, stress, and fear can be created by
external elements. In our experiment it is suggested that first
cognitive skill are measured in normal environment for all

𝐶𝑆𝑘 =

5
𝑖=1 𝑤𝑖 . 𝑒𝑖

𝑤𝑎 𝐴𝑔𝑒

(1)

where 𝑒𝑖 and emotional situation that can be from 1 to 11.
𝑤𝑖 is its weight that is proportional to the contribution of a
particular emotion in forming and effecting cognitive
abilities.

VI.

LIMITATIONS AND CONCLUSION

Main goal of our research is to find a comprehensive
formula that can be used to predict expected cognitive skills
of an individual depending using different emotional
condition, age and gender. In our initial experiment, we
could not test all these however we are able to develop an
initial equation. In our experiment there were only two
79

International Journal of Computer Theory and Engineering, Vol. 7, No. 1, February 2015
[15] E. H. Jang, B.-J. Park, S.-H. Kim, Y. Eum, and J. Sohn,
"Identification of the optimal emotion recognition algorithm using
physiological signals," in Proc. the International Conference on
Engineering and Industries, Jeju, 2011.
[16] S. L. Tóth, D. Sztaho, and K. Vicsi, "Speech emotion perception by
human and machine," Verbal and Nonverbal Features of HumanHuman and Human-Machine Interaction, Berlin Heidelberg, 2008.
[17] M. V. Vliet, A. Robben, N. Chumerin et al., "Designing a braincomputer interface controlled video-game using consumer grade EEG
hardware," presented at the Biosignals and Biorobotics Conference,
Manaus, 2012.
[18] P. kaur and S. Vashisht, "Analyzing cognitive skills through data
mining," International Journal on Computer Technology &
Applications (IJCTA), vol. 3, pp. 1959-1962, November-December
2012.
[19] Y. Jing, S. Jing, C. Huajian, S. Chuangang, and L. Yan, "The gender
difference in distraction of background music and noise on the
cognitive task performance," in Proc. the Eighth International
Conference on Natural Computation, Chongqing, 2012.
[20] A. A. Samadani and Z. Moussavi, "The effect of aging on human
brain spatial processing performance," in Proc. the Annual
International Conference of the IEEE on Engineering in Medicine
and Biology Society, San Diego, CA 2012.
[21] H. Gaudreau, J. Carrier, and J. Montplaisir, "Age ‐ related
modifications of NREM sleep EEG: from childhood to middle age,"
Journal of Sleep Research, vol. 10, pp. 165-172, 2001.
[22] J. M. Tien and J. P. Burnes, "On the perceived speed of time over
time," in Proc. the IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man,
and Cybernetics, Nashville, TN 2000.
[23] S. Georgiev, Z. Minchev, C. Christova, and D. Philipova, "Gender
event-related brain oscillatory differences in normal elderly
population EEG," International Journal of Bio-Automation, vol. 15,
2011.
[24] D. Hunyadi, "Performance comparison of apriori and FP-growth
algorithms in generating association rules," in Proc. the European
Computing Conference, 2011, pp. 376-381.
[25] J. Han, J. Pei, Y. Yin, and R. Mao, "Mining frequent patterns without
candidate generation: A frequent-pattern tree approach," Data Mining
and Knowledge Discovery, vol. 8, pp. 53-87, 2004.
[26] S. Nasehi and H. Pourghassem, "An optimal EEG-based emotion
recognition algorithm using gabor features," WSEAS Transactions on
Signal Processing, vol. 8, pp. 87-99, July 2012.

females and eight males, all of them were totally aware
about the nature and purpose of the experiment. Because of
these limitations, it is assumed that these results are a bit
biased and are insufficient to develop a generalized equation
that can be applied for all type of personalities.
From this initial data we could not fix weights for
different emotions that work best for all. Further, from this
initial data we could not see the effects on these emotions in
different genders.
In our next phase we are planning to arrange similar but
more detail experiment with 100 participants. Where we will
test
 Difference in cognitive skills in males and females.
 Effects of different emotional condition on cognitive
skills and their relative effects in male and female.
 Effect of age on analytical and cognitive skills
 Effect of emotions during different age groups in
problems solving abilities.
After collecting enough data, suitable data mining
techniques will be applied to obtain proper relationship and
weight for different variable in our equation.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]
[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

Y. Wang, Y. Wang, S. Patel, and D. Patel, "A Layered reference
model of the brain (LRMB)," IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man,
and Cybernetics, Part C: Applications and Reviews, pp. 124-133,
2006.
D. C. Park, “The Basic mechanisms accounting for age-related
decline in cognitive function” Cognitive Aging: A primer, 11thed,
Psychology Press, 2000, pp. 3-19.
T. A. Salthouse, T. M. Atkinson, and D. E. Berish., "Executive
functioning as a potential mediator of age-related cognitive decline in
normal adults," Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, vol.
132, pp. 566-594, 2003.
Is pornography bad for society and should it's sale and distribution be
banned? [Online]. Available: http://www.debate.org
D. Zimprich and M. Martin, "Can longitudinal changes in processing
speed explain longitudinal age changes in fluid intelligence?"
Psychology and Aging, vol. 17, 2002.
C. Ayoub, E. O’Connor, G. Rappolt-Schlictmann, C. Vallotton, H.
Raikes, and R. Chazan-Cohen, "Cognitive skill performance among
young children living in poverty: Risk, change, and the promotive
effects of Early Head Start," Early Childhood Research Quarterly,
vol. 24, pp. 289-305, 2009.
L.-F. Rodriguez, F. Ramos, and Y. Wang, "Cognitive computational
models of emotions," in Proc. 2011 10th IEEE International
Conference on the Cognitive Informatics & Cognitive Computing,
2011.
O. AlZoubi, I. Koprinska, and R. A. Calvo, "Classification of braincomputer interface data," presented at the 7th Australasian Data
Mining Conference, Glenelg, Australia, 2008.
R. Plutchik, “The nature of emotions human emotions have deep
evolutionary roots, a fact that may explain their complexity and
provide tools for clinical practice," American Scientist, vol. 89, pp.
344-350, 2001.
D. Mokeddem and H. Belbachir, "Distributed classification using
class-association rules mining algorithm," in Proc. International
Conference on the Machine and Web Intelligence, 2010.
T. Tsoneva and A. Nijholt et al., "Emotional brain-computer
interfaces," International Journal of Autonomous and Adaptive
Communications Systems, vol. 6, pp. 9-25, 2013.
K. A. A. D. Raj and P. Padma, "Application of association rule
mining: A case study on team India," in Proc. International
Conference on Coimbatore the Computer Communication and
Informatics, India, 2013.
S. Wang, R. Ding, Y. Hu, and H. Wang, "Analysis of relationships
between color and emotion by classification based on associations." in
Proc. International Conference on the Computer Science and
Software Engineering, 2008.
D. Dorner and J. Gerdes, "Motivation, emotion, intelligence," in Proc.
the International Conference on Systems and Informatics, Yantai,
2012.

Sadique Ahmad is a MS leading to PhD students at
Institute of Management Sciences Peshawar, Pakistan. He
did his bachelor in computer sciences in 2008 and master
in computers in 2011 from University of Science &
Technology Bannu Pakistan. Currently he is working in
emotion based on computation in IM|Sciences Peshawar.
He is under the supervision of Awais Adnan.
Awais Adnan is working in Institute of Management
Sciences Peshawar as an assistant professor. He has done
his MS from NUST in computer software engineering. He
has done master in business administration and master in
computer sciences from University of Peshawar.
Currently he is doing his PhD in content aware
multimedia systems. He is working in multimedia and
computational intelligence. He is the head of multimedia group in the
institute.
Gulnawar Khan is a MS leading to PhD students at
Institute of Management Sciences Peshawar Pakistan. He
did his bachelor in information technology (HONS) in
2007 and master in information technology in 2010 from
institute of management sciences Peshawar Pakistan.
Currently he is working in emotion based computation.

Nasir Mehmood Khan is a MS student in the Department
of Computer Sciences, Institute of Management Sciences
Peshawar Pakistan. He did his bachelor in computer
sciences in 2005 and master in computers in 2008 from
University of Peshawar. He is currently working as an
inspector in a government department. Currently he is
working on feature based video classification and filtering.

80

