NeuroQuantology | December2016 | Volume 14 | Issue 4 | Page 780-790 | doi:10.14704/nq.2016.14.4.963
Valverde R., A quantum biofeedback and neurotechnology for support of transpersonal psychotherapy

780

A Quantum Biofeedback and Neurotechnology
Cybertherapy System for the Support of
Transpersonal Psychotherapy
Raul Valverde
ABSTRACT

Transpersonal psychology is the study of human nature and rests on the assumption that human beings possess
potentials that exceed the limits of their ego and integrate the spiritual experience within a broader
understanding of the human psyche and consciousness. Altered states of consciousness have been used to aid
psychotherapy by transpersonalists for decades. A cyberpsychotherapy system is proposed to support
transpersonal psychotherapy. The system can be used to induce a non-ordinary state of consciousness that can be
used by transpersonal psychologists as a healing tool to treat patients with psychological problems such as
psychosis. With the help of internet technology, these treatment sessions can occur over great distances. The
cyberpsychotherapy system uses a quantum signal generator for the induction of altered states of consciousness,
based on the so-called Koren Helmet of Persinger’s (1983). The cyberpsychotherapy has integrated EEG which
serves as a biofeedback device in order to assess if the patient has reached the desired level of consciousness.
Additionally, this EEG measurement can be used to inform the adjustment of the signal generator frequency to
improve the psychotherapy experience of the patient, if necessary. A sample of 10 patients was used to test the
cybertherapy system based on neurotechnology and quantum biofeedback. Data was collected and analysed to
confirm the system’s efficacy. Although the results show that the patients were not able to reach the desired level
of consciousness for the psychotherapy, there was statistically significant evidence that the proposed system can
alter an individual’s level of consciousness, which may help inform future designs intended to induce a state of
consciousness most conducive to psychotherapy.
Key Words: altered states of consciousness, neurotechnology, biofeedback, quantum medicine, transpersonal
therapy
DOI Number:10.14704/nq.2016.14.4.963
NeuroQuantology 2016; 4:780-790

Introduction1i
Cybertherapy is an internet based computermediated system used to facilitate psychotherapy
Corresponding author: Raul Valverde
Address: Concordia University, John Molson Building, Canada.
Phone: + (514) 848-2424 ext. 2968
e-mailraul.valverde@concordia.ca
Relevant conflicts of interest/financial disclosures: The authors
declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any
commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conflict of interest.
Received: 11 June 2016; Accepted: 15 July 2016
eISSN 1303-5150

(Botella et al., 2009). This includes new
applications of technology within psychology and
healthcare which utilize augmented and virtual
reality components in order to facilitate effective
psychotherapy (Botella et al., 2009). Although
there are many cybertherapy systems in the
literature (Takacs, 2005), none of them address
transpersonal psychotherapy or are based on
quantum biofeedback technology. Transpersonal
psychotherapy that is based on transpersonal
research and theory, considers the psyche to be
www.neuroquantology.com

NeuroQuantology | December2016 | Volume 14 | Issue 4 | Page 780-790 | doi:10.14704/nq.2016.14.4.963
Valverde R., A quantum biofeedback and neurotechnology for support of transpersonal psychotherapy

multidimensional and composed of several
"levels of consciousness," each having different
characteristics that are governed by different
laws. Transpersonal psychology is the study of
human nature and development, based on the
assumption that human beings possess potentials
that exceed the limits of normal ego development.
A main goal of transpersonal theory is to
integrate the spiritual experience within a
broader understanding of the human psyche and
consciousness (Grof, 1988).
The trend of explaining consciousness by
applying quantum theories has gained popularity
in recent years and, although clearly disdained by
many neuroscientists, more and more,
researchers have been directing their attention to
quantum explanations (Valverde, 2016). Brian D.
Josephson (1962) of the University of Cambridge,
winner of the 1973 Nobel Prize in Physics for his
studies
on
the
quantum
effects
in
superconductors (Josephson effect), proposes a
unified field theory of quantum nature that would
explain not only consciousness and its attributes,
but also the phenomenology observed to date in
terms of psychological and mystical experiences.
The human being experiences different altered
states of consciousness, that is, consciousness can
be altered in different ways. Stanley Krippner
(2000) defines altered states of consciousness as
mental states that can be subjectively recognized
by an individual, or by an objective observer, that
are different in mental functions, the normal state
of the individual, and alertness and waking states.
Altered states of consciousness have been
used as an adjunct to psychotherapy by
transpersonal therapists. One of these
techniques, known as Holotropic breathwork, is
produced by utilizing a hyperventilation
technique, instructing the individual to breath
deeply and rapidly for several minutes. Grof
(1988), with this technique, induces a
homeostatic crisis which leads to an altered state
of
consciousness,
allowing
meaningful
subconscious content and self-insights from that
new state. Stanislav Grof (1988) uses the
experiential healing power of this new state of
consciousness to help treat his patients. Although
holotropic breathwork induces these altered
states of consciousness, quantum biofeedback
and neurotechnology offer an alternative way to
induce altered state of consciousness for
transpersonal therapy that can be easily
implemented with the use of quantum computer
technology and used in combination with the
eISSN 1303-5150

781

internet to facilitate online transpersonal therapy
(Valverde, 2015a).
Quantum biofeedback uses sensors to
monitor physiological relaxation indicators, like
skin temperature and muscle tension. It expands
classical biofeedback by using galvanic skin
response (GSR) together with modern computer
technology to detect the response of the builtmind-spirit body (sometimes called the superconscious), to a large array of stress indicators.
Quantum Biofeedback is a sophisticated
biofeedback technique based on advanced
quantum scientific principles that promote a
deeper understanding of health and healing. This
approach views the body as a complex electrical
circuit combined with the application of the
principles of electrical engineering, which are
able to analyze and balance the electric body.
Quantum Biofeedback interacts with all
cellular matrices of the body, which allows
communication
between
conscious
and
unconscious levels (Valverde 2015a). This is
accomplished
by
establishing
electrical
communication using 12 electrodes which are
attached to the head, wrists, and ankles of the
patient. A loop and cyber handshake between the
Quantum Biofeedback System and the patient
using a calibration procedure is then created. By
connecting in this way, all 200 billion cells in the
human body are included in the exchange of
information. On this basis, it is now possible to
identify and prioritize the tensions and toxins
that are a major concern and bring them into
balance (Valverde, 2015a).
Classic biofeedback is based on
electroencephalographic(EEG)
measurements
taken from the frontal cortex. This EEG
information is presented to the user who then
tries to consciously change their internal
reactions to modify their brainwave state.
Quantum Biofeedback links the user’s reactions
to all body cell matrices, not only the conscious
aspects, but also with the unconscious. This
provides greater gain in the understanding of
health, as our conscious perception of the world
is limited by design to 17% of the stimulation we
receive (Valverde 2015a).
An application of quantum physics
(neurotechnology) in the altered states of
consciousness was carried out by Persinger
(1983). Persinger was able to induce visions of
God and other religious and mystical experiences
in the laboratory by using a computer and with
www.neuroquantology.com

782

NeuroQuantology | December2016 | Volume 14 | Issue 4 | Page 780-790 | doi:10.14704/nq.2016.14.4.963
Valverde R., A quantum biofeedback and neurotechnology for support of transpersonal psychotherapy

what he called the Koran Helmet that also has the
nickname of the Koren helmet. The Koren Helmet
was originally called the Koran Helmet, named
after its inventor Stanley Koren and Michael
Persinger. He found that the temporal lobes of the
brain are the source of the most spiritual
experiences and other alternate state of
consciousness.
This Koren helmet is a device to induce
altered states of consciousness using weak
magnetic signals to direct brain activity that can
induce spiritual experiences that helps with
transpersonal exploration and transformation of
many people that is able to heal because of these
transpersonal experiences (Persinger, 2000). It is
suggested that altered states of consciousness
such as sensed presence and out-of-body
experience, whether they are produced by
magnetic, electrical, or other stimulations or
circumstances, can be most effectively explained
as the changes of the relative contents and/or
intensities of the test subjects’ neural quantum
entanglement with their surroundings including
possibly spiritual environments or information
(Hu and Wu, 2012).
With the aid of quantum biofeedback and
neurotechnology, people can discover hidden
deep events and conflicts in their subconscious
that can lead to healing experiences. The
proposed research has the objective of creating a
cyberpsychotherapy system that uses quantum
biofeedback and neurotechnology to facilitate
transpersonal psychotherapy by inducing altered
state of consciousness over the internet.
This work has the goal of contributing to
the existing literature regarding the application
of quantum biofeedback and neurotechnology to
psychology by suggesting a cybertherapy system
for
the
facilitation
of
transpersonal
psychotherapy.

(founder and first editor of the Journal of
Transpersonal Psychology), provided one of the
first formal definitions of transpersonal
psychology in 1969 at the inaugural edition of the
Journal of Transpersonal Psychology:
The emerging Transpersonal Psychology refers
specifically to the empirical, scientific study,
and the responsible application of relevant
results, becoming meta-needs individual and
species-wide, the final values, conscience
unitive, peak experiences, values, ecstasy,
mystical, amazing experience, being, self,
essence, joy, wonder, ultimate meaning,
transcendence of self, the spirit, unity, cosmic
consciousness, synergy of individual and
species
level,
maximum
interpersonal
encounter, sacralization of everyday life,
transcendental phenomena, self-cosmic humor
and joy maximum sensory awareness,
responsiveness and expression; and concepts,
experiences and activities (Sutich, 1969).

Stanislav Grof, co-founder of transpersonal
psychology with Abraham Maslow, defines
transpersonal psychology as “The psychology
that respects the entire spectrum of human
experience, including holotropic states, and all
domains of the psyche - Biographical, perinatal
and transpersonal” (Grof, 2000).
Transpersonal psychology covers a
multitude of experiences and behaviors produced
by spontaneous or altered states of
consciousness.
Transpersonal
phenomena
include meditative experiences, dreaming,
experiences induced by psychedelics, peak
experiences,
cosmic
consciousness,
enlightenment,
mysticism,
out-of-body
experiences, channeling trance, near-death
experiences,
memories
of
reincarnation,
extrasensory awareness, archetypal phenomena,
accelerated learning, exceptional state of health
and well-being, mind-body healing, and
spontaneous healing from many types of illnesses
that are chronic.

Transpersonal Psychology
Transpersonal psychology integrates the spiritual
experience within a broader understanding of the
human psyche. It is with the study of states of
consciousness and the full potential of man, that
transpersonal psychology assumes that humans
can achieve harmony and transcendence through
spiritual
development.
Transpersonal
is
something that exceeds the range of an
individual’s own experience or personal history.
Transpersonal psychotherapist, Anthony Sutich
eISSN 1303-5150

Altered States of Consciousness and
Transpersonal Psychology
Ludwig (1966) defines an “altered state of
consciousness” as any mental state(s) induced by
various types of physiological, psychological or
pharmacological agents, which can be recognized
subjectively by an individual (or by an objective
observer), as representing a sufficient deviation
in the subjective experience, or psychological
www.neuroquantology.com

NeuroQuantology | December2016 | Volume 14 | Issue 4 | Page 780-790 | doi:10.14704/nq.2016.14.4.963
Valverde R., A quantum biofeedback and neurotechnology for support of transpersonal psychotherapy

functioning, during ordinary states of conscious
awareness. This deviation can be sufficiently
represented by a greater awareness than usual
with internal sensations or mental processes,
changes in the formal characteristics of thought,
and the deterioration of the test of reality to
varying degrees.
According to Ludwig (1966), the cognitive
approach to altered states of consciousness has a
distinct set of characteristic which include
alterations in thinking, loss of control, change in
emotional expression, change of body image,
perceptual distortions, change in the meaning or
importance, a sense of the ineffable, and feelings
of rejuvenation.
By applying the disruptive force
requirement for the basic state of consciousness
(either through some physiological action, such
as drugs or the alteration of attention via
practices like meditation), the organization of
cognitive subsystems is destabilized until a new
force pattern (such as mental set, setting,
expectations, drug effects) is applied to shape the
subsystems in a whole new system, resulting in
the production of a new discrete state of
consciousness.
The cognitive awareness approach has
helped transpersonal psychologists differentiate
several levels of waking states of consciousness.
According to this approach, consciousness is not
one homogenous state, but varies and changes
much like the colors of the rainbow.
Transpersonal psychologists tend to see the
experiences of mystical union, enlightenment,
nirvana, and related experiences as natural and
beneficial non-ordinary states of consciousness
that may be subject to the effects of statedependent learning. The idea that the experience
of the sacred can be interpreted as altered states
of consciousness can be construed from two
observations: (1) psychedelic drugs have been
used through the centuries and cultures to induce
religious experiences, and (2) reports from some
drug experiences are phenomenologically
(descriptively or experiential) indistinguishable
from accounts of natural mystical experiences
(Smith, 1964).
Transpersonal psychologist, Charles T.
Tart, has examined altered states of
consciousness from a cognitive perspective in
terms of changes in the configuration and
operation of the underlying mental processes
(Tart, 1971; 1976; 1983; 1992). According to
eISSN 1303-5150

783

Tart, states of consciousness involve cognitive
functioning
that
include
the
following
subsystems: exteroceptors (receives sensory
information), interoceptors (receives kinesthetic
input), input processing (working memory), the
subconscious processes, sense of identity,
evaluation and decision making, emotions, space
/ time sense, long term memory, the motor
output (behavior) plus latent functions. These 10
subsystems (with even more latent functions
possible), define any discrete state of
consciousness. The particular configuration of the
subsystems in a given time is shaped and limited
by the deployment of attention, the body's
energies, characteristics of the structures
themselves, and the particular social and cultural
environments in which they operate.
Grof (1988) suggested that the term
“altered states of consciousness” cover
transpersonal experiences; however, there are
certain types of altered states of consciousness
that do not meet the criteria for being
transpersonal (involving an expansion or
extension of consciousness beyond the limits of
the usual and limitations time and space). For
example, a living and complex childhood memory
occurs in an altered state of consciousness (e.g.,
hypnosis or psychedelic sessions), but do not
meet the criteria for being transpersonal.
The cultural context of the 1960s and
1970s provided fertile ground for the emergence
of transpersonal studies as an independent field
of study in psychology. The infusion of Eastern
ideas, including the contemplative traditions of
Zen, Advaita, Vedanta and Taoism, along with the
institutionalization of the humanist revolution in
academic psychology, and the growing interest in
consciousness
and
altered
states
of
consciousness that are triggered by the
widespread use of psychedelics, paved the way
for the birth of transpersonal psychology
movement in California in the late 1960s (Ferrer,
2002).
Since the 1970s, transpersonal psychology,
as the humanist movement that preceded it, has
been divided into three different groups; the first
group represented by the ideas of Grof (1988)
that believes that transcendence can only occur
in the presence of an altered state of
consciousness. This group produces conceptual
models of non-ordinary states of consciousness.
The second group, led by Wilber (1975), include
those trying to assign internal states of
www.neuroquantology.com

NeuroQuantology | December2016 | Volume 14 | Issue 4 | Page 780-790 | doi:10.14704/nq.2016.14.4.963
Valverde R., A quantum biofeedback and neurotechnology for support of transpersonal psychotherapy

consciousness and identify with the monistic and
perennial philosophy of Aldous Huxley. Wilber
believes that all expressions of the highest state
of consciousness in each tradition are the same as
the psychopathic conditions occurring at the
bottom, the normal waking reality in the middle
and meditative states of higher consciousness in
the top. The third and by far the largest segment
of the transpersonal movement has no
identifiable bearer, it sees the self as getting up
and go to work in the morning, the higher
consciousness is sweeping the floor, washing
dishes, and raking leaves. The lighting is doing
everything we are supposed to be doing at this
minute. There is a preconceived thing; is not an
altered state of consciousness, it is simply the
deep philosophy, which is to be found most
clearly in the mundane.
Altered states of consciousness answer the
question “who we really are?” The answer to this
question is that we are a part of God and that
humans are spiritual beings having human
experiences that somehow reveal the status of
our full identity of our cosmic direction.
Brain Waves
Our brain works primarily with bioelectrical
energy. Although the power of electricity that
handles our neurons is low (measured in
millivolts), this power processes, manages,
distributes and utilizes vast amounts of
information and generates an almost infinite
number of responses. So by using micro
electricity, we can quantitatively establish that
the brain is a machine operating at low
frequencies. Our brain, in addition to processing
information that comes by the senses, is capable
of emitting extra-sensory information received
via similar “electromagnetic waves”, but with
lower intensity similar to the frequencies of a
radio transmitter-receiver. Our brain can act as a
radio station, similar to numerous species of
birds that in their migrations are guided by a
genuine receiver of terrestrial magnetism located
in the pituitary gland. With this receiver, they
know where they have to fly and in what
direction. It's like having a real compass
incorporated into the brain. The mind could be
defined as the “sense” of the brain (like sight is
the sense of the eye).
A German psychiatrist, Hans Berger (18431941), demonstrated that an “amplifier” device,
eISSN 1303-5150

784

which
was
later
termed
an
electroencephalograph, could capture electrical
potential (voltage fluctuations) in the human
brain. Before him, the English physician Richard
Caton (1842-1926) showed similar potential in
dogs. The first types of brain frequencies that
were discovered were of the “alpha” and “theta”
ranges. Later, these findings were complemented
by research of other ranges of frequency
captured by the electroencephalograph. Each
type of wave results in a different
neuropsychological state. That is, our mind, our
body, and our physical and physiological activity
are completely different in each of these states or
frequencies. The type of neurochemicals and
hormones released into the blood stream varies
depending on frequency and the presence and
quantity of such substances have an impact on
the mood we have and interact to produce the
physiological-mental-physical-end of our mental
state. A level of consciousness is conscious
thought that is always thinking, even in moments
of apparent inactivity, but trivial ideas
continually pass by consciousness. Most of the
thoughts are accompanied by reactions in
behavior, and small involuntary movements.
When you're not actively thinking then you're
probably dreaming. According to Signer and
Streiner (1966), a person has, throughout the
day, about 200 daydreams. Therefore,
consciousness is the sum of all the different
perceptions. The most general distinctions of
consciousness are wakefulness and sleep;
however, both cerebral and psychological states
change according to conscious and subconscious
content, unique to each individual. These changes
are directly related to the electrical activity of the
brain. This activity can be measured by the
number of oscillations per second (Hz) that are
linked to different states of consciousness in the
brain: our brain only perceives a limited range of
frequencies, defining our existence in this threedimensional medium. 20 to 20,000 vibrations per
second are perceptible by our ears, the range of
the electromagnetic spectrum perceivable by our
eyes extends from red to violet (although the
visible spectrum is only a sliver of the larger
continuum), all possible smells and tastes (which
are also vibrations) and the endless textures that
we can distinguish with our skin. But the brain is
not only receiver but also is sends vibrations. It
has been proven thanks to the EEG, that the brain
emits waves of varying intensity and frequency
www.neuroquantology.com

NeuroQuantology | December2016 | Volume 14 | Issue 4 | Page 780-790 | doi:10.14704/nq.2016.14.4.963
Valverde R., A quantum biofeedback and neurotechnology for support of transpersonal psychotherapy

depending on the mental state of the person
being observed. These waves are classified into:
Table 1. Types of Brainwaves (Valverde, 2015a).
TYPES OF
STATES OF CONSCIOUSNESS
BRAIN
WAVES
BETA
This type of waves is recorded when the
WAVES: 14
person is awake in a state of normal
Hz to 30
activity. Correspond to states of
Hz
conscious attention, anxiety, surprise,
fear, stress.
GAMMA
They express pathological conditions of
WAVES: 25
maximum tension, excitement and the
and 100 Hz
individual enters a state of STRESS in
which the coordination of ideas and
normal physical activity are seriously
altered.
ALPHA
Relaxation and rest, calm, reflective state.
WAVES: 8
Reduction of bodily sensations. The
Hz to 13
subconscious
begins
to
emerge:
Abstraction, suggestibility. Assimilation
Hz
of the study. Ease of visualization of
mental images.
THETA
WAVES:
3.5 Hz to 7
Hz

DELTA
WAVES: 1
Hz to 3 Hz

During sleep or in deep meditation,
autogenous training, hypnosis, yoga
(whenever the formations of the
subconscious act). The state stimulates
creative inspiration. Considered a state
for maximum capacity of learning.
Fantasy,
imagination.
Hypnagogic
images.
It arises mainly in the states of deep
sleep and unconsciousness. Very rarely
can be experienced being awake unless
with a very hard training (Yoga,
Meditation, Zen, Hypnosis, Self-hypnosis)
or with a synchronizer of hemispheres. It
corresponds to deep sleep, hypnotic
trance, REM sleep. It corresponds to
sleep without dream, trance, deep
hypnosis. Delta waves are very
important in the healing process and
strengthening the immune system.

The alpha state is when, if we would
connect to an electroencephalogram, our brains
would work between 7.5 to 14 cycles per second.
When “operating” in this state, we traverse along
the border of the conscious and the unconscious.
It is a gate between both states of consciousness
and this makes “alpha state” special, because it
allows us, on the one hand, still have conscious
awareness of our mind and body, that is, we
realize what we think and happening around us.
On the other hand, since the “lift” of
consciousness in the “lower floors” of the mind,
gives us access to information and own
subconscious states, can utilize the wealth
ofmental “power” residing in the subconscious.
This state is a “being comfortable,” in inner peace
eISSN 1303-5150

785

and happiness, in deep relaxation, greatly
increases the power of suggestion and autosuggestion. That is, hypnosis is much more
effective in alpha and suggestion will be more
easily accepted with fewer “filters” from our
conscious rationality.
Magnus and Van der Holst (1987) speak of
frequencies ranging from 3.5 to 7.5 cycles per
second. They are associated with the states of
creative ideation and imagery. During its cortical
proliferation, an individual can discover events
deeply hidden in the recesses of their
subconscious, as well as conflicts – those of
personality, in particular. Is the wave of
imagination and dynamic contact with other
possible “dimensions psi” that offers us the
opportunity to research our personality and deep
in our psychology?
Research Methodology
The state of consciousness of someone can be
loosely determined by measuring physiological
changes. Certain physiological changes are
typically associated with altered state of
consciousness so measuring these physiological
changes may provide evidence to more
accurately determine the state of consciousness
someone is in. Cade and Coxhead (1979) were
able to map altered state of consciousness with
alpha brain waves between 10 to 8 cycles.
This research uses EEG that was
specifically designed to show the ephemeral
patterns of the electrical signals from the two
hemispheres of the cortex as they are happening
(Cade & Coxhead, 1979). The EEG technology
used for this research is the Emotiv 3D Brain
Activity Map EEG software (Emotiv, 2016) that
works with the Emotiv EPOC neuroheadsets. The
neuroheadset captures the users’ brainwave
(EEG) signals. After being converted to digital
form, the brainwaves are processed, and the
results are wirelessly transmitted to the USB
receiver. The Emotiv 3D Brain Activity Map
interprets these signals to displays mental
activity in real time. The software displays brain
activity in four significant brainwave frequency
bands (delta, theta, alpha, beta) and uses the
headset EPOC to read data. The software displays
a colored gradient map showing the distribution
of the indicated frequency band activity where
red indicates the highest level of activity, falling
away to orange, yellow, green, blue then black.
www.neuroquantology.com

NeuroQuantology | December2016 | Volume 14 | Issue 4 | Page 780-790 | doi:10.14704/nq.2016.14.4.963
Valverde R., A quantum biofeedback and neurotechnology for support of transpersonal psychotherapy

Figure 1, shows theta frequency bands
with the highest level of activity indicating that
the individual in this case was experiencing deep
meditative states, daydreaming, and automatic
tasks. Emotiv 3D Brain Activity Map EEG
software has data collection and replay
functionalities that can be use to analyze the
collected data.
An application of quantum physics
(neurotechnology) in the altered states of
consciousness was carried out by Persinger
(1983). Persinger (1983) was able to induce
visions of God and other religious and mystical
experiences in the laboratory by using a
computer and with what he called the Koren
helmet that has also the nickname of the Koren
helmet. He found that the temporal lobes of the
brain are the source of the most spiritual
experiences and other alternate state of
consciousness.

Figure 1. 3D viewer.

This Koren helmet is a device to induce
altered states of consciousness using weak
magnetic signals to direct brain activity that can
induce spiritual experiences that helps with
transpersonal exploration and transformation of
many people that is able to heal because of these
transpersonal experiences (Persinger, 2000). It
is suggested that altered states of consciousness
such as sensed presence and out-of-body
experience whether they are produced by
magnetic, electric, or other stimulations or
circumstances can be most effectively explained
as the changes of the relative contents and/or
intensities of the test subjects’ neural quantum
entanglement with their surroundings including
possibly spiritual environments or information
(Hu and Wu, 2012).
eISSN 1303-5150

786

Intense experiences are based in the
temporal lobes (Persinger, 1983), The sessions
used in the research are intended for eliciting
altered states of consciousness, and use the coils
over the temporal lobes, which are understood to
be the source of the mystical experiences
(Persinger, 1983).
This research uses a product called Shakti
(Shakti, 2016) that is based on the Koran helmet
of Koran and Persinger (1983). Shakti Software
produces audio analogs to EEG signals. These are
applied to the brain using modified commonly
available magnetic coils. The magnetic signals are
applied to the head at very low strength. The
signals are short bursts, followed by intervals of
silence. Each signal speaks a language that only
one brain structure understands and responds.
The brain has two hippocampi and two
amygdalas, one on each side. Shakti is applied
using the structure’s own signal, but only over
the side of the head where it supports something
positive. When these structures respond, they put
the person in a positive altered state of
consciousness (Shakti, 2016).
The Shakti sessions that were used for
this research are 'interhemispheric' (switching
from both hemispheres to one) sessions,
incorporating the same principles used in the
study of Sculthorpe & Persinger (2003). In this
last study, it was shown that the most effective
sessions turned out to be two-phase sessions.
This study applies a modulated 40 Hz signal to
both temporal lobes, followed by the amygdala
signal to only the left temporal lobe as indicated
in figures 2 and 3. This is the session design that
comes closest to the sessions used in the "Koren
Helmet" experiments (Shakti, 2016).
Electromagnetic frequency emissions
(EMF) emissions are varieties of radiation,
and/or electrons. The Shakti helmet uses
magnetic fields, which are neither radiation nor
electrons. Electromagnetic radiation is composed
of photons; magnetic fields are not. Magnetic
fields are not composed of the elementary
particles than can interact with some organic
compounds, nor are they composed of electrons,
ions, or anything else that is encompassed by the
word 'emission'. These are simple magnetic fields
created by two poles. Fields from an
electromagnet are made of the same matter as
the earth's magnetic field. These are 'made' of
'lines of force', and are not 'EM emissions'. These
www.neuroquantology.com

787

NeuroQuantology | December2016 | Volume 14 | Issue 4 | Page 780-790 | doi:10.14704/nq.2016.14.4.963
Valverde R., A quantum biofeedback and neurotechnology for support of transpersonal psychotherapy

do not pose a health risk of any kind (Greenland
et al., 2000).
The Shakti helmet uses magnetic coils
connected to a computer sound card. The output
of a sound card is modulated DC. The polarity one wire is positive and the other wire is negative
- is always the same, no matter how the
amplitude varies. A speaker or headphones uses a
magnetic coil to move a diaphragm to make
sound. Generally, the goal is to move the coil two
ways to make sound. However, because of the
springiness of the coil you only need one polarity.
For example, a given voltage might push the coil.
When the voltage drops lower, the voice coil will
rebound and move the other way. EM fields reach
deep inside the brain. Magnetic fields cannot be
blocked by the skull (Hatch and Stelter, 2001).
The proposed helmet's magnetic signals reach
deep inside the brain because there is nothing in
or around the brain capable obstructing them
(Persinger, 1997).

The proposed architecture of the
cybertherapy is depicted in figure 4. The
therapist computer has installed 3D activity map
software and Skype that provide a human
computer interaction for the interface between
the therapist and the system (Valverde 2011).
Skype is a telecommunications software that
allows verbal and text communications with the
patient, the 3D activity map software allows the
therapist to visualize the states of consciousness
of the patient by detecting the frequency band
with the highest level of activity.

Shakti
signal
generator

3D brain activity map software

EEG headset

Computer Psychoterapist

Computer Patient

Flexihub

Shakti helmet

Figure 4. Proposed cybertherapy system.

The therapist is able to access the EEG
signals collected by the EEG headset wore by the
patient. These digital signals are transmitted
over the internet by using Flexihub software
(Flexihub, 2016), FlexiHub is a USB over IP
software solution, it enables sharing access to
USB devices over Internet. The EEG headset is
connected to the USB of the patient’s computer
via a USB wireless adaptor.
Figure 2. Left side of the session used.

Figure 3. Right side of the session.
eISSN 1303-5150

The Shakti helmet is worn by the patient
and is meant to induce altered states of
consciousness by modulating 40 Hz signals to
both temporal lobes from a signal generator
installed in the patient’s computer. A sample of
10 patients were used to test the cybertherapy
system and quantum biofeedback data collected
and analyzed to confirm that the patients were
able to reach a desired level of consciousness for
the psychotherapy.
Each patient was required to sit down and
relax in a quiet room for a period of 40 minutes
wearing an EEG headset without being exposed
to the Shakti system, the therapist recorded the
session during this 40 minute (pre-test). After,
the patient was exposed to the Shakti signals by
wearing the Shakti helmet, during which time the
www.neuroquantology.com

NeuroQuantology | December2016 | Volume 14 | Issue 4 | Page 780-790 | doi:10.14704/nq.2016.14.4.963
Valverde R., A quantum biofeedback and neurotechnology for support of transpersonal psychotherapy

788

therapist also recorded the session for 40
minutes (post-test). Information about the
difference between the two tests was not given to
the patients in order to avoid bias in the
measurements.

but it is expected that the average of the levels is
under 5 as the patient needs go from 0 to 5 at
different stages. However, it is expected that the
post-test average is higher than the pre-test as
we want to probe that the cybertherapy system is
capable of raising the level of consciousness.

Table 2. States of consciousness and frequency
measurements.
Level
Measured Types
of
Consciousness level
frequency waves
0
Just he is beginning to
relax with difficulty
alpha and
25-20
quieting the
beta
mind.
1
Not very clear
Guests beta
conscience
20-16
alpha
or sense of anesthesia
continuous
2
Alpha
continues
Calm and relaxed with
16-13
without beta
flash back memories
theta
intermittent
3
Well defined state.
Feeling of floating with
Alfa falling
increased imagination
13-10
Continuous
and more concentration
theta
sustained
4
Extremely vivid
awareness of breathing
heartbeat, or other
alpha
bodily sensations. Living
continuous
10-8
consciousness.
theta falling
Sometimes an
Frequency
alternation of internal
and external awareness
5
Awareness with
satisfaction and deep
Theta
intense alertness
continuous
and calmness and
8-5
alpha close to
detachment. Feeling of
theta
altered state lacking in
previous levels 0 to 4.
6
New way of feeling by
intuitive vision
Delta
below 4
synthesis of opposites
occasionally
in a higher unity

A mean and standard deviation for these
levels were calculated for each pre-test and postest sessions for each patient. The mean values of
pre-test and post-test results were compared to
check if there is an improvement in state of
consciousness with the use of the cybertherapy
system. The mean values were tested using the tStudent test, and the t-values were calculated by
using the following formula:

Each recording session displayed the
different frequency bands that represent each
level of consciousness including alpha, beta, theta
and delta. For the analysis, we quantified the
different states of consciousness in a manner
similar to Cade and Coxhead (1979) who
conducted EEG tests in 70 subjects and measured
the ESR (electrical resistance of the skin). These
results were applied to the work of Terry Lesh
(1970) allowing us to build the table below
representing the objective and subjective
correlates of these states. The targeted level is 5
as this represents altered state of consciousness
eISSN 1303-5150

t-value = (Mean of post-test – Mean of pre-test) /
square root (Variance of post-test / Sample size
of post-test +
(1)
Variance of pre-test / Sample size of pre-test)

The Alpha level used was 0.05 of one tail
test; with 18 degrees of freedom (sample size of
pre test + sample size of post test – 2). According
to the t-distribution significance table, the critical
value is 1.734 for one tail test for this alpha and
degrees of freedom. The Null Hypothesis is that
there is no difference between the pre test and
post test sample means for the states of
consciousness because of the use of the
Cybertherapy system.
Results
Table 3 shows the results of the study, a mean of
the pre-test and post-test for each patient was
calculated during the 40 minutes’ sessions for
each patient because of the use of the
Cybertherapy system. The results show that each
patient had a different reaction to the use of the
system. While some patients showed very little
difference from the pre-test and post-test (e.g.
patient 8) or even a decrease of the level of
consciousness (e.g. patient 2) some patients
observed a great level of improvement with the
post-test session (e.g patients 3, 6 and 9). The
mean of means for all the patients for the pre-test
is 2 (Calm and relaxed) while the mean of means
for all the patients for the post-test is 3 (Feeling
of floating with increased imagination and more
concentration sustained). While it seems that the
Cybetherapy system contributes to raise the level
of consciousness, none of the patients were able
to maintain an altered state of consciousness
(level 5) during the sessions although this level
was reached for a few minutes by a few patients.
www.neuroquantology.com

NeuroQuantology | December2016 | Volume 14 | Issue 4 | Page 780-790 | doi:10.14704/nq.2016.14.4.963
Valverde R., A quantum biofeedback and neurotechnology for support of transpersonal psychotherapy

The standard deviation for the pre-test
was calculated as 1.34 and the standard deviation
for the post test is 1.108. The t-value for the
sample is 1.75. Based on this last value, the null
hypothesis can be rejected; this means that there
is enough statistical evidence that the
Cybertherapy system is able to raise the level of
consciousness. However, this is not enough to
raise the level to the altered state of
consciousness that is required to conduct
transpersonal therapy.
Table 3. Results of the experiment.
Patient

Mean Pre-test

Mean Post-test

1

2.82

3.19

2

2.73

2.48

3

2.45

3.55

4

2.73

3.00

5

1.73

3.55

6

1.45

2.95

7

0.91

2.18

8

2.27

2.36

9

1.64

3.27

10

1.36

3.18

The results suggest that although it seems
that the proposed system is on the right track, the
system should be enhanced by including other

References
Cade CM and Coxhead N. The Awakened Mind: Biofeedback
and the Development of Higher States of
Awareness.Delacorte Press: New York, 1979.
Botella C, Garcia-Palacios A, Banos RM and Quero S.
Cybertherapy: Advantages, Limitations and Ethical issues.
PsychNology Journal 2009; 7(1): 77-100
Emotiv,
3D-Brain,
https://emotiv.com/store/product_74.htmlAccessed
date: January 10, 2016.
Ferrer JN. Revisioning transpersonal theory: A participatory
vision of human spirituality. Suny Press, 2002.
Flexihub
Flexihub
software,
http://www.flexihub.com/Accessed date: January 15,
2016.
Shakti
S.
Neuromagnetic
signal
generator,
https://www.shaktitechnology.com/winshakti/rotating/
Accessed date: January 8, 2016.
Goleman D and Davidson RJ. Consciousness: Brain, states of
consciousness, and mysticism. Harper, New York, 1979
Greenland S, Sheppard AR, Kaune WT, Poole and Kelsh MA
and Childhood Leukemia-EMF Study Group. A pooled
eISSN 1303-5150

789

known means to reach altered states such as
music therapy (Bonny, 1975), guided meditations
(Lehmann et al., 2001) and channeling (Valverde
2015b).
Conclusions
Inducing altered states of consciousness with
neurotechnology is a relatively new concept and
although there are serious studies, they are not
typically
incorporated
into
mainstream
psychology or traditional medicine. This, more
than anything, is due to a lack of understanding of
this technology. The aim of this paper is to open
the eyes of the therapists about the potential of
these technologies for clinical purposes and the
ability of the use internet technology to be able to
conduct transpersonal therapy from a distance.
Although the results do not prove that the
presented technologies are effective at reliably
inducing altered states, they show that there is
potential for this as there is statistically
significant evidence that they are able to
influence one’s level of consciousness.
Future research will ideally focus on the
inclusion of supporting methods, such as music
therapy, guided meditations, and breath work, in
order to reach the desired state that can help the
therapist to heal patients at a distance with the
use of transpersonal psychology.

analysis of magnetic fields, wire codes, and childhood
leukemia. Epidemiology 2000; 11(6): 624-634.
Grof S. The Adventure of Self-Discovery. State University of
New York Press, New York, 1988.
Grof S. Psychology of the Future: Lessons from modern
consciousness research. State University of New York
Press, Albany, NY, 2000.
Hatch GP and Stelter RE. Magnetic design considerations for
devices and particles used for biological high-gradient
magnetic separation (HGMS) systems. Journal of
Magnetism and Magnetic Materials 2001; 225(1): 262276.
Hu H and Wu M. Scientific GOD: Michael Persinger & the GOD
Experiments. Scientific GOD Journal, 2012; 3(10): 918921.
Josephson BD. Possible new effects in superconductive
tunnelling. Physics letters 1962; 1(7): 251-253.
Krippner S. The epistemology and technologies of shamanic
states of consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies
2000; 7(11-12): 93-118.
Lehmann D, Faber P, Achermann P, Jeanmonod D, Gianotti LR
and Pizzagalli D. Brain sources of EEG gamma frequency
www.neuroquantology.com

NeuroQuantology | December2016 | Volume 14 | Issue 4 | Page 780-790 | doi:10.14704/nq.2016.14.4.963
Valverde R., A quantum biofeedback and neurotechnology for support of transpersonal psychotherapy

790

during volitionally meditation-induced, altered states of
consciousness, and experience of the self. Psychiatry
Research: Neuroimaging 2001; 108(2): 111-121.
Lesh TV. Meditators Zen and the Development of Empathy in
Counselors, Journal of Humanistic Psychology 1970;
10(1): 39-74.
Ludwig A. Altered states of consciousness, Archives of
general Psychiatry 1966; 15(3): 225-234.
Magnus O and Van der Holst M. Zeta waves: a special type of
slow delta waves. Electroencephalography and Clinical
Neurophysiology 1987; 67 (2): 140-146.
Ornstein RE. The psychology of consciousness, WH Freeman,
New York, 1972.
Persinger MA. Religious and mystical experiences as artifacts
of temporal lobe function: general hypothesis. Perceptual
and Motor Skills 1983; 57(3): 1255-1262.
Persinger MA. Depression following brain trauma is
enhanced in patients with mild discrepancies between
intelligence and impairment on neuropsychological
scores. Perceptual and Motor Skills 1997; 84(3c): 12841286.
Persinger MA, Tiller SG and Koren SA. Experimental
simulation of experience and an elicitation haunt of
activity
by
paroxysmal
electroencephalographic
transcerebral complex magnetic fields: induction of a
synthetic ghost. Perceptual and Motor Skills 2000; 90 (2):
659-674.
Sculthorpe L and Persinger MA. Does phase-modulation of
applied 40-Hz transcerebral magnetic fields affect
subjective experiences and hypnotic induction?
Perceptual and Motor Skills 2003; 97(3): 1031-1037.
Smith H. Do drugs have religious import? The Journal of
Philosophy 1964; 61(1): 517-530.
Sutich AJ. Some considerations regarding transpersonal
psychology. Journal of Transpersonal Psychology 1969;
1(1); 11-20
Takacs B. Special education and rehabilitation: teaching and
healing with interactive graphics. Computer Graphics and
Applications. IEEE 2005; 25(5): 40-48.
Tart CT. Scientific foundations for the study of altered states
of consciousness. Journal of Transpersonal Psychology
1971; 3(1): 93-124.
Tart CT. States of consciousness. Psychological Processes, El
Cerrito, CA, 1989.
Tart CT. The basic nature of altered states of consciousness: A
systems approach. Journal of Transpersonal Psychology
1976; 8(1): 45-64.
Tart CT. Transpersonal psychologies, American Psychological
Association, Washington DC., 1992.
Valverde R. Principles of Human Computer Interaction
Design: HCI Design. LAP Lambert Academic Publishing,
Germany, 2011.
Valverde R. Neurotechnology as a Tool for Inducing and
Measuring Altered States of Consciousness in
Transpersonal Psychotherapy. NeuroQuantology 2015a;
13(4):502-517.
Valverde R. Channeling as an Altered State of Consciousness
in Transpersonal Psychology Therapy. Journal of
Consciousness Exploration & Research, 2015b; 6(7): 405416.
Valverde R. Possible Role of Quantum Physics in
Transpersonal & Metaphysical Psychology. Journal of
Consciousness Exploration & Research 2016; 7(4): 303309.
Wilber K. Psychologia Perennis: The Spectrum of
Consciousness. Journal of Transpersonal Psychology
1975; 7(2): 105-132.
eISSN 1303-5150

www.neuroquantology.com

