Scientia et Technica Año XXI, Vol. 21, No. 1, marzo de 2016. Universidad Tecnológica de Pereira. ISSN 0122-1701

Ānāpāna: Neuro-engineering of Mindfulness
Ānāpāna: Neuroingeniería de la Meditación
Carlos Diego Ferrin Bolaños, Esteban Mauricio Correa Agudelo, Andrés Mauricio Hernández
Camacho, Juan Diego Gómez
Centro de Bioinformática y Biología Computacional de Colombia, Manizales, Colombia
Correo-e: carlos.ferrin@bios.co
esteba.correa@bios.co
andres.hernandez@bios.co
juan.gomez@bios.co
Abstract— Meditation benefits have been widely supported by
many research works. It is considered a natural way of reducing
stress, depression, and other anxiety disorders. However,
meditation process is a breathe pursuing task that requires long
time training to avoid the so-called mind wandering. In this
work, we propose a neural-feedback system that detects when
mind wanders and generates an audible signal, this way patient’s
attention is recovered back again. Finally, we support our
approach by testing the system on novice and advanced
meditators.
Key Word — Machine Learning, Electroencephalography (EEG),
Neurofeedback, Functional Magnetic Resonance (fMRI),
Psychotherapy, Signal Processing.
Resumen—Los beneficios psicoterapéuticos de la meditación han
sido avalados científicamente en muchos trabajos a nivel
mundial, considerándola una forma natural de reducir los
niveles de estrés, depresión, etc. Sin embargo, la meditación
mediante el seguimiento consciente de la respiración es un
proceso que requiere largos periodos de entrenamiento para
aprender a evitar la denominada desviación de la atención. En
este trabajo se propone un sistema de retroalimentación
neuronal que detecta la desviación de la atención y genera una
señal auditiva que recupera la atención del paciente. A
continuación, se reportan resultados preliminares que avalan el
enfoque propuesto en este trabajo.
Palabras
clave—
Máquinas
de
Aprendizaje,
Electroencefalografía (EEG), Resonancia Magnética Funcional
(fMRI), Psicoterapia, Procesamiento de Señales.

mental training. Foremost, neuroscience has focused on the
brain mechanisms and neural correlates of meditation.
Particularly, R. Davidson et al [10] have been leading a series
of uncommon, yet seminal studies involving Buddhists monks
[11], [8], [12], [13], [20]. For instance, groundbreaking
experiments conducted with French Buddhists monk Matthieu
Ricard yielded recently remarkable results: “during
meditation, Ricard's brain produces a level of gamma waves those linked to consciousness, attention, learning and memory
- never reported before in the neuroscience literature” [11].
Inherently, of course, computer vision, signal processing,
machine learning and pattern recognition, they all have
contributed to achieve these findings in more technical
aspects. In sight of this, nowadays, few doubt about the
benefits of mindfulness meditation in treating mental
disorders [14], [15], [22], [24], and [26]. This particularly
applies to depression [14], [17], a psychological condition that
is treated, otherwise, with several different invasive
approaches such as antidepressant drugs [31], transcranial
stimulation [32] and more recently, Araujo et al [33] have
used psychedelic plants such as Ayahuasca.
Despite the scientifically proved benefits of meditation and its
potential use for healing medical conditions. At the best of our
knowledge, nobody has tried yet to engineer a system that
permits automatic learning of mindfulness meditation, as an
aid for trainees and patients. Therefore, the introduction,
design and prototype of such a system are the main
contributions of this paper. To start with, we argue three
scientific facts that will endorse our approach:
•

I.

INTRODUCTION

Depression is a mental disorder with a profound negative
effect on behavior and quality of life. According to the World
Health Organization, in about 20 years, depression will be the
disorder with the most significant repercussions, both socially
and economically [1]. Recently, fundamental and applied
research has investigated purported benefits of meditation and
Fecha de Recepción: 13 de mayo de 2015
Fecha de Aceptación: 23 de febrero 2016

Depression is increased by Mind-wandering: Mindwandering is the experience of constantly changing
thoughts, without any awareness of doing so. This
happens particularly when we are not engaged in an
attention-demanding or goal-directed task (Fig.1,
left). While mind wandering may be helpful
sometimes, (e.g. it is linked to creativity), when
excessive it may bring devastating consequences.
This is mainly the case because most of the time, we

86

Scientia et Technica Año XXI, Vol. 21, No. 1, marzo de 2016. Universidad Tecnológica de Pereira.

87

mind-wander to stressful thoughts such as worries,
ruminations, pre-occupations etc. In fact, scientific
evidence amply supports that mind wandering is
positively correlated with the severity of depression.
More precisely, a major depression disorder follows
an increase of mind-wandering and task-unrelated
thoughts. [2], [14], [24], [25], [26], [28], [29].
•

•

Mind wandering arises from activity in the DefaultMode Network (DMN): Recently, neuroscientists
have found the neural basis of mind-wandering (Fig.
1, middle). There is a network of brain regions
(DMN) that oscillate synchronously and more active
when the mind wanders relative to when engaged in
attention-demanding tasks. Indeed, functional
neuroimaging (fMRI) studies show that during
wakeful rest, this network exhibits highest coherent
neural
activation.
Likewise,
task-induced
deactivation was found possible when participants
were asked to concentrate in goal-directed task.
Overall, the DMN has been hypnotized to produce
spontaneous thoughts during mind wandering. [3],
[14], [16], [21], [23], [27], [30].
Mindfulness meditation regulates DMN activity:
Mindfulness is form of meditation meant to develop
the skill of paying attention by being fully aware of
inner and outer experiences. Not surprisingly, studies
suggest that the neural mechanisms underlying
mindfulness training are associated with differential
activity of the DMN. Specifically, functional
neuroimaging reveals that after a 40-day course,
reduction of DMN activity in naïve meditators
becomes apparent. Awareness of the breath is
perhaps the most popular kind of mindfulness.
Trainees must watch their breath attentively and
uninterruptedly, as it occurs naturally (for as long as
possible), see Fig. 1, right. This seemingly simple
task turns out extremely difficult for those unfamiliar
with the method, let alone depressed patients. No
matter how hard they try, their minds constantly
wander without awareness of doing so, instead of
following the breath. [4], [15], [16], [17], [19], [22],
[30].

Roughly, in our framework (Fig. 2) the patient needs to have
his brain activity measured while practicing mindfulness (e.g.
using an fMRI machine). By precisely assessing the activity
of the DMN, the medical team (i.e. a neuroscientist or/and
physiotherapist) will know whether the brain of the patient is
engaged in meditation, or has entered a mind-wandering state.
If the latter proves true, the patient will be gently reminded
(by the therapist) to go back to his mediation, so the mind
wandering will be immediately cut off. The key aspect here is
the timely reminder, which is impossible in self-training, since
mind wandering begins unconsciously. With sustained
practice of this guided methodology (in a daily basis), we

expect the patient to enhance his attention and lower his DMN
activity in the end.

Figure 1. Left: mind-wandering girl. Middle: Areas of the brain
involved in mind wandering (default mode network). Right: A group
of trainees in mindfulness meditation.

Figure 2. Computer-aided mindfulness meditation: Brain activity of a
patient is assessed with an fMRI machine. If DMN activity is
detected, a warning voice (microphone) alerts the patient. Otherwise,
the cycle of assessment continues without intervention.

Although we think this methodology is bound to succeed,
some disadvantages are apparent: the technology is
unaffordable and the human resources are untenable for a
daily therapy (mornings, afternoons and nights). There are
also practical issues associated to this model: the position of
the patient easily elicits sleepiness and the ‘reminding’ voice
may break his concentration instead of holding it (frights are
likely). In light of this, we put forward in what follows a smart
prototype capable of executing the proposed methodology,
while dramatically decreasing technology costs and removing
human intervention.
II.

METHODOLOGY

Overall, Ānāpāna is an assistive device that artificially
enhances the breath if the mind wanders. The more the mind
wanders, the more the breath is enhanced. In short, attention
does not pursue breath, but breath pursues attention. To this
end, we use three key elements to be described in this section:
the telemindphone, the offsetting microphone and the super
interface; see Fig. 3:

Scientia et Technica Año XXI, Vol. 21, No. 1, marzo de 2016. Universidad Tecnológica de Pereira.

Figure 3. A graphical representation of our system Ānāpāna.

A. The telemindphone.
A low-cost, yet efficient approach to brain activity monitoring
is a wireless EEG headset. A good example is the Emotiv
EPOC, a high resolution, multi-channel, portable
neuroheadset whose signal interpreter is typically a computer
[7]. Although in our case, we transmit wirelessly EEG signals
to an iPhone (not a computer), which natively runs a super
smart interface that assesses the DMN activity. The coupling
of these two technologies is what we term a telemindphone. In
brief, we place the 14 data collecting electrodes and 2
reference electrodes of the Emotiv EPOC, in roughly
international convention [5] with labels as shown in Fig. 4 and
6. The headset transmits encrypted data wirelessly to the
phone whose wireless chip is proprietary and operates in the
same frequency range as 802.11 (2.4Ghz). The connection is
completed, once we are able to extract valuable signals (from
the neuroheadset) through smart signal processing and
classification algorithms running on the phone (super
interface).

Figure 4. A telemindphone measuring brain activity (sides) and the
connectivity protocol for EEG (top-center).

B. The offsetting microphone.
If we try to follow uninterruptedly our breath, at some point,
we will suddenly realize that we had stopped doing so
inadvertently, as we find ourselves having any sort of
unrelated thoughts. It is as though the sound of the breath (in
our mind) had vanished unnoticeably, when spontaneous
thoughts arose and became louder. Thus, our idea (Fig. 5) is to
regulate the loudness of the breath to keep it constant and
unaffected by spontaneous thoughts (mind wandering).
Specifically, we use an earphone to convey the sound of the
breath (captured by a microphone attached to the nostrils)
with a loudness that is proportional to the activity in the DMN

88

(estimated by the telemindphone). For instance, if the DMN
remains deactivated, no breath feedback will be transmitted.
In contrast, when the DMN shows subtle activation so does
the microphone to compensate the lack of attention.
Accordingly, the sound of the breath never gets outshined by
the wandering of the mind. This can be regarded as a gentlerise reminder for the patient to fix back his attention to the
breath. Our hypothesis is that artificially enhanced breath
prevents mind wandering. We advise against the use of an
alarm (or a voice, Fig. 2) because this will simply break
concentration: the therapeutic idea is not to resume
concentration, but hold it for as long as possible.

Figure 5. Meditation state (left). Mind-wandering state (middle),
which correlates DMN activity (red stain). Meditation state
recovered by the offsetting microphone progressive activation (right).

C. The superinterface.
Our interface is a multitask tool at the core of our system. It
regulates the offsetting microphone through brain waves, and
enriches the user experience with a sophisticated yet, very
friendly interaction. There are three global features that
remarkably define our interface in an overall picture: signal
processing, auto regulation, and remote medical follow-up.
This paper, although, offers insights just into the signal
processing. Particularly, the extraction of patterns within brain
waves using machine learning. This is the case because the
two latter features (i.e. auto-regulation and remote follow up)
lie out of the scope of this manuscript. More precisely, they
belong in research fields rather distant to neurocomputing,
namely software engineering, mobile interfaces and human
computer interaction. Notwithstanding, we do describe them
briefly at the end of this section as to provide a holistic
portrait of Ānāpāna.
1) Intelligent signal processing: Evaluating brain activity in
the DMN is known to be difficult, especially if an Emotiv
EPOC is used instead of an fMRI machine. In fact, at the best
of our knowledge, it has not been done yet. On the one hand,
our interface has to deal with incomplete data, for the EEG
connectivity is not dense at all. On the other hand, the
Emotive is particularly prone to noise, which calls for an
increasing of the Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR) using
Independent Component Analysis (ICA) as described in [39],
[40], [6]. More importantly though is the need for Machine
Learning algorithms to classify patterns of DMN activity
hidden within the EEG signals (Fig. 4). To this end, our
interface uses Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) trained with
deep learning algorithms [6], [34], and [37]. Accurate training
of these ANNs requires also the gathering of fMRI datasets,
which provide a baseline for learning and comparisons. We

89

Scientia et Technica Año XXI, Vol. 21, No. 1, marzo de 2016. Universidad Tecnológica de Pereira.

trained our ANNs in off-line mode as follow: we collected
both negative and positive examples of DMN activation by
asking first six well-trained meditators (teachers) to meditate
inside an fMRI machine, while wearing the Emotiv EPOC. In
like manner, we ask six other subjects not meditators, to
simply rest under same conditions. Thus, we can gather fMRIs
and corresponding EEGs of both, mindfulness and mindwandering states (Fig. 6). Once both groups get into
performing their tasks, we evaluate them based on the fMRI
images. Only if the DMN is indeed highly activated (not
meditators) we proceed to record the EEG. Likewise, only
when the DMN shows negligible activity (meditators) the
EEG is also recorded. All subjects are asked to perform their
respective tasks 10 times during at least one minute. Then, we
record EEG and fMRI data for 30 seconds. Accordingly, we
collect a total of 1800 seconds of EEG signals for each case:
mindfulness and mind wandering. Finally, each second of
these EEG signals serves as a pattern of DMN activity
(positive or negative), when treated in the frequency domain.
This makes a total data set of 3600 patterns for training.

simply the same inputs, which is not a condition in the general
case of ANN. Once all the hidden layers have been trained,
we apply standard supervised gradient-based learning to the
whole network. This will affect both the pre-trained hidden
layers (fine-tuning) and the untrained output layer
(classification task). This pre-training strategy is known to
improve on the traditional random initialization by providing
“clues” to each intermediate layer about the kinds of
representations that should be learnt, and thus initializing the
supervised fine-tuning optimization in a region of parameter
space from which a better local minimum of the error function
can be reached. The overall structure of our network has been
empirically set to 10 layers of 480, 400, 300, 150, 80, 40, 20,
10, 5 and 1 neuron respectively.

Figure 7. Performance of our ANN during training and validation.
Left: training performance (goal error: 0.001; minimum error:
0.02424). Right: Precision-recall curve (best precision: 0.855; best
recall 0.872). For training 70% of the collected data set was used; i.e.
2520 patterns. The remaining 30% was used for validation; i.e. 1080
patterns.

Figure 6. Two example of DMN activity described by fMRI images
(top) and the corresponding EEG signals (bottom). Left: relatively
high activity, which correlates a mind-wandering state (positive
activation). Right: relatively low activity, which correlates a
mindfulness state (negative activation). These one-second EEG
signals are used as patterns to be learned by our ANN, once
transformed to frequency domain. Refer to Fig. 4 to see electrode
labeling and scalp mapping.

As mentioned, we use deep Neural Networks; i.e. networks
with more than three layers. However, training these neural
networks is known to be hard. The standard learning strategy
(consisting of randomly initializing the weights of the network
and applying gradient descent using backpropagation) is
known empirically to find poor solutions for networks with
three or more hidden layers. A clever strategy to train deep
neural networks (known as deep learning) consists in simply
initializing the weights (before applying gradient descent) not
randomly but following a strategy. This strategy is rather
simple: each layer but the last one, is trained individually as
an unsupervised autoencoder [35], [38]. Here, an autoencoder
is a one-layer neural network that applies backpropagation,
setting the target values to be equal to the inputs. It is called
unsupervised because the outputs need no labels, as they are

On the one hand, the size of the first layer obeys to the size of
an input pattern. To arrange an input pattern we calculate the
first 40 frequency components for each of the 14 one-second
EEG signals (from AF4 to AF3, see Fig. 6). Next, we
concatenate them all together to achieve a 480-dimensional
vector. We use only 40 frequency components (1-40 Hz),
because this is a widely known suitable range to study the
most important EEG rhythmic activity frequency bands; i.e.
delta, theta, alpha, beta etc. [16]. On the other hand, the last
layer of the ANN has only one neuron that ultimately
estimates how positive (+1, mind wandering), or negative (-1,
mindfulness) the input vector is. Autonomously, we chose this
layer not to be binary but real between -1 and +1; i.e. a tansigmoid transfer functions. Therefore, we can observe smooth
transitions from mindfulness to mind-wandering states, and
vice versa. In fact, the offsetting microphone is increasingly
activated when the ANN output ranges from -0.5 up to +1.
The performance of this ANN is shown in the next figure
(Fig. 7).
Note that the interface does not carry out the training, but
simply host the tuned weights of the ANN. Once one-second
EEG signal from the Emotive is received, preprocessed and
converted to frequency domain. A multiplication between this
signal and such weights takes place in order to calculate the

Scientia et Technica Año XXI, Vol. 21, No. 1, marzo de 2016. Universidad Tecnológica de Pereira.

ANN output. In what follows we want to outline the deep
learning method we have used to train our ANN. Roughly,
each layer (l) of the deep network is to be treated as an
individual autoencoder [34], [38], by taking the previous layer
(l-1) as input layer and adding it a temporal layer of the same
size as output layer. After training, tuned weights of this
temporal layer are dropped. In contrast, tuned weights
between layers l-1 and l are transferred, as the initial weights
(between those layers), to the original network that is yet to be
trained as a whole (fine-tuning). If we repeat this process layer
by layer, we will be learning features of the input in the first
layer, features of features in the second and so on. In other
words, each layer is to encode a more abstract version of the
input. The final layer of the original network that is meant to
respond with the expected outputs of the global problem we
are training for; will be tuned once the backpropagation ([6],
[37]) algorithm is applied globally to the network. This
routine is summarized in the pseudo-code shown in Table 1.

1. Initialize W randomly;
2. %pre-training
3. for i ∈ {1…L-1} do
4.
if i==1
5.
Itemp=I;
6.
else
7.
Itemp= tan-sigmoid(W(i)* Itemp);
8.
end
9.
Otemp=Itemp;
10. create a ANNi of tree layers (size(Itemp),
size(W(i)), size(Otemp));
11. train ANNi with Itemp and Otemp using
standard backpropagation;
12.
W(i)=WANNi in hidden layer;
13. end
14. %fine tuning phase
15. train the original ANN with I and O using standard
backpropagation;
Table 1. Pseudo-code for Deep Learning ANNs.

W represents the weights of the original network to be trained
as a classifier in this thesis. L is the total number of layers of
the network. I and O represent the inputs and outputs
respectively or patterns to be learned in the classification
problem. W(i) are the weights of the layer i in the global
network. Itemp and Otemp are the temporary patterns to be
learned by autoencoders-like hidden layer. Finally, note that a
log-sigmoid function tan-sigmoid has been chosen as the
activation function for all the neurons in this network.
2) Self-regulation: Our interface (Fig. 8) is highly
configurable. Thus, based on the medical diagnosis, we can
set up a daily routine for meditation (times, periods,
repetitions, etc.) and take it with us wherever we go. Overall,
this interface is an enriching new resource dedicated to

90

providing patients with the tools and exercises they need in a
format that is accessible and easy-to-use. Over 20 meditations,
prayers, mantras and exercises are automatically played if
stress (or anxiety) is detected. We can detect levels of stress
using both the microphone activations (the more it is
activated, less concentration is being kept). As for the
microphone activation, it is optimal: at the beginning, the
loudness of the first breaths is measured (in decibels). Thus,
the interface knows how much the current breath sound needs
to be amplified to keep loudness high enough, when mind
wandering appears.

Figure 8. Examples of our superinterface.

The interface accounts for statistics, so it can tell whether a
patient is meeting his medical prescription or not. If not, it
reconfigures automatically all routines and times, so
meditative goals are not missed within stipulated times.
Further, speech-based reminders and advices are often given
after practical sessions, such as the maximum period of
uninterrupted concentration was 3.45 minutes, the next
session won’t be stopped until 5 concentration periods of 3
minutes have been reached’, or ‘an uninterrupted period of
10.4 minutes of concentration was registered in this section,
that’s twice as much as expected. The next section of this
morning has been canceled, take a rest’. If wished, statistics
can be automatically shared in social networks such as
Facebook or Twitter. This is meant to create a collaborative
network where participants can: challenge each other, evaluate
their performance, find advises; or just to promote social
interaction with peers, which is known to be good for
overcoming depression.
3) Remote medical follow-up: This last feature (Fig. 9) aims
at reducing costs of the treatment, while enhancing
conformability and efficiency. Patients and clinics may save
time and money related to geographical displacements. Let
alone that depressed patients are generally reluctant to go
outside home. Likewise, not treating a patient on time may
also increase the cost in the end. Through our interface,
patient and therapist remain linked 24/7 in a point-to-point
internet-based connection. The therapist can remotely follow
the progresses, update routines, send private chats and
monitor the emotional states of the patient as he practices; all
this in real time. Needless to say, that this is a precious
diagnostic tool to understand if a patient needs further
treatment, or definitely the use of specific drugs is advisable.

Scientia et Technica Año XXI, Vol. 21, No. 1, marzo de 2016. Universidad Tecnológica de Pereira.

91

On the other side, the patient can use the private chat to ask
for feedback, advises, encouragement or counseling, which
are all helpful in nursing him back to health. Further, if
needed, therapies may be held using video calling assistance.

Figure 9. Remote medical follow-up.

III.

EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS

For this test we recruited 10 first-week trainees from a
meditation course (novice meditators), whose age ranged from
23 to 44. A first group (5 subjects) was asked to meditate for 5
minutes wearing the Emotiv, as we recorded their ANN
outputs. Given that we can get an ANN output every second,
we collected a total 1500 outputs, i.e. 60 seconds x 5 minutes
x 5 subjects. For this first group, the offsetting microphone
was fully deactivated (i.e. meditation without the aid of
Ānāpāna). Afterwards, a second group (5 subjects) was given
40 minute training about the experiment. Basically, they all
were explained both, the central idea of Ānāpāna and how to
react to the gentle-rise alarm of the microphone. Further, they
themselves tried the system several times in order to get
familiar with it. After that, we ran the second recording (1500
more ANN outputs), this time with the microphone on; i.e.
meditation with the aid of Ānāpāna. The following boxplot
(Fig. 10) shows the distributions of the ANN outputs for the
each group of meditators during the five-minute test.
Additionally, we also report a third group (as a baseline) of
five experienced meditators (using Ānāpāna) recorded during
five minutes of meditation as well (1500 more ANN outputs).

Figure 10. Boxplot quartiles distribution of the ANN outputs during
our experiments.

In Fig. 10, we see that naïve meditators mind wander
excessively, as expected. In average their ANN response is
+0.24 during five minutes of meditation. Further, only 25 %
of their ANN responses fall below +0.02, which means that in
nearly 75% of the cases they do show positive DMN activity.
Actually, some of this group’s extreme data reaches +1, the
highest level of DMN activation. As for the second group, it

becomes apparent that the inclusion of Ānāpāna dramatically
improves the performance. The average of ANN responses
drops off to -0.61 and 75% of the outputs fall below +0.04. In
other words, this group predominantly shows DMN
deactivation (negative ANN outputs) during the test. For
example, in the worst case, they mind wander up to +0.39,
which is still acceptable compared to their previous meditative
peers. As expected, the third group shows in turn the best
performance, with lowest DMN activity and least variability
in ANN outputs. This means that these subjects were able to
keep steady concentration during the task. Accordingly, these
subjects never activated the offsetting microphone, since not
even in the worst case their mind wandering reached -0.5
(threshold for activation). This is perhaps more noticeable in
Fig. 11, where we have plotted the ANN outputs (as a signal)
of one group member (randomly chosen) per group.

Figure 11. ANN outputs for one subject (randomly chosen) of each
group.

In the figure above (bottom signal), we can clearly see how
our system effectively prevents attention from dropping off.
Every time that DMN activity intensifies (signal rises), a
sudden decrease takes place to shape a pick in the signal. This
decrease is certainly induced by the offsetting microphone
which is triggered once the signal reaches a critical threshold;
i.e. -0.5. At this point, the artificially enhanced breathing
helps the naïve meditator to fix the attention back on it. In
fact, a pattern of picks with high frequency reflects the
struggling of the novice meditator, whose mind tends to
wander but is constantly inhibited. Yet, they do not mind
wander at all. In sharp contrast, experienced mediators exhibit
an almost flat curve that can be interpreted as calamity. This
also applies to novice meditators without Ānāpāna; they do
not register a consistent pattern of picks, for the struggling just
fades away when the mind begins to wander. Our assumption
is that with time, such induced increase of attention will
become natural and the struggling will cease. As it is mostly
the case when training a particular skill.
IV.

CONCLUSION

There is absolutely no need to constrain the applicability of
Ānāpāna to depression, nor is medical consent/supervision a
requirement for it to be used. Due to its portability and
easiness, Ānāpāna can be used by anyone seeking to enhance

Scientia et Technica Año XXI, Vol. 21, No. 1, marzo de 2016. Universidad Tecnológica de Pereira.

his (her) meditation skills at any moment, anywhere. There
are scientifically validated benefits of 30-to-40 minutes of
meditation a day. Particularly, it has been shown that
mindfulness can reshape our brains in the long run (i.e.
neuroplasticity). For example, many neuroscientists regard
this practice as a natural way to alleviate anxiety, insomnia
and stress, to reverse heart disease, and to enhance attention
[8]. Both, neuroimaging and encephalography research
support that mindfulness slows down the natural age-related
cortical decline, and decreases the amygdala’s gray matter
(associated with fear and anger) [9], [18]. Consequently, we
presented here an assistive device to improve the quality of
life for the benefit of modern busy society.

Figure 12. Ānāpāna prototype. Note how this prototype simplifies the
framework shown in Fig. 2.

Finally, in Fig. 12 we can clearly see how the framework
presented in Fig. 2 can be simplified by the system proposed
in this paper (i.e. Ānāpāna). Yet a final prototype is in need of
validation with patients. This is, therefore, the focus of our
future research. We want first to verify more robustly our
hypothesis that artificially enhanced breath prevents mind
wandering. Moreover, after that, we would like to prove that
our system speeds up the learning of mindfulness and hence,
the reduction of depression, anxiety and other mental
disorders. In doing so, we need to deal with depressed
patients, clinicians, neuroscientist and ethical committees.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Special thanks to Prof. Olaf Blank from Brain Mind Institute
(École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne - EPFL) for his
support in this work.
REFERENCES
[1]. World Health Org. (2010, March) WHO. [Online].
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs282/en/
[2]. Smallwood, J., Fitzgerald, A., Miles, L. K., &
Phillips, L. H. (2009). Shifting moods, wandering
minds: negative moods lead the mind to wander.
Emotion, 9(2), 271–276.
[3]. Christoff, K., Gordon, A., Smallwood, J., &
Schooler, J. (2009). Experience sampling during

92

fMRI reveals default network and executive system
contributions to mind wandering. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 106(21), 8719–8724.
[4]. Brown, K. W., & Ryan, R. M. (2003). The benefits
of being present: mindfulness and its role in
psychological well-being. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 84(4), 822–848.
[5]. 10-20 system (EEG). (2010, March) Wikipedia.
[Online].
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1020_system_(EEG)
[6]. [Baldi, P., & Hornik, K. (1989). Neural networks and
principal component analysis: Learning from
examples without local minima. Neural Networks,
vol. 2, no. 10, pp. 53–58, 1989.
[7]. Emotiv EPOC. (2010, March) EPOC. [Online].
http://emotiv.com/epoc/
[8]. Flook, L., Goldberg, S. B., Pinger, L., Bonus, K., &
Davidson, R. J. (2013). Mindfulness for teachers: A
pilot study to assess effects on stress, burnout and
teaching efficacy. Mind, Brain and Education, 7,
182–195.
[9]. Lee, H, & Davidson, R. J. (2012). Amygdalaprefrontal coupling underlies individual differences
in emotion regulation. Neuroimage, 62(3), 1575-81.
PMCID: PMC3408571.
[10].
Center for investigating healthy minds.
(2010,
March)
[Online].
http://www.investigatinghealthyminds.org/cihmDrDa
vidson.html.
[11].
Antoine, L., Lawrence L. G., Nancy B. R.,
Matthieu R., & Davidson, R. J. (2004). Long-term
meditators self-induce high-amplitude gamma
synchrony during mental practice. PNAS 2004 101
(46) 16369-16373; published ahead of print
November 8, 2004, doi:10.1073/pnas.0407401101.
[12].
Ekman P., Davidson R.J., Ricard M.,
Wallace A. (2005). Buddhist and psychological
perspectives on emotions and well-being. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 14, 59–63.
[13].
Abercrombie H.C., Schaefer S.M., Larson
C.L., Oakes T.R., Lindgren K.A., Holden J.E.,
Davidson R.J. (1998). Metabolic rate in the right
amygdala predicts negative affect in depressed
patients. NeuroReport, 9, 3301–3307.
[14].
Anand A., Li Y., Wang Y., Wu J., Gao S.,
Bukhari L., Lowe M.J. (2005). Activity and
connectivity of brain mood regulating circuit in
depression: A functional magnetic resonance study.
Biological Psychiatry, 57, 1079–1088.
[15].
Anderson N.D., Lau M.A., Segal Z.V.,
Bishop S.R. (2007). Mindfulness-based stress
reduction and attentional control. Clinical
Psychology & Psychotherapy, 14, 449–463.
[16].
Austin J.H. (2006). Zen-brain reflections.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
[17].
Baer R.A. (2003). Mindfulness training as a
clinical intervention: A conceptual and empirical

93

Scientia et Technica Año XXI, Vol. 21, No. 1, marzo de 2016. Universidad Tecnológica de Pereira.

review. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice,
10, 125–143.
[18].
[Banks S.J., Eddy K.T., Angstadt M.,
Nathan P.J., Phan K.L. (2007). Amygdala-frontal
connectivity during emotion-regulation. Social
Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 2, 303–312.
[19].
Bishop S.R., Lau M., Shapiro S., Carlson
L.E., Anderson N.D., Carmody J., Devins G. (2004).
Mindfulness: A proposed operational definition.
Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 11, 230–
241.
[20].
Brefczynski-Lewis J.A., Lutz A., Schaefer
H.S., Levinson D.B., Davidson R.J. (2007). Neural
correlates of attentional expertise in long-term
meditation practitioners. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, 104, 11483–11488.
[21].
Brewer J.A., Kober H., Worhunsky P.D.,
Tang Y.-Y., Gray J.R., Weber J. (2011). Mental
training reveals differences in default mode network
activation and functional connectivity. Manuscript
submitted for publication.
[22].
Brown K.W., Ryan R.M. (2003). The
benefits of being present: Mindfulness and its role in
psychological well-being. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 84, 822–848.
[23].
Buckner R.L., Andrews-Hanna J.R.,
Schacter D.L. (2008). The brain’s default network:
Anatomy, function, and relevance to disease. Annals
of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1124, 1–38.
[24].
Carmody J., Baer R.A. (2008). Relationships
between mindfulness practice and levels of
mindfulness, medical and psychological symptoms
and well-being in a mindfulness-based stress
reduction program. Journal of Behavioral Medicine,
31, 23–33.
[25].
Carmody J., Baer R.A., Lykins E.L.B.,
Olendzki N. (2009). An empirical study of the
mechanisms of mindfulness in a mindfulness-based
stress reduction program. Journal of Clinical
Psychology, 65, 613–626.
[26].
Chiesa A., Serretti A. (2009). Mindfulnessbased stress reduction for stress management in
healthy people: A review and meta-analysis. Journal
of Alternative and Complementary Medicine, 15,
593–600.
[27].
Farb N.A.S., Segal Z.V., Mayberg H., Bean
J., McKeon D., Fatima Z., Anderson A.K. (2007).
Attending to the present: Mindfulness meditation
reveals distinct neural modes of self-reference. Social
Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 2, 313–322.
[28].
Goldin P.R., Gross J.J. (2010). Effects of
mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR) on
emotion regulation in social anxiety disorder.
Emotion, 10, 83–91.
[29].
Hofmann S.G., Sawyer A.T., Witt A.A., Oh
D. (2010). The effect of mindfulness-based therapy

on anxiety and depression: A meta-analytic review.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 78,
169–183.
[30].
Jang J.H., Jung W.H., Kang D.H., Byun
M.S., Kwon S.J., Choi C.H., Kwon J.S. (2010).
Increased default mode network connectivity
associated with meditation. Neuroscience Letters,
487, 358–362.
[31].
Pizzagalli D. (2010). Frontocingulate
Dysfunction in Depression: Toward Biomarkers of
Treatment Response Neuropsychopharmacology.
36(1): 183–206. Published online 2010 September
22. doi: 10.1038/npp.2010.166.
[32].
Mayberg HS, Lozano AM, Voon V,
McNeely HE, Seminowicz D, Hamani C, Schwalb
JM, Kennedy SH. (2005). Deep brain stimulation for
treatment-resistant depression. Neuron. 2005 Mar 3;
45(5):651-60.
[33].
Araujo, D. (20014).The Therapeutic
Potentials of Ayahuasca in the Treatment of
Depression. Journal of Psychoactive Drugs Volume
30, Issue 4, Special Issue: Therapeutic Use of
Hallucinogens.
[34].
H. Larochelle, Y. Bengio, J. Louradour and
P. Lamblin, "Exploring Strategies for Training Deep
Neural Networks," Journal of Machine Learning
Research, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 1-40, 2009.
[35].
A. Krizhevsky and G. Hinton, "Using Very
Deep Autoencoders for Content-Based Image
Retrieval," in European Symposium on Artificial
Neural Networks ESANN, Bruges, 2011.
[36].
R. Sarikaya and G. Hinton, "Deep Belief
Nets for Natural Language Call-Routing," in
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and
Signal Processing ICASSP, New York, 2011.
[37].
Y. LeCun, L. Bottou, Y. Bengio and P.
Haffner, "Gradient-based learning applied to
document recognition," Proceedings of the IEEE,
vol. 86, no. 11, p. 2278–2324, 1998.
[38].
S. University, "UFLDL Tutorial," Stanford
University, 11 April 2011. [Online]. Available:
http://ufldl.stanford.edu/wiki/index.php/UFLDL_Tut
orial. [Accessed 30 January 2013].
[39].
Pun, T. (2012).The impact of denoising on
independent component analysis of functional
magnetic resonance imaging data. Journal of
Neuroscience Methods 213 (2013) 105–122.
[40].
Gomez, Juan; et al. Eterno de resplandor de
una mente sin recuerdos: si me dejas te suprimo.
Scientia et Technica. Universidad Tecnológica de
Pereira. ISSN 0122-170. No 48, Agosto de 2011.

