SPECIAL SECTION ON TRENDS, PERSPECTIVES AND PROSPECTS OF MACHINE LEARNING
APPLIED TO BIOMEDICAL SYSTEMS IN INTERNET OF MEDICAL THINGS

Received April 6, 2018, accepted May 28, 2018, date of publication June 5, 2018, date of current version July 6, 2018.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2844308

A Deep Learning Approach for Vital Signs
Compression and Energy Efficient
Delivery in mhealth Systems
AHMED BEN SAID1 , (Member, IEEE), MOHAMMAD FATHI AL-SA’D 1 , MOUNIRA TLILI1 ,
ALAA AWAD ABDELLATIF 1 , AMR MOHAMED 1 , (Senior Member, IEEE),
TAREK ELFOULY 1 , (Senior Member, IEEE), KHALED HARRAS2 ,
AND MARK DENNIS O’CONNOR3
1 Department
2 School
3 Mobile

of Computer Science and Engineering, Qatar University, 2713 Doha, Qatar
of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University in Qatar, Education City, Doha, Qatar
Healthcare Service, Ambulance Service, Hamad Medical Corporation, Doha, Qatar

Corresponding author: Amr Mohamed (amrm@ieee.org)
This work was supported by NPRP through the Qatar National Research Fund (a member of the Qatar Foundation)
under Grant 7-684-1-127.

ABSTRACT Due to the increasing number of chronic disease patients, continuous health monitoring has
become the top priority for health-care providers and has posed a major stimulus for the development of
scalable and energy efficient mobile health systems. Collected data in such systems are highly critical and
can be affected by wireless network conditions, which in return, motivates the need for a preprocessing
stage that optimizes data delivery in an adaptive manner with respect to network dynamics. We present in
this paper adaptive single and multiple modality data compression schemes based on deep learning approach,
which consider acquired data characteristics and network dynamics for providing energy efficient data
delivery. Results indicate that: 1) the proposed adaptive single modality compression scheme outperforms
conventional compression methods by 13.24% and 43.75% reductions in distortion and processing time,
respectively; 2) the proposed adaptive multiple modality compression further decreases the distortion by
3.71% and 72.37% when compared with the proposed single modality scheme and conventional methods
through leveraging inter-modality correlations; and 3) adaptive multiple modality compression demonstrates
its efficiency in terms of energy consumption, computational complexity, and responding to different
network states. Hence, our approach is suitable for mobile health applications (mHealth), where the smart
preprocessing of vital signs can enhance energy consumption, reduce storage, and cut down transmission
delays to the mHealth cloud.
INDEX TERMS WBASN, multiple modality data, compression, deep learning, cross-layer optimization.
I. INTRODUCTION

The World Health Organization (WHO) classifies chronic
diseases by having one or more of the following features:
everlasting, cause disability, exist due to non-reversible
pathological alteration, demand patient rehabilitation, or
require a long period of supervision, observation, or
care [1], [2]. Internationally, the number of Chronic Disease (CD) patients is increasing exponentially, more than
900 million individuals worldwide, and 80% of health-care
spendings are reserved for CDs [3]. Chronic diseases, such
as Epilepsy [4], Diabetes [5], Asthma [6], Alzheimer [7],
etc., are widely spreading. According to WHO, approximately 50 million people worldwide have Epilepsy, making

VOLUME 6, 2018

it one of the most common neurological diseases globally
with nearly 80% of them living in low to middle-income
countries [8]. People suffering from brain disorders require
constant monitoring for their brain activities and a rapid
notification system that is connected to a health-care provider
in case of an emergency [9]. In order for those patients to be
constantly monitored while living a normal life, acquisition,
processing and transmission of their biomedical data such
as Electroencephalography (EEG), Electromyogram (EMG)
and Electrooculography (EOG) is required.
Biomedical data have become abundant, thanks to the
development of wearable commercial devices, and variant by coming from multiple modalities. Even the most

2169-3536 2018 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only.
Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

33727

A. Ben Said et al.: DL Approach for Vital Signs Compression and Energy Efficient Delivery in mhealth Systems

complicated medical follow-ups that require in-bed procedures are now possible with commercial devices. For example, EEG can be recorded using wearable, non-invasive,
commercially available devices such as Emotiv headsets [10].
However, the processing and transmission of these signals,
in particular, can be challenging, as high-quality monitoring
can generate data at 1 Mbps, resulting in more than 80 GB of
data everyday [11]. Hence, compression is a highly desirable
pre-processing stage in order to optimize resources.
Motivated by the myriad of biomedical sensors, mobile
phones, applications, and the rise of Internet of Things (IoT)
[12] and Internet of Medical Things (IoMT) [13], scientific
communities have standardized a system that focuses on the
acquisition of vital signs via Wireless Body Area Sensor
Networks (WBASN) under IEEE 802.15.6 [14]. A typical
WBASN system consists of a wearable device that collects
vital signs from the body, sends them to a Personal/Patient
Data Aggregator (PDA) on which data can be processed and
forwarded to a remote medical server to be stored for further
analysis. Generally, data delivery is likely to be hindered due
to mobile device and network resource constraints. In addition, network state is continuously changing due to wireless
channel impairments, network congestion, patient mobility,
etc. Therefore, for data compression to be efficient, it must
be adaptive to network dynamics.
Following edge computing paradigm where we push
the intelligence closer to the patient to optimize performance [15], we propose an adaptive data compression scheme
exploiting Deep Learning (DL) approach for single and multiple modality data compression. This scheme is dynamically adapted to wireless network variations to optimize the
total energy consumption, while maintaining application constraints. Hence, our contributions are summarized as follows:
1) We present an energy efficient framework for adaptive
multiple modality data compression over multi-user
mHealth system, where each user is able to collect
multiple vital signs using wearable devices, compress,
and transmit multiple modality data to the mHealth
cloud (MHC).
2) We propose a Deep Learning (DL) approach for single
and multiple modality data compression at the PDA
level, where we exploit the intra and inter-correlation
among multiple modalities for enhancing compression
efficiency. Our approach is reversible in the sense that
data are efficiently recovered at the MHC level.
3) We formulate an optimization framework for resource
allocation in multi-user system that defines the optimal compression ratio for each user based on network dynamics, while minimizing the total energy
consumption.
4) Our simulation results demonstrate the advantages of
the proposed approach with respect to state-of-theart techniques for increased compression ratio while
maintaining signal distortion below a predefined
threshold. Furthermore, the proposed optimization
framework illustrates its efficiency for reducing the
33728

total energy consumption, while optimally allocating
network resources between multiple users.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2,
is an overview of related work. We present in Section 3 our
mHealth system, and describe our multiple modality compression algorithm in Section 4. In Section, 5 we formulate our optimization problem, and in Section 6, we present
results. Finally, we conclude in Section 7 and summarize our
remarks.
II. RELATED WORK

In this Section, we review previous work related to the following topics: conventional lossless and lossy compression
methods, WBASN constraints and application requirements
for efficient compression, neural networks and deep learning
for data compression, and lastly, compression enhancements
via multiple modality paradigms.
Many successful time series compression algorithms have
been proposed which take into account the intra-modality
correlation, and possibly the varying wireless network conditions to be able to adapt compression parameters for the
purpose of minimizing transmission energy.
On one hand, some of these techniques are lossless such as
Dictionary-based coding. In [16], a compression technique
was proposed by quantizing data vectors. Compression was
achieved through sending codebook indexes to the decompresser in place of the original time series. Although this technique showed low computational complexity and relatively
high compression ratios; it is inefficient for EEG compression
due to its non-stationarity. Hejrati et al. in [17] focused on
reducing the intra and inter-channel redundancy and proposed a lossless multichannel EEG compression algorithm.
First, intra-channel redundancy was removed using Differential Pulse Code Modulation. Then, a K-means clustering
algorithm was used to remove the inter-channel correlation.
Finally, arithmetic coding was applied to further compress
the resultant signal. Furthermore, in [18], the concept of
Correlation Dimension (CD) was used to assess alikeness.
EEG signals were divided into segments, then, CD was calculated for each segment and blocks of EEG samples were
arranged according to their CDs. After that, compression
using neural networks was conducted [19].
On the other hand, lossy compression was also tested
on EEG while simultaneously preserving diagnostic accuracy and complying with application requirements. Commonly used lossy compression techniques include Discrete
Cosine Transform (DCT), Discrete Wavelet Transform
(DWT) and Compressive Sensing (CS) techniques [20], [21].
Srinvasan et al. in [22] suggested to arrange EEG signals into
2D matrices. Specifically, each 1D EEG signal is cut into
segments of the same length and arranged to form a matrix,
where odd rows are filled directly whereas even rows are
flipped. A smoothness analysis showed that EEG has a shortterm memory which reflects inherent hidden correlation.
This characteristic was exploited to enhance compression
performance using classic image compression techniques.
VOLUME 6, 2018

A. Ben Said et al.: DL Approach for Vital Signs Compression and Energy Efficient Delivery in mhealth Systems

In [23], electromyography signals were compressed with
75-90% compression ratios with an average distortion
of 3.4 to 7% via DWT. In addition, adaptive data compression
using DWT, based on the network condition, was proposed
in [24] to optimize total energy consumption. Compressive
Sensing has also been a very popular technique for EEG compression as it is lightweight on the transmitter side and most
of the computation is done at the receiver side. Shukla and
Majumdar [25] exploited the correlation of EEG signals and
argued that they have a common sparse support in a transform
domain. A sparse recovery problem was then formulated and
solved. However, Majumdar et al. in [26] argued that the
CS approach is inefficient since there is no sparsifying basis
that fulfills the requirements of incoherence and sparsity.
Instead, they formulated the recovery as a rank deficiency
problem. Furthermore, they suggested using Schatten-p norm
instead of the classic Nuclear norm as it showed better recovery results. The main problem was then divided into two subproblems solved using Conjugate Gradient and p-shrinkage
of singular values [27]. Xu et al. in [28] proposed a 1.5D EEG
compression approach for WBASN where DWT was applied
on the signal and its coefficients were arranged in a 2D matrix
to concentrate energy and allow compression.
Although many lossless compression algorithms have been
proposed in the literature; compression ratios obtained from
these techniques remain limited. Consequently, in this work,
we will focus on lossy compression techniques.
Few publications have focused on the network parameters and constraints when compressing EEG signals, particularly in WBASN system. Hussein et al. in [29] studied
EEG compression in the context of WBASN with focus on
encoding and transmission energy optimization in order to
address power and distortion constraints. They proposed a
scalable energy efficient EEG compression scheme based on
DWT and CS. Several parameters have been considered to
optimize the total energy consumption of the encoder and
transmitter. The optimal configuration of these parameters
was selected by limiting the total power consumption below
a certain threshold. Awad et al. in [24] proposed an energy
efficient cross-layer design where the optimal transmission
rate and compression parameters were obtained based on the
application requirements and network constraints.
Recently, data driven algorithms such as neural networks
have emerged vastly. Artificial Neural Networks (ANN)
proved to be state of the art in many cognitive tasks
such as image recognition, speech detection and compression [30]. In [31], Google researchers have achieved
state of the art image compression using ANNs. In [32],
Kuleshov et al. introduced a state of the art ANN-based
technique for audio prediction using Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNN), and they were able to generate missing
audio samples in low resolution audio signal. Furthermore,
Sriraam and Eswaran [33] have compared different EEG near
lossless compression techniques using: single layer perception, multilayer perception, log sigmoid activations, Elman
networks and autoregressive models. They concluded that
VOLUME 6, 2018

single layer perception with linear activations performs the
best EEG near lossless compression.
Auto-Encoder (AE) is a particular type of ANN that seeks
to approximate the identity function so that the output would
be similar to the input [30]. Throughout this process, AE is
able to learn important structures about data by constraining
the neural network. Yan Ollivier in [32] proved that there is
a strong relationship between minimizing the code length of
data and minimizing reconstruction error that AE seeks. Tan
and Eswaran [34] used a Stacked AE (SAE) for mammogram
image compression where training was conducted on image
patches instead of whole images. Testa and Rossi [35] applied
AE for Electrocardiogram (ECG) compression. Comparisons
with various classic compression methods showed that this
special type of network is reliable for signal compression.
Thus, in this paper we will focus on testing SAE for EEG
compression.
Following the development of WBASN, vital signs
data have become abundant. mHealth systems are now
capable of collecting data from different modalities
(EEG, EOG, etc). Although, they may seem totally unrelated,
these data can give insights about the same phenomena. For
example, in case of schizophrenic patients, when a stimulus is presented, a peak in EEG is observed and activations in the temporal lobe and the middle anterior cingulate region are depicted via functional Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (fMRI) [36]. These findings confirm that both
modalities are very likely to be correlated, as they present
projections of the same underlying process.
In this paper, we hypothesize that deep learning is a
good candidate to tackle this problem, due to its ability to
efficiently exploit intra-modality correlation which allows
extracting hierarchical representations of data. One of the
well known advantages of deep neural networks is the ability
to perform feature extraction. For example, when performing
digit recognition using CNNs on the MNIST dataset [37],
the extracted first order features represent image edges,
the second order features correspond to patterns in the first
features, such as corners and contours, and finally, higher
orders tend to learn higher-level features. These characteristics have motivated us to investigate the application of deep
learning on multiple modality data compression by exploiting
not only intra-modality correlation but also inter-correlation
among multiple modalities.
III. MULTI-USER mHEALTH SYSTEM

In this Section, we present the main components of our
mHealth system, explain their individual and collective rules,
and discuss their requirements to build an overall energy
efficient vital signs delivery system.
A high-level description of our system is illustrated
in Figure 1, where it consists of the following three major
sub-systems/components:
• Edge network: multiple users equipped with PDAs
to acquire vital signs using wearable devices. The
PDA handles communication with the wearable device,
33729

A. Ben Said et al.: DL Approach for Vital Signs Compression and Energy Efficient Delivery in mhealth Systems

signs. In particular, we first propose a single modality data
compression technique using Stacked Auto-Encoders (SAE).
Then, we extend the proposed approach for the multiple
modality case discussing the obtained improvements in system performance. Finally, we present the complexity analysis
of the proposed technique to assess its efficiency for maintaining low computational complexity.
A. DESIGN REQUIREMENTS

FIGURE 1. Overview of our system model consisting of edge network,
network infrastructure, and mHealth cloud.

collects, pre-processes and transmits data to the
MHC sub-system via the network infrastructure. Preprocessing consists of a compression algorithm that
maps the original data to another representation.
We propose to use a multiple modality deep learning
compression approach that exploits the availability of
multiple modality data and captures the inter-modality
correlations to provide an adaptive compression technique. Specifically, we propose SAE-based compression
schemes that compress acquired medical data before
the transmission to the MHC taking into consideration network’s state and application level Quality of
Service (QoS).
• Network infrastructure: it allows the PDA to communicate with the MHC sub-system. The PDA is battery
operated; thus, optimizing its transmission energy is
essential. In this work, we formulate an optimization
problem for multiple users to minimize energy consumption. We minimize a cost function that models the
energy consumed by the different entities in the system, and their allocated resources based on the wireless channel state of each user. Furthermore, our model
allows selecting an appropriate compression configuration given the current network dynamics.
• mHealth Cloud (MHC): a medical server that receives
the compressed data from patients, decompresses and
stores them for further analysis by the medical staff.
In what follows, we present the background and details of
the proposed SAE-based compression schemes in Section 4.
Then, to turn our proposed solution to be adaptive, we formulate and solve the optimization problem in Section 5 that aims
to minimize the total energy consumption and select the optimal compression ratio for each user taking into consideration
the network dynamics.

The following requirements guide the design of a compression approach used before transmitting vital signs as part
of the mHealth system in accordance with the network and
application constraints (see Section III):
1) Compressibility: It must be able to reduce input data
dimensionality to a specific level that is required by the
network state and capacity.
2) Reversibility: It needs to be able to reverse the compression operation (uncompress) at the receiver side within
the performance criteria defined by the application.
3) Efficiency: It has to divide the required computational
burdens between the edge node and MHC to reduce
required network demands.
B. STACKED AUTO-ENCODER

SAE is a particular type of neural networks that can be used
for supervised learning. It is comprised of an input layer,
hidden layers and an output layer, see Figure 2. The output of
each layer is fed as the input of the next layer until reaching
the output layer. Within the hidden layers, a bottleneck is
defined as the layer with the least number of neurons. SAE is
designed to hierarchically capture abstractions of input data.
It learns data representations; the first layer learns the first
order features from the input data, the second layer learns
the second-order features from the first order features and
so on. SAE can be adopted for compression in the mHealth
system as it complies with the design requirements defined in
Section IV-A; it is able to compress data with specific ratios
by adjusting the number of neurons in the bottleneck layer
(compliance with Req. 1), reverse the compression operation
by optimal decoding (compliance with Req. 2), and able to
divide computational and resource burdens between the edge
network and MHC by exclusively encoding in the first, while
training and decoding in the latter (compliance with Req. 3).
Let us consider an SAE with Q layers for encoding and

IV. PROPOSED DEEP LEARNING APPROACH FOR SINGLE
AND MULTIPLE MODALITY DATA COMPRESSION

In this Section, we present the design requirements and
methodology of the proposed compression scheme for vital
33730

FIGURE 2. Stacked Auto-Encoder with three encoding and three decoding
layers.
VOLUME 6, 2018

A. Ben Said et al.: DL Approach for Vital Signs Compression and Energy Efficient Delivery in mhealth Systems

Q layers for decoding, and an input signal x with n samples such that x = [x(1), x(2), · · · , x(n)]T . SAE seeks to
reconstruct x using two operations; encoding and decoding,
where the first can be performed in the edge network, and
the latter can be performed in the MHC (compliance with
Req. 3) First, the encoder gradually transforms x to a compressed representation z, at the bottleneck layer, such that:
z = [z(1), z(2), · · · , z(m)]T where m < n. Due to the
encoding operation, an intermediate compressed signal zq is
produced at each layer q by the following expression:

zq = f Wq zq−1 + bq ,
(1)
where f is the activation function, q = [1, 2, · · · , Q],
z0 = x, zq has mq samples such that: m = mQ < · · · <
m1 < m0 = n, zQ = z, Wq is a mq × mq−1 weight matrix and
bq is a mq × 1 bias vector.
After that, the decoder gradually transforms back z to produce an estimate x̂. Due to the decoding operation, an intermediate estimate x̂q is produced at each layer q by the following expression:


xq = f Wq0 xq−1 + b0q ,
(2)
where f is the activation function, q = [1, · · · , Q],
x1 = z, xq has nq samples such that: m = n1 < · · · < nQ−1 <
nQ = n, xQ = x̂, Wq0 is a nq × nq−1 weight matrix and b0q is a
nq × 1 bias vector.
The former operations are optimized by training the SAE
in a greedy layer-wise fashion. Each
 layer is trained such
 that
the optimal set of parameters 2 = 21 , 22 , · · · , 2Q , containing each layer weight and bias, is obtained to minimize a
reconstruction error L2 (x, x̂) (compliance with Req. 2). This
error is generally modeled by the squared Euclidean distance,
Eq. (3), or by cross-entropy, Eq. (4), and can be minimized
using a Gradient descent algorithm [38].
L2 (x, x̂) = ||x − x̂||2 .
(3)
n
X
L2 (x, x̂) = −
xi log(x̂i + (1 − xi ) log(1 − x̂i )). (4)
i

FIGURE 3. Single modality compression for two modalities x and y
using SAE-S.

D. MULTIPLE MODALITY DATA COMPRESSION

We will refer to this technique as SAE-M. In this regard,
we compress acquired signals from more than one modality jointly using one Stacked Auto-Encoder. SAE-M allows
encoding multiple modalities in a single shared representation, which can in return, produce better compression results
through joint optimization leveraging inter-modality correlations. Assuming the same two modality signals x and y as
in Section IV-C, SAE-M is conducted by concatenating the
two modalities into one vector [x, y]. After that, one SAE
is applied to this vector as depicted in Figure 4. Multiple
modality compression is a simple solution that liberates the
mHealth system from the local optimal conditions dilemma
as follows:
• Only one SAE-M model needs to be stored on the user’s
PDA for all modalities for a specific application.
• Data transmission is free of modality type headers.
• SAE-M performs joint optimization leveraging both
intra and inter-modality correlations.

C. SINGLE MODALITY DATA COMPRESSION

We will refer to this technique as SAE-S. In this context,
we compress every signal from any modality independently
using a Stacked Auto-Encoder. Without loss of generality, let’s consider a scenario where we have two modality
signals x and y with number of samples nx and ny . Compression of x and y can be conducted using two separate SAEs,
see Figure 3. SAE-S is a technique that uses a simple architecture of SAE and that yields good compression distortions.
However, it comes with the following limitations:
• Separate SAE models need to be stored on each PDA for
every modality.
• SAE-S exploits the modality’s intra-correlation only, i.e.
greedy solution.
Such restrictions force the mHealth system to operate in
local optimal conditions that can quickly deteriorate when the
number of modalities and/or the number of users increase.
VOLUME 6, 2018

FIGURE 4. Multiple modality compression for two modalities x and y
using SAE-M.

E. COMPLEXITY ANALYSIS

Training an SAE is an expensive task, however, it can be
conducted off-line at the server side in the MHC to obtain
an optimal configuration of weights and biases, which then
33731

A. Ben Said et al.: DL Approach for Vital Signs Compression and Energy Efficient Delivery in mhealth Systems

can be stored on the patient PDA to be used in real-time.
In what follows, we assess the computational complexity of
SAE-S and SAE-M during test time (forward propagation)
through formalizing the number of performed operations,
multiplications and/or additions, in both the encoder and the
decoder.
Let us re-write Eqs. (1) and (2), assuming linear activation
function f , such that:




Q−p
Q
Q
Y
X
Y

z=
WQ−q+1  x +
WQ−q+1  bp . (5)
q=1


x=

Q
Y

p=1


0
z
WQ−q+1

q=1

+

Q
X

q=1



Q−p
Y


p=1

(i)

E (i) = Et + Ec(i) + Eq(i) ,


0
 b0p .
WQ−q+1

(6)

q=1

The number of operations ζ (complexity) for a Q-layered
SAE encoder or decoder can be deduced as:
ζ = Q mQ +

Q
X

n samples, and compresses them to Z with m samples such
that: n = [n1 , n2 , · · · , nN ] and m = [m1 , m2 , · · · , mN ],
where ni and mi correspond to the original and compressed
number of samples of user i data. The amount of transmitted
bits in such system can be expressed as: L = β m, where
L = [l1 , l2 , · · · , lN ] contains the number of transmitted bits
of all users and β = [β1 , β2 , · · · , βN ] contains the number of
bits/sample of all modules. Note that in this Section, the same
indexing scheme will be used for all vectors.
The total energy consumed by user i, denoted as E (i) , can
be expressed as follows:


q mq−1 mq ,

(7)

q=1

where m0 up to mQ are decaying number of samples in case
of encoding, or increasing number of samples in case of
decoding.

(i)

(i)

where Et , Ec , and Eq are the energies consumed for
data transmission, compression and quantization/encoding in
(i)
module i respectively. Following [39], Et can be computed
using the following equations:

 r
i
ωi li
(i)
2 gi − 1 ,
(9)
Et =
ri gi
where ri is the transmitted data rate of PDA i over bandwidth
(i)
ωi , and gi is the channel gain. Furthermore, Ec can be calculated using its proportionality to the compression algorithm
complexity (see Section IV-E) such that:
Ec(i) = ζi Ep ,

V. ENERGY CONSUMPTION OPTIMIZATION

In this section, we propose an optimization framework for
multi-user mHealth system taking into consideration the network and application requirements. Specifically, we adapt
our SAE-M technique based on network dynamics and application demands to obtain optimal compression ratios that
minimize total energy consumption through selecting the DL
configuration that guarantees such compression ratio. First,
we summarize the network/application constraints, and then,
formalize the total energy consumption to be minimized.
After that, we formulate the optimization problem and solve
it using convex optimization tools.

(i)

(8)

(10)

where ζi is the compression algorithm complexity of module i
encoder and Ep is the energy consumed per computation [40].
Using Eq. (7), for a Q-layered SAE-M, modifies Eq. (10) to:


Q h
i
X
(q−1) (q) 
(Q)
Ec(i) = Q mi +
q mi
mi
Ep .
(11)
q=1
(i)

Finally, Eq depends on the number of conversion steps,
which is proportional to mi and the energy consumed at each
(i)
step Es [41]. Thus, Eq can be computed by the following:
Eq(i) = mi Es .

(12)

A. NETWORK AND APPLICATION CONSTRAINTS

The aim of the proposed scheme is not only proposing a lowcomplexity compression technique but also to be adaptive to
network dynamics and application demands. Our mHealth
system is optimized such that the total energy consumption is
minimized while optimally assigning transmission rates and
bandwidths to all PDAs. Such assignment must be in accordance with the following application constraints: distortion
threshold PRDthr , and the following network requirements:
delay deadline Dthr and total available bandwidth ωt . In our
model, we assume the network is interference free, and the
main energy consuming components are the compression
module, quantization, encoding, and transmission, as shown
in Figure 1.
B. ENERGY CONSUMPTION CALCULATION

Let us consider a multi-user mHealth system with N users,
where each records signals X = [x1 , x2 , · · · , xN ]T with
33732

C. PROBLEM FORMULATION

Performance of compression is quantified using Compression
Ratio (CR) and distortion via Percentage Root Mean Square
Difference (PRD) such that:


mi
(i)
,
(13)
CR = 100 × 1 −
ni
||xi − x̂i ||
PRD(i) = 100 ×
,
(14)
||xi ||
where || || is the Frobenius norm. Using regression analysis,
PRD can be estimated from CR by the exponential operator
h such that:
n
o
(i)
PRD(i) = h CR(i) = a eb CR ,
(15)
where a and b are the regression parameters.
The objective of our optimization problem is to to minimize the total energy consumption of all users E, given the
VOLUME 6, 2018

A. Ben Said et al.: DL Approach for Vital Signs Compression and Energy Efficient Delivery in mhealth Systems

application requirements and network constraints, i.e. maxi(i)
(i)
mum allowed distortion PRDthr , delay deadline Dthr , and the
total available bandwidth ωt . Consequently, our problem can
be formulated as follows:


 r
i
ωi li
(Q)
g
i
min
2 − 1 + Q mi
(i)
r
g
i i
CR , ri , ωi

Q h
i
X
(q−1) (q)
+
q mi
mi Ep + mi Es ,
(16)
q=1
(i)

(i)

subjected to : a eb CR ≤ PRDthr .
li
(i)
≤ Dthr .
ri
N
X
ωi ≤ ωt .

(17)
(18)
(19)

i=1

Checking convexity shows that this form of problems is nonconvex due to Et [42]. Thus, as noted in [39], we leverage the
Geometric Program transformation to put this optimization in
a convex form and solve it using convex optimization tools,
as follow:
1) In Eq. (9), substitute 2ri /gi using Taylor’s theorem by:
1+

ri log(2)
gi

+

ri 2 log2 (2)
2g2i

+

ri 3 log3 (2)
6g3i

+ ···.


c (i) = log CR(i) ,
2) Using change of variables, define CR
b
gi = log(gi ) and b
r = log(ri ).
P bi s 
The function log
ae
is convex if a > 0 [42]. Hence,
c (i) ,b
the problem turns to be convex in CR
gi andb
ri , and is solved
using convex optimization tools. Solving this optimization
problem results in optimal compression ratios, as well as
transmission rates and bandwidths allocated for each user.
Thus, each PDA can adapt its compression configuration of
the SAE-M based on the obtained optimal CRs and network
state.
VI. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS

In this section, we describe the utilized dataset with the
required pre-processing, and present the following results:
1) We conduct experiments for single modality adaptive
data compression, where we apply SAE for EEG and
EOG compression and compare it with Discrete Cosine
Transform (DCT), Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT)
and Compressive Sensing (CS) methods [20], [21].
2) We conduct experiments for multiple modality adaptive
data compression, where we apply SAE-S and SAEM for EEG and EOG compression and compare their
results.
3) We assess the computational complexity of SAE-S and
SAE-M, in terms of processing time, and compare it
with DCT, DWT and CS.
4) We assess the efficiency of the proposed adaptive
compression techniques by comparing the total energy
consumption under different distortion thresholds and
bandwidths.
VOLUME 6, 2018

A. DATASET, RATIONALE AND PRE-PROCESSING

Data compression and analysis is performed using the multiple modality DEAP dataset described in [43]. EEG, EMG,
EOG and other physiological signals are collected from
32 healthy participants (50% males) aged between 19 and
37 years old. In this work, we confine our scope by only using
EEG and EOG from this dataset. EEG was recorded using
32 active AgCl electrodes, placed according to the international 10-20 system, at 32 Hz, while EOG was recorded using
four electrodes placed around each patient eyes [43].
EEG and EOG are selected as testing signals due to their
ability in revealing the true performance of a compression
system thanks to the following properties:
1) EEG is a highly non-stationary signal; it has a timevarying spectrum [44]. Thus, time or frequency domain
compression techniques are naturally limited due to
EEG non-stationarity, making it challenging to our
design along with conventional compression techniques. In addition, EOG is a stationary signal; it has a
time-independent spectrum [44]. Therefore, its opposing nature with EEG can be used for testing.
2) EEG and EOG are intensive signals that hinder
real-time analysis and immediate medical interventions [45], [46]. Using the sampling rate of our utilized dataset, 32 Hz, approximately 6 million EEG and
EOG data samples are generated per channel per day.
This creates a Big Data problem for any automated
analysis system and any network infrastructure [47].
Thus, efficient EEG and EOG compression can push
the development of automated remote sensing systems.
3) EEG has been utilized in various applications such
as: seizure detection [48], abnormality localization [49]–[51], brain-computer interfaces [46], etc.
In addition, EOG along with EEG has been successfully used for artifacts detection and removal [50],
eye-writing recognition [52], wheelchair control [53],
etc. Hence, the integration of these two modalities is
interesting to validate the viability of our compression
technique to capture properties of each signal and
provide a joint optimization that leverages the intermodality correlations to minimize overall distortion.
In this work, we pre-process the utilized EEG and EOG
by segmentation to produce a total of 2250 segments for
each modality. Each segment corresponds to 7 seconds
of activities or 896 samples of data. Moreover, each segment is whitened to become a zero mean vector with unity
variance. After that, segments are randomly divided into
75% for training and 25% for testing to assess SAE-S and
SAE-M performances in compression.
B. ADAPTIVE SINGLE MODALITY COMPRESSION

Figures 5 and 6 illustrate compression distortions
for DCT, DWT, CS and SAE at different compression ratios
for EEG and EOG respectively. Note that DCT is performed
on a critically sampled version of the signals, i.e. zero
DCT compression implies considering all frequencies that
33733

A. Ben Said et al.: DL Approach for Vital Signs Compression and Energy Efficient Delivery in mhealth Systems

results are opposing each other, as the first shows better
performance up to 75% compression, and the second shows
lower distortion above 75% compression. Furthermore, DCT
and SAE depict higher performances when compared to the
former with averaged distortions of 4.12% for DCT and
4.44% for SAE, proving SAE ability to compress stationary
signals. Finally, Figures 7 and 8 demonstrate the compressed
versus original EEG and EOG signals respectively using
SAE for 20% and 80% compression ratios to give a visual
assessment for the low distortions SAE can achieve.

FIGURE 5. Performance of EEG compression using DCT, DWT, CS, and SAE.

FIGURE 7. Comparison between original and compressed EEG using SAE
at 20% and 80% compression ratios.

FIGURE 6. Performance of EOG compression using DCT, DWT, CS, and SAE.

cover 99.995% of the total energy. In addition, CS is applied
on the Fourier transforms of the signals, assuming they
are sparse, and samples are randomly selected for reconstruction [21]. Furthermore, DWT is optimized to minimize
reconstruction distortion, where db29 and sym9 with single
levels were found to be the best performing wavelets for
EEG and EOG compression respectively [20]. In SAE, number of layers Q is selected to compress/decompress the signal
by around 10% per layer, e.g. 40% SAE compression requires
Q = 4, 4 for encoding and 4 for decoding. We use a linear
activation function and the Squared Euclidean distance as our
loss function regularized by a weight decay [54]. Finally,
DCT and DWT compression results of the 2250 testing
data segments are averaged via linear interpolation to ensure
unbiased performance analysis.
On one hand, one can note in Figure 5 that DCT and DWT
results are close to each other with no significant difference,
and that SAE improves performance at high compression
rates with an average distortion of 22.96% proving its ability
to compress non-stationary signals. In addition, CS depicts a
diverging distortion trend for high compression rates which
agrees with Majumdar et al. conclusions in [26], EEG is
not sparse. On the other hand, in Figure 6, DWT and CS
33734

FIGURE 8. Comparison between original and compressed EOG using SAE
at 20% and 80% compression ratios.

C. ADAPTIVE MULTIPLE MODALITY COMPRESSION

Figure 9 illustrates multiple modality compression distortions for DWT, SAE-S, and SAE-M at different compression
ratios. Multiple modality results of DWT and SAE-S are
computed by averaging the single modality outcomes using
linear interpolation. The number of SAE-S and SAE-M layers
Q is selected to compress/decompress the signal by around
10% per layer. In addition, we use linear activation functions
and the Squared Euclidean distances as our loss functions
regularized by a weight decay [54].
By examining the results, one can note that SAE-M
shows an enhanced overall performance at all compression
ratios with an average distortion of 13.21%. This proves
the feasibility of SAE-M for multiple modality compression
as it illustrates 72.37% and 3.71% relative increments in
VOLUME 6, 2018

A. Ben Said et al.: DL Approach for Vital Signs Compression and Energy Efficient Delivery in mhealth Systems

FIGURE 9. Performance of multiple modality compression using DWT,
SAE-S and SAE-M.

performance when compared to DWT and SAE-S respectively. This illustrates SAE-M ability to compress both stationary and non-stationary signals as depicted in Figure 10.

FIGURE 11. Computational complexity of EEG compression using DCT,
DWT, CS, and SAE encompassed with 95% confidence intervals (CI).
Note that some CIs are not visual on this plot due to estimation
precision and logarithmic scale.

FIGURE 10. Comparison between original and compressed signals using
SAE-M at 20% and 80% compression ratios.

D. COMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITY FOR ADAPTIVE
COMPRESSION

Assessment of computational complexity for the utilized
adaptive compression techniques is conducted on a Lenovo
Laptop (Y510P) with an Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-4700MQ
x64-based processor, a 2.4 GHz CPU, 16 GB of memory and M ATLAB R2016a. Results are produced by
Monte-Carlo simulations where each single modality algorithm processing time is assessed by compressing 2250 segments of EEG or EOG (≈ 4.4 hours of data per modality).
Multiple modality results for DCT, DWT, CS, and SAE-S
algorithms are produced by assuming a sequential paradigm;
modalities are compressed independently in a sequential
manner. Note that, DCT and DWT simulations are conducted
with pre-defined thresholds using the optimal parameters
summarized in Section VI-B, and that their results are averaged via linear interpolation to ensure integrity.
1) ADAPTIVE SINGLE MODALITY COMPRESSION

Figures 11 and 12 depict the required processing time for
each single modality algorithm at different compression rates
VOLUME 6, 2018

FIGURE 12. Computational complexity of EOG compression using DCT,
DWT, CS, and SAE encompassed with 95% confidence intervals (CI).
Note that some CIs are not visual on this plot due to estimation
precision and logarithmic scale.

for EEG and EOG respectively. First, one can note that
SAE requires the least processing time in both compression scenarios (EEG and EOG compression). Furthermore,
DCT and DWT curves are independent of compression rate,
while CS and SAE trends decrease and increase respectively
with compression rate. In addition, mean processing times
of DCT, CS, and SAE-S do not change, significantly, with
the data type (EEG or EOG); however DWT does due to the
different optimal parameters for each modality.
2) ADAPTIVE MULTIPLE MODALITY COMPRESSION

Figure 13 demonstrates the required processing time when
compressing multiple modality data. SAE-S still shows the
least required processing time; however, SAE-M illustrates a
competing trend due to its lower distortion rates (Figure 9)
with an average processing time of ≈ 1 second. Using
33735

A. Ben Said et al.: DL Approach for Vital Signs Compression and Energy Efficient Delivery in mhealth Systems

FIGURE 14. Total energy consumption and compression ratio of SAE-M
with varying distortion threshold.
FIGURE 13. Computational complexity of multiple modality compression
using DCT, DWT, CS, SAE-S, and SAE-M encompassed with 95% confidence
intervals (CI). Note that some CIs are not visual on this plot due to
estimation precision and logarithmic scale.

the averaged processing times, one can deduce the average
number of compressed bytes per second as 67.80 MB/s for
DCT, 1.15 MB/s for DWT, 1.21 MB/s for CS, 96.38 MB/s for
SAE-S and 29.30 MB/s for SAE-M. By utilizing the former
results, a pipeline for selecting an appropriate compression
configuration depending on the network constraints can be
created. For instance, SAE-S can be selected when the delay
is the highest priority constraint, while SAE-M can be chosen
when distortion is the most important concern.
E. ENERGY CONSUMPTION

We show in the following how the proposed SAE-M technique contributes in reducing the energy consumption under
various network states. Based on the network topology
in Figure 1, we analyze the energy consumption under different distortion thresholds and available bandwidths, given
the simulation settings presented in Table 1. Figure 14
shows the total energy consumed for different values of
distortion threshold. As shown, with more tolerance on the
maximum allowed distortion, SAE-M can increase the compression ratio, hence, provides a significant reduction in the
total energy consumption. Furthermore, using the proposed
SAE-M technique, the achieved compression ratio has been
increased compared to DWT and CS schemes, at the same
distortion threshold. This enhancement in compression ratio
leads to a significant reduction in energy consumption. Thus,
we obtain about 45% and 20% reduction in energy consumption compared to DWT and CS, respectively.

TABLE 1. Simulation setting.

FIGURE 15. Total energy consumption of SAE-M for different total
available bandwidths.

Regarding the effect of network dynamics, Figure 15 illustrates the resulting energy consumption with respect to the
total available bandwidth, for PRDthr = 10% and Dthr = 1s.
At congested networks, the PDA will be allocated low bandwidth, hence will consume more energy to be able to transmit its data, while maintaining application’s QoS requirements. On the contrary, at networks with large bandwidth,
the PDA can consume less energy, hence obtaining less compression ratio, less distortion, and better energy efficiency.
Findings show the importance of considering the variations
of available network bandwidth and its impact on energy consumption. Thus, in the proposed adaptive SAE-M technique,
we could optimize the total energy consumption, given the
network dynamics, through adapting each user compression
ratio, while maintaining the application QoS requirements.
VII. CONCLUSION

We proposed an adaptive biomedical data compression technique using Stacked Auto-Encoders for mHealth systems.
We examined single and multiple modality data compression
to exploit modalities intra and inter-correlation. We also proposed an energy and resource-aware framework for medical
33736

VOLUME 6, 2018

A. Ben Said et al.: DL Approach for Vital Signs Compression and Energy Efficient Delivery in mhealth Systems

data delivery considering continuous changes in network
dynamics. This was done by adapting the proposed algorithm to the following network constraints: delay deadline,
the available bandwidth, and the application requirements,
i.e. the maximum allowed distortion. We compared and analyzed our method with common compression approaches
such as CS, DWT, and DCT and demonstrated that: 1) the
proposed single and multiple modality compression techniques, SAE-S and SAE-M respectively, turn out to be adaptive to the network and application constraints. 2) Single
modality SAE outperforms DWT by 13.24% reduction in
distortion and DCT by 43.75% reduction in processing time.
3) SAE-M further decreases the distortion by 3.71% and
72.37% when compared to SAE-S and multiple modality
DWT respectively. 4) SAE-S results depict its ability to
disjointly compress stationary and non-stationary signals,
while its extension, SAE-M, proves its ability to jointly
leverage inter-signal correlations, making it essential for reallife applications. 5) SAE-S and SAE-M light computational
complexities make them deployable on an edge device and
suitable for real-time applications. 6) SAE-M technique was
able to minimize the total energy consumption while adapting
its compression ratio based on different network states.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT

(Mohammad F. Al-Sa’d and Mounira Tlili contributed
equally to this work.) The statements made herein are solely
the responsibility of the authors.
REFERENCES
[1] N. Zwar et al., ‘‘A systematic review of chronic disease management,’’
Australian Primary Health Care Res. Inst., Australian Nat. Univ., Canberra,
ACT, Australia, Tech. Rep., 2017.
[2] J. H. Hibbard, J. Greene, R. M. Sacks, V. Overton, and C. Parrotta,
‘‘Improving population health management strategies: Identifying patients
who are more likely to be users of avoidable costly care and those more
likely to develop a new chronic disease,’’ Health Services Res., vol. 52,
no. 4, pp. 1297–1309, 2017.
[3] World Health Organization, Regional Office for the Eastern Mediterranean. (2006). Country Cooperation Strategy for WHO and Qatar: 2005–
2009. [Online]. Available: http://www.who.int/iris/handle/10665/193975
[4] J. Halford, Electrographic Seizures in Adults: Recognition and Examples.
Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2017, pp. 87–113.
[5] W. H. Polonsky, D. Hessler, K. J. Ruedy, and R. W. Beck, ‘‘The impact of
continuous glucose monitoring on markers of quality of life in adults with
type 1 diabetes: Further findings from the DIAMOND randomized clinical
trial,’’ Diabetes Care, vol. 40, no. 6, pp. 736–741, 2017.
[6] M. H. Shamji et al., ‘‘Biomarkers for monitoring clinical efficacy of allergen immunotherapy for allergic rhinoconjunctivitis and allergic asthma:
An EAACI position paper,’’ Allergy, vol. 72, no. 8, pp. 1156–1173, 2017.
[7] J. M. Corchado, J. Bajo, Y. de Paz, and D. I. Tapia, ‘‘Intelligent environment
for monitoring alzheimer patients, agent technology for health care,’’
Decis. Support Syst., vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 382–396, 2008.
[8] World Health Organization. (Feb. 2017). Epilepsy. [Online]. Available:
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs999/en/
[9] A. S. Detsky, ‘‘What patients really want from health care,’’ JAMA,
vol. 306, no. 22, pp. 2500–2501, 2011.
[10] Emotiv. Emotiv Website. [Online]. Available: https://www.emotiv.com/
[11] N. Memon, X. Kong, and J. Cinkler, ‘‘Context-based lossless and nearlossless compression of EEG signals,’’ IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed.,
vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 231–238, Sep. 1999.
[12] L. Atzori, A. Iera, and G. Morabito, ‘‘The Internet of Things: A survey,’’
Comput. Netw., vol. 54, no. 15, pp. 2787–2805, Oct. 2010.
VOLUME 6, 2018

[13] S. M. Riazul Islam, D. Kwak, M. Humaun Kabir, M. Hossain, and
K.-S. Kwak, ‘‘The Internet of Things for health care: A comprehensive
survey,’’ IEEE Access, vol. 3, pp. 678–708, Jun. 2015.
[14] IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks—Part 15.6:
Wireless Body Area Networks. IEEE Std 802.15.6-2012, Feb. 2012,
pp. 1–271.
[15] W. Shi, J. Cao, Q. Zhang, Y. Li, and L. Xu, ‘‘Edge computing: Vision and
challenges,’’ IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 3, no. 5, pp. 637–646, Oct. 2016.
[16] M. Hooshmand, D. Zordan, D. Del Testa, E. Grisan, and M. Rossi,
‘‘Boosting the battery life of wearables for health monitoring through
the compression of biosignals,’’ IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 4, no. 5,
pp. 1647–1662, Oct. 2017.
[17] B. Hejrati, A. Fathi, and F. Abdali-Mohammadi, ‘‘Efficient lossless multichannel EEG compression based on channel clustering,’’ Biomed. Signal
Process. Control, vol. 31, pp. 295–300, Jan. 2017.
[18] N. Sriraam, ‘‘Correlation dimension based lossless compression of EEG
signals,’’ Biomed. Signal Process. Control, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 379–388, 2012.
[19] N. Sriraam, R. Kannan, and C. Eswaran, ‘‘Lossless compression of EEG
data using neural network predictors,’’ in Proc. 9th Int. Conf. Neural Inf.
Process. (ICONIP), vol. 4, Nov. 2002, pp. 2046–2048.
[20] S. Grgic, M. Grgic, and B. Zovko-Cihlar, ‘‘Performance analysis of image
compression using wavelets,’’ IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 48, no. 3,
pp. 682–695, Jun. 2001.
[21] M. A. Qureshi and M. Deriche, ‘‘A new wavelet based efficient image
compression algorithm using compressive sensing,’’ Multimedia Tools
Appl., vol. 75, no. 12, pp. 6737–6754, Jun. 2016.
[22] K. Srinivasan, J. Dauwels, and M. R. Reddy, ‘‘A two-dimensional approach
for lossless EEG compression,’’ Biomed. Signal Process. Control, vol. 6,
no. 4, pp. 387–394, 2011.
[23] M. V. C. Costa, P. D. A. Berger, A. F. D. Rocha, J. L. A. D. Carvalho, and
F. A. D. O. Nascimento, ‘‘Compression of electromyographic signals using
image compression techniques,’’ in Proc. 30th Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng.
Med. Biol. Soc. (EMBS), Aug. 2008, pp. 2948–2951.
[24] A. Awad, A. Mohamed, and A. A. El-Sherif, ‘‘Energy efficient crosslayer design for wireless body area monitoring networks in healthcare
applications,’’ in Proc. IEEE 24th Int. Symp. Pers. Indoor Mobile Radio
Commun. (PIMRC), Sep. 2013, pp. 1484–1489.
[25] A. Shukla and A. Majumdar, ‘‘Row-sparse blind compressed sensing
for reconstructing multi-channel EEG signals,’’ Biomed. Signal Process.
Control, vol. 18, pp. 174–178, Apr. 2015.
[26] A. Majumdar, A. Gogna, and R. Ward, ‘‘A low-rank matrix recovery
approach for energy efficient EEG acquisition for a wireless body area
network,’’ Sensors, vol. 14, no. 9, pp. 15729–15748, 2014.
[27] A. Majumdar and R. Ward, ‘‘Some empirical advances in matrix completion,’’ Signal Process., vol. 91, no. 5, pp. 1334–1338, 2011.
[28] G. Xu, J. Han, Y. Zou, and X. Zeng, ‘‘A 1.5-D multi-channel EEG compression algorithm based on NLSPIHT,’’ IEEE Signal Process. Lett., vol. 22,
no. 8, pp. 1118–1122, Aug. 2015.
[29] R. Hussein, A. Mohamed, and M. Alghoniemy, ‘‘Scalable real-time
energy-efficient EEG compression scheme for wireless body area sensor network,’’ Biomed. Signal Process. Control, vol. 19, pp. 122–129,
May 2015.
[30] Y. Bengio, ‘‘Learning deep architectures for AI,’’ Found. Trends Mach.
Learn., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–127, 2009.
[31] G. Toderici et al., ‘‘Full resolution image compression with recurrent neural networks,’’ in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jul. 2017, pp. 5435–5443.
[32] R. Dennis et al., ‘‘A systematic review of chronic disease management
interventions in primary care,’’ BMC Family Pract., vol. 19, no. 1, 2018,
doi: 10.1186/s12875-017-0692-3.
[33] N. Sriraam and C. Eswaran, ‘‘Performance evaluation of neural network
and linear predictors for near-lossless compression of EEG signals,’’ IEEE
Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 87–93, Jan. 2008.
[34] C. C. Tan and C. Eswaran, ‘‘Using autoencoders for mammogram compression,’’ J. Med. Syst., vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 49–58, Feb. 2011.
[35] D. Del Testa and M. Rossi, ‘‘Lightweight lossy compression of biometric
patterns via denoising autoencoders,’’ IEEE Signal Process. Lett., vol. 22,
no. 12, pp. 2304–2308, Dec. 2015.
[36] N. Correa, Y.-O. Li, T. Adalı, and V. D. Calhoun, ‘‘Examining associations
between fMRI and EEG data using canonical correlation analysis,’’ in
Proc. 5th IEEE Int. Symp. Biomed. Imag., Nano Macro (ISBI), May 2008,
pp. 1251–1254.
[37] Y. LeCun, C. Cortes, and C. J. C. Burges. The MNIST Database of Handwritten Digits. [Online]. Available: http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/mnist/
33737

A. Ben Said et al.: DL Approach for Vital Signs Compression and Energy Efficient Delivery in mhealth Systems

[38] L. Bottou, ‘‘Large-scale machine learning with stochastic gradient
descent,’’ in Proc. COMPSTAT, Y. Lechevallier and G. Saporta, Eds.
Heidelberg, Germany: Physica-Verlag, 2010, pp. 177–186.
[39] A. Awad, A. Mohamed, A. A. El-Sherif, and O. A. Nasr, ‘‘Interferenceaware energy-efficient cross-layer design for healthcare monitoring applications,’’ Comput. Netw., vol. 74, pp. 64–77, Dec. 2014.
[40] E. Grochowski and M. Annavaram, ‘‘Energy per instruction trends in Intel
microprocessors,’’ Technol. Intel Mag., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 1–8, 2006.
[41] B. Murmann, ‘‘A/D converter trends: Power dissipation, scaling and digitally assisted architectures,’’ in Proc. IEEE Custom Intergr. Circuits Conf.
(CICC), Sep. 2008, pp. 105–112.
[42] S. Boyd and L. Vandenberghe, Convex Optimization. Cambridge, U.K.:
Cambridge Univ. Press, 2004.
[43] S. Koelstra et al., ‘‘DEAP: A database for emotion analysis; Using physiological signals,’’ IEEE Trans. Affective Comput., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 18–31,
Jan./Mar. 2012.
[44] B. Boashash, Ed., Time-Frequency Signal Analysis and Processing, 2nd ed.
Oxford, U.K.: Academic, 2015.
[45] M. Odabaee, W. J. Freeman, P. B. Colditz, C. Ramon, and S. Vanhatalo,
‘‘Spatial patterning of the neonatal EEG suggests a need for a high number
of electrodes,’’ NeuroImage, vol. 68, pp. 229–235, Mar. 2013.
[46] Y. Zhang et al., ‘‘Multi-kernel extreme learning machine for EEG classification in brain-computer interfaces,’’ Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 96,
pp. 302–310, Apr. 2018.
[47] W. P. Fifer, P. G. Grieve, J. Grose-Fifer, J. R. Isler, and D. Byrd, ‘‘Highdensity electroencephalogram monitoring in the neonate,’’ Clin. Perinatol.,
vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 679–691, 2006.
[48] B. Boashash, H. Barki, and S. Ouelha, ‘‘Performance evaluation of timefrequency image feature sets for improved classification and analysis of
non-stationary signals: Application to newborn EEG seizure detection,’’
Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 132, pp. 188–203, Sep. 2017.
[49] B. Boashash and A. Aïssa-El-Bey, ‘‘Robust multisensor time-frequency
signal processing: A tutorial review with illustrations of performance
enhancement in selected application areas,’’ Digit. Signal Process., vol. 77,
pp. 153–186, Jun. 2017.
[50] B. Boashash, A. Aïssa-El-Bey, and M. F. Al-Sa’d, ‘‘Multisensor
time–frequency signal processing MATLAB package: An analysis tool for
multichannel non-stationary data,’’ SoftwareX, pp. 1–6, Dec. 2017.
[51] P. Nemtsas et al., ‘‘Source localization of ictal epileptic activity based on
high-density scalp EEG data,’’ Epilepsia, vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 1027–1036,
2017.
[52] F. Fang and T. Shinozaki, ‘‘Electrooculography-based continuous eyewriting recognition system for efficient assistive communication systems,’’
PLoS ONE, vol. 13, no. 2, p. e0192684, 2018.
[53] M. Djeha, F. Sbargoud, M. Guiatni, K. Fellah, and N. Ababou, ‘‘A combined EEG and EOG signals based wheelchair control in virtual environment,’’ in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Electr. Eng.-Boumerdes (ICEE-B), Oct. 2017,
pp. 1–6.
[54] W. Sun, S. Shaoa, R. Zhaob, R. Yana, X. Zhangc, and X. Chen, ‘‘A sparse
auto-encoder-based deep neural network approach for induction motor
faults classification,’’ Measurement, vol. 89, pp. 171–178, Jul. 2016.

AHMED BEN SAID received the Ph.D. degree
in computer Science from the University of Burgundy, France, in 2015. He was a Research Assistant with Qatar University on several projects,
including the simulation of a surgical cutting
operation using 3-D modeling, the usage of multispectral image for face recognition, and the development of reliable mHealth system for remote
patient diagnosis. He currently holds a postdoctoral position at Qatar University. His research
interests include machine learning and computer vision. He is also interested
in crowd-sourced mobile applications and mobile health systems.

33738

MOHAMMAD FATHI AL-SA’D received the
B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees in electrical engineering from Qatar University, Qatar, in 2012 and
2016, respectively. He is specialized in signal
processing and graduated with honors under the
supervision of Prof. B. Boashash. He has been
with the College of Engineering, Qatar University,
as a Research Assistant, since 2012. His research
interests include multichannel EEG analysis and
processing, time–frequency array processing,
information flow and theory, statistical modeling and optimization, data
mining, and machine learning. He has served as a Technical Reviewer for
many journals, including Biomedical Signal Processing and Control, Digital
Signal Processing, and so on.

MOUNIRA TLILI received the B.Sc. degree in
computer science from Carnegie Mellon University in 2017. She is currently a Research Assistant
with the Engineering Department, Qatar University. Her work focuses on data reduction and compression using deep learning for mHealth systems.
The main objective of her work is creating a technology that senses the environment and reacts to it
autonomously and seamlessly resulting in holistic
experience for users with minimal interaction. Her
research interests are in the fields of artificial intelligence, machine learning,
and deep learning.

ALAA AWAD ABDELLATIF received the B.Sc.
and M.Sc. degrees (Hons.) in electronics and
electrical communications engineering from Cairo
University, Egypt, in 2009 and 2012, respectively.
He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with
the Department of Electronics and Telecommunications, Politecnico di Torino, Italy, and the
Computer Science and Engineering Department,
Qatar University. He was a Research Assistant
with the Center for Wireless Studies, Cairo University, from 2009 to 2012, and with Qatar University from 2013 to 2014.
His research interests include edge computing, in-network processing, heterogeneous networks, and resource optimization for efficient wireless sensor
networks and smart health systems. He has served as a Technical Reviewer
for many international IEEE journals and magazine, including the IEEE
SYSTEMS, the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MULTIMEDIA, the Journal of Biomedical
and Health Informatics, and Communications Magazine.

VOLUME 6, 2018

A. Ben Said et al.: DL Approach for Vital Signs Compression and Energy Efficient Delivery in mhealth Systems

AMR MOHAMED (S’00–M’06–SM’14) received
the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical and computer engineering from The University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, Canada, in 2001 and 2006,
respectively. He was an Advisory IT Specialist
with the IBM Innovation Centre, Vancouver, from
1998 to 2007, taking a leadership role in systems
development for vertical industries. He has over
25 years of experience in wireless networking
research and industrial systems development. He is
currently an Associate Professor with the College of Engineering, Qatar University, and the Director of the Cisco Regional Academy. His research interests include wireless networking and edge computing for IoT applications.
He has authored or co-authored over 150 refereed journal and conference
papers, textbook, and book chapters in reputed international journals and
conferences. He holds three awards from IBM Canada for his achievements
and leadership, and three best paper awards, latest from IEEE/IFIP NTMS
2015 in Paris. He has served as a Technical Program Committee (TPC)
Co-Chair for workshops in IEEE WCNC 2016 and a Co-Chair for the technical symposia of international conferences, including GLOBECOM 2016,
Crowncom 2015, AICCSA 2014, IEEE WLN 2011, and IEEE ICT 2010.
He has served on the organization committee of many other international
conferences as a TPC Member, including the IEEE ICC, GLOBECOM,
WCNC, LCN, and PIMRC, and a technical reviewer for many international
IEEE, ACM, Elsevier, Springer, and Wiley journals. He is serving as a
Technical Editor for the Journal of Internet Technology and the International
Journal of Sensor Networks.
TAREK ELFOULY has over 12 years of experience
in computer network research. He published over
80 papers, most of them are related to wireless
sensing and network security. He supervised many
master’s students and served as an examiner for
many others. He has many projects under development related to computer networks and security. He has managed to secure over $3 million of
funds for his research. His projects received many
national and regional awards. His research work
focuses on network security and protocols, physical layer security, and wireless sensor networks especially in the field of structural health monitoring
and health applications. He has three provisional patent applications in USA,
all of them are related to cyber security. He has 17 journal papers in reputable
journals, such as the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS and
the IEEE COMMUNICATION SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS. One of the projects that he
secured a fund of 900K $ was related to network and service security using
social networking, while another focused on information theory-enabled
secure wireless networking by defining scaling laws, network control, and
implementation. One of the projects that he lead with a total fund of $1million
was in smart city structural health monitoring using wireless sensor networks
for detecting the health of infrastructures in a city remotely and continuously
while harvesting energy from the environment and optimizing the energy use.
He has been involved in the deep learning field and has some publication to
the applications of deep learning in health. He is currently with the Supreme
Committee for Legacy and Heritage on a project to secure the evacuation of
crowded venues, such as stadiums and shopping malls.

VOLUME 6, 2018

KHALED HARRAS is currently an Associate Professor with Carnegie Melon University in Qatar
(CMUQ), where he is also the Director of the
Computer Science Program. He is also the Founder
and the Director of the Networking Systems Lab,
CMUQ. He has been involved in or managing
research grants that amount to over $ 4 million,
and has supervised over 30 different personnel,
including undergraduate and graduate students,
post-doctoral researchers, and research engineers.
He has over 100 refereed publications and holds four U.S. patents. Along
with his research group in the past few years, he received the Best National
Computing Research Award twice and two Best Paper Awards. His work has
been featured online in various venues, such as MIT Tech Review and Tech
the Future.

MARK DENNIS O’CONNOR was born in
London, U.K., in 1962. He received the degree in
physics from the St. Peter’s College, Oxford University, in 1983, and the M.B.B.S. degree from the
Charing Cross and Westminster Medical School,
University of London. During his early postgraduate training, he became a member of the Royal College of Physicians (1992) and the Royal College
of General Practitioners (1995) and an Associate
Fellow of the Faculty of Occupational Medicine.
He has spent a large part of his career specializing in the field of family
medicine and occupational medicine, as a Senior Partner of the National
Health Service General Medical Practice, Bristol, U.K. He has an interest
in medical education. He was an Associate Lecturer in medicine with Bristol
University, U.K. Since 2014, he has been the Associate Medical Director of
mobile healthcare services, a division of the National Ambulance Service of
Hamad Medical Corporation, Qatar. He is currently an Assistant Professor
of clinical medicine with the Faculty of Clinical Medicine, Weill Cornell
University, Qatar. He undertakes clinical work alongside holding a senior
executive role within this National Organization. He leads a team of over
130 clinicians in establishing new community clinical services for the entire
population of the country. He regularly contributes to the Ministry of Health
National Health Strategy work groups and is a regularly invited speaker
to International fora and other local organizations wishing to learn more
about integrating primary and secondary care health systems to improve
the care of long term conditions in the community. He sits on the National
Ambulance Service’s Group Research Oversight Committee and is currently
collaborating, as a Principle Investigator, with the College of Engineering,
Qatar University, on applying deep machine learning techniques to realworld clinical problems.

33739

