2013 IEEE 17th International Symposium on Consumer Electronics (ISCE)

A Brain Computer Interface for Smart Home Control
Wei Tuck Lee, *1Humaira Nisar, *2Aamir S. Malik, 1**Kim Ho Yeap,*Senior **Member IEEE
1
Universiti Tunku Abdul Rahman, 2University Technology PETRONAS, Perak, Malaysia

1

Abstract--. The aim of this study is to control home devices
using a non invasive brain computer interface (BCI). The
Electroencephalographic signals (EEG) recorded from the brain
activity using the Emotiv EPOCH headset are interfaced with the
help of mouse emulator to a graphical user interface (GUI) on the
computer screen. The user will use this GUI to control various
devices in a smart home. This application will be very useful
especially for people with special needs.

Emotiv EPOC uses three built-in suites to determine the
various types of signal inputs: i.e Expressiv Suite for
analyzing users facial expressions, the user’s emotional state is
interpreted by the Affectiv Suite while the Cognitiv Suite
analyzes user‘s intent to control a movement. In addition the
gyro can be used as a mouse emulator.
The aim of this project is to acquire and identify the EEG
signal that is related with the user intention to operate a device
in the smart home. Hence for event detection it is necessary to
have a unique profile for each user to map the user’s brainpatterns. In this study we have used a simple feature i.e. raise
an eyebrow to create an event. So whenever the user will raise
an eyebrow a mouse click will be activated. Fig. 2 shows the
mouse emulator from the EmoControl Panel. While wearing
the headset the mouse emulator in EmoControl Panel will be
used to generate a mouse click whenever the user will raise an
eyebrow. The set up of EmoKey is shown in Fig.3.

I. INTRODUCTION
BCI is a system that captures the brain electrical activity in
the form of EEG signals; and translates those specific features
of the signal that represents the intent of the user into
computer readable commands. These commands can control
and operate an electronic device [1]-[2]. This technology is
developing very rapidly, as it has innumerable uses, the most
important of which is improving the quality of life of human
beings in general and elderly and disabled people in particular
[3]-[5]. The BCI can be divided into non-invasive and
invasive type, where in latter an IC is implanted in the brain
by surgery. Hence people prefer non invasive BCI which
involves only wearing of a headset or cap equipped with an
active electrode system.
In this paper, our main aim is to develop a thought
controlled smart home system. We will use a non-invasive
BCI device known as Emotiv EPOC headset [6] to capture
EEG signals. The EEG signals are transmitted via Bluetooth to
the interface computer. The built in gyro sensor in the emotive
headset helps to control the mouse cursor in the mouse
emulator. Hence the electroencephalography (EEG) signals
produced by the brain electrical activity can be trained and
used to control the mouse on a graphical user interface of
home appliances on the computer screen.

Fig. 1. Emotiv EPOC headset and electrodes location

II. METHODOLOGY
Recent research shows that brain computer interface can be
used for motion disabled people, however the mean
classification rate achieved is above 80%. This means there is
still 10-20% error rate [7]. This error may result in loosing
user control. Hence in this study we propose a very simple and
effective method for smart home control.
Fig. 2. Mouse emulator

A. EEG Signal Acquisition and Event Detection
For EEG signal acquisition the Emotiv EPOC headset is
used. It has 14 channels (electrodes) and the sampling
frequency is 128 Hz (2048 Hz internal). It has a built in 5th
order low pass sinc filter of bandwidth 0.2 to 45 Hz, and is
connected wirelessly to the computer through a 2.4 GHz band.
Fig.1 shows the Emotiv EPOC headset and the location of the
electrodes.

978-1-4673-6199-6/13/$31.00 ©2013 IEEE

Fig. 3. The setup of EmoKey

35

2013 IEEE 17th International Symposium on Consumer Electronics (ISCE)

Mouse click
c
enabled GUI
(virtu
ual smart home)

Emotiv Control
Panel (Mouse
Emulator)
Brain Signal
(EEG)

Emokey to produce
mouse click signal

Personal Computer (PC)
To actual home devices via 8051 microcontroller
m
and
RS232 USB cable

GUI feeedback to user
Fig. 4. Block diagram of brain controlled smart home sysstem

D DISCUSSION
III. CONCLUSION AND

B. Setup of Virtual Smart Home System
In order to control and operate the home ussing brain signals,
a virtual home environment has been createed. In the virtual
environment there is indoor and outdoor access, it consists of
many rooms, each having many devices like TV, MP3, lights,
temperature control, doors to operate. All thesse commands can
be shown via a graphical user interfacee (GUI), on the
computer screen. The user will select his deesired application
using a raise of an eyebrow (or a smirk, or a combination of
actions if needed and to incraese the sensitivity of the system),
that will cause a mouse click on the desired ccontrol, as a result
the control will be toggled. For example, thee subject can turn
on the light of a room by selecting the liight symbol, and
reselection means light will be turned OF
FF. The interface
between the Emotiv EPOC and the GUI hhas been written
using Microsoft Visual C5 using Common Laanguage Runtime
(CLR). Fig. 4 shows the block diagram of thee brain controlled
smart home system. A simple flow chart of thhe flow of events
in a brain controlled smart home system is shoown in Fig. 5.

The main goal of this paper is to design, develop and
implement a brain controlled smaart home system. In this
system, the brain EEG signals arre acquired using Emotiv
EPOCH headset. A single featuree i.e. raising an eyebrow
along with mouse emulator is used
d to control a virtual home
environment using a graphical user interface. Each click on
the desired home icon by using a raised eye brow signal
(feature) will activate the control off that home item, like turn
off the light. All this will happen in
n real time. It is possible to
add more controls to the virtual environment by using a
combination of activities like raisin
ng an eyebrow and a single
or multiple blinks. The system haas been trained and tested
with 4 subjects. The preliminary
y results show a thought
controlled smart home system can become
b
a reality in the near
future. It will result in a drastic chan
nge in the type and quality
of life of individuals and disableed and elderly people. In
addition it will also result in an
n increase in demand of
consumer electronics devices that caan be easily interfaced with
BCI systems.
REFERENCE
ES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]
[7]
Fig. 5. A sample flow chart of event detection and conntrol in a smart home

36

R Corralejo, R. Horneroand D. Alvareez,. “A Domotic Control System
using Brain-Computer Interface (BCI))”, IWANN 2011, LNCS, 6691,
part I, pp. 345-352, 2011.
A. Vourvopoulos, and F. Liarokapis,. “Brain-controlled NXT Robot:
Tele-operating a robot through brrain electrical activity”, Third
International Conference on Games and
a
Virtual Worlds for Serious
Applications, Coventry University Coveentry, UK. 2011.
Humaira Nisar, Vooi Voon Yap, Kim
m Ho Yeap, Aamir Saeed Malik,
“Analysis of Electroencephalogram signals generated from eye
movements”, Australasian Physical and Engineering Sciences in
Medicine, Accepted, December, 2012.
T. Lee, Q.W. Yeoh, A. Malik, K.
H. Nisar, H.C. Balasubramaniam, W.T
Yeap, “Analysis of real-time brain activity while controlling an
animated 3D cube,” Journal of Neurology, June 2013. (Accepted).
J. J. Szafir, “Non-Invasive BCI throu
ugh EEG: An Exploration of the
Utilization of Electroencephalography to Create Thought-Based BrainComputer Interfaces,” Boston College. 2010.
Emotiv.com (2013). EPOC Featurres. [online] Retrieved from:
http://www.emotiv.com/epoc/ [Accesseed: 5 Mar 2013].
Hyun-sang Cho et.al, “The Virtual Reality
R
Brain Computer Interface
System for Ubiquitous Home Control,” LNAI 4304, pp. 992-996, 2006

