Author's Accepted Manuscript

Bio-signal based control in assistive Robots: A
survey
Ericka Janet Rechy-Ramirez, Huosheng Hu

www.elsevier.com/locate/dcan

PII:
DOI:
Reference:

S2352-8648(15)00009-7
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.dcan.2015.02.004
DCAN8

To appear in:

Digital Communications and Networks

Received date: 18 December 2014
Revised date: 20 February 2015
Accepted date: 26 February 2015
Cite this article as: Ericka Janet Rechy-Ramirez, Huosheng Hu, Bio-signal based
control in assistive Robots: A survey, Digital Communications and Networks, http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.dcan.2015.02.004
This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication.
As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript.
The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting
galley proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during
the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content,
and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Bio-signal based Control in Assistive Robots: A Survey
Ericka Janet Rechy-Ramirez* and Huosheng Hu

School of Computer Science & Electronic Engineering
University of Essex, Colchester CO4 3SQ, U.K.
Email: ejrech@essex.ac.uk, hhu@essex.ac.uk
Abstract
Recently, bio-signal based control has been gradually deployed in biomedical devices and
assistive robots for improving the quality of life of disabled and elderly people, among
which EMG (Electromyography) and EEG (Electroencephalography) bio-signals are being
used widely. This paper reviews the deployment of these bio-signals in the state of art of
control systems. The main aim of this paper is to describe the techniques used for: i)
collecting EMG and EEG signals and diving these signals into segments (data acquisition
and data segmentation stage), ii) emphasizing the important data and removing redundant
data from the EMG and EEG segments (feature extraction stage), and iii) identifying
categories from the relevant data obtained in the previous stage (classification stage).
Furthermore, this paper presents a summary of applications controlled through these two
bio-signals and some research challenges in the creation of these control systems. Finally,
a brief conclusion is summarized.

Keywords: Assistive Robots, EMG, EEG, Feature Extraction & Classification.

1. Introduction
As traditional assistive robotic systems and rehabilitation devices have a traditional user
interface, such as joysticks and keyboards, many disabled people have difficulty in
accessing them and more advanced hands-free human-machine interfaces become
necessary. EMG (Electromyography signal: electrical activity generated during the

2
contraction of a skeletal muscle) and EEG (Electroencephalography signal: electrical
activity of the brain recorded from the scalp) are two kinds of bio-signals that are physical
quantities which vary with time [1]. They contain rich information in which a user‘s intention
in the form of a muscular contraction and a brainwave can be detected through surface
electrodes. These detected bio-signals can be used in a control system to operate
rehabilitation devices and robots.
In general, the development of EMG and EEG control systems can be divided into four
stages [2-4], namely (1) data acquisition and data segmentation, (2) feature extraction, (3)
classification and (4) controller. As shown in Fig. 1, the bio-signals are acquired from the
human body and then filtered to reduce the noise produced by other electrical activities of
the body or inappropriate contact of the sensors, namely artifact. At this first stage the
output is raw signal. In the second stage, i.e. feature extraction stage, the raw signal
obtained from the previous stage is converted into a feature vector. The feature vector
represents relevant structure in the raw data. Then, a process called dimensionality
reduction is carried out, in which redundant information is eliminating from the feature
vector, generating a reduced feature vector [3]. The third stage is classification, i.e.
translation algorithm, in which categories are identified from the reduced feature vector by
employing pattern recognition techniques. Finally, in the fourth stage, i.e. the controller, the
categories obtained from the classification stage are translated into control commands for
execution.
The most important advantage of bio-signal control systems over other types of control
systems, such as body-powered mechanical systems, is its hands-free control a user‘s
intention. For instance, bio-control is now a competitive alternative for mechanical bodypowered systems in commercial functional prosthesis. It provides more proximal functions
and cosmetic appearance [2]. Focusing on EMG and EEG signals, many potential real-

3
world applications operated through these two bio-signals have been reported, including
multifunction prosthesis, intelligent wheelchairs, gait generation, grasping control, virtual
keyboards, gesture-based interfaces, etc.

Figure 1 Stages for developing EMG and EEG control systems

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the stage of data
acquisition and data segmentation. Then Sections 3 and 4 explain the feature extraction
stage, and the classification stage, respectively. Section 5 outlines some applications of
EMG and EEG control systems. Section 6 provides some research challenges in the
development of EMG and EEG control systems. Finally, a brief conclusion is given in
Section 7.
2. Data acquisition and segmentation
Once the EMG signals are gathered from muscles or EEG signals are collected from the
scalp, they are divided into representative segments to extract features from each one. A
general overview of the data acquisition and data segmentation stage can be seen in Fig.
2.

4

Figure 2 Overview of the data acquisition and data segmentation stage

2.1. EMG data acquisition and segmentation
In general, myoelectric activities can be acquired by two techniques [5]: (i) invasively by
inserting a needle electrode through the skin directly into the muscle; or (ii) non-invasively
by placing a surface electrode on the skin overlying the muscle. The spatial resolution of
the non-invasive data acquisition technique is more limited than the invasive data
acquisition technique, therefore the high frequency content of a MUAP (Motor Unit Action
Potential) is smoothed when the EMG signal is collected non-invasively.

5
To segment EMG signal, Christodoulou and Pattichis employed a fixed length window and
a segmentation algorithm that calculates a threshold depending on the maximum value
and the mean absolute value of the whole EMG signal [6]. Peaks over the calculated
threshold are considered as candidate segments. On the other hand, Gut and Moschytz
used a sliding time window to determine the beginning and the end of a segment [7]. If the
mean slope within this window exceeds a certain threshold, the beginning of a segment is
detected; while the end of a segment is reached when the total variation of the EMG within
the window falls below another threshold.
Both disjoint and overlapped segmentation methods have been evaluated by Oskoei and
Hu [8]. In disjoint segmentation, separate segments with a predefined length are used for
feature extraction; while in overlapped segmentation, the new segment slides over the
current segment with an increment. Therefore, disjoint segmentation is associated with
segment length, while overlapped segmentation is associated with length and increment.
They compared classification performances over disjoint segments with a length of 200ms
and overlapped segments with a length of 200ms and an increment of 50ms. Their results
showed that a disjoint segmentation with a length of 200ms provides high performance
during EMG classification and a reasonable response time to allow real-time application;
whereas overlapped segmentation with a length of 200ms and an increment of 50ms
shortens the response time without a noticeable degradation in accuracy.
Conversely, Kaur et al. [9] analyzed three EMG segmentation techniques: 1) by identifying
the peaks of the MUAPs (Motor Unit Action Potentials), 2) by finding the beginning
extraction point (BEP) and ending extraction point (EEP) of MUAPs, and 3) by using
discrete wavelet transform (DWT). In the first technique, the EMG signal is segmented by
detecting areas of low activity and candidate MUAPs; the second technique identifies the
BEPs and EEPs of the possible MUAPs by sliding a window throughout the signal; and in

6
the third technique, EMG signal is decomposed with the help of daubechies4 (db4)
wavelet to detect MUAPs. In general, the first technique reported the best performance
with a total success rate of 95.90%, in comparison with the total success rates of 75.39%
and 66.64% for the second and third techniques, respectively.
2.2. EEG data acquisition and segmentation
The most used recording technique for clinical EEG and for the study of event related
potentials in non-clinical settings is the International 10/20 system; which is a standardized
system for electrode placement proposed by Jasper [10]. This system employs 21
electrodes attached to the surface of the scalp at locations defined by certain anatomical
reference points. The numbers 10 and 20 are percentage signifying relative distances
between different electrode locations on the skull perimeter. The sampling rate for EEG
signal acquisition is usually selected to be at least 200Hz [5].
To segment EEG signal, Biscay et al. deployed three methods [11]: (1) adaptive
segmentation, which is based on the detection of changes of an auto-regressive model; (2)
a priori piece-wise segmentation followed by clustering; and (3) the syntactic approach,
which incorporates grammatical rules with the temporal contextual information for
segmentation.
On the other hand, Kaplan et al. used two approaches to segment EEG signals [12]: fixedlength segmentation and adaptive segmentation. The fixed-length segmentation consists
of four stages: (a) first, the EEG recording is divided into equal minimal (‗elementary‘)
segment lengths; (b) then, each segment is characterized by a certain set of features (e.g.,
spectral estimations or auto-regressive coefficients); (c) the main EEG segments are
assigned to one of a number of classes accordingly to their characteristics by using one of
the multivariate statistical procedures; and finally, (d) the boundaries between the

7
segments belonging to a same class are erased. Each of these stationary segments is
characterized by its specific duration and typological features, but some EEG fragments
contain transition processes and, are not strictly stationary, since this segmentation
approach does not take into account the properties of the EEG recording. In contrast,
adaptive segmentation splits the EEG recording into quasy-stationarity segments of
variable length [13]. This process can be done by employing parametric methods and nonparametric methods.
Parametric methods describe the piecewise stationary structure of the EEG signal
adequately, and are effective if the phenomenological model of the process under study is
known [14][15]. Dvořák and Holden [16] established auto-regressive model (AR),
autoregressive moving average (ARMA) and Kalman filter, as the most used parametric
methods for EEG signal analysis. However, a drawback is that all these methods designed
for the analysis of non-stationary processes are based on a procedure which may be
applied only to stationary processes [12]. In this context, Aufrichtig et al. [17] examined the
parametric method called AR model for segmenting EEG signals in four manners: (a) an
AR-model is estimated for the reference window and the signal in the moving window is
filtered with the corresponding inverse filter; (b) an AR model is estimated for the moving
window, followed by an inverse filtering and calculation of test statistic for the reference
window; (c) an asymptotic Gaussian distribution of the AR-parameters is used to achieve a
test statistic for the difference between the AR-parameters of the reference and moving
windows; and (d) a sum of two statistical tests is calculated, one statistical test
corresponds to the difference between the AR-parameters of the reference and moving
windows, and the other statistical test is the same difference, but the order of the windows
is inverted, an asymptotic Gaussian distribution of AR-parameters is used in both
differences.

8
Non-parametric methods do not make numerous or stringent assumptions about the
population (EEG recording), and do not need a priori information about probability
distributions of random sequences [12, 18]. Brodsky et al. [15] proposed a non-parametric
method for the segmentation of the EEG signal called the algorithm of change-point
detection. This consists of five steps: (a) construction of the diagnostic sequence (a
random sequence of detection of changes) from an initial signal, (b) checking the
homogeneity hypothesis, (c) preliminary estimation of change-points, (d) rejecting doubtful
change-points, and (e) final estimation of change-points.
3. Feature extraction
The feature extraction stage involves the transformation of raw signal into a feature vector
by reducing noise and highlighting important data. This stage implies ―dimensionality
reduction‖, i.e. eliminating redundant data from the feature vector. An overview of this
stage can be found in Fig. 3.
3.1. EMG feature extraction
Three types of features are used in EMG control systems [3]: (a) time domain features, (b)
frequency domain features, and (c) time-frequency domain features. The time domain
features are computed based on signal amplitude. The resultant values give a measure of
waveform amplitude, frequency and duration within some limited parameters [19]. On the
other hand, frequency domain features are based on signal‘s estimated power spectrum
density (PSD) and are computed by periodogram or parametric methods; but these
features in comparison with time domain features require more computation and time to be
calculated [19]. The time-frequency domain features can localize the energy of the signal
in time and frequency, allowing a more accurate description of the physical phenomenon;

9
but these features generally require a transformation that could be computationally heavy
[20-21]. The features of all above domains are presented in tables 1 and 2.
Figure 3 Overview of the feature extraction stage

10
Table 1
EMG time domain features.
Time domain features
N

Integrated

IEMGk   xi

Root Mean

i 1

EMG

Square (RMS),

N

x

2

i

i 1

[24]

(IEMG), [22]

MAVk 

1 N
 xi
N i 1

ZC is incremented, if

xi  0 and xi 1  0 or

Mean
Absolute
Value (MAV),
[23]

Zero Crossings

xi  0 and xi 1  0

(ZC), [23]

xi  xi 1 

and

MMAV 1k 
Modified
Mean
Absolute
Value 1
(MMAV1),
[24]

1
N

RMSk 

1
N

N

w

i

xi

SSC is incremented if

i 1

xi  xi 1 and xi  xi 1or

Slope Sign
1, 0.25 N  i  0.75 N
w i   
Changes (SSC),
 0.5, otherwise
[23]

xi  xi 1 and xi  xi 1
and xi  xi 1  or
xi  xi 1 

MMAV 2k 
Modified
Mean
Absolute
Value 2
(MMAV2),
[24]

1
N

N

w

i

Value Slope

WAMPk   f ( xi  xi 1 )

i 1

i 1

Willison


1, 0.25 N  i  0.75 N

4i

w i   
, 0.25 N  i
N

 4 i  N 
, 0.75 N  i

N


Mean
Absolute

N 1

xi

Amplitude
(WAMP), [24]

Simple Square
MAVSk = MAVk+1 - MAVk

Integral (SSI),
[24]


f ( x)  


1, x 
0, otherwise

N

 

SSI k   xi 2
i 1

11

(MAVS), [24]

1
VARk 
N

Variance
(VAR), [19]

¯


x

x



i

i 1 
N

2

HEMG divides the elements in
EMG signal into b equally spaced
Histogram of
EMG (HEMG),

Waveform
N 1

WLk   xi 1  xi

Length (WL),
[23]

[24]

segments

and

returns

the

number of elements in each
segment

i 1

Variables of the time domain features
xi is the value of each part of the segment k.
N is the length of the segment.
¯

x is the mean value of the segment k.

 is a threshold.
Table 2
EMG frequency and time-frequency domain features.
Frequency domain features

Time-frequency domain features

N

Auto-Regressive
coefficients (AR), [24]

xk  ai xk i  ek

Frequency Median
(FMD), [19]

FMD 

i 1

1 M
PSDi
2 i 1





M

Frequency Mean
(FMN); [19]

FMN

f PSDi

i 1 i
M

PSDi

i 1

Short
Time
Fourier
Transform
(STFT),
[26]

Wavelet
Transform
(WT), [1]

STFTx  t , w  W * (  t ) x( )e j d

 1  * t b 
Wx  a, b   x  t  
 dt
 
 a  a 

fi = (i * samplingrate) /
(2 * M)

Modified Frequency
Median (MFMD), [24]

1 M
MFMD  Aj
2 j 1


MFMN 


M

Modified Frequency
Mean (MFMN), [24]

f Aj

j 1 j
M

Aj

j 1

Wavelet
Packet
Transform

WPT is a generalized version of the
continuous wavelet transform and
the discrete wavelet transform [3].
The basis for the WPT is chosen

12

Frequency Ratio (FR),
[25]

FR j 

F (² )

jlowfreq

(WPT)

F (² ) jhighfreq

Variables of the frequency domain features

Variables of the time- frequency domain
features

ai is AR coefficients.

W(t) is the window function.
* is the complex conjugate.
τ represents time.
w stands for frequency.
x(t) is the function representing the input
signal.
is the complex conjugate of the mother

ek is white noise or error sequence.
M is the length of the power spectrum density.
PSDi is the ith line of the power spectrum density.
Aj is the EMG amplitude spectrum at frequency
bin j.
fj is the frequency of the spectrum at frequency
bin j.

F (² ) j is the fast Fourier transform of EMG
signal in channel j.
lowfreq is the low frequency band.

using an entropy-based cost
function [27].

*
wavelet function.

 t b 
 is the shifted and scaled version of the
 a 
wavelet at time b and scale a.

*

highfreq is the high frequency band.

Several studies have assessed the performances of these EMG features (e.g. Huang and
Chen [22], Oskoei and Hu [19], Phinyomark et al. [24]). Huang and Chen [22] have carried
out a comparison of the performances of EMG time domain features (IEMG, VAR, bias
zero crossings (BZC), SSC, WL and WAMP) and EMG frequency domain features (AR of
order four) in two stages, in order to distinguish hand movements. In the first stage, they
applied the Davies-Bouldin index to evaluate each feature, resulting that VAR, WL and
IEMG reported better cluster separability than others. In the second stage, the best
features (VAR, WL and IEMG) obtained in the previous stage were combined with other
features (WAMP, BZC and AR of second order) to reinforce the whole clustering
performance. From the results, two combinations of features were used in the neural
network classification engine. On the other hand, Oskoei and Hu [19] applied advanced
subset search algorithms rather than comparing index to evaluate EMG features of upper
limb. These algorithms consist of: (i) a genetic algorithm adopted as the search strategy;
(ii) Davies Bouldin index and Fishers linear discriminant index employed as the filter

13
objective functions, and (iii) linear discriminant analysis used as the wrapper objective
functions. An artificial neural network was implemented as the classifier in the upper limb
EMG system.
Phinyomark et al. [24] compared eighteen time domain features and five frequency domain
features in a noisy environment, with the aim of determining which one has a better
tolerance of white Gaussian noise. Their results showed that from the point of view of
white Gaussian noise, MFMN was the best feature comparing with others on the quality of
the robustness of EMG features. MFMN obtained an average error of 6% on strong EMG
signals and 10% on weak EMG signal at signal-to-noise ratio 15 value of 0dB. Also, MFMN
reported an average error of 0.4% in both strong and weak EMG signals at signal-to-noise
ratio value of 20dB.
Table 3
EEG time and frequency domain features.
Time Domain Features
¹

Mean Value

Frequency Domain Features

x

1
N

N

x

Auto-

i

i 1

Regressive
coefficients

Standard deviation

Maximum peak value, [28]
Skewness.

It measures the
degree of deviation from the
symmetry of a normal or
Gaussian
distribution.
This
measure has the value of zero
when
the
distribution
is
completely
symmetrical
and
assumes some nonzero value
when the EEG waveforms are
asymmetrical with respect to the
baseline [29].

xstd 



N

¹

( xi  x)

As can be seen in [32 - 34],
this feature is used in EEG
signal as well as in EMG
signal.

(AR)
2

i 1

N 1

xk  max xi

Power
spectrum
density
(PSD),
[35]

N 1

PSD  xi e
i 0

 j 2 ki 2
N

14

S kmc 

¹


xi  x 

N 
 i 1 N 

3

¹ 2



x

x
 N  i
 
 
 
N
 i 1






Kurtosis.

It
reveals
the
peakedness or flatness of a
distribution.
In
clinical
electroencephalography,
when
EEG with little frequency and
amplitude
modulation
is
analyzed, negative values of
kurtosis are observed; whereas
high positives values of kurtosis
are present when the EEG
contains transient spikes, isolated
high-voltage wave group, etc. [29]

Band
power

K mc 

¹


xi  x 

N 
 i 1 N 

4

¹ 2 



x

x
 N  i
 
 
 
N
 i 1






2

3

Cross correlation. It measures
the extent of similarity between
two
energy
signals
[30].
Chandaka et al. [31] explain that
if a signal is correlated with itself,
the resulting sequence is called
the auto correlation sequence.
The order of the subscripts, with x
preceding
y,
indicates
the
direction in which one sequence
is shifted, relative to other.

3/2

The cross correlation of
x(n) and y(n) is given by:

R xy  m  

Based on [33, 35], EEG
contains different specific
frequency components, which
carry
the
discriminative
information. This type of
feature reflects the energy in
several bands (α, β, δ, γ and
θ). Once that the bands are
filtered, the power spectrum
density can be applied to each
one to obtain important
features.

Asymmetry
ratio PSD,
[36]

 PSD1  PSD2 
AS PSD  

 PSD1  PSD2 

 N  m 1
  xn  m yn m  0
 n 0

m0
 R yx  m 

Variables of the time domain features
xi is time series for i = 1, 2,…, N.
N is the number of data points.
¯

x is the mean value.
x(n) and y(n) are two signal sequences, each of which with

Variables of the frequency domain
features
k = 0, 1,…;N - 1, N is the length of the EEG
data.
xi represents the discrete samples of EEG
signal.
PSD1 is the power spectrum density in one
channel.

15
a finite energy.
m = …-2, -1, 0, 1, 2,…, represents the time shift parameter.
Subscript xy stands for sequences being correlated.

PSD2 is the power spectrum density in
another channel, but in the opposite
hemisphere.

3.2. EEG feature extraction
Since the EEG signal contains different waves, such as α, β, δ, γ and θ, the following
methods are deployed in EEG feature extraction.
1) Time domain: These features are derived directly from the signal and include the
(averaged) time-course. These features are summarized in table 3.
2) Frequency domain: These features characterize the power of the brain signal in
several frequency bands. They are also presented in table 3.
3) Time-Frequency domain: These features describe how spectrum power varies over
time. The short time Fourier transform and the Wavelet transform are the most
employed.
4) Spatial filtering: This type of filtering uses signals from multiple electrodes to focus
on activity at a particular location in the brain.
 Bipolar montage - Bipolar channels are computed subtracting the signals from two
neighboring electrodes [37].
 Common average reference - This technique subtracts the average value of the
entire electrode montage (the common average) from that of the channel of
interest [38].
 Laplacian method - It calculates for each electrode location the second derivative
of the instantaneous spatial voltage distribution. The value of the Laplacian at each
electrode location is calculated by combining the value at that location with the
values of a set of surrounding electrodes. The distances to the set of surrounding
electrodes determine the spatial filtering characteristics of the Laplacian [38].

16
 Common spatial patterns - It is a technique to analyze multi-channel data based
on recordings from two classes (tasks). It is given by:
xCSP (t) = x(t) W
where x(t) is the signal, and W is a matrix that projects the signal in the original
sensor space to a surrogate sensor space xCSP (t). Each column vector of a W is a
spatial filter. CSP filters maximize the variance of the spatially filtered signal under
one task and minimize it for the other task [37].
Other complex methods have been used in EEG feature extraction, such as Kalman
filtering [39], entropy, and fractal dimensions [33].
Some studies have evaluated the performances of various EEG features. Omidvarnia et
al. [39] compared the features of AR, power of signal in different EEG bands (α, β, δ, γ and
θ), wavelet coefficients and Kalman filter. Bayesian with a Gaussian kernel, Parzen
estimation, K-nearest neighbor and back-propagation neural network were employed as
the classifiers of the features. Kalman filter obtained the best performance over the other
features when Parzen estimation, K-nearest neighbor and back-propagation neural
network were used; while AR reported a better performance than Kalman filter when
Bayesian with a Gaussian kernel was used. Likewise, Sabeti et al. [33] assessed the
performances of the features of AR, band power, fractal dimension (calculated by Katz‘s,
Higuchi and Petrosian methods) and wavelet energy, in order to determine the most
relevant features for EEG signal classification of schizophrenic patients. The features
were classified by using linear discriminant analysis and support vector machines. As a
result the most consistent feature for discrimination of the schizophrenic patients and
control participants was AR.
3.3. Dimensionality reduction

17
Once the feature vector is obtained, it is necessary to reduce its dimensionality by
eliminating the redundant data from it. The resulting vector is called reduced feature
vector. There are two main strategies for dimensionality reduction [20]:
1) Feature projection - This strategy is to determine the best combination of the original
features to form a new feature set, generally smaller than the original one [3].
Principal component analysis (PCA) can be used as a feature projection technique.
PCA produces an uncorrelated feature set by projecting the data onto the
eigenvectors of the covariance matrix [40].
2) Feature selection - This strategy chooses the best subset of the original feature
vector according to some criteria for judging whether one subset is better than
another. The ideal criterion for classification should be the minimization of the
probability of misclassification, but generally simpler criteria based on class
separability are chosen [3].
Englehart et al. [21] compared PCA as a feature projection technique and Euclidean
distance class separability (CS) as a feature selection technique. The result was that PCA
provided more effective means of dimensionality reduction than feature selection by CS,
when time-frequency feature sets were employed.

4. Classification
Once the features have been extracted from the raw signal (feature extraction) and the
features with redundant information have been reduced (dimensionality reduction), some
classifiers should be deployed to distinguish different categories among the reduced
feature vector. Then, these obtained categories are going to be used in the next stage as
control commands, i.e. the controller. As can be seen in Fig. 4, several techniques are
deployed to classify data, e.g., neural networks (NN), Bayesian classifier (BC), fuzzy logic

18
(FL), linear discriminant analysis (LDA), support vector machines (SVM), hidden Markov
models (HMM) and K-nearest neighbor (KNN).

Figure 4 Overview of the classification stage

Nevertheless, before classifying EMG and EEG signals, it is important to bear in mind
that these signals are expected to present variations in the value of a particular feature.
Oskoei and Hu [2], explain that there are external factors, such as changes in electrode
position, fatigue, and sweat that cause changes in a signal pattern over time. Besides,
according to [2], a classifier should meet the following requirements to categorize EMG
and EEG signals properly: i) it should be able to cope with varying patterns optimally; ii) it
should prevent over fitting; and iii) it should be adequately fast, in order to meet real-time
constraints.
4.1. Neural networks (NN)
A significant amount of literature presents the success of neural networks in bio-signal
classification. The advantage of a neural network is its ability to represent both linear and
non-linear relationships, and learn these relationships directly from data being modeled. It

19
also meets real time constraints, which are an important feature in control systems [2].
Huang and Chen [22] developed a myoelectric discrimination system for a multi-degree
prosthetic hand. They classify eight types of hand movements, such as three-jaw chuck,
lateral hand, hook grasp, power grasp, cylindrical grasp, centralized grip, flattened hand
and wrist flexion. They employ a back-propagation neural network (BPNN) for
discriminating among the feature sets. One hidden layer and one output layer are used in
the BPNN. The transfer functions for hidden layer neurons and output layer neurons are all
nonlinear sigmoid functions. The discrimination system achieved success rates of 85% for
offline test and of 71% for online test.
Also, Karlik [41] classified EMG signals for controlling multifunction prosthetic devices
by using a three-layered BPNN. The inputs of the BPNN are auto-regressive (AR)
parameters of a1, a2, a3, a4 and signal power obtained from different arm muscle
motions. The result was an accuracy rate of 97.6% for categorizing six movements (R:
resting, EF: elbow flexion, EE: elbow extension, WS: wrist supination, WP: wrist pronation
and G: grasp) in 5000 iterations. Tsuji et al. [42] proposed a neural network, called
―recurrent log-linearized Gaussian mixture network (RLLGMN)‖ for classification of time
series, more specific for EEG signal. The structure of this network is based on a hidden
Markov model (HMM). R-LLGMN can be interpreted as an extension of a probabilistic
neural network using a log-linearized Gaussian mixture model, in which recurrent
connections have been incorporated to make temporal information in use.
Chu et al. [43] proposed a real-time EMG pattern recognition for the control of a
multifunction myoelectric hand from four channel EMG signals. To extract a feature vector
from the EMG signal, they use a wavelet packet transform. For dimensionality reduction
and nonlinear mapping of the features, they propose a linear-nonlinear feature projection
composes of PCA and a self-organizing feature map (SOFM). The classification of the

20
feature vector is carried out through a multilayer perceptron (MLP) with the following
layers: a) an input layer constructed from the eight outputs of the SOFM for four channels;
b) two hidden layers, each hidden layer with nine neurons; and c) an output layer with nine
neurons for the nine hand motions to be recognized. The average classification success
rates of the MLP were 97.024% when PCA+SOFM were used, 97.785% when SOFM was
applied, and 95.759% when PCA was employed.
Subasi et al. [44] compared BPNN and wavelet neural networks (WNN) for classifying
neuromuscular disorders of EMG recordings. They use an auto-regressive (AR) model of
EMG signal as an input to classification system. The BPNN is designed with AR spectrum
of EMG signal in the input layer, and an output layer of three nodes representing normal,
myopathic or neurogenic disorders. On the other hand, the WNN is implemented with
mono-hidden-layer forward neural network with its node activation function based on
dyadic discrete Morlet wavelet function. A total of 1200 MUPs (Motor Unit Potential)
obtained from 7 normal subjects, 7 subjects suffering from myopathy and 13 subjects
suffering from neurogenic disease were analyzed. The success rates were: 90.7% for the
WNN technique and 88% for the BPNN technique.
4.2. Bayesian classifier (BC)
Bayes classifiers are a family of simple probabilistic classifiers based on applying
Bayes' theorem with strong independence assumptions between the features. Bu et al.
[45] developed an EMG control system, in which a robotic arm is able to imitate a
sequence of arm motions created by a subject to carry out a task. A Bayesian network
(BN) is used to predict the arm motion to be executed by the robotic arm based on the
context information of the task. Besides the motion prediction, EMG signal is
simultaneously classified by a log-linearized Gaussian mixture network (LLGMN). Then,
the probabilities, which are outputs of LLGMN and the BN, are combined to generate

21
motion commands. Experiments were conducted with four subjects, which executed the
same task. The classification rates of using only the LLGMN and the proposed (BN with
LLGMN) method were 85.1% and 92.9%, respectively.
4.3. Fuzzy Logic (FL)
There are many advantages of using fuzzy logic for bio-signal classification since biosignals are not always strictly repeatable. Fuzzy systems are able to discover patterns in
data that are not easily detectable. Fuzzy approaches exploit tolerance of imprecision,
uncertainty, and partial truth, to achieve tractable, robust, and low-cost solutions for
classification. Si et al. [46] designed an expert system for the pediatric intensive care unit
with the aim of alerting experts about the level of abnormality of the EEG of the patients.
They use fuzzy logic and neural networks to classify the data in the expert system. Four
fuzzy sets are used for the amplitude of the EEG: severe, moderate, mild and normal.
Results showed an accuracy percentage of 91%.
James et al. [47] developed a multi-stage system for automated detection of
epileptiform activity in the EEG; using fuzzy logic and an artificial neural network called
organizing feature map (SOFM). SOFM is in charge of assigning a probability value to
incoming candidate epileptiform discharges (ED), while fuzzy logic is employed to
incorporate spatial contextual information in the detection process of ED. Results showed
that the system has a selectivity of 82%.
Ajiboye and Weir [48] presented a heuristic fuzzy logic approach to multiple EMG
pattern recognition for multifunctional prosthesis control. Mean and standard deviation are
used for membership function construction and fuzzy c-means (FCMs) data clustering is
employed to automate the construction of a simple amplitude-driven inference rule base.
The multi input-single-output fuzzy system consists of three parts: 1) input membership
functions that convert numerical inputs to linguistic variables; 2) an inference rule base,

22
which applies pattern classification to linguistic variables in order to obtain linguistic
outputs and associated degrees of truth; and 3) an output membership function that
defuzzifies the linguistic outputs by converting them to one numerical value. Four fuzzy
sets are defined for signal gradation (OFF, LOW, MED, HIGH). Fuzzy -means (FCM)
clustering is used to generate the rules. Overall classification rates ranged from 94% to
99%.
4.4. Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA)
LDA is a well-known method for feature extraction and dimension reduction. It has been
widely used in many bio-signal classification tasks such as brain tissue analysis, face and
speech recognition. Sabeti et al. [33] analyzed EEG signals of 20 schizophrenic patients
and 20 age-matched control participants using 22 channels, with the aim of determining
the most informative channels to distinguish the two groups. Bi-directional search and
plus-L minus-R Selection (LRS) are employed to select the most informative channels;
while LDA and support vector machines (SVM) are used as classifiers. The results were
accuracy rates of 84.62% for LDA, and 99.38% for SVM when bidirectional search was
employed; and 88.23% for LDA, and 99.54% for SVM when LRS technique was applied.
4.5. Support Vector Machines (SVM)
The SVM is a kernel-based approach and has become an increasingly popular tool for
machine learning tasks involving classification and regression. It has recently been
successfully applied to bio-signal classification. Yom-Tov and Inbar [34] designed a
classifier combining a genetic algorithm and support vector machines (SVM) to distinguish
between movements of contralateral fingers using movement-related potentials embedded
in EEG. Their results showed that, it is possible to select as few as 10 subject-specific
features and achieves average accuracy rates of 87% between two limbs and 63%
between three limbs. Crawford et al. [49] developed a 4-degrees-of-freedom robotic arm.

23
They employ linear SVM as the classifier, achieving accuracy rates of 92-98% in 3
subjects.
Halder et al. [50] proposed a combination of blind source separation and independent
component analysis (signal decomposition into artifacts and non-artifacts) with SVM
(automatic classification). The accuracy percentages of the classification between artifacts
and non-artifacts were 99.39% for eye blink, 99.62% for eye movement, 92.26% for jaw
muscle, and 91.51% for forehead. Choi and Cichocki [51] controlled a motorized
wheelchair online. They use the linear SVM to classify the feature vector obtained from the
EEG signal into each class of motor imagery. Three subjects participated in the
experiments; each one was asked to think of moving the hand and foot according to the
direction of an arrow displayed on the computer.
Firoozabadi et al. [52] developed a hands-free control system for operating a virtual
wheelchair, which is based on forehead multi-channels bio-signals. SVM is used to classify
the motion control commands (forward, left, right, backward and stop). Three subjects (one
adult and two children) participated in controlling a virtual wheelchair using the interface
software on a personal computer. The accuracy percentages of SVM classification were:
100% for the adult, and 89.75% and 97.49% for the two children. Lucas et al. [53]
proposed a multi-channel supervised classification of EMG signals to control myoelectric
prostheses. The classification of six hand movements is performed with SVM approach in
a multi-channel representation space. The results showed an average misclassification
rate of 5%.
Oskoei and Hu [8] evaluated the application of SVM to classify upper limb motions using
EMG signal. Four popular kernels were examined: radial-basis, linear, polynomial and
sigmoid. The four applied kernels performed similarly. The average accuracy for all kernels
was approximately 95.5 ± 3.8%. Gurmanik et al. [54] proposed an integrated binary SVM

24
classifier to distinguish neuromuscular disorders by means of EMG signal. SVM aims to
find optimal hyperplane for separating MUAP clusters. They use threshold technique to
segment EMG signal and autoregressive coefficients (AR) as features. A total of 12 EMG
signals obtained from 3 normal, 5 myopathic and 4 motor neuron diseased subjects were
analyzed. The classification accuracy of binary SVM with AR features was of 100%.
Subasi and Gursoy [55] developed an EEG signal classification method for diagnosing
epilepsy. This method is based on discrete wavelet transform and the dimension reduction
is performed by PCA, independent components analysis (ICA) and LDA. The classification
is carried out by SVM with a radial basis function (RBF) as a kernel. The classification rate
with LDA feature extraction was the highest (100%), ICA came as second (99.5%); while
the PCA reported the lowest correct classification percentage (98.75%). SVM without
using PCA, ICA or LDA achieved an accuracy rate of 98%.
Wei and Hu [56] designed a human machine interface for hands-free control of a
wheelchair, employing forehead EMG signal and color face image information. Five
recognizable movements are deployed, namely SJC (single jaw clenching), DJC (double
jaw clenching) and CJC (continuous jaw clenching) from jaw movements, and LEC (left
eye close) and REC (right eye close) from eye movements. SJC and DJC patterns are
recognized by using a threshold based strategy; while CJC, LEC and REC are separated
through SVM with a radial-basis function kernel. An accuracy rate of over 93% in the
classification was reported by SVM.
4.6. Hidden Markov Model (HMM)
HMM is a statistical Markov model in which the system being modeled is assumed to be
a Markov process with unobserved (hidden) states. It has been widely used in temporal
pattern recognition such as speech, handwriting, gesture and bio-signal recognition. Novák
et al. [57] employed HMM in scoring of human sleep. They use three HMM states, one

25
corresponding to wake state, other representing deep sleep, and the other one standing
for REM sleep. Obermaier et al. [58] developed a letter spelling device operated by hand
and leg motor imagery, i.e. the device is controlled through spontaneous EEG signal. They
employ two HMMs to classify the EEG signal. Experimental results reported that the ability
of three people in the use of the letter spelling device varied between 0.85 and 0.5
letters/min in error-free writing.
Chan and Englehart [59] used HMM to process four channels of EMG signal, in order to
discriminate six classes of limb movement. Six-state fully connected HMMs are applied;
each state is associated with an intended limb motion. HMM classification of continuous
myoelectric signals resulted in an average accuracy of 94.63%. Solhjoo et al. [60] studied
the performances of two kinds of HMMs, discrete HMM (dHMM) and multi-Gaussian HMM
(mHMM), in the classification of EEG based mental task. This task implied the controlling
of a feedback bar by thinking of moving left or right hand according to the cues shown to
the subject. The best performance of dHMM was 77.13 % with 2 states and 16 observable
symbols/state according to 0.5s segment of data; while for mHMM was 77.5% using first
0.5s segment with 8 states and 2 Gaussians/state.
4.7. K-nearest neighbor (KNN)
KNN is a simple algorithm that stores all available cases and classifies new cases
based on a similarity measure (e.g., distance functions). It has been widely used in
statistical estimation and most recently bio-signal recognition as a non-parametric
technique. Peleg et al. [61] employed KNN as a classifier of EMG signals in finger
activation, in order to be used in a robotic arm. While Chaovalitwongse et al. [62] used
KNN to classify normal and abnormal (epileptic) brain activities employing EEG recordings.
Experimental results reported a sensitivity of 81.29% and a specificity of 72.86% in the
classification on average across ten patients.

26
.

4.8. Combination of Classifiers
Lotte et al. [63] proposed boosting, voting and stacking techniques as classifier
combination strategies used in EEG signal analysis. In the Boosting technique, several
classifiers are used in cascade. Each classifier focuses on the errors committed by the
previous ones [64]. In voting, several classifiers are employed, each of them assigning the
input feature vector to a class. The final class will be that of the majority [63]. In stacking,
the outputs of the individual classifiers are used to train the ―stacked‖ classifier. The final
decision is made based on the outputs of the stacked classifier in conjunction with the
outputs of individual classifiers [65].
Okamoto et al. [66] employed a hierarchical pattern classification algorithm based on
boosting approach to estimate a suitable network structure. In this algorithm, the structure
of the classification network is automatically constructed by adding LLGMNs (log-linearized
Gaussian mixture network) as classifiers, in order to categorize EMG signal of six
Japanese phonemes.
4.9. Comparison of Classifiers
Some studies [8, 32, 39, 67, 68, 69] have carried out a comparison of several classifiers
with the aim of determining which classifier provides the best categorization of bio-signals.
These studies evaluated the performance of each classifier in terms of statistical
measures of sensitivity and specificity [39], accuracy rate [8, 32, 67] and misclassification
rate [68, 69].
Huan and Palaniappan [32] used linear discriminant analysis (LDA) and multilayer
perceptron neural network trained by the back-propagation algorithm (MLP-BP) to classify
mental tasks using features that are extracted from EEG signal. They employ the following

27
feature methods: AR coefficients computed with Burgs algorithm, AR coefficients
computed with a least-squares (LS) algorithm, and adaptive auto-regressive (AAR)
coefficients computed with a least mean-square (LMS) algorithm. The results showed that
sixth-order AR coefficients with the LS algorithm without segmentation gave the best
performances (93.10%) using MLP-BP and (97.00%) using LDA.
Omidvarnia et al. [39] compared the performances of several classifiers (Bayesian with
a Gaussian kernel, Parzen estimation, K-nearest neighbor (KNN), and back-propagation
neural network) in terms of statistical measures of sensitivity and specificity. They use as
features: AR, power of signal in different EEG bands (α, β, δ, γ and θ), wavelet coefficients
and Kalman filter. In conclusion, when AR and Kalman filter are used as features, the best
classifier is KNN with accuracy rates of 93.16% and 96.13%, respectively; and when
wavelet coefficients and power of signal are used as features, the best classifier is
Bayesian with a Gaussian kernel with accuracy rates of 88.58% and 83%, respectively.
In the same vein, Lotte [67] compared four classifiers in order to categorize motor
imagery signals using EEG signal. These classifiers are a fuzzy inference system (FIS), a
support vector machines with Gaussian kernel (SVM), a multilayer perceptron (MLP), and
a perceptron as a linear classifier (LC). The best performance was achieved by SVM with
an accuracy percentage of 79.4 %, followed by FIS with an accuracy percentage of 79 %.
MLP and LC reported accuracy percentages of 78.9 % and 76.2%, respectively. Oskoei
and Hu [8] compared SVM, LDA and multilayer perceptron neural network (MLP) in
classifying upper limb motions using myoelectric signals. They use four kernels (radialbasis, linear, polynomial and sigmoid) in SVM, and two multilayer perceptron neural
networks, one with one hidden layer (MLP1), and the other one with two hidden layers
(MLP2). The average accuracy for all kernels in SVM was approximately 95.5 ± 3.8%. The
LDA was placed after SVM with the average performance of 94.5 ± 4.9%. The MLP2

28
performed a similar accuracy to the SVM and LDA, while the accuracy of MLP1 dropped
approximately 6%.
Zhou et al. [68] used a feature set including higher-order statistics based on the
bispectrum of EEG signal for classifying left/right-hand motor imagery. Support vector
machines with Gaussian kernel (SVM), linear discriminant analysis (LDA) and neural
networks (NN) were used as classifiers and were compared with the winners‘ classifier of
BCI-competition 2003, using the same BCI data set and using their own data. In the NN,
they employ an input layer with 24 nodes for the features, a hidden layer with 15 nodes, an
output layer with two nodes for the classes of hand motor imagery, and back-propagation
algorithm to train the NN. The results showed that, using the same BCI data set and their
own features, the best classifiers were NN and SVM, both with a minimal misclassification
rate of 10%. However, using their own data and their own features, the best classifiers
were SVM, NN and LDA, with minimal misclassification rates of 9%, 10% and 12 %,
respectively.
On the other hand, Radmand et al [69] have evaluated a variety of EMG time domain
feature combinations and popular classifiers. In the experiments, subjects were asked to
elicit a set of contractions at a repeatable ‗medium‘ force level of eight classes of motion
(wrist flexion/extension, wrist pronation/supination, hand open, power grip, pinch grip, and
a no motion) during three sessions with positional variations. The features involved in the
experiments are: mean absolute value (MAV), mean absolute value slope (MAVS),
wavefrom length (WL), zero crossings (ZC), slope sign changes (SSC), Willison amplitude
(WAMP), variance (VAR), log-detector (LD), and 4th order auto-regression coefficients
(AR). With respect to the classifiers used to distinguish the motions, these are K-nearest
neighbor (KNN), support vector machines (SVM), neural network (NN), fuzzy clustering
(FC), linear discriminant analysis (LDA), and Mahalonobis distance (MD). The results

29
showed that adding Willison amplitude (WAMP) feature to the commonly used time
domain feature set combined with LDA classifier reduces the averaged absolute
classification error by 1.4%.
In the same context of classification of EMG signal, Scheme and Englehart [70] have
reviewed the state-of-the-art of EMG pattern recognition for control of upper limb
prostheses. In this study, they mention as the most popular choices of classifiers the
following ones: linear discriminant analysis, support vector machines, and hidden Markov
models. They explain that the main advantage of linear discriminant analysis is its
simplicity of implementation and ease of training.

5. Controller
In the controller stage, output commands produced in the classification stage are fed to
a robot or an assistive device such as wheelchairs, robotic arms or computers. In the
following sections, a number of EMG and EEG control applications are outlined.
5.1. EMG non-invasive applications
Sörnmo and Laguna [5], and Oskoei and Hu [2] have shown that some EMG noninvasive applications are:
1) kinesiology, since EMG can assist on the study of motor control strategies,
mechanics of muscle contraction and gait;
2) ergonomics, as EMG provides a valuable, quantitative measure of muscle load,
often used to asses physical load during work, therefore it can help to avoid workrelated disorders and design better workplaces;
3) prosthesis control, inasmuch as the control signal is derived with surface electrodes
placed over muscles or muscle groups under voluntary control within the residual
limb [8, 22, 43, 61];

30
4) wheelchair controllers [52, 56, 71];
5) virtual keyboards [72]; and
6) diagnoses and clinical applications, such as functional neuromuscular stimulation
[54] and detection of preterm births based on uterine myoelectric signals.
More details can be seen in table 4.
Table 4
EMG applications
Multifunction prosthesis
1999, Huang and
Chen [22]
2002, Peleg et al.
[61]
2006,
Chu et al. [43]
2008, Oskoei and
Hu [8]

Feature extraction
IEMG, VAR, bias ZC, SSC,
WL, WAMP and AR
AR and discrete Fourier
transform
Wavelet packet transform
MAV, RMS, WL, VAR,ZC,
SSC, WAMP, MAV1, MAV2,
power spectrum, AR, FMN
and FMD

Classifier
BPNN
KNN
Multilayer
perceptron
SVM

Application
A myoelectric discrimination system for
a multi-degree prosthetic hand
Finger activation for using a robotic
prosthetic arm
Control of a multifunction myoelectric
hand
Classification of upper limb motions
using myoelectric signals

Wheelchairs
2008, Firoozabadi
et al. [52]
2010, Tamura et al.
[71]
2010, Wei and Hu
[56]

MAV

SVM

Not indicated

Threshold
algorithm

MAV, RMS, WL, ZC, FMN
and FMD

SVM

Hands-free control system for operating
a virtual wheelchair
Hands-free control system for electric
wheelchairs with facial muscles
Hands-free control of electric wheelchair
with forehead EMG signals and color
face images

Other applications
2004, Jeong et al.
[72]
2010, Gurmanik et
al. [54]

IEMG, difference
mean value

absolute

AR

Fuzzy minmax NN
SVM

Using a computer by clenching teeth
Differentiating neuromuscular disorders

5.2. EEG non-invasive applications
Many EEG non-invasive applications have been reported [4, 5, 73], including the
following ones:

31
1) Diagnosing mental disorders including epilepsy and schizophrenia [33, 55], also
sleep disorders, such as insomnia, hypersomnia, circadian rhythm disorders and
parasomnia;
2) Monitoring mental tasks [32, 34]; and
3) Controlling spelling program, computer cursor for communication with the external
world, video games, intelligent wheelchair [51, 74, 75], television, robotic arm or a
neuroprosthesis that enables the multidimensional movements of a paralyzed limb.
More detailed summary is given in table 5.
Table 5
EEG applications

2002,
Yom-Tov
Inbar [34]

and

2004, Huan &
Palaniappan[32]

Mental tasks
Feature extraction
Classifier
AR, PSD, Barlow, mean amplitude Combination of a
difference and standard deviation of genetic algorithm
the amplitude difference between and SVM
every pair of recorded electrodes
AR

BPNN and LDA

Application
Classification of movementrelated potentials recorded
from the scalp
Two-state BCI from EEG
signals extracted during
mental tasks

Wheelchairs
2005, Tanaka et
al. [74]
2007, Leeb et al.
[75]
2008, Choi et al.
[51]
2007,
Sabeti et al. [33]
2010,
Subasi
and Gursoy [55]

Coefficient of correlation
Logarithmic band power
Common spatial pattern

Recursive training
(Euclidean
distance)
Threshold
algorithm
SVM

Mental and neurological disorders
AR, band power, fractal dimension
and wavelet energy
LDA and SVM
Mean of absolute values, standard
deviation of the coefficients, average
power of wavelet coefficients in each
sub-band, ratio of absolute mean
values of adjacent sub-bands

SVM

Electroencephalogram-based
control
of
electric
wheelchair
BCI control of a wheelchair
in virtual environments
Control of a wheelchair by
motor imagery in real time
Selecting relevant features
for EEG classification of
patients
Diagnostic decision support
tool for physicians treating
potential epilepsy

6. Challenge issues in EMG and EEG control systems
One of the most significant current discussions in the area of EMG prostheses is about
the existing gap between the industry and the academic achievements regarding

32
myoelectric control of artificial limbs. Jiang et al. [76], have explained the main reasons
contributing to this. First, despite the academic community has presented sophisticated
techniques for classifying EMG signals, (e.g., fuzzy logic, neural networks, mixing of
classifiers), these techniques do not offer simultaneous and proportional control of the
prostheses. On the other hand, the majority of commercial prostheses employ the simplest
classification method, i.e., a threshold that is compared with the EMG signal to trigger
functions, leading to offer limited and simple functions. Second, most of the myoelectric
control systems proposed by the academic community may not be adaptive to the
changes of the EMG signal characteristics presented in a real scenario due to their
development under controlled laboratory conditions. Third, the functional movements of a
limb involved for achieving a task are generally complex; therefore there is the need of
combining different sensor modalities to improve the control of prostheses rather than
using merely EMG.
Some studies have proposed methods to provide simultaneous and proportional
myoelectric control. For instance, Muceli and Farina [77] have used artificial neural
networks to estimate kinematics of the complex wrist/hand from high-density surface EMG
signals of the contralateral limb during mirrored bilateral movements in free space. The
neural networks are trained with the Levenberg–Marquardt back-propagation algorithm. In
the same vein, Hahne et al. [78] compared control accuracies of linear and nonlinear
regression methods (linear regression, mixture of linear experts, multilayer-perceptron, and
kernel-ridge regression) for independent, simultaneous and proportional myoelectric
control of wrist movements with two degrees of freedom (DOFs). EMG signals from ten
healthy subjects and one person with congenital upper limb deficiency were obtained to
assess the accuracies of these methods in terms of the number of electrodes and the
amount and diversity of training data used. They identified that a logarithmic

33
transformation of the established variance feature linearized the relationship between
EMG and wrist angles. This allows applying very simple and computationally cheap linear
methods. In [79], four DOFs of a physical hand can be controlled simultaneously and
independently by processing peripheral neural correlates in real time. This is achieved by
using EMG signal from intramuscular electrodes on the extrinsic flexor muscles of
subjects.
Furthermore, it is becoming increasingly difficult to ignore the impact of external factors
on the act of wearing prosthesis and using it in a functional manner. According to Scheme
and Englehart [70], some of these external factors are: electrode shift, variation in force,
variation in position of the limb, and transient changes in EMG. In this context, Fougner et
al. [80] propose two possible solutions to reduce the adverse limb position effect: (1)
collection of EMG signal and training of the classifier in multiple limb positions, and (2)
measurement of the limb position with accelerometers. They conducted experiments with
ten normally limbed subjects, and their results showed a reduction in the average
classification error from 18% to 5.7% by using the first method and 5.0% by using the
second method. Based on these results, they conclude that sensor fusion (using EMG and
accelerometers) may be an efficient method to mitigate the effect of limb position.
Similarly, Cipriani et al. [81] showed that variations in the weight of the prosthesis and
upper arm movements significantly influence the robustness of a traditional classifier
based on a KNN algorithm, causing a significant drop in performance. They suggest
adding inertial transducers (e.g. multi-axes position and acceleration sensors) to the EMG
signal classifier in order to recognize the effects of the weight and inertia of the prosthesis.
In the case of EEG control systems, Milán et al. [82] and Nicolas-Alonso and Gomez-Gil
[83] present the following challenges issues that need to be addressed. First, users require
expert assistance to interact with a system controlled exclusively via EEG signals; hence

34
an approach called hybrid Brain Computer Interface has been proposed to cope with this
issue, i.e., the use of EEG signal in conjunction with other signals (e.g., EMG signal).
Second, the performances of EEG control systems are affected by noisy and low-bit-rate
outputs. Shared autonomy techniques could tackle this challenge by analyzing information
about the environment to obtain a better user‘s intent (e.g., obstacles perceived by the
sensors in the control of a wheelchair via EEG signal). Third, the portability and ease of
use of an EEG control system are compromised by the majority of current EEG
technology, mainly because the EEG signal is collected through a conventional electrode
cap, which is connected to the computer via wires and their electrodes need to be
moistened. Different companies (Emotiv, Quasar USA, NeuroSky) have developed
wireless prototypes based on dry electrodes to overcome this issue. Finally, most EEG
control systems remain at the research stage without being used in the daily life of people.
7. Conclusions
This document provides an overview of how bio-control systems are designed, in
particular on EEG and EMG control systems. As explained, the design of bio-control
systems has four stages: data acquisition & segmentation, feature extraction, classification
and control. Furthermore, techniques used in each stage were described, as well as some
applications of the control systems.
This paper has also shown that despite the technology is extremely useful for improving
the quality of life of disabled and elderly people, there are several challenge issues
referring to the implementation of EMG and EEG control systems that need to be solved,
e.g., i) although the academic community has proposed sophisticated techniques for
classifying EMG and EEG signals, the commercial applications accomplish simple tasks
due to the use of basic classifiers; and ii) most of the EMG and EEG control systems
proposed by the academic community may not be adaptive to the changes of the signal

35
characteristics presented in a real scenario due to their development under controlled
laboratory conditions.
It is clear that bio-control technologies will begin to converge to address the key issues
described earlier, and consequently improve our human-machine interaction. In the near
future we will see highly robust and flexible bio-control systems, which are based on
various bio-signals such as voice, muscle contractions, brain waves and gestures. These
control systems will become increasingly simple and intuitive, and no training will be
required, namely plug and play. These bio-control systems will have ability to understand
human intentions and emotions, and adapt the dynamic changes in the real-world. It is no
doubt that these big inventions will change our life style forever in the 21st century just as
the computers did in the 20th century.
Acknowledgments
The 1st author has been supported by the Mexican National Council of Science and
Technology (CONACYT), through the program ―Becas para estudios de posgrado en el
extranjero‖ (no. 183592).
References
[1] M. Weeks, Digital signal processing using MATLAB and wavelets, second ed., Jones
and Bartlett Publishers, LLC, 2011.
[2] M. A. Oskoei, H. Hu, Myoelectric control systems–A survey, Biomedical Signal
Processing and Control, Elsevier, 2 (4) (2007) 275–294.
[3] M. Zecca, S. Micera, M.C. Carrozza, P. Dario, Control of multifunctional prosthetic
hands by processing the electromyographic signal, Critical Reviews in Biomedical
Engineering, 30 (4-6) (2002) 459-485.

36
[4] J.R. Wolpaw, N. Birbaumer, D.J. McFarland, G. Pfurtscheller, T.M. Vaughan, Braincomputer interfaces for communication and control, Clinical neurophysiology, Elsevier,
113 (6) (2002) 767–791.
[5] L. Sörnmo, P. Laguna, Bioelectrical signal processing in cardiac and neurological
applications, Elsevier Academic Press, 2005.
[6] C.I. Christodoulou, C.S. Pattichis, Unsupervised pattern recognition for the
classification of EMG signals, IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, 46 (2)
(1999) 169–178.
[7] R. Gut, G.S. Moschytz, High-precision EMG signal decomposition using communication
techniques, IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 48 (9) (2000) 2487–2494.
[8] M.A. Oskoei, H. Hu, Support vector machine-based classification scheme for
myoelectric control applied to upper limb, IEEE Transactions on Biomedical
Engineering, 55 (8) (2008) 1956–1965.
[9] G. Kaur, A.S. Arora, V.K. Jain, Comparison of the techniques used for segmentation of
EMG signals, In Proceedings of the 11th WSEAS international conference on
Mathematical and computational methods in science and engineering, (2009) 124–129.
[10] H.H. Jasper, The ten twenty electrode system of the International Federation,
Electroencephalography and clinical neurophysiology, 10 (1958) 371–375.
[11] R. Biscay, M. Lavielle, A. González, I. Clark, P. Valdés, Maximum a posteriori
estimation of change points in the EEG, International journal of bio-medical computing,
Elsevier, 38 (2) (1995) 189–196.
[12] A. Kaplan, J. Röschke, B. Darkhovsky, J. Fell, Macrostructural EEG characterization
based on nonparametric change point segmentation: application to sleep analysis,
Journal of neuroscience methods, Elsevier, 106 (1) (2001) 81–90.

37
[13] A.Y. Kaplan, S.L. Shishkin, Application of the change-point analysis to the
investigation of the brain‘s electrical activity, Chapter 7 in: B.E. Brodsky, B.S.
Darkhovsky (Eds.), Nonparametric Statistical Diagnosis: Problems and Methods, Kluwer
Academic Publishers, 2000, pp. 333–388.
[14] M. Hollander, D.A. Wolfe, Nonparametric statistical methods, John Wiley & Sons, New
York, 1973.
[15] B. E. Brodsky, B. S. Darkhovsky, A. Ya. Kaplan, S. L. Shishkin, A nonparametric
method for the segmentation of the EEG, Computer methods and programs in
biomedicine, Elsevier, 60 (2) (1999) 93–106.
[16] I. Dvořák, A.V. Holden, Mathematical approaches to brain functioning diagnostics,
Manchester University Press, 1991.
[17] R. Aufrichtig, S.B. Pedersen, P. Jennum, Adaptive segmentation of EEG signals, In
International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, 13
(1) (1991) 453–454.
[18] S. Siegel, Nonparametric statistics, The American Statistician, 11 (3) (1957) 13–19.
[19] M.A. Oskoei, H. Hu, GA-based feature subset selection for myoelectric classification,
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics, (2006) 1465–1470.
[20] K. Englehart, Signal representation for classification of the transient myoelectric
signal, PhD thesis, University of New Brunswick (1998).
[21] K. Englehart, B. Hudgins, P.A. Parker, M. Stevenson, Classification of the myoelectric
signal using time-frequency based representations, Medical engineering & physics,
Elsevier, 21 (6-7) (1999) 431–438.
[22] H.P. Huang, C.Y. Chen, Development of a myoelectric discrimination system for a
multi-degree prosthetic hand, IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation, 3 (1999) 2392–2397.

38
[23] K. Englehart, B. Hudgins, A robust, real-time control scheme for multifunction
myoelectric control, IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, 50 (7) (2003) 848–
854.
[24] A. Phinyomark, C. Limsakul, P. Phukpattaranont, A novel feature extraction for robust
EMG pattern recognition, Journal of Computing, 1 (1) (2009) 71–80.
[25] J.S. Han, W.K. Song, J.S. Kim, W.C. Bang, H. Lee, Z. Bien, New EMG pattern
recognition based on soft computing techniques and its application to control of a
rehabilitation robotic arm, In Proc. of 6th International Conference on Soft Computing,
IIZUKA2000, (2000) 890–897.
[26] D. Gabor, Theory of communication. Part 1: The analysis of information, Journal of the
Institution of Electrical Engineers-Part III: Radio and Communication Engineering, 93
(26) (1946) 429–441.
[27] R.R. Coifman, M.V. Wickerhauser, Entropy-based algorithms for best basis selection,
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 38 (2) (1992) 713–718.
[28] S. Günes, M. Dursun, K. Polat, S. Yosunkaya, Sleep spindles recognition system
based on time and frequency domain features, Expert Systems with Applications,
Elsevier, 38 (3) (2011) 2455-2461.
[29] J.D. Bronzino, The biomedical engineering handbook, CRC Press, 2000.
[30] J.G. Proakis, D.G. Manolakis, Digital signal processing: principles, algorithms, and
applications, third ed., Prentice Hall Upper Saddle River, NJ, 1996.
[31] S. Chandaka, A. Chatterjee, S. Munshi, Cross-correlation aided support vector
machine classifier for classification of EEG signals, Expert Systems with Applications,
Elsevier, 36 (2) (2009) 1329–1336.

39
[32] N.J. Huan, R. Palaniappan, Neural network classification of autoregressive features
from electroencephalogram signals for brain–computer interface design, Journal of
neural engineering, 1 (3) (2004) 142-150.
[33] M. Sabeti, R. Boostani, S.D. Katebi, G.W. Price, Selection of relevant features for
EEG signal classification of schizophrenic patients, Biomedical Signal Processing and
Control, Elsevier, 2 (2) (2007) 122–134.
[34] E. Yom-Tov, G.F. Inbar, Feature selection for the classification of movements from
single movement-related potentials, IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and
Rehabilitation Engineering, 10 (3) (2002) 170–177.
[35] Z. Iscan, Z. Dokur, T. Demiralp, Classification of electroencephalogram signals with
combined time and frequency features, Expert Systems with Applications, Elsevier, 38
(8) (2011) 10499-10505.
[36] R. Palaniappan, Biological Signal Analysis, BookBoon, 2010.
[37] C. Vidaurre, N. Krämer, B. Blankertz, A. Schlögl, Time Domain Parameters as a
feature for EEG-based Brain-Computer Interfaces, Neural Networks, Elsevier, 22 (9)
(2009) 1313–1319.
[38] D.J. McFarland, L.M. McCane, S.V. David, J.R. Wolpaw, Spatial filter selection for
EEG-based communication, Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology,
Elsevier, 103 (3) (1997) 386–394.
[39] A.H. Omidvarnia, F. Atry, S.K. Setarehdan, B.N. Arabi, Kalman filter parameters as a
new EEG feature vector for BCI applications, In Proceedings of the 13th European
Signal Processing Conference (2005).
[40] C.M. Bishop, Neural networks for pattern recognition, Oxford University Press, 1996.
[41] B. Karlik, Differentiating type of muscle movement via AR modeling and neural
network classification, Turk J Electr. Eng. & Computer Sci., 7 (1-3) (1999) 45-52.

40
[42] T. Tsuji, N. Bu, O. Fukuda, M. Kaneko, A recurrent log-linearized Gaussian mixture
network, IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, 14 (2) (2003) 304–316.
[43] J.U. Chu, I. Moon, M.S. Mun, A real-time EMG pattern recognition system based on
linear-nonlinear feature projection for a multifunction myoelectric hand, IEEE
Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, 53 (11) (2006) 2232– 2239.
[44] A. Subasi, M. Yilmaz, H.R. Ozcalik, Classification of EMG signals using wavelet neural
network, Journal of neuroscience methods, Elsevier, 156 (1-2) (2006) 360–367.
[45] N. Bu, M. Okamoto, T. Tsuji, A hybrid motion classification approach for EMG-based
human–robot interfaces using bayesian and neural networks, IEEE Transactions on
Robotics, 25 (3) (2009) 502–511.
[46] Y. Si, J. Gotman, A. Pasupathy, D. Flanagan, B. Rosenblatt, R. Gottesman, An expert
system for EEG monitoring in the pediatric intensive care unit, Electroencephalography
and clinical neurophysiology, Elsevier, 106 (6) (1998) 488–500.
[47] C.J. James, R.D. Jones, P.J. Bones, G.J. Carroll, Detection of epileptiform discharges
in the EEG by a hybrid system comprising mimetic, self-organized artificial neural
network, and fuzzy logic stages, Clinical Neurophysiology, Elsevier, 110 (12) (1999)
2049–2063.
[48] A.B. Ajiboye, R.F. Weir, A heuristic fuzzy logic approach to EMG pattern recognition
for multifunctional prosthesis control, IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and
Rehabilitation Engineering, 13 (3) (2005) 280–291.
[49]

B.

Crawford,

K.

Miller,

P.

Shenoy,

R.

Rao,

Real-time

classification

of

electromyographic signals for robotic control, Proceedings of the National Conference
on Artificial Intelligence, (2005) 523-528.
[50] S. Halder, M. Bensch, J. Mellinger, M. Bogdan, A. Kübler,

N. Birbaumer, W.

Rosenstiel, Online artifact removal for brain-computer interfaces using support vector

41
machines and blind source separation, Computational Intelligence and Neuroscience,
(2007) 1–10.
[51] K. Choi, A. Cichocki, Control of a wheelchair by motor imagery in real time, Intelligent
Data Engineering and Automated Learning–IDEAL, Springer, 5326 (2008) 330–337.
[52] S.M.P. Firoozabadi, M.A. Oskoei, H. Hu, A Human-Computer Interface based on
forehead multi-channel bio-signals to control a virtual wheelchair, Proceedings of the
14th Iranian Conference on Biomedical Engineering, (2008) 272–277.
[53] M.F. Lucas, A. Gaufriau, S. Pascual, C. Doncarli, D. Farina, Multi-channel surface
EMG classification using support vector machines and signal-based wavelet
optimization, Biomedical Signal Processing and Control, Elsevier, 3 (2) (2008) 169–174.
[54] K. Gurmanik, A.S. Arora, V.K. Jain, EMG Diagnosis via AR Modeling and Binary
Support Vector Machine Classification, International Journal of Engineering Science
and Technology, 2 (6) (2010) 1767-1772.
[55] A. Subasi, M.I. Gursoy, EEG signal classification using PCA, ICA, LDA and support
vector machines, Expert Systems with Applications, Elsevier, 37 (12) (2010) 8659-8666.
[56] L.Wei, H. Hu, EMG and visual based HMI for hands-free control of an intelligent
wheelchair, Proceedings of the IEEE 8th World Congress on Intelligent Control and
Automation, (2010) 1027–1032.
[57] D. Novák, Y.H.T. Al-ani, L. Lhotská, Electroencephalogram processing using hidden
Markov models, 5th EUROSIM Congress on Modelling and Simulation, (2004).
[58] B. Obermaier, G.R. Müller, G. Pfurtscheller, Virtual keyboard controlled by
spontaneous EEG activity, IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation
Engineering, 11 (4) (2003) 422–426.

42
[59] A.D.C. Chan, K.B. Englehart, Continuous myoelectric control for powered prostheses
using hidden Markov models, IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, 52 (1)
(2005) 121–124.
[60] S. Solhjoo, A.M. Nasrabadi, M.R.H. Golpayegani, Classification of chaotic signals
using HMM classifiers: EEG-based mental task classification, In Proceedings of the
European Signal Processing Conference, (2005).
[61] D. Peleg, E. Braiman, E. Yom-Tov, G.F. Inbar, Classification of finger activation for
use in a robotic prosthesis arm, IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and
Rehabilitation Engineering, 10 (4) (2002) 290–293.
[62] W.A. Chaovalitwongse, Y.J. Fan, R.C. Sachdeo, On the time series K-nearest
neighbor classification of abnormal brain activity, IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man
and Cybernetics, Part A: Systems and Humans, 37 (6) (2007) 1005–1016.
[63] F. Lotte, M. Congedo, A. Lécuyer, F. Lamarche, B. Arnaldi, A review of classification
algorithms for EEG-based brain–computer interfaces, Journal of neural engineering, 4
(2007).
[64] R.O. Duda, P.E. Hart, D.G. Stork, Pattern classification, second ed., Wiley New York,
2001.
[65] A.K. Jain, R.P.W. Duin, J. Mao, Statistical pattern recognition: A review, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 22 (1) (2000) 4–37.
[66] M. Okamoto, Y. Matsubara, K. Shima, T. Tsuji, EMG pattern classification using
hierarchical network based on boosting approach, International Journal of innovative
computing, information and control, 5 (12 B) (2009) 4935– 4943.
[67] F. Lotte, The use of fuzzy inference systems for classification in EEG-based braincomputer interfaces, In Proc. of the 3rd international Brain-Computer Interface
workshop and training course, (2006) 12–13.

43
[68] S.M. Zhou, J.Q. Gan, F. Sepulveda, Classifying mental tasks based on features of
higher-order statistics from EEG signals in brain-computer interface, Information
Sciences, Elsevier, 178 (6) (2008) 1629–1640.
[69] A. Radmand, E. Scheme, P. Kyberd, K. Englehart, Investigation of optimum pattern
recognition methods for robust myoelectric control during dynamic limb movement,
Evaluation, 1500, (12) (2013).
[70] E. Scheme, K. Englehart, Electromyogram pattern recognition for control of powered
upper-limb prostheses: state of the art and challenges for clinical use. Journal of
Rehabilitation Research & Development, 48 (6) (2011) 643 - 660.
[71] H. Tamura, T. Manabe, T. Goto, Y. Yamashita, K. Tanno, A study of the electric
wheelchair hands-free safety control system using the surface-electromygram of facial
muscles, in: H. Liu et al. (Eds.), ICIRA, Part II, LNAI 6425, Springer-Verlag Berlin
Heidelberg, 2010, pp. 97–104.
[72] H. Jeong, J.S. Kim, J.S. Choi, A Study of an EMG-controlled HCI Method by
Clenching Teeth, In Computer Human Interaction, Springer, 3101 (2004) 163–170.
[73] M. van Gerven, J. Farquhar, R. Schaefer, R. Vlek, J. Geuze, A. Nijholt, N. Ramsey,
P. Haselager, L. Vuurpijl, S. Gielen, The brain-computer interface cycle, Journal of
Neural Engineering, 6 (4) (2009).
[74] K. Tanaka, K. Matsunaga, H.O. Wang, Electroencephalogram-based control of an
electric wheelchair, IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 21 (4) (2005) 762–766.
[75] R. Leeb, D. Friedman, G.R. Müller-Putz, R. Scherer, M. Slater, G. Pfurtscheller, Selfpaced (asynchronous) BCI control of a wheelchair in virtual environments: a case study
with a tetraplegic, Computational intelligence and neuroscience, (2007) 1–12.

44
[76] N. Jiang, S. Dosen, K. R. Müller, D. Farina, Myoelectric control of artificial limbs—Is
there a need to change focus, IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 29 (5) (2012) 149152.
[77] S. Muceli, D. Farina, Simultaneous and proportional estimation of hand kinematics
from EMG during mirrored movements at multiple degrees-of-freedom.

IEEE

Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, 20 (3) (2012) 371-378.
[78] J. M. Hahne, F. Biebmann, N. Jiang, H. Rehbaum, D. Farina, F. C. Meinecke, L. C.
Parra, Linear and Nonlinear Regression Techniques for Simultaneous and Proportional
Myoelectric Control. IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation
Engineering, 22 (2) (2014) 269-279.
[79] C. Cipriani, J. Segil, J. Birdwell, R. Weir, Dexterous control of a prosthetic hand using
fine-wire intramuscular electrodes in targeted extrinsic muscles. IEEE transactions on
neural systems and rehabilitation engineering: a publication of the IEEE Engineering in
Medicine and Biology Society, 2014.
[80] A. Fougner, E. Scheme, A. D. Chan, K. Englehart, Ø. Stavdahl, Resolving the limb
position effect in myoelectric pattern recognition. IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems
and Rehabilitation Engineering, 19(6) (2011) 644-651.
[81] C. Cipriani, M. Controzzi, G. Kanitz, R. Sassu, The Effects of Weight and Inertia of the
Prosthesis on the Sensitivity of Electromyographic Pattern Recognition in Relax
State. JPO: Journal of Prosthetics and Orthotics, 24 (2) (2012) 86-92.
[82] J. d. R. Millán, R. Rupp, G. R. Müller-Putz, R. Murray-Smith, C. Giugliemma, M.
Tangermann, C. Vidaurre, F. Cincotti, A. Kübler, R. Leeb, C. Neuper, K.-R. Müller, D.
Mattia, Combining Brain–Computer Interfaces and Assistive Technologies: State-of-theArt and Challenges, Frontiers in neuroscience, 4 (2010).

45
[83] L.F. Nicolas-Alonso, J. Gomez-Gil, Brain Computer Interfaces, a Review, Sensors, 12
(2) (2012) 1211-1279.

