International Journal of Recent Technology and Engineering (IJRTE)
ISSN: 2277-3878, Volume-9 Issue-1, May 2020

Design and Simulation of Brain Controlled
Electronic Wheelchair for Physically
Challenged Person
Emani Susmitha, K. Kishore Kumar

Abstract: Improving the quality for the life of elders and disabled
person and giving proper care at the right time is one of the most
important role to be performed as a responsible citizen in the
society. This paper is describing about the integration of
hardware, software and sensors with the help of Brain Computer
Interface (BCI) to develop best generation wheelchair for physical
challenged persons. Electronic wheelchair is one of the easiest
way for disabled persons to lead an independent life. This smart
wheelchair is totally controlled by brain, and here mechatronics
plays an important role in safety recovery. By developing these
types of wheelchairs it can reduce the usage of human effort and
force to drive the wheels of wheelchair. It also provides a better
opportunity for physically handicap person to move from one
place to another. One of the best method to record brain activities
can be done with the help of electroencephalography (EEG) this is
also known as brain waves signal, through these EEG signals the
BCI interface encode and decode the signals and transfers to
ATMEGA 328 microcontroller. This wheelchair with the support
of motor drives the movement is designed in such a way to control
the commands like moving forward and backward, stop, turn left
and right. Intelligent Wheelchair is designed using solid works
and implementing into MATLAB using simmechanics is
simulated using simscape multibody and the resulting torque is
obtained. The aim of this paper is implement mind controlled
movements for disabled persons.Keywords: Orthosis, Paraplegia,
Rehabilitation, Simulation, Under limb.
Keywords: Arduino, ATMEGA 328, Brain computer interface,
Emotiv EPOC headset, Electroencephalogram (EEG),
wheelchair.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Wheelchairs are the most important source for many physical
handicapped and senior citizen people. Wheelchair is used as
topmost assistive devices for enhancing personal mobility for
challenged people. It is manually operated or power-driven
device which is designed for challenged person. Smart
wheelchairs have been the subject of research since 1980s
and have been developed on four continents. A Brain
Computer Interface (BCI) system provides a better

Revised Manuscript Received on April 17, 2020.
* Correspondence Author
Emani Susmitha*, Department of Mechanical Engineering,
Lakshmiah
Education
Foundation,
Guntur,
India.
sushmitha161@gmail.com
K. Kishore Kumar, Department of Mechanical Engineering,
Lakshmiah
Education
Foundation,
Guntur,
India.
kishorekumardavid@kluniversity.in

Retrieval Number: A1552059120/2020©BEIESP
DOI:10.35940/ijrte.A1552.059120

Koneru
Email:

communication between computer and brain and other
physical devices by translating different patterns of brain into
commands in real time interface[2]. Many designs based on
the BCI are designed with the Electroencephalogram (EEG)
systems, such as brain controlled wheelchair present in this
literature. BCI technology provides a means of
communication which allows the persons with severely
impaired movement to communicate with assistive devices
using the EEG or other brain signals. EEG technique deploys
an electrode cap which is placed on the user’s scalp for
acquisition of EEG signals that are captured and translated
into movement commands by Arduino microcontroller
which moves the wheelchair[2]. The electrical activity of the
brain is monitored in real time interface by using an array of
electrodes, which is arranged on the scalp in a process known
as EEG, these sensors are most expensive and their use is
only for hospitals and laboratories. EEG signal are classified
into several bands like alpha, delta, beta, theta and mu
suppression, each corresponding to various states of being
like relaxing, ranging over 8-14 Hz; concentrating, ranging
over 13-30 Hz; deep sleep, from 0-4 Hz; meditating from 4-8
Hz; moving your hands or legs or just by imagining these
motion
actions respectively[1]. It is non-invasive in nature, this has
an advantage over traditional Body Mass Index (BMI), for
not being hazardous to health. With the advance technology,
EEG acquisition devices are made more compact, handy and
wireless. Using the above mentioned technique, a simple
thought brain controlled wheelchair system has been
proposed in this paper.
Extensive loss of sensation and they suffer with complete
inability to feel anything below the waist.
Predominant cause for paraplegia:
Car & motor cycle accidents, fall, Medical/Surgical Injuries
are estimated to be around 72% reasons for the people
suffering with paraplegia.
There are many rehabilitation techniques for the people
suffering with paraplegia due to Spinal cord injury. At the
initial stages of paraplegia, patient rely on a wheelchair for
their movement, but using wheelchair for excessive time may
lead to medical co-morbidities. Hence rehabilitation devices
like Wearable Exoskeletons and orthotic devices are been
developing since 40 years. Starting from training a person in
virtual reality environment and using a suspended treadmill
to over-ground.

Koneru
Email:

1166

Published By:
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering
& Sciences Publication

Design and simulation of brain control electronic wheelchair for physically challenged persons.
II.

OBJECTIVE

Independent mobility is very much necessity to live
everyday life for human beings. A person with
physically challenged person has restricted mobility.
Brain Computing Interface (BCI) provides a better
promising solution for challenged person which helps in
direct communication between brain and smart
electronic wheelchair. Here Electroencephalogram
(EEG) signal works as the best method in recording
brain signals. By this we can reduce the external human
power in controlling the wheelchair. The main
objectives in design process is given below:
1. To minimize user effort in controlling of the
wheelchair.
2. To assure safety when controlling of wheelchair.
3. To maintain safety precautions during the
movement of wheelchair.
4. These smart electronic wheelchair using open
source software and hardware.
5. The design system should be portable for the
challenged persons.
III.

METHODODLOGY AND
HARDWARE

By taking into the consideration with the existing technology
based on number of electrodes which is costly and is used
only in the hospitals and laboratories. Mostly this EEG
technique is used in hospitals to trace the patient’s brain wave
conditions. The headset is used on the mind controlled
wheelchair is to pick up EEG signals from the brain. These
signals are processed through EEG device and to BCI system
which analyze and decode the wave signals by
microcontroller which takes a decision regarding motion and
direction of wheelchair with the help of motor drives and
accordingly drives the motor. Modification of manual
wheelchair is done by mechanically coupling motors to rear
wheels thereby making it an electric wheelchair. In this
active rear wheels are rotated by motors to the orientation
that matches the current driving direction the system employs
differential drive [2]. The proposed device proved to be
effective for those people who are suffering from paralysis
where the patient loses control over various parts of body and
also useful for old age people.

Fig (2) Block diagram of brain wave through
EEG headset.
In this flow process brain waves are captured through EEG
headset. These signals
are analyzed and decoded and the information extracted is
sent to microcontroller. Microcontroller controls the
functioning of motors through motor driver.
Emotiv EPOC headset:
Emotiv EPOC headset is one of the EEG device headset
which is manufactured by the company Emotiv. This headset
is a high resolution portable EEG device and multi-channel
for the purpose of BCI system[10]. If consists of 14
electrodes for capturing of EEG signals from brain. The
mental command detections like left, right, forward,
backward and etc.

Electronics and Embedded system:
The Electronics and embedded system is about how the
emotive headset receives the EEG signals from the brain
to the user by using the microcontroller.
Fig (3) Emotiv EPOC Headset.[10]

(a)

(b)

Fig. (1) Conceptual Block diagram (a) Training for
wheelchair using GUI (b) Mind controlled wheelchair.

Retrieval Number: A1552059120/2020©BEIESP
DOI:10.35940/ijrte.A1552.059120

1167

Published By:
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering
& Sciences Publication

International Journal of Recent Technology and Engineering (IJRTE)
ISSN: 2277-3878, Volume-9 Issue-1, May 2020
Arduino Uno:
This Arduino Uno microcontroller is ATMEGA 328P
with high frequency of 16MHz for providing high speed
control and better processing and having 14 Analog
input/output pins of which 6pins can be used as Pulse
Width Modulation(PWM)[5]. This microcontroller
additionally helps that are provided on the chair like
automatic braking, monitoring system and automatic
braking.[4]

Table I Characteristics of the Five Basic Brain
Waves [9]

Frequency
band
Gamma
(γ)
Beta (β)

Frequency

Brain states

35Hz

Concentration

Alpha (α)
Theta (θ)

8-12Hz
4-8Hz

Delta (δ)

0.5-4Hz

12-35Hz

Anxiety dominant,
relaxed
Very relaxed
Deeply
relaxed
Sleep

IV. DEVICES DEVELOPED

Fig (4) Arduino Uno Development Board
Different Drive wheelchair:
Basically, one has to select wheelchair according to their
needs. In designing and controlling the wheelchairs
several points need to be concentrated more like people
will be of different heights, cost efficient motors,
durability and etc. many wheelchairs are available in the
market that can be easily movable from one place to
another[7]

In this present society it is very much essential to take
care of elders or handicaps. So we can help them by
inventing different types of wheelchair at low cost by this
the user can afford easily with minimum requirements.
Here are some of different types of wheelchairs
developed for physically challenged persons to move
from one place to another without any external help for
the user. By developing these types of wheelchair they
can independently do their works, can move from place to
place, some of the wheelchair can climb the stair.
I.
Manual Wheelchair:
The manual wheelchair is the type of devices to help a
person to move him without assistance of battery. There
are three types of manual wheelchairs namely
self-propelled, attendant propelled, and wheelbased
wheelchairs[6]. This wheelchair when we use as a
Single-arm drive wheelchair it enables the user to move
either left or right and while two-armed drive wheelchair
enables user moving in the forward or backward
directions on a straight path as shown in Fig(8).

Fig (5) Different Drive wheel configuration [7]
Brain waves frequency that detected in EEG:

Fig (6) Manual Wheelchair.

Retrieval Number: A1552059120/2020©BEIESP
DOI:10.35940/ijrte.A1552.059120

1168

Published By:
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering
& Sciences Publication

Design and simulation of brain control electronic wheelchair for physically challenged persons.
II.
Stair Climbing Wheelchair:
The stair-climbing wheelchair is very high expensive,
when compared to normal wheelchair, it is classified into
three categories: - continuous stair climbing wheelchair,
auxiliary stair climbing wheelchair and intermittent-stair
climbing wheelchair. Continuous stair climbing
wheelchair having the best set of supporting device,
wheelchair relies on this supporting device for the
continuous motions. In this auxiliary stair climbing
wheelchair, the attachment depend on the another device
which is fitted on wheelchair and this will be needed an
assistance to support the functions of climbing stairs. The
process of climbing stairs is similar to the people who are
climbing from up and down stairs, it is also called as
walking stair climbing wheelchair. Intermittent stair
climbing wheelchair is one of the top most supporting
devices that elevates the wheelchair and other set of
supporting systems.

IV.
Electric Wheelchairs:
This is an electric wheelchair which can be used for
someone those who hasn’t got the mobility or dexterity
due to disabled condition of hands, shoulders or more
general conditions. Main advantage of powered
wheelchair is it can recline, leg and seat elevations and
other necessary functions. It has special seating and arm
and leg rest requirements. These wheelchairs will bring
independence and freedom to physically handicap
persons [6]. Each wheelchair has its own particular
handling characteristics.

Fig (9) Electric wheelchair
V.

DESIGN OF WHEELCHAIR IN
SOLIDWORKS

Fig (7) Stair Climbing Wheelchair
III.
Manual Pediatric Wheelchairs:
Manual pediatric wheelchair are popular type of
wheelchairs used by kids of all ages. In this type of
wheelchairs motors do not propel so either the user or
caregiver must and should push the chair to move
around[6].

The Brain control electronic wheelchair is specially
designed for physically challenged persons. This
wheelchair is especially designed for those who are
paralyzed, handicaps, accident persons and born
handicaps by birth. It has an Electroencephalogram
(EEG) brain sensing device which is placed on the top
that senses the brain signals and convert it into movement
of wheels with Brain Computer Interface. EEG head rest
is a rotary joint which can be easily adjustable for
wearer’s body. With the help of two servo motors and
microcontroller the wheels can be moved. Here are the
figures designed in solid works.

Fig (8) Manual Pediatric Wheelchair

Retrieval Number: A1552059120/2020©BEIESP
DOI:10.35940/ijrte.A1552.059120

1169

Published By:
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering
& Sciences Publication

International Journal of Recent Technology and Engineering (IJRTE)
ISSN: 2277-3878, Volume-9 Issue-1, May 2020

Fig. (12) Simmechanics explorer if the wheelchair
design
VII.

RESULT

Rotary joint of wheels is provided with sinusoidal input
signal in order to calculate the output torque. The same graph
for both the wheels of the wheelchair. Motion for the device
is provided by the sensors and the torques are set to
automatically compute. Output torques are realized and are
plotted as shown in the Fig.13. and the signal statistics are
shown in the table II.

Fig (10) Isometric view for proposed wheelchair.

Fig (11) Top view of wheelchair

VI.

SIMULATION

This wheelchair is mainly designed in solidworks and
simulation is done in MATLAB software. Solidworks
design in imported into MATLAB through simmechanics
is shown in the Fig[12]. By using simmechanics explorer,
we can run the simulation of the device and verify its
motion.

Retrieval Number: A1552059120/2020©BEIESP
DOI:10.35940/ijrte.A1552.059120

1170

Fig (13) Torque output graph
TABLE II. SIGNAL STATISTICS
Values

Time

Max

3.502e-01

0.747

Min

-3.502e-01

8.602

Published By:
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering
& Sciences Publication

Design and simulation of brain control electronic wheelchair for physically challenged persons.
Peak to Peak

RERFERENCES:

7.003e-01

1.

Mean

1.172e-02

Median

3.841e-02

RMS

2.533e-01

2.

3.

4.

ADVANTAGES:
1. Using a portable EEG brainwave headset can be
used as dry active sensor technology to read the
brain electric activity.
2. It can prove beneficial for any individuals in
handling and shifting of the wheelchair.
3. It doesn’t require any human support for the
movement of wheelchair.
4.
DISADVANTAGES:
1. Fixing of these electrodes must be done before
in any other further course.
2. The mental state must be stable in all the time of
working in wheelchair.
3. Some basic training must be given to the user
before the person use in environmental
conditions.
4. Cost of the wheelchair is high.
VIII.

FUTURE SCOPE

In this brain control electronic wheelchair is mainly
controlled by thoughts. This wheelchair can be modelled
in such a way that it can be easily turn into semi sleeper
position to avoid long seating position of the user and to
have some relaxation[8]. In this we can use previously
invented techniques like stairs climbing, etc. These are
more can be proposed in the future scope of the
wheelchair.

IX.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

A.Mirza , "Mind-controlled wheelchair using an EEG headset
and arduino microcontroller," 2015 International Conference
on Technologies for Sustainable Development (ICTSD),
Mumbai, 2015, pp. 1-5.
Sinha, Utkarsh, and M. Kanthi. "Mind controlled
wheelchair." International Journal of Control Theory and
Applications 9, no. 39 (2016): 19-28.
Sharma, Ravi S., Chinmay V. Modak, Lovely Y. Singh, and
Shruti K. Kharti. "Smart Wheelchair for Physically
Handicapped Persons." (2018).
Charles, P. K., M. Krishna, G. V. P. Kumar, and D. L. Prasad.
"EEG-Controlled Wheelchair Movement: Using Wireless
Network." J Biosens Bioelectron 9, no. 252 (2018): 2.
Nirmal, T. M. "Wheelchair for physically and mentally disabled
persons." International Journal of Electrical and Electronics
Research 2, no. 2 (2014): 112-118.
Mishra, Ankit Kumar, and Krishna K. Warhade. "Design and
Development of Electric Wheelchair for differently abled
person." International
Journal
of
Engineering
and
Technology 9, no. 2 (2017).
Simpson, Richard C. "Smart wheelchairs: A literature
review." Journal
of
rehabilitation
research
and
development 42, no. 4 (2005): 423.
Akila¹, M., K. SathiyaSekar, and A. Suresh. "Smart
Brain-Controlled Wheelchair And Devices Based On EEG In
Low Cost For Disabled Person." (2015).
Swee, Sim Kok, Kho Desmond Teck Kiang, and Lim Zheng
You. "EEG controlled wheelchair." In MATEC Web of
Conferences, vol. 51, p. 02011. EDP Sciences, 2016.

AUTHORS PROFILE
Ms.
Emani Susmitha currently pursuing
Masters of Technology in Mechanical Engineering
with specialization in Robotics & Mechatronics at
Koneru Lakshmaiah Education Foundation
(KLEF, Deemed to be University). Areas of
research interests includes Robotics, Mechatronics
and Embedded Systems.
Dr. K. Kishore Kumar did his Bachelor of
Technology in Mechanical Engineering from
SCRED, JNTU. Obtained Masters of Technology
in CIM, from KLCE Nagarjuna University, and
got his Ph.D. in Robotics and Mechatronics from
KLEF. His current research includes artificial
intelligence, machine learning, IOT, robot vision,
face recognition and mechatronics.

CONCLUSION

Design consideration of EEG signal based Brain
control electronic wheelchair for physically challenged
persons has been discussed to lead an independent life
without any difficulties. Several methods are planned to
receive the signals from EEG device for movement of the
wheelchair and controlling the operations by using motor
or the system using with microcontroller. This wheelchair
can assists the human by doing their work by their own
without any external user support in moving in their
lifestyles. These results can be taken further and can be
implemented for making device in real time interface
with low cost of the system and to expand the application
range.

Retrieval Number: A1552059120/2020©BEIESP
DOI:10.35940/ijrte.A1552.059120

1171

Published By:
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering
& Sciences Publication

