Welcome

Hello and Welcome to the ACNS 2012 Conference
This is the 3rd Australasian Cognitive Neuroscience Conference, and the first to be run officially under
our new society – the Australasian Cognitive Neuroscience Society. The Society was founded only in
April this year and now has members from across Australia, New Zealand, Japan, China, Singapore,
and Indonesia.
We are expecting over 250 people at this conference. We have put together a scientific program of
international Keynote Speakers, invited Symposia each day, 72 oral presentations in two parallel
streams, and over 100 poster presentations.
Topics are very diverse, ranging from studies of cognition and brain function, in health and disorder,
using EEG, fMRI, TMS methods, to computational models in neuroscience, to pure psychophysics in
vision sciences, to animal models in neuropsychiatry. We hope that across this broad range of
scientific work you find things a little off your primary topic to surprise and inspire you, and spark new
ideas.
We also have our opening reception, to meet and greet everyone, and hope many of you can come to
our conference dinner. There will be plenty of opportunity to meet and chat during the posters
sessions, and over the lunches provided during lunch breaks.
We hope you enjoy the ACNS 2012 Conference!

Ross Cunnington
Founding President, Australasian Cognitive Neuroscience Soc

ACNS 2012 Organising Committe
Ross Cunnington, Chair
Sakinah Alhadad
Jeff Bednark
Megan Campbell

Luca Cocchi
Merryn Constable
Harriet Dempsey-Jones
Paul Dux

Natasha Matthews
Jason Mattingley
Martin Sale
Chase Sherwell

1

Conference Information
Venues
The conference will be held in the Queensland Brain Institute (QBI), University of Queensland (Building 79),
with the oral presentation sessions in the UQ Physiology lecture theatres (Building 63) just next door.
QBI Foyer (level 3)
QBI Auditorium (level 7)
QBI Level 7
Physiology Theatres

Conference Registration (from 5pm Thursday and 8am Friday)
Keynote Lectures and Symposia (9am and 4:30pm each day)
Poster Sessions and Company Exhibitors
Oral Presentation Sessions (11:00am and 1:30pm each day)

Company Exhibitors
Some of our sponsors have exhibition spaces in the Poster room (QBI Level 7). Please make sure you stop
by to have a look at their latest products and have a chat. Exhibitors include: BESA and Neurospec
(BioSemi), Compumedics, Symbiotic Devices (Brain Products and Brainsight systems), and Siemens.

Conference Dinner
The conference dinner will be at Watt Restaurant + Bar, Brisbane Powerhouse, New Farm, from 7:30pm on
Saturday 1st December. It’s a great restaurant just by the Brisbane River in a converted power-station that is
now a popular theatre and entertainment venue.
It is very easy to get to New Farm on the CityCat ferry along the Brisbane River. It is a 1-hour trip from the
University along the river – 30 min from Southbank or the City. We will have some volunteer Guides leaving
from QBI to the CityCat stop after the Keynote Lecture on Saturday evening to help you find your way to the
dinner.

Instructions for Poster Presenters
There are two sessions Poster Sessions, on Friday 3pm to 4:30pm and Saturday 3pm to 4:30pm. You will
present your poster in one of those sessions, so check the Program to see in which session you are
presenting. You are expected to stand by your poster during your poster session.
Posters should be put up on the poster boards before the morning tea break on the day you are presenting
(the poster room will be open from 8am before the morning Symposium) and should be taken down at the
end of the day. Poster boards are numbered, so please find the number of your poster in the Program and
put your poster in your numbered space.

Instructions for Oral Presenters
All Oral Presentation sessions will be in the UQ Physiology lecture theatres (Building 63; just next to the
Queensland Brain Institute). We have PowerPoint available on both PC and Mac computers in the lecture
theatres.
Please load your presentation onto the computer in the correct room during the break before your talk.
Because times for talks are short, and we are keeping to a strict schedule, you must load your talk onto the
computer before the session starts.
Our AV helpers will be in the lecture theatres 30 minutes before each session, from 10:30am each morning
(during the morning tea break) and from 1:00pm (during the lunch break). If you want to check your slides on
our system, you are very welcome see one of our AV helpers in the lecture theatre during any morning tea
or lunch break.

2

3

19:00

18:00

17:00

16:30

15:00

13:30

12:30

11:00

10:30

9:00
Action Understanding, Autism,
and Mirroring

Understanding Schizophrenia

Professor Kia Nobre

Professor Christian Keysers
The empathic brain

7:30pm: Conference Dinner
Watt Restaurant + Bar, New Farm

QBI Level 7

Temporal expectations: The fourth
dimension of attention

4:30pm: Keynote – QBI Auditorium

Afternoon Tea

Afternoon Tea

4:30pm: Keynote – QBI Auditorium

3pm: Posters – QBI level 7

1:30pm: Talks – Physiol. Theatres

Lunch

11am: Talks – Physiol. Theatres

3pm: Posters – QBI level 7

1:30pm: Talks – Physiol. Theatres

Lunch

11am: Talks – Physiol. Theatres

Morning Tea

9am: Symposium – QBI Auditorium

9am: Symposium – QBI Auditorium

Morning Tea

Saturday 1 Dec

Friday 30 Nov

7pm: Opening Reception

Dr John Serences
Attention and the efficiency of
information processing

6pm: Keynote – QBI Auditorium

5pm: Registration - QBI Foyer

Thursday 29 Nov

3:30pm: Conference Closing

2pm: Talks – Physiol. Theatres

Annual General Meeting

1pm: ACNS Society – Physiol.

Lunch

11am: Talks – Physiol. Theatres

Morning Tea

Vision and Perceptual
Awareness

9am: Symposium – QBI Auditorium

Sunday 2 Dec

Thursday 29th November, 5:00pm – 9:00pm
Queensland Brain Institute Auditorium – Level 7
17:00- Registration in QBI Foyer
18:00
18:00- Conference Opening – Welcome
18:10
A/Prof Ross Cunnington
18:10- Keynote Lecture – QBI Auditorium
19:00
Dr John Serences, University of California, San Diego, USA
Attention and the efficiency of information processing in human visual cortex
19:0021:00

Opening Reception
Drinks and Nibbles

Keynote Lecture
Dr John Serences, University of California, San Diego, USA
John Serences is Associate Professor of Psychology at the University of California San Diego
(UCSD). Work in his lab employs converging methods including computational modeling,
psychophysics, fMRI and EEG to study how attentional factors influence perceptual processing,
working memory and decision making. Serences did his undergraduate work at the University of
California, San Diego under the guidance of Dr. Harold Pashler, his graduate work at Johns
Hopkins University with Dr. Steven Yantis, and a Postdoctoral Fellowship at the Salk Institute
with Dr. Geoffrey Boynton. He was a faculty member in the department of Cognitive Sciences at
UC Irvine for 1.5 years before moving back to UCSD in 2008. Work in his lab is generously
funded by the National Institutes of Mental Health and a James S. McDonnell Foundation Scholar
Award.
Keynote Lecture sponsored by Cambridge Research Systems

Attention and the efficiency of information processing in human visual cortex
Current behavioral goals and motivational drives play a critical role in shaping and refining information processing so that
only the most relevant sensory stimuli are perceived and allowed to influence decision making. Traditional accounts hold
that these ‘top-down’ attentional factors are critically important in information processing precisely because attention
enhances the gain of the sensory neurons that are selectively tuned to relevant stimulus features. These models are
intuitively appealing and suggest that attention effectively increases the intensity of important stimuli in a manner
analogous to turning up the volume knob on a stereo. Using the early visual system as a model, I will use fMRI and a
novel analytic approach to show that attention modulates the gain of the most informative sensory neurons given
whatever specific perceptual task confronts the observer. Counter-intuitively, enhancing the gain of the most informative
sensory neurons often means biasing patterns of neural activity away from the patterns evoked by sensory stimuli. Thus,
contrary to most traditional accounts, these observations suggest that the primary function of attention is not simply to
enhance the gain of stimulus-driven responses, but to optimize performance on the current perceptual task.

4

Friday 30th November, 9:00am – 10:30am
Queensland Brain Institute Auditorium – Level 7
8:309:00

Registration in QBI Foyer

9:0010:30

Symposium – QBI Auditorium
Understanding Schizophrenia:
Phenomenological, cognitive, and neuroscience perspectives.
Chaired by Professor Pat Michie, University of Newcastle
Speakers
Professor Sohee Park, Vanderbilt University, USA
Abandoned body, weakened self and the internal landscape of schizophrenia
Professor Ulrich Schall, University of Newcastle
Brain Imaging Correlates of Emerging Schizophrenia
Dr Alex Fornito, University of Melbourne
Connectomic disturbances in schizophrenia
Dr Sharna Jamadar, Monash University
Functional mapping of semantic association in schizophrenia

10:3011:00

Morning Tea Break

5

Friday 30th November, 11:00am – 12:30pm
Physiology Lecture Theatres
STREAM 1 – Room 358

STREAM 2 – Room 360

Chair: Ottmar Lipp

Chair: Paul Dux

11:00- Affective prosody in psychosis: Recent
11:15 evidence and future directions
Susan Rossell, Tamsyn Van Rheenen and
Christopher Groot

Decoding reveals distributed neural
mechanisms for temporal individuation in
the human brain
Claire Naughtin, Benjamin Tamber-Rosenau
and Paul Dux

11:15- Facial expression recognition and
11:30 medication effects in Huntington’s disease
Izelle Labuschagne, Rebecca Jones, Jenny
Callaghan, Daisy Whitehead, Eve Dumas,
Miranda Say, Ellen Hart, Damian Justo, Allison
Coleman, Rachelle Dar Santos, Chris Frost,
David Craufurd, Sarah Tabrizi and Julie Stout

Finding a single guy: The role of attention in
masked priming under conditions of high
attentional load
Genevieve Quek and Matthew Finkbeiner

11:30- Face facts: BD patients show impairments in
11:45 emotion processing
Tamsyn Van Rheenen, Susan Rossell and
Greg Murray

Neural correlates of contingent attentional
capture during sustained visual monitoring
Oscar Jacoby, Roger Remington, Marc Kamke,
Kristy Butler and Jason Mattingley

11:45- Neural correlates of emotional processing in
12:00 Parkinson’s disease and the influence of
affective disturbances
Nadeeka Dissanayaka, Tiffany Au, Anthony
Angwin, David Copland, John O’Sullivan,
Gerard Bryne, Rodney Marsh, George Mellick
and Peter Silburn

Sustained target-driven interference under
optimal preparation in a cued task switching
paradigm using orthogonal polynomial trend
analysis (OPTA)
Alexander Provost, Andrew Heathcote, Scott
Brown, Sharna Jamadar and Frini Karayanidis

12:00- Influence of attention and 5-HTTLPR
12:15 variation on amygdala responses to emotion
Daniel Stjepanovic, Jason Mattingley, Ziarih
Hawi and Mark Bellgrove

Binocular rivalry and schizotypal personality
traits in non-clinical individuals
Anna Antinori, Luke Smillie, Phillip Smith and
Olivia Carter

12:15- Behavioural evidence suggesting
12:30 expressions of emotion and emotion
recognition are not mediated by the same
neural substrates
Rick Van Der Zwan and Rayshell Harkin-Allen

The effects of serotonergic drugs citalopram
and buspirone on perceptual rivalry
Jody Stanley, Suresh Sundram and Olivia
Carter

12:3013:30

Lunch Break

6

Friday 30th November, 1.30pm—3.00pm
Physiology Lecture Theatres
STREAM 1 – Room 358

STREAM 2 – Room 360

Chair: Natasha Matthews

Chair: Frini Karayanidis

13:30- Face processing in pre-school aged children: Fronto-striatal involvement in strategic
13:45 An MEG neuroimaging study
adjustments of response caution: A
Wei He, Jon Brock and Blake Johnson
combined DWI and ERP study
Elise Mansfield, Birte Forstmann, Andrew
Heathcote and Frini Karayanidis
13:45- Orientation and spatial frequency selective
14:00 surround suppression impairment in high
autistic tendency
Christina Van Heer and David Crewther

The degree of functional independence
between motor sequencing and motor
rhythm
Jeff Bednark, Megan Campbell and Ross
Cunnington

14:00- Altered contextual modulation of primary
14:15 visual cortex responses in schizophrenia
Kiley Seymour, Timo Stein, Matthias
Guggenmos, Ines Theophil and Philipp Sterzer

Sustained effects of anodal tDCS over the
dominant motor cortex on response
preparation processes
Alexander Conley, Jodie Marquez, Mark
Parsons, Ross Fulham, Jim Lagopoulos and
Frini Karayanidis

14:15- Visual mismatch negativity and early visual
14:30 ERPs in healthy ageing, mild cognitive
impairment and Alzheimer’s disease
George Stothart, Andrea Tales and Nina
Kazanina

Modulation of attentional network coherence
during manipulation of cognitive load in
Parkinson’s freezing
James Shine, Elie Matar, Philip Ward, Sharon
Naismith and Simon Lewis

12:30- Is the rodent brain capable of auditory
14:45 deviance detection and MMN-like
responses?
Patricia Michie, Lauren Hams, Ross Fulham,
Markku Penttonen, Juanita Todd, Mick Huner,
Timothy Budd, Ulrich Schall and Deborah
Hodgson

Multilevel complex interactions between
cognitive and motor domains in Williams
syndrome
Darren Hocking, Jasmine Menant, Melanie
Porter, Christine Gamham, Hannah Kirk and
Kim Cornish

14:45- Longitudinal functional and connectivity
15:00 changes during working memory
performance in Huntington’s disease: The
IMAGE-HD study
Nellie Georgiou-Karistianis, Julie Stout, Govinda
Poudel, Marcus Gray, Juan Dominguez, Andrew
Churchyard, Phyllis Chua and Gary Egan

Online control of reaching is impaired in
adults with developmental coordination
disorder – DCD
Ian Fuelscher, Reannon Ivancic, Chevelle
Smalley, Emra Oguzkaya, Jacqueline Williams
and Christian Hyde

15:0016:30

Afternoon Tea and Poster Session - QBI

7

Friday 30th November, 3:00pm – 5:30pm
Queensland Brain Institute Auditorium – Level 7
15:00- Afternoon Tea and Poster Session
16:30
16:30- Keynote Lecture – QBI Auditorium
17:30
Professor Christian Keysers, Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience
The empathic brain

Keynote Lecture
Professor Christian Keysers, Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience
Professor Christian Keysers studied Biology and Psychology in Germany (University of
Konstanz) and Boston (MIT, Harvard) and made his PhD in St Andrews with David Perrett on
the neural basis of facial perception. In 2000, he moved to Parma, Italy where he worked with
Giacomo Rizzolatti in the laboratory where mirror neurons were discovered. He contributed to
the discovery of auditory mirror neurons in primates and showed that the idea of mirror neurons
also applies to our emotions and sensations using fMRI in humans. He then moved to
Groningen, the Netherlands, where he became a full professor for the social brain in 2008. In
2010, he moved to Amsterdam to become a department head at the Netherlands Institute for
Neuroscience, a research institute of the Royal Dutch Academy of Arts and Sciences. His work
has been published in leading journals, including Science, Neuron, Trends in Cognitive
Sciences and Current Biology. He is the author of the award winning book “The Empathic
Brain” (empathicbrain.com) that explains how the science of mirror neurons has changed our
understanding of human nature and psychiatric disorders.

The empathic brain
One of the most remarkable features of human interactions is our intuitive sense that the people around us have intentions,
sensations and emotions like our own. In this talk, I will review evidence that neurons and brain regions involved in
controlling our own actions become activated while we see or hear those of others (1, 2). I will address the less recognized
fact that regions involved in sensing our own body (SI/SII) become active while we see the movements and tactile
sensations of others (3). I will show that insular and cingulate cortices become active while we view the emotions of others
(4). These three sets of data show that we have an empathic brain: a brain that activates representations of our own actions,
sensations and emotions whenever we see those of others, as if we were in their stead. I will suggest, that these vicarious
activations are not the mysterious product of some genetic predisposition to empathize with others, but, at least in part, the
result of simple Hebbian learning between executing an action and seeing/hearing oneself do the action (5). I will then
review evidence, that disturbing regions of the empathic brain can lead to impairments in understanding the inner states of
others. I will then present behavioral data from a study in which we find evidence for empathy in rats (6), and data from a
study with participants with psychopathy where we find the empathic brain to be hypoactive.

8

Saturday 1st December, 9:00am – 10:30am
Queensland Brain Institute Auditorium – Level 7
9:0010:30

Symposium – QBI Auditorium
Action Understanding, Autism, and Mirroring
Chaired by A/Professor Ross Cunnington, University of Queensland
Speakers
Dr Kevin Pelphrey, Yale University, USA
Building a translational social neuroscience of autism
Dr Valeria Gazzola, Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience
Somatosensation in action
Dr Peter Enticott, Monash University
Do mirror systems play a role in social cognition and autism?

10:3011:00

Morning Tea Break

9

Saturday 1st December, 11:00am – 12:30pm
Physiology Lecture Theatres
STREAM 1 – Room 358

STREAM 2 – Room 360

Chair: Mark Williams

Chair: Nellie Georgiou-Karistianis

11:00- The effects of cognitive context on visual11:15 motor interactions
Marta Bortoletto, Jason Mattingley and Ross
Cunnington

Cognitive processes involved in fluency
tests: A neuropsychological investigation
Gail Robinson

11:15- Mu-rhythm desynchronisation demonstrates
11:30 action representation in pianists during
passive listening of piano melodies
Carolyn Wu, Vanessa Lim, Jeffrey Hamm and
Ian Kirk

Distinctive semantic feature loss in
Alzheimer’s disease
Kieran Flanagan, David Copland, Helen
Chenery, Gerard Byrne and Anthony Angwin

11:30- Motor simulation underpins temporal
11:45 coordination in joint action
Giacomo Novembre, Luca Ticini, SchützBosbach and Peter Keller

Brain activity during word rhyming: Are two
disorders better than one?
Karen Waldie and Anna Wilson

11:45- Using a virtual hand to investigate body
12:00 representations
Regine Zopf, Jason Friedman and Mark
Williams

Optimising speech outcomes in Deep Brain
Stimulation for essential tremor
Adam Vogel, Hugh McDermott, Richard
Peppard and Colette McKay

12:00- Action processing under attentional load
12:15 Veronika Halasz, Jason Mattingley and Ross
Cunnington

New evidence for a complex interaction
between executive control and motor
functioning in young female FMR1
premutation carriers
Claudine Kraan, Darren Hocking, John
Bradshaw, Nellie Gerogiou-Karistianis and Kim
Cornish

12:15- Differences in connectivity of putative mirror
12:30 neuron network between stroke survivors
and healthy controls
Susan Palmer, Ross Cunnington, Katherine
Reynolds and Leeanne Carey

The use of eye movements to detect
cognitive changes in carriers of medium
expansions of the FMR1 gene
Annie Shelton, Claudine Kraan, Kim Cornish
and Joanne Fielding

12:3013:30

Lunch Break

10

Saturday 1st December, 1:30pm – 3:00pm
Physiology Lecture Theatres
STREAM 1 – Room 358

STREAM 2 – Room 360

Chair: Paul Corballis

Chair: Rob Hester

13:3013:45

The effects of race and experience on neural
empathy for pain
Yuan Cao, Luis Contreras and Ross Cunnington

Impaired learning from errors in chronic
cannabis users: Dorsal anterior cingulate
cortex and hippocampus hypoactivity
Susan Carey, Liam Nestor, Jennifer Jones, Hugh
Garavan and Robert Hester

13:4514:00

Neural oscillations related to self-evaluation in Dopamine gene variants are associated with
social comparison context: An EEG study
EEG measure of error processing
Yan Mu
Tarrant Cummins, Mykalos Byrne, Ziarih Hawi
and Mark Bellgrove

14:0014:15

Degrees of separation: Are mirror neurons
human language specific?
Bernadine Cocks, Graham Jamieson, Ian Evans
and Bruce Stevenson

ERP-based multivariate pattern classification
predicts errors before an over response is
executed
Stefan Bode and Jutta Stahl

14:1514:30

Acquired ‘mirror pain’ in amputees
Bernadette Fitzgibbon, Peter Enticott, Melita
Giummarra, Paul Fitzgerald, Nellie GeorgiouKaristianis and John Bradshaw

Interactions between proactive and reactive
response inhibition
Paul Sowman

12:3014:45

Where I feel is where I attend: Proprioceptive
locationalisation and visuospatial attention
near hands
Hayley Colman, Roger Remington and Ada
Kritikos

Inhibitory control of a rewarding stimulus
under different reward and distractor
conditions: A fMRI study
Franco Scalzo, David O’Connor and Robert
Hester

14:4515:00

Can’t take my eyes off you: Goal-irrelevant
kinematics of observed actions prime
subcomponents of motor output under
perceptual load
Samuel Sparks and Ada Kritikos

Disruption to frontal white matter pathways
related to performance on the stop-signal task
Todd Jolly, Ross Fulham, Pat Michie, Christopher
Levi, Mark Parsons and Frini Karayanidis

15:0016:30

Afternoon Tea and Poster Session - QBI

11

Saturday 1st December, 3:00pm – 5:30pm
Queensland Brain Institute Auditorium – Level 7
15:00- Afternoon Tea and Poster Session
16:30
16:30- Keynote Lecture – QBI Auditorium
17:30
Professor Kia Nobre, University of Oxford, UK
Temporal expectations: the fourth dimension in attention
19:3022:30

Conference Dinner
Watt Restaurant + Bar, Brisbane Powerhouse, New Farm

Keynote Lecture
Professor Kia Nobre, University of Oxford, UK
Anna Christina (known as Kia) Nobre is a cognitive neuroscientist interested in
understanding the principles of the neural systems that support cognitive functions in the
human brain. Her current research investigates how neural activity linked to perception and
cognition is dynamically modulated according to memories, task goals, and expectations.
She is also interested in understanding how these fine and large-scale regulatory
mechanisms develop, and how they are disturbed in disorders of mental health. Her work
integrates behavioural methods with a powerful combination of non-invasive techniques to
image and stimulate the human brain. Kia obtained her PhD from Yale University. She
moved to Oxford in 1994 where she is now Professor of Cognitive Neuroscience at the
University of Oxford and Tutorial Fellow of Psychology at New College. Kia directs the
Oxford Centre for Human Brain Activity, a state-of-the-art facility for scientists investigating
the neural dynamics that underpin human cognition and the neural deficits in psychiatric and
neurological disorders, and heads the Brain & Cognition Lab, in the Department of
Experimental Psychology.

Temporal expectations: the fourth dimension in attention
The field of ‘selective attention’ has convincingly established that our sampling and experience of the external
environment is highly selective. When all works well, dynamic regulatory mechanisms adapt sensory, cognitive, and
motor mechanisms to prioritise events that are relevant to current task goals according to our expectations. The last few
decades have witnessed significant advances in unveiling the neural mechanisms for attention to spatial locations and
object features. The fourth dimension, time, is a relative newcomer to the field. By now it clear that we are able to orient
attention flexibly in anticipation of the predicted timing of relevant events. But we still know little about the mechanisms by
which we code temporal expectations and how they come to tune neural excitability to the relevant moments of our
unravelling environment. In my laboratory, we have developed different experimental paradigms to manipulate temporal
expectations according to informative temporal cues, probability functions, and rhythms and have demonstrated that
temporal expectations can enhance speed of responses as well as perceptual discrimination of events. By recording brain
activity during task performance, we have shown that these behavioural benefits come about through mechanisms that
complement those for spatial attention. Interestingly, when temporal expectations are combined with spatial expectations
they enhance early modulatory effects of spatial attention. Neural oscillations appear to play a major role in orchestrating
the effects of temporal expectations, enabling the regulation of neural excitability associated with spatial or other features
over time, in order to optimise the processing of relevant events at their expected moments.

12

Sunday 2nd December, 9:00am – 10:30am
Queensland Brain Institute Auditorium – Level 7
9:0010:30

Symposium – QBI Auditorium
Vision and Perceptual Awareness
Chaired by Professor Jason Mattingley, University of Queensland
Speakers
Dr Derek Arnold, University of Queensland
Why is binocular rivalry uncommon?
Dr Olivia Carter, University of Melbourne
Onset rivalry: Brief presentation isolates an early independent phase of perceptual
competition.
Dr Joel Pearson, University of New South Wales
Accumulating decisional evidence without awareness
Dr Nao Tsuchiya, Monash University
Towards a system-level understanding of conscious vision

10:3011:00

Morning Tea Break

13

Sunday 2nd December, 11:00am – 12:30pm
Physiology Lecture Theatres
STREAM 1 – Room 358

STREAM 2 – Room 360

Chair: Joel Pearson

Chair: Olivia Carter

11:0011:15

Atypical neural response to high and low
spatial frequency stimuli in a rare case of
visual perseveration
Mark Williams, Bhuvanesh Awasthi, Paul
Sowman, Matthew Finkbeiner and Anina Rich

Measuring the level of consciousness based
on the amount of integrated information
Masafumi Oizumi, Toru Yanagawa, Shun-ichi
Amari, Naotsugu Tsuchiya and Naotaka Fujii

11:1511:30

Autistic children show more efficient
parvocellular visual processing
Alyse Brown and David Crewther

Brain networks in health and disease –
Epilepsy as a dynamic network phenomena
John Terry, Oscar Benjamin and Mark
Richardson

11:3011:45

The magnitude and spatial extent of visual
crowding are reduced during saccade
preparation
Will Harrison, Roger Remington and Jason
Mattingley

Early visual evoked potentials are modulated
by matching odarants: Evident for olfactoryvisual interactions in humans
Amanda Robinson, Jason Mattingley and Judith
Reinhard

11:4512:00

Testing theories of visual position perception
by manipulating magnocellular processing for
various motion trajectories
Mark Chappell, Zach Potter and Trevor Hine

Multimodal EEG-fMRI integration using DCM
to study network interactions during
perception of faces
Vinh Nguyen, Michael Breakspear and Ross
Cunnington

12:0012:15

Shape aftereffects reflect a weighted function
of retinal and surface slant information
Katherine Storrs and Derek Arnold

Perceptual decision making and the timeorder effect: A neural circuit model of biased
vibrotactile discrimination
Angela Langdon, John Rinzel and Michael
Breakspear

12:1512:30

Spatio-temporal structure of multi-focal
magnetoencephalographic visual evoked
potentials (MVEP)
David Crewther, Alyse Brown and Laila Hugrass

It’s beginning to look a lot like my hand: Fake
hand perceived to resemble own hand for
people with body dysmorphic disorder but not
controls
Ryan Kaplan, Susan Rossell, Peter Enticott,
Jakob Hohwy and David Castle

12:3013:00

Lunch Break

13:0014:00

Annual General Meeting of the Australasian Cognitive Neuroscience Society
Room 358

14

Sunday 2nd December, 2:00pm – 3:30pm
Physiology Lecture Theatres
STREAM 1 – Room 358

STREAM 2 – Room 360

Chair: David Crewther

Chair: Luca Cocchi

14:00- Medial temporal lobe substructures
14:15 differentially contribute to processing
within- and between-domain associative
recognition memory for semantic and nonsemantic stimuli
Marshall Dalton, Michael Hornberger and
Olivier Piguet

Disruption to frontal white matter pathways
on performance in the task-switching
paradigm
Frini Karayanidis, Todd Jolly, Patrick Cooper,
Christopher Levi, Marks Parsons and Pat Michie

14:15- The influence of Brain-Derived
14:30 Neurotrophic Factor val66met
Polymorphism on the degree of long-term
potentiation of human visual evoked
potentials predicts memory performance
Ian Kirk

Modulation of fronto-parietal connectivity by
cognitive interference and working memory:
A dynamic causal modeling study
Ian Harding, Murat Yucel, Ben Harrison,
Christos Pantelis and Michael Breakspear

14:30- Dissociable hippocampal representations
14:45 of environmental size and complexity
during active spatial navigation
Oliver Baumann and Jason Mattingley

Resting-state functional connectivity in
Huntington’s disease: The IMAGE-HD study
Govinda Poudel, Gary Egan, Andrew
Churchyard, Phyllis Chua, Julie Stout and Nellie
Georgiou-Karistianis

14:45- Distinct reinstatement of multi-voxel
15:00 patterns predicts memory for complex
audio-visual stimuli
Alexandra Woolgar, Alexander Walther, Mark
Williams, Anina Rich and Nikolaus
Kriegeskorte

Dissociable effects of focal inhibition and
excitation of primary motor cortex on
functional connectivity within the motor
network
Luke Hearne, Luca Cocchi, Martin V. Sale,
Andrew Zalesky, Amy Taylor and Jason B.
Mattingley

15:00- Interaction of spatial- and feature-based
15:15 attention during distractor processing in
the human brain
Inga Laube, Jason Mattingley and Mark
Bellgrove

Morphology and connectivity of the anterior
cingulate cortex in unilateral cerebral palsy
Simon Scheck, Kerstin Pannek, Roslyn Boyd
and Stephen Rose

15:15- The role of working memory in spatial
15:30 contextual cueing
Susan Travis, Jason Mattingley and Paul Dux

Connectivity-based parcellation of
subcortical structures in the preterm infant’s
brain at term age
Kerstin Pannek, Giulia D’Acunto, Andrea
Guzzetta, Simon Finnigan, Roslyn Boyd, Paul
Colditz and Stephen Rose

15:3016:00

Conference Closing – Student Prize Awards
Room 358

15

Symposium Abstracts
Friday 9:00am to 10:30am
Understanding Schizophrenia:
Phenomenological, cognitive, and
neuroscience perspectives
Chair: Professor Pat Michie, University of Newcastle
Abandoned body, weakened self and the internal landscape
of schizophrenia
Sohee Park
Department of Psychology, Vanderbilt University, USA
Splitting of the self and anomalous agency were central to early
concept of schizophrenia but self disturbance as a core feature is
absent from the current diagnostic criteria and has not been fully
addressed in the context of social impairments that prevent
recovery. We studied the control of mental representation in
social perception, perspective taking, self-other transformations,
and simulation to elucidate the relationship between core
cognitive deficit of schizophrenia and self-disturbances using
behavioral and neuroimaging techniques. The results from these
studies indicate that a unique profile of cognitive deficits and
enhancement when combined with social isolation may
contribute to anomalous sense of self and agency. Specifically,
individuals with schizophrenia appear to show superior mental
imagery generation, inspection and manipulation abilities in spite
of their permanent working memory deficits and their enhanced
imagery ability extends to perspective taking that is related to a
porous sense of the body boundary and self. Further
investigation revealed that schizophrenia spectrum is associated
with weakened body ownership and about half of outpatients with
schizophrenia as well as prodromal individuals have experienced
out-of-body phenomenon. These disturbances of self seem to be
associated with reduced social interactions and increased social
isolation, as observed empirically as well as in published first
person accounts across the past three decades. Taken together,
these results depict a complex and richly contoured internal
landscape of schizophrenia. Severe cognitive deficits coupled
with superior abilities may lead to misperception,
misinterpretation and miscalculation of the internal and external
worlds and contribute to a subjective experience of unreality. This
brings us back to the core nature of schizophrenia as the
disorder of self, and highlights the importance of integrating the
methods of cognitive neuroscience with the subjective
phenomenology of the psychosis experience.

Brain Imaging Correlates of Emerging Schizophrenia
Ulrich Schall
Priority Centre for Translational Neuroscience & Mental Health
Research, The University of Newcastle, Australia
Schizophrenia Research Institute, Australia
Hunter Medical Research Institute, Australia
The early detection of the schizophrenia prodrome in young
people considered at-risk of developing this severe mental illness
has entered mainstream clinical practice despite the limitations in
the predictive specificity of the clinical criteria that define the Atrisk Mental State Syndrome (ARMS). These limitations are
increasingly addressed by brain imaging research which has
added substantial evidence to the notion of emerging and
progressive grey and white matter abnormalities in the early
phase of illness. The association of the apparent neuropathology
with the clinical signs and symptoms of the disorder – along with
cognitive impairment and the underlying pathophysiology – will
be reviewed in an “ultra-high risk” cohort of the Minds in
Transition (MinT) project.

Connectomic disturbances in schizophrenia
Alex Fornito
Melbourne Neuropsychiatry Centre and Centre for Neural
Engineering, University of Melbourne, Australia
NICTA Victorian Research Laboratory, Australia
Accumulating evidence indicates that schizophrenia is not
caused by focal pathology in a single, specific brain region.
Rather, it arises from disordered interactions within and between
distributed neural circuits. In other words, it is a disorder of brain
connectivity. A great deal of insight into the pathophysiology of
the disorder can therefore be gained from recent attempts to map
the human connectome–the complete set of neural elements and
connections comprising the brain. This talk will overview some of
the basic concepts and methods of the burgeoning field of human
connectomics and illustrate how these techniques can be used to
characterize disruptions at either the level of specific neural
circuits or the entire brain in patients with schizophrenia. Many of
these changes have a genetic basis, suggesting that they
represent viable risk biomarkers for the disorder.

Functional mapping of semantic association in
schizophrenia
Sharna Jamadar1,2 Godfrey Pearlson1,3 and Michal Assaf1,4
1
Institute of Living, Olin Neuropsychiatry Research Center, USA
2
Monash Biomedical Imaging/School of Psychology & Psychiatry,
Monash University, Australia
3
Departments of Psychiatry & Neurobiology, Yale University,
USA
4
Department of Psychiatry, Yale University, USA
Individuals with schizophrenia show a broad range of language
impairments, including abnormalities in verbal production and
comprehension, reduced sentence complexity and semantic
processing deficits. Here, I will present the results of two recent
studies of language dysfunction in schizophrenia using the
Semantic Object Retrieval Task (SORT). SORT indexes noncompositional semantic association, where participants are
presented with word-pairs that either recall a third unpresented
word (e.g. ‘honey’ and ‘stings’ activates ‘bees’, Retrieval trials) or
do not (e.g. ‘teacher’ and ‘plastic’, No-Retrieval trials). Individuals
with schizophrenia reported more associations between
unrelated word pairs than healthy controls, and this over-retrieval
increased with formal thought disorder severity. Individuals with
schizophrenia also failed to report associations between related
word pairs, this under-retrieval increased with negative symptom
severity. Retrieval vs. no-retrieval trials activated a distributed
fronto-parietal-temporal network, group differences (FWE p<.05)
were obtained in bilateral inferior parietal lobule, with
schizophrenia showing significantly reduced activity in this region
compared to healthy controls. The IPL plays a central role in both
the semantic system and heteromodal association network,
serving as a ‘supramodal convergence zone’, binding
representations from multiple sensory/motor/affective zones to
allow efficient, rapid processing of the current context.
Implications of the results for models of the semantic system and
psycholinguistic impairment in schizophrenia will be explored.

16

Symposium Abstracts
Saturday 9:00am to 10:30am
Action Understanding, Autism, and Mirroring
Chair: A/Professor Ross Cunnington, University of
Queensland
Building a translational social neuroscience of autism
Kevin A. Pelphrey
Yale Child Study Center, Yale University, USA
Humans are intensely social beings that have evolved and
developed within highly social environments in which each
individual is dependent upon others. We constantly engage in
social perception, using cues from facial expressions, gaze shifts,
and body movements, to infer the intentions of others and plan
our own actions accordingly. My laboratory has been
investigating the properties of specialized brain systems that are
important for social perception using functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI), eye tracking, and molecular genetics
in typically developing adults and children, as well as in children
and adults with autism, a neurodevelopmental disorder marked
by severe dysfunction in aspects of social perception. In this talk,
I will describe these studies in three parts: First, I will describe
our basic research using fMRI to identify the basic brain
mechanisms for social perception in typically developing children
and adults. Second, I will describe our most recent efforts to
chart the typical and atypical development of brain mechanisms
for social perception in children with and without autism, as well
as in unaffected siblings of children with autism. Finally, I will
discuss our latest studies involving the study of treatment effects
(drug and behavioral treatments) on brain function in children
with autism.

Do mirror systems play a role in social cognition and
autism?
Peter Enticott
Monash Alfred Psychiatry Research Centre, Central Clinical
School, Monash University, Australia
Mirror systems have been implicated in a range of social
cognitive processes, whereby they are thought to represent a
neurobiological substrate for understanding other’s minds. It has
also been widely suggested that autism spectrum disorder
(ASD), which is characterised by impairments in social relating,
might involve dysfunction within mirror system circuitry. We have
conducted a series of studies utilising transcranial magnetic
stimulation (TMS) and electromyography (EMG) that examine the
role of mirror systems in a range of social cognitive processes,
including facial affect recognition, social perception, and emotion
processing, in both healthy adults and individuals diagnosed with
ASD. Results provide some support for a link between mirror
system activity and social cognition, although this is most evident
for tasks involving an overt emotional element. With respect to
autism, individuals with ASD display reduced mirror system
activity when viewing other people’s motor behaviour, and this is
associated with the severity of their social symptoms. There are,
however, instances in which mirror system activity in ASD does
not appear to be impaired (e.g., during the observation of
interactive behaviour). These findings provide somewhat
inconsistent support for the link between mirror systems, social
cognition, and autism. More recent theoretical models of mirror
system function, which stress the importance of top-down social
processing and associative learning, may provide a more tenable
account of the functional significance of mirror systems.

Somatosensation in Action
Valeria Gazzola
University Medical Center Groningen, Netherlands
Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience, Netherlands
The mirror neuron system (MNS), active both during action
execution and observation, is classically thought to include only
premotor and posterior parietal areas. Recently, the primary
somatosensory cortex (the BA1/2 inparticular) was also shown to
be activated during action execution and observation. In my talk I
will therefore focus on the role that the somatosensory cortices
could play within the action perception circuits. In particular I will
show that (1) TMS induced changes in BA1/2 activity predicted
changes of action-specific brain activation in premotor nodes of
the MNS, supporting the idea that BA1/2 plays a causal role in
the MNS, (2) BA1/2 plays a causal role in extracting
somatosensory features (heavy/light) from observed action, and
(3) µ-suppression actually correlates more with activity in BA1/2
than the premotor nodes. I will conclude with the idea that the
MNS might provide an integrated, somato-motor representation
of other's actions.

17

Symposium Abstracts
Sunday 9:00am to 10:30am
Vision and Perceptual Awareness
Chair: Professor Jason Mattingley, University of
Queensland
Why is binocular rivalry uncommon?
Derek Arnold
School of Psychology, University of Queensland, Ausralia
Most binocular rivalry papers and abstracts begin with an
incautious fib. Not this one. When different images project to
corresponding points in the two eyes they can instigate a
phenomenon called binocular rivalry (BR), wherein each image
seems to intermittently disappear such that only one of the two
images is seen at a time. Note the important caveat – this
situation can instigate BR, but usually it doesn’t. Unmatched
monocular images are frequently encountered in daily life, but
this does not tend to induce BR. In this talk I will explore the
reasons for this and discuss implications for BR in general. I will
argue that BR is resolved in favor of the instantaneously stronger
neural signal, and that this process is driven by an adaptation
that enhances the visibility of distant fixated objects over more
proximate obstructions of an eye. Accordingly, BR would reflect
the dynamics of an inherently visual operation that usually deals
with real-world constraints.
Onset rivalry: Brief presentation isolates an early
independent phase of perceptual competition.
Olivia Carter
School of Psychological Sciences, University of Melbourne,
Australia
When the left and right eyes are simultaneously presented with
different images, observers typically report exclusive awareness
of only one image. This phenomenon is termed binocular rivalry
reflecting the fact that the dominant image “competes” for
perceptual awareness and leads to alternations in perception
every few seconds. Despite the apparent continuity in perceptual
switching, we now demonstrate that the initial “onset” period is
fundamentally different to all subsequent rivalry epochs. Using
brief intermittent presentations, rivalry dominance shows strong
biases such that the same target is perceived with each
successive stimulus onset. These biases remain consistent
within any given location, but vary across the visual field in a
distribution that is stable over multiple weeks but highly
idiosyncratic across observers. If the presentation exceeds ~1sec
at any location, however, the very different and much more
balanced alternations of sustained binocular rivalry become
apparent. The effects of high-level cognitive and affective factors
at onset are less clear but also show differences from their
effects in sustained viewing. Together these findings suggest
these phases may be driven, at least partly, by different neural
mechanisms. This talk will summarize current research and
explore the factors influencing this initial ‘onset’ stage of
perceptual competition. It will also discuss the important
implications for the interpretation of any rivalry experiments using
brief presentation paradigms and for understanding how the brain
copes with binocular discrepancies in natural viewing conditions
in which our eyes constantly move around an ever-changing
environment.

Accumulating decisional evidence without awareness
Joel Pearson and Alexandra Vlassova
Psychology, The University of New South Wales, Australia
The mystery of the possible functions of conscious awareness
has captivated the minds of scientists and philosophers for
generations. Recently, there has been a surge of interest in
exploring the role of awareness in the context of decision‐
making. A particularly controversial and heavily debated claim is
that information can be processed and evaluated unconsciously.
Here, we address this issue through a novel paradigm that allows
us to control and manipulate both awareness and the decision
variables. Random‐ dot‐motion stimuli, which require the gradual
accumulation of evidence for a decision to be reached, were
suppressed from conscious awareness by a dichoptic dynamic
noise pattern.
We found that information in the suppressed signal modulated
decision accuracy, which suggests that evidence was
accumulated outside of awareness. This unconscious boost to
accuracy was not accompanied by a similar boost to confidence.
These results indicate that information that is accumulated in the
absence of conscious awareness can improve accuracy on a
sensory decision‐making task. Our findings present compelling
evidence that perceptual and metacognitive awareness are not
necessary for evidence to be accumulated and an accurate
decision to be made.
Towards a system-level understanding of conscious vision:
a study with electrocorticogram (ECoG) recording under
continuous flash suppression (CFS).
Naotsugu Tsuchiya
School of Psychology and Psychiatry, Monash University,
Australia
When physical inputs to the visual system are dissociated from
subjective conscious perception under various visual illusions,
such as binocular rivalry, previous studies have shown that
activities of the single neurons in higher visual areas correlates
with the conscious perception while those in lower visual areas
correlates more with the physical inputs. However, how the visual
system as a whole integrates information from the low- to highlevel visual areas and generates conscious vision remains poorly
understood. To understand the system-level dynamics underlying
conscious vision, we recorded the electrocorticogram (ECoG)
from 64-128 channels implanted in various cortical regions in
monkeys and humans while subjects performed a detection task
under continuous flash suppression (CFS). Under CFS, an
otherwise highly salient visual object presented to one eye
becomes invisible due to a rapid sequence of flashes presented
to the other eye. Depending on the strength of suppression, we
found that reaction times (RTs) can be rendered highly variable
across trials and that longer suppression trials were associated
with the strong evoked power at low-frequency bands in the early
visual areas as well as in the prefrontal cortex. We will also
present some preliminary results on the inter-areal interaction
using Granger causality analysis. Our preliminary results are
consistent with a view that conscious vision is dynamically
regulated at the system level through interaction among various
cortical areas at various frequencies.

18

Poster Session
Friday 3:00pm to 4:30pm
Queensland Brain Institute – Level 7
1.

2.

3.

The influence of subliminal threat cues on successful
response inhibition
Catherine Orr, Hugh Garavan, Karen Weierstall and Robert
Hester
The "weaker" conditioning paradigm: Differences in
fear learning and the propensity to develop phobias
Yiling Ho and Ottmar V. Lipp
Evidence for functionally distinct regions of the right
inferior frontal gyrus during motivationally-modulated
inhibitory control
David A. O'Connor and Robert Hester

4.

A direct comparison of controlled and automatic
cognitive inhibition using EEG source analysis
Tara Spokes, Tim Cutmore and David Shum

5.

Mental rotation in an n-back task: Performance related
working memory manipulation in parietal cortex
Gemma Lamp, Bonnie Alexander, Andrea Rockliffe, Sheila
Crewther and David P. Crewther

6.

At-risk alcohol users show decreased sensitivity to
punishment severity in learning from errors
Jennifer L. Moore, Sarah Rossiter, Elizabeth Beadle and
Robert Hester

7.

Examining the Neural Correlates of Learning From
Errors: The Respective Roles of the pMFC and Insula
Cortex
Kathleen Charles-Walsh1*, Catherine Orr1 and Robert
Hester

8.

9.

Modelling of cognitive functions in driving environment
using EEG
Nabaraj Dahal, Nanda Nandagopal, R. Vijayalakshimi,
Bernadine Cocks, Andrew Nafalski and Zorica Nedic
The contributions of lower order cognitive skills to
executive function performance in schizophrenia
Erica Neill and Susan L. Rossell

10. What causes misattribution of meaning in
schizophrenia? Evaluations and implications from the
single word level
Eric J. Tan, Gregory W. Yelland and Susan L. Rossell
11. Pre-attentive processing as the link between schizotypy
and autistic tendencies
Talitha Ford
12. Greater disruption to the control of voluntary saccades
and online refinement of saccade accuracy in highfunctioning autism than Asperger's disorder
Beth Johnson, Nicole Rinehart, Chloe Stanley-Cary, Owen
White and Joanne Fielding
13.

Neural correlates of inverted faces in individuals with
high and low autistic-like traits
Svjetlana Vukusic, David P. Crewther, Joseph Ciorciari
and Jordy Kaufman

14. Neural mechanisms underlying emotional processing in
healthy older adults: Electrophysiological correlates of
visual affective word processing
Tiffany Au, Anthony Angwin, David Copland, George
Mellick, John O'Sullivan, Peter Silburn, Gerard Byrne and
Nadeeka Dissanayaka
15. Posterior hippocampus contributes differentially to long
-term consolidation of contextual memory across age
groups
Sicong Tu and Michael Hornberger
16. Generating multiple false autobiographical memories in
single subjects
Aleea Devitt, Edwin Monk-Fromont, Daniel Schacter and
Donna Rose Addis
17. The functional epistasis of 5-HTTLPR and BDNF
Val66Met on emotion processing: A preliminary study
Tim Outhred, Pritha Das, Carol Dobson-Stone, Kristi
Griffiths, Kim L. Felmingham, Richard A. Bryant and Andrew
H. Kemp
18. How the Thatcher illusion reveals evolutionary
differences in the face processing of primates
Kimberly Weldon, Jessica Taubert and Lisa A. Parr
19. Contrast orientation and recognition of facial identity across
variable lighting conditions
Samuel L. Pearce
20. Does the visual mismatch negativity (vMMN) care about
eye-of-origin information?
Bradley N. Jack, Urte Roeber and Robert P. O'Shea
21. Distinct signatures of visual target selection and
distractor suppression investigated using high-density
electroencephalography
Dion T. Henare and Paul M. Corballis
22. Is there a magnocellular advantage? A TMS study of
early visual cortex
Alexandra L. Shilton, Robin Laycock, Claire L. Hoysted and
Sheila Crewther
23. Measurement of human visual cortex excitability using
suprathreshold phosphene perception
Alice K. Lagas, Cathy M. Stinear, Winston D. Byblow, Bruce
R. Russel, Robert R. Kydd and Benjamin Thompson
24. Critical periods of early visual cortex activation for
abrupt and ramped object identification: a TMS study
Claire L. Hoysted, Robin Laycock, Alexandra L. Shilton and
Sheila Crewther
25. Statistical segmentation of streams of syllables: a pilot
EEG study
Leidy J. Castro-Meneses, Paul Sowman and Blake W.
Johnson
26. Does semantic content influence differential ERP
responding in males and females?
Rosemaree Miller and Frances Martin
27. If you want your writing to be remembered, use a
disfluent font
Owen Churches, Mark Kohler, Scott Coussens, Myra
Thiessen and Hannah Keage
28. An ERP analysis of the world-sense and semantics
mismatches in Japanese sentences
Yu Odagaki, Sakriani Sakti, Graham Neubig, Tomoki Toda
and Satoshi Nakamura

19

29. Tracking eye movements in attentional asymmetries
Nicole A. Thomas
30. Moving to the direction of the eyes: Finding the masked
gaze cueing effect
Shahd Al-Janabi and Matthew Finkbeiner
31. The causal attribution between self-made actions,
others' actions and their sensory consequences
Simmy Poonian, Guy Wallis and Ross Cunnington
32. The neural dynamics of temporal attention: Evidence
from EEG and fMRI
Chase S. Sherwell and Ross Cunnington
33. Manipulation of intergroup relationships does not
reduce racial bias in empathetic neural responses
Emily R. Hielscher, Luis S. Contreras and Ross Cunnington
34. Investigating Shared Task Representations in the Social
Simon Paradigm: Effects of Friendship and Empathy
Ruth Ford and Brad Aberdein
35. The effect of visual spatial attention on bilateral
plasticity in the human motor cortices
Daina S. Dickins, Martin V. Sale, Jason B. Mattingley and
Marc R. Kamke
36. Visual spatial attention influences plasticity in the
human motor cortex
Marc R. Kamke, Alexander Ryan, Martin V. Sale, Stephan
Riek, Timothy J. Carroll and Jason B. Mattingley
37. A Neuronavigated TMS Investigation of the Functional
Chronometry of V5 and Middle and Posterior
Intraparietal Sulcus in Motion-Driven Attention
Robin Laycock, Bonnie Alexander, David P. Crewther and
Sheila G. Crewther
38. Motor cortical plasticity is enhanced by passive
observation of mirror-matched limb movements
Martin V. Sale and Jason B. Mattingley
39. Objective measures of efficacy of deep brain
stimulation for treatment of tremor
Colette M. Mckay, Thushara Perera, Richard Peppard,
Hugh J. McDermott and Adam P. Vogel
40. Dual Task Performance in Huntington’s Disease Using
Cancellation and Auditory Tasks
Eleftheria Vaportzis, Nellie Georgiou-Karistianis, Andrew
Churchyard and Julie Stout
41. Potential diffusion and volume biomarkers of
longitudinal neuropathological change in premanifest
and early symptomatic Huntington’s disease: Results of
IMAGE-HD 18-month follow-up
Juan F. Domínguez, Gary F. Egan, Marcus A. Gray, Andrew
Churchyard, Phyllis Chua, Julie C. Stout and Nellie
Georgiou-Karistianis
42. The role of the corpus callosum in regulating voluntary
and involuntary unimanual movement in multiple
sclerosis
Anne-Marie Ternes, Jerome J. Maller, Joanne Fielding,
Patricia Addamo, Owen White and Nellie GeorgiouKaristianis
43. Acute administration of escitalopram increases salience
of trait responsivity to stressful events: A potential EEG
marker of individual differences in therapeutic
effectiveness of SSRIs
Matthew A. Beauregard

44. Inflammation in Major Depressive Disorder and
psychophysiological correlates
Peter Goodin, Joseph Ciorciari and Susan Rossell
45. Neurological and affective vulnerability to depression:
A prospective study
Michael D. Tooley, Rosie Moody and Gina M. Grimshaw
46. Quantifying sub-optimal decision making in depression
Matthew P. Hyett, Gordon B. Parker and Michael
Breakspear
47. Exploring biological motion using binocular rivalry:
Starting conditions and preliminary findings
Graeme A. Hacker, Anna Brooks and Rick van der Zwan
48. Discriminating sex from representations of the human
hand: Evidence of a pan-stimulus male bias
Justin Gaetano, Anna Brooks and Rick van der Zwan
49. Cross-modal connectivity of secondary auditory cortex
with higher visual area in the congenitally deaf
Yulwan Sung and Seiji Ogawa
50. Using diffusion tensor imaging to investigate how
BDNF genotype influences thalamo-cortical tracts
Nicole S. Mckay, Sarina J. Iwabuchi, Chris S. Thompson
and Ian J. Kirk
51. Visualisation of complex neural connections during
cognitive load using EEG data
Naga M. Dasari, Doraisamy Nandagopal, Vijayalakshmi
Ramasamy, Bruce Thomas, Nabaraj Dahal and Bernadine
Cocks
52. Pre-discharge QEEG can inform prognoses of poststroke cognitive impairments
Emma Schleiger, Nabeel Sheikh, Tennille Rowland,
Stephen Read, Andrew Wong and Simon Finnigan
53. A systematic review of obstetric complications as risk
factors for eating disorder and a meta-analysis of
delivery method and prematurity
Isabel Krug, Emma Taborelli, Hannah Sallis, Janet Treasure
and Nadia Micali
54. Social and emotional processing as a behavioural
endophenotype in eating disorders: A pilot
investigation in twins
Natalie Kanakam, Isabel Krug, Charlotte Raoult, David
Collier and Janet Treasure
55. Suppression of memory acquisition due to coadministration of lithium and atorvastatin in male mice:
Role of nitric oxide pathway
Mehrak Javadi-Paydar, Amir Reza Honarmand, Nasim
Pourtabatabaei and Ahmad Reza Dehpour
56. Influence of isoflurane duration on permeability of the
blood-brain barrier in mice
Emma Morrisroe and Stephen Robinson
57. Exposure to inhalational anaesthetics causes
neuroinflammation
Sasha M. Zaman and Stephen R. Robinson
58. The effect of midazolam and sevoflurane anaesthesia
on the permeability of the blood-brain barrier
Ari Pinar and Stephen R. Robinson
59. Psychological needs and indices of well-being among
physical disabilities
Behzad Behzadnia and Malek Ahmadi

20

Poster Session
Saturday 3:00pm to 4:30pm
Queensland Brain Institute – Level 7

16. Visual N1 peak latency predicts individual location of
point of subjective simultaneity and prior-experience in
audiovisual temporal order judgments
Lars T. Boenke, David Alais1 and Frank W. Ohl

1.

Measures of white matter decline and global cognitive
ability in older adults
Jaime L. Rennie, Todd A. Jolly, Pat Michie, Christopher
Levi, Mark Parsons, Rhoshel Lenroot and Frini Karayanidis

17. The influence of cognitive load on visual perceptual
processing
Ping Liu, Luca Cocchi, Jason Forte, David K. Sewell and
Olivia Carter

2.

The relationship between arterial and venous pulsatility
and microstructural white matter changes
Todd A. Jolly, Grant Bateman, Christopher Levi, Mark
Parsons and Frini Karayanidis

18. EEG alpha power and methadone treatment
Grace Y. Wang, Trecia A. Wouldes, Rob Kydd and Bruce R.
Russell

3.

Audiovisual Speech Processing depends on Context: a
high-density EEG study
Tim Paris, Jeesun Kim and Christopher Davis

4.

Object information in the brain
Chris Davis, Tim Paris, Bronson Harry and Jeesun Kim

5.

Beyond modality-specific brain regions: The neural
implementation of object colour knowledge requires
anterior temporal lobes
Rocco Chiou, Paul Sowman, Andy Etchell and Anina N.
Rich

19. Alpha peak training in sensory motor areas increases
efficiency of executive attention networks
Russell D. Downham, Harley S. Macnamara and Graham A.
Jamieson
20. Source localisation of cortical oscillation differences in
Yoga meditation between medium and advanced level
practitioners
Graham A. Jamieson, John Thomas and Marc Cohen
21. Hypnosis and the dissociation of cognitive control
Janelle Cleary, Graham Jamieson, Rodney Croft, Bruce
Findlay and Simon Hammond

6.

MEG neuroimaging in preschool-aged children: New
insights into the developing brain
Blake W. Johnson and Stephen Crain

22. On the transfer of training in perception and decisionmaking.
Kelly G. Garner, Mike Tombu and Paul E. Dux

7.

Objective automated analysis of natural language: The
Fluency Profiling System as a measure of the efficiency
of dynamic language networks
Kathryn M. Hird, Kim Kirsner, Daniel Little, Raoul Oehmen
and John Dunn

23. Effects of context and training on meta-learning and
about unattended sound sequences
Juanita Todd and Andrew Heathcote

8.

9.

Language lateralisation and cognitive performance in
young children: A functional transcranial doppler study
Amie Hartland, Mark Kohler, Owen Churches, Hannah
Keage, Nicholas Badcock, Rachael Spooner and Scott Elliot
Spatiotemporal correlation of MEG data and language
models
Mehdi Parviz, Mark Johnson and Jon Brock

10. Neural responses to speech and nonspeech sounds
and language impairment in children with ASD
Shu H. Yau, Blake W. Johnson and Jon Brock
11. Oscillatory phase tracking of acoustic signal: Inter-trial
phase locking response as a sensitive measure
Huizhen Tang, Jon Brock, Katherine Demuth, Stephen
Crain and Blake W. Johnson
12. Children's neuromagnetic beta-band oscillations to
isochronous sounds reflects predictive timing
Andrew C. Etchell, Paul F. Sowman and Blake W. Johnson
13. Effects of to-be-ignored information on performance
judging point light walker sex
Anna Brooks and Jacalyn Hall
14. Assessing the functional significance of the horizontal
effect
Arnab Ahmed and Tamara L. Watson
15. Multisensory integration of temporal processing in the
auditory and somatosensory modalities: A
psychophysical and EEG study
Justin Timora and Timothy Budd

24. Research in progress: Investigating the intersections of
attention and self-regulated learning through stimulated
recall and student’s eye-tracking behaviour
Nayadin Persaud and Matt Eliot
25. Neural Correlates of Uncertain Decision Making: ERP
Evidence from the Iowa Gambling Task
Ya Wang, Ji-fang Cui, Raymond C. Chan and David H.
Shum
26. Unconfounding of reward frequency and magnitude in
the Iowa Gambling Task: A comparison between the
Iowa and Soochow gambling tasks in opiate users
Julie Stout, Rebecca Kerestes, Dan Upton, Junyi Dai and
Jerome Busemeyer
27. Variability in resting state EEG and task switching
performance
Patrick Cooper, Chris Brown, Anna Tuyl, Ross Fulham, Pat
Michie and Frini Karayanidis
28. Scopolamine reduces top-down control of selective
attention: An SSVEP study
Natasha Matthews, Inga Laube, Angela Dean and Mark A.
Bellgrove
29. Facial affect recognition and schizotypal
characteristics: A cross-cultural study
Linda Byrne, Christopher Wilson and David Mellor
30. Is visual attraction for human eyes present at birth?
Eve Dupierrix, Anne Hillairet de Boisferon, David Méary,
Elisa Di Giorgio, Francesca Simion, Kang Lee, Paul C.
Quinn, Masaki Tomonaga and Olivier Pascalis

21

31. Modulation of spontaneous emotional facial
expressions during modality-specific emotion
processing: A simultaneous EEG and EMG study
Aimee L. Mavratzakis and Peter Walla
32. Attentional capture by angry faces depends on the
distribution of attention
Joshua J. Foster, David Carmel and Gina M. Grimshaw
33. Faces and scenes elicit qualitatively different emotions:
An electroencephalography (EEG) study
Peter Walla and Aimee Mavratzakis
34. The effect of emotional arousal and valence on the
delayed recall of neutral images
Jessica L. Boglis, Leslie C. Schachte and Agnes Hazi
35. Distractibility and top-down attentional control in
children using a cochlear implant
Marc R. Kamke, Jeanette Van Luyn and Jill Harris
36. Disentangling motor control processes in the basal
ganglia using high-resolution fMRI in a 3T scanner
Megan E. Campbell, Jeff Bednark and Ross Cunnington
37. Focal disruption to primary motor cortex causes
widespread changes in functional connectivity
Amy L. Taylor, Luca Cocchi, Martin V. Sale, Luke Hearne
and Jason B. Mattingley
38. Does motor imagery ability predict reaching correction
efficiency? A test of recent models of human motor
control
Christian Hyde, Kate Wilmut, Ian Fuelscher and Jacqueline
Williams
39. Does the ability to represent movement at a neural level
influence movement planning?
Kate Wilmut, Christian Hyde, Ian Fuelscher and Jacqueline
Williams
40. Sensori-motor rhythm neurofeedback increases fine
motor skills in elite racket sport athletes
Trevor Brown, Graham Jamieson and Nick Cooper
41. Handedness and proprioceptive position estimation:
Are left handed people more accurate in self
representation and is this representation resistant to
manipulation by the Rubber Hand Illusion?
Harriet Dempsey-Jones and Ada Kritikos
42. The interplay between learnt representations and
asymmetries in task-switch costs.
Ayla Barutchu, Stefanie I. Becker, Olivia Carter, Robert
Hester and Neil Levy
43. A preliminary structural MRI study of neurological soft
signs in patients with major depression
Qing Zhao, Jia Huang, Ya Wang, David Shum and
Raymond Chan
44. Examining the changes in neural activity during
cognitive processing in depression following a
traumatic brain injury
Neil Bailey, Kate Hoy and Paul Fitzgerald
45. Is age or culture important for the use of speech as a
marker of depression?
Adam P. Vogel and James C. Mundt

46. Using QEEG parameters (asymmetry, coherence, and
P3a Novelty response) to track improvement in the
treatment of depression
Leon Petchkovsky, Kirstin Robertson-Gillam and Yury
Kropotov
47. A network-based approach to diagnosis of Autism
Spectrum disorders
Joon Yong An, Alexandre S. Cristino, Qiongyi Zhao, David
Ravine, John A. Wray, Vikki M. Marshall, Andrew J.
Whitehouse and Charles Claudianos
48. Electrophysiological measures of infant siblings of
children with autism
Jordy Kaufman, Leila Dafner, Angela Mayes, Lauren Pigdon
and Shuk Man Sumie Leung
49. Cognitive profiles in intellectual disability
Katrina Tsoutsoulis, Nahal Goharpey and Sheila G.
Crewther
50. Raven’s Coloured Progressive Matrices performance as
a valid predictor of cognitive and motor delay in
Intellectual Disability regardless of etiology
Nahal Goharpey, Katrina Tsoutsoulis and Sheila G.
Crewther
51. Does parametric fMRI analysis with SPM yield valid
results? – An empirical study of 1484 rest datasets
Camilla Josephson
52. Empirically validating fully automated EOG artifact
correction using independent components analysis
Ian D. Evans, Graham Jamieson, Rodney Croft and Trieu T.
Pham
53. Emotiv versus Neuroscan: Validating a gaming EEG
system for research quality ERP measurement
Nicholas A. Badcock, Betty Mousikou, Yatin Mahajan, Peter
de Lissa, Johnson Thie and Genevieve McArthur
54. The Flinders Handedness survey (FLANDERS) and its
relation with other measures of lateral preference, sex
and familial handedness
Michael E. Nicholls
55. Dissecting childhood and adulthood obsessivecompulsive personality traits in eating disorders using
a discordant sister-pair design: a multicenter European
study
Isabel Krug, Natalie Kanakam, Marija Anderluh, Fernando
Fernandez-Aranda, Nadia Micali, Emma Taborelli, Kate
Tchanturia, Andreas Karwautz, Gudrun Wagner, David
Collier and Janet Treasure
56. Impairment of memory formation, consolidation and
retrieval of inhibitory avoidance task in acute
mitragynine-treated rates
Farah Wahida Suhaimi, Zurina Hassan, Visweswaran
Navaratnam and Christian P. Müller
57. Effects of acute mitragynine exposure on the
establishment of conditioned place preference and
locomotor activity
Nurul Hasnida Mohammad Yusoff, Zurina Hassan,
Visweswaran Navaratnam and Christian P. Müller
58. Changes in the spontaneous EEG and locomotor
activity of freely moving rats in mitragynine-treated
animals.
Zurina Hassan, Zarif M. Sofian and Visweswaran
Navaratnam

22

