www.biomedgrid.com

American Journal of
Biomedical Science & Research

ISSN: 2642-1747
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Copyright@ Murad B. Sultanov
Short Communication

Brain-Computer Interfaces: From Past to Future
Murad Sultanov*
Laboratory of Ecological Toxicology, National Academy of Sciences of Azerbaijan, Azerbaijan

*Corresponding author: Murad B. Sultanov, Laboratory of Ecological Toxicology; AI Qaraev Institute of Physiology, National
Academy of Sciences of Azerbaijan, Azerbaijan.
To Cite This Article: Murad Sultanov. Brain-Computer Interfaces: From Past to Future. Am J Biomed Sci & Res. 2019 - 4(3). AJBSR.MS.ID.000799.
DOI: 10.34297/AJBSR.2019.04.000799

Received: July 26, 2019 | Published: July 31, 2019
Abstract
More than 100 years ago, scientists were interested in the capabilities of the brain and tried to understand whether it is possible to somehow
influence it. In 1875, English doctor Richard Caton managed to register a weak electric field on the surface of the brain of rabbits and monkeys. Then
there was a lot of discovery and research, but only in 1950, José Manuel Rodríguez Delgado, a professor of physiology at Yale University, invented
the device, which could be implanted in the brain and controlled by radio signals. Thus, began the era of neural interfaces and technologies capable
of enhancing human biological capabilities. Already in 1972, a cochlear implant went on sale, which converted the sound into an electrical signal,
transmitted it to the brain and actually allowed people with severe hearing impairments to hear. Moreover, in 1973, for the first time, the term
“brain-computer interface” was used - a computer-based neuro interface. .
Keywords: Brain-Computer interface; Neurofeedback; Non-Invasive method; EEG

Introduction
The biofeedback and neurofeedback technology developed in
the middle of the 20th century proved a simple but effective way
of regulating the physiological characteristics, in particular, the
frequency of cardiac contractions, the tone of blood vessels, and
the electrical activity of the human brain [1]. Neuro interface – a
system for the exchange of information between the human brain
and an electronic device. This is a technology that allows a person
to interact with the outside world based on the recording of the
electrical activity of the brain is electroencephalogram (EEG).
A person’s desire to perform some action is reflected in EEG
changes, which in turn decodes the computer. Neural interfaces are
unidirectional and bidirectional. The former either receive signals
from the brain or send them to him. The latter can send and receive
signals simultaneously. In addition to training and entertainment
programs, developers have created a large number of applications
designed for professional use. As an example, the software Mind
Rec by Neuro Sky, which is designed for medical, sports, ordinary
psychologists and psychologists working with representatives of
power structures.
How is it used? The person puts on a neuro headset, the
psychologist starts the program and starts the session. During the
session, the following information is monitored and stored in the
computer’s memory, namely: the level of concentration, attentiveness,
the raw EEG signal, in several types of visualization at a time,
in the range from 0 to 70 Hz. Signals divided by frequency ranges

that make up the spectrum of the main signal. The breakdown is
made on eight ranges: Delta, Theta, Low Alpha, High Alpha, Low
Beta, High Beta, Low Gamma, and High Gamma. If necessary,
audio and video recordings of the patient psychologist’s actions
are performed. Recorded material can be reviewed by seeing
everything that was displayed in real time during the session. If the
psychologist did not notice something immediately, then when restudying a session or a workout, he can study changes in the wave
reactions of the brain, compare them with audiovisual information.
This is a very valuable tool for any specialist in this field.

Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) technology for neurofeedback
include from prosthetics and control systems [2] to medical
diagnostics [3]. Training brainwave activity may make it easier to
enter a state of alertness, or, on the other hand, make it easier to
enter a relaxed state [4]. Along with this, neurofeedback is actively
used in training users of systems BCI, and how practically healthy [5]
and, in particular, completely paralyzed persons [6,7]. In addition
to parameters for neurofeedback can be quite wide and include
specificities of almost all EEG bands both low-frequency (0.1-30 Hz)
and high-frequency (more than 30 Hz) range. Together, determining
the relationship of individual psychological and neurophysiological
characteristics is today one of the urgent tasks of psychophysiology.
There are many mobile systems, which is designed for medical,
sports, ordinary psychologists and psychologists working with
representatives in military service. Furthermore, increasing

This work is licensed under Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License AJBSR.MS.ID.000799

205

Am J Biomed Sci & Res

Copyright@ Murad Sultanov

interest to the investigation of electrical activity of brain during
active biomechanical actions, such as walking, running, various
kinds of sports has been one of the main causative factors in the
active development and application of wireless neurocomputers in
industry for the calculation of electroencephalic signals and their
derivatives.

Conclusion

Research into neurofeedback, including of fMRI decoding
psychology state open new opportunities for dimension in
biological recording, however the importunacy of the analyzing
equipment makes it difficult to turn to account from data catch
to provide feedback [8]. Thus, neurofeedback from lightweight
wireless EEG system (Neuro Sky; Emotiv et al.) might be used to
research of psychological characteristics in people, who cannot
travel to a traditional EEG laboratory, for example, elderly people,
who cannot tolerate laboratory conditions, for example people with
autism, depression and other behavioral diseases; along with that
children with AD/HD.

References

2. Loudin JD, Simanovskii DM, Vijayraghavan K, Sramek CK, et al. (2007)
Optoelectronic retinal prosthesis: system design and performance. J
Neural Eng 4(1): S72-84.
3. Fong SS, Tsang WW, Cheng YT, Ki WY, et al. (2015) Single-channel
electroencephalographic recording in children with developmental
coordination disorder: validity and influence of eye blink artifacts.
Journal of Novel Physiotherapies.
4. Ramsay JR (2010) Nonmedication treatments for adult ADHD: Evaluating
impact on daily functioning and well-being. American Psychological
Association.

5. Hwang HJ, Kwon K, Im CH (2009) Neurofeedback-based motor imagery
training for brain–computer interface (BCI). J Neurosci Methods 179(1):
150-156.
6. Birbaumer N, Murguialday AR, Weber C, Montoya P (2009)
Neurofeedback and brain–computer interface: clinical applications. Int
Rev Neurobiol 86: 107-117.

7. Hoffmann U, Vesin JM, Ebrahimi T, Diserens K (2008) An efficient
P300-based brain–computer interface for disabled subjects. J Neurosci
Methods 167(1): 115-125.
8. Haynes JD, Rees G (2006) Neuroimaging: decoding mental states from
brain activity in humans. Nat Rev Neurosci 7(7): 523-534.

1. Gruzelier JH (2014) EEG-neurofeedback for optimising performance.
III: a review of methodological and theoretical considerations. Neurosci
Biobehav Rev 44: 159-182.

American Journal of Biomedical Science & Research

206

