International Journal of Science and Research (IJSR)
ISSN (Online): 2319-7064
Index Copernicus Value (2015): 78.96 | Impact Factor (2015): 6.391

Effect of Immersion (2D vs. 3D) on Attention
through Virtual Reality
Rajesh Kumar1, Greeshma Sharma1, Lokesh Kumar3, Sushil Chandra4
1, 4

Institute of Nuclear Medicine and Allied Science, DRDO, India
2, 3

Thapar University, Punjab, India

Abstract: There are growing evidences which shows the use of Virtual Reality (VR) in numerous fields such as education, real estate,
research, data mining etc. However, the role of neural substrate in information processing vary when the level of immersion in VR
changes. It leads to variation in performance task based on the attention in the task. There are very few studies which deal with the
effectiveness of immersions in display of information with neuroscience. In this experiment, we examined effect of fully immersive 3D
VR and less immersive desktop VR environments on the brain. In this, eight participated in spatial navigation task in three modes. Each
mode consisted of different times. Electroencephalography (EEG) was acquired during third person's and first person's perspective
navigation. After each mode some questions were asked to check the attention of the participants. Result was analysed using energy and
power spectral density of Gamma and Alpha bands. Alpha band showed reduction in 3D VR while Gamma Band showed enhancement
in 3D VR. The objective score of questionnaires in both 3D and desktop VR showed the amount of alertness. The immersive virtual
reality results shows that it had much more immersion and it provided more information compared to Desktop VR. Also, there was
increase in alertness in immersive virtual reality. This study confirmed use of 3D VR in displaying information using EEG for
enhancing performance in normal and rehabilitation.
Keywords: Virtual Reality, Immersion, Electroencephalography (EEG), Energy, PSD, Attention

1. Introduction
Virtual reality (VR) is now a known term in every possible
fields of arts and science. It is increasing possibilities with
the advancement of technology in computer science. Cheap
head mounted display (HMD) like oculus rift has enhanced
its concernment in applied fields. To implement task in VR
successfully, there is a need to understand what kind of
immersion can captivate attention of participants. This
phenomenon is termed as presence which is entirely
participative. Presence can be felt when there is some
immersion in VR. To measure the attention in VR, presence
can be one of the independent variables that derive
behavioural output from the interaction with task. Therefore,
it is necessary to assess attention by measuring presence of
the participant in a particular task. In this experiment,
attention was measure through Electroencephalography
(EEG), during spatial navigation and objective
questionnaires were asked about the environment.
EEG offers real time assessment of temporal dynamics of
brain signals during the task. EEG signals consisted of five
wave patterns which are Gamma(30-60 Hz), Beta(13-30
Hz), Alpha(8-13 Hz), Theta(4-8 Hz) and Delta(0.1-4 Hz). In
this study we choose Gamma and alpha wave patterns.
Spectral analysis of gamma and alpha wave is important in
assessing psychological states. Energy and PSD is two
important features which determines the attention of
participants. Various researches showed how these features
changes with the attention. Presence of alpha wave showed
rest state of brain (Buzsáki G 2006) while lack of alpha
showed brain is engaged in some task that is having
attention (Foxe et al. 2011). Also, there was a decrease in
alpha band power in response to the imperative stimulus
(Klimesch et al. 1998). Gamma band activity played a role
in selective attention at intermediate phenotype level (Enge
et al. 2014). In one research reverse was done, in which
selective attention enhanced signal power of auditory

steady-state response in gamma range (Skosnik et al. 2007).
Also, it had been strongly correlated with top down attention
selection and had network in frontoparietal regions of brain
that process relevant features of stimuli (Jensen et al. 2007,
Noudoost et al. 2010).
One study was executed to examine the differential effect of
3D versus 2D VR environment on cognitive/motor task
along with EEG (Slobounov et al. 2015). Participant felt
high presence in 3D when compared to 2D. They also found
significant change in frontal central theta power during
encoding of route in navigation and it increased during
successful performance of perceptual-motor tasks. This
suggested that fully immersive 3D VR required more brain
resources allocation than 2D VR. Also, 3D VR promoted
error monitoring and future learning. It could be a useful
technique for enhancing performance in rehabilitation using
VR and EEG altogether. But biggest limitation of their study
was that they included only theta band and was tested only
for one virtual environment. These limitations are overcome
by our study.
We selected alpha and gamma band energy and PSD
together based on the literature support as above mentioned.
One more limitation of that paper was that they didn't
perform any questionnaire related to their environment,
which is again overcome by us. We included objective
questions that could show degree of attention in 2D and 3D
VR. In the next section methods, results and discussions are
included. It will demonstrate the usefulness of navigation in
3D VR when compared to 2D VR environment.

2. Materials and Methods
Human subject, Virtual Park scenarios, EEG signal
acquisition, MATLAB used for the analysis of EEG signal
with the help of Wavelet Transform etc.

Volume 6 Issue 3, March 2017
www.ijsr.net

Licensed Under Creative Commons Attribution CC BY
Paper ID: ART20171447

204

International Journal of Science and Research (IJSR)
ISSN (Online): 2319-7064
Index Copernicus Value (2015): 78.96 | Impact Factor (2015): 6.391
Participants
Eight healthy participants aged 22-26 (4 male and 4 female)
years were participated in this study and no participant had
any medical illness, brain injury, psychiatric or cardiac
history or were taking prescription drugs.
Virtual Park Scenarios
Three different park scenarios were developed using Unity
4.5. The scenarios were in both two dimensional displays
(2D) and three dimensional displays (3D). For 2D, desktop
version of VR was used while immersive VR was shown
using stereoscopic goggle. Virtual Park scenarios were
created with different texture and objects to judge effect of
environmental properties on attention. The first scenario had
rich set of texture and fewer objects. The flying camera was
placed at more height. The time period of this scenario was
about 120 seconds. The second scenario had good amount of
texture and objects. The time period of this scenario was 85
seconds. The flying camera was situated at less height as
compared to first scenario. The third scenario had a fair
amount of texture and objects. The time period of this
scenario was 80 seconds. The flying camera was situated at
less height as compared to all scenarios. The users could
easily navigate into the environment by using a joystick.
Data Acquisition
Wireless Emotiv EPOC neuroheadset is a very efficient tool
which was used for acquiring the EEG signals. It is very user
friendly hardware. It is a fourteen channel plus Common
Mode Sense (CMS) active electrode/ Driven Right Leg
(DRL) passive electrode references, P3/P4 locations. Device
having a sampling frequency of 128 Hz, It has resolution of
14 bits, bandwidth of 0.2 - 45Hz, digital notch filters at
50Hz and 60Hz.
Feedback Questionnaires for attention measurement
In this research questionnaire were created to analyze the
attention. The Feedback Questionnaire (FQ) was based on
fine details of the various scenarios. Formulated questions
were such as "Was there any red box over there?" or "Was
there any blue wall?" After each scenario five questions
were asked to the participant. The questionnaires were
different in desktop VR and 3D VR environment. Questions
were randomised for each participant to remove any biases.
Procedure
Environment was presented in system having 15.6" display
size, 4GB Ram, Intel i5 processor. Participants were shown
three different virtual park scenarios in 2D and 3D mode
with mixed randomised trials. One practice session was
conducted to make the participant comfortable with gadgets
like joystick and the stereoscopic goggle. In this research
work the user navigated by flythrough camera function in
one trial and then with the help of joystick in next trial. Total
twelve trials were played by the participants. Simultaneously
EEG signals were acquired for each scenario. During
recording session all metallic objects and mobile phones
were kept away from the participant as well as administrator
to minimize the external noise. Participants were asked to
minimize muscle movements. After watching the scenarios
the FQ were asked for analysis of attention for the
comparative study of 2D and 3D VR environment.

EEG Signal Analysis
Pre-processing of EEG raw signal included segmentation,
noise removal and frequency division. Normalization was
done by subtracting the mean value of signal from the raw
signals. It reduced the effects of individual differences due
to their fundamental frequency rhythms and the
computational complexity. A 50 Hz notch filter was used to
remove power line interference from the acquired signals.
Wavelet soft de-noising was used to de-noise the signal,
from the wavelet packet co-efficient reconstruction, different
frequency bands of EEG were reconstructed. In this study,
only Gamma and Alpha bands were reconstructed.
Feature Extraction
Energy
Wavelet packet node energy is more robust in representing a
signal than using the wavelet packet coefficients directly.
According to Parseval‟s theorem, the energy of the distorted
signal can be partitioned at different resolution levels. Total
signal energy can be defined in equation (1).
2
(1)
E= 𝑁
𝑗 =1 |𝐶𝑖𝑗 |
i=1, 2……l
Where i=1,2……l is the wavelet decomposition level from
level 1 to level l. N is the number of the coefficients of detail
or approximate at each decomposition level. In order to
analyze specific frequency region, suitable tree structure
should be chosen, which represent the wavelet packet energy
distribution in that tree.
Power Spectral Density (PSD)
Power spectral density function shows the strength of the
variations (energy) as a function of frequency. In other
words, it shows at which frequencies variations are strong
and at which frequencies variations are weak. The power is
calculated using PSD concept. The estimated PSD provides
a lot of information about the signal which will be
considered for modelling and prediction of signal
characteristics. The PSD of a signal provides lots of
information about the signal including signal characteristics.
For a finite length signal xl (n) of length l the PSD is
calculated by, multiplying the Fourier transform of the
filtered signal with the conjugate of that filtered signal and is
given by equation (2).
1
(2)
F[rxx (1)]= Il (w)= {𝐹[𝑥𝑙(1)∗𝑥 ∗𝑙 (−1)]}
𝑙
Where rxx (1) is the biased autocorrelation estimate and Il (w)
is known as period-gram.
Statistical Analysis
For statistical analysis of EEG data and FQ the multivariate
analysis was used. It‟s a tool box of Statistical Package for
the Social Sciences (SPSS) software. The multivariate
analysis correlated all the parameter to each other and gave
the mean and standard deviation values. The dependent
variables like Energy, PSD and answers of FQ were
compared through unpaired sample t-test with keeping
significance level (α) at 0.05.

3. Results

Volume 6 Issue 3, March 2017
www.ijsr.net

Licensed Under Creative Commons Attribution CC BY
Paper ID: ART20171447

205

International Journal of Science and Research (IJSR)
ISSN (Online): 2319-7064
Index Copernicus Value (2015): 78.96 | Impact Factor (2015): 6.391
In the present research work, EEG signals were picked up
with the help of Emotiv Head Set at F3, F4, O1 and O2
channels by giving visual stimulus in both 2D and 3D VR
environments. Occipital lobe was engaged in processing of
visual stimuli while Frontal lobes found to be activated
mostly during attention. The mean and standard Deviation
values of energy and PSD of alpha and gamma band were
calculated corresponding to 2D VR environment and 3D VR
environment. Alpha Energy and PSD reduced for 3D VR
environment as compared to 2D environment, while energy
and PSD of Gamma band increased for 3D VR environment
as compared to 2D environment. Scores in FQ increased for
3D scenarios when compared to 2D as shown in Fig.1.
Although results were insignificant by applying t-test due to
small sample size, but differences were evident between 2D
vs. 3D.

4. Discussion
The objective of the present study was to compare
differences in brain activities in 2D and 3D mode due to
differences of immersion. It was in effect of variation in
attention during navigation. Three virtual scenarios were
compared for 3D versus 2D with EEG and questionnaire for
attention. Participant navigated in one scenario in four trials,
which were in 2D and 3D, with joystick and fly through
camera. In total, twelve trials were performed by each
participant with alteration of order to removes any biases.

Fig.1 it showed subject's average correct score for Feedback
questionnaire for three virtual park scenarios in two different
modes. Here VP1, VP2 and VP3 represented virtual park
scenario 1, 2 and 3 respectively.
It was considered that more immersion in the VR
environment would have more alertness that increased the
attention of participant. In other words, if participant felt
more presence in one virtual scenario then its encoding
would be more which would be reflected in his EEG. In
previous paper (Slobounov et al. 2015) it was shown that
frontal central theta increased during encoding phase
(Slobounov et al. 2011) which reflected great sense of
presence. They proved high immersion could induce great
sense of presence which alleviated alertness. One limitation
of this paper was that only theta feature were analysed with
one virtual environment. Here in our study, we changed
scenarios from less number of objects to more number of
objects. Also, two EEG features i.e. energy and PSD were
computed for visualising the effects of immersion on
attention. Result gave evidence of visual attention activity

and increase in alertness during the participant„s interaction
with the 3D virtual reality environments. The decrease in
alpha band showed an increase in attention activity with the
3D VR environment which indicated the participants were
transit to wake-up state. Moreover, the increase in gamma
band showed the participants were in thinking or in
reasoning state and analyzing the scenario„s information The
scene realism and information consistence with the virtual
reality that was involved in the environmental richness and
visual attention caused the observed alpha wave reduction in
the frontal and occipital lobes. Result was consistent with
previous studies (Skosnik et al. 2007, Jensen et al. 2007, and
Noudoost et al. 2010).The results of feedback questionnaires
proved the 3D virtual reality had more alertness activity in
scenario 1 and scenario 2. The scenario 3 had more
significance in 2D because it had less solid object which was
easily recognizable in 2D as compared to 3D VR. Combined
(EEG+ immersive VR) provides valuable assets in various
fields to increase attention that ultimately enhances the
performance regardless of any application. The capacity of
VR is to create dynamic, immersive three dimensional
stimulus environments, in which all behavioural responding
can be recorded. It offers assessment and manipulation
options that are not available using traditional assessment
methods.

References
[1] Buzsaki and G.: “Rhythms of the brain”. Oxford
University Press, New York (2006).
[2] Enge, S., Fleischhauer, M., Lesch, K. P., Reif, A., and
Strobel, A.: “Variation in key genes of serotonin and
nor epinephrine function predicts gamma-band activity
during goal-directed attention”. Cerebral Cortex24 (5),
1195-1205(2014).
[3] Foxe, J.J., Snyder and A. C.: “The role of alpha-band
brain oscillations as a sensory suppression mechanism
during selective attention”. Front. Psychology. 2,154
(2011).
[4] Hazarika N., Chen J., Tsoi A. and Sergejew A. ,
“Classification of EEG Signals Using the Wavelet
Transform”, Signal Processing, Vol.59, No.1, pp. 61–72
(1997).
[5] Jensen, O., Kaiser, J., Lachaux, J. P.: “Human gammafrequency oscillations associated with attention and
memory”. Trends Neurosci. 30, 317–324 (2007).
[6] Klimesch, W., Doppelmayr, M., Russegger, H.,
Pachinger, T., & Schwaiger, J.: Induced alpha band
power changes in the human EEG and attention.
Neuroscience letters. 244(2), 73-76 (1998).
[7] Noudoost, B., Chang, M.H., Steinmetz, N.A., Moore,
and T.: Top-down control of visual attention. Curr Opin
Neurobiology. 20, 183–190 (2010).
[8] Skosnik, P. D., Krishnan, G. P., & O‟Donnell, B. F.:
The effect of selective attention on the gamma-band
auditory steady-state response. Neuroscience letters.
420 (3), 223-228 (2007).
[9] Slobounov, S. M., Ray, W., Johnson, B., Slobounov, E.,
and Newell, K. M.: Modulation of cortical activity in
2D versus 3D virtual reality environments: an EEG
study. International Journal of Psychophysiology. 95(3),
254-260 (2015).

Volume 6 Issue 3, March 2017
www.ijsr.net

Licensed Under Creative Commons Attribution CC BY
Paper ID: ART20171447

206

International Journal of Science and Research (IJSR)
ISSN (Online): 2319-7064
Index Copernicus Value (2015): 78.96 | Impact Factor (2015): 6.391
[10] Slobounov, S., Sebastianelli, W., and Newell, K. M.:
“Incorporating virtual reality graphics with brain
imaging for assessment of sport-related concussions”.
In: Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society,
EMBC 2011. Annual International Conference of the
IEEE, pp. 1383-1386,IEEE(2011).

Volume 6 Issue 3, March 2017
www.ijsr.net

Licensed Under Creative Commons Attribution CC BY
Paper ID: ART20171447

207

