Transmission: A Telepresence Interface for Neural
and Kinetic Interaction
Oliver Gingrich, Alain Renaud, Eugenia Emets, Zhidong Xiao

Oliver Gingrich
CDE - Center for Digital Entertainment
Bournemouth University
Fern Barrow, Dorset, BH12 5BB
United Kingdom
oliver@musion.co.uk

ABSTRACT

Transmission is both a telepresence performance and a research project. As a real-time visualization
tool, Transmission creates alternate representations of neural activity through sound and vision,
investigating the effect of interaction on human consciousness. As a sonification project, it creates
an immersive experience for two users: a soundscape created by the human mind and the influence
of kinetic interaction. An electroencephalographic (EEG) headset interprets a user’s neural activity. An
Open Sound Control (OSC) script then translates this data into a real-time particle stream and sound
environment at one end. A second user in a remote location modifies this stream in real time through
body movement. Together they become a telematic musical interface—communicating through visual
and sonic representation of their interactions.

Alain Renaud
CDE - Center for Digital Entertainment
Bournemouth University
Fern Barrow, Dorset, BH12 5BB
United Kingdom
arenaud@bournemouth.ac.uk
Eugenia Emets
Artist at Analema Group, London
126 Fernhead Road W9 3EN
London, United Kingdom
emetsjange@gmail.com
Zhidong Xiao
National Center for Computer Animation
Bournemouth University
Fern Barrow, Dorset, BH12 5BB
United Kingdom
zxiao@bournemouth.ac.uk

Introduction

Transmission is the second project by London-based collective Analema Group, in a series of art
and research projects on telepresence. Using neurological data to engage audiences, Transmission
presents users with an audiovisual experience that reflects their affective bodily resonance to
telepresence. With Transmission, we present an audiovisual interface for communication that
translates both neurological processes and kinetic dynamics into a new form of interactivity.
The technical aim of Transmission is to create an infrastructure to sonify and visualize brain
activity during telepresence interactions. Users explore their own thought processes and neural
activity in real time. A user in a remote location influences and thus interacts with these visual
and sonic representations. Through motion capture techniques, the remote participant can
directly manipulate and modify the interpretation of his interlocutor’s brain activity (Figure 1).
Juxtaposing an inner, subjective and an external, kinetic activity, the EEG provides users with
feedback on the psychological effect of their interaction.
Transmission creates an art form that constantly reinvents
itself and lives through its participants and their
respective communications. As research environment,
the installation provides information on telepresence in
the form of EEG data that are quantifiable and evaluated
with the aid of standardized, qualitative tests. As
artwork, Transmission is rooted in the history of
telepresence art, interactive art, and audiovisual art.
Figure 1. Analema Group, Transmission, 2014.

Concept

Screenshot 1920 x 1080—Particle Test, Decem-

Between the first use of the term “telepresence” by
Marvin Minsky, in his article of the same name [1], and
today stretch more than 30 years of academic and artistic
discourse. Since Roy Ascott’s pioneering work [2], a rich

ber 2013. Representation of human brain activity
changes in real time through EEG and kinetic data
from a remote location. © 2014 Analema Group.

doi:10.1162/LEON_a_00843

Leonardo, Vol. 47, No. 4, pp. 375-385, 2014

|

© 2014 Oliver Gingrich, Alain Renaud, Eugenia Emets, Zhidong Xiao

375

history of telepresence art has evolved. Telepresence art developed along with the technologies
it engages: higher bit and streaming rates, increasing processing and computing power, and
optimized recording standards resulted in improved photorealism and enriched experiences.
Concurrent with technical developments, artistic and academic discourse developed along with
the practice of its proponents. Paul Sermon’s Telematic Dreaming [3], Telematic Séance [4], and
Telematic Vision [5] focused on the ideas of remote presence and a sense of “being there.” Tina
Keane’s experiments in telepresence art resulted in Couch, a telepresence environment exhibited
all over the world [6]. The discourse shifted from an early concentration on translocation and
disposition—for instance, in Rafael Lozano-Hemmer’s The Trace [7] or Displaced Emperors
[8]—to a concentration on virtuality [9] during the 1990s. Since 2000, academics concentrated
on posthumanism [10]—for example in Stelarc and Olivero’s performance Rotating Brains and
Beating Heart [11]. Telepresence art is not confined to a single focus—it touches questions of a
philosophical nature as much as questions of cultural identity and urbanism (for example, in
Stanza’s Connecting Cities [12]).
Over the past 30 years, the field has undergone an artistic, technological, and conceptual
evolution. Artists have expanded their practice, outreach, and focus through the development
and integration of new techniques, devices, and tools. New interfaces (Arduino, IR), new tools
(such as motion capture, gesture control, and augmented reality), and new programming
languages (processing, Max/MSP, OSC, VVVV, etc.) have augmented user experiences.
Telepresence art continues to explore remote presence, boundaries of perception, and new forms
of interactivity.
Interactive art and telepresence are strongly interrelated, both conceptually and technically. Ever
since Marcel Duchamp’s Bicycle Wheel [13], interactive art has been interested in user
participation, chain reactions of cause and effect, and a kinetic discourse between art piece,
author, and spectator. Whether users are invited to write with their eyes (as in Zach Lieberman’s
Eyewriter [14]) or physically experience rain (as in rAndom International’s Rain Room [15]),
interactive arts tend to involve physical engagement as well as kinetic and bodily interactions.
Transmission not only stands in this tradition of visible and reactive movement, but also shifts
the focus onto invisible dynamics—in this case generated by the user’s brain through interaction.
With Transmission, we widen the reach of telepresence from mere physical involvement to
psychological engagement, from the conscious to the subconscious. Kinetic movement extends
to our minds, our inner activities—an intangible dynamic of our respective, dislocated bodies.
Contrary to traditional interactive arts, seen as going beyond psychological engagement [16],
Transmission places interactive art in the realm of the subjective, psychological sphere of the self.
The juxtaposition of physical and psychological interaction and neurological reaction builds the
dialectic tension in Transmission.
Ultimately, with Transmission we are not only interested in exploring a sense of presence, of
being elsewhere, but also in the effect of presence on a remote user. This piece is introspective as
much as extroverted, looking at the effect presence has on our own minds. Interactive art doesn’t
have to be limited to a dialogue with technology or the other—Transmission focuses on
interaction with the self (Figure 2).
Sound is the integral facilitator in this discourse between mind and body. Not only is sound
foreboding, embedding, conditioning, and generative, it engenders visual representation. The
user’s brain waves are digitally modified to emphasize dominating dynamics. Certain neural

376

Gingrich, Renaud, Emets, Xiao

|

Transmission: A Telepresence Interface for Neural and Kinetic Interaction

affective states can be mapped to specific
frequencies, sound bites, and sonic effects,
thereby initiating empathic states. As a result,
emotions are accentuated and thus easier to
communicate to the remote user. The user’s
mind creates a soundscape for interaction—a
piece of music of telepresence.
Since telepresence pioneer Pauline Oliveros
founded her Deep Listening Institute [17],
sound artists have explored the relationship
Figure 2. Eugenia Emets of Analema Group, Transmission EEG
between telepresence and sound on multiple
and sonification test. The EEG headset sends a real-time stream
levels. Artistic engagement with neuroscience
of data on affective states to an OSC script, allowing for realand music dates even further back: avant-garde time introspection of the user. Transmission looks at the effect of
remote interaction on individuals. © 2013 Analema Group.
artists and pioneers such as Yoko Ono and
John Lennon experimented with EEGs and
music as early as the 1960s. Alvin Lucier performed Music for Solo Performer at Brandeis
University in 1965 [18]. By making use of the headset as a wearable device, Lucier interpreted
brain waves to generate soundscapes. A few years later, Richard Teitelbaum’s Musica Elettronica
Viva used EEG signals to manipulate electronic synthesizers [19]. In 1971, David Rosenboom’s
Ecology of the Skin created an orchestra of EEG music by working with a multitude of live
participants [20]. As EEG headsets became more affordable, their use within the artistic and
academic communities increased. Artists such as Eduardo Miranda [21], Andrew Brouse
(Biomusic) [22], or Marina Abramovic (The Magic of Mutual Gaze) [23] developed sophisticated
patches for EEG interaction. Contemporary neurofeedback-inspired art takes all new forms: In
2001, Neam Cathode’s Cyber Mondrian [24] incorporated EEG headsets into an audiovisual
environment. Artist Mariko Mori’s Wave UFO allows for an immersive brain sonification
experience in which users can climb inside a spaceship [25]. Lisa Park’s Eunoia maps brain
activity to vibrations of water [26].
On a purely academic level, Jeffrey Thompson [27] studied the brain’s reaction to specific
frequencies. Sophisticated patches and interfaces for brain wave sonification have been
developed, for instance by Mick Grierson at Goldsmith University. At the same time, whole
departments have been dedicated to EEG and sound research: the Neuromusic Lab at the
University of Plymouth, Stanford’s Neuromusic Laboratory at the CCRMA, and departments
at University of British Columbia and Technische Universitaet Graz.
Transmission is rooted in traditions of experimental sound, interactive arts, and telepresence art.
The body’s interactions, its extroverted bi-directionality between self and other, generate a sonic
and visual imprint. Visual references for the design derive from ideas of connectedness,
references to flight data visualizations, and Leonardo Da Vinci’s representations of the human
body as network (Figure 3). Transmission consists of a user experience, an art piece, and a
research project. As the work is a cross-over between art and science, audiences learn to
scrutinize telepresence experiences analytically by experiencing the effect in real time.
Transmission thus facilitates an understanding of the functioning of our inner landscape. Ethical
questions about measuring emotions and linking these to visual representations—i.e. questions
about the transparent human—are explored interactively.
On a secondary level, we aim for science to profit from new visualization and representation
techniques by including experts in our discourse. With a neuroscientist (UCL London) and a

Transmission: A Telepresence Interface for Neural and Kinetic Interaction

|

Gingrich, Renaud, Emets, Xiao

377

neurotherapist as part of
the collective, we intend
to relay complex
knowledge to art
audiences and to
develop new strategies
for neural data
interpretation.
Transmission has an
educational agenda to
communicate our
understanding of the
cortex. Audience
members can either be
Figure 3. Transmission, 2014. Holographic Projection Test. 5m x 2.8m using Pepper’s Ghost
passive observers or
display. December 2013. Transmission stands in a long tradition of EEG interpretation ranging
active participants. As a
back to the 1960s and 1970s. © 2014 Analema Group.
result, users are not only
the subject matter of academic research, they become artists themselves. Users learn about their
own reactions to interactions and listen to their inner processes.
Research

Transmission presents a standardized model for the analysis of telepresence. Classification
systems, models, and research parameters for telepresence have been conceptualized in many
different ways over more than 30 years of academic discourse. As a result, key coherences across
these various models have emerged. The focus in academic debate on telepresence as a terminus
technicus has shifted gradually from its original, techno-centric conception towards a perceptionfocused, user-centric conception. Initial definitions linked the term to tele-robotics,
tele-operators, and a man-machine discourse. These concepts were substituted by a discourse on
virtuality and mediacy in the 1990s, and by the notions of perceived non-mediation, media
irrelevance, and remote presence which dominate present-day discourse.
On a more analytical, methodological level, classifications for telepresence have been developed
for sonic and visual telepresence, with various degrees of complexity. Renaud lists three
distinctive cues for sonic telepresence: behavioral, notational, and temporal cues [28]. Lombard
and Ditton [29] enumerate core components of telepresence such as social experience, realism,
immersion, and transportation, among others. Witmer and Singer [30] differentiate between
four distinctive factors: degree of control, sensory factors, distraction, and realism. Sadowski and
Stanney [31] identify individual and system variables such as ease of interaction, user-initiated
control, pictorial realism, length of exposure, social factors, and system. Sheridan [32] identified
five factors of telepresence—three technological and two context-based. Freeman favors a further
reduction of discourse-relevant components to at most three factors: spatial physical presence,
immersion, and social realism [33]. A strong argument for a simplified and coherent model of
telepresence persists.
With Transmission, we narrow recurring discursive factors down to immersion, involvement, and
realism. Immersion was singled out specifically by Barfield and Weghorst [34]. Prothero and
Hoffman [35] and Hoffman, Prothero, Wells, and Groen [36] discussed the relevance of
involvement; and Barfield and Hendrix focused on realism [37] as core elements of presence.
Transmission is an ideal pilot to test such a comprehensive model. Analyzing a complex
phenomenon over elemental key dimensions allows for a streamlined methodological approach.

378

Gingrich, Renaud, Emets, Xiao

|

Transmission: A Telepresence Interface for Neural and Kinetic Interaction

For a multi-sensory user-specific phenomenon, we require a conceptualization that ensures
cross-platform compatibility, flexibility in application, and the possibility to be applied to both
quantitative and qualitative research.
Telepresence has long left the confinements of academic discourse behind, to become a function
of everyday life: people around the world engage in voice-over-Internet-protocol (VoIP) calls,
videoconferencing, and Skype calls via handsets, tablets, laptops, etc. As the use of telepresence
gains momentum across the globe, the need to understand the concept of remote presence
increases. With a new plurality of media, new models for cross-platform analysis are required.
With Transmission, we synthesize and condense existing strands of analysis into a succinct,
standardized model. Our classification system is user-centric and focuses on individual
experiences within the analysis. Furthermore, the model is media-unspecific and can be applied
to a range of technologies. Depending on the choice of media, certain factors might be more or
less conducive or detrimental to the overall perception of presence.
3D environments, 3D display technologies, and augmented reality tools such as Oculus Rift [38]
and Pepper’s Ghost mediate presence as much as networked streaming, mobile phones, or
tablets. Technical modalities and tools remain secondary in dominating definitions. Telepresence
was defined by the International Society for Presence Research (ISPR) as “a psychological state
or subjective perception in which, even though part or all of an individual’s current experience is
generated by and/or filtered through human-made technology, part or all of the individual’s
perception fails to accurately acknowledge the role of the technology in the experience” [39].
The focus on perceived non-mediation shifts the onus from the media onto the user. Presence is
a multi-sensory communication experience of perceived non-mediation with immersive qualities.
In conceptualizing immersion, realism, and interactivity as core factors of telepresence, we can
look at their underlying sub-components and measure them individually.
Realism is often understood as a main component of presence. Image quality, transmission
signal, lighting, etc. all affect how we perceive a transmitted image. Like immersion and
interactivity, realism is a component of, but not a requirement for, presence. An abstract visual
image can convey presence as much as a photorealistic video stream. Realism can be analyzed
across subjective/perceptual parameters as well as technical parameters.
Equally, immersion is understood as both a perceptual/psychological reality and a technical
condition. Immersion describes the subjective absorption into a mediated environment. The
user’s segregation from the outer world engenders a perceptual predominance of the media
reality. Immersion can be measured through technical cues and subjective perceptual
parameters.
The Oxford English Dictionary defines interactivity as a two-way flow of information between a
computer and a user, allowing for the user’s input [40]. Interactivity is a technical condition and
a perceptive reality at once, a social condition and a state of involvement. As a co-factor for
perceived presence, interactivity is generated through both technical and perceptual cues. The
concept of interactivity is strongly related to concepts of intimacy and immediacy [41]. As a
technical condition, interactivity has been analyzed by Shrum and Liu [42]. Over the course of
this project, we have measured technical factors as much as perceptual cues.
With Transmission, we analyze telepresence as a subjective (immersion) and social (interactivity)
experience. Transmission operates in a dialectic field between individual perception and social

Transmission: A Telepresence Interface for Neural and Kinetic Interaction

|

Gingrich, Renaud, Emets, Xiao

379

activity, being introspective
and interactive at the same
time. EEG impulses are
assembled as quantifiable data
and compared to the
qualitative data of
questionnaires. Triangulation
of quantitative EEG data with
correlating qualitative tests
(Figure 4) allows for a multidimensional analysis across
various key factors [43]. Our
research tackles the question
of how immersion and
interactivity can be related to
telepresence. More than
creating a pool of data, the
aim is to communicate results
of our analysis to the audience
in situ. Users thus explore a
complex phenomenon
through interaction.
Consolidating different
conceptual angles, a simplified
model of telepresence leads to
new methods for crossplatform analysis.

Figure 4. PQ (Presence Questionnaire), as developed by Witmer and Singer, will be
distributed as part of the research on Transmission. Qualitative questionnaires will be
compared to quantitative data resulting from EEG tests.

Technical Setup

Transmission uses two main
spaces: a motion capture
studio to capture the
movement of the user and a
projection and display
environment in which the
user generates neurofeedback for visual and sonic
representation.

Figure 5. Schematic of a large-scale Pepper's Ghost projection. A holographic image
is projected onto a live stage environment, allowing for real-time interaction between a
virtual image and a live performer or user. © 2014 Musion.

Transmission’s technical setup consists of a networked installation between the EEG and its
visual interpretation output, a motion capture studio, and the projection environment. Motion
data manipulates a particle stream displayed on a screen interface, such as a “holographic”
(Pepper’s Ghost) display in a remote location. Holographic screens will be preferred wherever
practical. Sound, visual data, and motion data are generated and streamed in real time, allowing
for their immediate alteration, and thus creating a constant feedback loop between external
motion and internal fluctuation.
For testing purposes, we have linked a motion capture studio at Bournemouth University to a
holographic projection studio in Central London (Musion) where the audience can observe and
interact with an illustration of their own neural activity on a “holographic interface.” Motion

380

Gingrich, Renaud, Emets, Xiao

|

Transmission: A Telepresence Interface for Neural and Kinetic Interaction

control systems were tested on the holographic screen interface as an on-site installation and in
combination with telepresence. Recording and display parameters such as frame rate, streaming
method, and camera angles were identified for recording and display environments.
Large-scale Pepper’s Ghost displays (Figure 5) allow for the presentation of 3D images within
a spatial environment via optical cues and a dedicated lighting environment. Holographic
interfaces convey a certain cinematic, almost immersive, experience, which supports our goal
for enhanced social engagement.

Projection Area

Speaker 1

Sub

Maya / Motion Builder
Computer
(IP: xxx.xxx.xxx.xxx)

Switch

Speaker 2

Max/Msp Computer
(IP: xxx.xxx.xxx.xxx)

Camera
Audio
Interface

EEG
"Skype" Computer
(IP: xxx.xxx.xxx.xxx)

Speaker 3

Speaker 4

Cortex
(IP: xxx.xxx.xxx.xxx)

MOCAP

Switch

Speaker 1

Speaker 2

"Skype" Computer
(IP: xxx.xxx.xxx.xxx)

Audio
Interface

Legend:
IP Connectivity
Data
Audio

Figure 6. Schematic of Transmission setup. The setup is split between two
spaces, one for EEG recording and one for remote motion capture. © 2014
Analema Group.

Brain wave data generated by the user
are sonified in real time around the
holographic stage area using
multichannel speaker diffusion. The
resulting immersive character of the
soundscape corresponds to the visual
qualities of the interactive display. A
feedback signal is relayed from the
holographic stage to the remote
performer in the motion control
studio. We have tested minimum
motion control data transfer with a
threshold of 6–8mbps upload and
download speed. Higher bit rates
allow for a more seamless experience
of motion data streaming.
The Motion Analysis Cortex server
parses the motion data from the
motion capture control studio to the
stage environment. In the future,
other scenarios using Kinect motion
capture or similar tools are planned.
Data received from the Cortex server
is passed onto Autodesk Maya via
OSC (Open Sound Control) signals
in real time through a network. The
particle stream is based on parameters
of the OSC signal input.

The effect stream is created as a real-time particle system within Maya using an OSC Maya
plugin and OSC messages from the EEG device (emotiv epoc) [44]. The emotiv engine interprets
the user’s EEG data, passing them on as arguments of affective states. These emotional states are
mapped onto colors and particle emissions of the particle system. A constant stream of particles
visually represents the users’ mental activity, providing them with information on their inner
processes during the experience of telepresence. This real-time generated image is supported by a
specially developed audio script that maps neuro-data into sound parameters for both
interlocutors. Parameters such as specific changes in neural frequency oscillations, expressive or
affective states can be mapped to sound signals with the aim of exploring certain
communicational tendencies. Visual imagery is manipulated in real time by the user in a remote
location. The generated imagery, as well as the EEG data, can be monitored for later analysis.

Transmission: A Telepresence Interface for Neural and Kinetic Interaction

|

Gingrich, Renaud, Emets, Xiao

381

In Transmission, neurofeedback methods are re-contextualized artistically, giving participants
tools for interpretation of their own neural activity. A biofeedback loop enables us to extract
visual mirror images of telepresence. On a sonic level, it allows the user to control and
manipulate the soundscape in two locations through their actions, through focused attention or
meditation and relaxation. Whereas visually, users control the representation of their neural
activity through color codes and particle intensity, they are also immersed in a sound
environment generated by their own brain activity. This procedural sound field is characterized
by gradual discrepancies and changes in the EEG data input. Rather than neurofeedback signals,
which consist of beep tones in a medical or therapeutic context, users experience their inner
soundscape as a pleasant, continuous, and meditative surrounding. In Transmission, “sonic
events,” such as sound bursts and gentle vibrations, structure the experience and enforce a clear
indication of the type of brainwave activity, e.g. relaxation, meditation, engagement, etc.
To create this feedback loop of actions and interactions, we
send a reference signal to the motion data studio (Figure 6).
The installation does not require extremely high bandwidth,
as data interpretation is handled on-site. Only motion data
and reference signals are streamed in real time.
A number of tests for sound, vision, and motion capture data
[45] have been conducted to guarantee technical feasibility.
capture tests have been conducted. © 2014
Current tests at the Motion Analysis motion capture studio
Analema Group.
at Bournemouth University rely on a Cortex server (Figure
7). We tested OSC compatibility with Maya and software integration between Maya and Motion
Analysis. An ongoing discourse with programmer Paolo Emilio Selva helps us to adapt OSC
input into the Maya script. OSC data interpretation from the EEG headset was tested.
Figure 7. Analema Group’s Eugenia Emets

at the motion capture test. Multiple motion

A multitude of tests between Geneva and London focused on EEG sonification—to help us
understand latency implications and to develop a cohesive workflow. After comparison between
different EEG systems, the choice fell on a flexible unit that has been successfully used in artistic
contexts of similar scope. Transmission is technically, conceptually, sonically, and visually past its
pilot stage. We are now in a position to optimize the workflow, present the project to the public,
and concentrate on research design, data acquisition, and data interpretation.
Research Design

With our research, we are interested in generating tangible results—a set of viable, reliable, and
representative data that reflects both the subjective, psychological as well as the objective,
quantifiable aspects of telepresence. We can measure components of telepresence, such as
interactivity and feelings of immersion, both directly through questionnaires, and indirectly by
looking at factors such as time, affective EEG cues, and intensity of signal levels. With both
standardized questionnaires (PQ) and a corollary set of EEG data at hand, we aim for
comprehensive research results. Specifically, we want to find answers to the following questions:
•
•
•
•

What affects the propensity to interact?
How relevant is realism for the conveyance of presence?
Is there a discrepancy between perceived and measured perceptions of presence?
Is there a correlation between interactivity, immersion, and telepresence?

A public display is currently planned for the Bl-nk space in London at the end of 2014, in
conjunction with Kinetica and Hackney Council. This installment of Transmission will be

382

Gingrich, Renaud, Emets, Xiao

|

Transmission: A Telepresence Interface for Neural and Kinetic Interaction

followed up with questionnaires and further analysis of the generated data. The research
collective is working closely with a neuroscientist and a neurofeedback therapy practitioner, who
will be closely involved in the interpretation of our research outcome.
Future Outlook

In addition to the conceptualization and production of Transmission as a participatory
performance piece, we want to optimize the work as a user-focused installation. In the first
instance, Transmission has been developed as a performance tool, involving professional
choreographers and dancers in real-time interaction. A stand-alone installation piece will be
developed as an audience-participation tool in a second phase. Sound modulation and visual
representation will give users live insight into their brainwave frequency data while they
communicate across two different spaces. A single-user mode as a more introspective, more
educational device is also planned. Initial limitations on complexity of mapping and complexity
of representation will be challenged in due course.
Visualization projects on human brain activity and the
nervous system, such as The Human Connectome Project
[46] or The Human Brain Project [47] lead the field in
visualization strategies on the human brain. On an academic
level, Transmission first and foremost concerns telepresence
itself—as a cultural, a phenomenological, and a perceptual
concept. On a conceptual level, Transmission is concerned
with understanding and transcending the body-mind
dichotomy. The body as a networked environment, as a
network itself, a rhizome, a field of synapses and neural
transmissions, is never self-enclosed, always interacting,
reacting, emitting, and communicating. Transmission is
intended to raise awareness for conscious reactions and
interactions between the mind and the body.

Figure 8. Transmission visualization.
Screenshot 1920 x 1080, December 2013.
With Transmission, Analema Group created a
new interface for audiovisual interpretation
of brain waves. The long-term plan is to find
therapeutic and potentially even medical
uses for this piece. © 2014 Analema Group.

Transmission, once widely trialed and tested, will propose a technical infrastructure which could
be used for medical and/or therapeutic purposes. Working closely with neurofeedback
practitioners, we understand the need for more complex, visually and sonically developed
interfaces for the interpretation of neural signals (Figure 8). The experience of the team and
expert consultancy will ensure successful re-contextualization of our analysis tool. Ultimately,
our objective is to introduce our interface into a therapeutic setting by adapting an artistic tool
to practical considerations.
Academic research in the framework of this project combines standardized tests with
quantifiable EEG data and subjective telepresence data with objective data sets. With the
presentation of a standard model for telepresence, we want to focus on underlying factors and
components of presence. Concentrating on three core factors—interactivity, immersion, and
realism—we will discuss their interrelations, their relevance, and their characteristics within the
research environment of Transmission.
On an artistic level, Transmission presents a new interface for reflective engagement with one
another, a performance tool that integrates audiences by empowering them to “see” and explore
their mind, their reflexes, their reactions and their interactions in a new light. The dialectic
between inner evolutions and outer influences, mind and body, external and internal
environments, is represented as a Mobius loop of infinite possibilities.

Transmission: A Telepresence Interface for Neural and Kinetic Interaction

|

Gingrich, Renaud, Emets, Xiao

383

References and Notes

1. Minsky, Marvin, “Telepresence,” Omni, 45–51 (1980).
2. Widely regarded as the first example of telepresence art, Roy Ascott’s La Plissure du Texte was first
exhibited at the Musée de l’Art de la ville de Paris. La Plissure du Texte, <http://alien.mur.at/rax/
ARTEX/PLISSURE/plissure.html> (Paris, 1983), accessed March 24, 2014. Mixed media.
3. Sermon, Paul, Telematic Dreaming, <www.paulsermon.org/> (Finland, 1992), accessed February 15,
2014. Mixed media telepresence projection, variable dimensions.
4. Sermon, Paul, Telematic Séance, <www.paulsermon.org/> (Finland, 1993), accessed February 15, 2014.
Mixed media, variable dimensions, telepresence projection.
5. Sermon, Paul, Telematic Vision, <www.paulsermon.org/> (Karlsruhe, 1994), accessed February 15,
2014. Mixed media, variable dimensions.
6. Keane, Tina, Couch, <www.luxonline.org.uk/artists/tina_keane/couch.html> (multiple locations,
1998–2003), accessed January 5, 2014. Mixed media, monitors, telepresence environment, and couch.
Variable dimensions.
7. Lozano-Hemmer, Rafael, The Trace, <www.lozano-hemmer.com/the_trace.php> (1995), accessed
March 17, 2014. Outdoor projection. In Christiane Paul, Digital Art (London: Thames & Hudson,
2003), 72–77.
8. Lozano-Hemmer, Rafael, Displaced Emperors (Ars Electronica, Linz, 1998). Outdoor projection. In
Christiane Paul, Digital Art (London: Thames & Hudson, 2003), 72–77.
9. A good example for discourse on virtuality is Ken Goldberg’s Telegarden, displayed at Ars Electronica
Center (Linz, 1995–2004), <http://goldberg.berkeley.edu/garden/Ars/>, accessed March 15, 2014.
10. Hayles, Katherine N., How We Became Posthuman (Chicago: Chicago University Press, 1999).
11. Stelarc, Rotating Brains / Beating Heart, <www.youtube.com/watch?v=m36PRHsX57w>, accessed
January 2, 2014. A virtual-reality performance featuring Pauline Oliveros, Stelarc, and the Avatar
Orchestra Metaverse (New Adventures in Sound Art SOUNDplay Festival, November 2010, OCAD
University, Toronto, Canada).
12. Stanza, Connecting Cities, <www.stanza.co.uk/data/index.html>, accessed January 1, 2014. Live data
visualization projection, Liverpool, 2010.
13. Duchamp, Marcel, Bicycle Wheel, <www.moma.org/collection/object.php?object_id=81631> (New
York, 1913), accessed January 21, 2013. Mixed media, metal wheel mounted on painted wood stool.
Dimensions: 129.5 x 63.5 x 41.9 cm.
14. Lieberman, Zach, et al., Eyewriter interactive read/writing software, <www.eyewriter.org/> (New
York, 2010), accessed February 12, 2014.
15. rAndom International, Rain Room, <http://random-international.com/work/rainroom/> (Barbican,
London, 2012), accessed February 16, 2014. Water, injection-moulded tiles, solenoid valves, pressure
regulators, custom software, 3D tracking cameras, steel beams, water management system, grated
floor. 100 sq m.
16. Paul, Christiane, Digital Art (London: Thames & Hudson, 2003) 67.
17. Oliveros, Pauline, Deep Listening, <http://deeplistening.org/site/content/pauline-oliveros> (2009),
accessed December 21, 2013.
18. Lucier, Alvin, Music for a Solo Performer, live performance, Brandeis University, 1965.
19. Teitelbaum, Richard, Spacecraft, <www.alvincurran.com/writings/mev.html> (New York, 1967),
accessed March 21, 2014. EEG-triggered live musical performance.
20. Rosenboom, David, Biofeedback and the Arts: Results of Early Experiments (Vancouver: Aesthetic
Research Centre of Canada, 1974).
21. Miranda, Eduardo, Thinking Music (Plymouth, UK: University of Plymouth Press, 2014).
22. Brouse, Andrew, Biomusic (Montréal: Society for Arts and Technology, 2007).
23. Abramovic, Marina, The Magic of Mutual Gaze, <www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ut9oPo8sLJw> (New
York, 2011), accessed February 21, 2014.
24. Cathode, Neam, Cyber Mondrian (Oboro Gallery, Montréal, 2001). EEG Performance.

384

Gingrich, Renaud, Emets, Xiao

|

Transmission: A Telepresence Interface for Neural and Kinetic Interaction

25. Mori, Mariko, Wave UFO <www.deitch.com/artists/sub.php?artistId=15> (New York, 2003), accessed
March 1, 2014.
26. Park, Lisa, Euonia <www.thelisapark.com/> (2013), accessed March 22, 2013.
27. Thompson, Jeffrey D., “Methods for Stimulation of Brainwave Function Using Sound,” <www.
neuroacoustic.com/methods.html> (1990), accessed March 13, 2014.
28. Renaud, Alain, “Dynamic Cues for Network Music Interactions,” Proceedings of the SMC Conference
2010, <http://smcnetwork.org/resources/smc2010>, accessed March 20, 2014.
29. Lombard, Matthew, and Theresa Ditton, “At the Heart of It All: The Concept of Presence,” Journal of
Computer-Mediated Communication 3, 1083–6101 (1997).
30. Witmer, Bob, and Michael Singer, “Measuring Presence in Virtual Environments: A Presence
Questionnaire,” Presence Vol. 7, No. 3, 225–240 (June 1998).
31. Sadowski, Wallace, and Kay Stanney, Measuring and Managing Presence in Virtual Environments
(Orlando, FL: University of Central Florida, 2002), <http://web.cs.wpi.edu/~gogo/courses/imgd5100/
papers/Sadowski_HVE_2002.html>, accessed March 20, 2014.
32. Sheridan, Thomas, “Musings on Telepresence and Virtual Presence,” Presence Vol. 1, No. 1, 120–126
(1992).
33. Freeman, Jonathan, “Implications for the Measurement of Presence from Convergent Evidence on the
Structure of Presence,” paper presented to the Information Systems Division at the Annual Meeting of
the International Communication Association (New Orleans, LA, 2004). In Campanella Bracken,
Cheryl, and Paul Skalski, “Telepresence and Video Games: The Impact of Image Quality,”
PsychNology Journal Vol. 7, No. 1, 101–112 (2009).
34. Barfield, Woodrow, and Suzanne Weghorst, “The Sense of Presence Within Virtual Environments: A
Conceptual Framework,” Human-Computer Interaction: Software and Hardware Interfaces Vol B,
699–704 (1993).
35. Prothero, J.D., and H.G. Hoffman, “Widening the Field-of-View Increases the Sense of Presence in
Immersive Virtual Environments,” Human-Computer Interaction: HCI Intelligent Multimodal
Interaction Environments, Vol. 4552, 393–400 (2007).
36. Hoffman, H.G., et al., “Virtual Chess: The Role of Meaning in the Sensation of Presence,”
International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction Vol. 10, 251–263 (1998).
37. Barfield, Woodrow, and Claudia M. Hendrix, “The Effect of Update Rate on the Sense of Presence
within Virtual Environments,” Virtual Reality: The Journal of the Virtual Reality Society Vol. 1, No. 1,
3–16 (1995).
38. Oculus Rift, <www.oculusrift.com>, accessed March 21, 2014.
39. International Society for Presence Research, “The Concept of Presence: Explication Statement,”
<http://ispr.info> (2000), accessed February 15, 2014.
40. Oxford English Dictionary, <www.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/english/interactive>, accessed
January 4, 2014.
41. Lombard, Matthew, and Theresa Ditton, “At the Heart of It All: The Concept of Presence,” Journal of
Computer-Mediated Communication Vol. 3, 1083–6101 (1997).
42. Liu, Yuping, and Shrum, L.J., “What Is Interactivity and Is It Always Such a Good Thing?
Implications of Definition, Person, and Situation for the Influence of Interactivity on Advertising
Effectiveness,” Journal of Advertising Vol. 4, 53–64 (2002).
43. Witmer, Bob, and Michael Singer, “Measuring Presence in Virtual Environments: A Presence
Questionnaire,” Presence Vol. 7, No. 3, 225–240 (June 1998).
44. Emotiv EEG device, <www.emotiv.com>, accessed March 20, 2014.
45. Zhidong, Xiao, Motion Capture Based Motion Analysis and Motion Synthesis for Human-like Character
Animation (Bournemouth University, 2009).
46. Human Connectome Project, <www.humanconnectomeproject.org>, accessed February 21, 2014.
47. Human Brain Project, <www.humanbrainproject.eu>, accessed February 15, 2014.

Transmission: A Telepresence Interface for Neural and Kinetic Interaction

|

Gingrich, Renaud, Emets, Xiao

385

