Proceedings of the ASME 2012 International Design Engineering Technical Conference &
Computers and Information in Engineering Conference
IDETC/CIE 2012
August 12-15, 2012, Chicago, IL, USA

DETC2012-71608
EVALUATION OF SSVEP AS PASSIVE FEEDBACK FOR IMPROVING THE
PERFORMANCE OF BRAIN MACHINE INTERFACES
Shaocheng Wang*
Department of Mechanical
Engineering
University of California Riverside
Riverside, CA, USA

Ehsan Tarkesh Esfahani*
Department of Mechanical
Engineering
University of California Riverside
Riverside, CA, USA

such as positron emission tomography (PET) and magnetic
resonance imagery (MRI) find only restricted application in
brain-computer interfaces although they are widely used in
medical and research settings [1].
Brain-computer interfaces have been primarily used to
provide assistance to severely disabled people [1,2]. However,
BCIs can also be used as an alternative interface for regular
human computer interaction. New developments in BCIs have
already enabled users to navigate in virtual scenes, manipulate
virtual objects or play games just by means of their cerebral
activity [3]. BCIs are also being considered as effective tools in
future computer aided design systems by engaging visual
imagery in design process [4] or helping the selection of
geometries in virtual environments[5].
Motor imagery i.e. the imagery involved in motion has
been the primary focus of most BCIs [2, 3]. Here signals are
obtained during imagined sensorimotor rhythms (SMR).
Typically, the SMRs are detected based on features of the µ and
β rhythms (8–12 and 18–26Hz) [1]. Changes in the amplitudes
of these frequency bands are referred to as event-related
desynchronization (ERD) (i.e. decrease) and event-related
synchronization (ERS) (i.e. increase). The rhythms decrease or
desynchronize with movement or its preparation, and increase
or synchronize after movement and with relaxation [6].
BCIs based on sensorimotor rhythms (SMR) are the basic
elements for movement control in virtual environments. It has
been shown that using SMR based BCI, it is possible to control
the 2D motion of a cursor [7], [8].
The main advantage of motor imagery classification is that
it requires no external stimuli and the ongoing EED is used to
classify the mental task. However, its implementation in
continuous human computer interaction is subjected to false

ABSTRACT
Research in brain-computer interfaces have focused primarily
on motor imagery tasks such as those involving movement of a
cursor or other objects on a computer screen. In such applications, it is important to detect when the user is interested in
moving an object and when the user is not active in this task.
This paper evaluates the steady state visual evoked potential
(SSVEP) as a feedback mechanism to confirm the mental state
of the user during motor imagery. These potentials are evoked
when a subject looks at a flashing objects of interest. Four different experiments are conducted in this paper. Subjects are
asked to imagine the movement of flashing object in a given
direction. If the subject is involved in this task, the SSVEP signal will be detectable in the visual cortex and therefore the motor imagery task is confirmed. During the experiment, EEG
signal is recorded at 4 locations near visual cortex. Using a
weighting scheme, the best combination of the recorded signal
is selected to evaluate the presence of flashing frequency. The
experimental result shows that the SSVEP can be detected even
in complex motor imagery of flickering objects. The detection
rate of 85% is achieved while the refreshing time for SSVEP
feedback is set to 0.5 seconds.
INTRODUCTION
Brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) have gained greater
attention in the past several years because they provide the
possibility to directly create a communication channel between
the human brain and the computer by translating human
intentions into control signals for the computer. In non-invasive
BCIs, electroencephalography (EEG) is commonly used due to
its excellent time resolution, ease of data acquisition, portability
and lower system cost. Other brain monitoring mechanisms
_______________________________________________
* These authors have equal contributions to this manuscript.

Sundararajan V.
Department of Mechanical
Engineering
University of California Riverside
Riverside, CA, USA

1

Copyright © 2012 by ASME

detection of movement because certain brain activities involved
even in an idle state can mimic motor imagery.
Moreover, while BCI research efforts have succeeded in
providing communication for some users, it has often been
report that (very roughly) 20% of subjects do not exhibit BCI
performance adequate for effective control [9].
Therefore in order to use BCI as an alternative in human
computer interactions, it is critical to increase its robustness.
To overcome these problems a hybrid BCI approach has
been proposed. The main idea of hybrid BCI is to use a stimulus
based response such as P300 or visual evoked potential with
sensorimotor rhythms to increase the robustness of the BCI [8],
[10].
Similarly, to reduce the false alarm in classification of
ongoing EEG signals, Pfurtscheller et al [11] have proposed a
brain switch by combining visual evoked potential and event
related synchronization (ERS)-based BCI. Although, they could
achieve high robustness by combining SSVEP and ERS, their
hybrid BCI is only designed to detect one mental task and may
not have the same performance in complex situations.
In this paper, we have conducted a series of experiments to
verify the robustness of hybrid BCIs in multi-mental task
situations. To this end, steady state visual evoked potential
(SSVEP) is used in combination with different motor imagery.
The idea is that in human computer interaction, the motor
imagery usually occurs when the subject is gazing on a virtual
object to move or rotate. Therefore by flashing the object of
interest on the screen, it may be possible to get passive
confirmation about correct detection of user’s intent. This
passive confirmation (feedback) is achieved through SSVEP
detection.
The organization of this paper is as follow: The
background behind visual evoked potential and SSVEP is
provided in next section. It is followed by detailed experimental
methods and signal processing algorithms for detecting SSVEP.
Finally, the experimental results and conclusions are presented
in the final sections.

kinds of stimulus are different, researchers usually use temporal
methods for TVEP analysis and frequency analysis for SSVEP
case [14].
A Steady-State Visual Evoked Potential (SSVEP) is a
resonance phenomenon arising mainly in the visual cortex when
a person is focusing his/her visual attention on a light source
flickering with a frequency above 6 Hz [13].
The SSVEP can be elicited up to at least 90 Hz [15] and
could be classified into three ranges: low (up to 12 Hz),
medium (12-30) and high frequency (> 30 Hz). In general, the
SSVEP in low frequency range has larger amplitude responses
than in the medium range. Thus, the lower frequencies are
easier to detect.
The high-frequency SSVEP ranges have the advantage of a
minimum visual fatigue caused by flickering, making the
SSVEP-based BCI a more comfortable and stable system [16].
At a same time these frequencies experience the weakest
SSVEP which make the SSVEP detection a more difficult task
and requires computationally expensive algorithm.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
EEG signals were recorded using the Emotiv neuroheadset
at 4 channels on the scalp. The names of channels that are used
for this study are based on the international 10-20 system are:
P7, O1, O2, and P8. Signals were recorded at sampling rate of
2048 Hz, and sent to the computer wirelessly after being downsampled to 128 Hz.
The selected visual stimulation was a three-dimensional
cube that flashed on the screen. The background is black while
the cube had white surfaces and blue edges. All surfaces of the
cube were flashing at a frequency of 13 Hz.
Four different experiments were conducted in this study.
Each experiment consists of two parts: part one is conducted in
only one trial during which the cube is not flashing. In this part
of the experiment, subject is asked to gaze at the object and
conduct an imagery movement in a given direction. This
experiment only contains motor imagery and therefore can be
used as the control. Part two contains 5 trials in which the
subject is performing the same task as part one but with
presence of the flashing stimulus. In each trial for all
experiments, subject is asked to sit on a comfortable position
and look at the screen. EEG data for each trial is recorded once
the cube appears on the screen until it disappears.
The motor imagery task that subject is instructed to
perform each experiment are shown in the Figure 1. The arrows
describe how the cube is rotating or translating and its direction.
The numbers denote different states during the experiment
process. All the arrows and numbers in the figures are only for
the convenience of description and do not exist in the
experiment.
In the first experiment, the cube only rotates along the
horizontal axis which passes its geometric center. In the second
experiment, the cube moves from the position of initial state 1
to that of final state 2, it is also rotating along the vertical axis

STEADY STATE VISUAL EVOKED POTENTIAL
Among different brain signals that have been employed for
EEG based BCIs, VEP (Visual Evoked Potentials) based system
has been studied since 1970s [12]. It is commonly accepted as a
method that provides high information transfer rate and needs
less user training. VEP is the response of human brain to the
visual stimulus. It is categorized into transient VEP (TVEP) and
steady state VEP (SSVEP) which correspond to visual stimulus
with low and high frequency, respectively. TVEP arises when
the stimulation frequency is less than 2 Hz, while SSVEP
appears when the repetition rate of the stimulus is higher than 6
Hz [13]. It is well agreed that SSVEP has a wider area of
application than TVEP because in most cases, the human’s
brain is considered in steady state of excitability in which the
responses that elicited by the high frequency visual stimulus
will overlap each other. Since the characteristics caused by two
2

Copyright © 2012 by ASME

that passes its geometric center at the same time. The third
experiment is similar to the second one, but instead of
translating from right to left, it goes from top to bottom. In the
fourth experiment, the cube recedes into the screen along the
axis that perpendicular to the screen, rotates along the
horizontal axis that passes its geometric center at the same time

Nh

yi (t )   ain sin(2nft )  bin cos( 2nft )  Ei (t )

Equation 1 is a linear model which considers the dominant
activity of Nh harmonics of the flickering frequency in terms of
sine and cosine functions. Any other components, including all
non-SSVEP cognitive process, noise and artifacts are
considered in the second part ( Ei (t ) ). Equation 1 can be
expressed in vector form as Equation 2.

1

yi  Xgi  Ei

2

2

(2)

yi  [ yi (1) ... yi ( Nt )]T is the EEG of the ith electrode
containing Nt data points. X is the observation matrix which
contains sine and cosine components of SSVEP response. The
corresponding amplitude of matrix X, (ain and bin) are
represented with vector gi. Equation 2 can be further
generalized for Ny electrodes as Equation 3:

B

A

(1)

n 1

1

YNt N y  X Nt 2 Nh G2 Nh N y  E Nt N y

(3)

where Y = [y1, . . . , yNy] and G = [g1, . . . , gNy] contain all
the EEG data points recorded at Ny channels and their
associated harmonic amplitudes respectively.
In order to enhance the SSVEP component in the recorded
signal, a virtual channel is defined as a linear combination of all
the electrode signals, Y.

C

s Nt 1  YNT N y wN y 1
2

(4)

where w is a vector of weights [w1, ... , wNy] associated with
the contribution of individual electrode signals in the enhanced
SSVEP response. The weighting vector is selected to minimize
the non-SSVEP components. Therefore, a linear unbiased
estimator is used to estimate and thus extract the SSVEP
components from the recorded signals as shown in Equation 5.

1
D

~
Y  Y  X ( X T X )1 X T Y

Figure 1 COMBINATION OF MOTOR IMAGERY AND
SSVEP IN THREE DIFFERENT SCENARIOS A) PURE
ROTATION B-D) ROTATION AND TRANSLATION
AROUND X , Y AND Z AXIS.

(5)

In Equation 5 the term X ( X T X ) 1 X T Y is an estimate of
~
SSVEP component and Y is the remaining signal associated
with noise, artifacts and background brain activity. The
weighting vector w is then estimated such that it minimizes the
energy of non-SSVEP component of the signal as shown in
Equation 6:

SSVEP DETECTION
An SSVEP BCI reflects the user’s attention to a visual
stimulation oscillating at a constant frequency. Let consider the
EEG signal recorded at Ny channels in response to a visual
stimulation flickering at a frequency of f Hz. The SSVEP
response recorded at each channel, yi (t ) , can be modeled as

~ 2
wˆ  arg min Ywˆ

(6)

Herrmann has shown that the minimal eigenvalue of matrix

~ ~
Y T Y will minimize the cost function in Equation 6 [17]. The

Equation 1.

3

Copyright © 2012 by ASME

weight matrix is hence chosen based on the minimum
eigenvalue (λ1) and its corresponding eigenvectors (v1):

w

v1

As it can be seen in Figure 2, the target frequency has a
high power in the average signals of 40 trails; however it is
undetectable in single trial recorded at each of the electrodes
due to high activity in alpha frequency band (8-11 Hz). Finally
it shows that the single trial of the weighted signal has its
maximum power at the target frequency which clearly shows the
effectiveness of weighting method.
Moreover, since our long-term goal is to use SSVEP as
feedback to implement the motor imagery, we desire a high
refreshing rate of signal in the time domain. On the other hand
since the sampling rate of the signal is only 128 Hz, too short
signal interval in time domain may cause fail in detection of
SSVEP. Because of this trade-off, a test on the accuracy of
SSVEP detection was done by selecting different subset length
and shifting length for the moving window on the entire signal
that recorded.
Figure 3 shows the details of how moving windows are
selected. L is the length of entire signal that recorded in the time
domain. The first subset has length Lw which started from the
initial time. Then the subset is modified by shifting forward of d
seconds.

(7)

1

In SSVEP based BCI applications, the stimulation
frequency should be detected as a dominant frequency in the
power spectral density. Hence, to detect the presence of a
frequency in the spatially filtered signals, the ratio of power of
the signal (PSD) at the target frequency with respect to the
maximum power of the signal is calculated as shown in
Equation 8.
R



max PSD ( s) | ff 00..11
max



PSD ( s) |64
6





(8)

The ratio of 1 shows that flashing frequency is dominant in
the signal and therefore the SSVEP is detectable.

L

RESULTS
A comparison between the power spectral density of the
weighted signal calculated with Equation 10 and the signals
recorded at different location near visual cortex are shown in
Figure 2. In the actual system implementation, Nh = 2.
Single Trial O1

Lw

d

Single Trial O2

Figure 3 THE MOVING WINDOW PARAMETER FOR
CALCULATING THE BEST PARAMETERS

Single Trial P7

The averaged SSVEP detection rate over all subjects, for
different values of Lw and d is illustrated in Figure 4-7. Each
figure compares the classification rate with the control.

Single Trial P8

Average of multiple Trials O1 Single Trial weighted signal
Target frequency
13 Hz

Target frequency
13 Hz

Figure 2 COMPARISON BETWEEN THE POWER OF
TARGET FREQUENCY IN SINGL TRIAL SIGNAL OF
EACH ELECTRODE, THE AVERAGE AND THE
WEIGHTED SIGNAL

Figure 4 SSVEP DETECTION RATE FOR PURE ROTATION
(EXP 1A)
4

Copyright © 2012 by ASME

As it can be seen in Figure 4-7, the minimum classification
rate appears at the smallest size of the moving window where
the number of available data points is relatively low.
The classification has to take the moment into account
when the user does not focus on any stimuli. For this reason the
SSVEP detection rate in the normal condition is also calculated.
The lower surfaces in Figure 4-7 show the SSVEP detection
rate in normal condition or in other words the rate of false alarm
in classification. In 3 out 4 experiments, the average false alarm
is less than 5%. Pure rotation with no flashing experiences the
maximum misclassification of idle case as SSVEP. To further
investigate the reason of false alarm and SSVEP
misclassification, the normalized power of signal at flashing
frequency is shown in Figure 8.
Figure 5 SSVEP DETECTION RATE FOR ROTATION AND
TRANSLATION X-AXIS (EXP 1B)

Figure 8 SSVEP DETECTION RATE FOR ROTATION AND
TRANSLATION Y-AXIS (EXP 1C)
It worth nothing that the stimulation frequency is located
very close to the alpha band, this could produce false
classifications in the resting state or slightly reduce the
normalized power of the target frequency –Equation11-. In this
case the R value will be slightly less than one and still classify
as non-SSVEP.
Such problems could easily be avoided by introducing a
proper threshold for R value and/or using calibration session for
every subject. In the calibration session, the power of the target
frequency will be normalized with respect to the normal
condition. However, the calibration session is avoided in this
paper to eliminate the training period of the SSVEP detection to
consider the worst case scenario when it is used as brain switch
in a hybrid BCI.

Figure 6 SSVEP DETECTION RATE FOR ROTATION AND
TRANSLATION Y-AXIS (EXP 1C)

CONCLUSION
In this paper, the steady state visual evoked potential
(SSVEP) was evaluated as a feedback through conducting
different experiments to confirm the mental state of the user
during motor imagery. In each experiment, subjects were asked
to imagine the movement of flashing object in a given direction.
Using a weighting scheme the best combination of the
recorded signal is selected to evaluate the presence of flashing
frequency. The presence of SSVEP implies that the subject was

Figure 7 SSVEP DETECTION RATE FOR ROTATION AND
TRANSLATION z-AXIS (EXP 1D)
5

Copyright © 2012 by ASME

involved in the motor imagery and therefore, the ERD/ERS
classifier should be actively applied to the signal.
It is worth noting that SSVEP detection method is
considered as a brain switch. Upon detection of the target
frequency, the motor imagery classifier is engaged. In other
words, SSVEP detection is implemented to reduce the false
alarm rate of motor imagery classifier. This paper only focused
on the evaluation of SSVEP as a brain switch in BCIs.
However, in future works, we are looking forward to
synchronized it with an active ERD/ERS classifier

Hinterberger, T., McFarland, DJ., and Muller, KR., Eds.
Cambridge, MA, pp. 1-25.

REFERENCES
[1]
Mak, JN and Wolpaw, JR, 2009 “Clinical Applications of
Brain-Computer Interfaces: Current State and Future Prospects”. IEEE reviews in biomedical engineering, 2(1),
pp. 187-199.

[10]

Allison, B., Brunner, C., Kaiser, V., Muller-Putz, GR.,
Neuper, C., and Pfurtschelle, G., 2010 “Toward a hybrid
brain–computer interface based on imagined movement
and visual attention”. Journal of neural engineering, 7(2),
pp. 1-9.

[11]

Pfurtscheller, G., Solis-Escalante, T., Ortner, R.,
Linortner, P., and Müller-Putz, GR., 2010. “Self-Paced
Operation of an SSVEP-Based Orthosis With and Without
an Imagery-Based Brain Switch: A Feasibility Study Towards a Hybrid BCI,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering. 18(4), pp. 409-414.

[12]

Vidal, JJ., 1977. “Real-time Detection of Brain Events in
EEG”. Proceedings of the IEEE, 65(5), pp. 633-641.

[13]

Cheng, M., Gao, X., Gao, S., and Xu, D., 2002. “Design
and implementation of a brain-computer interface with
high transfer rates.,” IEEE Transactions on Biomedical
Engineering, 49(10), pp. 1181-6.

[14]

Wang, Y., Gao, X., Hong, B., Jia, C., and Gao, S., 2008.
“Brain-computer interfaces based on visual evoked potentials”. IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Magazine, 27(5), pp. 64–71.

[2]

Pfurtscheller, G., Müller-Putz, G., Scherer, R. and
Neuper, C., 2008. “Rehabilitation with brain-computer interface systems”. Computer, 41(10), pp. 58-65.

[3]

Lecuyer, A., Lotte, F., Reilly, RB., Leeb, R., Hirose, M.,
and Slater, M., 2008. “Brain–computer interfaces, virtual
reality, and videogames”. Computer, 41(10), pp. 66-72.

[4]

Esfahani, ET., and Sundararajan, V., 2011. “Classification
of primitive shapes using brain–computer interfaces”.
Computer Aided Design, doi:10.1016/j.cad.2011.04.008,
(In press).

[15]

Esfahani, ET., and V. Sundararajan, “Using Brain Computer Interfaces for Geometry Selection in CAD Systems:
P300 Detection Approach,” ASME 2011 Design Engineering Technical Conference, pp. 1-6.

Herrmann, CS., 2001. “Human EEG responses to 1-100
Hz flicker: resonance phenomena in visual cortex and
their potential correlation to cognitive phenomena”. Experimental Brain Research, 137(3-4), pp. 346-353.

[16]

Diez, PF., Mut, VA., Perona, E., and Leber, EL., 2011.
“Asynchronous BCI control using high-frequency
SSVEP,” Journal of Neural Engineering and Rehabilitation, 8(39), pp. 1-8.

[17]

Friman, O., Volosyak, I., and Graser, A., 2007. “Multiple
channel detection of steady-state visual evoked potentials
for brain-computer interfaces”. IEEE Trnsactions on Biomedical Engineering, 54(4), pp. 742–750.

[18]

Volosyak, I., 2011. “SSVEP-based Bremen-BCI interface-boosting information transfer rates”. Journal of neural
engineering, 8(3), p. 036020.

[5]

[6]

Pfurtscheller, G., 1999. “EEG event-related desynchronizeation (ERD) and event-related synchronization (ERS)”.
Electroencephalography: Basic Principles, Clinical Applications and Related Fields, 4th ed., Niedermeyer, E.,
and Lopes da Silva, F., Eds. Baltimore, MD: Williams and
Wilkins, pp. 958-967.

[7]

Trejo, LJ., Rosipal, R., and Matthews, B., 2006. “Brain–
computer interfaces for 1-D and 2-D cursor control: designs using volitional control of the EEG spectrum or
steady-state visual evoked potentials”. IEEE Transactions
on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, 14(2),
pp. 225–229.

[8]

Long, J., Li, Y., Yu, T., and Gu, Z., 2012. “Target Selection With Hybrid Feature for BCI-Based 2-D Cursor Control”. IEEE Ttansactions on Biomedical Engineering,
59(1), pp. 132-140.

[9]

Kubler, A., and Muller, KR, 2007. “An introduction to
brain–computer interfacing”. Toward Brain–Computer Interfacing, MIT Press., Dornhedge, G., Millan. J,
6

Copyright © 2012 by ASME

