Advances in Science, Technology and Engineering Systems Journal Vol. 4, No. 1, 17-26 (2019)

ASTESJ

www.astesj.com

ISSN: 2415-6698

Special Issue on Advancement in Engineering and Computer Science

A Wearable Exoskeleton Rehabilitation Device for Paralysis – A Comprehensive Study
Ahmed Roshdy, Samer Al Kork*, Sherif Said, Taha. Beyrouthy
College of Engineering and Technology, American University of the Middle East, Kuwait
ARTICLE INFO
Article history:
Received: 20 December, 2018
Accepted: 27 December, 2018
Online : 20 January, 2019
Keywords:
Rehabilitation
EEG
Prosthetic
Emotiv headset
Paralysis

1.

ABSTRACT
As the technology grows scientists and engineers are trying to combine their work to
compensate some body parts that is lost. Prosthetic devices grabbed the attention of most
of the doctors and engineers working on solution for lost body parts. Generally prosthetic
devices are either external wearable devices or internal ones. Such devices may depend on
a built on microcontroller or the brain signals from the patient himself. Although it is used
for lost body parts it can also be used for rehabilitation, power assistance, diagnostics,
monitoring, ergonomics, etc. The currently used devices usually have the disadvantages of
big size and high cost. The suggested device in this paper is targeting the design of portable
rehabilitation device with light weight and low cost for paralyzed hand people. The
suggested device allows the user to train the patient’s hand or perform some needed
exercises for his impaired hand. This helps the user to restore the normal hand movement
and functionality. The device includes two modes of operation to be chosen by the user
through the platform built on a microprocessor which can help controlling the exoskeleton
to perform the needed exercises or tasks. Collaboration with several healthcare
organizations will be considered to verify or test the effectiveness of this exoskeleton.

Introduction

This paper is an extension of work originally presented in
BioSMART, the 2nd International Conference on Bioengineering for Smart Technologies” titled ‘A wearable
rehabilitation device for paralysis’ [1]. Diseases like stroke may
lead to the loss of some parts of the human body and some other
people are actually suffering of paralysis, broken bones, spinal
cord injury, hemiplegia or traumatic brain injury. People facing
such diseases or injuries are actually facing some problems in
their day to day activities because of the infected or injured body
part. One of the suggested solutions for such cases is the
rehabilitation therapy to improve the infected part movement and
regain the strength and power of that part. Some of the
physiotherapy exercises are needed for the recovering
rehabilitation process for the patient to be able to completely or
partially restore the normal movement of the paralyzed body part
[2]. Although this process is needed for hands or legs
rehabilitation, this paper is actually focusing on a device to be
used for the hands’ problems and injuries. Humans are using their
hands for writing, touching, holding, squeezing, and so many
other functionalities. The partial or total loss of this part of the
human body means losing so many valuable functions that any
human being needs. The full hand with all its many joints act as
natural motors to perform routine daily tasks [2]. This paper is
meant to target a rehabilitation therapy system for patients with
hand disabilities like too weak hands or even paralysis. The
*

Samer Al Kork, American University of the Middle East, +965 2225 1400 Ext.
1732, samer.alkork@aum.edu.kw
www.astesj.com

https://dx.doi.org/10.25046/aj040103

suggested device compared to the existing devices is considered
to be low cost, lightweight, customizable, programmable and safe
for human practice. All the functions of the device should be
running in two different rehabilitation modes of training called
active and passive. The design process will move into four phases,
which are human interface, processing unit, health care sensors,
and display. Each one of them has special task to do. Human
interface will be responsible of the interface between the user and
the processing unit. Processing unit will transmit commands to the
electromechanical part. Electromechanical part will control the
movement of the Exoskeleton. Health 10 care sensor will be used
to monitor the user’s health to insure the safety. The results will
be shown in the display part.
The paper is going through literature review for common
wearable devices available in the market showing the mode of
control and the controlling method of each one. Also the literature
review is covering the different brain waves’ readers as well as
the brain waves and the motor controls on the device itself. At the
end the proposed wearable device is discussed mainly in hardware
with a comparison to the available devices.
2.

Literature Review

2.1. Wearable Device
Here in this section is the comparison between the main
projects already exist as rehabilitation wearable devices and
assistive exoskeletons. In Table 1 the comparison shows the
difference in the modes and the methods used in some projects
17

A. Roshdy et al. / Advances in Science, Technology and Engineering Systems Journal Vol. 4, No. 1, 17-26 (2019)
that were built for rehabilitation and assistive purposes for either
hand or leg usage. Most of the projects are based in using either
Virtual Reality (VR) or electromyography (EMG) as an interface
for the device. None of the currently used devices has built the
system using Electroencephalography (EEG) interface for the
wearable device like what is offered in this study. The main
problems for the devices already exist in the market are the high
cost and the heavy weight because of the heavy materials used in
their fabrication [4]. Although there already exist so many devices
but only few of them offers the two modes of control passive and
active. Herewith the study is based on EEG interface with the two
possible modes of operation as well as keeping a light affordable
weight and low cost.

University of Technology in Sydney Designed and developed
a hand exoskeleton for rehabilitation following stroke [4]. The
device is achieving full flexion/extension motion of the five
fingers of the left hand (impaired hand) based on the motion of
the identical digits of the right hand (healthy hand). The device is
less than 2 Kg and they chose Aluminum because of its
lightweight. The hand exoskeleton has 15 degrees of freedom
(DOFs). However, the hand exoskeleton cannot perform
abduction/adduction movement; as a consequence, more work
needs to be done on the device (Figure 2).

Table 1 Some Applications of Wearable Devices
Title

Control
Modes

Methods

Design and development of a hand
exoskeleton for rehabilitation
following stroke [4]

Active

-

Hand Rehabilitation Support system
Based on Self-motion control, with
Clinical case report [5]

Active

VR

Current Hand Exoskeleton
Technologies for Rehabilitation and
Assistive Engineering [6]

Passive

VR

Design and Development of a Hand
Exoskeleton Robot for Active and
Passive Rehabilitation [7]

Active/Passive

EMG

An EMG-driven exoskeleton hand
robotic training device on chronic
stroke [8]

Active

EMG

A review of technological and clinical
aspects of robot-aided rehabilitation
of upper-extremity after stroke [9]

Active

VR

Hong Kong polytechnic University designed a portable set of
robotic hand exoskeleton that can be used or carried anywhere to
help stroke patients in opening or closing their hands [8]. It works
in an active mode and has 2 degree of freedom for each finger at
the MCP and PIP. The robotic hand consists of Velcro straps to
hold the hand in place, 5 linear actuators for fingers and a palm
support platform. Finger assemblies are used to provide finger's
flexion and extension. Also, it is designed in a way that can be
used for different finger length. Also, there is an embedded
controller that handles the robotic hand various tasks and monitor
the EMG signals (sensor) that are used for the closing and opening
process of a hand. Moreover, the set contains a wireless remote
control system that helps the therapist to configure and select from
different training modes (Figure 1).

Figure 2. Hand Exoskeleton for Rehabilitation

Kyushu University proposed a hand exoskeleton using threelayered sliding spring mechanism [10]. The idea of this paper is
to present a lightweight and compact device to easily use, so
under-actuated mechanism is used to reduce the mass and size of
the device by limiting the number of actuators into one (Figure 3).

Figure 3. Overview of the Hand Exoskeleton

Figure 1. The Set of Hand Exoskeleton and Overview of the Prototype
www.astesj.com

The weight of the exoskeleton is 320 g. Each finger has three
DOF, which is flexion/extension, but the thumb is fixed for the
sake of robust grasping. Therefore, the three DOF is actuated
through one actuator.as a result; the four fingers will work
simultaneously. Three-layered sliding spring consists of 3 springs
that is divided into inner (Si), center (Sc) and outer (So) springs
and rigid bodies into tip (Rt), inner (ri) and outer (Ro) parts. The
mechanism helps to perform flexion motion (Figure 4).
18

A. Roshdy et al. / Advances in Science, Technology and Engineering Systems Journal Vol. 4, No. 1, 17-26 (2019)

Figure 4. Three-Layered Sliding Spring Mechanism

University of Salford developed a hand assistive exoskeleton
that operates in the active mode [11]. It uses virtual reality
exerciser to perform the physical therapy exercises. It allows the
patient to do the therapy exercises through fun interactive games.
This exoskeleton allows hand motion, analysis and recording
easily. The exoskeleton has 7 active DOF (Figure 5).

electrodes are utilized to record the signals, and they are attached
directly to the human head. On the other hand, the invasive
technique records the signals by embedding electrodes inside the
skull itself till the brain. In addition, there are two different types
of communication, the first one is the BCI (brain computer
interface), and the second one is BMI (brain machine interface).
These two types define the communication method or interface
between the brain and the device meant to record the brain signals.
Relating the mentioned two communication methods to EEG
techniques the BCI communication type follows the non-invasive
technique while the BMI type follows the invasive method. Using
the EEG will allow the user to control the motors by his own brain
signals. The brain signal captured by the EEG is to be sent to set
of motors to perform the needed movement or action. These days,
this technique has turned out to be affordable and available to
general society. Many different products already available in the
market are using EEG in order to monitor the brain activity.

Figure. 7. EEG electrodes record signals from brain

Figure 5. Assistive Exoskeleton

A team at Twenty university develop a low cost portable hand
exoskeleton for assistive and rehabilitation in 2016 (Figure 6).
They developed it to be for active rehabilitation, cheap, wearable,
and portable [12]. This hand controlled by the mussels, they used
EMG method. It can be for different sizes. They used 3D printer
for some damages exoskeleton’s components. The aim of this
robotic hand exoskeleton is to assist persons with hand opening
disabilities.

The brain is a very complex and essential organ that its main
function is to control the whole body. In general, the brain
anatomy or structure is consisting of three main sections these are
forebrain, midbrain and hindbrain. The forebrain is classified into
three parts, which are thalamus, cerebrum, and hypothalamus. The
cerebrum represents the largest part of the brain. It is divided into
4 portions called lobes, which are frontal (F), parietal (P),
temporal (T), and occipital (O) lobes.
Each area or region has its own function. The frontal lobe is
responsible for problem solving, speaking, judgment, emotional
expression, thinking, planning and movement.
Parietal lobe is more into processing sensory and interpreting
visual information (reacting into environment); it allows sensation
from muscle and skin, body orientation, and reading. Temporal
lobe is associated with behavior, memory, hearing and
understanding language. Moreover, the occipital lobe is used for
color perception, image recognition and vision or sight (Figure 8).

Figure 6. Assistive/Rehabilitation Exoskeleton

2.2. EEG
EEG stands for “Electroencephalography”. EEG is a
technique used to screen and record electrical signals produced
inside the brain (Figure 7). There are two EEG techniques, which
are non-invasive and invasive. In the non-invasive technique,
www.astesj.com

Figure 7. The Main Portions of the Brain

19

A. Roshdy et al. / Advances in Science, Technology and Engineering Systems Journal Vol. 4, No. 1, 17-26 (2019)
2.3. Emotiv (EPOC+) and the 10-20 System

2.5. Brainwaves

EPOC follows the 10-20 system electrode placements which
is considered to be an international system [13]. This system
depends on 10% or 20% separation between the electrodes. It
permits 21 electrodes on the surface of the scalp shown in Figure..
Each possible location for the electrodes is described by a letter to
identify the lobe and a number to define the location of the
hemisphere (left or right side of the brain). It shows the 14
channels of EPOC are distributed as frontal (AF3, AF4, F7, F3,
F4, F4), front-central (FC5, FC6), parietal (P8, P7), temporal (T8,
T7) and occipital (O1, O2) lobes [14]. The odd numbers refer to
the left side of the brain and the even numbers refer to the right
side of the brain. The system renamed some locations or points,
which are T4, T3, T5 and T6 to be T8, T7, P7 and P8 respectively.
Also, the AF and FC are intermediate sites; AF is between Fp and
F but FC is between F and C. Moreover, A1 and A2 are the
locations of earlobes, DRL and CMS correspond to P3 and P4,
which are the reference sensors (Figure 9).

The brain signals are different according to the band of
frequencies of each one of them. The different frequencies or to
be more precise the different band of frequencies are covering all
the brain activities whether the human body is moving or not.
Each wave generated by the brain is does have particular location
to be produced from. The main 5 range of frequencies from the
brain are Delta, Beta, Theta, Alpha, and Gamma (Figure 11). Each
band has a specific frequency range but a different meaning.

Figure.9. Locations of the reference sensors

2.4. The Motor Area
As the different brain parts are generating different types of
waves for each task needs to be performed by the human body,
the headset. The primary motor cortex, which is located in the
frontal lobe, is responsible for controlling the execution of
movement [15]. In fact, it is located in an area called Precentral
gyrus. This part of the brain is participating in controlling the
movement of different parts of the body like arm, hand, face, foot,
etc. (Figure 10). According to the 10-20 system brain map, C3, Cz
and C4 are the nearest to the location where motor execution
occurs [15], [16]. Unfortunately, the three motor locations aren’t
available in the EPOC headset. However, there is an easy way to
obtain one of the three points; the headset can be tilted a little bit
till pointing one of the electrodes to one of the needed three
locations.

Figure 11. The Main 5 Brainwaves

The first range of frequencies is from 0.5 to 3 Hz and
considered to be the Delta range. This range of waves are created
while sleeping or relaxing meditation sessions. Also in our scope
of work the Delta waves are generated during the normal human
body healing during a deep sleep. The next range of waves is the
Theta waves and it’s in the range of 4 – 8 Hz. Usually these kind
of waves generated while sleeping as well or laziness. Third range
for the Alpha waves is from 4 to 12 Hz and the got generated by
the occipital, parietal and frontal lobes in some cases like closing
the eyes and by the frontal lobe during relaxation. Out of the
Alpha waves range there is a range from 8-12 Hz is called Mu
waves. The Mu waves mainly corresponds to the body movement.
In other words, the Mu waves are generated when the human body
is relaxed. The next range from 12 to 25 Hz is called Beta waves.
Beta waves are generally created in body movements and brain
activities like thinking or problem solving. Above 25 Hz signals
are called Gamma signals and they are faster than the other waves
as noticed from its frequency. Such signals are usually generated
with excessive brain work during multi-tasking.
2.6. Virtual Reality

Figure 10. The Location of the Hand Movement in the Motor Cortex
www.astesj.com

Virtual reality represents an alternative way to be engaged or
involved in the rehabilitation therapy routines and not easily get
bored by using the rehabilitation gaming system [18],[19]. The
rehabilitation gaming system is a virtual reality tool in a three20

A. Roshdy et al. / Advances in Science, Technology and Engineering Systems Journal Vol. 4, No. 1, 17-26 (2019)
dimensional world that let the patient does the therapy exercises
through fun interactive games (Figure 12). Also, it can be used as
a stimulus to help the patient in the motor imagery process. The
VR technology is currently a very up-to-date trend. It is quickly
moving towards the mainstream that even big companies are
investing in this technology like Samsung, Sony, Apple, etc. They
are developing their existing devices to follow this new
technology.

the location of the signal and decide the lobe and the side of the
brain sending the signal. Next step the headset will wirelessly
communicate with the computer through Wi-Fi to start the
analysis. After the analysis is done the signal should be compared
to previously recorded data to indicate the meaning of the brain
signal based on pattern recognition. In the Preprocessing unit, the
signal will be filtered. Then the signal goes to the second part
where features and specific characteristic will be detected. The
final stage the signal will go through is the classification where
the imagined movement will be identified and performed. After
signal processing, the information taken from the headset will be
compared to the previous saved data. Using pattern recognition if
the comparison got a match, then it will send the data through
Bluetooth ZigBee module to the electromechanical parts to start
the movement. This part will then give the instructions to the
servo motors to start performing the needed movement. This part
includes two big servos that ensure the movement of the arm up
and down (Figure 14).

Figure 12. Virtual Reality Tool in a Three-Dimensional World

2.7. Electromyography (EMG)
Electromyography EMG measures electrical current inside
muscles (Figure 13). EMG is controlled by nervous system. It
gains noise while moving through different tissues. Specific
Algorithms should be used to reduce the noise in order to obtain
accurate EMG signal [20]. Many applications have been
implemented using EMG method for exoskeleton hand control;
they used muscle signals to control the impaired hand which is
driven by an intact organ [8].

Figure 14. The movement of the arm

The health sensors part includes a body temperature sensor,
which allows the user to measure his body temperature [20]. It
includes also a pulse oximetry sensor that indicates the arterial
oxygen saturation of functional hemoglobin. An LCD screen is
present to show the results of some sensors like the body
temperature sensor and it is considered to be a major part of the
interface between the user and the device. Wi-Fi is used to send
all the results to the mobile application. These results will lead to
activating or deactivating the mechanical parts (motors). The
schematic of the Robotic-Based Rehabilitation system with all its
basic parts is shown in Figure 15.

Figure 13. EMG Signals Comes From Muscles

3.

Detailed design

3.1 Design Overview
The whole design is described in Figure 18 showing the
whole design different stages through the design. In the active
mode the EEG headset starts to read the brain signals and detects
www.astesj.com

Figure 15. Design overview

21

A. Roshdy et al. / Advances in Science, Technology and Engineering Systems Journal Vol. 4, No. 1, 17-26 (2019)
spectral type of information. On the other hand, spectral
information represents the power of the frequency bands. At the
end a computer will classify the signals to be able to select the
movement. There are many classifiers; however, neural network
and SVM are most commonly used [23][24]],[14],[26]. The
classifier will then save the obtained data in the feature vector with
either movement to class A or class B. Comparing these data with
the database stored from pre imagined movements will lead in
case of matching to moving the signal to Arduino as the brain for
the servo motors to perform the exercise and move the device.

Figure 16. Design schematic

3.2 System Design
The overall design and flowchart is represented in Figure 16
and Figure 17. The user enters his/her age. Then, the temperature,
ECG, and Pulses of the user are displayed on the LCD. If the
values are in the normal ranges, the system continues running,
otherwise, it stops. There are specific ranges for each one of them.
The normal body temperature tends to be between the range
36.1°C to 37.2°C. On the other hand, the normal human pulses
can be classified according the ages to be 40 to 60 pulses for ages
between 1 to 10 years and 60 to 100 pulses for ages between 10 to
60 years. Therefore, these things will provide extra security for
the user.
Second, the user picks the required mode through the built on
switch (left for active, middle for off, right for passive). If the user
selected the first mode which is the passive mode, the user will be
able to select the needed exercise through the keypad connected
to the Arduino microcontroller. After that, the servo motors will
start performing the corresponding movements based on the code
on the Arduino board. The motors are connected through rods to
the wearable device parts like fingers and rest to perform the right
movement.
The other mode of operation is the Active mode that can be
selected by moving the switch to the left. In the Active mode the
movements and therapy will be controlled by the brain signals
read by the EEG headset. When the headset reads the brain signal
it will pass it to the Arduino for analyzing to recognize the
required move Figure 18. In the beginning the signals are filtered
whenever read by the EEG to get rid of the noise signals through
bandpass filter and notch filter used particularly for 50Hz signals
that will be there most of the time from the surroundings and
power sources around the patient [14]. After having the clean
signal, the next step is getting the information from the signal and
translate it into movements or exercise through the motors
connected to the wearable device. The signals movement
translated orders are saved in a features vector to be performed.
The extracted information is classified in order to help in
extracting the features into spatial and spectral information. The
location of the electrode extracting the signal is considered to be
www.astesj.com

Figure 17. Flowchart of the system design

Figure 18. Signal processing steps [21][24]

3.3 Relevant Engineering Application and Calculations
Servomotors was chosen for this project. Four servo motors in
two separate joints are needed for each arm. To check the loads
on the motors and make sure about the safety of the human body,
it was designed to allow the device to hold weights up to 10 kg.
This amount of weight causes the torque on the servo motors
while moving. The angle of movement should also be taken into
considerations to have the right calculations of the motors
22

A. Roshdy et al. / Advances in Science, Technology and Engineering Systems Journal Vol. 4, No. 1, 17-26 (2019)
mechanical loads. The torque on the servomotors according to the
applied force will be calculated using equation (1)
𝜏 = 𝐹 × 𝑟 × 𝑠𝑖𝑛∅
(1)
Where 𝜏 is the applied torque, 𝐹 is the force cause by the
weight carried (𝐹 = 𝑚 × 𝑔), 𝑟 is the distance, and ∅ is the
maximum angle of movement which is 90°. The distance used in
our design is 0.74m and the mass of the arm is 3.628kg, and the
gravity in Kuwait is 9.793N/A. The resulting torque is 26.29N.m.
For such torque and safety, the servomotors will be chosen
accordingly. From equation (1) there is a direct proportional
relation between the torque and the applied force. Taking into
considerations the power consumption, the no load power can be
calculated using equation 2 knowing that the maximum current
used with no load is 500Ma.
𝑃 = 𝑉 × 𝐼 = 25 × 0.5 = 12𝑤

Table 2. Materials' Specifications
Materials

Price per
kg ($)

Strength
(Mpa)

Density

How easy to
customize

Iron

169

7.1 g/cc

Difficult

80

2.68 g/cc

Difficult

ABS

0.049 0.098
0.307 –
1.221
29.30

25-50

Easy

PLA

29.30

36-55

1.01-1.21
Mg/ m3
1.25 Mg/
m3

Aluminum

Table 3. Advantages & Disadvantages Comparison
Materials

Advantages

Iron

•
•

Strong
Durable

Aluminum

•
•
•
•

Light Weight
Durable
Won’t Rust
Doesn’t deteriorate

(2)

Disadvantages
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

3D Printer
Materials

Figure 19. Power Consumption Parameters

3.4 Materials
For the process of building the hand exoskeleton device, so
many materials need to be studied in terms of weight, safety, and
flexibility in order to choose the suitable one for the project. Iron,
aluminum and 3D printed material which is mainly plastic-based
are different materials that can be used for exoskeleton. Each one
of them has different properties. Iron is heavier than aluminum
because of its density, which is 7.1 g/cc. Moreover, Iron is cheaper
than aluminum because it does not need many processes to obtain
as the aluminum. It is stronger than aluminum. Iron’s strength is
169 (MPa) whereas aluminum is 80 (MPa). Aluminum takes time
to be manufactured. The features of 3D printer materials are:
cheap, flexible, durable, lightweight and available with varies
colors. Easy to redesign and model if needs to do any changes.
For example; if something is broken we can have reprinted it
easily. Furthermore, it is not taking much time to print. The
materials that should be used must be environment friendly to
provide safety for a long period time. Aluminum is not
environment friendly. The releasing of perfluorocarbons during
the aluminum smelting process are 9,200 times more harmful than
carbon dioxide. Iron is not recommended due to the chemicals
which enters into the environment and affect the eco balance, and
cause so many health problems. 3D printer materials like
Acrylonitrile Butadiene Styrene (ABS) and Polylatic Acid (PLA)
can be considered as environment friendly materials because it is
easy to recycle, no waste of materials, and no more unsold
product. The comparison is summarized in Table 2 & Table 3.
www.astesj.com

Easy

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Light Weight
Cheap
Easy to recycle
Environment Friendly
Flexible
Durable
Won’t Rust
Doesn’t deteriorate

•

Heavy Weight
Expensive
Hard to recycle
Not environment
friendly
Rusts
Not very strong
Expensive
Hard to recycle
Not environment
friendly
Can easily be water
stained
Not very strong

3.5 Electromechanical System
1) Battery:
For a battery, there are different kinds of batteries and each of
them has its own features. First of them is Lithium ion Battery
which has very high capacity, normal size, long life, high cost and
it is rechargeable. Second one is NiMH which has a small size,
low capacity, short life, low cost and non-rechargeable.
Third one is NiCd has big size, low capacity, short life, low
cost, and rechargeable. Final one is SLA-6v20 has very big size,
very high capacity, long life, high cost, and rechargeable.
Energizer NH15BP and Duracell have short life and low capacity
so they will not benefit this project well. Lithium ion and SLA6v20 both are good, but we will choose Lithium ion because its
size is smaller. Batteries comparison shown in Table 4.
2) Actuators:
Actuators are mechanical devices that move or turn energy into
motion. There are different types of actuators, which are electric
actuators, hydraulic and pneumatic actuators. Electric actuators
transfer electrical energy into mechanical energy. There are two
types of electric actuators which are direct current motor (DC
motor) and servomotors. Brushless DC motor is a type of DC
motor that has different properties. It is small in size and weight
not to mention its high speed and torque. On the other hand, a
23

A. Roshdy et al. / Advances in Science, Technology and Engineering Systems Journal Vol. 4, No. 1, 17-26 (2019)
servomotor is a type of actuator that its functionality is to control
motion. It operates within the limit of the specified angle (angular
precision) by receiving a control signal to take further action.
Moreover, it uses closed-loop feedback to control speed, torque or
position. Pneumatic actuator is a hollow cylinder inside it a piston.
The piston moves by applying a pressure from a pneumatic pump
(compresses air) to create a force. Hydraulic actuators work
similarly to Pneumatic actuators; except for the fact they are
driven by liquid (fluid) pressure instead of air pressure. Pneumatic
actuators are more expensive than hydraulic actuators. Moreover,
hydraulic actuators are stronger or have greater force to move
heavy loads.

Energy
(Wh/Kg)
Life Cycle
(80% DoD)
Charge Time
(H)
Cell Voltage(v)
Safety
Requirements
Cost

Cobalt
150250
5001000
2-4

Li-Ion
Phosphate
100-150

Manganese
90-120

500-1000

1000-2000

1-2

1-2

14.8
3.7
3.2-3.3
Protection circuit mandatory
High

NiMH

NiCd

60-120

45-80

3005003
2-4

10003
1-2

1.2
1.2
Fuse protection,
thermally stable
Moderate

3.6 Programming
3) Processor
Nowadays, the advancement in the processors and controller’s
technology has made it affordable and possible to achieve most of
project requirements. In today’s market, the top leading and the
most common three processors/controllers are Raspberry pi,
Arduino and Intel Edison. Raspberry pi considers as a tiny
computer that has its own operating system. It is Linux based
operating system and it can multitask. The board includes a
processor, Ram, USB ports and everything a normal computer
has. There are four models or generations of raspberry pi, which
are Raspberry Pi 1, Raspberry Pi 2, Raspberry Pi 3, and Raspberry
zero. Each one of them has different properties and using them
depend on the needs. In general, a raspberry pi allows the user to
not be restricted or limited to a certain programing language. Also,
it is very fast in processing and easy to connect to Internet
On the other hand, Arduino is a microcontroller that is consists
of software and hardware. It is a board that contains a chip to be
programmed and use it to perform several functions. It is flexible
that can interact with different devices like LEDs, buttons,
speakers, motors, and cameras. For instance, it can read data from
sensors, get to blink an LED, etc. There are several types of
Arduino but the most popular one is the Arduino UNO. Most
Arduinos have the same components, which are a power source, a
processor, digital and analog pins, a reset button and a USB port.
Arduino is easier to work with and it is better in controlling than
Raspberry pi. It is capable of controlling complex external
hardware. Also, it is cheaper than Raspberry pi. There is also
another type of microprocessor that considers as a competitor to
raspberry pi. It is offered by Intel Company, which is called Intel
Edison. It functions as a computer. The board has a processor,
RAM, USB port, Bluetooth and WiFi. It is a little bit similar to
Raspberry pi but each one of them has its own features. For
www.astesj.com

On a separate note, microcontrollers and microprocessors show
different weaknesses and strengths depending on the application.
There is a difference between microcontroller and microprocessor
and each has advantages and disadvantages. In general,
microcontrollers are more suitable for controlling devices (such
as servos, etc.) whereas the microprocessors are better in
processing
4) Interface

Table 4. Batteries Types
Specifications

example, Intel Edison is more expensive than raspberry pi. Also,
it has less numbers of USB ports and the processor speed is lower
than the one in raspberry pi.

There are so many user interfaces to help the user interact with
the computer to detect and analyze specific information, or to get
some feedback from it. EEG is one of the user interfaces that
measured by using electrodes that is placed on the scalp. It can be
recorded by the electric fields that are generated by the nerve cells
in the brain. EEG has so many advantages such as the
characteristic of the electrical recording system because it has
high precision and time measurements. Another advantage is that
EEG is a very inexpensive device, and can easily be operated with.
Poor recording spatial resolution is one of the disadvantages of the
EEG. EMOTIV provides two different headsets, which are
EPOC+ and Insight. Each one has different properties or features.
The main differences that will serve our needs are related to the
number of sensors and signal resolution. The EPOC features 16
sensors plus 2 reference sensors. Also, it provides high resolution.
On the other hand, the insight has 5 sensors plus 2 reference
sensors and it is less accurate than EPOC when detecting the
signals (low resolution).
The second user interface is virtual reality. It is an artificial
environment that is made by software and presented by the user
in such a way that makes it real. Virtual reality also has so many
advantages and disadvantages. One of the most important
advantages is that the disabled people that are not able to
experience reality can explore the virtual world, and experience
the full life there. It also allows the user to experience impossible
things in real life. One of the biggest drawback of the virtual
reality is that people might get addicted to that virtual world which
will lead them to forget their responsibilities in the real life.
The third user interface is the electromyography (EMG). It is
way to access the health muscles and nerves to control and interact
with it. EMG signals can be detected or transferred through a
small device called electrodes. It has some advantages and
disadvantages. EMG is more accurate, safe, and easy to get the
wanted results. Also, EMG signals are not as complicated as the
EEG when it comes to finding locations for measuring. However,
noises may occur due to the distance between the user and the
signals of muscles.
3.7 Communication
The first category to be chosen is to have wireless
communication to give the user the freedom to move while using
the device. The Wifi, Bluetooth, and XBEE (pronounced ZigBee)
24

A. Roshdy et al. / Advances in Science, Technology and Engineering Systems Journal Vol. 4, No. 1, 17-26 (2019)
are three different types of wireless communications which varies
in the Safety, range of accessibility, reliability, power
consumption, and bandwidth.
Starting with WiFi, its security is lower than the other two types
with 20-150 meters range of communication. Although the
reliability is low it still consumes high power with its wide
bandwidth. Second choice is the Bluetooth which has a bit better
safety communication than the Wifi. But the main problem is the
short range which is 8-30 meters. Still it has low reliability but
low power consumption with a narrow bandwidth. The third
option is the ZigBee is offering a good safety communication with
a good range of communication coverage 20-150 meters. It does
have a high reliability compared to the other two options as well
as low power consumption with a narrow bandwidth
3.8 Decision Making and Selections
Based on the project needs and requirements, a 3D printed
design was used. The pressure sensor chosen to be LPS25MB
because it is cheap and light in weight. Also MS5637-02BA03
was chosen to be the selected pressure sensor for its low cost and
high accuracy. For the health sensor Pulse and Oxygen in Blood
Sensor (SPO2) was chosen due to its accuracy and fast response.
And the servo motor ASMC-03B was selected due to its high
torque even it’s a bit more expensive than other servo motors.
Cobalt Li-ion battery got the highest score because of its suitable
cell voltage, long life time, good energy, suitable charge time, low
cost and it is safe. For the interface, EEG and EPOC allows
obtaining more or variety of locations than insight. Based on the
comparison, EPOC is more suitable than insight in terms of
accuracy and sensors location. Finally, Arduino was chosen
because it has the least price above them all. In case something
happened during the coding process and the circuit got damaged
we can easily buy another one because of its low price. Also, it
can help us easily in our project since it has so many libraries and
control system to control the exoskeleton.
4.

Results and Analysis

The servo motors are responsible for the fingers movement
according to the selected exercise. Based on the user selection the
servo motors will perform the selected task. In other words, if the
user chooses one the Arduino will give the corresponding signals
for the motors to perform exercise one which is opening the hand
five fingers then close them twice with a delay five seconds after
each open or close process. The second exercise that might be
selected by the user also is to open the fingers and closing them
five times with the same delay time in between. The third and last
exercise is opening and closing the fingers nine times. Beside this
the medical sensors such as the temperature sensor is helping the
assisting the user continuously check his body temperature.
Another medical sensor mounted on the device is the pulse
oximetry sensor to monitor the arterial oxygen saturation in the
hemoglobin. Also a regular sixteen characters two lines LCD is
used to show the measured and monitored data for the user with a
Wi-Fi connected between the wearable device and the mobile
phone application to send the collected data. Innovator X Post-Op
Elbow was used as an angular controller. It provides safety to the
user due to the adjustments of the angle position that we can make
to prevent hand broken.
www.astesj.com

The biggest challenge of the project was to build a pattern
recognition system for the brain signals to be able to detect the
required movement from the brain itself with any other external
method. The problem is that making a wrong pattern recognition
may hurt the patient if a wrong move was done if the brain signal
was not read correctly. A raw brain signal data coming from the
EEG was read and analyzed by MATLAB software. MATLAB
included a digital band pass and band stop filters to eliminate the
noise from the brain signal.
5.

Conclusion

Patients suffering from some kind of hand disabilities are
facing a problem in their day to day activities that’s why in this
paper we’ve suggested a light weight low-cost wearable device
compared to the devices used nowadays. The device designed to
assist the user through two different modes of operation. The two
modes are active and passive and both are helping the user to
perform some hand exercises as well as monitoring his body
temperature, pulses, ECG, and oxygen percentage.
Exoskeleton is a wearable device that improves the user’s
performance. There are two kinds of exoskeleton, which are
assistive and rehabilitation. Assistive exoskeleton gives a user an
extra strength to do different tasks. Rehabilitation exoskeleton
reduces the recovery time and has long-term effect. This project
will help many people that suffer from diseases like stroke, broken
bones, spinal cord injury, hemiplegia and traumatic brain injury.
Hands are so important part of the human body, so we will design
a hand rehabilitation exoskeleton for stroke patients. This hand
works in two modes: passive and active. It will be free size. This
exoskeleton expected to increase the strength of the hand, the
chance of healing, decrease the pain, the cost, and the recovery
time.
Our design contains mainly four parts, first the EEG part, which
will read the signals from the brain and send it to the PRU part
through the Wi-Fi. PRU stands for pattern recognition unit that its
function is to analyze signals. Signals were analyzed using
Matlab. The third part, which is electromechanical part, will take
the signals from PRU through ZigBee and control the arm
servomotor using Arduino. Electromechanical part also contains
five small servomotors to control the fingers to do specific
exercises. Health care part contains three sensors, which are
temperature sensor, pulse sensor, and ECG sensor and the results
will be shown in the LCD. The user also can enter his information
and choose any exercise using keypad and LCD. The last part is
mobile application, which will take the results from the health care
part through the Wi-Fi.
As a suggested future work and improvements the device can
be improved by selecting the control mode through the brain
signals with the keypad used as an extra input method. Also the
keypad with the screen can be replaced by one big touch screen.
Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgment
We would like to thank the American University of the Middle
East that gave us the opportunity to carry out our research. We
would also like to thank the Robotics Research center for funding
the project providing us such great facilities and assistance
throughout our research.
25

A. Roshdy et al. / Advances in Science, Technology and Engineering Systems Journal Vol. 4, No. 1, 17-26 (2019)
References
[1]

[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]
[14]

[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]

[19]

[20]
[21]

F Sayegh, F Fadhli, F Karam, M BoAbbas, F Mahmeed, JA Korbane, S
AlKork, T Beyrouthy "A wearable rehabilitation device for paralysis," 2017
2nd International Conference on Bio-engineering for Smart Technologies
(BioSMART), Paris, 2017, pp.1-4.
A. P. Ong and N. T. Bugtai, “Recent Developments of Robotic Exoskeletons
for Hand Rehabilitation,” Presented at The DLSU Research Congress 2016,
pp. 1-2.
C. A. Lim 2013, “Ironman Project-Design Of Electro-Mechanical Muscle
For Elbow Exoskeleton Robot,” 2013.
Rahman, M. A., & Al-Jumaily, A. Design and development of a hand
exoskeleton for rehabilitation following stroke. Procedia Engineering, 41,
1028-1034, 2012.
Kawasaki, H., Kimura, H., Ito, S., Nishimoto, Y., & Hayashi, H. Hand
rehabilitation support system based on self-motion control, with a clinical
case report. In 2006 World Automation Congress (pp. 1-6). IEEE. (2006,
July).
Heo, P., Gu, G. M., Lee, S. J., Rhee, K., & Kim, J. Current hand exoskeleton
technologies for rehabilitation and assistive engineering. International
Journal of Precision Engineering and Manufacturing, 13(5), 807-824.
(2012).
Sandoval-Gonzalez, O., Jacinto-Villegas, J., Herrera-Aguilar, I., PortilloRodiguez, O., Tripicchio, P., Hernandez-Ramos, M., ... & Avizzano, C.
Design and Development of a Hand Exoskeleton Robot for Active and
Passive Rehabilitation (2016).
Ho, N. S. K., Tong, K. Y., Hu, X. L., Fung, K. L., Wei, X. J., Rong, W., &
Susanto, E. A. An EMG-driven exoskeleton hand robotic training device on
chronic stroke subjects: task training system for stroke rehabilitation. In 2011
IEEE international conference on rehabilitation robotics(pp. 1-5). IEEE
(2011, June).
Babaiasl, M., Mahdioun, S. H., Jaryani, P., & Yazdani, M. A review of
technological and clinical aspects of robot-aided rehabilitation of upperextremity after stroke. Disability and Rehabilitation: Assistive
Technology, 11(4), 263-280 (2016).
Arata, J., Ohmoto, K., Gassert, R., Lambercy, O., Fujimoto, H., & Wada, I.
A new hand exoskeleton device for rehabilitation using a three-layered
sliding spring mechanism. In Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2013 IEEE
International Conference on (pp. 3902-3907). IEEE (2013,May).
Sarakoglou, I., Tsagarakis, N. G., & Caldwell, D. G. (2004, September).
Occupational and physical therapy using a hand exoskeleton based exerciser.
In Intelligent Robots and Systems. (IROS 2004). Proceedings. IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on (Vol. 3, pp. 2973-2978). IEEE) (2004).
Capitani, S., Cremoni, A., Lindenroth, L., Secciani, N., Shaftr, A., Stilli, A.,
&Venture, M. Development of low-cost portable hand exoskeleton for
assistive and rehabilitation purposes. For The ENTERFACE International
Workshop (pp. 1-3) (2016).
W. D. Hairston, K. W. Whitaker, A. J. Ries, J. M. Vettel, J. C. Bradford, S.
E. Kerick, and K. McDowell, “Usability of four commercially-oriented
EEG systems,” in Journal of neural engineering, 11(4), 046018, 2014.
abilah Hamzah, Haryanti Norhazman, Norliza Zaini and Maizura Sani.
Classification of Eeg Signals Based on Different Motor Movement Using
Multi-layer Perceptron Artificial Neural Network. Journal of Biological
Sciences, 16: 265-271 (2016).
F. Lotte, L. Bougrain, and M. Clerc, “Electroencephalography (EEG)-based
Brain Computer Interfaces,” Wiley Encyclopedia of Electrical and
Electronics Engineering, Wiley, pp. 44, 2015.
F. Lotte, “A Tutorial on EEG Signal Processing Techniques for Mental State
Recognition in Brain-Computer Interfaces,” Eduardo Reck Miranda; Julien
Castet. Guide to Brain-Computer Music Interfacing, Springer, 2014.
M. M. Moazzami, “EEG signal Processing in Brain-Computer
Interface” (Doctoral dissertation, Michigan State University), 2012.
S AlAwadhi, N AlHabib, D Murad, F AlDeei, M AlHouti, T Beyrouthy, S
Al-Kork "Virtual reality application for interactive and informative
learning," 2017 2nd International Conference on Bio-engineering for Smart
Technologies (BioSMART), Paris, 2017, pp. 1-4.
S.A. Awadhi, N.A. Habib, D. Al-Murad, F.A. deei, M.A. Houti, T.
Beyrouthy, S. Al-Kork "Interactive Virtual Reality Educational
Application", Advances in Science, Technology and Engineering Systems
Journal, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 72-82 (2018).
Reaz, M. B. I., Hussain, M. S., & Mohd-Yasin, F. Techniques of EMG signal
analysis: detection, processing, classification and applications. Biological
procedures online, 8(1), 11-35 (2006).
S. Said, S. AlKork, T. Beyrouthy and M. F. Abdrabbo, "Wearable biosensors bracelet for driver as health emergency detection," 2017 2nd

www.astesj.com

[22]

[23]

[24]
[25]

[26]

International Conference on Bio-engineering for Smart Technologies
(BioSmart), Paris, 2017, pp. 1-4.
Hasan S., Al-Kandari K., Al-Awadhi E., Jaafar A., Al-Farhan B., Hassan M.,
Said S. and AlKork S. (2018). Wearable Mind Thoughts Controlled Open
Source 3D Printed Arm with Embedded Sensor Feedback System.In
Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Computer-Human
Interaction Research and Applications - Volume 1: CHIRA, ISBN 978-989758-328-5, pages 141-149.
S. K. A. Kork, I. Gowthami, X. Savatier, T. Beyrouthy, J. A. Korbane and S.
Roshdi, "Biometric database for human gait recognition using wearable
sensors and a smartphone," 2017 2nd International Conference on Bioengineering for Smart Technologies (BioSMART), Paris, 2017, pp. 1-4.
D. Planelles, E. Hortal, Á. Costa, A. Ubeda, E. Iaez, and J. M. Azorin,
“Evaluating classifiers to detect arm movement intention from eeg
signals,” Sensors, 14(10), pp. 18172-18186, 2014.
Taha Beyrouthy, Samer Al. Kork, J. Korbane, M. Abouelela, "EEG Mind
Controlled Smart Prosthetic Arm – A Comprehensive Study", Advances in
Science, Technology and Engineering Systems Journal, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 891899 (2017).
T. Beyrouthy, S. K. Al Kork, J. A. Korbane and A. Abdulmonem, "EEG
Mind controlled Smart Prosthetic Arm," 2016 IEEE International
Conference on Emerging Technologies and Innovative Business Practices
for the Transformation of Societies (EmergiTech), Balaclava, 2016, pp. 404409.

26

