ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGIES FOR BRAIN-INJURED GAMERS
1

Jason Colman 1 and Paul Gnanayutham 2
SAE Institute, United House, North Road, London, N7 9DP, United Kingdom,
+44 (0) 20 7923 9159, j.colman@sae.edu
2
Department of Computing, University of Portsmouth, Buckingham Building,
Lion Terrace, Portsmouth, PO1 3HE, United Kingdom,
+44 (0) 23 9284 6404, paul.gnanayutham@port.ac.uk

Abstract
This paper surveys assistive technologies which make video games more accessible for people who
have an acquired brain injury (ABI). As medical care improves, an increasing number of people
survive ABI. Video games have been shown to provide therapeutic benefits in many medical
contexts, and rehabilitation for ABI survivors has been shown to be facilitated by playing some
types of video game. Therefore, technologies which improve the accessibility of games have the
potential to bring a form of therapy to a larger group of people who may benefit. Hardware
technologies which may make games more accessible for brain injury survivors are considered.
These include brain-computer interfaces, head and eye tracking, and mouth controllers.
Complementing these devices, game developers should incorporate accessibility features into their
games during the development process. The dissemination of best practice guidelines among game
development practitioners would improve accessibility and thus the therapeutic potential of future
games.
1 INTRODUCTION
Any brain injury which occurs after birth is called an acquired brain injury (ABI). Causes of ABI
include stroke, tumours, degenerative diseases, demyelinating conditions and infectious disorders
(Murdoch & Theodoros, 2001). A traumatic brain injury (TBI) is an ABI caused by trauma such as
a blow to the head, an impact with a blunt object, or penetration by a sharp object. Common causes
of TBI are motor vehicle accidents; bicycle accidents; assaults; falls and sports injuries (Hyder et
al., 2007). Motor vehicle accidents are the most common cause of TBI globally (Hyder et al.,
2007), although for children this may be as a pedestrian or cyclist rather than passenger (Murdoch
& Theodoros, 2001).
Theodoros et al. state “The prevalence of TBI in modern society has reached epidemic proportions”
(2001, p. 27): Hyder et al. (2007) estimate that 10 million people per year are affected by TBI
globally. TBI is especially prevalent in Low and Middle Income Countries, where the risk factors
tend to be higher, and health systems are inadequately prepared. Road traffic injuries in Latin
America and Sub Saharan Africa are the main cause of a higher TBI incidence in these regions.
For people who have suffered a brain injury, rehabilitation is the process of regaining lost skills, or
developing coping mechanisms to replace them. The goal is for a cognitively impaired person to
function safely, productively and independently (Mateer, 2005). Cicerone et al. (2000) stress that
the aim of cognitive rehabilitation services is to improve a person's function in areas relevant to
their everyday lives. Mateer (2005) highlights some general principles for successful cognitive
rehabilitation. These are: the need to take an individualised approach; to involve clients and
caregivers in all aspects; and clear and realistic goal setting. Mateer (2005) notes that most
successful interventions involve multiple, eclectic approaches. One such approach could be the use
of video games as therapy: this paper looks at ways in which video games can be made more
accessible for people who have survived brain injury, and how awareness can be raised among
game developers.

2 VIDEO GAME THERAPY FOR BRAIN INJURIES
Video games tend to receive quite a lot of negative press, but have been used in a wide variety of
therapeutic contexts for over 25 years (Griffiths et al., 2005), including helping people who have a
brain injury. To give some examples: Sietsema et al. (1993) report the use of an electronic table-top
game to promote arm reach for people who have suffered a TBI. Betker et al. (2007) have used
bespoke serious games to promote balance for people with spinal cord and traumatic brain injuries.
Burke (2009) and colleagues have developed a suite of serious games designed to aid recuperation
after a stroke. This is accomplished by requiring the player to make repetitive arm movements
which aid upper limb recovery. O’Connor (2000) and team developed a wheelchair interface to
computer games called Game Wheels. This interface motivated spinal cord injury patients to
exercise more regularly, by controlling games by driving their wheelchair. Galego and Simone
(2007) developed a simple memory matching game which is played within the Second Life virtual
environment, enabling the user and therapist to meet virtually. The game is controlled by the
Nintendo Wii remote (“Wiimote”), and so exercises motor as well as cognitive skills. The authors
state that playing this type of game can be a powerful rehabilitation activity, in areas such as upper
extremity rehabilitation after a stroke. Katz et al. (2005) conducted a study into the effectiveness of
a virtual reality (VR) program to train stroke patients to cross roads safely. The participants suffered
from unilateral spatial neglect as a result of the stroke. In this condition, patients will ignore objects
or people on one side. The VR treatment was found to be effective in improving visual-spatial
skills, and particularly, improved the ability to cross roads safely.
So, video games definitely have a place in physical therapy for ABI survivors; unfortunately
commercial games are not always accessible.
3 ACCESSIBILITY HARDWARE FOR GAMERS
Many disabled people are prevented from playing video games. Practically all games require the
user to be able to hold a controller, and manipulate the controls quickly and accurately in order to
progress in the game. People with disabilities may be prevented from doing this due to the design of
the controllers, the reaction speed required, the dexterity and accuracy required, and so on.
Controller technology is evolving, but not necessarily in a more accessible direction. The three
major console manufacturers have introduced controller hardware which is radically different to the
classic joystick. These advances in controller technology assume able-bodied players, who can
precisely aim a remote (in the case of the Wii) or precisely move their whole bodies (in the case of
Microsoft® Kinect for the Xbox 360®). Work has been done in making games accessible to
disabled people. Ellis (2009) describes how PCs and game consoles can be made accessible, for
instance by replacing standard controllers with large individual switches. These can be placed
around the player allowing a game to be played using any combination of body movements.
For gamers who are severely motor impaired, a brain-computer interface (BCI) could be an
appropriate enabling interface. In this section we review BCIs and their applicability to video game
control.
Bio-potentials are electrical signals originating in the brain and nervous system. A BCI may use any
of the bio-potentials which are under the conscious control of the user (Wolpaw et al., 2002).
Typically BCIs measure the electroencephalographic (EEG) waveform generated by the brain, eye
motion (electromyography) and muscle activity (electrooculography). Several low-cost BCI
headsets are available, aimed at the games market. Table 1 shows some currently available assistive
technology which can be used to play games, including the low-cost BCI devices.

Table 1. Commercially available accessibility hardware
Name
Neural Impulse Actuator™
EPOC (fig. 2)
MindSet (fig. 1)
SmartNav™ (fig. 4)
ViVo Mouse™

Manufacturer
OCZ Technology
Emotiv
NeuroSky
Natural Point®
Vortant Technologies, LLC

EeZee Mouse
Tracker Pro®
Headmouse®
EyeGuide™
Integra Mouse (fig. 3)
QuadJoy (fig. 5)
IntelliSwitch

LaZee Tek
Madentec Inc.
Origin Instruments Corp.
Grinbath
LIFETool
SEMCO
Madentec Inc.

Type
BCI
BCI
BCI
Head motion tracker
Head-tracking and voicetracking sofware
Body motion tracker
Head motion tracker
Head motion tracker
Eye gaze tracking
Mouth controller
Mouth controller
Sip/puff controller for
left/right mouse button
clicks

Regarding the consumer BCI devices, the number of sensors is far fewer than for medical or
research grade EEG machines, and so this hardware may not be up to the task of controlling real
time video games: Halley (2010) expresses scepticism that the Emotiv or Neurosky devices will
actually be used for gaming “any time soon”. Graimann et al. (2011) state that most computer
games cannot be played using a BCI because of the bandwidth limitations. Bos et al. (2010) note
that for controlling games, BCIs are slower and less accurate than other modalities, and require
extensive training. Other researchers do report success in controlling games using BCI, at least in
the lab. Jackson et al. (2009) used a BCI to control a first-person shooter-style game.
The promise of BCI gaming is not yet a reality, then. More success has been achieved using eye
gaze tracking to effectively control real time games such as racing games. Eye tracking systems
determine the point on the screen at which the user is focused. Most eye tracking systems work
using infra red light, so as not to dazzle the user. The IR light reflected by the eye forms a bright
circle at the pupil. A smaller point of IR light is reflected due to the corneal reflection, (also called
the first Purkinje image). The vector from the pupil centre to the corneal reflection is processed to
give the gaze direction (Poole & Ball, 2005). Another form of AT is a mouth-controlled joystick
(e.g. Jouse, QuadJoy, Integra Mouse). These interfaces incorporate sip (suck) and puff (blow)
sensors to enable left and right mouse click actions.
4 VIDEO GAME ACCESSIBILITY GUIDELINES
To improve accessibility for any software, including games, Universal Design principles apply,
defined by Dix et al. as “...the process of designing products so that they can be used by as many
people as possible in as many situations as possible” (2004, p. 366). This can be achieved by
designing in redundancy, or by supporting assistive technologies. Universal Design is based on
seven principles proposed by Story et al. (1998). These seven principles are: equitability – no user
should be excluded or stigmatised; flexibility; simplicity; clarity; error tolerance; low physical effort
requirements; and sufficient size and space for use. Multi-modal interaction is recommended,
providing access to information through more than one mode of interaction. This both enhances the
richness of interaction, and also guards against excluding a group of users.
For video games, the user experience is honed over the course of the production process using game
usability methodologies, which can be quite different to the usability methodologies followed for

productivity software. As a particular example, Nielsen's (1993) Discount Usability methods are not
appropriate for group or 'party' multi-player games, as the user experience is based on social
interaction (Amaya et al., 2008).
The issue of video game accessibility has led to the formation of organisations which identify and
disseminate good practice. The International Game Developers Association Game Accessibility
Special Interest Group (IGDA-GASIG, www.igda-gasig.org) publishes a list of the most important
ways in which game developers can make their games playable by a wider audience.
The “top ten” guidelines for video game accessibility are:
1. Allow controller reconfiguration;
2. Provide alternative controller support;
3. Offer sound alternatives;
4. Provide separate volume controls for music, sound effects and dialogue;
5. Provide high visibility graphics;
6. Be colour-blind friendly;
7. Provide difficulty level and speed adjustment;
8. Offer practice modes;
9. Make menus as accessible as possible; and finally,
10. Publicise the accessibility features and game requirements.
The 2012 Global Game Jam (www.globalgamejam.org) featured an Accessibility Challenge, where
the participants were invited to develop games which incorporated as many of these guidelines as
possible. Events such as this disseminate these guidelines in an important way: many of these
participants will be part of the 'next generation' of game developers.
5 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Some disabled video game players are prevented from playing their choice of game due to
accessibility limitations caused by the game controller or the game itself. Although assistive
technologies are often thought of as specialised hardware peripherals, video game AT also
encompasses game software development best practice for accessibility. Video games can be made
more accessible by individual end users, by modifying hardware or using off-the-shelf AT hardware
instead of standard controllers. Several low-cost BCI peripherals have recently appeared on the
market, aimed specifically at the gaming market; the challenge is to make these devices really
usable. Other forms of AT include switches, head-mounted pointers, sip and puff controllers, and
eye gaze technology.
Another approach is to make the games more accessible, by following guidelines set by IDGAGASIG and other groups, and by incorporating principles of Universal Design into the games. The
advantages of making video games more accessible go far beyond the economic advantage of
increasing the target market for a game, and the ethics of excluding between 10 and 20 percent of
the population. Video games have been shown to provide therapeutic medical benefits in so many
contexts, that making games more accessible opens up their beneficial potential to many more
people.
The authors believe that further research is called for in a number of areas. For one, can the 'gaming'
BCIs recently introduced really be used for this purpose? BCIs are typically hard to use without
training, and so, although BCI-controlled games have had some success in laboratory settings,
advances in this direction would be welcome. Further research would further refine and evaluate the
guidelines for game accessibility proposed by organisations such as IGDA-GASIG. As best practice
guidelines for game accessibility are formed, they must be disseminated to the practitioners who

can incorporate them into the video games of the future.
References
Amaya, G., Davis, J., Gunn, D., Harrison, C., Pagulayan, R., Phillips, B., and Wixon, D. (2008)
Games User Research (GUR): Our experience with and evolution of four methods. In: Ibister, K.,
and Schaffer, N. (Eds.) Game usability: Advice from the experts for advancing the player
experience. Burlington, MA: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers
Betker, A., Desai, A., Nett, C., Kapadia, N., and Szturm, T. (2007) Game-based exercises for
dynamic short-sitting balance rehabilitation of people with chronic spinal cord and traumatic brain
injuries. Physical Therapy 87 (10): 1389-1398
Bos, D. P.-O., Reuderink, B., van de Laar, B., Gürkök, H., Mühl, C., Poel, M., Nijholt, A., and
Heylen, D. (2010) Brain-computer interfacing and games. In Tan, D., and Nijholt, A. (Eds.), BrainComputer Interfaces. London: Springer-Verlag
Burke, J.W., McNeill, M., Charles, D., Morrow, P., Crosbie, J., and McDonough, S. (2009)
Optimising engagement for stroke rehabilitation using serious games. Visual Computing 25: 10851099
Cicerone, K. D., Dahlberg, C., Kalmar, K., Langenbahn, D. M., Malec, J. F., Bergquist, T. F.,
Felicetti, T., Giacino, J. T., Harley, J. P., Harrington, D. E., Herzog, J., Kneipp, S., Laatsch, L.,
and Morse, P. A. (2000) Evidence-based cognitive rehabilitation: Recommendations for clinical
practice. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 81 (December)
Dix, A., Finlay, J., Abowd, G., & Beale, R. (2004) Human-computer interaction (3rd edn). Harlow:
Pearson Education
Ellis, B. (2009) OneSwitch.org.uk website. http://www.oneswitch.org.uk/ Retrieved 15 April 2012
Galego, B., and Simone, L. (2007) Leveraging online virtual worlds for upper extremity
rehabilitation. Bioengineering Conference, 2007. NEBC '07. IEEE 33rd Annual Northeast: 267-268,
10-11 March 2007
Graimann, B., Allison, B.Z., and Pfurtscheller, G. (2011) An introduction to brain – computer
interface (BCI) systems, In: Graimann, B., Allison, B.Z., & Pfurtscheller, G. (Eds.) Brain-Computer
Interfaces: Revolutionizing Human-Computer Interaction. Springer Publishing
Griffiths, M.D. (2005) Video games and health. British Medical Journal 331: 122-123
Halley, D. (2010) App lets you make a phone call with your mind.
http://singularityhub.com/2010/08/12/app-lets-you-make-a-phone-call-with-your-mind-video/
Retrieved 15 April 2012
Hyder, A., Wunderlich, C., Puvanachandra, P., Gururaj, G., and Kobusingye, O. (2007) The impact
of traumatic brain injuries: A global perspective. NeuroRehabilitation 22
Jackson, M.M., Mappus, R., Barba, E., Hussein, S., Venkatesh, G., Shastry, C., and Israeli, A.
(2009) Continuous control paradigms for direct brain interfaces. In Jacko, J. (Ed.): HumanComputer Interaction, Part II, HCII 2009, LNCS 5611: 588-595.

Katz, N., Ring, H., Naveh, Y., Kizony, R., Feintuch, U., and Weiss, P. (2005) Interactive virtual
environment training for safe street crossing of right hemisphere stroke patients with Unilateral
Spatial Neglect. Disability and Rehabilitation 29 (2): 177 – 181
Mateer, C. (2005) Fundamentals of cognitive rehabilitation. In Halligan, P., and Wade, D. (Eds.)
Effectiveness of rehabilitation for cognitive defects. Oxford University Press
Murdoch, B., and Theodoros., D. (2001) Epidemiology, neuropathophysiology, and medical aspects
of traumatic brain injury. In Murdoch, B., and Theodoros., D. (Eds.) Traumatic Brain Injury:
Associated speech, language and swallowing disorders. San Diego, CA: Singular Publishing Group
Nielsen, J. (1993) Usability Engineering. San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann
O'Connor, T. J., Cooper, R. A., Fitzgerald, S. G., Dvorznak, M. J., Boninger, M. L., VanSickle, D.
P., and Glass, L. (2000) Evaluation of a manual wheelchair interface to computer games.
Neurorehabil Neural Repair 14
Poole, A., and Ball, L. J. (2005) Eye tracking in human-computer interaction and usability research.
In Ghaoui, C. (Ed.) Encyclopedia of human computer interaction. Idea Group, Pennsylvania: 211219
Sietsema, J., Nelson, D., Mulder, R., Mervau-Scheidel, D., and White, B. (1993) The use of a game
to promote arm reach in persons with traumatic brain injury. American Journal of Occupational
Therapy 47 (1)
Story, M., Mueller, J., and Mace, R. (1998) The Universal Design file: Designing for people of all
ages and abilities (Revised edition). State University, NC: Center for Universal Design
Theodoros, D. G., Murdoch, B. E., and Goozée, J. V. (2001) Dysarthria following traumatic brain
injury: Incidence, recovery, and perceptual features. In Murdoch, B., and Theodoros., D. (Eds.)
Traumatic Brain Injury: Associated speech, language and swallowing disorders. San Diego, CA:
Singular Publishing Group
Wolpaw, J. R., Birbaumer, N., McFarland, D. J., Pfurtscheller, G., and Vaughan, T. M. (2002)
Brain–computer interfaces for communication and control. Clinical Neurophysiology 113: 767–791

Figure 1. NeuroSky MindSet. Reproduced with permission.

Figure 2. Emotiv EPOC. Reproduced with permission.

Figure 3. LIFETool Integra Mouse. Image © Copyright LIFETool.

Figure 4. SmartNav 4. Image © Copyright NaturalPoint, Inc.

Figure 5. QuadJoy. Copyright © 2012 United Spinal’s Action Online Magazine

