Journal Pre-proof
Unified protocol for anxiety disorders in two cities of Mexico measuring gamma
activity: Study protocol for a randomized controlled trial
A. Dominguez-Rodriguez, S.M. Chavez-Valdez, G.C. Avitia, L.C. Valencia-Espinoza
PII:

S2451-8654(20)30040-5

DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conctc.2020.100556

Reference:

CONCTC 100556

To appear in:

Contemporary Clinical Trials Communications

Received Date: 8 December 2019
Revised Date:

2 March 2020

Accepted Date: 14 March 2020

Please cite this article as: A. Dominguez-Rodriguez, S.M. Chavez-Valdez, G.C. Avitia, L.C. ValenciaEspinoza, Unified protocol for anxiety disorders in two cities of Mexico measuring gamma activity:
Study protocol for a randomized controlled trial, Contemporary Clinical Trials Communications, https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.conctc.2020.100556.
This is a PDF file of an article that has undergone enhancements after acceptance, such as the addition
of a cover page and metadata, and formatting for readability, but it is not yet the definitive version of
record. This version will undergo additional copyediting, typesetting and review before it is published
in its final form, but we are providing this version to give early visibility of the article. Please note that,
during the production process, errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal
disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
© 2020 Published by Elsevier Inc.

Unified protocol for anxiety disorders in two cities of Mexico measuring gamma activity:
Study protocol for a randomized controlled trial

Dominguez-Rodriguez, A.1, Chavez-Valdez, S.M. 2, Avitia G.C.3 & Valencia-Espinoza, L.C.1
1

Faculty of Medicine and Psychology, Autonomous University of Baja California.
of Psychology, Escuela Libre de Psicología ELPAC, University of Behavioral Sciences
Institute of Social Sciences and Administration, Autonomous University of Juarez.

2 Faculty
3

Alejandro Domínguez Rodríguez, PhD (corresponding author)
Full professor of Psychology
Autonomous University of Baja California, Faculty of Medicine and Psychology
Calzada Universidad 14418 Parque Industrial Internacional Tijuana, Tijuana B.C. 22427
Phone: 52 01 (664) 979-75-00
Fax: 52 01 (664) 682-1075
Email: alejandro.dominguez.rodriguez@uabc.edu.mx
Sarah Margarita Chávez Valdez, PhD
Full professor of Psychology
Escuela Libre de Psicología ELPAC, University of Behavioral Sciences
Calle Pedro Zuloaga #8805, Colonia Labor de Terrazas, Chihuahua, Chih. 31207
Phone: 52 01 (614) 220-15-08
Fax: 52 01 (614) 416-3979
Graciela Cristina Avitia, PhD
Full professor of Psychology
Institute of Social Sciences and Administration, Autonomous University of Juarez.
Av. Universidad y Av. Heroico Colegio Militar Zona Chamizal,
32300 Juarez, Chihuahua, Mexico
Phone: 52 01 (656) 576-91-36
Laura Concepción Valencia Espinoza
Full professor of Medicine
Autonomous University of Baja California, Faculty of Medicine and Psychology
Calzada Universidad 14418 Parque Industrial Internacional Tijuana, Tijuana B.C. 22427
Phone: 52 01 (664) 979-75-00
Fax: 52 01 (664) 682-1075

1

Abstract

Background: The Unified Protocol for Emotional Disorders (UP) for emotional regulation
manifests effective results in a broad range of mental disorders. The UP efficacy was tested in
several countries, but it has not been tested within Mexican population. It is crucial to do more
research and implement effective protocols to intervene Mexican population with Anxiety
Disorders (AD).

Objective: This study aims to examine and describe the research procedures and treatment
interventions of the UP in a Randomized Controlled Trial (RCT), to approach and treat AD in
patients in 2 Mexican borderland cities, by applying the UP and an Electroencephalogram (EGG)
neuro screening.

Methods: The enrolled patients will be randomized in a two-arm control trial with repeated
measures, comprising between 18-60 years, that were diagnosed with an AD, and low scored in
depression symptoms and suicidal ideation. The study will comprise of two conditions: an
intervention group clinical trial with the UP or a waiting list control. The primary outcome
measures will be applied on AD quantitative self-reports and a gamma activity by EGG before
and after the intervention and in follow-ups of 3 and 6 months. The participants in the waiting
list group, will receive the treatment after the trial first group completes the treatment.

Conclusions: Processes and outcomes of this project, will provide evidence in order to apply the
UP in a broader population with AD and other mental disorders also covered by this protocol,
such as depression and borderline personality disorder in a broader Mexican population, a

2

country that suffers with a major health issue with an increasing rate of mental disorders and
scarce psychological and health coverage.

Keywords

Anxiety disorders
Unified Protocol
Randomized Controlled Trial
Electroencephalography
Mexican population

Abbreviations
AD
Anxiety Disorders
ADIS-IV
Anxiety Disorders Interview Schedule
BDI-II
Beck Depression Inventory–II
CBT
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy
CRES-4
Consumer Reports Effectiveness Scale
DSM-5
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders version 5
EEG
Electroencephalography
GAD
Generalized Anxiety Disorder
GAD-7
Generalized Anxiety Disorder 7-item scale
OASIS
Overall Anxiety Severity and Impairment Scale
3

ODSIS
Overall Depression Severity and Impairment Scale
PDS
Posttraumatic Diagnostic Scale
SPSS
Statistical Package for Social Sciences
RCT
Randomized Controlled Trial
STAI
State-Trait Anxiety Inventory
UP
Unified Protocol for Emotional Disorders
WHO
World Health Organization
Y-BOCS
Yale-Brown Obsessive-Compulsive Scale

1. Introduction
Anxiety Disorders (AD), have the highest prevalence worldwide, 24.6 million individuals
registered on 2015 [1]. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), the AD includes
generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, phobias, social anxiety disorder obsessivecompulsive disorder and post-traumatic stress disorder [1]. In the last version of the Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders version 5 (DSM-5), were removed the obsessivecompulsive disorder, and post-traumatic stress disorder from anxiety disorders, however anxiety
symptoms are common in both disorders [2]. According to the Mexican Office of Scientific and
Technological Information 18% of the population in México aged 18-64 suffers a mood disorder,
such as: anxiety, depression or phobia and only half of the Mexican population receives an
adequate treatment [3].

4

1.1 Unified protocol for anxiety disorders
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) is the main evidence-based psychological approach
for AD that has the most available amount of evidence regarding its efficacy [4]. The Clinical
effectivity of CBT is widely recognized; the disadvantage is that this approach is less efficient in
comorbid diagnoses [5]. The transdiagnostic treatments is an innovative approach for a broad
range of emotional disorders. The unified or transdiagnostic treatments applies the same
principles across mental disorders without tailoring the protocol to specific diagnoses:
“Emphasis is on functional links (thoughts, behaviors, physiology, and emotions), increasing
flexibility to identify cognitions contributing to different cues (interoceptive cues, social
interactions), as well as, emotional responses (depression, anxiety, anger)” (p.24) [6].
Emotional regulation

and physiological adjustments increase repeated

stressful situations engaged in divergent cognitive evaluations.

challenges

during

The Unified Protocol for

Emotional Disorders (UP) developed by David Barlow et al., combines intervention elements,
such as: cognitive reappraisal and exposure, into a series of coordinated modules to target
psychological mechanisms that maintain negative effect across disorders [7]. The UP has already
been implemented in different studies worldwide. Sakiris & Berle provided a meta-analysis
evaluating the effectiveness of the UP of 15 studies with 1,244 participants, demonstrating
reductions across AD with large effect sizes (g > 0.8) [5]. In Latin America, de Ornelas Maia,
Braga, Nunes, Nardi & Silva applied and evaluated in Brazil the UP on patients with comorbid
mood and AD, reaching high size effects on quality of life, sexuality, and anxiety/depression
symptoms [8]. Also, de Ornelas, Nardi & Cardoso, achieved a high significance results by
applying the UP that resulted on a evident emotional stabilization and socialization in a Brazilian
sample diagnosed with anxiety and depression disorders [9].

5

1.2 Electroencephalogram application in anxiety disorders
On the other hand, the Electroencephalogram (EEG) has been found useful with
functional exploration techniques of the central nervous system measuring electrophysiological
activity and analyzing the brain waves across different pathologies [10-11]. In patients with
Major Depressive Disorder, it was observed that the beta waves, which oscillate between 12 and
30 hertz, and low gamma waves between 30 and 50 hertz, showed significant negative
correlations with an applied scale of 9 items that measure inattention scores [12]. An EGG
reliability diagnostic measured electrocortical activity in social anxiety patients in two different
instances with one week difference, briefly, the task consisted in providing a speech during 3
minutes on controversial topics that were relevant to the context of the country they live in; (e.g.,
capital punishment), in front of two female observers and recorded by a video camera. The topic
was different in the two scenarios, the results showed excellent test-retest reliability regarding
measures of alpha power and resting frontal EEG asymmetry [13]. In a study with patients
suffering from Generalized Anxiety Disorder (GAD), were submitted to a worry induction task,
observing an increment in the gamma activity, and in a relaxation phase a reduction of the same
wave [14]. Also, there is available evidence in patients with social anxiety disorder that were
measured with EEG before and after receiving 12 sessions of standardized group CBT, observing
that previous to the intervention, there was a greater recording relative to the right frontal EEG
activity after the intervention. Also, it was observed greater relative left frontal brain activity,
and this was also correlated with higher success in psychological interventions [15].
These results are in accordance with the study of Mathersul, et al., where it was found left
frontal lateralization in healthy participants, greater right frontal lateralization in anxious
participants and symmetrical frontal activity in depressed and comorbid (anxiety and depression)

6

participants [16]. Despite the vast evidence of the use of EEG to measure the brain activity in the
patients to predict the effectiveness of psychological interventions, and also to measure the
changes after receiving such interventions, this tool is usually not applied in Mexico [17].

The purpose of this article is to examine and describe the research procedures and
treatment intervention for a protocol of a Randomized Controlled Trial (RCT) to treat AD. The
intervention plan is to take place in the two biggest borderland cities in Mexico: Tijuana and
Juarez, both cities sharing high direct and indirect exposure to extreme social violence [18-19].
Treatment effectiveness will be analyzed by self-report psychometric, Cohen´s effect size d
estimate and corroborated by EGG.

1.3 Study specific aims
The aims of the study are: (1) To examine the acceptability of research procedures and
treatment interventions for the UP for the treatment of AD in a sample of the population
requesting psychological treatment in mental health centers of Tijuana and Juarez. (2) Describe
how the methods will be performed, as the treatment will be delivered face-to-face, (3) how the
efficacy of the UP will be tested: Primary end-point is self-report psychometric results that will
be estimated by Cohen´s effect size d and activity in the gamma rhythm.

7

2. Methods

2.1. Study design and aims
An experimental test-post-test with control and an experimental group RCT will be
carried out in Tijuana and Juarez. Exactly the same conditions and procedures will be performed
in both cities. Participants will be randomly assigned to experimental or control condition. The
experimental group will receive psychological treatment through the UP and the control group
will be on the waiting list. After the time period of the treatment has finished, the participants in
this group will receive the treatment. This will be a single-blinded study. The primary outcomes
will be pre and post testing, and the follow-up assessments at 3 and at 6 months. The secondary
outcomes will be self-reported symptoms of Anxiety and Depression during each session of the
treatment. It is hypothesized that the UP will be efficacious trough the different AD disorders in
the population manifesting in reductions in comorbid disorder severity [20]. Also it is expected
that the gamma rhythm will be lower in the patients after the UP intervention, compared with the
control group. Finally, also it is hypothesized that this reductions will be maintained in the
follow-up assessments. With this design it will be possible to obtain enough data to accept or
reject the established hypothesis. The participants will not receive any payment for their
collaboration in this study; however, the entire treatment that they will receive will be free of
cost.

8

2.2 Procedures

2.2.1 Participant selection, recruitment, retention
Advertising will be created for the distribution of project information. Such advertising
will be located in strategic places located in both cities, such as community centers, schools, and
shopping centers, as well as the Autonomous University of Baja California, Tijuana Campus and
the Autonomous University of Ciudad Juarez. In addition, this advertising will be distributed
through digital media. Participants will be informed that this treatment will be free of charge and
aimed at people with a diagnosis of AD. During the recruitment phase, the existence of the
project will be made public through posters in order to attract potential candidates to participate.
Once potential participants have applied for the project, the battery of psychometric tests will be
applied, as well as a specialized interview to determine the existence and severity of symptoms
of AD. Those individuals who clearly present symptoms of one or more of the AD will be also
measured with EEG device and included in the study (see Figure 1).

9

Figure 1. Study Design: Three Phases Explanatory Diagram.

2.2.2 Study settings
The first setting of the study will be in Juarez, a city that is located approximately 231
miles from Chihuahua state capital city, Chihuahua City, and 970 miles northwest from Mexico
City. This borderland region remains an important gateway for migration, trade, and services. A
migration based population that has cultural and economic disadvantages, and conversely a lack
of understanding about the borderlands crisis. Juarez has a population of 1.32 million people
[17], and since the Mexican Drug Crisis in 2008, Juarez habitants has been directly and
indirectly exposed to high quantitative and qualitative violent scenarios. Juarez is the second
major borderland metropolitan area in the Mexico – U.S. border city [19].
The second study setting is considered the first major metropolitan borderland area,
Tijuana City, which is located on the border shared with San Diego, California; it has a

10

population of 1.30 million people. During last decade, Tijuana has suffered as Juarez City did, as
a main hot spot for rival drug dealer wars [21].

2.2.2.1 Interventional settings
1) The Psychology laboratory of the Faculty of Medicine and Psychology of the Autonomous
University of Baja California, in Tijuana. The laboratory is equipped and isolated of external
noise with full privacy consulting rooms, where several patients living in Tijuana from all
socioeconomic levels receive psychological treatment at low cost (50 pesos that is equivalent to
approximately 2.5 dollars) or in some specific cases the treatment is totally free.
2) Institute of Social Sciences and Administration of the Autonomous University of Juarez. The
institute also has consulting rooms with similar characteristics to the aforementioned location,
and the general community of Juarez can attend the Psychological Care Center named SURÉ,
which provides treatment to university students and general population for the same price as
location 1.

2.2.3 Inclusion and exclusion criteria
The participants must fulfill all the following inclusion criteria and to not meet in any of
the exclusion criteria.

2.2.3.1 Inclusion criteria
1. The participants must be residents of Tijuana or Juarez.
2. Man or woman aged 18 to 60 years diagnosed in the clinical interview with a generalized
anxiety disorder and/or agoraphobia with or without panic attacks and/or posttraumatic stress

11

disorder and/or obsessive-compulsive disorder and/or social anxiety disorder and/or specific
phobias.
3. Those participants who have been diagnosed by the clinicians on the self-reported scales one
of the previous anxiety disorders, with low scores in depression and suicidal ideation
considering a cutoff <11 in the ODSIS (Overall Depression Severity and Impairment Scale),
will be considered as study participants. Using the traditional threshold approach, the optimal
cut-off score from the perspective of the balance of sensitivity and specificity for a high level
of depression score was 11 or higher [22].
4. Gives full informed consent to participate in the study.

2.2.3.2 Exclusion criteria
1. Any participant who is currently using drugs.
2. Participants currently in psychological and / or pharmacological treatment.
3. Recent suicide attempt (3 months or less ago).
4. Refuse to sign the informed consent.
5. Other relevant reasons determined by the clinician.

2.2.3.3 Relevant concomitant care and interventions that are permitted or prohibited during the
trial
Patients that receive another psychological treatment should notify the therapist due to
this will not be permitted and the patient would have to be excluded. Similar for starting to take
antidepressants or Anxiolytics.

12

Patients that start an exercise program or improving eating patterns should also mention
to the therapist but would be allowed to continue in the treatment.

2.3.2. Withdrawal criteria
Participants will be withdrawn from this study if there are any concerns about their
informed consent. Participants are allowed to withdraw at any point of the study without
explanation to the therapist or researchers in charge. Patient’s withdrawals will be registered and
analyzed for future improvements of the study.

2.3.3 Randomization and blinding
The patients will be randomized to one of the two conditions. Afterwards, the therapist
will conduct the participant´s evaluation and will send an e-mail with the code of the patient to
the main researcher, subsequently; the researcher will use the randomization software GraphPad
[23]. The technique with which the randomization will be performed is Adaptive Random
Covariation [24]. This technique has the advantage that it does not only randomly assign each
participant to one of the established conditions, but also balances that both conditions have the
same number of participants, thus avoiding decompensations between the groups. Once the
randomization is completed, the main researcher sends back an email to the therapist and the
main researchers to indicate in which of the 2 conditions the patient will be assigned. The trial
participants will be blinded as to how many conditions exist in the study [25]. The patients will
not be aware that there is an intervention group and a control group (see Figure 2). The
conditions of the study are only known by the researcher, the therapists, and the bioethics
committee of the Autonomous University of Baja California. If for any reason unblinding is

13

necessary and occurs, the bioethics committee of the Autonomous University of Baja California
will be notified and will be reported in the results.

Therapist sends e-mail to
the main researcher with
the code of patient

Figure 2. Randomization and Blinding Explanatory Diagram ----Note: simplified process model.

2.3.4 Eligibility determination and diagnostic assessment
Previous depression symptoms will be assessed for the determination of eligibility at
intake using the depression symptom measures, capturing the severity and functional
impairment, and will be diagnosed by the ODSIS [22]. In addition, intake decision diagnoses are
established using the Scale of Suicide Ideation [26]. The Scale of Suicide Ideation, is utilized for
eligibility determination at intake as a primary outcome measure at pre-test. Treatment history
and previous diagnoses of AD disorders will be assessed by a preliminary interview.

14

2.4 Standing intervention content
The UP was designed to address emotional disorders including AD. The UP is a
manualized Emotion Regulation Transdiagnostic intervention that focuses on core emotion
dysregulation through psychopathology to effect changes in diverse outcomes included positive
and negative affects [7]. Although it is based on cognitive behavioral therapy, it contains
strategies similar to that of treatments for specific disorders, such as cognitive reevaluation and
exposure, but focused on emotional experience and not on situational factors [27]. The UP is
composed of 8 modules, of which 5 are core modules since they are based on the components of
emotion, such as thoughts, emotions (physical sensations), and behaviors. These correspond to
modules 3 to 7 of the protocol: 3) Training in emotional awareness; 4) Cognitive evaluation and
reevaluation; 5) Emotional avoidance of behaviors driven by emotion; 6) Awareness and
tolerance of physical sensations; and 7) Interoceptive and situational emotional exposure, the
first two modules refer to improving motivation and understanding emotions and the last to
prevent relapse [28]. Each of the five core modules address different aspects of emotion
regulation, such as the development of tolerance skills directed to reduce unhelpful avoidance
behaviors in emotionally-charged situations, and also focuses on cognitive flexibility to foster
the development of cognitive reappraisal skills in contexts of high emotion [5]. It is
recommended to implement the protocol within a range of 12 to 18 sessions with an approximate
duration of 50 to 60 minutes each [28] (See Table 1).

15

Table 1
Modules and objectives of the Unified Protocol.

Module

Number of
sessions

Objective

1 session

Increase of disposition and motivation for the behavioral
change of the patient, as well as the promotion of selfefficacy.

(2) Understanding emotions

1-2 sessions

Psychoeducation about the nature of emotions and the
components of emotional experience.

(3) Emotional awareness
training*

1 -2 sessions

Help in identifying how the patient reacts to his/her
emotions and training in emotional awareness centered on
the present.

(4) Cognitive evaluation and
reevaluation*

1 -2 sessions

Identify maladaptive thoughts and increase flexibility in
value judgments.

(5) Emotional avoidance of
emotion-driven behaviors *

1 -2 sessions

Identify emotional avoidance patterns and behaviors
driven by maladaptive emotion regulation strategies.

(6) Awareness and tolerance of
physical sensations *

1 session

Raise awareness about the role of physical sensations in
emotional experiences.

(7) Interoceptive and situational
emotional exposure *

4 -6 sessions

(8) Maintenance and prevention
of relapses

1 session

Exposure to internal and external emotional activators to
increase tolerance for emotions and promote contextual
learning.
General review of the treatment and evolution of the
patient.

(1) Setting Goals and
Maintaining Motivation

Note: *= Central protocol modules. (Barlow et al. 2017) [27].

Also, for a guarantee in the treatment adherence, three evaluations will be carried out
during the therapeutic process, at the beginning, in the middle, and at the end of it, where the
therapists will be evaluated by the patients. For this, the participant will receive 3 emails at
different times with a link that will include the evaluation of the therapist. This will be done
through the Therapeutic Alliance Negotiation Scale [29], developed and implemented in the
Mexican population. The opinion of the patients about the treatment will be evaluated by the
16

treatment effectiveness perception of the patient´s by a brief Spanish adaptation of the Consumer
Reports Effectiveness Scale (CRES-4), consisting of four items as a complementary tool to judge
satisfaction with the treatment [30]. The answers obtained in these questionnaires will only be
accessed by the main researcher of this study and these evaluations will be used to analyze the
therapist's performance and patient´s treatment effectiveness perception.

2.5 Primary outcomes
Primary outcomes refer to acceptability and diagnostic confirmation by self-reported
measures including the patient´s diagnostic confirmation, and physiological EGG gamma
activity, all of them to be analyzed at baseline, intervention and follow ups by self-reported and
physiological scores. Treatment acceptability measure in the study will be measured through the
Therapeutic Alliance Negotiation Scale and the Consumer Reports Effectiveness Scale (CRES4),

The AD self-reported emotional scores will be simultaneously measured in each phase of

the study by the following scales.

2.5.1 Electroencephalogram EMOTIV EPOC+ [31]
It is a 14-channel mobile electroencephalogram that allows measurement of brain
electrical activity patterns. The EEG performs measurements in the 4 lobes, for the frontal lobe it
has electrodes in the areas AF3, AF4, F7, F8, F3, F4, FC5 and FC6; in time T7 and T8; in
parietal P7 and P8; and in the occipital O1, O2. In addition, use the pairs of P3 and P4 as a
reference. The electrodes use saline solution to boost brain electrical signals. As for the
resolution of the signals, it uses sequential sampling at a rate of 128 samples per second at 14

17

bits that measures beta, alpha, gamma, and theta activity. In addition, it has a bandwidth of 0.2 to
43Hz and is connected via Bluetooth.
2.5.2 The Anxiety Disorders Interview Schedule (ADIS-IV) [32]
This structured interview follows the criteria of the DSM-IV, which allows a diagnosis of
anxiety disorders to be obtained at the present time and the patient past experiences. In addition,
it allows a functional analysis of anxiety disorders and provides information on mood disorders,
substance abuse, and to screen for other condition´s presence (e.g., psychotic disorders). The
discomfort and interference score ranges from 0 to 8, where 0 is "no interference/discomfort" and
8 is "maximum interference/discomfort." The same version as Garcia-Palacios et al. was applied
[33].

2.5.3 Generalized Anxiety Disorder 7 item scale (GAD-7) [34]
It is a short-scale tool that consists of 7 items as a measure of severity of generalized
anxiety disorder. The answers are based on how many days a week each item feels (symptoms).
The Likert score is rated 0 to 3, with a total score of 21, where 0-4 "no anxiety is appreciated"
and 15-21 "severe anxiety symptoms are appreciated." In addition, an eighth item is added where
a question asks about the difficulty of having symptoms in the functioning of daily life, ranging
from "no difficulty" to "extremely difficult". For this study the version is Spanish of GarcíaCampayo, et al. [35] was applied.

2.5.4 State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI) [36]
This scale is divided into two factors that measure anxiety as a trait and anxiety as a state.
The first factor measures how individuals generally feel, the second measures how they feel at a

18

given time. Each of these factors is made up of 20 statements of how they generally feel at this
time. The scale is of the Likert type that ranges from 1 (not at all) to 4 (almost always). Range
score for each sub-test is 20-80, and the higher score indicating greater anxiety. This instrument
has been validated in Spanish [37].

2.5.5 Posttraumatic Diagnostic Scale (PDS) [38]
The scale contains 17 items that assess the criteria and severity of posttraumatic stress
disorder according to the DSM-IV in the last two weeks. The instrument is evaluated by the
researcher on a Likert scale of 0 to 3, where 0 is "nothing" and 3 "a lot" with a maximum score
of 51. The diagnosis is made when a symptom of appearance, three of avoidance is observed,
and two of activation. For this study, the Spanish validated version of Novy, et al. was used [39].

2.5.6 Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale (Y-BOCS) [40]
For this study, the version adapted and translated to Spanish by Yacila-Giuliana, et al.
[41] was used. It is composed of 10 items: 5 related to obsessions and the other 5, to
compulsions, having an answer option from 0 to 4 (from not presenting a symptom until
presenting extreme symptoms). The diagnostic classification is based on the points of cut where
0 to 7 represents "without clinical manifestations", 8 to 15, "mild", 16 to 23, "moderate", 24 to 31
as "severe" and 32 to 40 as "extreme".

2.5.7 Beck Depression Inventory (BDI-II) [42]
It is a self-report designed to measure the presence and severity of depression symptoms
in adolescents and adults. It consists of 21 items with Likert scale response options, ranging from

19

0 to 3, with the exception of items 16 and 18 that have 7 response options. The score ranges from
0 to 63, where 0-13 is minimal depression; 14-19 is mild depression; 20-28 is moderate
depression; and 26-63 is severe depression. The Spanish version of Penley et al. [43] was used.

2.5.8 The Scale of Suicide Ideation [26]
The scale is intended to quantify and evaluate the frequency of attitudes, behaviors and
plans to commit suicide through 19 items whose response options range from 0 to 2. The scoring
range is 0 to 38 and a score greater than or equal to 10 indicates that the individual is at risk of
committing suicide. The application of the scale is suspended if items 4 and 5 are scored with
“0”. The internal consistency of the scale in Mexico has a Cronbach's alpha of .93 [44].

2.6 Secondary outcomes

2.6.1 Overall Anxiety Severity and Impairment Scale (OASIS) [45]
This scale measures the anxiety-related severity and impairment through anxiety
disorders. It is composed by 5 items, all of them focused to explore on the past week how often
and how severe the patient experimented anxiety and fear. The 5 point Likert scale of answers
are no anxiety, infrequent, occasional, frequent and constant anxiety. In this instrument, the
participants are asked how the anxiety interfered with his/her activities related to work, school,
home, social life, and relationships. The version in Spanish has been validated; an example is the
study of González-Robles, et al. [46].

20

2.6.2 Overall Depression Severity and Impairment Scale (ODSIS) [22]
This instrument is the modified version of the OASIS. It measures depression symptoms
capturing the severity and functional impairment related to depression. It measures the
frequency, intensity and interference with work, school, social life and relationships. One of the
main differences with the OASIS is the replacement of one item assessing impairment with an
item that measures the loss of interest. The version in Spanish of the ODSIS has been
implemented by Osma, et al. [47].

2.6.3 Therapeutic Alliance Negotiation Scale [29]
This instrument allows the assessment of the functioning of the therapy received, by
providing feedback of the quality of the perceived relationship from the patient’s part. It is
possible to use it to monitor therapeutic progress and prevent possible ruptures in the therapistpatient relationship. This scale was subject to an exploratory factor analysis with orthogonal
rotation with 199 patients, the percentage of total variance explained was 63.3%, the measure of
adaptation to the Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin sample was .85 and the Bartlett’s test of sphericity was χ2
= 885.40, df = 66, p = <.001. By separating the positive and negative reagents, a Cronbach's
alpha of .81 was obtained.

2.6.4 Consumer Reports Effectiveness Scale (CRES-4) [30]
This scale evaluates the satisfaction of the patients with the therapy received and how
effective they perceived the therapy. It comprised by 4 items in a liker scale from 0 (completely
dissatisfied) to 5 (completely satisfied) in the first and second items, and from 0 (I'm very bad, I
barely manage to face things) to 4 (I am very well, I really like the life I have), in the third and
21

fourth items. The scale is composed by 3 components: 1) Satisfaction towards the treatment
(item 1), 2) Problem solutions (item 2), and 3) perception of emotional change (items 3 and 4).

2.7 Training of the therapists and adaptation of the protocol
The therapists will be trained by the main researcher of this project since he has
experience of the implementation of the UP with a broader population, as well as the
development of the adaptation of the content for the Spanish population. The training will consist
of 2 sessions of 2 hours each week during 5 weeks, where each one of the modules of the UP are
detailed and explained, using examples of the implementation of the protocol with real patients,
while preserving and in all moment protecting the confidentiality of the patients. Also, it was
developed a manual directed for therapists and patients, adapted from the book of Barlow et al.
[27] to implement the UP. This manual was adapted for a viable version in Spanish for Mexican
Population. At the end of the training, an exam will be applied to the therapists to ensure
knowledge understanding and procedural competency.

2.8 Ethical considerations
The participants will be notified through a confidentiality agreement on how the
protection of their data will be proceeded with, this agreement explains articles 12, 36, 47, 61-69,
73 and 134 of the Mexican Society of Psychologist's Code of Ethics [48].
Also, the participants must read and sign the informed consent to participate in this study.
This consent can be retrieved from the registration of the study in
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03916315. Participants that obtain a score that indicates
serious disorder, and/or high suicidal ideation and intentionality will be directed to the
22

corresponding institutions to receive the necessary treatment. Likewise, the participants who
remain on the waiting list (control group), once the intervention with the experimental group is
finished, will proceed to receive the UP treatment. The bioethics committee of the Autonomous
University of Baja California, is allowed to monitor at any time that the process of the study is
being conducted properly and following the protocol that was delivered to them for review and
approval of this project. The organization that funded this project, will review every 6 months
the development of the project and objectives fulfilled at the moment of report of the results.

2.8.1

Declarations

2.8.1.1 Ethics approval and consent to participate
The research protocol was reviewed and approved by the Bioethics Committee of the
Faculty of Medicine and Psychology of the Autonomous University of Baja California (internal
control code: 414/2019-1).
Important protocol modifications will be informed properly to the Bioethics Committee
of the Faculty of Medicine and Psychology of the Autonomous University of Baja California and
Clinical Trials.

3. Data management and statistical analysis method plan

3.1 Data collection
All measures occur at baseline and at 3- and 6-months’ follow-up assessments. Retention
rates will be monitored and follow-ups with participants missing two or more sessions in a row
will be followed up in order to assure that they will continue with the intervention and the
23

planned measures. In case that it’s considered necessary, the post measures can be conducted via
telephone or email.
The instruments will be encoded and captured in databases. The results obtained will be analyzed
later using the Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS). For the analysis of the EEG, the
similar analysis as Oathes, et al [14], will be conducted, were the EEG data will be eye artifact
corrected and fast Fourier transformed then converted to amplitudes, averaged and squared so
that power can be calculated for the gamma frequency band with average for each individual
tasks during the protocol measuring of EEG activity (2 minutes base line, 5 minutes relaxation
and 5 minutes worry induction). Finally, the averages will be log-transformed to normalize
distributions. If obtained the necessary sample to carry out parametric tests (N = 30) [49], it is
planned to perform analysis that includes a Pearson's correlation [50] to know if a relationship
exists between the studied variables; Independent sample t-test to compare difference between
the means of the evaluations will be carried out before and after the treatment in both cities
(where it would be expected that there is no statistically significant differences between them),
and to compare the control and experimental group before and after the treatment; and repeated
measured t-tests for intra-group comparisons of before and after the intervention period in both
the control and experimental groups. Failure to comply with the necessary N, the corresponding
non-parametric tests of each of those mentioned above will be used. In addition, Chi square will
be used to observe the differences in frequencies between the different anxiety diagnoses [51].

3.2 Sample size calculation
Due to the limited amount of resources and spaces available in both cities, 5 part-time
therapists will be included in each city. With the constraint of a limited period of time, the
sample size for this study is not derived statically as with a sample size calculation. The rationale
24

for this is due to the limited resources that are available for the first study implementing the UP
in a Mexican population. Therefore, a convenience sample has been selected for this RCT [52].
The total amount planned is of 100 participants, 25 in each condition in each city, giving a total
for 50 participants for intervention and 50 participants for control group. This criterion was
based on the minimum sample size. For experimental and quasi-experimental designs, at least 15
cases per group or 21 cases per group are needed for a one-sided hypothesis [53].

4. Discussion
The UP is a multi-disorder intervention with well-known feedback on efficacy from the
international community on recent interventions applied worldwide. Processes and products from
this project may have relevance and be adaptable to other Mexican cities aiming to mental
disorders and emotional transdiagnostic to address AD, and other mental impairments. This
study will consist in conducting a RCT where the effectiveness of the UP will be tested within
and between participants due the inclusion of a control group that will consist of a waiting list.
Also, to measure the effectiveness of this treatment, subjective measures will be implemented,
such as widely validated psychometrics and objective measures, like the electroencephalography
tracking activity in the gamma rhythm.
As mentioned, the UP has been implemented in different countries, in Latin America; two
well conducted randomized controlled trials were performed in Brazil [8-9], and are included in
the systematic review and meta-analysis of Sakiris and Berle [5]. An UP intervention case was
also performed in Colombia with a female participant exposed to an armed conflict, with proven
efficacy patient the reduction of the symptomatology [54]. In Argentina, the UP was applied
through group format in a sample of 23 patients that met the diagnostic criteria of panic attack,

25

agoraphobia, social phobia, GAD, unspecified anxiety disorder, and major depression. The
results performed a significant reduction of the symptoms; however, no follow-up was reported
nor was reported on a control group [55]. The effectiveness of the UP regarding anxiety and
affective disorders is clear [5].
It has been identified that Mexico is a developing country with a notorious lack of mental
health caregivers working on the public service side, according to the statistics of the WHO, the
country should have 12,000 psychiatrists and it only has 4,600 [56]. Also, psychological
treatment is typically offered to people with middle- to high- economic status by private
psychological assessments, or to receive treatment in universities centers such as SURÉ, where
the quantity of people requesting psychological support surpasses the amount of the therapists
and spaces available. Also, in many Mexican cities like Juarez or Tijuana, serious mental health
affectations are a common leading and increasing phenomenon that result in high suicidal rates
[57-58].
The results of this study will be published in peer-reviewed journals and academic
congress and also the data will be publicly available through the journals were the articles are
published. Data such as full protocol, participant level data set, statistical code and data syntaxes
will be available as well.
Also, it is intended to present the results of this RCT to healthcare professionals, mainly
in Mexico and afterwards internationally. If the intervention is effective, this could be presented
to the directors and managers of the Mexico’s public health system, in order to consider the
adaptation of this treatment to a broader population, and to be disseminated through the Mexican
social security system. If positive results are obtained from this RCT, it can provide evidence to
conduct larger trials in other Mexican states and to be conducted in longer periods with other

26

disorders besides AD, such as depression and personality limit disorder to which the Unified
Protocol also has shown to be effective [59-60].
There are several limitations that need to be considered when the results of this study are
collected, and its effectiveness shared with the general and scientific community. First, due to the
limited resources, such as time, available spaces, and limited amount of therapists, it was not
possible to conduct a proper sample size calculation. Second, we do not have another treatment
to compare the effectiveness of the UP, such as traditional CBT protocols or treatments
developed and adapted from the UP and delivered solely by internet [61] or through a cellphone
application.
Another limitation of this study is that the population is not restricted to a specific age
range, it is a wide range (18-60 years old), a narrow age range is a better sample target. In
addition, another limitation is the generalization of the study to another geographic location in
Mexico, because this study targets specifically northern borderland cities. However, there is an
urgent need for evidence-based interventions to be tested on Mexican population, and to reduce
the prevalence of mood disorders in high violence contexts. Another consideration is the fact of
the impact that a study of this kind can be useful to Mexico, as the first UP intervention, which if
the results are successful in reducing the symptomatology the patients, it could be a great
contribution for the treatment of AD and similar disorders in the Mexican population.

Funding
This project was funded by the Teaching professional development program, superior
type (PRODEP), a program of the Mexican Secretariat of Public Education from the Mexican
Government. F-PROMEP-38/Rev-04.

27

This funding source has reviewed and approved the research plan, but did not have any role
during the planning of the study, and will not be involved in data collection and analysis,
interpretation of the data, or decision to submit the results.

Author´s contributions
DRA formulated the research question, designed the study and drafted the manuscript,
coordinates the study and drafted all the versions of the manuscript.
CVS participated in the manuscript draft, coordinated the main analysis and drafted
several sections of this proposal.
AGC participated in formulating the research question, is involved in the coordination of
the study, and edited drafts of the manuscript.
VELC critically revised the manuscript and approved the final version as submitted
All authors revised the manuscript and read and approved the final manuscript.

Acknowledgments
For their project implementation and data collection contribution, the authors would like
to acknowledge Arantza Mariel Solis Nicolas, Victoria Acosta Guzmán, Yhasser Cantú, María
Guadalupe Gallegos Fraire, Rafael Lopez Castañeda, César Jossue Villafuerte Martínez, Sara
Villagrana Ortíz, Aurelio Arzate, Ana Gaudelia García Martínez, Leticia Guadalupe Cobian
López and Karen Ochoa.
The authors would like to thank Marisela Gutierrez, PhD researcher affiliated to the
Autonomous University of Ciudad Juarez, for her support to evaluate the quality of this
manuscript.

28

Competing Interests
Authors have no competing interests to declare.

Author´s information
DRA & VELC Faculty of Medicine and Psychology, Autonomous University of Baja
California, Mexico.
CVS Faculty of Psychology, Escuela Libre de Psicología ELPAC, University of
Behavioral Sciences, Chihuahua City, México.
AGC Institute of Social Sciences and Administration, Autonomous University of Juarez.

References
[1]

World Health Organization. Depression and other common mental disorders: global
health estimates. Geneva: World Health Organization, 2017.

[2]

Gordon RP, Brandish EK, Baldwin DS. Anxiety disorders, post-traumatic stress disorder,
and obsessive–compulsive disorder. Medicine 2016;44(11):664-671.

[3]

Oficina de Información Científica y Tecnológica para el congreso de la unión, [Office of
Scientific and Technological Information for the congress of the union] INCyTU. Salud
mental en México [Mental Health in México].
https://www.foroconsultivo.org.mx/INCyTU/documentos/Completa/INCYTU_18007.pdf (2018). Retrieved 11 May 2019.

[4]

Butler AC, Chapman JE, Forman EM, Beck AT. The empirical status of cognitivebehavioral therapy: A review of meta-analyses. Clin Psychol Rev 2006;26(1):17-31.
doi:10.1016/j.cpr.2005.07.003.

29

[5]

Sakiris N, Berle D. A systematic review and meta-analysis of the Unified Protocol as a
transdiagnostic emotion regulation based intervention. Clin Psychol Rev 2019;72.
doi:10.1016/j.cpr.2019.101751.

[6]

McEvoy PM, Nathan P, Norton PJ. Efficacy of transdiagnostic treatments: A review of
published outcome studies and future research directions. J Cogn Psychother
2009;23(1):20-33. doi:10.1891/0889-8391.23.1.20.

[7]

Ellard, Kristen K., et al. "Unified protocol for the transdiagnostic treatment of emotional
disorders: Protocol development and initial outcome data." Cognitive and Behavioral
Practice 17.1 2010; 88-101. doi:10.1016/j.cbpra.2009.06.002

[8]

Maia ACC, Braga AA, Nunes CA, Nardi AE, & Silva AC. Transdiagnostic treatment
using a unified protocol: Application for patients with a range of comorbid mood and
anxiety disorders. [Tratamento transdiagnóstico utilizando um protocolo unificado:
Aplicação em pacientes com diferentes transtornos de humor e ansiedade comórbidos].
2013; 35(2), 134-140. doi:10.1590/S2237-60892013000200007.

[9]

De Ornelas, Maia ACC, Nardi AE, Cardoso A. The utilization of unified protocols in
behavioral cognitive therapy in transdiagnostic group subjects: A clinical trial. J
Affective Disord 2015;172:179-183. doi:10.1016/j.jad.2014.09.023.

[10]

Pinel JP. (2007). Métodos de investigación en biopsicología [Research methods in
Biopsychology]. En In J. P. Pinel (Ed.), Biopsicología (6ª. ed., pp. 117-118). Madrid:
Pearson.

[11]

Ramos-Argüelles F, Morales G, Egozcue S, Pabón RM, Alonso MT. [Basic techniques of
electroencephalography: principles and clinical applications]. An Sist Sanit Navar
2009;32 Suppl 3:69-82.

30

[12]

Roh SC, Park EJ, Shim M, Lee SH. EEG beta and low gamma power correlates with
inattention in patients with major depressive disorder. J Affective Disord. 2016;204:12430.

[13]

Schmidt LA, Santesso DL, Miskovic V, Mathewson KJ, McCabe RE, Antony MM, et al.
Test-retest reliability of regional electroencephalogram (EEG) and cardiovascular
measures in social anxiety disorder (SAD). Int J Psychophysiol 2012;84(1):65-73. doi:
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2012.01.011

[14]

Oathes DJ, Ray WJ, Yamasaki AS, Borkovec TD, Castonguay LG, Newman MG, et al.
Worry, generalized anxiety disorder, and emotion: Evidence from the EEG gamma band.
Biol Psychol 2008;79(2):165-170. doi:10.1016/j.biopsycho.2008.04.005.

[15]

Moscovitch DA, Santesso DL, Miskovic V, McCabe RE, Antony MM, Schmidt LA.
Frontal EEG asymmetry and symptom response to cognitive behavioral therapy in
patients with social anxiety disorder. Biol Psychol 2011;87(3):379-385.

[16]

Mathersul D, Williams LM, Hopkinson PJ, Kemp AH. Investigating models of affect:
relationships among EEG alpha asymmetry, depression, and anxiety. Emotion.
2008;8(4):560-572.

[17]

Núñez M. Análisis cuantitativo del electroencefalograma en pacientes con depresión
mayor [Quantitative electroencephalogram analysis in patients with major depression]
(Master Thesis disertation). Toluca, Mexico. Autonomous University of Mexico State
2016. Retrieved from:
http://ri.uaemex.mx/bitstream/handle/20.500.11799/65352/8%20Tesis%20MCS%20Mika
l%20N%C3%BA%C3%B1ez%20Morales-split-merge.pdf?sequence=3&isAllowed=y

31

[18]

Regional Stakeholders Committee. “The Paso del Norte Region, US-Mexico: SelfEvaluation Report”, OECD Reviews of Higher Education in Regional and City
Development, IMHE:2009; http://www.oecd.org/edu/imhe/regionaldevelopment.

[19]

Morales MC, Prieto P, Bejarano C. Transnational entrepreneurs and drug war violence
between ciudad Juárez and El Paso. J Urban Res 2014;10.

[20]

Farchione TJ, Fairholme CP, Ellard KK, Boisseau CL, Thompson-Hollands J, Carl JR, et
al. Unified Protocol for Transdiagnostic Treatment of Emotional Disorders: A
Randomized Controlled Trial. Behav Ther 2012;43(3):666-678.

[21]

Herzog LA, Sohn C. The co-mingling of bordering dynamics in the San Diego–Tijuana
cross-border metropolis. Territory Polit Gov 2019;7(2):177-199.

[22]

Ito M, Bentley KH, Oe Y, Nakajima S, Fujisato H, Kato N, et al. Assessing Depression
Related Severity and Functional Impairment: The Overall Depression Severity and
Impairment Scale (ODSIS). PLoS ONE 2015; 10(4): e0122969.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0122969.

[23]

GraphPad. https://www.graphpad.com/ (n.d.). Accessed 20 Nov 2018.

[24]

Suresh K. An overview of randomization techniques: An unbiased assessment of
outcome in clinical research. J Hum Reprod Sci 2011;4(1):8-11. doi:10.4103/09741208.82352

[25]

SPIRIT Check list. Blinding (masking). https://www.spirit-statement.org/blindingmasking/(n.d.). Accessed 20 Nov 2018.

[26]

Beck AT, Steer RA, Ranieri WF. Scale for suicide ideation: Psychometric properties of a
self‐report version. J Clin Psychol 1988;44(4):499-505.

32

[27]

Barlow DH, Farchione TJ, Bullis JR, Gallagher MW, Murray-Latin H, Sauer-Zavala S, et
al. The unified protocol for transdiagnostic treatment of Emotional Disorders compared
with diagnosis-specific protocols for anxiety disorders: A randomized clinical trial.
JAMA Psychiatry 2017;74(9):875-884. doi:10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2017.2164.

[28]

Barlow DH, Farchione TJ, Fairholme CP, Ellard KK, Boisseau CL, Allen LB, Ehrenreich
MJT. Unified Protocol for Transdiagnostic Treatment of Emotional Disorders: Therapist
Guide (Treatments That Work). 2010. United Kingdom: Oxford University Press.

[29]

Díaz-Oropeza I, Peña-Leyva L. Validation of the Spanish version of the Therapeutic
Alliance Negotiation Scale / Validación de la versión en español de la Escala de
Negociación de la Alianza Terapéutica. Estud Psicol 2016;37(2-3):604-632.

[30]

Feixas G, Pucurull O, Roca C, Paz C,Garcia-Grau E y Bados,A. Escala de Satisfacción
con el tratamiento recibido (CRES-4): La versión en español. [Satisfaction scale with the
treatment received (CRES-4): the version in Spanish]. . Revista de Psicoterapia
2012;23(89): 51-58.

[31]

EMOTIV. EMOTIV EPOC+ 14 Channel Mobile EEG.
https://www.emotiv.com/product/emotiv-epoc-14-channel-mobile-eeg/#tab-description.
(n.d.) Accessed 20 Nov 2018.

[32]

Brown TA, Di Nardo PA, Barlow DH. Anxiety Disorders Interview Schedule for DSMIV (ADIS-IV). 1994. San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.

[33]

Garcia-Palacios A, Botella C, Hoffman H, Fabregat S. Comparing acceptance and refusal
rates of virtual reality exposure vs. in vivo exposure by patients with specific phobias.
Cyberpsychology & behav. 2007 Oct 1;10(5):722-4.

33

[34]

Spitzer RL, Kroenke K, Williams JBW, Löwe B. A brief measure for assessing
generalized anxiety disorder: The GAD-7. Arch Intern Med 2006;166(10):1092-1097.

[35]

García-Campayo J, Zamorano E, Ruiz MA, Pardo A, Pérez-Páramo M, López-Gómez V,
et al. Cultural adaptation into Spanish of the generalized anxiety disorder-7 (GAD-7)
scale as a screening tool. Health Qual Life Outcomes 2010;8.

[36]

Spielberger CD, Vagg PR. Psychometric Properties of the STAI: A Reply to Ramanaiah,
Franzen, and Schill. J Pers Assess 1984;48(1):95-97. doi:10.1207/s15327752jpa4801_16.

[37]

Novy DM, Nelson DV, Smith KG, Rogers PA, Rowzee RD. Psychometric Comparability
of the English-and Spanish-Language Versions of the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory. Hisp
J Behav Sci 1995;17(2):209-224.

[38]

Foa EB, Cashman L, Jaycox L, Perry K. The validation of a self-report measure of
posttraumatic stress disorder: The posttraumatic diagnostic scale. Psychol Assess
1997;9(4):445-451.

[39]

Novy DM, Stanley MA, Averill P, Daza P. Psychometric comparability of English- and
Spanish-language measures of anxiety and related affective symptoms. Psychol Assess
2001;13(3):347-355.

[40]

Beck AT, Steer RA, Ball R, Ranieri WF. Comparison of Beck depression inventories -IA
and

-II

in

psychiatric

outpatients.

J

Pers

Assess

1996;67(3):588-597..

doi:10.1207/s15327752jpa6703_13.
[41]

Yacila-Giuliana A, Cook-del Aguila Lorella, Sanchez-Castro Ana Elena, Reyes-Bossio
Mario, A. Tejada Romina. Traducción y adaptación cultural del Yale-Brown Obsessive
Compulsive Scale (Y-BOCS) para trastornos obsesivos compulsivos. [Translation and

34

cultural adaptation of the Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale (Y-BOCS) for
obsessive compulsive disorders] Acta méd. Peru. 2016; 33(3): 253-255.
[42]

Beck AT, Steer RA, Ball R, Ranieri WF. Comparison of Beck depression inventories -IA
and

-II

in

psychiatric

outpatients.

J

Pers

Assess

1996;67(3):588-597..

doi:10.1207/s15327752jpa6703_13.
[43]

Penley JA, Wiebe JS, Nwosu A. Psychometric Properties of the Spanish Beck Depression
Inventory-II in a Medical Sample. Psychol Assess 2003;15(4):569-577.

[44]

Mondragón L, Saltijeral MT, Bimbela A, Borges G. Suicidal ideation and its relation
with hopelessness and drug and alcohol abuse. Salud Ment 1998; 21(5):20-27.

[45]

Norman SB, Cissell SH, Means-Christensen AJ, Stein MB. Development and validation
of an Overall Anxiety Severity and Impairment Scale (OASIS). Depression Anxiety
2006;23(4):245-249.

[46]

González-Robles A, Mira A, Miguel C, Molinari G, Díaz-García A, García-Palacios A, et
al. A brief online transdiagnostic measure: Psychometric properties of the Overall
Anxiety Severity and Impairment Scale (OASIS) among Spanish patients with emotional
disorders. PLoS ONE 2018;13(11).

[47]

Osma J, Castellano C, Crespo E, García-Palacios A. The unified protocol for
transdiagnostic treatment of emotional disorders in group format in a Spanish public
mental health setting. Behav Psychol Psicol Conductual 2015;23(3):447-466.

[48]

Sociedad Mexicana de Psicología. Código ético del psicólogo. [Mexican Society of
Psychology. Code of Ethics of the Psychologist] 2010. Ciudad de México, México:
Trillas.

35

[49]

Ghasemi A, Zahediasl S. Normality tests for statistical analysis: A guide for nonstatisticians. Int J Endocrinol Metab 2012;10(2):486-489.

[50]

Lee Rodgers J, Alan Nice Wander W. Thirteen ways to look at the correlation coefficient.
Am Stat 1988;42(1):59-66.

[51]

Satorra A, Bentler PM. A scaled difference chi-square test statistic for moment structure
analysis. Psychometrika 2001;66(4):507-514.

[52]

Deaton A, Cartwright N. Understanding and misunderstanding randomized controlled
trials. Soc Sci Med 2018;210:2-21.

[53]

Hernández R., Fernández, C., Baptista, M. Metodología de la Investigación [Research
Methodology] (6 ed.). 2014. México: Mc Graw Hill.

[54]

Castro-Camacho L, Moreno JD, Naismith I. Contextual Adaptation of the Unified
Protocol for the Transdiagnostic Treatment of Emotional Disorders in Victims of the
Armed Conflict in Colombia: A Case Study. Cogn Behav Pract 2019;26(2):366-380.
doi:10.1016/j.cbpra.2018.09.002.

[55]

Grill SS, Castañeiras C, Fasciglione MP. Aplicación grupal del Protocolo Unificado para
el tratamiento transdiagnóstico de los trastornos emocionales en población argentina.
[Group application of the Unified Protocol for the transdiagnostic treatment of emotional
disorders in the Argentine population]. Revista de Psicopatología y Psicología Clínica.
2017; 22(3), 171-181.

[56]

Martinez W, Galván J, Saavedra N, Berenzon S. Barriers to Integrating Mental Health
Services in Community-Based Primary Care Settings in Mexico City: A Qualitative
Analysis. Psychiatr Serv. 2017; 1;68(5):497-502.

36

[57]

de Baca VC, de Baca JC. The "Shame Suicides" and Tijuana. Journal of the Southwest.
2001; 1:603-35.

[58]

O'Connor K, Vizcaino M, Benavides NA. Mental health outcomes of Mexico's drug war
in Ciudad Juárez: A pilot study among university students. Traumatology 2014;20(1):2431.

[59]

Sauer-Zavala S, Bentley KH, Wilner JG. Transdiagnostic treatment of borderline
personality disorder and comorbid disorders: A clinical replication series. J Pers Disord
2016; 30(1), 35-51. doi: 10.1521/pedi_2015_29_179.

[60]

Mohammadi F, Bakhtiari M, Arani A, M Dolatshahi, B, Habibi M. The applicability and
efficacy of transdiagnostic cognitive behavior therapy on reducing signs and symptoms
of borderline personality disorder with co-occurring emotional disorders: A pilot study.
Iran J Psychiatry Behav Sci 2018; 12(1), e9697. doi: 10.5812/ijpbs.9697

[61]

González-Robles A, García-Palacios A, Baños R, Riera A, Llorca G, Traver F, et al.
Effectiveness of a transdiagnostic internet-based protocol for the treatment of emotional
disorders versus treatment as usual in specialized care: Study protocol for a randomized
controlled trial. Trials 2015;16(1).

37

Table 1
Modules and objectives of the Unified Protocol.

Module

Number of
sessions

Objective

1 session

Increase of disposition and motivation for the behavioral
change of the patient, as well as the promotion of selfefficacy.

(2) Understanding emotions

1-2 sessions

Psychoeducation about the nature of emotions and the
components of emotional experience.

(3) Emotional awareness
training*

1 -2 sessions

Help in identifying how the patient reacts to his/her
emotions and training in emotional awareness centered on
the present.

(4) Cognitive evaluation and
reevaluation*

1 -2 sessions

Identify maladaptive thoughts and increase flexibility in
value judgments.

(5) Emotional avoidance of
emotion-driven behaviors *

1 -2 sessions

Identify emotional avoidance patterns and behaviors
driven by maladaptive emotion regulation strategies.

(6) Awareness and tolerance of
physical sensations *

1 session

Raise awareness about the role of physical sensations in
emotional experiences.

(7) Interoceptive and situational
emotional exposure *

4 -6 sessions

(8) Maintenance and prevention
of relapses

1 session

Exposure to internal and external emotional activators to
increase tolerance for emotions and promote contextual
learning.
General review of the treatment and evolution of the
patient.

(1) Setting Goals and
Maintaining Motivation

Note: *= Central protocol modules. (Barlow et al. 2017) [27].

1

Data category
Primary registry and trial identifying number
Date of registration in primary registry
Secondary identifying numbers
Source(s) of monetary or material support

Primary sponsor

Secondary sponsor(s)
Contact for public queries
Contact for scientific queries
Public title

Scientific title

Countries of recruitment
Health condition(s) or problem(s) studied

Intervention(s)

Key inclusion and exclusion criteria

Information
ClinicalTrials.gov
NCT03916315
16 April, 2019
414/2019-1
Teaching professional development program,
superior type (PRODEP), an organism of the
Mexican Government.
Teaching professional development program,
superior type (PRODEP), an organism of the
Mexican Government.
N/A
Dr. Alejandro Domínguez Rodríguez
alejandro.dominguez.rodriguez@uabc.edu.mx
Dr. Alejandro Domínguez Rodríguez
alejandro.dominguez.rodriguez@uabc.edu.mx
Unified Protocol treatment in the population of
two cities in Mexico with anxiety disorders and
electrophysiological correlate measurement:
study protocol for a randomized controlled trial.
Unified Protocol treatment in the population of
two cities in Mexico with anxiety disorders and
electrophysiological correlate measurement:
study protocol for a randomized controlled trial.
Mexico.
General anxiety disorder, posttraumatic stress
disorder, social phobia, obsessive compulsive
disorder, agoraphobia with and without panic
attacks and specific phobias.
Unified Protocol for Transdiagnostic Treatment of
Emotional Disorders.
Ages eligible for study: ≥18 years
Sexes eligible for study: both
Accepts healthy volunteers: no
Inclusion criteria: adult patient (≥ 18 years), living
in Tijuana or Juarez, Mexico, diagnosed with
generalized anxiety disorder and/or agoraphobia
with or without panic attacks and/or
posttraumatic stress disorder and/or obsessive
compulsive disorder and/or social anxiety
disorder and/or specific phobias, low score in
depression symptoms and suicidal ideation and
gives full informed consent to participate
Exclusion criteria: Any participant currently using
drugs, who is currently in psychological or
pharmacological treatment, recent suicide
attempt (3 months or less), refuse to sign the

Study type

Date of first enrolment
Target sample size
Recruitment status
Primary Outcomes
Key secondary outcomes

informed consent, other relevant reasons
determined by the clinician.
Interventional
Allocation: randomized intervention model.
Single blind model (therapist know the conditions
but the participants not).
Primary purpose: reduction of anxiety symptoms.
Phase:
May 2019
100
Not recruiting
Anxiety symptoms
Depression symptoms and alliance patienttherapist

