Full Papers

IDC 2015 Medford, MA, USA

Using Neurofeedback to Teach Self-Regulation to Children
Living in Poverty
Alissa N. Antle, Leslie Chesick*, Aaron Levisohn, Srilekha Kirshnamachari Sridharan, Perry Tan
School of Interactive Arts & Technology
Simon Fraser University, 250 -13450 102 Avenue
Surrey, B.C. Canada V3T 0A3
[aantle, alevisoh, skirshna, pta13]@sfu.ca

*Nepal House Society
7711 147A Street
Surrey, B.C. Canada V3S 8Z4
promorely@hotmail.com
new research project that arose after the principal investigator (PI)
traveled to this country to visit Nepal House Kaski (NHK), a
school for girls living in poverty in Pokhara, Nepal. The
organization that operates the school is run by local staff and a
Canadian NGO called Nepal House Society 1. The staff work with
children at NHK school and several of the local orphanages.
Many of the children who attend the school or live in these
orphanages have suffered severe complex trauma as a result of
poverty, political violence and/or domestic violence. The
counselors and teachers at the school are being trained by western
psychotherapists. One element of this training involves working to
improve the children’s ability to self-regulate when anxious (calm
down/relax) and focus (pay attention). The therapists are teaching
the counselors to use validated trauma therapy methods, including
mindfulness, breathing and yoga practices, in order to improve
educational outcomes in the school. When the counselors at the
school began to teach the children self-regulation techniques they
found it difficult. In part this was because many of the children
had been severely traumatized, which shuts down their pre-frontal
cortex which is responsible for executive functioning. In addition,
the counselors were having difficulty determining if and when the
children had learned the practices since anxiety and attention are
not always observable through behavior. Lastly, the counselors
did not have a way to monitor the children's progress learning
self-regulation over time.

ABSTRACT
In this paper we describe a neuro-feedback system and
applications we designed and deployed to help vulnerable
children at an NGO-funded school, called Nepal House Kaski, in
Pokhara, Nepal. The system, called Mind-Full, enables
traumatized children to learn and practice self-regulation by
playing simple, culturally appropriate games using an EEG
headset connected to an interactive tablet. Children can interact
with Mind-Full using body actions that may change their
physiology and brain states, which are sensed by the EEG headset
and used as input to the games. One of the key challenges was to
build an application that the children could immediately
understand how to use when they are illiterate, don’t speak
English and have no computer experience. We describe MindFull and highlight the design principles we used to meet these
constraints. We report on a subset of findings from a 14-week
field experiment in which we use a mixed-methods approach to
determine if children improved their ability to self-regulate during
gameplay as well as in the classroom, playground and in therapy
sessions. Findings from quantitative and qualitative assessment
measures suggest that the treatment group significantly improved
their ability to calm down and focus in a variety of contexts.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H5.2. Information interfaces and presentation: User interfaces.
K.3.m Computers and education: Miscellaneous.

What was needed was a way to motivate and help the children
learn and practice self-regulation techniques to improve their
ability to regulate anxiety and attention, as well as help the
counselors track the children's daily and cumulative progress.
Without the ability to self-regulate, children are unlikely to
succeed at NHK school, or in local public schools. Without
education, these children will likely remain in poverty. The
overarching research question that motivated the project was:
How can we help some of the world’s poorest children succeed at
school? Our goal was to create an intervention that motivated
repetitive practice, which could change children’s brains (think
neural plasticity), improve their ability to manage anxiety when
stressed and improve attention on educational materials and in
therapy sessions.

General Terms
Design, Human Factors, Measurement

Keywords
Brain computer interfaces, neurofeedback, self-regulation,
children, games for learning, developing countries, evaluation.

1. INTRODUCTION
One billion of the world’s children live below the poverty level,
living on less than $2.50 a day. The country we worked in is one
of the world’s poorest countries. Even with access to education
many children living in poverty are unable to focus on learning
due to multiple traumas they have suffered. Traumas may be
layered and include poverty, domestic violence, parental mental
illness and addictions, homelessness and civil war. Mind-Full is a

Current evidence from the fields of pediatric psychotherapy and
health science suggests that teaching children mindfulness
practices is an effective way to improve executive functioning and
help reset the limbic system after trauma [9, 17]. There have been
similar findings for adults [15]. The phrase “mindfulness
practices” has been used to refer to a variety of techniques
including deep breathing, focusing one’s attention on inner or
outer experiences, as well as different forms of mediation.
Approaches utilizing neurofeedback (NF) have been particularly
effective and are best practices for adults and children [7,11,14].

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
IDC '15, June 21 - 25, 2015, Medford, MA, USA © 2015 ACM.
ISBN 978-1-4503-3590-4/15/06…$15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2771839.2771852

1

119

www.nepalhousesociety.org

Full Papers

IDC 2015 Medford, MA, USA

[16]. Results from parent reports indicated improvement in
ADHD-related behaviours for children and their parents.
However, improvements in behaviours related to ADHD were not
seen by teachers in the classroom. While three children in the
study also received NF, the impact of this was not assessed. NF
has not yet been used in conjunction with mindfulness training to
help traumatized children (ages 5 and up) learn self-regulation.
However, mindfulness techniques have been developed and used
in many classrooms (e.g. Mind-up 2). These approaches have not
been studied experimentally (with control groups), and we cannot
assume positive outcomes reported by teachers in classrooms will
automatically transfer to therapeutic interventions for traumatized
children, although they may.

NF is a type of biofeedback that uses real-time displays of brain
activity (e.g. electroencephalography (EEG)), to teach selfregulation of brain function. Therapy oriented computer games
that utilize NF and/or biofeedback have also been effective with
child and youth populations [2,7]. Our main research questions
were: (R1) Can children living in poverty quickly learn to use
neurofeedback-based tablet games? (R2) If so, can children
control NF games by learning and practicing to self-relate anxiety
and attention? (R3) Can children transfer (i.e. use) their selfregulation skills to other contexts (classroom, playground, and
therapy sessions)? (R4) And lastly, can an EEG-based system help
counselors help the children (possibly in new ways)? To address
these questions we developed and evaluated a series of NF selfregulation games on an Android tablet. In many ways R3 was the
most important question. If children could play the games but not
transfer learning of self-regulation into their everyday lives, then
Mind-Full would not have achieved its main objective as stated in
the overarching research question.

2.2 Brain Computer Interfaces using EEG
Brain computer interfaces (BCI) allow for direct communication
between people and computers using electrical impulses generated
by neurons within the brain. These nerve impulses, which are
transmitted and received by cortical neurons, are collected and
measured by electroencephalograph (EEG) electrodes. The EEG
represents the voltage changes which are measured over time and
represented as power spectra, a plot of the squared amplitude of
the signals.

Our target audience was non-English speaking children living in
poverty, who had suffered multiple traumas and who had never
used a computer. Ages ranged from five to 11; most of the
children were seven to eight years old. Compared to children in
developed, industrialized countries, these children’s development
was often slower, making them seem younger than they were. For
example, most of the children could not yet read or write. We
designed a series of NF games using a touch tablet. In this paper,
we describe how we met the needs of our population through
unique design features. We describe a secondary application that
runs on a second tablet which enabled counselors to calibrate
brainwaves and game difficulty on-the-fly, and monitor the
children’s brainwave data during gameplay. We summarize the
deployment of two identical systems to the school for a 12-week
field study. By using a two-group design we controlled for
naturally occurring versus treatment-related change in selfregulation. In the study, we investigated if children can use the
system and, when they use it consistently, if it improves their
ability to calm down (relax) when anxious, focus in the classroom
and pay attention as needed. In this paper, we report preliminary
results of the field study focusing on changes between the start of
the study and the completion of the first treatment group six
weeks later.

There are four primary periodic rhythms recorded in an EEG:
alpha, beta, delta, and theta. These rhythms are classified by
frequency (Hz or cycles/sec) and amplitude, and correlate with
various states [8]. Alpha waves are most prevalent when a
person’s eyes are closed, and attenuate with focused attention on
external stimuli. However, with proper relaxation training it is
possible to maintain alpha frequencies with open eyes. Beta
rhythms occur during periods of attention to external stimuli or
focused mental effort. Both Delta and Theta waves are lowbandwidth EEG patterns associated with stages of sleep. They
may also increase during periods of high mental concentration.
Theta waves primarily occur in adults during the onset of
drowsiness; however, they can also occur during wakeful states as
a response to emotionally frustrating situations. Theta wave
patterns are also produced during deep meditative states.
The availability of inexpensive consumer-grade EEG systems over
the last several years has led to an increase in the development of
BCIs. Although these systems are not as robust as medical-grade
EEGs, they afford greater comfort and ease of use, making them
beneficial for use as BCI controllers [3]. The two most commonly
utilized EEG headsets are the Emotive EPOC 3 and the NeuroSky
Mindwave 4 with new systems such as the MUSE 5 coming to
market over the last year. For this project we selected the
Mindwave Mobile, a wireless version of the NeuroSky headset, as
our BCI hardware. The NeuroSky headset has been integrated into
a number of toys for children including Mattel’s MindFlex 6 and
the Star Wars Force Trainer 7. These prior-use scenarios provided
evidence of the system’s successful use with children.

2. BACKGROUND
2.1 Therapeutic Interventions for Children
Mindfulness training including breathing, relaxation and attention
exercises is beginning to be accepted as a best practice for
therapeutic interventions for children and adult issues related to
trauma, anxiety and ADHD (attention deficit and hyperactivity
disorder). For example, mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for
children (MBCT-C) is a 12-week group intervention developed to
help children (aged 9-13, n=23) to learn to self-regulate their
emotional balance, attention, and flexibility [9,12]. MBCT-C was
expected to reduce attention problems, anxiety symptoms and
behavioural issues. The MBCT-C included group interaction
using games, movement and sensory exercises to increase 'nonjudgmental awareness' such as visual, tactile auditory sensations.
Feedback was collected from parents, teachers, children and
observers. Results suggested that this approach was effective in
reducing issues related to attention and anxiety. Mindfulness
training was also used in an eight-week program with children
(aged 8-12, n=22) with ADHD and in parallel with their parents

The NeuroSky Mindwave headset is a single-electrode EEG
system that through the use of proprietary algorithms is capable of
sensing relative alpha, beta, delta, and theta wave powers. It
2

http://thehawnfoundation.org/mindup
http://emotiv.com/epoc.php
4
http://store.neurosky.com/products/mindwave-1
5
www.choosemuse.com
6
http://store.neurosky.com/products/mindflex
7
http://starwars.com/shop/toys/the_force_trainer
3

120

Full Papers

IDC 2015 Medford, MA, USA

questionnaire was filled out by parents and teachers based on their
observation of the children at home and in the school. Though
there was no significant improvement noticed by parents or
teachers, the results indicate that the children underwent the EEGbased NF training with ease.

involves a single dry electrode placed above the left eye, and an
ear clip (Figure 1). The system has a built in algorithm (called
eSense) that assesses the current meditation (relaxation) and
attention levels of the headset wearer. These values are returned as
two numbers on a scale from 0-100 with a higher value indicating
a greater degree of relaxation or attention. Values of 40-60
indicate moderate degrees of relaxation or attention. Although the
NeuroSky system uses proprietary algorithms the system has been
assessed by researchers to assure the validity of the EEG wave
measurements and the meditation and attention scales. Crowley et
al. validated the ability of the NeuroSky system to differentiate
between meditation and attention by having participants complete
the Stroop test and the Tower of Hanoi puzzle [1]. The attention
scale was also validated by another group of researchers using a
self-assessment test [13]. Stinson and Arthur’s research
demonstrated that the data output corresponds with the expected
wavelength powers despite some inconsistencies with the
relaxation and attention measures [15]. We used this headset in
our system, Mind-Full.

EEG-based NF was used as a mechanism to improve creativity
and well-being of the children (aged 11, n=33) [4]. The
experiment involved training children to enhance their theta/alpha
states with closed eyes relaxation and with opened eyes
relaxation. Children listened to auditory representations of their
theta (waves) and alpha (brook) states. They were instructed to
relax deeply and listen to pleasant sounds which would occur
more frequently as they relaxed more deeply. Results showed that
the training improved creativity and musical performance of the
children, half of whom rated positive on an index of ADHD. The
work also suggested that the students enjoyed the NF training and
that it was feasible to employ NF trainings in schools. While this
study did involve therapeutic interventions, the findings indicate
that it was possible to deploy in school settings.

2.3 EEG-based NF for Children

To date there have been no studies reporting on the use of NF to
improve young children’s self-regulation around issues of trauma,
anxiety and attention. However, therapeutic NF training with
adults for anxiety and depression has been shown to be very
effective in terms of helping adults purposefully attain alpha
brainwave states [5]. NF can be used effectively alongside
medications to treat anxiety disorders and depression. NF has also
been shown to be effective for improving outcomes related to
stroke, aging issues, and head injuries, with fewer side effects than
medication [15]. Our work explores the viability of using EEGbased NF to teach children with multiple traumas to self-regulate
anxiety and attention.

There have been several EEG-based NF interventions developed
for children. EEG data provides a reliable means to measure
several brain states (most notably attention and relaxation) in an
unobtrusive manner. This data can be then used as input to a
computer program which translate data into different forms of
feedback which children can use to better understand their current
brain state and motivate changes to desired brain states (e.g. calm
down, or focus more). There have been several EEG-based NF
applications developed and studied specifically for children.
FOCUS is a reading application that claims to increase the
engagement in reading by using an EEG-based augmented display
over a book [6]. The augmented display changes based on the
EEG data related to an attentional engagement index, which is a
measure of Beta / (Alpha + Theta). The Emotiv EPOC 8 headset
used in the study has 14 electrodes and requires pre-calibration.
Children (aged 6-8.5, n=24) were trained in two ways: contextual
reading where the augmented display was triggered when the
engagement index went below a threshold; and in-order training
where training was given after the reading session. Results
indicated that the EEG engagement index was significantly higher
for contextual reading compared to in-order reading. Teacher
feedback on children’s reading outcomes was significantly higher
for children who did contextual reading than in-order reading.
This study shows that EEG-based training can be used to help
children stay engaged in their reading sessions. However, in this
study, EEG data was taken from the visual cortex and assumes
that visual engagement is equivalent to reading engagement.

3. THE SYSTEM
3.1 Guiding Principles
Our main principle was to design the NF games based on familiar
activities from the children’s everyday lives which would cue or
encourage a child to perform physical actions that would shift the
child’s physiology and corresponding brainwave state to help
teach them how to self-regulate around relaxation/anxiety and
focus/attention. In addition to visual cues about what to do to selfregulate, we provided visual feedback when they had achieved
specific brainwave states (using game goals). Each goal involved
reaching a threshold brainwave state and holding it for a set
amount of time (which could be adjusted if needed). For example,
by blowing on a static pinwheel image displayed on the tablet, a
child would likely relax a little, which was sensed by the EEG
headset (an enhanced alpha wave state) and sent to the tablet
which responded by spinning the pinwheel. A second design
principle was that entire UI had to function so that a child could
learn how to interact in a single session (5-10 minutes) with only
minor coaching from the school counselors. This included
understanding how to log in, play all of the three games (and
switch between them), and understand their progress. A third
principle related to calibration. Unlike most EEG applications, we
could not calibrate each child’s brainwave resting levels prior to
game play because the children cannot relax or focus or even sit
still! To solve this we built an on-the-fly calibration application
which enabled us to calibrate while a child was playing games
even if unsuccessful (described below). This application also
enabled us to make the games easier, because our goal was

An EEG-based puzzle was built for children (aged 7-12, n=20)
with ADHD in order to improve their attentive state [10]. The
system calibrates the attentive and non-attentive states of each
child from their EEG for the first two sessions, requiring
extensive machine learning. The research grade headset had more
than 20 electrodes (making it unsuitable for school settings). The
experiment ran for 20 sessions over 10 weeks with ADHD
children who were new to medications, and a control group. The
sessions involved playing games using attention as input. For
example, racing a car where the speed of the car is proportional to
attention level. The difficulty level of the games was increased
over the sessions by the psychologist. After 5 and 10 weeks, a
8

http://emotiv.com/epoc.php

121

Full Papers

IDC 2015 Medford, MA, USA

Figure 1a. Demo session 1b. Child using system with counselor. 1c. User management interface with three users, one active.
reach the bottom of the mountain. To do this, the user had to stay
in a relaxed state for 11 seconds (default) above a specific
threshold (Relax=40). If the user’s relaxation measure fell below
the threshold then a thermal (gust of wind), pushed the paraglider
a little ways back up the mountain. Once the desired state was
achieved again, the paraglider continued its descent. The
animation for this game showed a girl lying down and relaxing
while she watched the paragliders drift down the mountain. She
moved out of the screen and a paraglider jumped off the hilltop.
Reminding the user about sitting back and watching paragliders
could be helpful to assist them in sustaining a relaxed state. Each
successful landing earned a paraglider token in the jar. Five
tokens filled the jar to mark game progress.

for the children to learn to self-regulate and practice selfregulation rather than win. Other guidelines were more practical.
We needed to build a robust (tablet not laptop), scalable, mobile
system that could work without power or internet for extended
periods.

3.2 System Overview
Mind-Full is composed of modules including: user management,
user progress (per game, session, study period), on-the-fly
calibration and three simple games. Each game is based on
familiar, everyday activities and actions which, when learned, can
elicit behaviors which in turn result in desired brain states related
to relaxation or attention. The simple, robust NeuroSky headset
monitors the child’s brainwave activity and uses pre-processed
data streams for either relaxation or attention to control visual
elements of simple, culturally relevant computer games that run
on the tablet. This provides visual feedback to the children about
their relaxation state (by monitoring their alpha/theta waves) or
attentive state (beta waves), depending on the game, and also
provides guidance and motivation to change their brain states.
More information about the design rationale for the Mind-Full
system is available through a video presentation 9.

The third game, called Stones, was an attention game (Figure 2c).
In the area along the river where many of the children live, some
of the adults earn money by collecting stones from the nearby
river. They load stones into wicker baskets which they carry on
their backs up to the roadside where they dump them. The stones
are picked up for construction. In addition, many of the children’s
games involve playing with or piling up stones. The stone game
focused on teaching attentional skills. In this game the user had to
focus for eight seconds on each of five stones to move each from a
basket to build a stone pile. As long as their attention level
remained above the threshold (Attn=40) then the stone would
move across the screen and place itself onto the stone stack. If the
user lost her focus, the stone would fall and roll back into the
basket (Figure 2c). The user did not control the lifting or the
placing of the stone, just its horizontal traversal across the screen.
The animation for the stone game showed a girl turning her head
as she watched the stone as it moved across the screen. By
focusing her attention on the stone as it traveled, the user could
learn to focus her attention. This game was a bit of a stretch from
reality but was none-the-less based on a familiar activity for the
children. We also designed it so that each stone pile was slightly
different, adding a fun element to achieving each stack. Five
stones were required to make a stack, which earns one token. Five
tokens filled a jar marking progress in the game.

3.3 Games
Mind-Full was composed of three games based on the counselors’
goals for the girls. The Pinwheel game was an introductory
relaxation game (Figure 2a). It functioned as a warm-up for the
user and had to be played every session. The game began with an
animation of a girl blowing softly on the pinwheel. The pinwheel
spun. The girl moved away and “handed” the pinwheel out
towards the user. To play, the user had to relax their mind and
body for five seconds to cause the pinwheel to spin. If they
maintained a relaxed state above the default threshold (Relax=40)
for five seconds they got a token added to the jar (on the left in
figure 2a), and got a new token for every five seconds they could
stay relaxed. The threshold and duration was adjusted using the
calibration device. The user had to fill the jar with five tokens in
order to unlock the other two games. Focusing on breathing was a
good way to begin learning how to relax. Breathing was not
required to achieve the desired state or to get the pinwheel to spin.

3.4 User Management
In order for young children who cannot yet read to be able to start
their own sessions, we used the camera utility of the tablets. With
a single tap, an image of a child was taken and then used to access
their account. The user photo page is shown in figure 1c. Basic
user management tools were also visual, but were meant for
counselors (see Figure 1c). Children started their session by
tapping their image. The most recently used accounts were
displayed first. Other tools enabled counselors to move users to a
different tablet or merge two accounts for the same user on a
single or multiple tablets.

The second game, called Paraglider, was also a relaxation game
(Figure 2b). The school sits at the foot of a large mountain range.
It is an ecotourism hub and tourists often paraglide from the hills.
On any given day one can see hundreds of paragliders descending
to the valley. Children watch paragliders land or swirl back
upwards on thermals, and build their own toy paragliders from
found materials. The goal of this game was to help the paraglider
9

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PJ4gfkRUedo

122

Full Papers

IDC 2015 Medford, MA, USA

Figure 2a. Pinwheel game animation. 2b. Paraglider with five tokens. 2c. Stones with signal quality showing green on user photo.

3.5 Progress

3.7 Technical Implementation

Progress is represented using jars of tokens for each game. Both
counselors and children can see progress in a game (Figures 2a,
2b, 2c), a session (Figure 3b) and/or all sessions (Figure 3c), each
represented with jars. Jars were colour coded to match the games
(yellow, pink, and blue respectively). If a user (counselor or child)
tapped the jar, she was taken to a page that showed all the jars she
had filled for any games she had played in that session. On the
session progress page jars were displayed on shelves just like in
the children’s homes (Figure 3b). By tapping any game icon she
returned to that game. By tapping any jar on a shelf she went to
the progress page for all her sessions (figure 3c). She could return
to her current session page by tapping any jar. Tapping the photo
of herself at any point returned her to the main page and ended
her session.

Mind-Full is composed of the NeuroSky MindWave headset and
two Samsung Galaxy 10.1 touch tablets that run the Android
operating system (OS) and Unity 3D (a mobile game development
engine). The Games tablet was connected to the headset using
wireless Bluetooth. This tablet runs the user modules (login,
management and progress) and the three games. The Calibrate
tablet, which was optional, was connected to the Games tablet
using WiFi direct (rather than the internet for stability). The main
program was developed in Unity. The headset connected to the
Android OS and Unity using a custom Java bridge program we
wrote. This program polled the headset 60 times a second for EEG
power spectrum data in all bands, a signal quality data stream and
eSense Meditation (Relaxation) and Attention data. Signal quality
was used within games to ensure consistent feedback, and was
visually displayed as a green, yellow, or red frame and headband
on the user’s photo on all screens (Figure 2c). When signal
quality was low, the game program held the current state until it
improved so that progress was not lost.

The counselors could see a girl’s progress through the study
period from the session progress page (Figure 3c). This page
showed all the games played by each user, including each
session’s date and time, the games played and duration of play.
The duration was split to show the time in a relaxed or attentive
state using a proportional pie chart. This page was scrollable from
left to right to facilitate the viewing of all sessions. Pie charts
enabled counselors to visually compare a user’s total, relaxed and
attentive times over multiple sessions. The pie chart segments
were colour-coded to match games (Pinwheel, Paraglider, and
Stones).

Each game had a time and eSense Relaxation or Attention
threshold which was set to default values, but could be changed
using the Calibrate application (or in user management). The
threshold determined if the game responded visually (e.g.
pinwheel spins, paraglider descends, stones stack). When the
threshold was met for the amount of time specified, a single token
was earned for that game. This process happened once per frame
at 60 frames per second, so there were about 16.7 milliseconds
between updates. Every time a token was earned, a save was
triggered to write the current player status to non-volatile storage
so that in the event of an accidental exit or power/battery issue,
game progress was not lost. When five tokens were earned, the jar
was complete and the game reset. Two animations (pinwheel
spinning, stones falling down or stacking) were physics based for
realism. The paraglider animation used 120 distinct frames that
were sequentially swapped in place of the currently rendered
frame while at the same time moving along a predefined motion
path based on the eSense threshold value. The paraglider moved
downwards when eSense was above threshold and upwards when
not.

3.6 Calibration Application
To date, all EEG-based brain computer interfaces require
calibration or training prior to using brainwave data in an
application. One of the challenges of working with young children
suffering from trauma is that we could not calibrate the EEG
ahead of usage. The children cannot reliably calm down or focus;
therefore we cannot calibrate the application using those states.
To solve this issue, we developed a second application running on
a second Android device (see technical implementation details
below). This application reported the live status from the EEG
headset and interacted with the game in real-time (Figure 3a). It
enabled a counselor to change any of the default values in the
games. For example, the Paraglider game could be made easier by
lowering the Relaxation value from 40 to 30, and/or by lowering
the time threshold from 11 to eight seconds. In this way, games
could also be made more difficult as a girl’s skills progressed, and
the new default values were stored in her account. This
application also showed brainwave data and signal quality, which
could help the counselor or a second observer understand how the
girl was doing (without looking at her game screen and disturbing
her).

Unity provided a data store for saving each user’s sessions.
Session data consisted of information such as the session
date/time, session number, time and threshold values, and number
of tokens achieved for each game. Every time a new session
started, that player’s data was pulled from storage to ensure
previous values were used for time and Relaxation or Attention
values. During gameplay, data was saved each a token was earned
or when the game was exited (thus ending the session). All logged
data were stored in spreadsheets which were synced to Google
Drive at the end of each day by counselors so that little

123

Full Papers

IDC 2015 Medford, MA, USA

Figure 3a. Calibration screen. 3b. Current session progress screen. 3c. All sessions progress screen (swipe L/R to see all).
practices. For the study, the 22 girls were split into two groups
(treatment/control). The first group used Mind-Full for the first
six-week study period. The teachers divided the girls into groups
by equivalent pairs based on age, grade, temperament and
behavioural issues. Two girls dropped out of the treatment group
because they left the school so data is not reported for them. Nine
girls completed the treatment during the first six-week period. In
this paper, we focus on findings for those nine girls.

data would be lost if a tablet was lost, broken or could not be
recharged due to a power outage.

4. FIELD STUDY METHODOLOGY
We conducted a two-group, repeated measures, field experiment
at the NHK school. Two equivalent groups of girls used MindFull three to five times per week over two six-week periods (total
12 weeks). The study length was based on other successful
mindfulness interventions for children (e.g.[17]). The session
frequency (3-5/week) meets or exceeds those used in other studies
and mirrors that of studies with adults such as Kabat-Zinn’s
Mindfulness Stress Reduction Program 10. In this paper, due to
space constraints, we only report on the group of girls who used
Mind-Full in the first period (weeks 1-6). Repeated measures
involved two assessments administered prior to and at the end of
six weeks. Other data was collected from counselor and teacher
reports, observations by the PI and counselors, feedback from the
girls, and log data of gameplay progress, all related to children’s
improved ability to regulate their relaxation and attention levels.
The repeated measures, two-group research design enables us to
have a control group to account for developmental and schoolrelated changes.

4.2 Procedure
In the 10 days before the study, the Western therapist worked with
all the teachers and counselors to learn to use Mind-Full. She took
the approach of teaching one of the senior counselors who in turn
taught everyone else in order to increase the capacity for NHK
staff to work with the children and reduce dependence on nonlocals. The PI arrived a week later and worked to iron out
technical issues and to re-develop all the assessment instruments
in conjunction with the Western therapist and NHK staff.
The study with the children began with demonstrations for all the
girls (split by class) of how to play all three games, demonstrated
by a 14-year-old boy. The goal was to reduce researcher and
power effects by using someone closer to the children’s own age,
who had developed proficiency using Mind-Full (Figure 1a). The
demonstration also enabled us to get verbal informed consent
from the girls who would not have been able to understand what
we were asking them without a demonstration. Their parents had
all met with the school previously to give their verbal consent
after a demonstration by the counselors.
All of the girls were assessed at the beginning of the study. Each
assessment
was
facilitated
by
a
trained
Western
therapist/researcher, and involved the child’s teacher with input
from their counselor. During the first week, the treatment group
began to use Mind-Full in addition to current (non-system)
instruction in breathing practices. Each session involved one child
using Mind-Full supervised by one counselor. We deployed two
identical systems. Each child used the system with a counselor for
about 10 minutes/day three to five times a week for six weeks (see
study setup in Figure 2b). The control group only received nonsystem instruction in breathing practices. At the end of six weeks
all of the girls were re-assessed by a western researcher and staff
with the same assessment instrument.

While it is tempting to have hypotheses for our study there are
many factors beyond control in the field, and in particular at a
school for children living in poverty. For example, during week
five, as a result of one girl having difficulty seeing the screen, all
the girls were all assessed for eye and ear issues. Three girls were
given glasses. In addition, another researcher worked with
teachers during the latter part of this six week period to improve
control in the classroom. Events in the children’s home lives
could also impact results. For these reasons, we state our
hypotheses as expectations and interpret our findings taking into
consideration any factors of which we were aware and which
could not be controlled in a field study.

4.1 Site and Participants
Twenty two girls (aged 5-11) attend the NHK school. All have
suffered trauma resulting from violence in home, substance abuse
in home, neglect, and/or parental death. There are three
classrooms based on age and ability. Children participate in daily
classroom work and weekly therapy sessions (.5-1 hours) which
include therapeutic art and play therapy. The school employs four
counselors, three teachers and other support staff. The staff take
an integrated approach and work with the children and their
families to address issues. The staff were trained and are
supervised by Western therapists in trauma and other counseling

10

4.3 Measures: Assessment Instrument
The assessment instrument was developed by the PI, the Western
trauma therapist, three counselors and a teacher from the school.
The goal of the assessment was to address the research questions
and was modified to include input about what the counselors and
teachers considered to be successful outcomes for the study, and
for the children. The end result was an instrument with open
survey questions, statements rated using an interval five point
Likert scale, and space for comments that explained ratings. The

www.mindfullivingprograms.com/whatMBSR.php

124

Full Papers

IDC 2015 Medford, MA, USA

open questions were designed to identify each girl’s main issues
and learning disabilities. The ratings and comments were designed
to assess each girl’s ability to self-regulate anxiety (i.e. calm
themselves) and focus or pay attention in and outside the
classroom. To ensure consistency of the multiple administrations
of the assessment, we iteratively developed standards for
administration. We included information on how to focus on
observable behaviours (as well as children’s emotional states),
using consistent terms, checking for consistency between similar
questions, using prompts to get more details and using examples.
The assessment instrument included two open questions about
general issues and learning disabilities: G1. What are the main
behavioural issues with this child in the classroom and at school?
G2. Do you think this child has a learning disability? If so,
explain why you think this? The next section used mixed
measures to assess Calmness. There were five closed statements
with a five-point interval rating system (from 0 to 4) in which the
staff rated the child’s ability to self-regulate anxiety and their
ability to calm themselves down after an upsetting situation. The
rating section was followed by an open comment field which was
used to explain ratings or add other comments related to calmness.
The statements covered contexts including the classroom,
playground and therapy sessions. The statements were:

5. PRELIMINARY RESULTS
In this paper we report on the results comparing the treatment and
control group using the first and second assessments. We would
expect the treatment group to improve across all qualitative and
quantitative measures and the control group to possibly improve
across some measures due to natural or developmental, and/or
counselling and/or educational factors but to improve less than the
treatment group. We report results in order of our research
questions with quantitative analysis first, followed by a thematic
analysis of written responses to G1 (issues), G2 (learning
disability) and comments for calmness and attention for both
groups. The qualitative analysis provides details which help
explain findings from quantitative ratings. We also include
observations from notes of three sessions and quotes from postsession focus groups with staff.
(R1) Can young children living in poverty quickly learn to use
neurofeedback based tablet games?
Based on observations we determined that all the girls in the
treatment group were able to quickly understand how to play the
Pinwheel game in the first session. The counselors gave them
minimal instructions. For example, saying things like “take a deep
breath to make the pinwheel spin” or “remember how the boy
took deep breaths to make the pinwheel spin” (from the demo
session). The children were also able to play Pinwheel
successfully again in the second and ongoing sessions. With
coaching, patience and minor re-calibration (e.g. reduced the
Stones hold time from eight to five seconds per stone), all of the
girls managed to complete one jar of five tokens for all three
games in the first session.

C1.Child can calm themselves eventually when they are upset
C2.Child can calmly talk about something upsetting that
happened in the past
C3.Child shows self-control in playground
C4.Child can calm down when they have done/been told they
have done something wrong
C5.Child can stay calm when helping other children

(R2) If so, can children control neurofeedback-based tablet
games by learning and practicing to self-relation of anxiety and
attention?
Based on observational notes, feedback during the focus groups
held after the first two sessions and in the second week, and
ongoing emails, we were confident that all of the girls easily
learned to use their bodies to calm or focus their minds in order to
successfully play all three games. After the first session all of the
girls understood that they should take deep breaths to blow on the
Pinwheel and make it spin. All of the girls were able to do this
within the first one to five minutes of each session and hold an
alpha state (threshold of 40) for five seconds, five times to get five
pinwheel tokens in their jar. In some sessions, this was more
difficult but counselors encouraged them. None of the children
required on-the-fly calibration to make the Pinwheel game easier
by lowering the threshold brainwave value for relaxation value or
decreasing the time they had to hold that state. We found that all
the girls understood how to play the Paraglider and Stones games,
although all of the children found these games harder. Most girls
found either one of Paraglider or Stones harder and this tended to
be consistent across sessions. Some of the girls needed minor recalibration and encouragement to successfully achieve tokens.
Session lengths ranged from 5 to 15 minutes. The longer sessions
typically involved re-calibration or re-starting when the WiFi
direct connection was lost, or headset Bluetooth connection was
weak (which turned out to be due to dirt on the girls’ foreheads).

The scale was worded so to represent equal intervals between
each of the 5 categories (Table 1).
4
Can do this mostly by themselves.
3

Can do this with some support/reminders.

2

Is developing the ability to do this with support.

1

Cannot do this unless they have a lot of support.

0

Cannot do this at all even with support.
Table 1. Five point interval scale for Calmness

The last section used mixed measures to assess Attention. The
closed statements, rated with a similar five-point interval scale,
were:
A1. Child can pay attention in the classroom
A2. Child can follow instructions
A3. Child can get back on task when distracted
The rating section was followed by an open comment field which
was used to explain ratings about attention and focus.
The PI also observed the first two sessions (to address RQ1 and
RQ2), and another session a week later. The PI conducted
informal focus groups with staff after each of these sessions.
Counselors also sent periodic email updates on progress and
issues throughout the six weeks and a written report alongside the
second assessment at the end of the first six weeks.
Quantitative data was analyzed using parametric techniques when
variances were equal since the rating scale was interval. We
analyzed written comments using a bottom up thematic analysis
approach to look for common themes, and changes between the
first and second assessments. We used our observational notes
and email comments from counselors to substantiate findings,
provide quotes and examples and report on unexpected benefits.

(R3) Can children transfer their self-regulation skills to other
contexts (classroom, playground, therapy sessions)?
In order to determine if there was an interaction between groups
(treatment, control) and assessment (1/pre, 2/post) we first looked
at variance using Levene’s test for between subjects (group) and
Mauchley’s test for within subject (assessment) for all questions

125

Full Papers

IDC 2015 Medford, MA, USA

(C1-C5; A1-A3). Results indicated that there was a homogeneity
of variance between subjects for all measures except A2 at the p >
0.05 level. The assumption of sphericity was also met for two
levels. Since these assumptions were met and our data was
interval we used as two way ANOVA for all measures except A2.
For A2, we used a Wilcoxan signed-rank test, which is the
nonparametric equivalent of a two way ANOVA for correlated
measures.

For A3 the results for the treatment group indicate that the ratings
of the children’s ability to concentrate significantly increased
from assessment 1 (M=1.61, SD=1.11, N= 9) to assessment 2
(M=2.66, SD=0.70, N=9), F(1,8)=6.5, p=0.34, η2 = 0.45. The
concentration of the children had no significant change from
assessment 1 to assessment 2 for the control group.
Our analysis of the qualitative comments for G1, overall calmness
and attention resulted in the identification of common themes in
both groups.
1. Hyperactive
2. Attention/concentration/loses items
3. Unruly
4. Angry/Aggressive
5. Fear/anxiety/reserved/low self esteem
Overall many of these behaviours that were described for each girl
in group 1 in assessment 1 were reduced in assessment 2. For
example, four girls were reported to have poor attention and
concentration in assessment 1 and only 3 in assessment 2. There
was some unruly behaviour reported for girls, such as not
listening to teachers, stealing and lying. These were reported for
six girls in assessment 1 and no girls in assessment 2. One girl
was reported to attend school irregularly but she came to school
when they had sessions. Six girls were reported to display anger
and aggressive behaviours in assessment 1, and 3 in assessment 2.
Five girls in assessment 1 were reported to have emotional issues,
such as fear, being reserved with friends and low self-esteem,
which was reduced to four girls in assessment 2. These
improvements were not mirrored in the control group findings. In
the control group, most of the issues mentioned in assessment 1
remained in assessment 2.
In addition to negative behaviors, there were several positive
comments from the teachers after assessment 2 for the treatment
group. The girls were able to concentrate well, openly express
themselves with friends, acted more disciplined in class and on
the playground, followed instructions more effectively, and
reduced the amount they hit other girls.

The results for the two way tests indicated that there was a
significant interaction between the groups and assessment for all
measures except C (stay calm while helping other children) at
levels ranging from p<.01 to p < 0.001, with an effect size ranging
from moderately large to large (η2 =.22 to .58). This means that
the children’s ability to calm down and pay attention increased
from assessment 1 to assessment 2 for the treatment group and
stayed the same or actually decreased from assessment 1 to
assessment 2 for control group. In order to further explore these
findings, we used one way repeated measures ANOVA. We report
the significance levels and effect sizes for all measures (except C5
because there was no difference in either group).
For C1 (calm themselves when upset) the results for the treatment
group indicate that the rating of calmness by teachers and
counselors significantly increased from assessment 1 (M= 1.27,
SD=0.61, N= 9) to assessment 2 (M=2.55, SD=0.88, N=9) with
high effect size (F( 1, 8)= 28.98, p =0.001, η2 = 0.78). There was
no significant change in the rating of calmness of the children in
the control group.
For C2 (calmly talk about past trauma) the results for the
treatment group indicate that the ratings of the children’s ability to
calmly talk about something that had upset them significantly
increased from assessment 1 (M=1.5, SD=0.50, N=9) to
assessment 2 (M=2.27, SD=0.66, N=9), F(1, 8)= 10.74, p=0.011,
η2 =0.57. There was no significant change in the rating of ability
of the children to calmly talk about stressful topics from
assessment 1 to assessment 2 for the control group.
For C3 the results for the treatment group indicate that the ratings
of children’s self-control on the playground significantly
increased from assessment 1 (M=1.5, SD = 1.3, 3N=9) to
assessment 2 (M=2.77, SD = 0.83, N=9), F(1, 8)= 7.93,
p=0.023, η2 =0.49. There was no significant change in the ratings
of children’s ability to maintain self-control in playground from
assessment 1 to assessment 2 for the control group.
For C4 the results for the treatment group indicate that the ratings
of children’s ability to calm down when they did something
wrong significantly increased from assessment 1 (M=1.11,
SD=1.26, N=9) to assessment 2 (M=2.66, SD=0.7, N=9) , F(1,
8)= 7.93, p=0.05, η2 = 0.64. There was no significant change in
the calmness of the children when their mistake was pointed out,
from assessment 1 to assessment 2 for the control group.
For A1 the results for the treatment group indicate that the ratings
of the children’s attention in the class significantly increased from
assessment 1 (M= 0.94, SD=0.72, N=9) to assessment 2 (M=2.55,
SD=0.52, N=9), F(1, 8)= 31.73, p < 0.001, η2 = 0.80. The
ratings of the children’s attention in the class did not change
significantly from assessment 1 to assessment 2 for the control
group.
For A2, the results for the treatment group indicate that the ratings
of the obedience of the children significantly increased from
assessment 1 to (M=1.44, SD=0.72, N=9) to assessment 2
(M=2.77, SD = 0.44, N=9), F(1, 8)= 32, p < 0.001, η2 =0.80. The
ratings of the children’s obedience did not significantly change
from assessment 1 to assessment 2 for the control group.

(R4) Can an EEG-based system help counselors help the
children?
Based on informal email reports during the six weeks, and a
written report at the end of the six weeks, the counselors were
mostly positive about how Mind-Full also helped them support
the girls and noticed many changes in the treatment groups’ girls’
behaviors. For example, at the end of the six-week period the head
counselor wrote that “some of the girls are paying more attention
in the class (reported to me from the teachers). For some children
(2 out of 4 girls I work with), their attention and relaxation time
has increased during tablet sessions. They can focus longer than
before. Even when the tablets aren’t working the children are not
getting frustrated very much. They are remaining calm. I’m
enjoying doing the tablet with the children and seeing some of the
changes (more focused, more relaxed, happy to be part of doing
the game, and happier in general) in their daily life from doing it.”
Most negative comments were about issues with the WiFi signal
being dropped between two tablets (likely due to spectral
interference), or EEG data quality issues (see below under
limitations). Another counselor said that the girls seemed more
open with them in therapy sessions after the tablet games were
done. This counselor mentioned that the girls were aware of their
breathing and if there was a problem with Mind-Full (e.g. headset
data quality) they did deep breathing while waiting. The
counselors also asked the girls what they thought about MindFull. They reported that the girls felt like it was easier to focus

126

Full Papers

IDC 2015 Medford, MA, USA

manifested as behavior. This new focus enabled them to better
assess whether their interventions, as well as Mind-Full, were
effective in mitigating pre-existing trauma.

with the teachers (in class) and with their friends they felt more
calm. The counselors also sent these two quotes from the girls, "I
like the tablet and after it I feel comfortable and I can draw a
picture" and "I practice deep breathing at night" (translated by
counselors into English).

Limitations and Confounds
One limitation was that sometimes a headset had poor data quality
during a session which took some time to rectify, usually by
adjusting the forehead connection, but other times by starting over
completely. Later in the study, we discovered that regular cleaning
of the headsets and girls’ foreheads with alcohol immediately
improved the connection; the headset signal quality was much
improved and stable from then onwards.

There were several important unexpected benefits that counselors
pointed out or we observed during sessions. The main benefit was
that all four counselors immediately commented that seeing the
girls use Mind-Full and seeing their real time brainwave data
enabled them to know more about how the girls were feeling or
what was going on for them with respect to attentional issues. For
three girls in the treatment group they identified discrepancies
between what they thought they knew about each girl, and what
Mind-Full’s brainwave data showed. This enabled them to better
understand what was going on with each girl and change the way
they planned to counsel and/or teach her. Based on these early
cases, the counselors started to use Mind-Full as a diagnostic tool.
For example, one Counselor said, “This girl isn’t at all focused in
class but she did very well at Stones … this tells us she can do it
… she’s got a lot of chaos in her family… that’s what the trouble
is … [knowing] this helps us work with her.” Another girl who
presented as a very calm child but had trouble learning was
diagnosed with a learning disability. However, she had a great
deal of difficulty with the Paraglider game and her brainwave data
showed that she was very stressed, while appearing outwardly
calm. This led the counselors to investigate her family situation,
and later change their assessment of her as learning disabled. They
instead focused on counselling and trying to understand and treat
her stress levels rather than her ability to learn. Another older girl,
who had been with the school longer than most because she was
not meeting learning objectives, had been assessed with severe
difficulties concentrating in class, similar to how a child with
ADHD or post-traumatic stress disorder might behave. However,
contrary to everyone’s expectations she quickly and easily
completed the Stones game in the first and subsequent sessions.
Her counselor commented that this would change how they
approached her counselling sessions, where their main focus had
been on getting her to pay attention. Now they might use the time
to explore her interests and feelings. It would also change how
they treated her in class, perhaps enabling her to work
independently in a quiet space, like the set up for the sessions.
Another girl had difficulty focusing on the screen and her eyes
(and ears) were subsequently tested. She required glasses.

For A1 (paying attention in the classroom) only the treatment
group improved. We expected that all children would improve
because another researcher was working with the teachers near the
end of the period to improve control in the classroom. However,
this factor beyond our control did not appear to affect our results.
Similarly when three of the girls in the treatment group were
given glasses during the first period. Their counselor reported that
the glasses improved their vision, which in turned improved their
ability to play games using Mind-Full. At least one of the girls
was nearsighted, which would not have affected classroom work.
Another issue is that the teachers might have been biased because
they knew which children had participated in the first treatment
group. Having a non-NHK therapist facilitate the second
assessment may have helped reduce this effect. It is difficult to
control all factors in a field study; however, our effect sizes were
large so we could be relatively certain that usage of Mind-Full
was an important element in improvements.

6. DISCUSSION
Mind-Full’s game design was based on activities that are familiar
to the children, combined with therapeutic best practices from the
west, some of which are also familiar in concept to these children
(e.g. breathing in Buddhist meditation). Mind-Full alongside
counselor support provided motivation for the children to
repetitively practice, receive visual feedback, and improve their
ability to self-regulate in the classroom. More importantly, our
findings show that children’s abilities to self-regulate anxiety and
attention transferred beyond our games into real-world situations
that the children face every day. Our experimental design enabled
us to make claims about the impact of our intervention compared
to naturally occurring changes due to maturation and other
interventions. Our preliminary results were overwhelmingly (and
surprisingly) positive. With so many factors beyond our control
and a population that has never been tested with NF or
commercial grade EEG headsets, there were many things that
might have gone wrong. Having the PI and/or Western therapist
and other researchers on site for the whole field study ensured that
we were able to troubleshoot, validate consistent usage and make
our own observations. The staff was involved from the very
beginning of the project, long before we started to design the
system. They were enthusiastic about our ideas, informed our
designs (system and assessment instruments), and were willing to
take the risk to run the study. A key strategy was to enable the
staff at the school to use and technically troubleshoot Mind-Full,
and be involved in all aspects of assessment and data collection.
Without this type of buy-in and their steadfast commitment to
conduct about 20-25 practice sessions with each child, it is
doubtful that our results would have been as positive as they were.

There were several other unforeseen benefits. The Western trauma
therapist commented that when she is in Canada, if she sees that
something has changed in the log data or reports coming from
counselors, she can follow up via Skype call with counselors and
check in to see what’s happening and coach them if needed. Other
benefits emerged from the process of creating and administering
the assessment instrument. When doing the assessments the
counselors and teachers all commented that they learned new
things about some of the children that they had not known. They
learned more through the process of working together to assess
each girl. In particular the Western trauma therapist said that she
learned many things about the children that would help her in
supervision of therapy sessions at the school and remotely when
she was back in Canada. Working together to administer the first
assessment helped create a common language for the therapist and
staff in terms of how to describe the children’s issues. The
counselors said that they learned more about how to describe
observable behaviors during the first assessment. For example,
when they described a child as fearful, we asked how this

At this time we can only make claims about short-term effects. It
remains to be seen if improvements will hold, with or without
further use of Mind-Full. We will determine this, in part, by re-

127

Full Papers

IDC 2015 Medford, MA, USA

using commercial brain computer interfaces. In Proceedings
of Extended Abstracts of Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (Vancouver, Canada, May 07 - 12,
2011). ACM, New York, NY, 1681–1686.
[4] Gruzelier, J.H., Foks, M., Steffert,T., Chen, M.J.L. and Ross,
T. 2014. Beneficial outcome from EEG-neurofeedback on
creative music performance, attention and well-being in
school children. Biol. Psychol. 95 (January 2014), 86–95.
[5] Hammond. D.C. 2005. Neurofeedback treatment of
depression and anxiety. J. Adult Dev, 12, 2-3 (August 2005),
131–137.
[6] Huang, J., Yu, C., Wang, Y. 2014. FOCUS : Enhancing
children’s engagement in reading by using contextual BCI
training sessions. In Proceedings of Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (Toronto, Canada, April 26May 12, 2014). ACM, New York, NY, 1905–1908.
[7] Knox, M., Lentini, J., Cummings, T.S., McGrady, A.
Whearty, K., and Sancrant, L. 2011. Game-based
biofeedback for paediatric anxiety and depression. Mental
Health in Family Medicine, 8 (2011), 195–203.
[8] Lagopoulos, J., Xu, J., Rasmussen, I., Vik, A., Malhi, G. S.,
Eliassen, C. F., et al. 2009. Increased Theta and Alpha EEG
Activity During Nondirective Meditation. The Journal of
Alternative and Complementary Medicine, 15, 11 (2009),
1187–1192
[9] Lee, J., Semple, R.J., Rose, D. Miller, L. Mind-Fullnessbased cognitive therapy for children: Results of a pilot study,
Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy, 22, 1 (2008), 15-28.
[10] Lim, C. G., Lee, T. S., Guan, C., Fung, D. S., Cheung, Y. B.,
Teng, S., & Krishnan, K. 2010. Effectiveness of a braincomputer interface based programme for the treatment of
ADHD: A pilot study. Psychopharmacol Bull, 43, 1 (2010),
73-82.
[11] Pop-Jordanova N. and Gucev, Z. 2010. Game-based
peripheral biofeedback for stress assessment in children,
Pediatrics International, 52 (2010), 428–431.
[12] Randye J. Semple, Jennifer Lee, Dinelia Rosa, and Lisa F.
Miller. 2009. A randomized trial of mindfulness-based
cognitive therapy for children: Promoting mindful attention
to enhance social-emotional resiliency in children. J. Child
Fam. Stud. 19, 2 (August 2009), 218–229.
[13] Rebolledo-Mendez, G., Dunwell, I., Martínez-Mirón, E.A.,
et al. 2009. Assessing NeuroSky’s Usability to Detect
Attention Levels in an Assessment Exercise. In HumanComputer Interaction New Trends. J.A. Jacko, ed., Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 2009, 149–158.
[14] Reiner, R. 2008. Integrating a portable biofeedback device
into clinical practice for patients with anxiety disorders:
Results of pilot study, Appl Psychophysiol Biofeedback, 33
(2008) 55–61.
[15] Stinson, B. and Arthur, D. 2013. A novel EEG for alpha
brain state training, neurobiofeedback and behavior change.
Complementary Therapies in Clinical Practice, 19, 3 (2013),
114–118.
[16] Van der Oord, S., Bögels, S. M., and Peijnenburg, D. 2012.
The effectiveness of mindfulness training for children with
ADHD and mindful parenting for their parents. Journal of
Child and Family Studies, 21, 1 (2012), 139-147.
[17] Zelazo, P.D. and Lyons, K.E. 2011. Mindfulness training in
childhood, Human Development, 54, (2011) 61–65.

assessing the first group after another six weeks in which they did
not use Mind-Full. We are also interested in long-term
compliance and usage in the school. At this time, there is interest
by staff and children in continuing to use Mind-full in weekly
practice. This will help us determine if effects will continue to
improve, flatline or even drop off due to a novelty effect. It is
possible using Mind-Full was a good jump-start for children but
will not have a lasting effect. NF studies of adults (including
experts in meditation) suggest that NF mindful and/or mediation
practice can actually change the brain’s neural configuration. For
NHK children, this would mean that Mind-Full practice alongside
other therapeutic interventions mitigates the effects of trauma on
their brain development. Our full field study (12 weeks) and
continued longitudinal studies will assess this. This would be the
best case outcome, and we are currently analyzing brainwave data
to begin to assess this goal as well as organizing a longitudinal
study.

7. CONCLUSION
Access to education is not enough to ensure successful outcomes
for many children living in poverty. Children who have suffered
multiple traumas also need therapeutic interventions. In particular
they need to be able to self-regulate anxiety and attention in order
to learn. We designed and deployed an EEG-based NF system that
leverages young children’s familiarity with everyday actions that
can be used to support learning and practicing self-regulation of
anxiety and attention. The main outcome of our research was to
help children improve their ability to regulate anxiety, focus and
pay attention through daily practice Mind-Full. With only slight
adaptations, our games can be repurposed for other cultures and
contexts. Our games and laddering strategy (easy game first, then
harder games are released) could enable us to help children with
different levels of trauma overcome their challenges. The
technical system, at its simplest, combines a simple yet robust
commercial grade EEG headset with an Android tablet and costs
about $400 off the shelf – less than many cellular phones or
laptops. Our longer term goal is to develop a training program that
will involve the dissemination of additional systems in order to
work with more orphanages and schools throughout Nepal, and
eventually with children worldwide who have suffered complex
trauma. A successful strategy could be used to translate this
experience for individuals with different levels of trauma such as
child soldiers, children with chronic pain or children with ADHD.

8. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We gratefully acknowledge the NHK School community, the
student design team at SIAT and funders: GRAND NCE,
Microsoft, NSERC and SSHRC.

9. REFERENCES
[1] Crowley, K., Sliney, A., Pitt, I., and Murphy, D.2010.
Evaluating a brain-computer interface to categorize human
emotional response. In Proceedings of IEEE International
Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies (Sousse,
Tunisia, July 5-7, 2010). ICALT, 276–278
[2] Ducharme, P, Wharff, E., Hutchinson, E. Kahn, J. Logan, G.,
and Gonzalez-Heydrich, J. 2012. Videogame assisted
emotional regulation training: An ACT with RAGE-Control
case illustration. Clin Soc Work Journal, 40 (2012), 75–84.
[3] Grierson, M. and Kiefer, C. 2011. Better brain interfacing for
the masses: Progress in event-related potential detection

128

