Augment Hum Res (2017) 2:3
https://doi.org/10.1007/s41133-017-0005-3

ORIGINAL PAPER

Augmented Cognition via Brainwave Entrainment in Virtual
Reality: An Open, Integrated Brain Augmentation
in a Neuroscience System Approach
Emanuele Argento1 • George Papagiannakis1,2 • Eva Baka1,3 • Michail Maniadakis1
Panos Trahanias1,2 • Michael Sfakianakis4 • Ioannis Nestoros5

•

Received: 6 September 2016 / Accepted: 15 February 2017 / Published online: 28 February 2017
 Springer SBM Singapore Private Ltd. 2017

Abstract Building on augmented cognition theory and
technology, our novel contribution in this work enables
accelerated, certain brain functions related to task performance as well as their enhancement. We integrated in an
open-source framework, latest immersive virtual reality
(VR) head-mounted displays, with the Emotiv EPOC EEG
headset in an open neuro- and biofeedback system for cognitive state detection and augmentation. Our novel
methodology allows to significantly accelerate content presentation in immersive VR, while lowering brain frequency
at alpha level—without losing content retention by the user.
In our pilot experiments, we tested our innovative VR platform by presenting to N = 25 subjects a complex 3D maze
test and different learning procedures for them on how to exit
it. The subjects exposed to our VR-induced entrainment
learning technology performed significantly better than
those exposed to other ‘‘classical’’ learning procedures. In
particular, cognitive task performance augmentation was
measured for: learning time, complex navigational skills and
decision-making abilities, orientation ability.

& Eva Baka
eva.mpaka@gmail.com
1

Computational Vision and Robotics Laboratory, Institute of
Computer Science, Foundation for Research and Technology,
Heraklion, Greece

2

Department of Computer Science, University of Crete,
Heraklion, Greece

3

Department of Medicine, University of Greece, Heraklion,
Greece

4

Department of Business Administration, University of
Piraeus, Piraeus, Greece

5

Synchronal Amphiaraia, University of Crete Snip-off
Company, Athens, Greece

Keywords Augmented cognition  Brainwave
entrainment  Virtual reality platform  Technologyenhanced learning  Human–computer interaction 
Brain–computer interfaces

Introduction
The focus of augmented cognition systems is real-time
assisted human interaction with complex computer systems
based on biofeedback detection and manipulation [40]. The
efficacy of this scientific approach to human abilities
enhancement has been widely proved over more than a
decade of independent research at DARPA [34, 35, 41].
Even if we recognize the importance and utility of such
an approach in augmenting human cognition, there is
strong evidence as suggested in this paper that recent VRenabled technologies can enhance human performance
permanently and generally and not only—as augmented
cognition does—temporarily and in synergy with the
specific technology used at the moment of the human–
computer interaction. Neuro- and biofeedback training
systems also have been widely investigated, tested and
used as an effective method for cognitive, creative and
physical human enhancement in performance oriented
contexts [15, 16, 33, 42] but not extensively combined with
latest VR developments [8].
Our approach, while building upon the already rich
research on systems neuroscience, brain augmentation,
augmented cognition and Neurofeedback training, bridges
them for the first time into a novel integrated technology
via new interdisciplinary research that effectively combines neuroscience, computer science, engineering, psychology and education, in order to produce scientific
theories, methodologies and technological tools, aiming to

123

3 Page 2 of 14

enhance human skills, learning potential and intelligent
problem-solving abilities.
This paper is structured as following: ‘‘Materials and
Methods’’ section briefly describes our novel methodology
in the frame of augmented cognition concepts, while
‘‘Results of the Experiment’’ section explains in essence
why our approach is interesting and scientifically relevant.
‘‘Discussion’’ section describes our system with more
details as well as it describes our experiment and findings.
At the end, we draw some final conclusions and propose
future developments. The statistical significance of the
research might be arguable, as the experimental group was
limited to only 25 subjects, the experimental groups many
(5) and the experimental conditions complex (a complex
VR environment with many variables). Nevertheless, our
main objective is the practical realization of a ‘‘proof of
concept’’ which is by definition usually focused. The purpose of this preliminary prototype and research is to prove
a concept that the theoretical idea of fast learning and skills
enhancement in VR is—under the described certain conditions—feasible and has practical huge potential.

Materials and Methods
Our novel methodology uses an open virtual reality immersive platform (VR) as an auditory–visual interface. Through
manipulation of virtual space and time in VR, we embarked
on the ambitious research (with first promising results) on
how we can visually and auditory ‘‘download’’ learning
content to the brain, interactively, by varying in VR the speed
and spatial modality of content presentation. Such speed and
modality vary accordingly to a complex set of neuro- and
biofeedbacks, interactively detected, modified and optimized by our real-time system for Autonomous Cognitive
State Detection, Manipulation and Augmentation.
By applying our novel VR technology, we illustrate first
findings on how to significantly compress the time needed to
develop certain ability or absorb a certain knowledge (neuroadaptive accelerated learning), while at the same time permanently improving the performance for such skill or area of
knowledge (permanent enhancement of human cognition).
Hence, we aim to establish a novel research area of
augmented cognitive neuro- and biofeedback, where
adaptive, fast learning VR systems can be employed for
permanent and independent human cognitive enhancement.

Augment Hum Res (2017) 2:3

environment ever in history, influencing every single
aspect of human life. The main technological advancements in our Information Age that most require fast human
adaptation response are, among the others:
•

•

•

We do not simply need to adapt or learn something once
and for all, (as this ‘‘something’’ is always changing…). In
order to adapt to the Information Age, we need to rethink
the process of how to learn better and faster, or—in other
word—we need to become superfast learners, and apply
this ‘‘advanced learning technology’’ to a wide variety of
skills and problem-solving contexts.
Old and classical ways of learning (created before the
modern information Age) are no longer efficient in terms of
volume/quantity of transmitted knowledge and speed of
absorption we need nowadays [2].
Therefore, we developed a novel architecture for augmented cognition by integrating latest virtual reality (VR)
immersive head-mounted displays with mobile neuro- and
biofeedback systems for Real-time, Autonomous Cognitive
State Detection, Manipulation and Augmentation. We also
integrated in our open-source VR framework both experimental Oculus Rift HMDs and the Emotiv EPOC mobile
EEG headset (Fig. 1).
More specifically our novel VR platform for augmented
cognition consists of:
•

•

•

•
The Context and Need of Application of Our Novel
Technology
Exponentially growing advances in computational platforms advancement create the fastest changing

123

The technological singularity and the fast rise of strong
artificial intelligence that might potentially create the
need of augmented cognition human abilities of control
over AI [44].
Big data exponential development that might potentially create the necessity of autonomous human fast
decision skills in a complex digital interconnected
environment [19].
Fast adaptation and accelerated learning might become
increasingly intertwined and both essential in our
modern technological society [4].

A noninvasive neuro- and biofeedback systems for
Real-time, Autonomous Cognitive State Detection and
Manipulation;
Virtual immersive reality for content delivery, cognitive enhancement, active interaction and cognitive state
manipulation;
Open-source VR framework for real-time 3D content
delivery, fast and effective learning and human cognitive enhancement for memory, knowledge and skills;
A neuro- and biofeedback system that can regulate in
real-time content delivery and learning engines according to real-time cognitive state detection.

One of the most important ideas of our research is the
possibility of delivering at high-speed audiovisual content
for learning and cognitive enhancement purposes, without

Augment Hum Res (2017) 2:3

Page 3 of 14 3

Fig. 1 Overview of our novel,
open VR platform (top) with the
associated wearable h/w devices
(Oculus Rift HMD and Emotiv
EEG headset) worn by a subject
of our experiments (center,
bottom). A detailed description
of the class diagram of the VR
architecture is provided in
[23, 29, 30]

losing knowledge retention from the subject. In fact, while
a subject is immersed in VR, we can control the speed at
which content is presented, the same way we can manipulate the speed when we see a movie on a computer screen.
Our pilot experiment has shown that this strategy, when
applied in virtual reality and combined with cognitive state
detection and manipulation via audio rhythmic brain
stimulation, is highly effective in both reducing learning
time and improving performance at the same time. The
reason we think this is possible, and effective is inherent
with the concept itself of virtual reality.
Since content presented in a high realistic VR environment is the actual reality for the subject, accelerating
content presentation in VR is equivalent to ‘‘accelerating
speed of events in (virtual) reality.’’ By rephrasing Einsteinian relativistic concepts, we might say that the higher
the speed of events in VR, the slower the time flows in VR,
compared to the reality outside VR. By interconnecting VR
with a neuro- and biofeedback engine, we can create a
neuroadaptive content presentation technology that can
optimize and enhance the human ability of learning in
terms of time.
As time and space perception is actually a qualia, or a
subjective perception [11], we believe that by slowing

brainwave toward the alpha frequency—even if subjective
time perception in VR might not change in comparison
with normal reality time perception—events at higher
speed in VR can be effectively processed by the subject’s
brain for learning and cognitive enhancement purposes,
therefore making such processes faster.
Our pilot experiment does not only show that this is
possible, but also points out that accelerating events in VR
while slowing brainwaves toward the alpha frequency
creates a compound effect that makes the entrainment fast
learning process as effective as the normal learning (but
less time-consuming) and even much more effective for
direct and indirect cognitive and skill enhancement.
Slowing brainwaves toward the alpha frequency [38, 39]
can be done in different ways, ranging from invasive
chemical compounds, to transcranial electrical brain stimulation, to noninvasive audiovisual rhythmic stimulation
that can theoretically produce a phenomenon called:
‘‘brainwave entrainment.’’ Brainwave entrainment can be
achieved, in general, through photic or audio stimulation
and has an old story. In fact, the first known clinical
application belongs to the French psychologist Pierre Janet,
at the turn of the twentieth century, in the late 1800 s. A lot
of studies followed afterward by many well respected

123

3 Page 4 of 14

researchers such as Bartley [14], Goldman et al. [9], Jung
[17], Toman [33]. However, no one ever considered the
possible effects of a photic stimulation. Therefore, after the
initial demonstration of Berger [13] in 1934 on electrical
activity recorded from the human brain, Adrian and
Mathews [1] showed that the Berger rhythm, which means
alpha rhythm, could be further amplified by photic stimulation at the same frequency. In 1942, Dempsey and
Morison [7] found that brain entrainment could also be
induced by tactile stimulus and in 1959 Chaitran [7]
reported entrainment effects with an auditory stimulus.
Meanwhile, in 1956, Walter [43] published the results of
his researches on the emotional and phychological effects
of a flickering light stimulation. Flickering light produced
frequency-dependent sensations of pattern, movement and
color. The development of brain entrainment tools
increased greatly from 1973, with Oster’s result [28] which
evidenced the properties of binaural beats. Studies on the
effects of brain entrainment on situations like pain, headaches, migraines, anxiety and stress followed in the 1980s,
as well as the incorporation of specific devices which
directly allowed the achievement of an entrainment, such
as David Siever’s device [12]. This kind of researches
expanded in the 1990s to include learning and memory,
learning disabilities, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, behavioral problems and PMS [6, 11, 12, 21, 37].
At the moment, while investigating other options, for
our novel technology, we have chosen this method as it is
easy to implement and because there is enough scientific
research on the subject that proves its effectiveness [20].
The stimulus used was a simple isochronic tone, recorded
at a specific target frequency of 10 Hz on a mp3 file and
played into the ears of the subjects with normal/commercial earphones.

The Experiment
While the primary objective of our technology is human
cognition augmentation and improvement in task performance, we first employed our novel architecture to a
common orientation path-finding task and way-finding
problem-solving abilities in immersive VR with and
without audio rhythmic brain stimulation.
Our simple pilot experiment, used to test our idea, is
presented in this section.

General Overview and Description of the Experiment
The main idea of the experiment was to test the ability of a
subject to effectively learn how to get out of a maze in an
immersive VR environment.

123

Augment Hum Res (2017) 2:3

Different learning processes were implemented and
tested, in order to determine the most effective one for
learning and augmented cognition. The effectiveness of
each learning process was measured by the time needed by
the subject to reach a specific point (a landmark) in the
labyrinth, while trying to find its exit. Time to exit was also
measured and was used to evaluate the ability to perform
precise movements in the labyrinth and effectively recovering from accidental mistakes as indirect by-product of the
learning process.
N = 25 subjects (16 males and 9 females—age from 13
to 52) were equally divided into 5 experimental groups of 5
subjects each:
•
•
•
•
•

Control group (C-group);
Basic pre-task entrainment group (B-group);
Simple learning group (SL-group);
Entrainment learning group (E-group);
Entrainment fast learning group (EFL-group).

The mean age of each group was in the range 26–35.
Because 3D gaming experience and proficiency of each
subject could play an important role in the average performance of the group, all the participants were first asked
to self-evaluate their proficiency/experience in 3D gaming
on a scale from 0—no experience at all—to 5—maximum
possible experience level. Based on their self-evaluation,
the participants were then randomly assigned to one of the
5 experimental groups, in order to maintain the mean
proficiency/experience level of every group at a level of
2–2.5.
The experiment was a single blind one, where the
individual subjects did not know whether they were ‘‘test’’
subjects or members of an ‘‘experimental control’’ group.
All the participants were informed that their task was to
find the exit root from a labyrinth, presented to them in a
VR environment via Oculus Rift, in the shortest time
possible. All groups were given the exact same labyrinth.
In order to minimize anxiety during their performance, all
the participants were informed that their performance
would not be used to evaluate their intelligence or abilities
in any way but that the purpose of the experiment was
simply to measure EEG in different VR environments and
gaming situations.
Every subject participating to the experiment was first
presented with Tuscany, a well-known VR environment in
Oculus—in which he/she was asked to move around for
about 5 min, just to familiarize with 3D virtual reality in
Oculus and the navigation buttons. Navigation in VR, both
for ‘‘Tuscany’’ and the maze, was performed by using the
mouse for rotation and the keys (w-s-a-d) to move,
respectively, forward, backward, left and right, as in usual
3D video games. At the present stage of development, this
choice of navigation is the simplest possible in an

Augment Hum Res (2017) 2:3

experimental VR environment with Oculus Rift. Of course,
people accustomed to video games find this way (or any
other possible way of navigation) easier to use than people
with less experience and that is why each experimental
group has been balanced. Even though different subjects
might have different 3D-game experience, we managed to
have a roughly same average 3D game experience level of
each group. Moreover, Tuscany is an open environment (a
minimalist villa in a relaxing open garden). Due to such
openness, navigation inside Tuscany is quite easy. On the
contrary, a maze is a closed environment, with narrow
walls hindering freedom of movements; to make navigation in the labyrinth even more difficult, in the second half
of it (see why in the description of the labyrinth), by design
collision detection for the walls was not accurate. By
choosing such open environment as ‘‘familiarization’’ for
all the experimental subjects, we avoided mixing the
familiarization procedure with actual training for the
labyrinth. This helped in establishing a better baseline for
the entire experiment.
The maze was built in order to present a moderate level of
difficulty to reach the exit. Two landmarks were put in the
labyrinth: one at one-third of the maze, one to mark the exit.
The first part of the maze—till the first landmark—was
actually the part involving decisions on the correct route to
take. The second part of the maze—after the first landmark—
was actually straightforward, with just one single possible
path to follow till the exit of the labyrinth. By design, collision detection of the walls throughout the entire second part
of the maze was incorrect: In fact on some points, the walls
were either sticky or it was possible passing through them.
This created for the participants serious navigational challenges that had nothing do to with the previous learning
process in itself, but with the ability to perform precise
movements in the labyrinth and effectively recovering from
accidental mistakes. We decided to have ‘‘anomalous’’ collision detection issues after the path planning part of the
maze especially and purposely to experimentally reverse a
classical situation where the latter is usually considered
when the first one is ‘‘solved.’’ In fact the collision problems
of the first part of the maze are those normally found in a
‘‘normal’’ 3D game, where the player is simply trying to
avoid hitting walls and find his/her way out of the maze. On
the contrary, the collision problems of the second part of the
maze are ‘‘anomalous’’ due to the purposely creation and
implementation of walls that are semi-permeable and
‘‘sticky’’ (not as real wall would be). When the player by
mistake ‘‘hits’’ those semi-permeable and ‘‘sticky’’ walls, he/
she is partially ‘‘captured’’ inside the wall: The player has to
perform exact precise movements to get free of the wall and
continue on his/her path to the exit. Because of this especially
difficult wall structure (only possible to create in a virtual 3D
environment and not in a real world where wall are not

Page 5 of 14 3

permeable nor sticky), and because the second part of the
maze is just one-way to the exit, the only parameter actually
measured by the time needed to get to the exit in the second
part of the maze is the ability to accurately navigate and
effectively recover from mistakes.
Therefore, the effectiveness of the different learning
processes (see following description of the experimental
groups) could only be evaluated by the time needed to
reach the first landmark, while final exit time (or better the
delta between final exit time and time to first landmark)
could be used to evaluate ability to perform precise
movements in the labyrinth and effectively recovering
from accidental mistakes.
The learning process was basically having all the subjects watching passively a first-person camera flying
through the labyrinth from the entrance directly to the exit,
through the only possible path. We had 2 possible
speed/duration times for a single fly-through: the normal
speed where a single fly-through would take approximately
1 min and 45 s and the fast speed where a single flythrough would take approximately 50 s.
During the learning session, we presented each subject
with 3 fly-throughs. The SL-group and EL-group were
presented with fly-throughs at normal speed. The EFLgroup was presented with fly-throughs at fast speed. The
B-, EL- and EFL-groups were also administrated with
rhythmic brain stimulation before the learning session.
Audio rhythmic stimulation was performed by presenting the subjects via headphones with a continuous audio
impulse at a frequency of 10 Hz. At the same time, a
relaxing environment in VR was presented in Oculus VR.
The relaxing VR environment was the same for all the
participants undergoing this procedure.
After that, and only for the subjects in the EL- and
EFL-groups, the rhythmic brain stimulation was again presented at the same frequency of 10 Hz via headphones, while
this time undergoes the learning phase. The C- and SL-groups
were not presented with any audio rhythmic stimulation.
The C-group after the familiarization procedure was
simply administrated the labyrinth test. The time needed
for each of the experimental subject in this group to find the
halfway mark and exit the maze was then recorded; then,
the mean value of the group calculated to determine a base
line for our experiment.
The B-group after the familiarization procedure was first
administrated with 15 min of audiovisual rhythmic brain
stimulation in the relaxing VR environment mentioned
before, at 10 Hz frequency. Then, the test was administrated. The time needed of the participants to find the
halfway mark and exit the maze was then recorded; then,
the mean value of the group was calculated to measure the
effectiveness of rhythmic brain stimulation alone on the
labyrinth task (Table 1).

123

3 Page 6 of 14
Table 1 Characteristics for
each group

Augment Hum Res (2017) 2:3

Group name

Task
Familiarization

C

4

B

4

SL

4

EL

4

4

EFL

4

4

The SL-group—or the ‘‘second control group’’—after
the familiarization procedure watched a learning video at
normal speed, presented 3 times. The labyrinth test was
then administrated to the SL-subjects. The time needed for
each of them to find the halfway mark and exit the maze
was then recorded as well, and the mean value was used to
evaluate the effectiveness of a simple learning process (at
normal speed and without rhythmic brain stimulation) in
order to have a second base life by confronting this classical learning procedure with the EL and EFL procedures.
The EL-group after the familiarization procedure was first
administrated with 15 min of audio rhythmic brain stimulation in the relaxing VR environment at 10 Hz frequency,
followed by a learning video at normal speed presented 3
times with embedded audio rhythmic brain stimulation.
Finally, the labyrinth test was administrated to the EL-group
and the time needed for each of the experimental subject in this
group to find the halfway mark and exit the maze was then
recorded. The mean calculated value of all the subjects of the
group was used to evaluate the effectiveness of rhythmic brain
stimulation and learning at normal speed in the labyrinth task.
The EFL-group, like the EL-group, was first administrated with 15 min of audio rhythmic brain stimulation in
the relaxing VR environment at 10 Hz frequency. After
that, a learning video at fast speed was presented 3 times
with embedded audio rhythmic brain stimulation. Finally,
the labyrinth test was administrated to the EFL-group. The
time needed for each of the experimental subject in this
group to find the halfway mark and exit the maze was then
recorded, so that the mean value was calculated to evaluate
the effectiveness of rhythmic brain stimulation and timecompressed learning (fast speed) on the labyrinth task.
For all the groups, if time spent in the labyrinth (without
finding the exit or the halfway landmark) was more than
6 min then the experiment was interrupted and no exit or
halfway landmark time was recorded (see sections:
‘‘Statistics’’ and ‘‘Results’’ for more details on how those
special cases where treated).
Signal Processing Procedure
After having recorded the EEG data, EEGlab and NBT
were used for signal processing and data analysis. EEGlab,

123

Relaxation

Learning

Fast learning

Maze
4

4

4
4

4

4

4
4

4

as well as NBT, is a toolbox and graphic user interface,
running on top of the MATLAB environment, developed
for processing collections of single—trial and/or averaged
EEG data of any number of channels [9, 10].
To filter the data as well as clean them from any possible
artifacts, the preprocessing tools were employed, offered
by both EEGlab and NBT [9] since sampling of the data
lead to aliasing. In general, for being able to eliminate this
aliasing process, it is suggested in the bibliography that the
data should be low-pass filtered at frequencies at least onethird lower than the sampling rate [3, 7]. Given that in our
case the sampling rate was 128 Hz, we used a basic FIR
filter with the lower edge of the frequency at 45 Hz and the
higher one at 55 Hz.
To clean the data, we removed further artifacts induced
by eye blinking and abrupt head or body movements
throughout the entire process. The Emotiv headset allowed
every participant to move freely in every direction, but this
caused most of the times unavoidable artifacts. Given the
purpose of our study, those movements could not be
eliminated at their entirety. For an efficient and a more
promising cleaning, we, sometimes had also to reject a
number of erroneous channels, marked as such by the
toolkits.
In addition, we run ICA for data decomposition, which
helped us with the further EEG processing. In this case,
EEGlab offered the most reliable results composed of 14
components, as the exact number of the channels used.
Subsequently, examining components activation and their
maps, we removed the erroneous components.
Through this procedure, we were able to determine the
frequencies that corresponded to the microvolts we recorded with the Emotiv headset throughout the experiment. At
the end, it allowed us to plot either the spectrum of each
channel or the one of the whole signal and the activity of
each channel in relation to the proportional brain activity
area.
We used the Emotiv headset because it is a low-cost and
high-quality EEG technology. Researchers do not all agree
on the reliability of the Emotiv EPOC headset for complex
tasks like—for example—rehabilitation or prosthesis control, but for simple noncritical applications such as games
and communication systems, ‘‘this low-cost headset is able

Augment Hum Res (2017) 2:3

Page 7 of 14 3

to record EEG data in a satisfying manner’’ [12]. As previously explained in this section, we relied on postrecording accurate EEG data processing to compensate for
possible real-time inaccurate readings of the Emotiv
headset.
Statistics
Data are expressed as mean values ± 1 SD. Analysis of
variance combined with multiple range analysis according
to Fisher’s least significant difference (LSD) procedure or
Kruskal–Wallis test combined with Box-and-Whisker Plot
(median notch option) was used as appropriate. A p value
of less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

Results of the Experiment
The following table summarizes the experimental results in
terms of performance in the labyrinth task and learning
time.
Analysis and discussion of those results are presented in
the next paragraph.
In Table 2, ‘‘n.a.’’ (not applicable) means that the time
needed to exit the labyrinth exceeded the time limit of
6 min and was considered as ‘‘missing variables’’ in the
statistical analysis. Thus, the EL-group in the TOT variable
(total time to exit) participates with only 3 values and the B
group with only 1 value and hence we do not allocate to B
group the mean values or participate in the ANOVA
analysis regarding the TOT variable but only the T1 (average time to halfway mark) (Fig. 2).
•

Meaning of the Delta (difference between the halfway
mark time and the exit time in seconds)

We remind the reader that—by design—from the halfway mark to the exit there are no choices to make, it is
simply one-way to the end. We remind the reader also that

the learning phase has only to do with showing, to a passive
subject, the path to the exit and has nothing to do with
actual practice in the labyrinth (see also consideration
about the familiarization phase). So we can consider the
difference between the halfway mark time and the exit time
(the delta) as a possible measure of the ability of a subject
to perform precise movements in the labyrinth and effectively recovering from accidental mistakes (precision and
recovery ability).
Concerning EEG analysis for C-group, the obtained
results were within a range of frequencies from about 11 to
17 Hz. There were no big differences between the familiarization and maze tasks, which means that participants
almost maintained their primary frequency throughout the
procedure. If, for example, the power spectrum of a participant presented peak at about 17 Hz in the familiarization task, then, in the maze task, the frequency will peak at
almost 16 Hz. We noticed though that at certain occasions,
in the familiarization task, there were multiple peaks for
the same spectrum, but usually concerning the same
brainwave state, which in our case was alpha or lower beta
(Fig. 3).
In the basic entrainment group (B), we found similar
results concerning the familiarization task. The power
spectrum presented an average peak at 15 Hz. After having
applied brainwave entrainment through the use of the isochronic beat mentioned before, we noticed changes in the
associated EEG data. The spectrum peaked at 11–12 Hz,
and we were able to verify this result through the spectrum
plot given by EEGlab and NBT and through the activity of
each channel individually.
In Fig. 4, we are able to see the power spectrum of an
individual channel and, also, its activity. The colors on top
present this activity based on each color, as we mentioned
before for the scalp map. The red one witnesses the highest
possible activity of the specific brain area in the indicated
frequency. Near this box, there is a scale for deciphering
the mean of each color. The graph below presents the

Table 2 Results per experiment group
Experimental group
ID

Average 3D gaming
experience

Average
age

C

2.25

28.25

Average time to halfway mark (T1)

Average time to exit
(TOT)

Delta
191.25 s

35.50 s

226.75 s

r = 4.80

r = 4.72

r = 3.72

168.00 s

n.a.

n.a.

B

2.25

32.75

r = 4.65

[6 min

SL

2.375

34.75

25.25 s

102 s

r = 1.71

r = 1.83

r = 1.82

EL

2.125

29.5

23.50 s

69.6 s

46.10

r = 2.38

r = 2.52

r = 2.12

EFL

2.375

26.5

15.25 s

74.75 s

59.50

r = 1.50

r = 2.06

r = 1.89

76.75 s

123

3 Page 8 of 14

Augment Hum Res (2017) 2:3

Fig. 2 Histogram showing the
differences of T1 time
according to each group

participants, throughout this task, presented a peak at
11.5 Hz, which is clearly an alpha state (Fig. 5).
In the relaxation task, the participants of EL-group
managed to find themselves slightly in a lower range of
frequency peaking at 10 Hz. During the next task of
learning, the peak of the frequency was almost maintained
at 10–11 Hz (Fig. 6).
Figures 7, 8, 9 present a complete image of the relaxation task of EFL-group, using both EEGlab and NBT. It is
clearly indicated that the frequency has been maintained at
10 Hz, as it was in the previous task of familiarization.
During the next tasks, we observed a range of frequencies
from 8 to 12 Hz.

Fig. 3 Power spectrum for familiarization task in C-group using
EEGLab. The several colored lines show the respective channels. The
scalp map indicates the activity of the specific frequency in different
brain areas. The red color represents the maximum intense activity
(C-group—familiarization task)

power spectrum of the specific channel, and we are clearly
able to see that, in this example, frequency peaks at 12 Hz.
Finally, the dots in the right present the position of each
channel on the scalp.
In the familiarization task of SL-group, we observed
almost the same results, with an average spectrum peak at
12 Hz. In this group, there was no relaxation task, so the
procedure proceeds with the simply learning task. All the

123

Analysis of the Experimental Results
Various studies and research experiments have been conducted on the effects of audiovisual rhythmic stimulation at
alpha frequency on EEG and performance [14, 15, 17, 45].
Some studies also have also shown changes in brainwaves toward the alpha frequency after exposure to television [24] and video games [32], and others have proved
that subjects showing alpha frequency brainwave dominance learn faster while playing a video game developed
for cognitive research [26].
Lastly, a series of studies have demonstrated that Zen
meditation (Zazen) [22] and nondirective meditation [25]

Augment Hum Res (2017) 2:3

Page 9 of 14 3

Fig. 4 Example of an individual channel from the right hemisphere
of the brain. The colors on the top represent the activity of the specific
brain area where the electrode was placed. The graph below witnesses

the power spectrum, and the dots in the right show the position of
each electrode on the scalp (B-group—relaxation task)

Fig. 5 Power spectrum plot for simple learning task in SL-group
using NBT. We can witness that frequency peaks at 11–12 Hz. The
different colored lines show the respective channel (SL-group—
simple learning task NBT)

Fig. 6 Power spectrum plot for learning task in EL-group using
NBT. We can witness the frequency peak at 11 Hz. The colored lines
indicate the different channels (EL-group—learning task NBT)

are characterized by alpha frequency on EEG with eyes
open, while the deep relaxation coexists with both an
increased internalized attention and an increased awareness
of the environment.

After having obtained the recorded EEG raw data from
the Emotiv headset, we used EEGlab and NBT to remove
possible artifacts and then to analyze and process the raw
signals into a clean signal.
Our results clearly show that rhythmic audiovisual
stimulation and relaxation in VR elicits in the subjects of

123

3 Page 10 of 14

Fig. 7 Power spectrum plot for relaxation task in EFL-group using
EEGlab. We witness that frequency peaks at 10 Hz. The activity in
the brain during this frequency is shown via the scalp map above the
graph (EFL-group—relaxation task EEGlab)

Fig. 8 Power spectrum plot for relaxation task in EFL-group using
NBT. We can clearly witness the peak at 10 Hz. (EFL-group—
relaxation task NBT)

the B, the EL and EFL-groups an increase in alpha brain
waves (8–12 Hz). From our analysis, we also noticed in
those subjects a significant presence of brainwaves in the
delta range.
As rhythmic audio stimulation is what differentiates the
SL- from the EL-group, and since the EL- and EFL-groups
performed better in the labyrinth task than all the other
groups (as we predicted in our theoretical model), we are
prone to think that increase in alpha and delta brain waves
is a key factor if we want to accelerate content presentation
in VR for fast learning purpose.
Let’s now discuss the experimental results presented in
the Table 2 from the viewpoint of time related
performance.

123

Augment Hum Res (2017) 2:3

The first interesting result regards the effect—on the
performance in the immediately subsequent labyrinth
test—of rhythmic brain stimulation (entrainment) combined with the presentation of a relaxing environment in
Oculus VR. We remind the reader that the B-group did not
receive any form of learning. Previous researches seem to
indicate that, in general, rhythmic brain stimulation alone
can help learning and performance, if such performance
involves aspects of creativity in a relaxed free-of-pressure
artistic environment, speed of execution is not a relevant
factor and tasks are not cognitively complex. If that can be
true under certain conditions, our experiment clearly
showed that rhythmic brain stimulation immediately before
a cognitive complex orientation performance, where time
is a critical factor, is not the best choice. In fact three of the
subjects in the B-group could not complete the labyrinth
task under the time limit of 6 min, while the C-group could
in less than 4 min.
The above findings can be related to the nature of our
experiment. Finding the halfway landmark and especially
passing through the second part of the labyrinth, without
previous knowledge of the passage from entrance to exit,
were stressful situations eliciting the fight-flight response
requiring hyper vigilance and increased sympathetic tone
as well as increased muscle tone, according to the bodily
changes described by Cannon [5] and Selye [36]. Deep
relaxation, that is, ataraxia or the absence of anxiety [27],
naturally decreases performance in the above tasks,
because this condition is the opposite of stress.
As shown in Fig. 2, the time for all the subjects of the B
group to find the halfway landmark was almost 5 times
more than the control group, and 11 times more than the
best performing group, the Entrainment Fast learning one,
where rhythmic brain stimulation was also combined with
a learning session at high speed.
Those results are too significant in size and consistency
to be just a coincidence: They seem to clearly indicate that
rhythmic brain stimulation at alpha frequency (10 Hz) and
relaxation in VR is highly counterproductive if immediately after that the subject has to perform a complex
operational task (especially when it involves real or
imaginary motor movements)—where completion time is a
significant factor creating stress.
Concerning SL- and EL-groups, we observe an interesting result. In both groups, training happened at normal
speed. The only difference in experimental conditions is
the presence of relaxation, in EL-group, in Oculus VR plus
audio rhythmic brain stimulation, which are not present as
conditions in the SL-group. Obviously both groups performed better than the C-group and the B-group, because
the learning process of the subject, watching passively a
first-person camera flying through the labyrinth from the
entrance directly to the exit, had a significant positive

Augment Hum Res (2017) 2:3

Page 11 of 14 3

Fig. 9 Example of an individual channel from the right hemisphere
of the brain in EFL-group using NBT. The colors on the top represent
the activity of the specific brain area where the electrode was placed.
The more intense the red color, the more intense the activity. The

graph below witnesses the power spectrum, and the dots in the right
show the position of each electrode on the scalp (EFL-group—
relaxation task NBT)

effect on performance by reducing cognitive anxiety [18].
But among them, for SL- and EL-groups no significant
difference was recorded in time to halfway landmark,
which is the actual measure of effectiveness of learning
procedure. EL-group, however, exhibited significantly
lower time to pass through the stressful second part of the
labyrinth, suggesting that the knowledge of how to pass
through the labyrinth from the entrance directly to the exit
(reducing cognitive anxiety) coupled with the induction of
alpha rhythm (reducing arousal) increased the performance
under stress [18].
So, as expected, it appears that relaxation/lowering
brainwave frequency toward the alpha range and learning
session at normal speed do not improve significantly the
effectiveness of the learning process. If we consider on the
other hand the EFL-group, which differs from the ELgroup only in the speed of content presentation in the
learning phase, the results are quite different. In fact, the
EFL-group performed to the halfway mark in average far
better than the EL-group and SL-group, which even on
already very fast performance of EL is a very significant
improvement. When we compare the results of the SLgroup with those of the EL- and EFL-group, the

experimental findings confirm our research hypothesis that
rhythmic brain stimulation and relaxation before a training
session at an accelerated speed are a winning combination
to produce the best result in direct learning and human
enhancement.
Indirect learning of certain ability is the process where
we learn how to develop such ability without undergoing
any form of direct learning related specifically to that
ability. In contrast direct learning is any kind of structured
learning specifically related to that specific ability. A very
interesting result has to do with the effect on indirect
learning of our combined audio rhythmic brain stimulation
and fast content presentation in VR. From our experimental
results, it seems that not only such combination is effective
for direct learning (as measured by time to landmark in the
labyrinth test), but also very effective in indirect learning,
and specifically on the ability we previously called: ‘‘precision and recovery.’’ In the C-group, the difference
between the halfway mark time and the exit time (the
Delta) is around 191 s and that is our baseline. In the
B-group, the rhythmic brain stimulation and the relaxation
in VR seem to have completely compromised that ‘‘precision and recovery’’ ability naturally present in the

123

3 Page 12 of 14
Table 3 Summary of statistics
for data variables T1 and TOT

Augment Hum Res (2017) 2:3

Group code

T1
Average

Standard deviation

Average

Standard deviation

C

35.5

4.79583

226.75

4.71699

B

133.25

4.64579

–

–

SL

25.25

1.70783

102.0

1.82574

EL

23.5

2.38048

69.3333

2.51661

EFL

15.25

1.5

74.75

2.06155

C-group: All the B-group subjects could find the halfway
mark (but it took them much more than the C-group), but
got lost in the second half of the labyrinth, where the only
simple thing to do was to follow the only way till the exit.
In the SL-group, even though the orientation learning had
nothing to do with ‘‘precision and recovery,’’ that ability
was indirectly and significantly improved. A better result
was in the EL-group, where learning at normal speed was
combined with rhythmic brain stimulation and the relaxation in VR. In EL-group, the delta was more than 4 times
less than the control group, and more than 1.5 time that of
the SL-group. So, it seems that—in this case—it is actually
the combination of learning and rhythmic brain stimulation
and relaxation in VR that indirectly but significantly
improved the ability of a subject to perform precise
movements in the labyrinth and effectively recovering
from accidental mistakes. The EFL-group performed
slightly worse than the EL-group only because a single
subject in the EFL-group performed terribly in the second
half of the labyrinth. If we remove that subject from the
EFL-group, average time to exit of that group decreases to
57.6 s (which is an improvement respect to the exit time of
EL-Group) and the delta of EFL-group become about 42 s,
even better than the EL-group. So, also for indirect learning
the EFL-group performed better than the other groups.
Finally, there is a possibility that the EFL-group performed better than the other groups, because the ‘‘peripheral route’’ according to the [31] communication model
was activated in this group. Thus, when the learning video
at fast speed was presented, information was passed
directly to the right hemisphere, which is involved in
spatial perception and navigation through the labyrinth [40]
without the subject’s careful and thoughtful consideration
of the information presented.
Let T1 be ‘‘time to halfway mark in the maze’’ and
TOT = total time to exit. Regarding TOT, the B group was
not part of this statistical analysis as 3 B-subjects out of 4
did not complete the labyrinth task within the 6-min time
limit. One subject also of the EL-group did not complete
the labyrinth task within the 6-minute time limit. For this
reason, and because the n.a. values were dealt with as
‘‘missing values,’’ the B group regarding TOT was not part
of the ANOVA calculation. Results of the statistical

123

TOT

analysis for the data variables T1 and TOT are illustrated in
Table 3.
There is a statistically significant difference between the
mean T1 from one level of code to another (p \ 0.01).
Four homogeneous groups are identified (1. EFL, 2. EL
together with SL, 3. C and 4. B, respectively). Here EFL
constitutes by itself a homogeneous group characterized by
the shortest time interval, it is followed by EL together
with SL and then the final two (C and B).
Finally, there is a statistically significant difference
between the mean TOS from one level of code to another
(p \ 0.01). Three homogeneous groups are identified (1.
EL together with EFL, 2. SL and 3. C, respectively). Here
EL together with EFL constitute together a homogeneous
group characterized by the shortest time interval, followed
by SL- and finally the C-group (the B-group does not
participate here as explained before) (Table 4).
In conclusion, the best performing group in the labyrinth
test was the EFL-group, considering both the direct
effectiveness of learning in exiting the maze, and the
indirect effectiveness of learning in increasing the ability to
perform precise movements in the labyrinth and effectively
recovering from accidental mistakes while doing so. This
fact was scientifically proven by the statistics as illustrated
in the previous sections.

Table 4 Significant differences between groups according to
ANOVA test using multiple range tests for T1
Groups contrast

Sig.

Difference

C–B

*

-97.75

5.0176

C–SL

*

10.25

5.0176

C–EL

*

12.0

5.0176

C–EFL

*

20.25

5.0176

B–SL

*

108.0

5.0176

B–EF

*

109.75

5.0176

B–EFL

*

118.0

5.0176

SL–EF

1.75

SL–EFL

*

EF–EFL

*

10.0
8.25

±Limits

5.0176
5.0176
5.0176

* denotes a statistically significant difference at the 95% confidence
level

Augment Hum Res (2017) 2:3

Considering that the learning time for the subject in the
EFL-group was nearly half of the learning time spent by
the other learning group (SL and EL-group), this result
seems to indicate that audio rhythmic stimulation at alpha
frequency combined with fast content presentation in VR is
the most effective tool for learning and human enhancement, at least in the context of our experiment. Further
research and experiments are necessary to determine upper
limits of the effectiveness of this procedure and for which
area of human enhancement this procedure is applicable. If
those findings could be vastly applied, and learning time
could be reduced to half for a large number of applications,
the impact on education and human evolution could be
measurably substantial.
The statistical significance of the research might be
arguable, as the experimental group was limited to only 25
subjects, the experimental groups many (5) and the
experimental conditions were complex (a complex VR
environment with many variables). Nevertheless, our main
objective is the practical realization of a ‘‘proof of concept.’’ The purpose of this preliminary prototype and
research is to prove a concept that the theoretical idea of
fast learning in VR is—under certain conditions—indeed
feasible and has important practical potential.

Discussion
The experimental findings in our research indicate that
neuro- and biofeedback systems for Real-time, Autonomous Cognitive State Detection, Manipulation and Augmentation, audiovisual rhythmic brain stimulation can be
combined with increased speed in content presentation and
retention in latest virtual reality (VR) immersive headmounted displays. This approach seems to be the most
appropriate strategy to improve particular learning and
problem-solving abilities related to the presented experimental conditions. This work also illustrates that—under
certain conditions—learning time can be drastically
reduced at least to the half by utilizing audiovisual rhythmic brain stimulation and immersive VR, while at the same
time increasing task performance. Further research and
experiments are needed to establish into what extent and in
which areas of human performance our novel architecture
for augmented cognition can be effectively used to improve
general human learning and problem-solving abilities.
Areas of future-related research are:
•

Integrating more complex neuro- and biofeedback
measurement for effective Real-time, Autonomous
Cognitive State Detection, Manipulation and Augmentation to increase speed of learning and performance
enhancement;

Page 13 of 14 3

•

•

•

•

Experimentally and theoretically establish the limits to
which it is possible—by utilizing our novel architecture
for augmented cognition—to reduce learning time
while at the same time increasing learning effectiveness
and problem-solving abilities in different contexts;
Define maximum possible variable speed of content
presentation in VR so that the subject’s brain can still
effectively process them;
Define the best complex cognitive state, related to and
measurable by integrated neuro- and biomarkers to
improve learning, problem-solving abilities and
performance.
Investigating and developing fast learning tools for a
wide variety of skill and bodies of knowledge that uses
content presentation in VR adapting real-time to neuroand biological condition of the subject

Acknowledgements The research leading to these results has
received funding from the EU FET Proactive grant TIMESTORM—
Mind and Time: Investigation of the Temporal Traits of Human–
Machine Convergence, funded under H2020-EU.1.2.2.-FET Proactive, with reference 641100.

References
1. Adrian E, Matthews B (1934) The Berger rhythm: potential
changes from the occipital lobes in man. Brain 57:355–384
2. Beller M, Or E (1998) The crossroads between lifelong learning
and information technology a challenge facing leading universities. J Comput-Med Commun 4(2). doi:10.1111/j.1083-6101.
1998.tb00094.x
3. Bilinskis I (2007) Digital alias—free signal processing, pp 14–17
and 71–76. ISBN 978-0-470-02738-7
4. Bostrom N (2002) Existential risks: analyzing human extinction
scenarios and related hazards. J Evol Technol 9(1):1–30
5. Cannon WB (1915) Bodily changes in pain, hunger, fear and
rage: an account of recent researches into the function of emotional excitement. Appleton-Century-Crofts, New York
6. Casciaro F, Laterza V, Conte S, Pieralice M, Federici A,
Todarello A, Orsucci F, Conte E (2013) Alpha-rhythm stimulation using brain entrainment enhances heart rate variability in
subjects with reduced HRV. World J Neurosci 3(4):213–220
7. Chaitran G, Petersen M, Lazarte J (1959) Response to clicks from
the human brain: Some depth electrographic observations. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 12:479–489
8. Crow FC (1987) The aliasing problem in computer-generated
shaded images. Mag Commun ACM 20:799–805
9. Dempsey E, Morison R (1942) The interaction of certain spontaneous and induced cortical potentials. Am J Physiol
135:301–307
10. Delorme A, Makeig S (2004) EEGLAB: an open source toolbox
for analysis of single trial EEG dynamics including independent
component analysis. J Neurosci Methods 134(1):9–21
11. Dennet CD, Kinsbourne D (1992) Time and the observer: the
where and when of consciousness in the brain. Behav Brain Sci
15(2):183–201
12. Duvinage M, Castermans T, Petieau M, Hoellinger T, Cheron G,
Dutoit T (2013) Performance of the Emotiv Epoc headset for

123

3 Page 14 of 14

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.
19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.
25.

26.

P300-based applications. BioMed Eng OnLine 12:56. doi:10.
1186/1475-925X-12-56
Goldman G, Segal J, Segalis M (1938) L’action d’une excitation
inermittente sur le rythme de Berger (The effects of intermittent
excitation on the Berger rhythms), vol 127. C.R Societe de
Biologie, Paris, pp 1217–1220
Gruzelier JH (2008) A theory of alpha/theta neurofeedback,
creative performance enhancement, long distance functional
connectivity and psychological. Cogn Process. doi:10.1007/
s10339-008-0248-5
Gruzelier J, Inoue A, Smart R, Steed A, Steffert T (2010) Acting
performance and flow state enhanced with sensory-motor rhythm
neurofeedback comparing ecologically valid immersive VR and
training screen scenarios. Neurosci Lett 480(2):112–116
Gruzelier JH, Foks M, Steffert T, Chen MJL, Ros T (2014)
Beneficial outcome from EEG-neurofeedback on creative music
performance, attention and well-being in school children. Biol
Psychol 95:86–95
Gruzelier JH, Thompson T, Redding E, Brandt R, Steffert T
(2013) Application of Alpha/Theta neurofeedback and heart rate
variability training to young contemporary dancers (State anxiety
and creativity). Int J Psychophysiol 93(1):105–111
Hardy L, Parfitt G (1991) A catastrophe model of anxiety and
performance. Br J Psychol 82(2):163–178
Hilbert M, López, P (2011) The world’s technological capacity to
store, communicate, and compute information. Science
332(6025):60–65. doi:10.1126/science.1200970. PMID 21310967
Huang TL, Charyton C (2008) A comprehensive review of the
psychological effects of brainwave entrainment. Altern Ther
Health Med 14(5):38–49
Jung R (1973) Das Elektroencephalogram und seine klinische
Anwendung, (The electroencephalogram ans its clinical application. Nervenarzt 12:569–591
Kasamatsu KH, Hirai T (1996) An electroencephalographic study
on the zen meditation (Zazen). Folia Psychiatrica et Neurologica
Japonica 20(4):315–336
Kateros S, Georgiou S, Papaefthymiou M, Papagiannakis G,
Tsioumas M (2015) A Comparison of gamified, immersive VR
curation methods for enhanced presence and human-computer
interaction in digital humanities. Int J Heritage Digit Era
4(2):221–234. doi:10.1260/2047-4970.4.2.221
Krugman HE, Hartley EL (1970) Passive learning from television. Oxford J 34:184–190
Lagopoulos J, Xu J, Rasmussen I, Vik A, Malhi GS, Eliassen CF,
Arntsen IE, Saether JG, Hollup S, Holen A, Davanger S,
Ellingsen Ø (2009) Increased theta and alpha EEG activity during
nondirective meditation. J Altern Complement Med
15(11):1187–1192
Mathewson KE, Basak C, Maclin EL, Low KA, Boot WR,
Kramer AF, Fabiani M, Gratton G (2012) Different slopes for
different folks: alpha and Beta EEG power predict subsequent
video game learning rate and secondary task improvement. Psychophysiology 49:1558–1570

123

Augment Hum Res (2017) 2:3
27. Nestoros JN (1984) GABAergic mechanisms and anxiety: an
overview and a new neurophysiological model. Can J Psychiatry
28(6):520–529
28. Oster G (1973) Auditory beats in the brain. Sci Am 4:94–102
29. Papaefthymiou M, Feng A, Shapiro A, Papagiannakis G (2015) A
fast and robust pipeline for populating mobile AR scenes with
gamified virtual characters. In: ACM SIGGRAPH-ASIA 2015,
symposium on mobile graphics and interactive applications,
Kobe. ACM Press
30. Papagiannakis G, Papanikolaou P, Greassidou E, Trahanias PE
(2014) glGA: an OpenGL geometric application framework for a
modern, shader-based computer graphics curriculum, eurographics. Edu Pap 2014:9–16
31. Petty RE, Cacioppo JT (1986) Communication and persuasion:
central and peripheral routes to attitude change. New York, NY:
Springer
32. Schier MA (2000) Changes in EEG alpha power during simulated
driving: a demonstration. Int J Psychophysiol 37(2):155–162
33. Schmorrow D (2014) Augmented cognition: achieving human
computer symbiosis with 21st century human factors tools,
Tutorial notes. HCI International, Heraklion
34. Schmorrow D, Kruse A (2002) DARPA’s Augmented Cognition
Program-tomorrow’s human computer interaction from vision to
reality: building cognitively aware computational systems. Hum
Factors Power Plants 1:4. doi:10.1109/HFPP.2002.1042859
35. Schmorrow D, John StM, Kobus DA, Morrison JG (2004)
Overview of the DARPA augmented cognition technical integration experiment. Int J Hum-Comput Interact 17(2):131–149
36. Selye H (1955) Stress and disease. Science 22(3171):625–631
37. Siever D (2003) Audio-visual entrainment: history and physiological mechanisms. Biofeedback 31:21–27
38. Stanney KM, Schmorrow DD, Johnston M, Fuchs S, Jones D,
Hale KS, Ahmad A, Young P (2009) Rev Hum Factors Ergon
5(1):195–224
39. Toman J (1941) Flicker potentials and the alpha rhythm in man.
J Neurophysiol 4:51–61
40. Toga AW, Thompson PM (2003) Mapping brain asymmetry. Nat
Rev Neurosci 4:37–48
41. The Role of Science and Technology in GEOSS (prepared by the
GEO Science and Technology Committee)
42. Thompson T, Steffert T, Ros T, Leach J, Gruzelier J (2008) EEG
applications for sport and performance. Methods 45(4):279–288
43. Walter GW (1956) Colour illusions and aberrations during
stimulation by flickering light. Nature 177:710
44. Yudkowsky E, Bostrom N, Cirkovic M (2014) Artificial intelligence as a positive and negative factor in global risk. Global
Catastrophic Risks. Oxford University Press, p 303, Bibcode:2008gcr..book..303Y, ISBN 978-0-19-857050-9
45. Zhuang T, Zhao H, Tang Z (2009) An Analysis of improving
memory performance based on EEG alpha and theta oscillations.
Comput Inf Sci 2(1):108–114

