Journal of Environmental Psychology 66 (2019) 101344

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Environmental Psychology
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jep

Impact of built environment design on emotion measured via
neurophysiological correlates and subjective indicators: A systematic review

T

Isabella Bowera, Richard Tuckera,∗, Peter G. Enticottb
a
b

School of Architecture and Built Environment, Faculty of Science, Engineering and Built Environment, Deakin University, Victoria, Australia
Cognitive Neuroscience Unit, School of Psychology, Faculty of Health, Deakin University, Victoria, Australia

A R T I C LE I N FO

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Environmental enrichment
Environmental psychology
Emotion
Interior design
Built environment
Neurophysiological measures

Studies investigating environmental enrichment have shown that exposure to enhanced sensory, cognitive,
motor and social stimulation results in behavioural, cellular and molecular alterations in animal models.
However, the evidence-base for the neurophysiological impact from environmental enrichment in humans has
not been widely examined. This paper, which considers the built environment as one signiﬁcant component of
environmental enrichment, draws together evidence on the impact of the design of interior spaces on human
emotion.
With no robust models currently available to evaluate how built environment design impacts our emotional
states, this systematic review consolidates research that has measured correlates of emotion in interior settings
using measures recording either autonomic nervous system (ANS) and/or central nervous system (CNS) activity
in conjunction with self-reporting to indicate conscious perception. This paper aims to assess what we know,
what methodologies exist and if consistencies can be seen across previously published studies.
The review found 237 records, of which 16 met abstract selection criteria. Only seven studies (across eight
papers) met full-text selection criteria. Due to the vast diﬀerences in the methodologies applied, a comprehensive
synthesis was not possible; highlighting the gap in controlled studies in this ﬁeld of research.
As Post Occupancy Evaluations (POEs) of the built environment currently focus on the physical safety and
environmental performance of buildings, this review helps inform the techniques and protocols that can be
applied when evaluating the emotional eﬀect of built environment exposure.

1. Introduction
Our understanding of how the design of the built environment affects our emotion is not well understood (Eberhard, 2009; Nanda,
Ghamari, Pati, & Bajema, 2013). With increasing mental health issues
in the population (AIWH, 2018), and lifestyles where substantial time is
spent inside of buildings (Klepeis et al., 2001), it is important to empirically determine whether exposure to the built environment is affecting our emotional states. If so, would this emotional response aﬀect
our overall mental health and sense of wellbeing? The aim of this
systematic review was to establish if the current body of research has
shown evidence linking the built environment to altered emotional
states. From this, we aimed to understand how we can evaluate the
impacts that interior built environments have on emotion, and thus
whether it might be possible to increase positive emotions through
building design to aid the health and wellbeing of the population.

For over 50 years, researchers from various ﬁelds have sought to
understand how the characteristics of the built environment impact our
emotions, behaviours and, more recently, our physical well-being. Until
recently, much of this work has occurred within disciplinary silos.
However, increasing numbers of convergent teams between
Humanities, Arts and Social Sciences (HASS) and Science, Technology,
Engineering and Medicine (STEM) are forming to bring interdisciplinary and industry expertise to this ﬁeld of research.
Neuroscientists have long investigated the concept of environmental
enrichment (EE). In EE experiments, animals are exposed to a housing
condition that provides opportunity for enhanced sensory, cognitive,
motor and social stimulation. The EE condition, in comparison to
neutral housing conditions, has been found to result in signiﬁcant behavioural, cellular and molecular alterations as well as disease oﬀset in
some neurological conditions (Nithianantharajah & Hannan, 2006; Van
Praag, Kempermann, & Gage, 2000). It has been suggested that this is

∗
Corresponding author. School of Architecture and Built Environment, Faculty of Science, Engineering and Built Environment, Deakin University, Geelong,
Victoria, 3220, Australia.
E-mail address: richard.tucker@deakin.edu.au (R. Tucker).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvp.2019.101344
Received 25 January 2019; Received in revised form 1 August 2019; Accepted 31 August 2019
0272-4944/ © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY-NC-ND/4.0/).

Journal of Environmental Psychology 66 (2019) 101344

I. Bower, et al.

(Tsunetsugu, Miyazaki, & Sato, 2005), have emerged as multidisciplinary research teams race to explore the emerging neuroscience
behind our experience of architecture.
Studies using objective measures to evaluate buildings have focused
on comfort variables as indicators of building performance (Dewing,
2009; Ma, Wong, & Mak, 2018; Parkinson & De Dear, 2016). Comfort
variables, commonly referred to as Indoor Environmental Quality
(IEQ), include thermal comfort, lighting, humidity, airborne contaminants, acoustics, airﬂow and ventilation. Research investigating the
impact of IEQ variables on building performance and occupant satisfaction has demonstrated signiﬁcant eﬀects. The use of such an objective measurement system arises from an understanding of the accepted range for human physiological comfort. While it is understood
that the IEQ performance of space has a signiﬁcant eﬀect on emotion
(Kim, Chong, Chun, & Choi, 2017; Steinmetz & Posten, 2017) (e.g.,
being comfortable is important for optimal functioning), few studies
have controlled IEQ in their experimental design to independently
analyse the impact that design characteristics such as colour, shape,
texture and scale have on emotion. This limitation raises signiﬁcant
concern for the quality of research when IEQ factors may have confounded the results. It is also notable that there has been a gap in
translating the controlled environmental conditions from animal studies used in neuroscience into the human environment research ﬁeld.
While studies have shown that design characteristics impact selfreported emotion, and that IEQ can further aﬀect physiological emotion
response, a further dimension is oﬀered by the addition of other inherent qualities of built environments, such as context driven cue reactivity (Chiamulera et al., 2017), and proxemics between occupants
that trigger a range of outcomes hard to control or predict (Gary W.
Evans, Schroeder, & Lepore, 1996). In addition, evidence suggests
emotions can directly impact health by aﬀecting the immune systems
inﬂammatory response and indirectly alter health related behaviours,
thus further diminishing wellbeing. For instance, negative emotional
states inﬂuence disease aetiology and cascade to reduced social interaction, physical activity and compliance with healthcare advice as a
secondary eﬀect on overall wellbeing (Kiecolt-Glaser, McGuire, Robles,
& Glaser, 2002). Due to the extensive periods of time we spend within
interior built environments and our inherent interaction with them, it is
critical the link between design characteristics of the built environment
and emotional states is understood.
Focusing on interior spaces, this review assesses the eﬀects of design
characteristics (of physical or virtual interior spaces) on the emotional
states of both healthy and clinical populations. The research focused on
interior built environments due to diﬃculty with controlling for the
multitudes of external factors (e.g. climatic and weather events) that
make up the experience of exterior space. By reviewing and synthesising current knowledge, the review establishes if neurophysiological
markers of emotion can be used to distinguish emotional states, and
whether these markers align with consciously perceived self-reported
responses resultant from exposure to controlled, enclosed interior built
environments. It is hoped that through this understanding the design of
the spaces we inhabit can be optimised to support physical and psychological health and wellbeing, thus contributing to preventative
mental health care.
Screening revealed 16 papers derived from 14 studies for full text
review. Independent full-text review by two authors agreed that only
eight (from seven studies) of the 16 papers met the criteria of having
used objective and subjective measures, within a semi-controlled virtually or physically experienced built-environment, to evaluate the
impact of design through measuring correlates of emotional response.
It is evident from the limited studies available there is a need for
more research to elucidate how design variables of the built environment aﬀect human emotion. The eight papers reviewed reported that
their experimental approach veriﬁed that exposure to one or more
elements of a virtually or physically experienced interior-built environment impacted emotional states under varying types of controlled

because enriched environments cause higher levels of brain activation,
leading to molecular changes for neuronal function and neuroplasticity
(Fox, Merali, & Harrison, 2006). Despite these indicators of positive
eﬀects on brain development and health, the translation of EE in human
models remains an under developed ﬁeld of research due to the complexity of the environmental exposures that humans experience
(Clemenson, Deng, & Gage, 2015; McDonald, Hayward, Rosbergen,
Jeﬀers, & Corbett, 2018; van den Bosch & Bird, 2018).
Numerous studies in the social sciences have explored whether built
environments impact our psychological health (G. W. Evans & McCoy,
1998; Ferguson & Evans, 2018; Papale, Chiesi, Rampinini, Pietrini, &
Ricciardi, 2016). However, this ﬁeld of enquiry has predominately used
subjective indicators of psychological eﬀect through self-evaluated
rating scales, questionnaires and descriptions (Dazkir & Read, 2012;
Dinis et al., 2013; Küller, Ballal, Laike, Mikellides, & Tonello, 2006;
Roessler, 2012). While subjective indicators are important tools for
understanding perceived experience, it is suggested that the subjectivity
of human consciousness makes it diﬃcult to compare, quantify and
justify this impact (Edelstein & Macagno, 2012). Adding to this diﬃculty, it is well established that our bodies are able to respond to a
stimulus before we are able to consciously process the input (Öhman,
Flykt, & Lundqvist, 2002), and in some circumstances without involvement of the visual cortex. For example, ‘blindsight’ lesion patients
showed brain activity, consistent with recognising facial stimuli depicting fear, without conscious visual experience of the stimulus
(Liddell et al., 2005). This stimulus response lag leaves a gap in subjective self-reported evaluation as the brain experiences extensive
physiological activity prior to and during eﬀortful cognition processing
(e.g., determining subjective indicators).
The term ‘behaviour setting’ emerged from the ﬁeld of environmental psychology to describe the eﬀect of the physical environment
(time, place and objects), as well as the social environment (activity
patterns of others), on behaviour. (Barker, 1978). Behaviour settings
were understood to be often bounded by architectural space (Bechtel,
1977; Schoggen, Barker, & Fox, 1989). Explaining the relationship between emotion on behaviour, Lazarus suggested that an emotional response occurs from appraisal of the personal signiﬁcance of an event,
and that this response results in changes to subjective experience, the
peripheral/autonomic nervous system, the central nervous system and
thus to behaviour (Lazarus, 1991).
Built environment impacts on emotion can also be suggested via the
social interaction impacts of the built environment. But while the impacts of social factors on social interaction have been widely considered
(Francis, Giles-Corti, Wood, & Knuiman, 2012; Fried, 1982; Sampson,
Morenoﬀ, & Gannon-Rowley, 2002; Skjaeveland & Garling, 1997;
Unger & Wandersman, 1985), far fewer studies have considered the
impact of the physical characteristics of the built environment on social
interaction beyond the single variable of density (Arundel & Ronald,
2017). Moreover, while neighbourhood diﬀerences in social connectivity have been mapped, few empirical studies have considered the
interplay between social interaction and speciﬁc physical characteristics of the built environment. Thus, for instance, it remains poorly
understood how proxemic relationships impact the experience of design
characteristics.
Although design practitioners and researchers have long argued that
the places we inhabit, whether urban landscapes, buildings or natural
environments, directly aﬀect our behaviour (Altman & Wohlwill,
1976), we are still yet to objectively determine the eﬀect of these
physical contexts on emotion. However, through the rapid progression
of science and technology, researchers can now use biomedical techniques to elucidate objective evidence of emotion-related neurophysiological impact. In response, studies using novel measures such as
electroencephalography (EEG) (Mavros, Austwick, & Smith, 2016; Roe,
Aspinall, Mavros, & Coyne, 2013) to measure electrical activity, and
functional near infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) to measure cortical oxy-/
deoxy-genation of haemoglobin as a correlate of neural activity
2

Journal of Environmental Psychology 66 (2019) 101344

I. Bower, et al.

be important for policy makers and built environment practitioners.
If we can demonstrate that objective neurophysiological markers of
emotion can be measured from exposure to the built environment, then
subsequent guidelines and design standards could aim to signiﬁcantly
improve public health. This review will enable us to understand how
thoroughly this ﬁeld of research has been investigated, by whom, where
in the world and what methodologies for measuring emotion currently
exist.

conditions. It was found that all studies lacked variance in cultural
background and age groups of participants. Moreover, no studies
meeting the inclusion criteria had evaluated the impacts of colour, or
proportion. In these eight studies, four design variables were investigated: (1) form (3D) or geometry (2D), (2) materiality or texture,
(3) style and context of interior furnishings, and (4) the ceiling height/
sense of enclosure of the space.
2. Background

3. Material and methods
2.1. Description of the condition
3.1. Criteria for considering studies for this review
In this review, aﬀect and emotion are considered as separate terms,
such that aﬀect is a general umbrella term for the sense of bodily state
(particularly with respect to the detection of valence and arousal),
while emotion is deﬁned from a neurobiological perspective as a
complex reaction involving, in part, stimulus processing in both subcortical (e.g., limbic) and cortical brain networks, along with a complex
mental representation (Lee & Hsieh, 2014). Correlates of neurophysiological emotion can be measured through the non-invasive methods,
such as electroencephalography (EEG) to observe electrical activity
from brain signalling, as well as through functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI), and near infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) (both fMRI and
fNIRS detect changes in blood oxygenation, which is taken to indicate
recent neuronal activity). Other physiological indicators indicating
arousal to a stimulus include heart rate, blood pressure, breathing rate
and galvanic skin response (GSR) also known as skin conductance resonance (SCR). This review examines studies that measure emotion in
participants exposed to virtually or physically experienced built environments through a combination of techniques indicating ANS and/or
CNS response as well as conscious perceptions.

The authors utilised the methodology provided in the Cochrane
Handbook (Higgins & Green, 2011) to perform the steps required in this
systematic review.
3.1.1. Types of studies
The review focused on studies where subjects were: (1) exposed to a
control and treatment condition/s, and (2) reported either ANS and/or
CNS response in conjunction with a form of self-report on emotional
state. For example, where (1) exposure to a speciﬁc design component,
such as colour, form, texture, scale etc., within a simulated or physically
experienced built environment, and where (2) heart rate was used to
determine response to stimulus (ANS), EEG was used to measure neurophysiological impact (CNS) in combination with a point scale to
evaluate the self-reported emotional state of the participant. Due to the
limited research available, a range of mixed methods studies that examined both objective and subjective indicators for cross-validation
were sought. Randomised and non-randomised study designs were included, measuring ANS and/or CNS response, in addition to a self-reported form of emotional state data.

2.2. Description of the intervention being investigated in this review
3.1.2. Types of participants
We have excluded animal models of ‘environmental enrichment,’
focusing instead on what evidence currently exists from studies with
human populations. Participants included healthy and clinical populations to elucidate if impacts are diﬀerent across population types. While
we aimed to only include research that took a random population
sample, the lack of such studies from a preliminary scoping review
meant that our population was limited to participants of a certain age
bracket (undergraduate university level), and/or race and/or geographical location.

Built environments are tangible human-made interventions that
enclose space and provide the setting for human activity. This review
examines studies investigating how design elements that comprise the
built environment impact neurophysiological emotion.
This research chose to limit study designs to interior built environment settings as a result of the signiﬁcant proportion of time humans spend indoors and the complexity of variables that make a controlled experiment diﬃcult to achieve in external environments. The
study is conﬁned to semi-enclosed spaces; deﬁned as conﬁned on both
sides of a vertical axis (ﬂoor and ceiling) and on at least three of four
sides on the horizontal axis. If the space has more than four sides or has
curvilinear surfaces, the space is considered semi-enclosed if the ﬁeld of
vision of the inhabitant is contained by solid matter. The review includes studies using virtual reality to control how participants are exposed to experimental conditions e.g., using a Cave Automatic Virtual
Environment (an immersive space created through projecting the virtual space onto screens surrounding the participant), or where a stereoscopic head mounted display is worn.

3.1.3. Types of interventions
The review incorporated any study investigating design characteristics of the built environment that included, but were not limited to
shape, colour, symmetry, texture, form, scale, proportion, pattern and
hierarchy. We excluded studies that did not compare an intervention
(such as exposure to a design component) with a neutral control/
comparator. The following contexts were investigated of comparisons
of intervention versus control/comparator:

• Virtually experienced through controlled Cave Automatic Virtual

2.3. Why is it important to do this review?
To understand how and if the built environment plays a role in our
psychological and physiological wellbeing, we must consolidate evidence across ﬁelds. This review explores what methods are currently
used to measure emotional state and whether these studies indicate that
exposure to built environment features alter neurophysiological markers of emotion and self-reported responses in healthy and clinical
populations. A systematic review of this kind comes at a critical time as
our population is rapidly expanding, mental health issues are growing
and technological advancements for objectively measuring physiological responses to stimuli are progressing. As a result of the widescale
impact the built environment may have on our health, this review can

•
•

Environment (CAVE) projected display, where four projection
screens form a room comprising of 3 walls and a ﬂoor;
Virtual Reality head mounted display via which the participant sees
an enclosed virtual interior space;
Physically experienced (through controlled conditions) where a
participant is immersed in a semi-enclosed space (such as a room).

3.1.4. Types of outcome measures
This review included all studies meeting the selection criteria that
reported an objective indication of autonomic response or central nervous system activity with self-reported indicators of emotional state for
cross validation. We did not limit the form of mixed methods, and thus
3

Journal of Environmental Psychology 66 (2019) 101344

I. Bower, et al.

author to independently identify if studies met the requirements. The
authors then shared their tables to compare if the same studies had been
selected. The outcome was that both reviewers independently selected
the same studies, cross validating the selection process.
Studies from the database and non-database sources that met the
preliminary selection criteria were saved into a shared EndNote library
before the full-text selection assessment was conducted.
The lead author independently extracted the study aim, country/
origin, method, participants, intervention, setting, outcomes and,
where required, notes detailing additional information that could inﬂuence the extracted data. The data extraction method was adapted
from the Cochrane Public Health Group Data Extraction and
Assessment Template. This entails extracting information on the type of
study, participants, type of intervention, comparator group/s, outcome
measures and setting.
The study used the Cochrane Collaboration Risk of Bias Tool
(Higgins JPT, 2017) to determine the quality of the included studies.
Risk of experimental bias was assessed by the lead author for each of
the eight full-text articles. Findings from the bias analysis are discussed
in the results. However, due to the small number of studies found for
this review, no studies were excluded for risk bias.
A ﬂow diagram outlining the selection and analysis process is shown
in Fig. 1.

found a variety of techniques and measurements to evaluate emotional
state.
CNS measures included but were not limited to electroencephalography (EEG), electrocardiography (ECG), electrooculography (EOG), functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and
functional near infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) cerebral blood ﬂow. ANS
measures included cardiac activity including blood pressure and pulse
rate, respiration rate and galvanic skin response (GSR).
Self-reported measures to indicate conscious perception included
but were not limited to point scales, Likert scales, Self-Assessment
Manikin (SAM) models, Proﬁle of Moods States (POMS) and space
characteristic descriptions.
The broad categories informing our content analysis of the studies
are: an understanding of the eﬀect of emotional state change from exposure to design components in the built environment; the experimental design approach; correlation between brain/body responses and
consciously processed measures of emotional state.
3.2. Search methods for identiﬁcation of studies
A search strategy combining the most frequently used terms (interior design AND emotion) was used in conjunction with limits that
included: authored in English, peer reviewed, and records from between the years 2000 to July 2018. This timeframe coincides with when
the body of signiﬁcant work had been achieved in the ﬁeld, which was
catalysed by technological advancements and a surge of interest in
transdisciplinary research. The list of ﬁnal search strings (Appendix A)
was reﬁned over a period of four months in consultation with librarians
from health sciences, the social sciences and architecture. A range of
databases was searched across the social and biological sciences. Architecture and built environment databases (Avery Index to Architectural Periodicals and Planning Architecture Design Database Ireland)
were incorporated in the preliminary search strategy but were excluded
during the full review as they did not retrieve any relevant records.
Three Elsevier databases were searched (EMBASE, Science Direct and
Scopus) as well as: The Cochrane Systematic Review Database; MEDLINE; PsycINFO and Web of Science. During the review process, email
alerts from the selected databases were employed to identify newly
published studies not retrieved during the initial search.
We also searched Google and Google Scholar applying the database
search keywords and limiting our screening to the ﬁrst 10 pages or until
the results appearing were no longer relevant. After we conducted fulltext eligibility of articles, we mined the references and citations from
the included studies to cross-check that important texts had been covered.
Four weeks before we submitted the ﬁnal review for editorial approval, we performed an updated search on all speciﬁed database and
non-database sources. At this stage, twelve additional records were
found with only one record meeting selection criteria for independent
full text review.

4. Results
Sixteen papers met eligibility in the title and abstract review; reﬁned to seven studies (eight papers) through independent full-text
screening. The seven were published between 2004 and 2017. There
were two instances within the sixteen papers (four papers in question)
where the same author had published two papers from one study
(Vartanian et al., 2015; Vartanian et al., 2013; Vecchiato, Jelic, et al.,
2015a; Vecchiato, Tieri, et al., 2015b). To determine which of these
papers to include, the authors agreed to only include those papers reporting diﬀerent study outcomes. This restriction resulted in inclusion
of two papers from one study by Vartainian (2013 and 2015), and one
paper by Vecchiato (2015a, b). Thus, eight studies were agreed upon
independently by both the authors for inclusion. A latter search conducted for new studies found one extra for full-text review, but this was
mutually excluded by the authors as the stimulus included exposure to
exterior built environments.
The inclusion process led to the removal of 19 studies examining
external or urban environments, 35 studies reporting only subjective
measures, and 19 studies focused on Indoor Environmental Quality
variables.
4.1. Overall results
The included studies evidenced that design characteristics of interior built environments can result in:

• Exit decisions and lowered judgement of beauty in enclosed rooms
with lower ceilings (Vartanian et al., 2015);
• Lower self-evaluated ratings for pleasure and arousal in rooms with

3.3. Data collection, management and synthesis
The ﬁrst two authors reviewed the eligibility table before preliminary title and abstract screening. The lead author scanned the abstract and title of all retrieved records to determine which studies
would undergo full-text assessment, consulting with the second author
for veriﬁcation. The full texts of studies meeting the selection criteria in
the title and abstract screening were independently evaluated by two of
the authors. Both reviewers chose to include eight of the papers representing seven individual studies. One additional paper identiﬁed
four weeks prior to submission for full-text review was independently
evaluated by the two authors but rejected.
A screening scoring matrix using criteria for the population, intervention, comparator/variable, outcome and setting (PICOS) was developed by the lead author. The matrix required the lead and second

•
•
4

more linear geometries with decreased anterior cingulate cortex
(ACC) activity (Banaei, Yazdanfar, Hatami, & Gramann, 2017) and
association of curvilinear spaces as ‘beautiful’, which activated ACC
but did not alter exit decision about space (Vartanian et al., 2013);
Furnished interior environments received higher self-reported ratings for the emotion state dimensions of presence and arousal indistinctly of the style of furniture which resulted in increased
heartrate and larger theta power across frontal sites for high presence (Vecchiato, Jelic, et al., 2015a);
The use of stereoscopy to enable the appearance of depth in virtual
environments increases self-reported levels of presence in participants (Rodríguez, Rey, & Alcañiz, 2011); and

Journal of Environmental Psychology 66 (2019) 101344

I. Bower, et al.

Fig. 1. Flow diagram of the article selection process following the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) process.

• Materiality (wood texture) in both virtually and physically is able to

to understand, introducing stress in experimental conditions may alter
brain function and the magnitude of emotional response that might
occur naturally.

reduce ANS activity (heart rate and sweat response) without conscious perception by participants (Tsunetsugu et al., 2005; X.;
Zhang, Lian, & Wu, 2017).

4.1.1. Population
During the screening process, participants were not limited to age,
gender or cultural background. Overall, 122 people in total took part in
the studies. Across all studies, the average age was 26 with small
standard deviation (see population characteristics in Table 1). Gender
mix varied between studies with only one paper (X. Zhang et al., 2017)
reporting equal numbers of male and female participants. Two studies
(Rodríguez et al., 2011; Vecchiato, Jelic, et al., 2015a) included odd
numbers of participants with roughly equalled gender (included one
more female than male). While there was a notable uneven balance of
sexes in the study reported by two papers (Vartanian et al., 2015) (6
males to 12 females), the rationale for this was not described. Similarly,
Tsunetsugu et al. (2005) did not justify why they included only male
participants. Only one study (Shemesh et al., 2017) failed to report the
gender of participants.
Inclusion criteria for participants included some which were

Notable excluded studies included those where: participant and
environmental controls were not stated (E. A. Edelstein et al., 2008;
Elbaiuomy, Hegazy, & Sheta, 2018; L. Zhang et al., 2010); the study
included examples of exterior built environments (Kirk, Skov,
Christensen, & Nygaard, 2009; Pati, O'Boyle, Hou, Nanda, & Ghamari,
2016); participants were selected from the same University disciplinary
cohort and did not apply a self-reported measure/s (Radwan & Ergan,
2017; Sharma et al., 2017); and the paper reported duplicated ﬁndings
by the same authorship team (Vartanian et al., 2013). We also excluded
one study that used a window to the outdoors and which induced stress
on participants (Fich et al., 2014).
While the excluded studies oﬀer valuable insights into the impact of
built environment, this review focused speciﬁcally on controlled interior spaces not subject to climatic conditions or the complexity of
natural features and phenomenon. While stress variables are important
5

Journal of Environmental Psychology 66 (2019) 101344

NR

3.8X3.2 × 2.8M

standard and generic, and some which were highly speciﬁc. Two studies
(Shemesh et al., 2017; Tsunetsugu et al., 2005) did not disclose any
criteria for the selection of participants. Normal or corrected-to-normal
vision was stipulated for participants in four studies (Banaei et al.,
2017; Rodríguez et al., 2011; Vartanian et al., 2015; Vartanian et al.,
2013; Vecchiato, Tieri, et al., 2015b), and self-evaluated right handedness was required in two studies (Banaei et al., 2017; Vartanian et al.,
2013, 2015). Participants in one study were described as ‘healthy’
without further clariﬁcation (Banaei et al., 2017), while ‘healthy’ was
deﬁned in one study via a list of exclusions: cardiovascular disease, skin
disease, blindness, rhinitis, women in their menstrual period or unfamiliar with how to use a computer (X. Zhang et al., 2017). In contrast,
two other studies (Vecchiato, Tieri, et al., 2015b), required only that
participants have no previous experience/exposure to using virtual
reality.
Only one study (X. Zhang et al., 2017) reported using statistical
analysis (G*Power) to determine the required number of participants
for statistical validity. This study used a within-subject design with
paired t-tests to compare the eﬀects. It was unclear how the sample size
was calculated for the remainder of studies in this review. Across the
seven studies, the mean number of participants was 18.86 with a
standard deviation of 10.75. Although with small samples it is important to report eﬀect size or correlation coeﬃcients alongside p values, only one study (Vartanian et al., 2013, 2015) reported p value and
z scores. Two EEG studies (Banaei et al., 2017; Vecchiato, Tieri, et al.,
2015b) reported p values and correlation coeﬃcients, while another
(Shemesh et al., 2017) did not report inferential statistics for the EEG
results. The remaining three studies only reported p values (Rodríguez
et al., 2011; Tsunetsugu et al., 2005; X.; Zhang et al., 2017).

NR
~26
10
10
10
2017
Zhang, X., Lian, Z., & Wu, Y.

NR = Not reported.
a
Data from two participants were removed from the ﬁnal reported study due to errors in data collection.4.2. Characteristics of the studies.

22-24 °C
500 lx

30–40% RH

3 × 3 × 2.5M
NR
NR
NR
NR

3D Virtual CAVE using 3DS Max 2011
software
Physical room
2.4
26.8
12
7
2015a, b

5

12X12X6-8M
13M2
NR
Soundlessa
NR
NR
NR
21-23 °C
NR
NR
15
6

Shemesh, A., Talmon, R., Karp, O., Amir, I. et al.
Tsunetsugu, Y., Miyazaki, Y., & Sato, H.
Vartanian, O., Navarrete, G., Chatterjee, A., Fich,
LB. et al
Vecchiato, G., Jelic, A., Tieri, G., Maglione, A. et al

2017
2005
2013

NR
0
12

42
15
18

NR
NR
23.39

NR
NR
4.49

NR
40 lx
NR

NR
50–60% RH
NR

NR
NR
NR
5
2011

5

10

26.8

1.751

NR

NR

NR
NR
NR
NR
28.6
15a
7

Banaei, M., Yazdanfar, A., Hatami, J., & Gramann,
K.
Rodríguez, A., Rey, B., & Alcañiz, M.

2017

8

Age Mean
F

Study Size

2.6

3D Virtual HTC Vive (head mounted)
Unity Game software
3D Virtual
CAVE-like (Stereoscopic)
3D Virtual CAVE VizTech XL software
Physical room
2D image in fMRI Signa Excite HD

NR

Area LXWXH
Noise dB
Humidity RH%
Temp °C
Artiﬁcial lighting
lx
Method of experience
M

Age SD

Environment/Setting
Population
Year

Table 1
The characteristics of the population and the environmental conditions reported in studies. This includes the gender breakdown, ﬁnal study size, mean age of participants standard deviation of participant, method of
experience (whether in a physical space or an experience facilitated through a virtual reality environment or headset), common IEQ parameters of lighting, temperature, humidity and noise and where reported and the
size of the environment.

I. Bower, et al.

4.1.2. Setting (controlled experimental conditions)
The physical settings of the included papers comprised four studies
of virtually experienced interior built-environments (Cave Automatic
Virtual Environment or virtual reality headset) and two of physically
experienced interior-built environments. One study was performed in a
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) room using 2D images of built
environments. In the MRI scanning environment, the participant lies
still inside the bore and is presented with visual stimuli via a mirror
above their eyes reﬂecting a screen projected from the end of the bore.
Although the two papers resulting from this study did not report any
data on the IEQ variables (lighting, humidity, temperature etc) of the
environment, we would expect that the room where the study was
conducted would achieve strict standards for medical/clinical environmental control.
Included studies focused on speciﬁc design elements such as geometry (2D) and form (3D), materiality and texture, style and context of
interior furnishings, and the ceiling height/sense of enclosure of the
space. Table 1 lists the IEQ variables in the environments of each study.
Only two of the articles reviewed reported the lighting, temperature
and humidity levels within the space. Both of these were experiments
using a physical ‘real’ environment. It remains unclear if studies using
headset or surround virtual reality were carefully monitoring and
controlling these comfort parameters.
4.1.3. Intervention/s (variables being tested for)
4.1.3.1. Form and geometry. Three studies investigated the impact of
form and geometry in virtual environments (two using EEG and one
using fMRI. In (Banaei et al., 2017), participants were instructed to
move through virtual environments to perceive room form from
diﬀerent perspectives. The self-reported results demonstrated that
rooms with more linear geometries resulted in lower pleasure and
arousal scores from participants (who had no former design experience)
while rooms with curvature resulted in higher scores in these two
domains. This ﬁnding is not unusual, with preference for curvature
identiﬁed in neuroaesthetics studies involving objects (Gómez-Puerto,
Munar, & Nadal, 2016). EEG data were analysed using Independent
6

Journal of Environmental Psychology 66 (2019) 101344

I. Bower, et al.

variety of physiological indicators were able to illustrate signiﬁcant
diﬀerences between wooden interior settings: electrocardiography,
blood pressure, electro-dermal activity, oxyhemoglobin saturation and
near distance vision. Blood pressure, oxyhemoglobin saturation and
skin conductance resonance were lower during exposure to three
wooden room conditions, indicating that participants in these
conditions were showing less signs of stress and tension. Near
distance of the eye was also improved for participants with normal or
myopic vision in the wooden room exposures, where task performance
improved when compared to the control (non-wood) room. The second
study investigating materiality and texture used wood panelling as the
intervention. Tsunetsugu et al. (2005) found participants were unable
to report diﬀerence between the two room conditions with varying
wood details. However, autonomic nervous activity (pulse rate, blood
pressure and regional cerebral blood ﬂow) indicated a change in state,
showing that self-evaluations were not as sensitive as physiological
indices. Both blood pressure and pulse rate were elevated in the
‘designed’ room and regional cerebral blood ﬂow was increased in
both conditions. Participants were ‘calmer’ in the ‘standard’ room based
on the physiological data obtained. This eﬀect may have been due to
sense of familiarity with a common stimulus. The experimental
approach enabled a clear indication across both studies that wood as
a materiality activated an ANS response which was not consciously
identiﬁed through self-report with participants.

Component Analysis (ICA) and Fast Fourier Transform (FFT), with
dipole modelling based on MNI coordinates. Participants showed
pronounced activity in the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) for rooms
self-evaluated as higher for pleasure and arousal, reﬂecting the
subjective results. Activation was also seen in posterior cingulate
cortex and occipital lobe during the perception of rooms as the
participants moved through the spaces. The second study by
Vartanian et al. (2013), which used fMRI, investigated the eﬀect of
rectilinear and curvilinear spaces that were either open or enclosed
with high or low ceilings (total of 8 conditions). In the judgement of
‘beauty’, statistical parametric mapping demonstrated that the
curvilinear conditions exclusively activated the ACC. Parametric
analyses to investigate the covariation of brain activity for beauty
and pleasantness was performed using ﬁrst order polynomial
expansion. For beauty, the frontopolar cortex (FPC), superior frontal
gyrus (SFG), globus pallidus (GP), precuneus (PN), parahippocampus
(PH), and middle occipital gyrus (MOG) were shown to be activated.
The ‘pleasantness’ rating also activated the precuneus, as well as the
middle frontal gyrus (MFG) and anterior cingulate cortex (ACC).
Shemesh et al. (2017) used manifold learning techniques to analyse
the EEG data, a technique not seen elsewhere in the literature reviewed.
In this study, results conﬁrmed data analysis could distinguish spaces,
with brain activity in the ﬁrst 2 s of exposure the most pronounced. The
authors did not report on or provide an analysis of the eﬀect seen in
diﬀerent interventions. To analyse the data obtained from the EEG, a
single channel was used from the left parietal region (P7), which was
compared against output from a right occipital electrode (O2). From
these studies, whether movement is involved or not, we can see that
curvature of objects or built environment activates the ACC, directly
linked to the salience and reward properties of visual stimuli.

4.1.3.4. Height and enclosure. One study (Vartanian et al., 2013, 2015)
investigated the eﬀect of height and sense of enclosure through the use
of 2D stimuli in an fMRI. Results were divided into behavioural
(participant choice from approach-avoidance and beautiful-not
beautiful decisions) and neural impacts (through analysing fMRI
results with statistical parametric mapping). On the beauty judgement
run for the high – low ceiling contrast, the left precuneus and left
middle frontal gyrus were activated. During the beauty run in the open
– enclosed contrast, the left middle temporal gyrus and right superior
temporal gyrus were activated. No signiﬁcant results were reported for
high – low ceiling on the approach – avoidance run. The open –
enclosed contrast revealed activity in the anterior cingulate cortex. The
authors concluded that high ceilings and curvilinear spaces were judged
as more beautiful, activating structures involved in visuospatial
exploration. Enclosed rooms activated the anterior midcingulate
cortex with higher exit decision. They concluded that the reduced
visual and locomotive permeability (enclosed, low ceilings) elicits an
emotional reaction to make an exit decision.

4.1.3.2. Furnishing style and context. Two studies explored the impact of
the style of furnishings in a room using EEG as an objective measure. A
description of furnishings in a bedroom context, whether ‘empty’,
‘modern’ or ‘cutting-edge’ was used in Vecchiato, Jelic, et al. (2015a)
and Vecchiato, Tieri, et al. (2015b), in contrast to ‘realistic’ or
‘materialistic’ residential spaces, and a high-rise ‘work’ oﬃce in
(Rodríguez et al., 2011). Vecchiato, Jelic, et al. (2015a) and
Vecchiato, Tieri, et al. (2015b) used Independent Component Analysis
with only artefact free trials considered for analysis. Power Spectral
Density was calculated using theta and alpha/mu bands through time
frequency analysis and topographic statistical maps. For interiors with
high self-reported presence ratings, mass univariate analysis showed
larger theta power across frontal and left temporal sites. Temporary
alpha and mu band activations were observed across the frontal and
central sites; however, these were not sustained. High comfort ratings
were associated with increased theta activity across the frontal midline
and signiﬁcant desynchronization across the left central and frontal mu
band. Overall, the authors concluded that the perception of pleasant
interiors activated visuospatial processing regions in the fronto-parietal
network, showing involvement of motor and cognitive processes during
the evaluation of spaces.
In contrast, Rodríguez et al. (2011) conducted a pilot study with 10
volunteers. A diﬀerence in presence levels was found in stereoscopic
versus non-stereoscopic environments, however this was only measured
through a questionnaire. In this study, the choice for interior environments lacked rigour, with some variables presenting potential confounding factors e.g., ‘oﬃce’ view from a great height), and the contextual clues of the interiors evoking participant connotations
(bedroom, workplace). The authors concluded that the study demonstrated higher reported presence levels with stereoscopic vision.
Overall, these studies reveal little insight due to the spatial clues and
aﬀordances associated with the complex and contrasting visual stimuli
presented.

4.1.4. Control/comparator
The studies in this review controlled their experimental design by
exposing participants to one of each of the environmental conditions in
a randomised order. Only one showed clear diﬀerentiation within their
population groups. As the split sample was to question if training in
architecture changed participants perceptions/experiences of the built
environment (Shemesh et al., 2017), half of the participants had previous training in architectural studies. Other studies included in the full
text review did not discern between participants as a control factor.
A clearly distinguishable built environment exposure ‘control’ was
used in three studies. These included studies investigating the eﬀect of:
form clusters by comparing a ‘simple cubic room without signiﬁcant
form features’ against 17 alternative room structures with diﬀerent
form (Banaei et al., 2017); furnishing style in a bedroom context by
comparing to an ‘empty room’ (devoid of furnishings or evidence of
inhabitancy) against ‘modern’ and ‘cutting edge’ furnished environments (Vecchiato, Tieri, et al. (2015b)); the eﬀect of timber construction and panelling in oﬃce environments by comparing a physical
(real) room constructed from steel and concrete, painted 100% white
against three timber constructed rooms with varying percentages of
light and dark wood panelling (X. Zhang et al., 2017); and another similar study on the eﬀect of timber panelling with a ‘standard’ type of

4.1.3.3. Materiality and texture (wood). In X. Zhang et al. (2017), a
7

Journal of Environmental Psychology 66 (2019) 101344

5. Discussion
This review investigated if studies examining visual properties of
interior built-environments have, using a combination of brain/body
responses in conjunction with self-reported measures, been able to
show an impact on human emotion.
Within the interventions tested, four considered categorical groups
of visual properties emerged: (1) geometry (2D) and form (3D), (2) style
(time period/aesthetic) and context (cue to the space use) of interior
furnishings, (3) materiality and texture, and (4) height and enclosure of
the space. Noticeably, no studies reported on the eﬀect of colour, scale
or proportion which should be examined in future studies.
Studies in this review showed that experience (through training or
exposure) eﬀects emotion state. In Banaei et al. (2017), lower pleasure
and arousal was found in conditions with more linear geometries, and
8

No
Yes
No
< 15 kΩ
NR
< 10 kΩ
1000 Hz hp = 0.016 Hz; lp = 250 Hz
NR
256 Hz hp = 0.5 Hz; lp = 45 Hz

Movement allowed?
Impedance
Sampling rate & ﬁltering
No. of electrode/channels

128
16/14
19/24
Wet
Dry
Wet
EASYCAP with EEGLAB toolbox
EMOTIV
BEMicro, EBNeuro wth EEGLAB

It is important to consider how the methodologies of the studies
reviewed are open to risk. Five types of risk that need attending to have
been discussed following the Cochrane tool for assessing risk of bias
(Higgins JPT et al., 2017).

Banaei, M., Yazdanfar, A., Hatami, J., & Gramann, K. (2017)
Shemesh, A., Talmon, R., Karp, O., Amir, I. et al. (2017)
Vecchiato, G., Jelic, A., Tieri, G., Maglione, A. et al. (2015)

4.2. Risk of bias

Wet/Dry System

4.1.5. Outcomes
EEG, used in three studies, was the most common output used for
measuring objective neurophysiological response. Two studies used wet
electrode systems (EASYCAP and BEMicro, EB Neuro), while one study
used the dry electrode EMOTIV system. The number of electrodes
ranged from 16 to 128. Sampling rate and band pass ﬁlter data was
diﬀerent across studies, indicating the diversity of protocols for collecting neurophysiological data. Two studies using EEG reported impedance was kept below 15 kΩ (Banaei et al., 2017) and 10 kΩ
(Vecchiato, Tieri, et al. (2015b)). Table 2 shows the diversity in devices/technology, procedures and data extraction techniques (see
Table 3).
Other forms of CNS data collection included fMRI (3 T MR, 8
Channel using SPM8) and fNIRS (NIRO-300). PNS measures included
BP (FinaPres and TKBP-H01) and one study which combined ECG,
SpO2 & SCR (PCG and PowerLab). As only single studies used each
technique, results cannot be compared.
A variety of self-reported measures were used across the array of
study designs. These included point scales (9 and 13 point), Proﬁle of
Moods Scale (POMS), Slater-Usoh-Steed (SUS) and Sanchez-Vives &
Slater questionnaires and the Self-Assessment Manikin (SAM).
Dimensions explored in these measures included experience, arousal,
dominance, valence, familiarity, novelty, comfort, pleasantness and
presence. Data was collected post-test (exposure) in ﬁve of the seven
studies, while one study asked participants to use approach/avoidance
decisions during exposure. Additionally, one study used a virtual Stroop
test to measure attention and another required each participant to
complete a written task during exposure (later evaluated for ‘quality)’.
These were given through the virtual environment (projected) and
verbally.

Brand & software

living room available to buy as the control with timber conﬁned to the
ﬂoorboards compared to a ‘designed’ room with wooden beams and
columns (Tsunetsugu et al., 2005).
The remaining three studies did not clearly discern a control within
their experimental design. These studies instead showed the diﬀerences
between groups; investigating the eﬀect of: geometry by comparing a
square space, round space, sharp space and curvy space (Shemesh et al.,
2017); enclosure by comparing an open high ceiling space, enclosed
high ceiling space, open low ceiling space and enclosed low ceiling
space (Vartanian et al., 2013, 2015); and furnishing typologies by
comparing a ‘realistic’, ‘materialistic’ and ‘oﬃce’ virtual environment
(Rodríguez et al., 2011).

EEG parameters and conditions used

Table 2
Details of the parameters and conditions from the three studies using EEG to record correlates of neurophysiological response. This included the brand of device, cap and analysis software, the type of system, number of
electrodes and channels, sampling rate, band pass ﬁlter and impedance. As some studies encouraged participants to move freely this has also been recorded as it may have aﬀected the data collected.

I. Bower, et al.

Journal of Environmental Psychology 66 (2019) 101344

I. Bower, et al.

Table 3
A list of the types of bias encountered across the reviewed studies and what steps were taken by the authors to reduce the risk.
Allocation
Blinding

Incomplete outcome data
Selective reporting
Other potential sources of bias

Six of the seven studies did not disclose how intervention allocation was determined; leading to unclear risk. X. Zhang et al. (2017) documented
that sequence generation was determined by a Latin Square Design to ensure the order of exposure did not aﬀect the results observed.
All studies sampled participants individually, thus reducing the likelihood participants were aware of a classiﬁcation grouping (such as ‘expert’
for participants of a design background). It is unclear whether participants were blind to the experimental design purpose as exposure to the
built environment is highly visible. It is also unclear whether the personnel carrying out the experiments were blinded to the categorisation of
participants and orders of exposure. All studies included exposures to control and experimental conditions. In (Vartanian et al., 2013, 2015) the
enclosed fMRI environment may have reduced the risk of performance and detection bias by personnel dependent on the level of automation in
the experimental procedure.
Two studies report incomplete data, ﬂagging potential attrition bias. Both these studies explain participants removal as due to technical
diﬃculties with objective data collection and excessive noise in the analyse of the data.
Two studies showed unclear risk of reporting bias as only signiﬁcant result was reported in the papers. Six papers report non-signiﬁcant ﬁndings
alongside signiﬁcant ﬁndings; reducing the risk selective reporting has occurred.
A key contamination concern is that the comfort qualities of the experienced built environments are not being reported. As these qualities,
referred to as Indoor Environmental Quality (IEQ) variables, play a signiﬁcant role in the experience of environments, their variation have high
risk of biasing the results when not monitored and stabilised. X. Zhang et al. (2017) is the only study in the review reporting physical
environmental parameters of temperature, relative humidity and luminance levels. We can reasonably assume a level of control in one study
(Vartanian et al., 2013, 2015) where the environment was stabilised due to the clinical fMRI environment where the study took place.
Uncontrolled IEQ measures pose the greatest risk in biasing the eﬀect reported in studies

eﬀect size or correlation coeﬃcient values, and the representation of
box and whisker plots should use conﬁdence intervals instead of
standard deviations for error bars.

Shemesh et al. (2017) showed participants with design training showed
deviation to non-design trained participants. Although it is diﬃcult to
make broad claims, it could be suggested that familiarity with design
characteristics may not be ‘enriching’ to stimulate the brain. In other
words, dependent on our experience, it is important that we actively
seek out new dynamic spaces to ensure we regulate stimulation. This
raises the question of whether novel environments with uncommon
design characteristics are important for ‘enrichment’? In particular,
should designers use uncommon and unique design features to simulate
brain activity and does this enhance positive emotional states?
Critically, X. Zhang et al. (2017) and Tsunetsugu et al. (2005) demonstrated that ANS response to materiality (wood) occurs without
conscious perception of emotion change in the participant. This demonstrates that current practice should not rely on occupant self-reported evaluation of buildings alone.
Methodologically, the results highlighted that: (1) limited studies
have been conducted in this ﬁeld; (2) studies have small sample sizes
with little diversity in participants and; (3) there is a broad array of
methodological and reporting procedures being used. In conjunction
with these limitations, no studies reported eﬀect size, demonstrating
that a meta-analysis is not yet possible for this area of research.
Four chief limitations are observed across the ﬁeld:

The methodology of future studies must carefully consider how the
use of technology to simulate a controlled built environment interacts
with objective measuring systems. The key cortical surface areas to
monitor for activation from the perception of visual stimuli will be in
the occipital (receiving visual input), temporal (recognising and identifying objects) and parietal (understanding object movement and location) regions that are involved in the process of perception. We would
also expect activation of the prefrontal cortex during the interpretation
of stimuli to emotional state. Considering the locations of surface level
cortical areas involved in this complex process, it is important that
studies using head mounted VR are not impeding EEG channels over
regions of the scalp where brain activity is expected. As a result, we
suggest that a CAVE rather than a head mounted VR device will provide
a more robust experimental design.
Investigations using fMRI and sophisticated modelling in EEG can
provide a deeper insight into the neural pathways, networks and
structures activated during visual perception and emotional response.
From the areas activated in the included studies, this would likely include cortical/subcortical networks involved in emotion and regulation
processes. In particular the ACC, which has extensive prefrontal and
limbic connectivity, was identiﬁed across four of the studies in both
fMRI and EEG data. As the ACC is involved with reward properties and
the salience of visual properties, this is not of surprise and reinforces
that areas involved with emotion processing are activated when appraising features of the built environment.
Other physiological tools such as GSR, HR and BP are helpful for
determining if the body is reacting to a stimulus. These measures require precise and measured experimental conditions to ensure the reaction is to the stimulus being tested rather than to a confounding
variable in the setup (such as temperature, ambient noise, associated
memory etc). Although these measures provide information that the
body is recognising and responding to a stimulus, they are not useful as
lone measures for detecting why neural activation is occurring and
where it is originating. Therefore, these tools are suited to conﬁrm a
reaction is occurring, while fMRI or EEG can show what CNS activity is
occurring. Combining these measures with a form of self-report is critical to further identify if the participant is consciously aware of a
change in emotional state to stimulus.

1. While all papers reported experimental approaches verifying that
exposure to the built environment impacts emotional states, none
used the same strategy for measuring or reporting this eﬀect. Due to
the range of diﬀerent approaches being used, ability is limited to
synthesise and cross validate through replication of the ﬁndings.
2. There was signiﬁcant underpowering across the studies, with an
average sample size of 19 participants and a very small variation in
the age group sampled. With a young pool of participants, it is not
clear whether this is due to age related experimental intentions, or
simply because the participants were all taken from tertiary institutions (which might indicate a level of training/education higher
than the average population).
3. There was a lack of consistency in data analysis procedures used
across the studies. With the use of multiple statistical analyses
techniques, there is a risk for reproducibility; although this is not
unusual in the cognitive neurosciences. This heavy reliance on statistical measures to separate multivariate data suggests the experimental designs employed required further consideration to produce
clearer results.
4. Similarly, a range of data representation methods were used; suggesting uncertainty in the ﬁeld for the best techniques to represent
data. In order to aid communication, plotted data would enable a
more representative and transparent visual than bar graphs. Due to
the limited sample sizes, p values should be presented alongside

6. Conclusion
Currently there is no standard, accepted, cross-validated protocol or
methodology for evaluating how design of built environments aﬀects
9

Journal of Environmental Psychology 66 (2019) 101344

I. Bower, et al.

transformations applied) for decoding objective data.
It is important to consider why we make subjective decisions and
opinions about built environments and whether neurophysiological
processes are aﬀecting our mental states and self-reported feelings towards spaces. In order for built environment practitioners to have a
clear understanding of the impacts of the visual characteristics (informed by design decisions) of interior built environments on emotion,
it is critical that standard practice is established for measuring and
evaluating the emotional impact of the built environment, and that
studies follow guidelines in reporting the parameters of the experimental design for transparency and for reproducibility. Through developing a reproducible and cross-validated technique that can be used
alongside subjective post-occupancy tools in evaluating buildings, new
formal and informal standards for the design of our environments
across sectors (education, healthcare, commercial, residential) and
countries could transform how industry and government value the design of interior built environments. If the impact of design characteristics can be understood on a neurophysiological level, this opens the
door to understanding if we can support mental health and wellbeing
(in both healthy and clinical populations) non-invasively through environmental exposure as a recognised form of therapy.

neurophysiological correlates of emotion in humans. This has resulted
in an array of techniques and approaches for conducting the research,
making a meta-analysis of eﬀect across studies a non-viable option at
this point in time. At present there is a lack of comprehensive studies
using and reporting controls for environmental comfort elements to
determine whether design characteristics aﬀect neurophysiological responses. In order to progress the ﬁeld, a rigorous protocol that reports
the comfort parameters of the controlled experimental environment is
needed before we establish the eﬀect of visual design variables on
emotion in interior built environments.
The body of evidence collected does not provide robust evidence for
the neurophysiological eﬀect in interior spaces to diﬀerent visual
properties of the built environment. However, the ﬁeld does suggest
that emotional state is aﬀected by visual properties that can be objectively measured, and which result in a range of neural and physiological
activity. It is also important to note that brain and body activity in
response to design characteristics can occur without conscious perception. Knowledge and measurability of these impacts may give rise to
a new standard for evaluating built environments. This review highlighted that more work is needed with greater rigour in experimental
design and analysis. Although the evidence summarised in this review
is only from seven studies, key methodological limitations are observed
across them: not reporting environmental IEQ parameters; inconsistent
reporting of participant characteristics; not disclosing the method and
rationale for calculating sample size; presenting p values without eﬀect
size or correlation coeﬃcients; and the use of diﬀerent techniques (type
of measure, type of system), protocols (impedance, sampling rate, ﬁlters) and programs (interfaces for data output and algorithms/

Declarations of interest
Isabella Bower is supported by funding from the Academy of
Neuroscience for Architecture (ANFA) and Creative Futures Pty Ltd.
Peter G. Enticott is supported by a Future Fellowship from the
Australian Research Council (ARC) (FT160100077).

Appendices
Appendix A
Search strings and databases used. These results were last updated on 3rd January 2019.Table Appendix A
Engine

Search String

Results

CINAHL
EMBASE
MEDLINE
PsycINFO
Science Direct
Scopus
Web of Science

(Interior Design*) AND (Aﬀect OR Emotion*)
(‘built environment'/exp OR ′built environment’ OR interior OR spatial) AND (‘aﬀective response’ OR ′emotion* response')
(Built Environment*) AND (Aﬀect OR Emotion*) Publication: 20010101–20181231 English Language
(Built Environment OR Interior) AND (Aﬀect* OR Emotion*) Publication Year: 2000–2019 Language: English
(Interior Design AND Physical AND Built Environment) AND (Emotion) Publication Year: 2000–2019
TITLE-ABS-KEY (interior AND design AND emotion) AND PUBYEAR > 1999
TOPIC: (((Interior Design AND Architect* AND Buil*) AND (Aﬀect OR Emotion*)))
Timespan: 2000–2019. Databases: WOS, MEDLINE. Search language = English

97
55
426
931
789
98
96

responses toward interior environments. Environment and Behavior, 44(5), 722–732.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0013916511402063.
Dewing, J. (2009). Caring for people with dementia: Noise and light. Nursing Older People,
21(5), 34–38.
Dinis, S., Duarte, E., Noriega, P., Teixeira, L., Vilar, E., & Rebelo, F. (2013). Evaluating
emotional responses to the interior design of a hospital room: A study using virtual reality.
Paper presented at the design, user experience, and usability. User experience in novel
technological environments, berlin, heidelberg. 2013//.
Eberhard, J. P. (2009). Applying neuroscience to architecture. Neuron, 62(6), 753–756.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2009.06.001.
Edelstein, E. A., Gramann, K., Schulze, J., Shamlo, N. B., van Erp, E., Vankov, A., et al.
(2008). Neural responses during navigation in the virtual aided design laboratory:
Brain dynamics of orientation in architecturally ambiguous space. Movement and
Orientation in Built Environments: Evaluating Design Rationale and User Cognition, 35,
35–41.
Edelstein, E., & Macagno, E. (2012). Form follows function: Bridging neuroscience and
architecture. In S. T. Rassia, & P. M. Pardalos (Eds.). Sustainable environmental design
in architecture: Impacts on health (pp. 27–41). New York, NY: Springer New York.
Elbaiuomy, E., Hegazy, I., & Sheta, S. (2018). The impact of architectural spaces' geometric forms and construction materials on the users' brainwaves and consciousness
status. International Journal of Low Carbon Technologies, 13(1), 43–51. https://doi.
org/10.1093/ijlct/ctx018.
Evans, G. W., & McCoy, J. M. (1998). When buildings don't work: The role of architecture
in human health. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 18(1), 85–94. https://doi.org/
10.1006/jevp.1998.0089.
Evans, G. W., Schroeder, A., & Lepore, S. J. (1996). The role of interior design elements in
human responses to crowding. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1, 41.
Ferguson, K. T., & Evans, G. W. (2018). The built environment and mental health reference

References
AIWH (2018). Mental health services in Australia, summary of mental health services in
Australia - Australian institute of health and welfare. Retrieved from https://www.aihw.
gov.au/reports/mental-health-services/mental-health-services-in-australia/reportcontents/summary.
Altman, I., & Wohlwill, J. F. (1976). Human behavior and environment : Advances in theory
and research. New York: Plenum Press 1976.
Arundel, R., & Ronald, R. (2017). The role of urban form in sustainability of community:
The case of Amsterdam. Environment and Planning B: Urban Analytics and City Science,
44(1), 33–53.
Banaei, M., Yazdanfar, A., Hatami, J., & Gramann, K. (2017). Walking through architectural spaces: The impact of interior forms on human brain dynamics. Frontiers in
Human Neuroscience, 11. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2017.00477.
Barker, R. G. (1978). Habitats, environments, and human behavior (1st ed.). San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass 1978.
Bechtel, R. B. (1977). Enclosing behavior: Dowden. Hutchinson & Ross.
van den Bosch, M., & Bird, W. (2018). Oxford textbook of nature and public health : The role
of nature in improving the health of a population (1st ed.). Oxford: Oxford University
Press 2018.
Chiamulera, C., Ferrandi, E., Benvegnù, G., Ferraro, S., Tommasi, F., Maris, B., et al.
(2017). Virtual reality for neuroarchitecture: Cue reactivity in built spaces. Frontiers
in Psychology, 8(185), https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2017.00185.
Clemenson, G. D., Deng, W., & Gage, F. H. (2015). Environmental enrichment and neurogenesis: From mice to humans. Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences, 4, 56–62.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cobeha.2015.02.005.
Dazkir, S. S., & Read, M. A. (2012). Furniture forms and their inﬂuence on our emotional

10

Journal of Environmental Psychology 66 (2019) 101344

I. Bower, et al.

neuroscience 'touches' architecture: From hapticity to a supramodal functioning of
the human brain. Frontiers in Psychology, 7, 866. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.
2016.00866.
Parkinson, T., & De Dear, R. (2016). Thermal pleasure in built environments: Spatial
alliesthesia from contact heating. Building Research & Information, 44(3), 248–262.
https://doi.org/10.1080/09613218.2015.1082334.
Pati, D., O'Boyle, M., Hou, J., Nanda, U., & Ghamari, H. (2016). Can hospital form trigger
fear response? HERD, 9(3), 162–175. https://doi.org/10.1177/1937586715624210.
Radwan, A., & Ergan, S. (2017). Quantifying human experience in interior architectural
spaces.
Rodríguez, A., Rey, B., & Alcañiz, M. (2011). Immersive virtual environments for emotional engineering: Description and preliminary results. Annual Review of
CyberTherapy and Telemedicine, 9, 161–164.
Roe, J., Aspinall, P., Mavros, P., & Coyne, R. (2013). Engaging the brain: The impact of
natural versus urban scenes using novel EEG methods in an experimental setting, Vol. 1.
Roessler, K. K. (2012). Healthy Architecture! Can environments evoke emotional responses? Global Journal of Health Science, 4(4), 83–89.
Sampson, R. J., Morenoﬀ, J. D., & Gannon-Rowley, T. (2002). Assessing" neighborhood
eﬀects": Social processes and new directions in research. Annual Review of Sociology,
443–478.
Schoggen, P., Barker, R. G., & Fox, K. A. (1989). Behavior settings : A revision and extension
of roger G. Barker's ecological psychology. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press
1989.
Sharma, G., Kaushal, Y., Chandra, S., Singh, V., Mittal, A. P., & Dutt, V. (2017). Inﬂuence
of landmarks on wayﬁnding and brain connectivity in immersive virtual reality environment. Frontiers in Psychology, 8(1220), https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2017.
01220.
Shemesh, A., Talmon, R., Karp, O., Amir, I., Bar, M., & Grobman, Y. J. (2017). Aﬀective
response to architecture – investigating human reaction to spaces with diﬀerent
geometry. Architectural Science Review, 60(2), 116–125. https://doi.org/10.1080/
00038628.2016.1266597.
Skjaeveland, O., & Garling, T. (1997). Eﬀects of interactional space on neighbouring.
Journal of Environmental Psychology, 17(3), 181–198.
Steinmetz, J., & Posten, A.-C. (2017). Physical temperature aﬀects response behavior.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 70, 294–300. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jesp.2016.12.001.
Tsunetsugu, Y., Miyazaki, Y., & Sato, H. (2005). Visual eﬀects of interior design in actualsize living rooms on physiological responses. Building and Environment, 40(10),
1341–1346. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2004.11.026.
Unger, D. G., & Wandersman, A. (1985). The importance of neighbors: The social, cognitive, and aﬀective components of neighboring. American Journal of Community
Psychology, 13(2), 139–169.
Van Praag, H., Kempermann, G., & Gage, F. (2000). Neural consequences of enviromental
enrichment. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 1(3), 191.
Vartanian, O., Navarrete, G., Chatterjee, A., Fich, L. B., Gonzalez-Mora, J. L., Leder, H.,
et al. (2015). Architectural design and the brain: Eﬀects of ceiling height and perceived enclosure on beauty judgments and approach-avoidance decisions. Journal of
Environmental Psychology, 41, 10–18. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvp.2014.11.006.
Vartanian, O., Navarrete, G., Chatterjee, A., Fich, L. B., Leder, H., Modroño, C., et al.
(2013). Impact of contour on aesthetic judgments and approach-avoidance decisions
in architecture. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 110(Supplement 2),
10446–10453. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1301227110.
Vecchiato, G., Jelic, A., Tieri, G., Maglione, A. G., De Matteis, F., & Babiloni, F. (2015a).
Neurophysiological correlates of embodiment and motivational factors during the
perception of virtual architectural environments. Cognitive Processing, 16(1),
425–429. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10339-015-0725-6.
Vecchiato, G., Tieri, G., Jelic, A., De Matteis, F., Maglione, A. G., & Babiloni, F. (2015b).
Electroencephalographic correlates of sensorimotor integration and embodiment
during the appreciation of virtual architectural environments. Frontiers in Psychology,
6(1944), https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01944.
Zhang, X., Lian, Z., & Wu, Y. (2017). Human physiological responses to wooden indoor
environment. Physiology & Behavior, 174, 27–34. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physbeh.
2017.02.043.
Zhang, L., Mike Chi, Y., Edelstein, E., Schulze, J., Gramann, K., Velasquez, A., et al.
(2010). Wireless physiological monitoring and ocular tracking: 3D calibration in a fullyimmersive virtual health care environment, Vol. 2010.

Module in earth Systems and environmental sciences. Elsevier.
Fich, L. B., Jönsson, P., Kirkegaard, P. H., Wallergård, M., Garde, A. H., & Hansen, Å.
(2014). Can architectural design alter the physiological reaction to psychosocial
stress? A virtual TSST experiment. Physiology & Behavior, 135, 91–97. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.physbeh.2014.05.034.
Fox, C., Merali, Z., & Harrison, C. (2006). Therapeutic and protective eﬀect of environmental enrichment against psychogenic and neurogenic stress. Behavioural Brain
Research, 175(1), 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbr.2006.08.016.
Francis, J., Giles-Corti, B., Wood, L., & Knuiman, M. (2012). Creating sense of community:
The role of public space. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 32(4), 401–409.
Fried, M. (1982). Residential attachment: Sources of residential and community satisfaction. Journal of Social Issues, 38(3), 107–119.
Gómez-Puerto, G., Munar, E., & Nadal, M. (2016). Preference for curvature: A historical
and conceptual framework. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 9(712), https://doi.org/
10.3389/fnhum.2015.00712.
Higgins JPT, A. D., & Sterne, J. A. C. (2017). Chapter 8: Assessing risk of bias in included
studies.Cochrane Handbook for systematic reviews of interventions version 5.2.0. In
C. R. Higgins JPT, J. Chandler, & M. S. Cumpston (Eds.). Cochrane. Retrieved from
www.training.cochrane.org/handbook.
Higgins, J., & Green, S. (2011). Cochrane Handbook for systematic reviews of interventions.
2018.
Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K., McGuire, L., Robles, T. F., & Glaser, R. (2002). EMOTIONS, morbidity, and mortality: New perspectives from psychoneuroimmunology. Annual
Review of Psychology, 53(1), 83. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.psych.53.100901.
135217.
Kim, M., Chong, S. C., Chun, C., & Choi, Y. (2017). Eﬀect of thermal sensation on emotional responses as measured through brain waves. Building and Environment, 118,
32–39. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2017.03.023.
Kirk, U., Skov, M., Christensen, M. S., & Nygaard, N. (2009). Brain correlates of aesthetic
expertise: A parametric fMRI study. Brain and Cognition, 69(2), 306–315. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.bandc.2008.08.004.
Klepeis, N. E., Nelson, W. C., Ott, W. R., Robinson, J. P., Tsang, A. M., Switzer, P., et al.
(2001). The national human activity pattern survey (NHAPS): A resource for assessing exposure to environmental pollutants. Journal of Exposure Analysis and
Environmental Epidemiology, 11, 231. https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.jea.7500165.
Küller, R., Ballal, S., Laike, T., Mikellides, B., & Tonello, G. (2006). The impact of light
and colour on psychological mood: A cross-cultural study of indoor work environments. Ergonomics, 49(14), 1496–1507. https://doi.org/10.1080/
00140130600858142.
Lazarus, R. S. (1991). Emotion and adaptation. Oxford University Press on Demand.
Lee, Y., & Hsieh, S. (2014). Classifying diﬀerent emotional states by means of EEG-based
functional connectivity patterns, Vol. 9.
Liddell, B. J., Brown, K. J., Kemp, A. H., Barton, M. J., Das, P., Peduto, A., et al. (2005). A
direct brainstem–amygdala–cortical ‘alarm’ system for subliminal signals of fear.
NeuroImage, 24(1), 235–243. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.08.016.
Mavros, P., Austwick, M. Z., & Smith, A. H. (2016). Geo-EEG: Towards the use of EEG in
the study of urban behaviour. Applied Spatial Analysis and Policy, 9(2), 191–212.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12061-015-9181-z.
Ma, K. W., Wong, H. M., & Mak, C. M. (2018). A systematic review of human perceptual
dimensions of sound: Meta-analysis of semantic diﬀerential method applications to
indoor and outdoor sounds. Building and Environment, 133, 123–150. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.buildenv.2018.02.021.
McDonald, M. W., Hayward, K. S., Rosbergen, I. C. M., Jeﬀers, M. S., & Corbett, D. (2018).
Is environmental enrichment ready for clinical application in human post-stroke rehabilitation? Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience, 12. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnbeh.
2018.00135 135-135.
Nanda, U., Ghamari, H., Pati, D., & Bajema, R. (2013). Lessons from neuroscience: Form
follows function, emotions follow form. Intelligent Buildings International, 5(SUPPL1),
61–78. https://doi.org/10.1080/17508975.2013.807767.
Nithianantharajah, J., & Hannan, A. (2006). Enriched environments, experience-dependent plasticity and disorders of the nervous system. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 9,
697.
Öhman, A., Flykt, A., & Lundqvist, D. (2002). Evolutionary perspectives, psychophysiological data, and neuropsychological mechanisms. Cognitive neuroscience of emotion,
296.
Papale, P., Chiesi, L., Rampinini, A. C., Pietrini, P., & Ricciardi, E. (2016). When

11

Minerva Access is the Institutional Repository of The University of Melbourne

Author/s:
Bower, I; Tucker, R; Enticott, PG
Title:
Impact of built environment design on emotion measured via neurophysiological correlates
and subjective indicators: A systematic review
Date:
2019-12-01
Citation:
Bower, I; Tucker, R; Enticott, PG, Impact of built environment design on emotion measured
via neurophysiological correlates and subjective indicators: A systematic review, JOURNAL
OF ENVIRONMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY, 2019, 66
Persistent Link:
http://hdl.handle.net/11343/227576
File Description:
Published version

