Protect your BSN: No Handshakes, just Namaste!

∗

Priyanka Bagade, Ayan Banerjee, Joseph Milazzo and Sandeep K.S. Gupta
IMPACT Lab (http://impact.asu.edu/)
School of Computing Informatics and Decision Systems Engineering
Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona
Email: {pbagade, abanerj3, joseph.milazzo, sandeep.gupta}@asu.edu
Abstract—Privacy of physiological data collected by a network
of embedded sensors on human body is an important issue to be
considered. Physiological signal-based security is a light weight
solution which eliminates the need for security key storage and
complex exponentiation computation in sensors. An important
concern is whether such security measures are vulnerable to
attacks, where the attacker is in close proximity to a Body
Sensor Network (BSN) and senses physiological signals through
non-contact processes such as electromagnetic coupling. Recent
studies show that when two individuals are in close proximity,
the electrocardiogram (ECG) of one person gets coupled to
the electroencephalogram (EEG) of the other, thus indicating
a possibility of proximity-based security attacks. This paper
proposes a model-driven approach to proximity-based attacks on
security using physiological signals and evaluates its feasibility.
Results show that a proximity-based attack can be successful even
without the exact reconstruction of the physiological data sensed
by the attacked BSN. Our results show that with a 30 second
handshake we can break PSKA with an average probability of
0.3 (0.24 minimum and 0.5 maximum).
Keywords—Model based, Security in Body Sensor Network

I.

I NTRODUCTION

The usage of miniature sensors with the capability of
wireless communication for pervasive health monitoring are
prone to security vulnerabilities and hence may jeopardize the
privacy of patient data [1]–[3]. Wireless sensors in Body Sensor Networks (BSNs) thus employ some form of cryptography
to encrypt physiological data while sending it to a base station
over the insecure wireless channel [4]. Recently researchers
have proposed the usage of physiological data collected by the
sensors to generate cryptographic keys to be used for secure
communication as a lightweight and usable alternative to traditional elliptic key or shared secret key cryptography [1]–[3],
[5]–[8]. Physiological signal based security have two working
principles: a) time variance, the features used for generation
of cryptographic keys vary over time and hence replay attacks
are not possible, and b) variance among individuals, where
physiological features of one individual is very different from
those of the other. Hence, an implicit assumption is that to
break the physiological signal based security the attacker has
to posses the sample by sample physiological data, which
was used to generate the key. In this paper, we show that
these two assumptions may not hold and physiological signal
based security can be violated using generative models, which
only need certain features as opposed to sample by sample
physiological measurements. Further, the paper also shows
that the features required for developing these models can be
obtained by an adversary who is in close proximity of the
attacked BSN. On a lighter note, we propose to use the Indian
∗ This research is funded by NSF grant CNS-0831544 and IIS-1116385.

tradition of greeting with a Namaste, without physical contact
and from a distance, instead of shaking hands just to keep your
BSN secure.
Physiological signal based security such as the Inter-pulseInterval (IPI) based key generation [2] or the physiological
value based key agreement (PSKA) [1] depend on some
common feature sensed by physiological sensors on the same
human body [7]. The assumption is that the common feature
can be extracted by any two sensors at different parts of the
body and cannot be obtained by any sensor not deployed on
the body. The operation of PSKA as an example is shown in
Figure 1 and discussed in more detail in Section III. When two
sensors on body need to communicate securely they consider
their current buffer of the physiological signal and extract
features, peaks of fast Fourier transforms in case of PSKA.
These features are similar if not exactly same between the
two sensors on the same body. A cryptographic key is then
generated at the sender and each of the features are transformed
using a function of the key. For PSKA it is a polynomial
transformation where the coefficients are derived from the key.
The transformed features are then obfuscated and transferred
to the receiver; fuzzy vault is used for PSKA. At the receiver
end all the features need not match. Only a few exactly
matching features, their number being a polynomial order with
respect to the key size, are needed to regenerate the key. Any
person with access to the extracted features can regenerate the
cryptographic key in polynomial time w.r.t. the key size. While
an attacker without access will need exponential time.
The attacker however may not need the timely physiological features. Representation of physiological signals using
generative models has been studied thoroughly [9] for quite
some time. Such models allow regeneration of diagnostically
equivalent current physiological signals from past data [10].
Approaches for electrocardiogram (ECG) and photoplethysmogram (PPG) signals have been exhaustively tested for robustness [10], [11]. Thus, if an attacker can obtain a generative
model of the physiological signal using past data then it
can regenerate diagnostically equivalent present signals and
can potentially use it to obtain timely features. However,
these generative models provide signals which are not sample
by sample equivalent to the current signal. Instead they are
equivalent in some key parameters such as heart rate, standard
deviation of heart rate, low frequency to high frequency (lfhf)
ratio, and morphological patterns of the signal. In this paper,
we show that diagnostic equivalence is sufficient to generate
timely features so that an attacker can break PSKA.
To generate timely features using the generative model
the attacker however needs current values of the diagnostic
features. Research in ECG artifacts reduction from electroen-

cephalogram (EEG) measurements show that when two individuals are in close proximity (less than four feet), the ECG of
one person gets reflected or coupled with the EEG of the other
person [12], [13]. However, exact re-construction of the ECG
from other person’s EEG may not be successfully achieved
unless actual physiological data for ECG is available [14].
We use ECG artifact reduction algorithms proposed in recent
literature and modify them to extract diagnostic parameters
such as R-R intervals, and R peak locations. These diagnostic
parameters are used by the generative models to extract timely
features to break PSKA. Specifically this paper makes the
following contributions: it a) provides a security attack on
PSKA using generative models of ECG and PPG, b) analyzes
the feasibility of the attack based on experiments on real
data obtained from MIT PhysioNet data base as well as data
collected at the IMPACT Lab, and c) proposes a methodology
for the attacker to extract diagnostic features from close
proximity which makes the security attack non-invasive.
II.

R ELATED W ORK

Using models to analyze the system security has become
a focused area of research. Attack models of known threats
and real vulnerabilities are injected in the systems to test
the security flaws [15]. Using only known threats model
to check system security might give false alarms due to
unusual legitimate input traffic. Thus adaptive attack model
which learns traffic data behavior is used along with known
threats model [16]. Attack models are executed on system
models to define system security metrics [17]. These attack
models are created by considering attack preferences, goals and
methodology of attacking the system. Network vulnerabilities
play an important role in securing the system. Model checker
are created to check these vulnerability [18]. These results
are further used to create attack models to test the system
security in such a susceptible environment. Further, application
specific query modeling technique is used to detect web server
and web-based attacks [19]. All these techniques are focused
on creating models of the attack to test the system security.
However this paper focuses on a methodology where system
models are used to break the system.
III.

S YSTEM MODEL FOR BSN SECURITY

In a BSN, wearable sensors are communicating with each
other through the wireless channel. The wireless channel is
under continuous surveillance by an attacker who has access
to all the information that a sensor sends to a base station.
In this scenario the sensor has to transfer a secret information
to the base station without the attacker knowing it. Secure
communication between sensors can be achieved by generating
secure key using physiological signals. Figure 1 shows the
generic system model for establishing security in BSN. Let S1
and S2 be the physiological signals collected by body wearable
sensors in a BSN. The sensed signals are processed further to
extract features, A1 = f (S1 ) and A2 = f (S2 ) respectively.
Each sensor uses these features to generate security key k,
by using signal processing algorithms. The extracted set of
features A1 and A2 are not equal as they are not time
synchronized. However, there exists some correlation between
them, A1 ∩ A2 = A. The signal S1 is further processed to
obtain k. The signal transformation, Tk (a1i ) is done on A1
set using k, where a1i is the ith feature value in set A1 . The
number of such pairs are equal to the size of set A1 . Set C

Fig. 1. BSN model, physiological value based security, and threat model.

contains the obfuscation of pairs [Tk (a1i ), a1i ] which is to be
sent to other sensor over the wireless channel. Before sending
C, large number of randomly generated pairs are added to C to
enhance security of the legitimate pairs. These extra chaff pairs
are of the form (b1 , b2 ), where b1 6= Tk (b2 ). This is called a
vault. The secret k is stored in this vault and receiver needs to
unlock it to know the secret. Once the receiver gets the vault
C, it first calculates set D such that it tries to match values
from set A2 with second value in the pair from each pair in
set C. The signal transformation algorithm T is known to all
sensors in the BSN. Thus the value of k is easily obtained by
using pairs in set D and transformation algorithm T , which
unlocks the vault.
This method of establishing secure communication in
BSNs using physiological value-based signals is presented
in [1], [2], [5]. PSKA [1] shows the usefulness of this method
using two sensors, ECG (Electrocardiography) and PPG (Photoplenthysymogram). It uses Fast Fourier Transform (FFT)
and peak detection techniques to extract features from physiological signals, f = peakDetect(F F T (S2 )). The sender
generates a random key, which is used as the coefficients of
a secret polynomial. A fuzzy vault is created using ordered
pairs of feature values and their secret polynomial evaluations,
(x, y). The vault is obfuscated using large number of chaff
points, which are randomly generated ordered pairs such that
y is not a polynomial evaluation of x. On the receiver end,
the set of extracted features using peak detection algorithm is
used to match vault pairs. If the feature value of receiver sensor
signal matches with feature values with sender, then those pairs
are is used to find the coefficients of the polynomial, which
unlocks the secret from the vault.
Physiological signal based key agreement has two basic
assumptions: trust model and threat model.
A. Trust Model
Sensors, in a BSN, communicate over insecure wireless
channel. While securing a BSN over untrusted wireless channel, it is assumed that there are no jamming and denial of
service attacks, where the wireless channels are blocked so
that legitimate devices can not communicate with each other.
This is done by tuning the transmitting frequency of adversary
sensor to that of legal receiver sensor. We have also assumed
that, no malicious sensor is implanted in BSN user’s body as
this can not be done unknowingly to the user and doctors, who

are able to do this during surgery, are considered as trusted
entities in BSN health services.
Although, we have assumed that there are no such attacks
or there is no adversary sensor in contact with the user, still
communication between sensors in a BSN can be interrupted.
To save energy and avoid network congestion, a pilot sensor is
selected among the sensors in the BSN. All non-pilot sensors
send sensed data to the pilot sensor, assuming it is a legitimate
sensor, which then sends redundancy-free data to the base
station in the BSN. Base station is also considered as non
tamper-able entity in BSN. If the adversary entity becomes
successful in establishing itself as a pilot sensor, the data
privacy, in the BSN, is easily compromised to attacks by
injecting malicious information into the system. Attacker can
tamper non-pilot sensor also, as the pilot sensor assumes that
it is receiving information from a legal sensor in the network.
These loopholes in the BSN security allows adversary to break
into an system’s security.
B. Threat Model
Generative models are developed to regenerate physiological signals by using morphology and signal variations from
raw data. These models are trained using raw data so that
they can replicate the diagnostic features for a particular person. Generative models use clinically important features from
physiological signals such as R-R interval, high frequency
and low frequency ratio, and heart rate for ECG signal. The
signal obtained from sensor and synthetic signal obtained from
generative model are not time synchronized. However, they
are highly correlated in frequency domain because of the
same diagnostic features. Currently available BSN security
methods, such as PSKA, relies on diagnostic features of
human physiology. Generative models also use these features
to generate physiological signals which do not vary over
time. Thus the original signal features used in PSKA are
similar to that extracted from synthetic signal. This regenerated
signal can be used for breaking the security protocol between
sensors in BSN (Figure 1). This section will focus on how the
secure communication protocol used in previous section can
be breached by an attacker using generative models.
Algorithm 1 illustrates the attack model for BSNs using
synthetic signal. It has been observed that physiological signals
are periodic in nature and have typical temporal variations.
With the help of physiological signal nature, the model is
formed by extracting peculiar features from signal S2 which
is used in Section III, to unlock the vault sent by signal S1 .
These features are sufficient for reproducing signal S2 using a
generative function. Sm2 is the modeled signal. Henceforth,
variables subscripted with m will be used for the attacker
who has access to a model and all other variables will be for
the BSN user. Attacker will perform similar signal processing
on the synthetic signal which would have been done on the
receiver end. Now attacker has got the set of extracted feature,
Am2 , from physiological signal similar to valid receiver. By
eavesdropping in a BSN, attackers can get vault from one of
the sensor. The attacker algorithm uses the synthetic signal
and received vault to reveal the shared secret. A1 and Am2
are raw and modeled features, respectively for the same
physiological signals of the same person. Thus there should
be some commonality between them, i.e. Im = A1 ∩ Am2 6=.
Using Im , the secret shared by sender will be revealed by the

Algorithm 1 Attacker Algorithm
1: Extract signal parameters using signal model M and raw data S2 ,
P = M (S2 ).
2: Use generative model G to generate synthetic signal, Sm2 = G(P ).
3: Apply feature extraction algorithms f on modeled signal, Am2 =
f (Sm2 ).
4: Get vault from BSN = {Tk (a1 ), a1 }∀a1 ∈ A1 + chaff points.
5: Call PSKA decryption algorithm with (vault, Am2 ) as argument.

attacker. Thus, if the attacker gets hold of physiological signal
model and raw data, security key can be obtained to breach
the BSN system. Here, our hypothesis is that, Am2 ∩ A1 6=,
and ||Im || ≥ ||k||. We will support this hypothesis using two
physiological signals, ECG and PPG, in following sections.
IV.

M ODEL - BASED ATTACK ON PSKA

Model based attack on physiological value based security
assumes that the attacker has access to a generative model
of the signal. The attacker generates a signal sample that is
diagnostically equivalent to the original signal. The attacker
then extracts timely features from the diagnostically equivalent
signal and uses the features to break the vault. In this section,
we discuss the generative models of ECG and PPG that the attacker can use. We also show how the PSKA features extracted
from the original signal and the synthesized diagnostically
equivalent signal match to a level that it is sufficient for the
attacker to break the vault.
A. Generative Models of ECG and PPG
A generative model is essentially a function of time and
physiological parameters of the signal, G = f (t, a, b, c, . . .).
The parameters a, b, c and so on can be of two types:
a) temporal, which represent time properties of the signal
for example average heart rate, standard deviation and b)
morphological, which represent the shape of the signal for
example, relative height of R peak with respect to Q peak
for ECG. The temporal features are often used for diagnosis.
The morphological parameters are obtained through a training
phase. In this phase an interval of the physiological signal is
taken and a mathematical model is fitted to it. The parameters
of the mathematical model capture the morphology of the
signal. In this paper we have considered PSKA for PPG as
well as ECG signals. Hence we need generative models for
both PPG and ECG signals.
For ECG signals, the ECGSYN generative model is
used [9]. The ECG signal has five peaks: P, Q, R, S and
T. Each peak is represented using a Gaussian function with
parameters a, b, and θ, which determine its height, width and
distance to R peak, respectively. The inter-beat features of
ECG (mean and standard deviation of heart rate and LF/HF
ratio) are modeled using three parameters: hrmean, hrstd and
lfhf ratio respectively. Two generative models for PPG are
proposed [11], one of which considered modeling the pumping
process of the heart using and electric circuit, while the other
one used templates of PPG waves as models. In this paper, we
use both the models for PPG.
B. Feature Extraction from Original and Synthetic signal
PSKA processes ECG and PPG signals in frequency
domain which gives better idea about the physiology of the

Amplitude

3000

50

2000

0

500

1000
Sample Number

1500

2000

0

200

150
100

50

1000
0

FFT Peaks for Original PPG signal
FFT Peaks for Modeled PPG signal

250

4000

100

-50

300

FFT of Original PPG signal
FFT of Modeled PPG signal

Peak Value

PPG signal Amplitude(uV)

5000
Original PPG signal
Modeled PPG signal

150

0

5

10

15
Frequency

20

25

30

00

10

20
30
Peak Index

40

50

Fig. 2. (a) Original and Modeled PPG signal (b) Original and Modeled PPG signals in frequency domain (c) Peak detection on FFT processed
Original and Modeled PPG signals.

patient as compared to time domain. In feature extraction
process, FFT algorithm is applied on both ECG and PPG.
Peak detection algorithm is then applied on these processed
signals to get peak values pv and the locations of the peaks pi .
For every peak, the feature is calculated as concatenation of
location of peak and its value, pv pi . The set of all calculated
features for every peak in FFT processed signal forms
extracted feature set for that signal. This set of calculation
is done for each sensor in the BSN. In this section, we
demonstrate that features extracted from signals obtained
using generative model gives maximum matching with that
of original signal features. This makes our hypothesis of
breaking security using models stronger.
We have obtained original ECG and PPG signals
for 10 subjects from the PhysioBank database
(http://www.physionet.org/physiobank). Generative models
discussed in the previous section are used to generate synthetic
signals using these original physiological signals. Figure 2
shows similarity between the original and modeled signals
of PPG after processing them with FFT and peak detection
algorithm. At every processing level, they show maximum
correlation. Equivalent results for ECG were also obtained.
This increases the possibility of generating same key from
both the signals.
As the original and modeled signal are highly correlated, false
positive and false negative results will give us the maximum
possible polynomial order for which the security protocol
can be broken. False positive means when the number of
common features between original and generated signal are
more for a given polynomial order where as false negative
means the number of common features for the modeled signal
are less than given polynomial order. Figure 3 shows that
for polynomial order 7 the values of false positive and false
negative are minimum. It implies that up to polynomial order
7, the vault can be broken using model based attack.
V.

F EASIBILITY OF MODEL - BASED ATTACK

Previous sections of the paper talks about model based
attack on BSN security is possible if attacker gets the model
of the physiological signal for the person irrespective of time
when the reading has been taken. However, feasibility of the
attack depends on getting access to physiological model of the
person. We focus on how to obtain the physiological model in
this section.
The attacker needs the generative model of the physiological signal and the current values of the temporal diagnostic

Fig. 3.

False positive and False negative Results for PPG.

features to regenerate timely physiological features for breaking PSKA. The generative model can be obtained in two ways:
From old physiological data: Physiological signals such
as ECG and PPG do not change in their morphology over
time [10], [11]. Thus, old physiological data can be used to
learn the morphological features of the generative model.
From sniffed network data: An attacker can sniff the network
and get access to the secure data. A brute force algorithm to
break the security can be employed to obtain physiological
signals. These signals can be used to train a generative
model on morphological features. The assumption is that the
morphology of physiological signals do not change over time.
However, the temporal features are hard to obtain and
without them timely physiological features cannot be generated
and the attacker cannot break the BSN security. To obtain
temporal features we propose to use the principle of electricity
touch as explained in [12]. The electromagnetic field generated
by heart is much stronger than that of brain electrical signals.
It has been experimentally proven that, due to the stronger
electromagnetic field generated by heart, whenever people
come in contact with each other or even if they are in proximity
with each other, the heart signal of one person gets reflected
in the brain signal of other person. It is observed that if
ECG and EEG for different people in contact by touch or in
proximity are over-layed then they show similar wave form.
Also, particularly alpha wave in EEG signal of one person
has a strong relation with R-waves in the ECG signal of other
person in contact. Using this result, the attacker can potentially
get access to temporal features by only holding hands or
staying in proximity with that person while wearing an EEG

Algorithm 2 Algorithm for Extracting ECG from EEG using
Wavelet Transform
1:
2:
3:
4:

Fig. 4.

Step-wise execution of proximity-based attack using models.
EEG wavelet
coefficients

150
100
50
0
4.41

4.42

4.43

4.44

4.45

4.46

4.47

4.48 x10

4

Filter the EEG signal to remove DC offset.
Use Coiflet-1 wavelet to perform CWT on EEG signal.
Extract the scale 4 data from the CWT processed EEG signal.
Set window length to detect peaks in CWT processed EEG signal
such that threshold y-values in the window length should represent
R-peak.
5: Update window length after every 5 seconds by averaging the
distance between R-peaks obtained in last 5 seconds.
6: Repeat step 5 to detect all R-peaks in the EEG.

125 Hz. Smith Medical pulse-oximeters (http://ww.smithsoem.
com/applications/oxiboards) were used for PPG sensing.

Time (seconds)
ECG (uV)

400

B. Extracting ECG from EEG using Wavelet Transform

200
0
-200
4.41

4.42

4.43

4.44

4.45

4.46

4.47

4.48 x10 4

Time (seconds)

Fig. 5.

R peaks from ECG data and wavelet transform of EEG.

sensor. Wavelet transform can be used to extract temporal
features such as heart rate, standard deviation of heart rate
and low frequency top high frequency ration (Section IV-A)
from EEG without using ECG as the reference signal [14].
We explore this possibility of obtaining physiological signal of the person using proximity-based technique in the
following sections. Figure 4 shows the step-wise execution
of this attack. The attacker wears an EEG sensor, sensing
EEG(A), and comes in close proximity of a BSN user with
an ECG monitor sensing ECG(B). The BSN is using PSKA
to secure inter sensor communication. The attacker shakes
hand with the BSN user and his EEG, EEG0 (A) contains
EEG(A) plus the ECG R waves of the BSN user (ECG(B)).
The attacker then samples the EEG signals and performs a
windowed wavelet transform on EEG0 (A). For each upward
wave of ECG(B) there exists a corresponding “oscillation”
in the wavelet transform. The oscillations are localized and
converted to peaks using an adaptive thresholding technique as
discussed in [13]. The R peaks from ECG(B) and the peaks of
wavelet coefficients of EEG0 (A) are shown in Figure 5. The
peaks obtained from EEG0 (A) are then used to determine the
heart rate, standard deviation, and lfhf ratio of ECG(B). This
also involves removing the EEG peaks corresponding to P, Q,
S, and T waves in the ECG. For this we run peak detection in
the ECG and map them to EEG peaks. The temporal features
thus obtained combined with the morphology features can
be used to generate the ECG signals of the BSN user. The
generated ECG signals are used to break the vault in PSKA.
A. Experimental Setup and Data Collection
We collected three physiological signals from the subject.
The first is EEG in which we used Emotiv Epoch Neuroheadset
Model 1.0 (http://www.emotiv.com/). It contains 14 channels
(AF3, F7, F3, FC5, T7, P7, O1, O2, P8, FC6, F4, F8, AF4)
with numbers indicative of the specific position of the lead
and a sampling rate of 128 Hz. The data is run through
a built-in digital 5th order Sinc filter and a notch filters
at 50 and 60 Hz to remove noise from power lines. The
ECG sensor is a Wireless Shimmer2r device. The sensor
has 3 leads (LA, RA, NL) and a sampling frequency of

Continuous Wavelet Transform (CWT) can capture temporal and morphological features in the signal which enable
it to be used for analyzing physiological signals [20]. CWT
gives information about the available frequencies in the signal
at a particular time, where as Fourier transform (FT) can only
illustrate frequency content in overall signal. Thus to detect
ECG in EEG, CWT is preferred over FT as both temporal
and morphological information are required. CWT uses a basic
signal function which is scaled according to the frequency and
time shift allowing specific shape properties of the signal to
be analyzed. CWT for x(t) signal is expressed as:
1
x(t) = √
a

Z

∞
−∞

x(t)ψ ∗



t−b
a


dt,

(1)

where, a > 0 is a scaling parameter, b is a shift parameter
and ψ is a wavelet function. The scale parameter a, is used
to denote how much the wavelet is stretched or compressed.
Smaller the value of a, more the compressed wavelet. The
shape of wavelet becomes stretched with increase in value
of a. R-peaks in ECG from EEG signal are correctly obtained using Coiflet-1 wavelet with scale parameter 4 [14].
Algorithm 2 gives the steps for extracting ECG R-peaks
from EEG using CWT. These R-peaks are further used to
create model for ECG signal for the particular person.
Algorithm 2 was applied to a 10 minute
data sample obtained
from two volunteers in
the IMPACT Lab (Figure 7). The data collection protocol included
an initial period of separation of the two individuals J and S and
then a period of holding
hands. Each period was
Fig. 7. Experimental setup for collecting
30 seconds in length.
data from subjects at the IMPACT Lab.
The window length of
Algorithm 2 was varied
from 1 sample to 128 samples. The inter peak interval of the
peaks obtained from EEG signals is obtained. It is observed
that when J was away from S, the average inter peak interval
of the wavelet of J’s EEG at a window length equal to the
average R-R interval of J, is equal to the average R-R interval
of J. However, when J and S were in proximity the average
inter peak interval of the wavelet transform of J’s EEG at
a window length equal to average R-R interval of J’s ECG

S and J far apart

S and J holding hands
91 samples

Average Inter Peak Interval (samples)

Average Inter Peak Interval (samples)

100
90
80
70
60
50

40

76 samples

R-R Interval of J
R-R Interval of S
Inter peak interval of
wavelet of J’s EEG

30
20
10
0

72 samples
10

20

30

40

50

60

70

Window Length (samples)

Fig. 6.

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

VI.

C ONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we have shown how models can be used to
breach the security in Body Sensor Networks. To demonstrate
the possible model-based attack using generative models, PPG
and ECG signals for multiple users are used. This paper identifies methods for retrieving private physiological signals from
a BSN user through a non-invasive method. The proximity
based attack is accomplished by extracting ECG of a BSN
user from EEG of an adversary entity, when these two subjects
were holding hands. We could break PSKA with an average
probability of 0.3 with 30 second handshakes.

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

R EFERENCES

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

88 samples

80

82 samples

70
60
50
40
30

R-R Interval of J
R-R Interval of S
Inter peak interval of
wavelet of J’s EEG

20

72 samples

10
0

10

20
30
40
50
Window Length (samples)

60

70

80

Comparison of R-R intervals of J and S with average inter peak interval of the wavelet transform of J’s EEG.

reduced considerably indicating overlap of S’s and J’s R peaks
in J’s ECG. This fact is shown in Figure 6. S’s R peaks can
then be obtained by removing J’s R peaks from the peaks
obtained from J’s EEG’s wavelet transform. This shows how
we can obtain the diagnostic parameters of S from J’s EEG.
This makes model based attack on PSKA feasible. This attack
was tested on 30 mins EEG and ECG data obtained from
different pairs of individuals shaking hands for 30 seconds at
regular time intervals and we found a 30% average accuracy
of ECG R peak detection from EEG. This implies that with
a 30 second handshake we can break PSKA with an average
probability of 0.3. The minimum and maximum probabilities
were 0.24 and 0.5, respectively.

[1]

100
90

K. K. Venkatasubramanian, A. Banerjee, and S. K. S. Gupta, “PSKA:
Usable and secure key agreement scheme for body area networks,”
Information Technology in Biomedicine, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 14,
no. 1, pp. 60 –68, Jan. 2010.
C. Poon, Y.-T. Zhang, and S.-D. Bao, “A novel biometrics method to
secure wireless body area sensor networks for telemedicine and mhealth,” Communications Magazine, IEEE, vol. 44, no. 4, pp. 73 – 81,
April 2006.
K. K. Venkatasubramanian and S. K. S. Gupta, “Physiological valuebased efficient usable security solutions for body sensor networks,”
ACM Transactions on Sensor Networks, vol. 6, no. 4, p. 31, 2010.
O. Morchon, H. Baldus, and D. Sanchez, “Resource-efficient security
for medical body sensor networks,” in Wearable and Implantable Body
Sensor Networks, BSN Intl. Workshop on, April 2006, pp. 4 pp. –83.
S. J. Kim and S. K. S. Gupta, “Audio-based self-organizing authentication for pervasive computing: A cyber-physical approach,” in Parallel
Processing Workshops, ICPPW. International Conference on, Sept.
2009, pp. 362 –369.
K. K. Venkatasubramanian, A. Banerjee, and S. K. S. Gupta, “Ekgbased key agreement in body sensor networks,” in INFOCOM Workshops 2008, IEEE, 2008, pp. 1–6.

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

S. Cherukuri, K. K. Venkatasubramanian, and S. K. S. Gupta, “Biosec:
a biometric based approach for securing communication in wireless
networks of biosensors implanted in the human body,” in Parallel
Processing Workshops, Proceedings International Conference on, Oct.
2003, pp. 432–439.
A. Banerjee, K. Venkatasubramanian, and S. K. S. Gupta, “Challenges
of implementing cyber-physical security solutions in body area networks,” in Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on
Body Area Networks, ser. BodyNets ’09. ICST, Brussels, Belgium,
Belgium: ICST (Institute for Computer Sciences, Social-Informatics and
Telecommunications Engineering), 2009, pp. 18:1–18:8.
P. E. McSharry, G. D. Clifford, L. Tarassenko, and L. A. Smith, “A
dynamical model for generating synthetic electrocardiogram signals,”
Biomedical Engineering, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 289–
294, 2003.
S. Nabar, A. Banerjee, S. K. S. Gupta, and R. Poovendran, “GeM-REM:
Generative model-driven resource efficient ecg monitoring in body
sensor networks,” in Body Sensor Networks (BSN), 2011 International
Conference on. IEEE, 2011, pp. 1–6.
——, “Resource-efficient and reliable long term wireless monitoring of
the photoplethysmographic signal,” in Proceedings of the 2nd Conference on Wireless Health, ser. WH ’11. New York, NY, USA: ACM,
2011, pp. 9:1–9:10.
R. McCraty, M. Atkinson, D. Tomasino, and W. Tiller, “The electricity
of touch: Detection and measurement of cardiac energy exchange
between people,” Brain and Values: Is a Biological Science of Values
Possible. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Publishers, vol.
1998, pp. 359–379, 1998.
S. Firoozabadi, N. Jafarnia Dabanlo, F. Mohammadi, and S. Koozehgari,
“Effect of physical contact (hand-holding) on heart rate variability,”
International Journal of Advanced Computer Science, vol. 2, no. 12,
2012.
J.-A. Jiang, C.-F. Chao, M.-J. Chiu, R.-G. Lee, C.-L. Tseng, and R. Lin,
“An automatic analysis method for detecting and eliminating ECG
artifacts in EEG,” Computers in biology and medicine, vol. 37, no. 11,
pp. 1660–1671, 2007.
A. Morais, A. Cavalli, and E. Martins, “A model-based attack injection
approach for security validation,” in Proceedings of the 4th international
conference on Security of information and networks, ser. SIN ’11. New
York, NY, USA: ACM, 2011, pp. 103–110.
A. Valdes and K. Skinner, “Adaptive, model-based monitoring for cyber
attack detection,” in Recent Advances in Intrusion Detection. Springer,
2000, pp. 80–93.
E. LeMay, M. D. Ford, K. Keefe, W. H. Sanders, and C. Muehrcke,
“Model-based security metrics using adversary view security evaluation
(advise),” in Quantitative Evaluation of Systems 8th International
Conference on. IEEE, 2011, pp. 191–200.
R. W. Ritchey and P. Ammann, “Using model checking to analyze
network vulnerabilities,” in Security and Privacy, Proceedings. IEEE
Symposium on. IEEE, 2000, pp. 156–165.
C. Kruegel, G. Vigna, and W. Robertson, “A multi-model approach to
the detection of web-based attacks,” Computer Networks, vol. 48, no. 5,
pp. 717–738, 2005.
M. Unser and A. Aldroubi, “A review of wavelets in biomedical
applications,” Proc. of the IEEE, vol. 84, no. 4, pp. 626–638, 1996.

