Journal of Neural Engineering
J. Neural Eng. 12 (2015) 043002 (9pp)

doi:10.1088/1741-2560/12/4/043002

Perspective

Assessment of brain–machine interfaces
from the perspective of people with paralysis
Christine H Blabe1, Vikash Gilja1,2,4, Cindy A Chestek1,3,
Krishna V Shenoy4,5,6,7,8, Kim D Anderson9,10 and Jaimie M Henderson1,6
1

Department of Neurosurgery, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and Neurosciences Program, University of California
San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA
3
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, and Neuroscience, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
4
Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94303, USA
5
Department of Bioengineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
6
Stanford Neurosciences Institute, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
7
Stanford Bio-X, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
8
Department of Neurobiology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
9
Department of Neurological Surgery, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA
10
The Miami Project to Cure Paralysis, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA
2

E-mail: cblabe@stanford.edu and henderj@stanford.edu
Received 5 December 2014, revised 23 April 2015
Accepted for publication 5 May 2015
Published 14 July 2015
Abstract

Objective. One of the main goals of brain–machine interface (BMI) research is to restore
function to people with paralysis. Currently, multiple BMI design features are being investigated,
based on various input modalities (externally applied and surgically implantable sensors) and
output modalities (e.g. control of computer systems, prosthetic arms, and functional electrical
stimulation systems). While these technologies may eventually provide some level of beneﬁt,
they each carry associated burdens for end-users. We sought to assess the attitudes of people
with paralysis toward using various technologies to achieve particular beneﬁts, given the burdens
currently associated with the use of each system. Approach. We designed and distributed a
technology survey to determine the level of beneﬁt necessary for people with tetraplegia due to
spinal cord injury to consider using different technologies, given the burdens currently
associated with them. The survey queried user preferences for 8 BMI technologies including
electroencephalography, electrocorticography, and intracortical microelectrode arrays, as well as
a commercially available eye tracking system for comparison. Participants used a 5-point scale to
rate their likelihood to adopt these technologies for 13 potential control capabilities. Main
Results. Survey respondents were most likely to adopt BMI technology to restore some of their
natural upper extremity function, including restoration of hand grasp and/or some degree of
natural arm movement. High speed typing and control of a fast robot arm were also of interest to
this population. Surgically implanted wireless technologies were twice as ‘likely’ to be adopted
as their wired equivalents. Signiﬁcance. Assessing end-user preferences is an essential
prerequisite to the design and implementation of any assistive technology. The results of this
survey suggest that people with tetraplegia would adopt an unobtrusive, autonomous BMI
system for both restoration of upper extremity function and control of external devices such as
communication interfaces.
S Online supplementary data available from stacks.iop.org/JNE/12/043002/mmedia
1741-2560/15/043002+09$33.00

1

© 2015 IOP Publishing Ltd Printed in the UK

J. Neural Eng. 12 (2015) 043002

C H Blabe et al

Keywords: spinal cord injury, brain–computer interface, brain–machine interface, paralysis,
BCI, BMI
(Some ﬁgures may appear in colour only in the online journal)
1. Introduction

beneﬁts and burdens of BMI technology. To address this
need, we conducted a technology survey to determine the
level of beneﬁt necessary for this group of end-users to
consider using different technologies, given their associated
burdens.

Paralysis, including spinal cord injury (SCI), is a signiﬁcant
health problem in the United States (US) and around the
world. According to the Christopher Reeve foundation, there
are approximately 6 million people living with paralysis in the
US alone (Reeve Foundation 2013). Of these, there are an
estimated 1275 000 people living with SCI. Daily living for
much of this population requires assistance from caregivers as
well as the need for assistive technology (AT). AT aims to
augment function for individuals with disability to increase
their ability to perform activities for daily living and interact
with the environment (Collinger et al 2013a). These assistive
technologies can improve the functional independence of
persons with SCI, affording them greater opportunity for
societal participation and integration (Hedrick et al 2006).
With recent revolutionary advances in low-power highperformance electronics, and advances in prosthetic (robotic)
arms (e.g., DARPA APL and DEKA arms), brain–machine
interfaces (BMIs) are showing increased potential as practical
assistive technologies. BMIs translate neural activity measured from the brain into control signals for guiding external
devices, or to potentially drive implantable functional electrical stimulation systems (FES) to reanimate paralyzed limbs
(e.g., Chadwick et al 2011). Although these technologies
have shown promise in recent animal and human studies,
improving the performance, reliability, and form factor of
these systems is critical to their successful clinical translation
(Ryu and Shenoy 2009). Numerous research groups are currently investigating many different BMI design features
including interface modality, control output (e.g. on-computer-screen cursor control and typing, prosthetic (robotic) or
FES arm control) and wireless capability (e.g., Homer
et al 2013). Although one important and high-visibility goal
of BMI research is to provide the ability to restore reach and
grasp functionality (e.g., Hochberg et al 2012, Collinger
et al 2013a), many other types of BMI-based assistive technologies are being actively pursued (Hochberg and Anderson 2012). However, despite these impressive technological
achievements, the actual utility of these early-generation BMI
systems for people with paralysis is still an unanswered
question.
As BMI technology is developed, it is critically important
to consider end-user needs and preferences. The beneﬁts of
any AT needs to be balanced by considerations of cosmetic
appearance, donning/dofﬁng of external devices, risks of
surgical implantation and the expected functional lifetime of
implants, and the possibility of using the technology without
the intervention of a caregiver or technician. Collectively,
these factors may be considered as burdens associated with
the use of the technology (e.g., Gilja et al 2011). Considering
the importance of understanding user-centered design, there is
a need to understand how people with paralysis view the

2. Methods
2.1. Survey design

Visual and written descriptions were provided for eight different technologies, including seven BMI technologies (four
implantable, three externally applied) and an eye tracking
system (ﬁgures 1 and 2). Each technology was then paired
with one of 13 hypothetical applications (table 1) and participants indicated their likelihood to adopt the technology for
that particular application. There were nine pages of questions, including one page regarding demographics. Qualtrics
survey software (Provo, Utah) was used to design the webbased survey, which was run on our Stanford Neural Prosthetics Laboratory (NPTL) computer servers.
Illustrations depicted the structure and design of each
technology with relationship to the head and brain (ﬁgure 1).
The same generic head and face drawing was used for all
technology depictions to create a uniform appearance. Each
illustration included associated text, which provided the following information: design of the device; its usage (including
information on donning and dofﬁng the device, assistance
needed, cleaning and maintenance); a description of any
surgical procedures required; physical restrictions while using
the device; and any known side effects (ﬁgure 2). The BMI
technologies included Electroencephalography (EEG), Electrocorticography (ECoG), and intracortical microelectrode
arrays, in several different form factors. An eye tracker device
was also included as an example of a commercially available
device associated with minimal burden to the user. Both
‘wired’ and ‘wireless’ examples of implantable and external
devices were illustrated, and descriptions were provided
highlighting potential differences between them including
technician intervention and possible restriction of movement.
We chose devices that were currently available on the market,
used in a clinical setting, or estimated to be available in the
not too distant future. We explicitly avoided providing an
expected lifetime for any of the devices, given that this data is
not known for some of the more speculative technologies.
For each represented technology, thirteen hypothetical
control capabilities were presented and the participant was
asked to rate his or her likelihood to adopt the technology
given that it could provide one of the control capabilities.
Participants rated their likelihood to use each combination of
technology and capability on a 5-point Likert scale using the
descriptors ‘very unlikely’ ‘unlikely’ ‘undecided’ ‘likely’ and
2

J. Neural Eng. 12 (2015) 043002

C H Blabe et al

Figure 1. Each illustration was presented to the participant in order to provide a visual description of each BMI technology.

‘very likely’ (see supplementary materials ﬁgure 3, where a
copy of the survey will be provided). Thus, the participant
provided thirteen rankings for each of the eight technologies,
for a total of 104 technology/application ratings. Table 1 lists
all of the BMI technologies and control capabilities explored
in the survey.

print by research survey personnel and electronically via SCI
discussion group blogs and the NPTL web site. This
recruitment methodology is analogous to existing work
(Anderson et al 2009). Participation in the survey was strictly
voluntary and no incentives were given. Only adult individuals (18 years or older) with cervical SCI living in the US
were included in this study, excluding people with other
causes of paralysis in order to provide a focused perspective
on a particular population.
The following supplemental documents were attached to
the survey: an introductory statement explaining the purpose
of the survey; directions for participating; a ‘Right to Privacy’
statement; and an explanation of how the results were to be
used. This information served as the informed consent statement, as required by the Stanford Institutional Review Board,

2.2. Participant recruitment

Links to the universal resource locator address of the survey
were posted on websites frequented by people living with
SCI, including The Christopher and Dana Reeve Foundation’s web site discussion group (www.spinalcordinjuryparalysis.org), and SCI and Support forum group (www.
apparelyzed.com). Advertisements were also distributed in
3

J. Neural Eng. 12 (2015) 043002

C H Blabe et al

Figure 2. Each illustration included associated text, which described the design of the device: its usage (including information on donning

and dofﬁng the device, assistance needed, cleaning and maintenance); a description of any surgical procedures required; physical restrictions
while using the device, and any known side effects.

the general populace. 31 (20.2%) of respondents have a
graduate degree as well as a college degree, 59 (38.6%).
To aid in side-by-side comparison of the large number of
individual technologies and control capabilities, we displayed
the data in a stacked bar graph format, coloring response
categories of ‘likely’ and ‘very likely’ so that they could be
easily distinguished from neutral or negative responses
(ﬁgure 3(a)). Each graph divides the respondents into four
groups based on their level and time post injury. We divided
the respondents into C1–4 and C5–7 levels of injury as we
expected these groups to have different needs. For example,
most SCI individuals with a level of injury at C1–4 are only
able to move their heads and possibly shrug their shoulders,
whereas individuals with a level of injury at C5–7 might be
able to bend their elbows, extend their wrists, or use their
hands, depending on the injury level (Consortium for Spinal
Cord Medicine 1999). There were 54 respondents in the C1–4
group and 102 respondents in the C5–7 group. We also
divided respondents into those more or less than 10 years
after cervical SCI, to assess the hypothesis that respondents
who had lived with their injury for a longer period of time

which approved the study. Written documentation of
informed consent was waived.

3. Results
3.1. Participant demographics

Two hundred and ninety-three people living with paralysis
completed at least a portion of the survey. Of those 285
individuals, 156 qualiﬁed for study participation (i.e., completed all pages of questions, including the demographics
section, were living with cervical SCI, and were age 18 years
or older). The 129 individuals were excluded in this analysis
due to their level of tetraplegia e.g., thoracic, lumbar, other
paralysis, or did not complete the entire survey. Age of survey
respondents ranged from 15–81 years old (those under 18
were excluded from participation) and time post injury ranged
from 1 month to 62 years. Table 2 lists the participants’ level
of injury, mechanism of injury, and education level. The
education level of respondents is considered high compared to
4

J. Neural Eng. 12 (2015) 043002

C H Blabe et al

restoration of hand grasp, while 67% would be likely to adopt
BMI technology for restoration of natural arm movement
without sensation. This high interest in restoring upper
extremity function is not unexpected, given prior surveys on
this topic (Anderson 2004, Snoek et al 2004).
Control of external devices such as prosthetic (robotic)
arms, computer cursors and wheelchairs was of moderately
high interest to participants with upper cervical injuries (more
than 60% of C1–4 respondents less than 10 years post injury)
(ﬁgure 3(b)). Participants with injuries at C5–7 were much
less likely to adopt these control capabilities unless they were
described as being fast, accurate or natural. Across all groups,
the two external control capabilities of most interest were high
speed typing of 40 words per minute and control of a fast
prosthetic (robotic) arm. In fact, those with injuries at C5–7
were more interested in either of these modalities than in
restoring less-than-natural native arm movement, via FES
(ﬁgure 3(b)).
Form factor of the BMI system had a large inﬂuence on
the likelihood of adoption (ﬁgure 3(C)). 80–95% of respondents would be ‘likely’ to adopt eye-tracking glasses or a
wireless EEG headset resembling the ‘Epoc’ manufactured
and sold by Emotiv (San Francisco, California). Across all
control types, externally applied EEG systems, either glued to
the scalp or integrated into an elastic cap, were no more likely
to be adopted than surgically implanted wireless intracortical
electrode arrays or wireless ECoG grids. According to survey
data, these surgically implanted wireless technologies were
twice as ‘likely’ to be adopted as their wired equivalents; the
median likelihood of adoption was statistically signiﬁcantly
higher for each control type (p < 1.3 × 10−5 by sign rank test
for all pairwise comparisons; false discovery rate < 0.005).
Wireless systems are not currently available today; however,
it is likely that they will be available in the no-too-distant
future (Homer et al 2013). Wired systems and arrays are
available and used in clinical settings and research trials (e.g.,
Simeral et al 2011, Hochberg et al 2012, Collinger
et al 2013b, Nuyujukian et al 2014, Pandarinath et al 2014).
Somewhat surprisingly, respondents were more interested in
adopting an implanted wireless intracortical array compared
to an external wired EEG cap (see ﬁgures 4(b) and (i)). 39%
of C1–4 respondents that had been injured for 10 years or
more were likely to adopt the wired EEG cap, whereas 52%
of the same population were likely to adopt the wireless
intracortical technology.
Given that interest in restoration of hand grasp was the
highest priority, we used this metric to compare the likelihood
to adopt several different technologies. 48% of C1–4
respondents and 45% of C5–7 respondents with less than 10
years post injury were likely to adopt the wireless ECoG
technology to restore some grasp of the hand, whereas 60% of
C1–4 and 46% of C5–7 of the same group were likely to
adopt wireless intracortical technology if it could restore some
grasp of their hand (see ﬁgure 4(b)). This level of interest was
sustained for restoration of almost any upper extremity
function (ﬁgure 4).
Interestingly, C5–7 participants that had been injured for
10 years or longer expressed quite a bit of interest in using

Table 1. Assistive applications and BMI Technologies assessed in
the survey.

Assistive applications
To TYPE at 3 words per minute with some errors
To TYPE at 3 words per minute with no errors
To TYPE at 40 words per minute with some errors
To CONTROL a cursor on a computer screen with less than perfect
accuracy
To CONTROL a cursor on a computer screen in a complete natural way
To CONTROL a robot with a camera
To CONTROL a robot with a camera and an arm
To CONTROL the steering of a wheelchair
To CONTROL a robotic arm with slow speed and acceptable
accuracy
To CONTROL a robotic arm with high speed and accuracy
To RESTORE some arm movement which is useful but not completely natural
To RESTORE natural arm movement without sensation
To RESTORE some ability to grasp with the hand
BMI Technologies
Eye tracking glasses
30+ electrodes glued to the head
Cap with wires
Wireless cap
Wired device on the brain
Wireless device on the brain
Wired device in the brain
Wireless device in the brain

would show less interest in AT in general, and BMI systems
in particular.
Results for each BMI technology are illustrated in a
separate graph, comparing the likelihood of adoption of each
of the 13 control types by the 4 summary groups i.e., typing,
cursor, external actuator, native limb (ﬁgure 3(b)). Summary
graphs are also presented to compare likelihood for adoption
for each BMI technology for a given control type
(ﬁgure 3(c)).

3.2. Survey results

Likelihood to adopt BMI technology varied widely depending
on the control type offered (ﬁgure 3(b)). For simplicity in the
following discussion, the term ‘likely’ will be used to represent the top two categories of ‘likely’ and ‘very likely’
combined, as represented visually with saturated colors in
ﬁgures 3(a) and 4(a).
Overall, participants were most likely to adopt technology that would allow restoration of natural upper extremity
movement and/or hand grasp. 91% of respondents with injury
level C1–4 who were less than 10 years post injury said they
would be ‘likely’ to adopt a BMI technology if it could
restore some grasp of their hand or restore natural arm
movement without sensation (ﬁgure 3(b)). 78% of C5–7
participants would be likely to adopt BMI technology for
5

J. Neural Eng. 12 (2015) 043002

C H Blabe et al

Figure 3. (a) Legend used throughout for creating the composite graphs of technology, control type, and likelihood of adoption. Red colored

bars denote upper cervical injury, while blue colored bars denote lower surgical injury. Each of these groups is subdivided further into
participants <10 years post-injury (lighter colors) and >10 years post-injury (darker colors). Categories of ‘likely’ and ‘very likely’ were
depicted in increasingly saturated colors, with ‘very unlikely’ and ‘unlikely’ depicted in shades of gray, and ‘undecided’ depicted as white.
(b) Composite graph showing likelihood of adopting any particular control type, independent of the BCI technology used as a sensor. (c)
Composite graph showing likelihood of adopting any BCI technology, independent of control type. (b) Interest in each control type for any
technology. (c) Interest in each technology for any control type.

BMI technology for computer cursor control. 56% of C5–7,
and 80% of C1–4 respondents, all injured for 10 years or
more were likely to adopt a technology if it could control a
cursor on a computer screen in a completely natural way (see
ﬁgure 3(b)). The same population was interested in a BMI
technology for high speed typing; 64% of C5–7, and 72% of
C1–4 respondents, would be ‘likely’ to adopt a technology if
it would allow them to type at 40 words per minute with some
errors (see ﬁgure 3(b)).

Table 2. Participant demographics.

Total
Level of injury
C1–2
C3
C4
C5
C6
C7

8 (5.1%)
18 (11.5%)
28 (17.9%)
60 (38.5%)
30 (19.2%)
12 (7.7%)

3.3. Respondents’ comments
Regarding mechanism of injury
By vehicle crash
By diving accident
By sporting accident
By fall
By violence

63 (47%)
31 (23.1%)
23 (17.2%)
16 (12%)
1 (0.7%)

Education level
Grad school
College Graduate
Some college
Tech school
High school degrees

90
59
32
15
16

Severity of injury (by self-report)
Incomplete cervical spinal cord injuries
Complete cervical spinal cord injuries

At the bottom of each page of questions, and at the end of the
survey, a comment box was offered to the respondent. These
comments provided a better understanding of how the
respondents viewed each technology. Respondents left a total
of 228 comments throughout the entire survey. Of those 228
comments, 17 comments related to aesthetic and cosmetic
appearance, 26 related to the needs for independence, and 20
related to maintenance, cleaning, and concerns about surgery.
Table 3 is a selection of representative comments left by
survey respondents.

(58.8%)
(38.6%)
(21%)
(9.8%)
(10.5%)

4. Discussion
90 (60%)
60 (40%)

As BMI technologies move closer to practical clinical
implementation, it is very important to take into consideration
6

J. Neural Eng. 12 (2015) 043002

C H Blabe et al

Figure 4. (a) Legend (see ﬁgure 3(a)). (b)–(i) Composite graphs showing likelihood of adopting each of the eight different BCI technologies
for a given control capability.

the preferences and priorities of the intended population of
end-users. This survey was designed to cover a broad range of
technologies and capabilities in a hypothetical manner,
understanding that some of the technologies listed are not
presently (and may never be) able to provide restoration of
some of the more advanced functions listed (e.g., an EEG
wireless cap to restore grasp of the participant’s hand). We
chose BMI technologies that are currently on the market, used
in clinical trials, will be available in the near term, or are
actively being developed and researched. A number of ﬁndings emerged from analysis of the survey results that should
be of interest to researchers working in this ﬁeld.
Restoration of upper extremity function is a high priority
for people living with cervical SCI. We found that 80% of all
survey respondents would consider adopting at least one of
the presented technologies if it could restore some hand grasp.
Up to 60% of respondents would undergo a neurosurgical
procedure if the system could provide improvements in upper
extremity function. These results are consistent with other
surveys that have suggested that restoration of hand grasp is
an important goal. Snoek and colleagues (Snoek et al 2004)
surveyed 565 members of the Dutch and UK participants
living with paraplegia and tetraplegia to identify how their
quality of life would be impacted by improvements in different functions. 75% of Dutch participants and 80% of UK
participants stated that they expected the greatest improvement in quality of life to occur with improved hand function.
Anderson (Anderson 2004) surveyed 681 participants with
SCI to rank the recovery of seven functions in regard to

improving quality of life. Again, the highest priority for
survey participants with cervical SCI was to regain arm/hand
function, with 48.7% indicating that regaining arm and hand
function would most improve their quality of life, regardless
of time post injury. Collinger and collegues surveyed 57 SCI
veterans, 21 (37%) with tetraplegia and 36 (63%) with
paraplegia, to assess their knowledge about currently available assistive technologies and to determine whether they
believe BCIs have the potential to increase their function and
improve their quality of life (Collinger et al 2013a). The
majority of participants (80%) indicated that they would use a
BCI if it did not inconvenience other aspects of their lives.
Most participants felt that BCI would be most useful for
controlling FES devices to restore movement or function to
their own muscles. Collinger and colleagues asked the participants how likely they would be to have surgery to implant a
BCI. Noninvasiveness was rated as a high priority; however,
a majority would consider having surgery; 24% with tetraplegia and 33% with paraplegia said deﬁnitely, and 33% with
tetraplegia and 27% with paraplegia, reported that they would
be very likely to undergo surgery for a BCI implant (Collinger et al 2013a).
AT, which can include devices such as BMI systems, is
less likely to be used if it is aesthetically unpleasing, unreliable, or difﬁcult or embarrassing to use (Wielandt et al 2006).
A national survey on technology abandonment found that
29.3% of all devices obtained were abandoned (Phillips and
Zhao 1993). There are many reasons for AT abandonment.
When technology-using family caregivers were surveyed, the
7

J. Neural Eng. 12 (2015) 043002

C H Blabe et al

Importantly, invasive procedures such as surgery were often
as acceptable as less-invasive therapy and exercise (Denise
Brown-Triolo et al 2002).
The National SCI Statistics Center (2013) divides data
into categories of SCI persons with a level of injury at C1–4
and C5–8. Level of injury clearly plays a role in the likelihood
of adopting a BMI technology, although certain technologies
and control capabilities were of uniform interest to all people
with cervical SCI. For example, there was no difference in the
likelihood to adopt a system for fast typing (>40 WPM)
between those with upper and lower cervical spine injuries.
Looking at ﬁgure 4(c) (‘Interest in each technology for any
control type’), there is about a 10% difference between the
responses from participants with injuries at C1–4 compared to
those with injuries at C5–7.
An unexpected ﬁnding was the interest in high-performance typing by people with SCI of all levels, particularly
those with retained arm movement. For all BMI technologies,
C5–7 respondents would be more likely to adopt the technology for high speed typing than for steering a wheelchair or
using any kind of robotic assistive device. This suggests that
communication is a very important priority and that emphasis
should be placed on development of high performance typing
interfaces.
Penetrating electrodes with a smaller form factor were
slightly preferred to surface electrodes that covered more area.
Thus, electrodes ‘in the brain’ were preferred to electrodes
‘on the brain’, perhaps because of their smaller form factor.
Wireless systems were more appealing to respondents than
wired systems. In fact, respondents preferred wireless brain
implants to wired EEG caps, suggesting that the convenience
and cosmetic advantages of a wireless system outweighed the
concern for surgery. This ﬁnding suggests that development
of wireless systems should be a very high priority in BMI
research.
Allowing the opportunity for survey respondents to
provide comments allowed a more detailed view of individual
attitudes, which provided valuable context to the numeric
results of the survey. In concordance with prior surveys,
aesthetic appearance is a very high priority, even potentially
outweighing concerns about undergoing a neurosurgical
procedure. Overall, respondents were more likely to adopt a
wireless version of any technology than its wired counterpart.
The ability to operate a BMI system independently, without
reliance on caregiver or technician assistance, was frequently
mentioned as a potential barrier to adoption.

Table 3. Comments from survey respondents.

Aesthetic/cosmetic appearance
‘I like that it [wireless device] would be under skin, undetectable…
no wires coming out to accidentally rip out, or get infected.’ C4–6,
Female, Injured in 1991.
‘Make the [wireless EEG] cap something desirable to wear. This
would be a challenge in an ofﬁce setting.’ C1–3, Female, Injured
in 1969.
‘I think some of this is interesting but a lot of devices are extremely
awkward and don’t think that I would functionally use them.’ C5,
Male, Injured in 1988.

Seeking independence
‘Device requiring a technician would not be helpful in every day life.
I would be willing to try anything that would give me any
movement to my arms.’ C4–5, Female, Injured in 2003.
‘If device cannot be operated independently, what’s the point? Might
as well have the assistant perform [tasks].’ C7, Male, Injured
in 2006.
‘Any device that limits movement of head will be difﬁcult.’ C6,
Male, Injured in 2006.
‘Needing a technician around nulliﬁes the beneﬁts to me—not
needing one would make this attractive.’ C3, Male, Injured
in 1996.

Maintenance concerns
‘Why take chance of infection with invasive technology—if constant
human monitoring must be at hand—they can perform the task.’
C7, Male, Injured in 1972
‘Limited range of motion, periodic daily cleaning and constant
supervision unacceptable.’ C5, Male, Injured in 2010
‘Don't like the idea of having something permanently coming out of
my head, and required cleaning per day.’ C4–5, Female, Injured
in 2003.

three leading perceived barriers to technology use were the
following: (1) technology will be too expensive (37%), (2)
technology doesn’t solve or address a caregiving issue (22%),
and (3) belief that the relation (patient) would resist accepting
the technology (20%). This qualitative survey queried 1000
technology-using family caregivers (Caregiver Survey, 2011).
However, caregivers may have different perceived barriers
than end-users.
One survey did attempt to identify and understand the use
of AT to restore mobility from the perspective of persons with
SCI (Denise Brown-Triolo et al 2002). This survey assessed
various priorities including standing, walking, climbing stairs
and transferring, as well as minimally acceptable levels of
mobility for adopting AT. Other questions in this survey
addressed cost of the technology and willingness to experience related risks. Visibility of assistive devices was consistently seen as an area of concern. For individuals with an
already physically stigmatizing condition, such as SCI, these
cosmetic barriers may provide a high burden to adoption,
even if the device provides signiﬁcant restoration of function.

5. Conclusions
Understanding the needs of the SCI community is of paramount importance in the design of BMI devices. Discovering
the limitations to using BMI technologies including procedure, cosmetic appearance, assistance needed, and daily usage
of each device is imperative in the early stages of
development.
In our survey, respondents were concerned about aesthetic factors, issues with daily maintenance, and the potential
8

J. Neural Eng. 12 (2015) 043002

C H Blabe et al

requirement for technician intervention. For BCI systems to
achieve widespread adoption, they will need to be autonomous, unobtrusive and require little to no maintenance. They
must also provide high performance in order to be widely
adopted by people with all levels of paralysis. These factors
seem to favor a surgically implanted system that is ‘always
on,’ requiring no donning/dofﬁng or caregiver intervention.
In terms of output, there was a preference for restoring natural
movement, which might be accomplished through FES.
However, there were a substantial number of people interested in a variety of applications, including prosthetic
(robotic) arms, wheelchairs, and computer cursors. Overall,
these results show strong enthusiasm in the community of
people living with paralysis, speciﬁcally SCI, for the development of BMI assistive technologies.

Collinger J L, Foldes S, Bruns T M, Wodlinger B, Gaunt R and
Weber D J 2013b Neuroprosthetic technology for individuals
with spinal cord injury J. Spinal Cord Med. 36 258–72
Consortium for Spinal Cord Medicine 1999 Outcomes Following
Traumatic Spinal Cord Injury: Clinical Practice Guidelines
for Health-crae Professionals (Paralyzed Veterans of America)
Gilja V, Chestek C A, Diester I, Henderson J M, Deisseroth K and
Shenoy K V 2011 Challenges and opportunities for nextgeneration intracortically based neural prostheses IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng. 58 1891–9
Hedrick B, Louise-Bender Pape T, Heinemann A W,
Ruddell J L and Reis J 2006 Employment issues and assistive
technology use for persons with spinal cord injury J. Rehabil.
Res. Dev. 43 185–98
Hochberg L R and Anderson K D 2012 BCI users and their needs
Brain–Computer Interfaces: Principles and Practice ed
J Wolpaw and L Wolpaw (Oxford: Oxford University Press)
ch 19 pp 317–23
Hochberg L R et al 2012 Reach and grasp by people with tetraplegia
using a neurally controlled robotic arm Nature 485 372–5
Homer M L, Nurmikko A V, Donoghue J P and Hochberg L R 2013
Implants and decoding for intracortical brain computer
interfaces Ann. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 15 383
Nuyujukian P, Pandarinath C, Gilja V, Blabe C, Perge J A,
Jarosiewicz B, Hochberg L R, Shenoy K and Henderson J M
2014 Design of a high performance intracortical brain
computer interface for a person with amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis Neuroscience Meeting Planner (Washington, DC)
Pandarinath C, Gilja V, Blabe C, Jarosiewicz B, Perge J A,
Hochberg L R, Shenoy K V and Henderson J M 2014 HighPerformance Communication using Neuronal Ensemble
Recordings from the Motor Cortex of a Person with ALS vol
92 (Washington, DC: American Society for Stereotactic and
Functional Neurosurgery) pp 1–75 (suppl 1)
Phillips B and Zhao H 1993 Predictors of assistive technology
abandonment Assist. Technol. 5 36–45
Reeve Foundation 2013 One Degree of Separation: Paralysis and
Spinal Cord Injury in the United States (Christopher and Dana
Reeve Foundation)
Ryu S I and Shenoy K V 2009 Human cortical prostheses: lost in
translation? Neurosurg. Focus 27 E5 special issue on
advances in brain–machine interfaces
Simeral J D, Kim S P, Black M J, Donoghue J P and Hochberg L R
2011 Neural control of cursor trajectory and click by a human
with tetraplegia 1000 days after implant of an intracortical
microelectrode array J. Neural Eng. 8 025027
Snoek G J, IJzerman M J, Hermens H J, Maxwell D and
Biering-Sorensen F 2004 Survey of the needs of patients with
spinal cord injury: impact and priority for improvement in
hand function in tetraplegics Nat. Spinal Cord 42 526–32
Wielandt T, Mckenna K, Tooth L and Strong J 2006 Factors that
predict the post-discharge use of recommended assistive
technology (AT) Disab. Rehabil.: Assist. Technol. 1 29–40

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Paul Nuyujukian, Chethan Pandarinath, and Adam Sachs for helpful conversations regarding
this manuscript.
This work was supported by NIH-NINDS, Stanford
Institute for Neuro-Innovation and Translational Neuroscience (SINTIN), Stanford BioX/NeuroVentures, and the
Garlick Foundation.

References
Anderson K D 2004 Targeting recovery: priorities of the spinal cordinjured population J. Neurotrauma 21 1371–83
Anderson K D, Fridén J and Lieber R L 2009 Acceptable beneﬁts and
risks associated with surgically improving arm function in
individuals living with spinal cord injury Spinal Cord 47 334–8
Brown-Triolo D L, Roach M J, Nelson K and Triolo R J 2002
Consumer perspectives on mobility: implications for
neuroprosthesis design J. Rehabil. Res. Dev. 39 659–70
Chadwick E K, Blana D, Simeral J D, Lambrecht J, Kim S P,
Taylor D M, Hochberg L R, Donoghue J P and Kirsch R F
2011 Continuous neuronal ensemble control of simulated
arm reaching by a human with tetraplegia J. Neural Eng. 8
034003
Collinger J L, Boninger M L, Bruns T M, Curley K, Wang W and
Weber D J 2013a Functional priorities, assistive technology,
and brain–computer interfaces after spinal cord injury
J. Rehabil. Res. Dev. 50 145–60

9

