EEG-Based Hypo-vigilance Detection
Using Convolutional Neural Network
Amal Boudaya1,2(B) , Bassem Bouaziz1,2(B) , Siwar Chaabene1,2 , Lotﬁ Chaari3 ,
Achraf Ammar4 , and Anita Hökelmann4
1

2

Multimedia InfoRmation Systems and Advanced Computing Laboratory
(MIRACL), University of Sfax, 3021 Sfax, Tunisia
amalboudaya71@gmail.com, Bassem.Bouaziz@isims.usf.tn,
siwarchaabene@gmail.com
Digital Research Center of Sfax, B.P. 275, 3021 Sakiet Ezzit, Sfax, Tunisia
3
University of Toulouse, IRIT-ENSEEIHT, Toulouse, France
lotfi.chaari@toulouse-inp.fr
4
Institute of Sport Science, Otto-von-Guericke University Magdeburg,
39104 Magdeburg, Germany
ammar.achraf@ymail.com, anita.hoekelmann@ovgu.de

Abstract. Hypo-vigilance detection is becoming an important active
research areas in the biomedical signal processing ﬁeld. For this purpose,
electroencephalogram (EEG) is one of the most common modalities in
drowsiness and awakeness detection. In this context, we propose a new
EEG classiﬁcation method for detecting fatigue state. Our method makes
use of a and awakeness detection. In this context, we propose a new EEG
classiﬁcation method for detecting fatigue state. Our method makes use
of a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) architecture. We deﬁne an
experimental protocol using the Emotiv EPOC+ headset. After that, we
evaluate our proposed method on a recorded and annotated dataset. The
reported results demonstrate high detection accuracy (93%) and indicate
that the proposed method is an eﬃcient alternative for hypo-vigilance
detection as compared with other methods.

Keywords: Hypo-vigilance detection

1

· EEG · CNN

Introduction

Hypo-vigilance has been one of the major causes of accidents in many areas
such as driving [1], aviation [2] and military sector [3]. Hence, the drowsiness
problem has gained great interest from researchers. This is today a real up to
date problem within the current Covid-19 [4] pandemic where medical stuﬀ is
generally overbooked. In fact, the drowsy condition is expressed predominantly
by the emergence of various behavioral signs such as heaviness in terms of reaction, reﬂex reduction, occurrences of yawning, heaviness of the eyelids and/or
the diﬃculty of keeping the head in the frontal position relative to the ﬁeld of
c The Author(s) 2020

M. Jmaiel et al. (Eds.): ICOST 2020, LNCS 12157, pp. 69–78, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-51517-1_6

70

A. Boudaya et al.

vision. Many studies [5–8] have been proposed to detect hypo-vigilance based
on biomedical signals such as electroencephalogram (EEG), electrocardiogram
(ECG), electromyogram (EMG), and electrooculogram (EOG). Given, its high
temporal resolution, portability and reasonable cost, the present work focus on
hypo-vigilance detection by analyzing EEG signal of various brain’s functionalities using fourteen electrodes placed on the participant’s scalp. On the other
hand, deep learning networks oﬀer great potential for biomedical signals analysis
through the simpliﬁcation of raw input signals (i.e., through various steps including feature extraction, denoising and feature selection) and the improvement of
the classiﬁcation results.
In this paper, we focus on the EEG signal study recorded by fourteen electrodes for hypo-vigilance detection by analyzing the various functionalities of
the brain from the electrodes placed on the participant’s scalp.
Various deep learning architectures [9] exist such as Convolutional Neural
Network (CNN), Recurrent CNN (R-CNN), Auto-Encoder (AE), Deep Belief
Network (DBN), including Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) and Gated Recurrent Units (GRU). As in [10], the CNN architecture is the most used to biomedical signals analysis providing a high classiﬁcation accuracy. Previous related
work [11] proposes a hypo-vigilance detection method using CNN by facial features. This method showed a classiﬁcation accuracy of 92.33%. Likewise [12],
introduces an adaptive conditional representation learning system for driver
drowsiness detection based on a 3D-CNN. The proposed system consists of four
steps (spatio-temporal representation, data preprocessing, features combination
and somnolence detection). The experimental results show a detection accuracy
equal to 92.04%. In this paper, we propose a CNN hypo-vigilance detection
method using EEG data in order to classify drowsiness and awakeness states.
Accordingly, the proposed approach including used equipment are presented in
Sect. 2. Section 3 describes the experimental results and the evaluation of the
employed method. Finally, a conclusion and future work are drawn in Sect. 4.

2

Proposed Approach

Fig. 1. Pipeline for the proposed approach.

EEG-Based Hypo-vigilance Detection Using Convolutional Neural Network

71

As shown in Fig. 1, the realization of the proposed approach is suggested
by two primary procedures: data acquisition and data analysis. The following
subsections provide a detailed explanation of each procedure.
2.1

Data Acquisition

The EEG data acquisition procedure is made up of two main steps which are
data collection and data preprocessing.
Data Collection: To collect the raw EEG data from participants, we use an
Emotiv EPOC+ headset as shown in Fig. 2[a] for the data acquisition process.
The key feature of this headset is a non-invasive Brain computer Interface (BCI)
tool designed for the development of human brain and contextual research [13].
The Emotiv EPOC + helmet contains fourteen active electrodes with two
reference electrodes (DRL and CMS), as shown in Fig. 2[b]. The electrodes are
placed around the participant’s head in the structures of the following zones:
frontal and anterior parietal (AF3, AF4, F3, F4, F7, F8, FC5, FC6), temporal
(T7, T8) and occipital-parietal (O1, O2, P7, P8).

Fig. 2. (a) Emotiv EPOC+ helmet, (b) Location of the Emotiv EPOC+ helmet electrodes (10–20 International Standard).

Data Preprocessing: The speciﬁc preprocessing steps of the data revolve
around the following points which are data preparation, data annotation and
data augmentation.
– Data Preparation
During data acquisition, our raw EEG signals may be inﬂuenced by various
sources of artifacts and noise such as endogenous electrical properties, speciﬁc fabrics physical structure, dipolar size variation, muscle shifts and Blinks.
Hence, data processing is a preliminary step to denoising the raw signals. We
suggest using an inﬁnite impulse response (IIR) ﬁlter that manages an impulsive signal within time and frequency domains. Other sophisticated denoising
approaches could be considered at the expense of higher computational complexity [14,15].

72

A. Boudaya et al.

– Signals Annotation
To evaluate each individual’s state of exhaustion, we concentrate on the brain
areas that are responsible for hypo-vigilance detection. In this regard, diﬀerent brain waves are targeted such as [16]:
• Delta waves refer to consciousness, sleep or deep sleep states. These
waves were found in the temporal and occipital conditions with low frequency (less than 4 Hz) and high amplitude.
• Theta waves design the relaxation and hypnosis states with a range
of frequency between 4 and 8 Hz. Theta waves are extracted from the
temporal zone and are produced during the ﬁrst phase of slow sleep or in
deep relaxation state.
• Alpha waves refer to waking but relaxed states. These waves are captured in the posterior part, precisely the occipital region, with a frequency
interval between 8 and 12 Hz and a low amplitude interval between 20
and 60 µV.
• Beta waves relate to alertness states. These waves are captured from
the temporal and occipital lobes of the brain. They are characterized by
high frequency interval of 12 to 30 Hz with a low amplitude interval of 10
to 30 µV.
• Gamma waves refer to hypervigilance states with a frequency interval
between 30 to 80 Hz.
In the data annotation step, we only use the O1 and O2 electrodes of occipital
zone which are responsible for drowsiness sensation.
As an annotation example, Fig. 3 indicates the amplitudes of the alpha and
theta signals from the two O1 and O2 electrodes reported for a participant in
three periods of the day. The relaxation state has been indicated by alpha waves
which have a frequency interval between 8 to 12 Hz and an amplitude interval
between 20 to 60 µV. The somnolence state has been indicated by theta waves
which have a frequency interval between 4 to 8 Hz and an amplitude interval
between 50 and 75 µV.

Fig. 3. The monitoring of O1 and O2 electrodes in the mornings (a), afternoons (b)
and evenings (c).

EEG-Based Hypo-vigilance Detection Using Convolutional Neural Network

73

– Data augmentation
In order to reduce overﬁtting and increase testing accuracy, we use the data
augmentation technique [17] which consists of increasing the training set by
label-retaining data transformations. The purpose procedure is to extend the
data by doubling the vectors from (5850, 2) to (59053, 2) where 5850 (resp.
59053) represents the vector size and 2 represents the class number.
2.2

Data Analysis: Simple CNN Classification

The diagram of the neural network simple CNN used in our EEG drowsiness
detection approach is represented in Fig. 4. The proposed simple CNN model is
composed of the following six main layers:
– The convolutional layers allow the ﬁlter application and the features
extraction characteristics of the input signals.
– The sample-based discretization max-pooling-1D blocks is used to
sub-sample each input layer by reducing its dimensionality using a decrease
in the number of the parameters to learn, there by reducing calculation costs.
– The flatten layer is used to ﬂatten out multidimensional data.
– The dropout layers help to reduce the loss accuracy by regularizing and
enhancing the overﬁtting of neural networks during the classiﬁcation process.
– The BatchNormalization layers are used to scale and speed up learning
of all activations. These layers normalize the previous activation layer output
by subtracting the batches average and dividing it by the standard deviation
to improve a neural network’s stability.
– The dense layers allow to done a connectivity function between the next
and intermediate neurons layer.

Fig. 4. The diagram of the simple CNN used in the proposed approach.

74

3

A. Boudaya et al.

Experimental Evaluation

Our protocol revolves around the following axes: eight volunteers in which four
women and four men aged twenty six and ﬁfty eight with normal mental health.
For each participant, we make three recordings of sixteen minutes divided over
three day periods (morning, afternoon and evening). To fully understand the
condition of the participants, we split the signal into windows to accurately
identify these diﬀerent states.
In the proposed simple CNN architecture for EEG signals classiﬁcation, we
use the Keras deep learning library. The diﬀerent parameters as ﬁlters, kernelsize, padding, kernel-initializer, and activation of the four convolutional layers
have the same values respectively 512, 32, same, normal and relu. The parameter
values of the remaining layers are detailed in the following:
– the dropout layer value equal to 0.2 (respect. 0.5) is used to inactivate 20%
(respect. 50%) of neurons in order to prevent overﬁtting.
– the Max-Pooling 1D layer is used with a ﬁlter size of 128.
– The muti-dimensional data output ﬂatting using 1D ﬂatten layer.
– For better classiﬁcation results, two dropout layers are used. The ﬁrst hidden
layer takes a value of 128 neurons. Since a binary classiﬁcation problem, the
second layer takes a value of 1.
The choice of the optimization algorithm makes the diﬀerence between good
results in minutes, hours or even days. There are various optimizers like
Adam [18], SGD [19] and RMS pop optimizer [20]. In our model, we use the
SGD optimizer which is more popular [21]. The method of this optimizer is simple and eﬀective for ﬁnding optimal values in a neural network. Table 1 presents
the hyperparameters choice of our model.
Table 1. Hyperparameters choices.
Parameters

Value

Optimization algorithm SGD
Momentum

0.5

Batch size

64

Activation function

Sigmoid

For selecting the best accuracy rate of the proposed method, we propose
to compare diﬀerent results recorded by diﬀerent numbers of electrodes. In [22,
23], the authors discover that the prefrontal and occipital cortex are the most
important channels to better diagnose the hypo-vigilance state. In this regard,
we choose the following recorded data:
– Recorded data by 2 electrodes (O1 and O2) electrodes from the occipital area.

EEG-Based Hypo-vigilance Detection Using Convolutional Neural Network

75

– Recorded data by 4 electrodes (T7, T8, O1 and O2) from temporal and occipital areas.
– Recorded data by 7 electrodes (AF3, F7, F3, T7, O2, P8, F8) from prefrontal
and occipital areas.
– Recorded data by 14 electrodes.
For the distribution of our data, we choose 70% for the train part and 30% for
the test. Table 2 presents the reported testing and training accuracy respectively
with two, four, seven and fourteen electrodes. After convergence the optimum
number of test epochs for all the diﬀerent electrodes results establish a value
equal to 80. The best results are given by the recording of 2 electrodes from the
occipital area. The curves of testing and training results for recorded data by
O1 and O2 electrodes are represented in Fig. 5.
Table 2. Training and testing results of the diﬀerent numbers of electrodes with data
augmentation.
Number of electrodes 2

4

7

14

Accuracy train

98.18% 98.28% 98.99% 98.99 %

Accuracy test

93.94% 65.58% 76.43% 77.43 %

Fig. 5. (a) Accuracy graph, (b) Loss graph.

According to results obtained in Fig. 5, we note that the test accuracy
increases after a certain number of epochs and the test loss decreases. To test
our system’s eﬃciency we measured the precision, recall and F1-score. Table 3
shows these diﬀerent measures in our experimental conﬁguration.
For comparison purposes, we compare the proposed method with recent
drowsiness methodology [24] where the authors propose a driver hypovigilance
detection using the Emotiv EPOC+ helmet. The Common Spatial Pattern
(CSP) algorithm is used for optimization accuracy of Extreme Learning Machine
(ELM). The reported values in Table 4 indicate that our method gives the optimum accuracy value classiﬁcation.

76

A. Boudaya et al.

Table 3. Accuracy, precision, recall and F1-score of our experimental conﬁguration
Accuracy Precision Recall
93.94%

87.29%

F1 score

99.79% 93.12%

Table 4. Accuracy comparison with related works.
Drowsiness detection methodology Accuracy Classiﬁcation method

4

R. Osmalina et al. [24]

91.67%

CSP algorithm

Proposed method

93.94 % CNNs

Conclusion

The present work proposes a CNN based approach for Hypo-vigilance detection.
In order to create a EEG dataset, we recorded raw EEG data using Epoc+
headset. The suggested system achieves an average classiﬁcation accuracy to
93.94% by testing it on a real dataset of eight participants. In future work, we
will focus to improve classiﬁcation accuracy with large datasets. Additionally,
fusion with other biomedical signals should be also considered to improve the
classiﬁcation accuracy.

References
1. Hu, J., Wang, P.: Noise robustness analysis of performance for EEG-based driver
fatigue detection using diﬀerent entropy feature sets. Entropy 19, 385 (2017)
2. Thomas, L.C., Gast, C., Grube, R., Craig, K.: Fatigue detection in commercial
ﬂight operations: results using physiological measures. Procedia Manuf. 3, 2357–
2364 (2015)
3. Neri, D.F., Shappell, S.A., DeJohn, C.A.: Simulated sustained ﬂight operations
and performance, part 1: eﬀects of fatigue. Mil. Psychol. 4, 137–155 (1992)
4. Chaari, L., Golubnitschaja, O.: Covid-19 pandemic by the “real-time” monitoring:
the Tunisian case and lessons for global epidemics in the context of 3PM strategies.
EPMA J. (2020)
5. Sahayadhas, A., Sundaraj, K., Murugappan, M.: Electromyogram signal based
hypovigilance detection. Biomed. Res. (India) 25, 281–288 (2014)
6. Wang, F., Wang, H., Fu, R.: Real-time ECG-based detection of fatigue driving
using sample entropy. Entropy 20(3), 196 (2018)
7. Ahn, S., Nguyen, T., Jang, H., Kim, J.G., Jun, S.C.: Exploring neuro-physiological
correlates of drivers’ mental fatigue caused by sleep deprivation using simultaneous
EEG, ECG, and fNIRS data. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 10, 219 (2016)
8. Basri, C., et al.: Muscle fatigue detections during arm movement using EMG signal.
IOP Conf. Ser. Mater. Sci. Eng. 557, 012004 (2019)
9. Alom, M.Z., et al.: A state-of-the-art survey on deep learning theory and architectures. Electronics 8(3), 292 (2019)

EEG-Based Hypo-vigilance Detection Using Convolutional Neural Network

77

10. Kiranyaz, S., Ince, T., Abdeljaber, O., Avci, O., Gabbouj, M.: 1-D convolutional
neural networks for signal processing applications. In: ICASSP, IEEE International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing - Proceedings, pp. 8360–
8364, May 2019
11. Dwivedi, K., Biswaranjan, K., Sethi, A.: Drowsy driver detection using representation learning. In: IEEE International Advance Computing Conference, IACC, pp.
995–999, February 2014
12. Yu, J., Park, S., Lee, S., Jeon, M.: Driver drowsiness detection using conditionadaptive representation learning framework. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 20,
4206–4218 (2018)
13. Strmiska, M., Koudelkova, Z.: Analysis of performance metrics using Emotiv
EPOC+. MATEC Web Conf. 210, 4–7 (2018)
14. Laruelo, A., et al.: Hybrid sparse regularization for magnetic resonance spectroscopy. In: IEEE International Conference of Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), pp. 3–7, July 2013
15. Chaari, L., Tourneret, J.-Y., Chaux, C.: Sparse signal recovery using a
Bernouilli generalized gaussian prior. In: European Signal Processing Conference
(EUSIPCO), Nice, France, 31 August–4 September 2015 (2015)
16. Surangsrirat, D., Intarapanich, A.: Analysis of the meditation brainwave from consumer EEG device. In: IEEE SOUTHEASTCON, pp. 1–6, June 2015
17. Solé-Casals, J., et al.: A novel deep learning approach with data augmentation to
classify motor imagery signals. IEEE Access 7, 15945–15954 (2019)
18. Jung, J.J., Youn, Y.C., Camacho, D., Li, G., Lee, C.H.: Deep learning for EEG
data analytics: a survey. Concurr. Comput. (2019)
19. Shaf, A., Ali, T., Farooq, W., Javaid, S., Draz, U., Yasin, S.: Two classes classiﬁcation using diﬀerent optimizers in convolutional neural network. In: International
Multi-topic Conference (INMIC), pp. 1–6 (2018)
20. Tafsast, A., Ferroudji, K., Hadjili, M.L., Bouakaz, A., Benoudjit, N.: Automatic
microemboli characterization using convolutional neural networks and radio frequency signals. In: 2018 International Conference on Communications and Electrical Engineering (ICCEE), pp. 1–4, December 2018
21. Reddy, S.V.G., Reddy, K.T., ValliKumari, V.: Optimization of deep learning using
various optimizers, loss functions and dropout. Int. J. Innov. Technol. Explor. Eng
22. Nugraha, B.T., Sarno, R., Asfani, D.A., Igasaki, T., Munawar, M.N.: Classiﬁcation
of driver fatigue state based on EEG using Emotiv EPOC+. J. Theor. Appl. Inf.
Technol. 86, 347–359 (2016)
23. Sarno, R., Nugraha, B.T., Munawar, M.N.: Real time fatigue-driver detection from
electroencephalography using Emotiv EPOC+. Int. Rev. Comput. Softw. (IRECOS) 11, 214 (2016)
24. Osmalina, R., Rahmatillah, A.: Drowsiness analysis using common spatial pattern and extreme learning machine based on electroencephalogram signal. J. Med.
Signals Sens. 9(2), 130–136 (2019)

78

A. Boudaya et al.

Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/),
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium
or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and indicate if changes were
made.
The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the
chapter’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the
material. If material is not included in the chapter’s Creative Commons license and
your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.

