IJCSN International Journal of Computer Science and Network, Volume 4, Issue 2, April 2015
ISSN (Online) : 2277-5420
www.IJCSN.org
Impact Factor: 0.417

444

Brain Machine Interface - Moving Chair
According to Human Brain Signals
1

Ganesh Padole, 2 Ashwini Gharde, 3 Pritam Gaigole, 4 Mahesh Panjwani
,
1
Computer Technology Department, RGCER, Nagpur, Maharashtra, India.
2

MCA Department, RGCER, Nagpur, Maharashtra, India
3

4

CSE Department, RGCER, Nagpur, Maharashtra, India

CSE Department, Priyadarshani College of Engineering, Nagpur

Abstract - Origin of the Research/Product Development
Problem: Stroke is the leading cause of long-term disability in
adults and affects approximately 20 million people per year. Five
millions remain handicapped and dependent on assistance in
daily life. Nearly 30% of all stroke patients are under the age of
60. Other diseases resulting in paralysis at such early age include
Multiple Sclerosis (MS), affecting more than 2.5 million people
worldwide, or spinal cord injury (SCI) with 12.1 to 57.8 cases
per million. BPI, the disruption of the upper limb nerves leading
to a flaccid paralysis of the hands, affects millions of people
every year. Paralytic patients are also called as “locked-in”
patients. Because of a stroke brain injury, cerebral degenerative
neurological disease such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis their
entire system is paralyzed. The only ray of hope is currently the
development of brain-computer interfaces (BCI), a direct
communication pathway between the brain and an external
device that records neural processes. To a certain extent BCI can
be created with non-invasive techniques. EEG recordings are the
most thoroughly studied potential interface and have the
advantage of excellent temporal resolution ease of use and
portability.

Keywords - BCI, EEG, EPOC, Device Control.

1. Introduction
Electroencephalography (EEG) is the recording of
electrical activity along the scalp. EEG measures voltage a
fluctuation resulting from ionic current flows within the
neurons of the brain.In conventional scalp EEG, the
recording is obtained by placing electrodes on the
scalp.The goal of our interactive BCI multimedia system
was to use brain signal input to provide computer
interaction.Our interactive BCI multimedia system was
developed according to the process flow in Figure 1 for the
Windows platform in C# using the .Net framework.

BCI system overview Our BCI system consists of six parts
where the Bluetooth interface and the Mindset Interface
are provided by Emotive. The Mindset interface consists
of libraries that handles the connection, disconnection, and
receives a container with data consisting of raw data which

Fig1. Signal Process Flow

is updated every 10 milliseconds and the rest of the data
updated every second. The rest of the data consists of
signal strength, various bands (Delta, Theta, Alpha,
Betaand Gamma), attention value, mediation value and
eye blink signal.An overview of our BCI system is shown
in Figure 2.

2. Methodology
Emotiv EEG wireless neuroheadset: The EEG
neurosheadset
provides
access
to
raw electroencephalography data. The EPOC brain helmet

IJCSN International Journal of Computer Science and Network, Volume 4, Issue 2, April 2015
ISSN (Online) : 2277-5420
www.IJCSN.org
Impact Factor: 0.417

445
has eighteen sockets and can hold sixteen nodes or sensor
•

Head rotation: The angular velocity of one's head
can be measured in the yaw and pitch (but not roll)
directions. This is detected by gyros, and isn't related
to the EEG features.

3. Procedures

Fig2. Signal Acquisition and Processing

pads. The remaining two sockets usually hold rubber pads,
and are known as the secondary reference sensors, which
are located immediately below and behind the ears. The
primary reference sensors, which generally hold a normal
sensor pad, are located immediately above and behind the
ears. The sensors pads detect electrical activity on the
surface of the brain. Open-source Matlab toolboxes such
as EEGLAB,
Fieldtrip,
and the Neurophysiologic
Biomarker Toolbox (NBT) can be used to process data
from the electroencephalography.
•

Conscious thoughts (Cognitiv suite): The device
detects 13 kinds of movement - six directions (left,
right, up, down, forward, and "pull/zoom") and six
rotations (anti-clockwise rotation, turn left and right,
and sway backward and forward), plus one other
visualization ("disappear").

•

Emotions
(Affectiv
suite): "Excitement",
"Engagement/Boredom",
"Meditation",
and
"Frustration" can currently be measured.

•

Facial expressions (Expressiv suite): Individual
eyelid and eyebrow positions, eye position in the
horizontal plane, smiling, laughing, clenching, and
smirking can currently be detected. Other expressions
may be added prior to release. The expressions are
detected by the EEG sensors picking up signals to
facial muscles, rather than by reading brainwaves.
Unlike reading mental activity, these detections are
very fast conveying a decisive advantage and
rendering them suitable for fast paced games in the
FPS genre.

Figure 3.1 Output

A brain–computer
interface (BCI)
is
a
direct
communication pathway between the brain and an
external device. BCIs are often directed at assisting,
augmenting, or repairing human cognitive or sensorymotor functions the long-term objective of this research is
to create a multi-position, brain-controlled switch that is
activated by signals measured directly from an
individual’s brain. We believe that such a switch will
allow an individual with a severe disability to have
effective control of devices such as assistive appliances,
computers, and neural prostheses in natural
environments. This type of direct-brain interface would
increase an individual’s independence, leading to a

Figure 3.2 Procedure

dramatically improved quality of life and reduce social
costs. Most often the greatest failing of technical aids for
persons with severe physical disabilities (as above) is the
inadequacy of the human-machine interface. With a
universal, effective and efficient interface, current
technology has the capability of providing substantial
independence and hence, a greatly improved quality of
life for even the most severely disabled persons. In
pursuit of such an ideal interface, researchers have been
studying the feasibility of utilizing electrical brain
potentials to directly communicate to devices such as a
personal computer system, robotic, humanoid arm and
UI applications.

IJCSN International Journal of Computer Science and Network, Volume 4, Issue 2, April 2015
ISSN (Online) : 2277-5420
www.IJCSN.org
Impact Factor: 0.417

446

4. Result Analysis
Table 1: Signal Values

Delta
Theta
Alpha
Beta
Gamma

Measure and track your
focus
Engagement
Interest
Affinity
Stress level

0.5Hz to 3.5 Hz
3.5Hz to 7.5Hz
7.5Hz to 12Hz
12Hz to 30HZ
31 Hz an up

5. Conclusions
In this project, it consists of six parts where the Bluetooth
interface and the Mindset Interface are provided by
Emotive. Simple BCI applications include systems for
answering
Yes/No
questions,
managing
basic
environmental control (e.g., lights, temperature),
controlling a television, or moving a wheel chair .The
proposed array has been designed for physical disable
patient and person who are paralyzed.

References
[1]
[2]

Alf Inge Wang, Erik Andreas Larsen Dept. Computer
and Information Science, Norwegian University of
Science and Technology Trondheim, Norway
Emotive neuroheadset SDK forum.

