Brain-controlled serious games for
cultural heritage
Vourvopoulos, A. , Liarokapis, F. and Petridis, P.
Author post-print (accepted) deposited in CURVE December 2013
Original citation & hyperlink:
Vourvopoulos, A. , Liarokapis, F. and Petridis, P. (2012). Brain-controlled serious games for
cultural heritage' in G. Guidi and A.C. Addison (Eds). Virtual Systems and Multimedia
(VSMM), 2012 18th International Conference on (pp: 291-298). IEEE.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/VSMM.2012.6365937
Publisher statement: © 2012 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission
from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including
reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new
collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted
component of this work in other works.
Copyright © and Moral Rights are retained by the author(s) and/ or other copyright
owners. A copy can be downloaded for personal non-commercial research or study,
without prior permission or charge. This item cannot be reproduced or quoted extensively
from without first obtaining permission in writing from the copyright holder(s). The
content must not be changed in any way or sold commercially in any format or medium
without the formal permission of the copyright holders.
This document is the author’s post-print version of the journal article, incorporating any
revisions agreed during the peer-review process. Some differences between the published
version and this version may remain and you are advised to consult the published version
if you wish to cite from it.

CURVE is the Institutional Repository for Coventry University
http://curve.coventry.ac.uk/open

Brain-Controlled Serious Games for Cultural
Heritage
Athanasios Vourvopoulos

Fotis Liarokapis

Interactive Worlds Applied
Research Group (iWARG)
Coventry University
Coventry, UK
vourvopa@uni.coventry.ac.uk

Interactive Worlds Applied
Research Group (iWARG)
Coventry University
Coventry, UK
F.Liarokapis@coventry.ac.uk

Abstract— This paper proposes a prototype system for
cultural heritage based on brain computer interfaces for
navigating and interacting with serious games. By
analyzing traditional human-computer interaction methods
and paradigms with brain-controlled games it is possible to
investigate novel methods for interacting and perceiving
virtual heritage worlds. An interactive serious cultural
heritage game was developed based on commercial BCI
headsets controlling virtual aggents in the ancient city of
Rome. Initial results indicate that brain computer
technologies can be very useful for the creation of
interactive serious games.
Keywords – serious games; cultural heritage; brain
computer interfaces.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Computer games and virtual environments for
entertainment have enjoyed a widespread use nowadays,
especially amongst the younger generation. This has
been demonstrated by the recent advances in software
and hardware technologies. As a result, the quality of
real-time computer graphics, increased realism and
immersion has been greatly improved in computer
games. However, although the widespread use of gaming
for leisure purposes has been well documented, the use
of games to support cultural heritage purposes, such as
historical teaching and learning, or for enhancing
museum visits, has been less considered [1]. The
potential use of serious games technologies on cultural
heritage education has been recently addressed in the literature [2], [3], [4].
The successes of games that cross over into
educational gaming – or serious gaming, as well as
games and virtual worlds that are specifically developed
for educational purposes, all of which exist within a
cultural heritage context, reveal the potential of these
technologies to engage and motivate beyond leisure time
activities [1]. A broad definition refers to serious games
as computer games that have an educational and learning
aspect and are not used just for entertainment purposes.
Serious games are currently being used in a range of
different contexts and two survey papers regarding of
serious games have been well documented [1], [5].

Panagiotis Petridis
The Serious Games Institute
(SGI)
Coventry University
Coventry, UK
ppetridis@cad.coventry.ac.uk

Moreover, different learners will have different
preferential learning styles, so a serious game cannot
automatically guarantee success, and there is some
evidence of the learner's gender playing a role in this [6].
However the available evidence generally suggests that
the visual medium that serious games employ has a
positive effect [7]. Another factor for the success of
serious games is the actual presentation of the subject
matter in the form of computer games, which have been
found to improve the players' concentration and attention
levels [8]. This not only benefits the retention of
information as such, but also increases the learners'
motivation, thereby improving the learning experience.
Although research on Brain-Computer Interfaces
(BCIs) started during the 1970‟s only the last few years it
became possible to introduce brain-computer interfacing
as an alternative controller to simple users through
commercial non-invasive EEG headsets. BCI technology
is a rapidly growing field of research with various
applications in computer games [9], prosthetics and
control systems [10] through to medical diagnostics.
Advances in medical imaging technology have presented
a variety of alternative means for bio-recording, such as
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI),
magnetoencephalography (MEG), and positron emission
tomography (PET). A fundamental difference between
bio-recording technologies used for diagnostic imaging,
and those used for BCI applications, is a typical
requirement for real or quasi-real time performance in
order to translate user input into interactive responses.
This paper proposes a prototype system for cultural
heritage based on brain computer interfaces for
navigating and interacting with serious games. By
analyzing traditional human-computer interaction
methods and paradigms with brain-controlled games it is
possible to investigate novel methods for interacting and
perceiving virtual heritage worlds. An interactive serious
cultural heritage game was developed based on
commercial BCI headsets controlling virtual aggents in
the ancient city of Rome. Initial results indicate that
brain computer technologies can be very useful for the
creation of interactive serious games.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows.
Section II provides relevant research done in BCIs.

Section III presents the architecture of our system.
Section IV describes the serious game called Roma
Nova. Section IV provides an overview of how brain
computer interactions are performed in the game.
Finally, section VI illustrates initial evaluation results
and section VII presents conclusions and future work.
II.

BACKGROUND

While there has been extensive research in BCI‟s for
communication and control of prosthetics and robotic
devices [11] only the last few years with the launch of
commercial BCI headsets as an alternative gaming
controller Brain-Computer Interfaces appeared in the
computer gaming and virtual reality domain. This gave
the opportunity to researchers to get involved with BCI
research for various applications by using relatively low
cost non-invasive EEG equipment and software
development kits (SDK‟s). This technology boosted the
BCI‟s in games research with main target medical
applications and brain rehabilitation through serious
games and virtual worlds. In addition, this has been also
assisted by mixed reality systems like Virtual and
Augmented Reality (VR and AR respectively), making
hybrid BCI systems capable of enhancing the user
experience [12], [13].
Currently, non-invasive BCI research methods
(recording the brain activity from the scalp with EEG
sensors) in serious games development are usually
oriented in the medical domain rather than entertainment.
A relatively early study dealt with an internet game
linked to a brain-computer interface (BCI) system. This
system translated real-time brain activities from
prefrontal cortex (PFC) or hippocampus of a rat into
external device control commands and used them to
drive an internet game [14]. Another BCI based 3D game
measured the user‟s attention level to control a virtual
hand‟s movement, based on 3D animation technique.
This system has been developed for training those who
suffering from Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder
(ADHD) [15]. Moreover, researchers are focused on the
design and implementation of games capable of moving
an avatar to simple a tennis games using only brain
activity [16]. This can assist people with diseases
involving movement difficulties for controlling a
computer. To achieve this, studies using the mu (μ)
rhythm of brain activity have been conducted for BCI
applications [17].
The concept of identifying users from the EEG
patterns of their brain and adapting the system without
training has become an issue for many research teams.
An EEG pattern recognition system to adapt a serious
game has been designed for comparing recognition rates
for experimental serious games without any traditional
controllers. Their proposed Support Vector Machine
(SVM) algorithm for classification is compared with
other algorithms, improving the recognition rate [18]. A
Quantitative and Qualitative Study in Self-Paced BrainComputer Interaction with Virtual Worlds showed that,
without training, roughly half of the subjects were able to
control the application by using real foot movements and

a quarter were able to control it by using imagined foot
movements. The application consisted of an interaction
with a virtual world inspired by the “Star Wars” movie.
Users were asked to control the take-off and height of a
virtual spaceship by using their motor-related brain
activity [19].
In the last few years research in BCI with serious
games and virtual worlds grew exponentially. All these
attempts for BCI controlled games target in
neurofeedback and in measuring users‟ different brain
states. Previous work in BCI game design with the BCI
equipment to be considered as a possible input controller
of games is rare. This is mainly because BCI and EEG
are traditionally considered medical techniques hence the
research is mostly medical oriented. A similar approach
just started to emerge in discussing current BCI research
from the viewpoint of games and game design [20].
On a recent study the development of practical and
inexpensive non-invasive brain-computer interface
systems was investigated by comparing different lowcost EEG systems by price and functionality [21]. In
their findings, the Emotiv Epoc headset scored high in
terms of usability. Lowering the cost of BCI equipment
allowed Gamers to focus their interest to BCI headsets as
a new game device as they‟re often the first to adopt any
new technology, willing to put the effort into learning
and work with it [22]. Brain-Computer interaction at this
stage is slower and less accurate than traditional
interfaces that are currently available. This makes
healthy users to be more demanding while interacting
with the game. In addition, BCI‟s often require a lot of
training for successful interaction which weakens the
overall user experience. Current Brain-Controlled games
are just proof-of-concepts with simple BCI paradigms,
such as moving a paddle (left or right) in the game Pong
with imaginary movement of the hand [23]. Overall,
BCIs can uniquely provide information to the gaming
environment that no other traditional game controller can
provide. Like thoughts, computer games are not
constrained, enhancing the possibilities of the humanmachine interaction. Therefore, connecting the user
directly with the virtual world gives a more natural way
of control and communication.
Moreover, a significant volume of literature exists
around the study of projects aiming to populate a virtual
environment with a crowd of characters. Crowds are
used in virtual worlds for varios purporses such as
bringing life and immersiveness into a historical
reconstruction/world, or for sumulating the behaviour of
human people for various scenarios such as emergency
evacuation. Crowds are desirable for a range of purposes,
such as bringing life and immersiveness to a historical
place, accurately simulating the behaviour of human
people, or application-driven scenarios, such as
emergency evacuations [24]. The Pennsylvania station
project aims to populate the historical reconstruction of
the famous New York City railroad station [25].
Although an emphasis is placed on the characters‟
diversity, similar to the Pompeii project, Shao and

Terzopoulos focused upon emulating the rich variety in
behaviour of the characters.
Other projects consider the role of the human viewer
in more detail when synthesising virtual crowds. The
Metropolis project investigates visual and auditory
perception of crowds in city environments [26].
Commercial games are worthy of interest as well, since
the interactions between the user and the „non-player‟
characters (NPCs) have a critical impact on the gameplay and the overall experience of the player. However in
the commercial games the player is not meant to interact
with all the NPCs of the games. There is a distiction
between the NPCs that the interaction is crucial for the
progression in the game, and the NPCs that are mainly
used to bring life to the virtual environment.
III.

detection results into an easy-to-use structure called an
EmoState. An EmoState is an opaque data structure that
contains the current state of the Emotiv detections,
which, in turn, reflect the user‟s facial, emotional and
cognitive state. EmoState data is retrieved by Emotiv
API functions as illustrated in Figure 2.

SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE

An abstract way that this prototype works with the
Emotiv Epoc headset is illustrated in Figure 1, where the
user controls brain-generated events in a closed neurofeedback loop. The user is visually stimulated by
controlling an avatar in the serious game (see section
IV). The raw data is calculated on the headset‟s chip and
sent to the dedicated computer. Afterwards EmoKey
generates the keystroke events moving the player based
on the users‟ brain-activity and facial expressions on the
virtual world.

Moreover, the 16 sensors (14 plus 2 reference
sensors) are based on the international 10-20 system
[27]. This is an internationally recognized method which
describes in detail the electrode placement on the scalp
for EEG tests or experiments as illustrated in Figure 3.

Figure 1 System Architecture

Figure 3 International 10-20 System Placement and Number
Designation

EmoKey translates the detection results of the
headset to predefined sequences of keystrokes according
to logical rules defined by the user through the EmoKey
user interface. A set of rules, known as an „EmoKey
Mapping‟, can be saved for later reuse. EmoKey
communicates with Emotiv EmoEngine in the same
manner a third-party application would do (i.e. by using
the Emotiv API exposed by edk.dll). EmoKey emulates a
Windows-compatible keyboard and sends keyboard input
to the Windows operating system‟s input queue. The
application with the input focus will receive the emulated
keystrokes.
The Emotiv EmoEngine refers to the logical
abstraction of the functionality that Emotiv provides (in
edk.dll). The EmoEngine communicates with the Emotiv
headset, receives preprocessed EEG and gyroscope data,
manages user-specific or application-specific settings,
performs post-processing, and translates the Emotiv

Figure 2 Integrating the EmoEngine and Emotiv EPOC with the Game

The protype system is fully operational [28] and it‟s
using a combination of Cognitive and Facial/Muscular
functions. It is worth-mentioning, that the Emotiv
Development Kit was used connecting the Emotiv Epoc
headset to the Emotiv control panel to create and train a
new user profile which takes approximately 30 to 60
minutes depending on the adaptability of the user.
IV.

ROMA NOVA SERIOUS GAME

The interactive game is built upon Rome Reborn
[29], [30] one of the most realistic 3D representations of
Ancient Rome currently in existence. This 3D
representation provides a high fidelity 3D digital model
which can be explored in real-time. Rome Reborn
includes hundreds of buildings, thirty two of which are
highly detailed monuments reconstructed on the basis of
reliable archaeological evidence. The rest of the 25 to 30
square kilometers model is filled with procedurally-

generated buildings based on accurate historical
knowledge. As a result, an obvious advantage of Rome
Reborn is its accurate recreation of the ancient city of
Rome c.340 A.D, and is therefore readily adaptable to a
serious game teaching history (see Figure 4).

Figure 4 Rome Reborn Reconstruction [30]

The Roma Nova project builds on previous work at
Coventry University [31], [32] and aims at teaching
history to young children (11 to 14 years old). It allows
for exploratory learning by immersing the learner/player
inside a virtual heritage environment where they learn
different aspects of history through their interactions
with a crowd of virtual authentic Roman avatars. It
addresses several serious game challenges where the
main aim of the players is to be taught history by
interacting with autonomous characters in a cultural
heritage environment. It demonstrates the potential of
game techniques for cultural heritage experiences,
outlining the problems encountered when integrating a
substantial number of different state-of-the-art
techniques.
The Roma Nova game has been designed based on
the „Unity 3D‟ game engine using a 3D realistic
reconstruction of ancient Rome. Unity 3D is an
integrated development environment for computer game
design and it runs on Microsoft Windows and Mac OS X
[33]. For this simulation both C# and Javascript were
used. The aim of the game is to navigate an avatar inside
virtual Rome and interact with intelligent agents while
learning at the same time. Both navigation and
interaction is performed using brain-wave technology
from the Emotiv headset. Figure 5 illustrates how the
RomaNova game looks like.

Figure 5 Roma Nova Game Play

Intelligent interactions are based on the three Level
of Interaction Framework (LoI) which was developed in
collaboration between the Serious Games Institute (SGI)
and Toulouse University [31], [32]. The LoI framework
simplifies the interaction between the player and the
NPCs. Graphically the LoI can be represented as auras of
increasing complexity centered on the player‟s avatar as
illustrated in Figure 6.

Figure 6 Level of Interaction Framework [32]

LoI is based on a simple social space metric [31],
[32] and it consists of three components. The first level
aims to populate the characters with authentic crowd in
order to increase the immersion of the player. Characters
located in closer surrounding of the player belong to the
interaction level. Finally, a character inside the dialogue
level interacts with the player in a natural way,
ultimately using speech recognition and synthesis.
All the NPCs by default belong to the background
level, but as the player moves on the environment and
they happen to get closer or away from the player and
thus enter or exit the interaction or dialogue levels [34].
Characters are not assigned a specific level of
interactiona priori. By default, they all belong to the
background. But as the player moves and/or they move
freely in the environment going about their business,
they happen to get closer or away from the player and
thus enter or exit the interaction or dialogue levels [32].
The latest implementation of Noma Nova includes:
(a) a crowd of Roman characters in the Forum and (b) a
highly detailed set of buildings that belong to the Rome
Reborn model. The NPCs are wandering in the 3D

environment between predefined points of interest, while
the player is able to move freely as shown in Figure 7.

Figure 7 Procedurally Generated Roman Agents

When clicked on by the player, a NPC changes its
current target to the position of the player, and hence
starts walking towards the player. When the NPC is close
enough to enter the dialogue level, a series of actions is
triggered by the engine [32]: (a) an animation is
triggered to change the camera from a wide angle to a
close-up perspective; (b) the smoothed highly detailed
version of the Roman character mesh is loaded to
replace the low polygon version, along with the
corresponding animations and (c) the steering controller
attributed to every background character is dropped and
replaced by a simple ECA engine developed on purpose
to play the scenario (see Figure 8).

V.

BRAIN-COMPUTER INTERACTIONS

The basic idea is to use Cognitive functions
(brainwaves) to move the player forwards/backwards,
and the Expressive functions (facial expression) to turn
the player left/right when the user blinks accordingly. To
accomplish that, the Emotiv Epoc EEG headset had been
used. The Emotiv Headset is a neuro-signal acquisition
and processing wireless neuro-headset with 14 wet
sensors (and 2 reference sensors) being able not only to
detect brain signals but also user‟s facial expressions,
offering optimal positioning for accurate spatial
resolution [35].
Unlike other commercial BCI headsets, Emotiv
needs a unique user profile to be trained in order to map
users‟ brain-patters. In a training session no more than 1
hour, user‟s skills can be increased up to 65% for the
forward & backward moves using the Emotiv control
panel (see Figure 9). Training the profile is not an easy
task and requires practice and familiarization, especially
when the user needs to train more than two actions as it
is easy to get distracted from outside stimuli and
„confuse‟ the training process of the users real
„intentions‟.

Figure 8 Dialogues in Roma Nova

Figure 8, illustrates how the dialogues are performed
in the Roma Nova. At the end of the dialogue, the
reverse procedure is performed allowing the 3D model as
well as the steering behaviours to be re-applied to the
NPC. This way, it carries on its navigation to its previous
point of interest as the computer memory is freed from
the ECA engine and the high definition 3D model [32].

Figure 9 Emotiv Control Panel (top), Emotiv EmoKey (bottom)

To take control of the events the EmoKey (see
Figure 9) the application was used in conjuction with the
Emotiv Control Panel to generate keyboard events for
each identified and trained thought. After that the
EmoKey application is transferring these events to the
game as key strokes.
The sensitivity adjustment display on the control
panel supports two types of „signatures‟ that are used to

classify input from the neuroheadset as indicating a
particular facial expression. Right Wink / Left Wink:
these two detections share a common graph line as
illustrated in Figure 10. A center level indicates no wink,
low level indicates a left wink and high level indicates a
right wink.

Figure 10 Panel Display

Emotiv‟s Cognitiv detection suite (see Figure 11)
evaluates a user‟s real time brainwave activity to
distinguish user‟s intentions in performing physical
actions on real or virtual objects. The detection is
designed to work with different actions and movements.
Cognitiv allows the user to choose up to four actions that
can be recognized at any given time. The detection
reports a single action or neutral (i.e. no action) at a time,
along with an action power which represents the
detection‟s certainty that the user has entered the
cognitive state associated with that action. Increasing the
number of concurrent actions increases the difficulty in
maintaining conscious control over the Cognitiv
detection results. Almost all new players readily gain
control over a single action quite quickly. Learning to
control multiple actions typically requires practice and
becomes progressively harder as additional actions are
added.

Figure 11 Cognitiv Suite Panel

The Cognitiv Suite panel uses a virtual 3D cube to
display an animated representation of the Cognitiv
detection output. This 3D cube is also used to assist the
player in visualizing the intended action during the
training process. The Cognitiv training process enables

the EmoEngine to analyze users‟ brainwaves and
develop a personalized signature which corresponds to
each particular action. As the EmoEngine „learns‟ and
refines the signatures for each of the actions (as well as
neutral) detections become more precise and easier to
perform.
Initially, the cube on the suite panel screen (see
Figure 11) will not move, as the system has not yet
acquired the training data necessary to construct a
personalized signature for the current set of actions.
After Neutral and each enabled action have been trained
(at least once) the Cognitiv detection is activated and the
cube will respond to the users‟ mental action detection,
in real time. Some users‟ find it easier to maintain the
necessary mental focus if the cube is automatically
animated to perform the intended action as a
visualization aid during training.
Mental dexterity with the training Suite is a skill that
will improve over time. As players learn to train
reproducible mental states for each action, the detection
becomes increasingly precise. Most players typically
achieve their best results after training each action
several times. Overtraining can sometimes produce a
decrease in accuracy – although this may also indicate a
lack of consistency and mental fatigue. Practice and
experience will help determine the ideal amount of
training required for each individual user to successfully
interact with the serious game.
VI.

INITIAL EVALUATION

To identify how fast the players adapt on braingenerated events, an evaluation has been conducted with
five participants in a laboratory environment. Feedback
was received in direct reply to the questions, as well as
by raising additional issues. All participants had no
previous experience with BCIs so some time was given
to familiarise with the technology. Since all users
interacted with a virtual object using their brainwaves for
the first time, it was necessary to perform repeatable
profile training using the control panel. That way the
players managed to familiarise with the prototype system
by receiving neurofeeback for the brain. At this stage, the
system extracts and classifies more accurately the
player‟s intentions.
The aim of this initial evaluation was primarily to
gather information on the playability and enjoyability of
the Roma Nova serious game, but also to discover
potential technical problems in terms of the interaction.
All participants had to complete a small task (ranging
between 5 to 10 minutes). The task was to move an
avatar inside the virtual city (the Roma Nova 3D
environment) and interact with the agents using just
brainwaves and facial expressions. An example
screenshot from the user testing is illustrated in Figure
12.

Figure 12 User Testing

In terms of the positive feedback, all participants
mentioned that it was a unique experience to interact
with the game through brainwaves. Even if it was
„slower‟ to interact with the game (compared to standard
input devices such as the mouse and the keyboard), they
reported that this way of interaction is far more
enjoyable. Moreover, all of them enjoyed the graphics
quality of the game as well as the „clever‟ dialogues with
the intelligent agents. The majority of the players
mentioned that the brain computer technologies can be
very useful for interaction of games and it can be
combined with other techniques (such as other natural
interaction techniques).
On the negative side, some participants found it hard
to adapt in taking control of the agent straight away. The
main reason was that they got distracted by external
stimuli. Initially, some mentioned that it was not easy to
concentrate to navigate in the game and they would
prefer a more immersive environment. Even if, through
time and concentration they started to get control and
adapt to the prototype system, it became apparent that
more time for training would be good. Finally, some
participants found the BCI technology not as accurate as
standard input devices. Even if in this particular game
there were no significant requirements on accuracy in
navigation, in other computer games that could be
problematic.
VII.

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

This paper proposed a novel BCI system for
controlling serious games for cultural heritage. As a case
study, a serious game for ancient Rome, called Roma
Nova, was employed. The aim of the game is to navigate
an avatar (agent) inside virtual Rome and interact with
intelligent agents while learning at the same time. Both
navigation and interaction is performed using noninvasive BCI technology from the Emotiv headset. Initial
user testing was very encouraging and results indicate
that brain computer technologies can be very useful for
the creation of serious games for entertainment,
education and neuro-rehabilitation although more
effective algorithms can be designed to improve
interaction accuracy.

In the future, more advanced BCI devices (with
more sensors) will be employed to control the game
much more effectively and accurately. A more
immersive environment using virtual reality equipment
such as a head-mounted display and 3D mouse will be
integrated for doing a comparative study. In addition, the
attention and engagement levels of the user will be
captured and analyzed during the learning experience.
This can be used in training users with learning
difficulties and those who suffer from Attention Deficit
Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) [15]. Finally, more
gaming scenarios will be developed and a large
evaluation study will be performed to test the learning
capabilities of the serious game as well as the
enjoyability of the brain-wave interaction and
classification algorithms for BCI research in serious
games and virtual worlds.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank the Interactive
Worlds Applied Research Group (iWARG) and the
Serious Games Institute (SGI) members for their their
support and inspiration.
REFERENCES
Anderson, E.F., McLoughlin, L., et al. “Serious Games in
Cultural Heritage”, Proc. of the 10th Int‟l Symposium on Virtual
Reality, Archaeology and Cultural Heritage, VAST-STAR,
Short and Project Proceedings, Eurographics, Malta, 22-25
September, 29-48, 2009.
[2] Apperley, T.H. “Virtual unaustralia: Videogames and Australias
Colonial History,” Proc. of Cultural Studies Association of
Australasias Annual (UNAUSTRALIA), 2006.
[3] Francis, R. “Revolution: Learning about history through situated
role play in a virtual environment,” In Proceedings of the
American Educational Research Association Conference, 2006.
[4] Jacobson, J. Holden, L. “The virtual egyptian temple,” In EDMEDIA: Proccedings of the World Conference on Educational
Media, Hypermedia & Telecommunications, 2005.
[5] Susi, T., Johannesson, M., Backlund, P. “Serious games - an
overview”, The American Surgeon, 73(10):1039-1043, 2007.
[6] Hodgins, D. “Male and female differences”, Coordinator Early
Childhood
Education,
Available
at:
[languagelog.ldc.upenn.edu/my.l/llog/Hodgins1.pdf], Accessed
at: 10/03/2012.
[7] Solanki, D. “Do E-learning and Serious Games help students to
revise more effectively rather than the traditional approach of
using Textbooks?”, Bachelors Dissertation, Coventry
University, 2009.
[8] Kirriemuir, J., McFarlane, C.A. “Literature Review in Games
and Learning”, White Paper, Future Lab. Available at:
[http://www.futurelab.org.uk/resources/documents/lit_reviews/
Games_Review.pdf], Accessed at: 10/03/2012.
[9] Rebolledo-Mendez, G., Dunwell, I., et al. “Assessing the
Usability of a Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) that Detects
Attention Levels in an Assessment Exercise”, Proc. of the 13 th
Int‟l Conference on Human-Computer
Interaction, Springer Berlin/Heidelberg Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, Volume 5610/2009, 149-158, 2009.
[10] Loudin, J.D., et al. “Optoelectronic retinal prosthesis: system
design and performance”, Journal of Neural Engineering, 4, 7284, 2007.
[11] Wolpaw, J.R, Birbaumer, N., et al. “Brain–computer interfaces
for communication and control”, Clinical neurophysiology:

[1]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]
[22]

[23]

[24]
[25]
[26]
[27]
[28]
[29]

official journal of the International Federation of Clinical
Neurophysiology, 133(6): 767-791, 2002.
Faller J, Leeb R, Pfurtscheller G and Scherer R. “Avatar
navigation in virtual and augmented reality environments using
an SSVEP BCI”, Proc. of the ICABB-2010, Venice, Italy,
October 14-17, 2010.
Pfurtscheller G and Scherer R. “Brain-Computer Interfaces used
for Virtual Reality Control”, ICABB 2010, Workshop W1
„Brain-Computer Interfacing and Virtual Reality‟, Proc. of the
ICABB-2010, Venice, Italy, October 14-17, 2010.
Lee, U., Han, Han, S.H., et al. “Development of a Neuron Based
Internet Game Driven by a Brain-Computer Interface System”,
Proc. of the 2006 Int‟l Conference on Hybrid Information
Technology, IEEE Computer Society, Vol. 02, 600-604, 2006.
Jiang, L., Guan, C., Zhang, Wang, C., Jiang, B., “Brain
computer interface based 3D game for attention training and
rehabilitation”, Proc. of the 6th IEEE Conference on Industrial
Electronics and Applications (ICIEA), IEEE Computer Society,
Beijing, 124-127, 2011.
Lopetegui, E., Zapirain, B.G., Mendez, A. “Tennis computer
game with brain control using EEG signals”, Proc. of the 16th
Int‟l Conference on Computer Games (CGAMES), 228-234,
2011.
Mattiocco, M., Babiloni, F. et al. “Neuroelectrical source
imaging of mu rhythm control for BCI applications”, Proc. of
the 28th Annual Int‟l Conference of the IEEE on Engineering in
Medicine and Biology Society, IEEE Computer Society, 980983, 2006.
Ahn, J.S., Lee, W.H., “Using EEG pattern analysis for
implementation of game interface”, Proc. of the 15th
International Symposium on Consumer Electronics (ISCE),
IEEE Computer Society, Singapore, 348-351, 2011.
Lotte, F., Renard, Y., Lécuyer, A. “Self-Paced Brain-Computer
Interaction with Virtual Worlds: A Quantitative and Qualitative
Study - Out of the Lab”, 2008.Proc. of the 4th Int‟l Brain
Computer Interface Workshop and Training Course, 2008.
Nijholt, A., Reuderink, B., Oude Bos, D. “Turning
Shortcomings into Challenges: Brain-Computer Interfaces for
Games”, In: Nijholt, A., Reidsma, D., Hondorp, H. (ed),
Intelligent Technologies for Interactive Entertainment. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 153-168, 2009.
Stamps, K., Hamam, Y. “Towards inexpensive bci control for
wheelchair navigation in the enabled environment–a hardware
survey”, Brain Informatics, 336-345, 2010.
Nijholt, A., Tan, D. “Playing with your Brain: Brain-Computer
Interfaces and Games”, Proc. Of ACE (International Conference
on Advances in Computer Entertainment Technology),
Salzburg, Austria, June 13-15, 2007.
Krepki, R., Blankertz, B., Curio, G., Müller, K.R. “The Berlin
Brain-Computer Interface (BBCI) – towards a new
communication channel for online control in gaming
applications,” Multimedia Tools and Applications, 33(1): 73-90,
2007.
Waldau, N., Gattermann, P., Knoflacher, H., Schreckenberg, M.
“Pedestrian and Evacuation Dynamics”, Springer-Verlag, 2007.
Shao, W., Terzopoulos, D. “Autonomous pedestrians,” Graph.
Models, 69(5-6): 246-274, 2007.
McDonnell, R., Larkin, M., Dobbyn, S., Collins, S., O‟Sullivan,
C. “Clone attack! perception of crowd variety,” Proc. of
SIGGRAPH ‟08, ACM Press, New York, NY, USA, 1-8, 2008.
Carmena, J.M., Lebedev, M.A., et al. “Learning to control a
brain-machine interface for reaching and grasping by primates”,
PLoS biology, 1(2): E42, 2003.
Wessberg, J., Stambaugh, C.R., et al. “Real-time prediction of
hand trajectory by ensembles of cortical neurons in primates”,
Nature, 408, 361-365, 2000.
Guidi, G., Frischer, B. “Virtualizing Ancient Rome: 3D
Acquisition and Modeling of a Large Plaster-of-Paris Model of
Imperial Rome”, Videometrics VIII, 119-133, San Jose,
California, USA, 2005.

[30] Rome
[31]

[32]

[33]
[34]

[35]

Reborn,
Available
at:
[http://www.romereborn.virginia.edu/],
Accessed
at:
10/03/2012.
Panzoli, D., Qureshi, A., et al. “Levels of interaction (LoI): a
model for scaffolding learner engagement in an immersive
environment”, Intelligent Tutoring Systems, Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, Volume 6095/2010, 393-395, 2010.
Panzoli, D., Peters, C. et al. “A Level of Interaction Framework
for Exploratory Learning with Characters in Virtual
Environments”, Intelligent Computer Graphics, Studies in
Computational Intelligence, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg,
321:123-143, 2010.
Unity
3D
Game
Engine,
Available
at:
[http://www.unity3d.com/], Accessed at: 10/03/2012.
Doulamis, A., Liarokapis, F., Petridis, P., Miaoulis, G. “Serious
Games for Cultural Applications”, Intelligent Computer
Graphics 2011, Studies in Computational Intelligence,
Plemenos, D., Miaoulis, G. (Eds.), Springer-Verlag, Volume
374/2012, 97-115, 2011.
Emotiv EPOC Software Development Kit, Available at:
[http://www.emotiv.com/store/hardware/299/], Accessed at:
10/03/2012.

