ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 10 August 2016
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.01187

Qualitative Analysis of Emotions:
Fear and Thrill
Ralf C. Buckley *
International Chair in Ecotourism Research, School of Environment, Griffith University, Gold Coast, QLD, Australia

Edited by:
Bill Mace,
Trinity College, USA
Reviewed by:
Peter Lewinski,
Kozminski University, Poland
Istvan Aranyosi,
Bilkent University, Turkey
*Correspondence:
Ralf C. Buckley
r.buckley@griffith.edu.au
ralf.c.buckley@gmail.com
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Theoretical and Philosophical
Psychology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychology
Received: 31 March 2016
Accepted: 26 July 2016
Published: 10 August 2016
Citation:
Buckley RC (2016) Qualitative
Analysis of Emotions: Fear and Thrill.
Front. Psychol. 7:1187.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.01187

People can speak, and this provides opportunities to analyze human emotions using
perceived experiences communicated via language, as well as through measurement
and imaging techniques that are also applicable to other higher animal species. Here I
compare four qualitative methodological approaches to test if, and how, thrill depends
on fear. I use eight high-risk, high-skill, real-life outdoor adventure recreation activities to
provide the test circumstances. I present data from: >4000 person-days of participant
observation; interviews with 40 expert practitioners; retrospective autoethnography of
50 critical incidents over 4 decades; and experimental autoethnography of 60 events.
Results from different methods are congruent, but different approaches yield different
insights. The principal findings are as follows. Individuals differ in their fear and thrill
responses. The same individual may have different responses on different occasions.
Fear boosts performance, but panic causes paralysis. Anxiety or apprehension prior
to a risky action or event differs from fear experienced during the event itself. The
intensity of pre-event fear generally increases with the immediacy of risk to life, and
time to contemplate that risk. Fear must be faced, assessed and overcome in order
to act. Thrill can occur either during or after a high-risk event. Thrill can occur without
fear, and fear without thrill. Below a lower threshold of perceived risk, thrill can occur
without fear. Between a lower and upper threshold, thrill increases with fear. Beyond
the upper threshold, thrill vanishes but fear remains. This there is a sawtooth relation
between fear and thrill. Perceived danger generates intense focus and awareness. Fear
and other emotions can disappear during intense concentration and focus. Under high
risk, the usual emotional sequence is fear before the action or event, then focus during
the action or event, then thrill, relief, or triumph afterward. The emotionless state persists
only during the most intense concentration. For events long enough to differentiate time
within the events, fear and thrill can arise and fade in different fine-scale sequences.
Keywords: risk, outdoor, emergency, sawtooth, autoethnography, emotionless

INTRODUCTION
Neurological and endocrine study of human emotions has advanced greatly in recent years
(LeDoux, 2012a,b; Lindquist et al., 2012; Adolphs, 2013). Neuroimaging techniques have been used
to correlate emotions with neural signatures, and signatures with emotions (Vytal and Hamann,
2010; Baucom et al., 2012; Hamann, 2012; Lindquist and Barrett, 2012; Kassam et al., 2013; Kragel
and LaBar, 2013; Woo et al., 2014; Chang et al., 2015; Howlett and Paulus, 2015).

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

1

August 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1187

Buckley

Qualitative Analysis of Emotions: Fear and Thrill

set of basic emotions, commonly recognizable from vocalizations
and/or facial and bodily expressions (Johnson-Laird and Oatley,
1989; Meeren et al., 2005; Stets, 2006; Nesse and Ellsworth,
2009; Izard, 2010; Ebner et al., 2012; Graham and LaBar, 2012;
Niedenthal and Brauer, 2012; Gu et al., 2013; Kliemann et al.,
2013; Kret et al., 2013; Scherer and Meuleman, 2013; Lewinski,
2015).
Fear has an important place in each of these frameworks.
Fear is routinely referred to as a basic or fundamental
emotion. It is commonly recognizable from facial expressions.
It includes a group of related terms such as anxiety, trepidation,
apprehension, dread, fright, panic, and terror. The biochemistry
and neurophysiology of fear are heavily studied (Chiao et al.,
2008; Mujica-Parodi et al., 2009; Haegler et al., 2010; Adams et al.,
2011; Agren et al., 2012; Adolphs, 2013; Avila and Lin, 2014;
Dehaene, 2014; Zimmer and Clark, 2014; Sussman et al., 2015;
White et al., 2016).
At a neurophysiological level, fear can arise through multiple
pathways, and fear of pain is different from fear of attack
(LeDoux, 2000, 2012a,b; Gross and Canteras, 2012; Adolphs,
2013; Tordjman et al., 2013). Humans also emit and detect fear
pheromones (Ackerl et al., 2002; Mujica-Parodi et al., 2009;
de Groot et al., 2015; Haviland-Jones et al., 2016). Individuals
exposed to these, or to other cues of fear or threat, experience
heightened perception and more rapid cognitive processing
(Chen et al., 2006; Grillon and Charney, 2011; Grupe and
Nitschke, 2013; Robinson et al., 2013; Stout et al., 2013; Jackson
et al., 2014; de Valk et al., 2015; Sussman et al., 2015; White
et al., 2016) and may take more risks (Maner and Gerend, 2007;
Haegler et al., 2010), though this also depends on anger (Habib
et al., 2015). When facial expressions of fear (Zhao et al., 2013)
are ambiguous, humans also rely on chemical signals to interpret
fear in others (Zhou and Chen, 2009; Graham and LaBar, 2012;
de Groot et al., 2015).
Reported experiences of fear (Habib et al., 2015) have been
described for people of different personalities and professions
in various circumstances and situations, from children playing
(Sandseter, 2009) to military activities (Fenz and Epstein, 1967;
Caputo, 1977; Wallenius et al., 2004; Berko and Erez, 2005; Cohn
et al., 2010; Taverniers et al., 2011; Bouchard et al., 2012; Lane
et al., 2012; Johnson et al., 2014).
Psychological frameworks for human emotions treat thrill as
less fundamental than fear. Related terms include excitement and
exhilaration. Emotions such as joy, and triumph or exultation,
may often be linked to thrill but are perceived as clearly
distinct. There has been less biochemical and neurophysiological
research for thrill or excitement than for fear. As with other
emotions, thrill is influenced both by genetics (Dmitrieva
et al., 2010; Thomson et al., 2013) and neurology (Zald et al.,
2008; Kruschwitz et al., 2012). Suggestions of links between
thrill and fear are longstanding (Kendrick, 1991; Mura, 2010)
but previously untested. In valence-arousal classifications of
emotions, fear is considered a negative emotion, and thrill
positive. Such links would thus represent a transition from
negative to positive valence.
Outdoor adventure recreation (Swarbrooke et al., 2003;
Buckley, 2006, 2010a) provides opportunities to study

Some aspects of emotional psychology, however, cannot
yet be examined using laboratory based approaches. These
aspects can only be studied through the qualitative analysis
of experiences communicated via language. The value of data
obtained via autobiographical memory has recently received
explicit recognition (Harrison and Loui, 2014; Boccignone
and Cordeschi, 2015; Buckley, 2015a; Gardner et al., 2015;
Morin et al., 2015). There have been far fewer field tests
or methodological advances using these approaches, however,
than for approaches based on technological observations and
measurements.
In particular, there are some emotional circumstances which
are experienced only by a limited number of individuals, and
which cannot be reproduced fully through virtual or other
experimental means. For example, experimental studies cannot
place participants under a real and immediate risk of death.
Most experimental studies of anxiety under threat, for example,
use only mild threats (Sussman et al., 2015), though some
have employed intravenous administration of cholecystokinin to
induce panic (de Montigny, 1989; Adolphs, 2013). Recent reviews
(e.g., Adolphs, 2013) therefore emphasize the value of studying
the conscious experience of emotions as well as the neurological
and endocrine aspects.
Here, therefore, I present a comparison between four
qualitative approaches in the study of emotions experienced by
practitioners of outdoor recreation, during incidents which do
involve real risk of immediate death, and which generate fear
and thrill. Specifically, I compare findings from retrospective and
experimental autoethnography (Buckley, 2015a) against those
from participant observation and conventional ethnography
(Silverman, 2010; Punch, 2014), which involve the recording of
autobiographical memories of research subjects (Gardner et al.,
2015).
Whilst many human emotions reflect feelings toward other
people (Wilutzky, 2015; Michael, 2016), both fear and thrill
are most commonly occasioned by an individual’s physical
surroundings. Fear may also be occasioned by other persons
perceived as threatening, and both fear and thrill may be
moderated by the presence or actions of companions. This study,
however, focuses on fear and thrill generated by voluntary but
potentially dangerous activities carried out during adventure
tourism and recreation.
Current understandings of fear and thrill are first reviewed,
with particular reference to high-risk outdoor recreation. Many
people deliberately take risks, and experience fear, in the
quest for thrills. Each of the four qualitative methodological
approaches is then presented, and each is compared against
current understandings, to test whether it can yield new insights
into: the factors influencing experiences of fear and thrill; the
timing and trajectory of each under various circumstances; and
the relationship between the two distinct emotions.

Fear, Thrill, and Outdoor Recreation
From an experiential perspective, emotions have been
analyzed within three different frameworks: as points in a
multidimensional emotional continuum; as a set of >100 distinct
named emotions in various groups; or as combinations of a small

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

2

August 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1187

Buckley

Qualitative Analysis of Emotions: Fear and Thrill

powerful human emotions, including fear and thrill, in
partially controllable settings (Celsi et al., 1993; Vermeir and
Reynier, 2007; Allman et al., 2009; Brymer and Oades, 2009;
Buckley, 2012, 2015a,b). Many types of adventure recreation,
especially at expert level, involve significant physical risk.
They require a high level of learned skill, rapid and precise
coordination between sensory perceptions and bodily actions,
and an ability to overcome fear. There are many ethnographic
analyses of such activities (Michel et al., 1997; Brymer and Oades,
2009; Buckley, 2012), and several relevant neurophysiological
studies (Pierson et al., 1999; Haegler et al., 2010; Taverniers
et al., 2011; Van Westerloo et al., 2011). For guided commercial
adventure tourism and recreation, guides choreograph and
manage their clients’ emotional responses (Arnould and Price,
1993; Muloin, 1998; Holyfield, 1999; Montag et al., 2005; Sharpe,
2005; Pomfret, 2006; Curtin, 2010; Van Dijk et al., 2011; Wu
and Liang, 2011; Buckley, 2012; Houge Mackenzie and Kerr,
2013).
Fear plays a key role in many adventure activities (Holyfield
and Fine, 1997; Holyfield, 1999; Jonas, 1999; Beedie and Hudson,
2003; Vermeir and Reynier, 2007; Schnädelbach et al., 2008;
Brymer and Oades, 2009; Carnicelli-Filho et al., 2010; Faullant
et al., 2011; Buckley, 2012; Brymer and Schweitzer, 2013). This
applies especially when fear must be mastered or managed
(Fenz and Epstein, 1967; Arnould and Price, 1993; Slanger and
Rudestam, 1997; Holyfield, 1999; Sharpe, 2005; Buckley, 2010b;
Faullant et al., 2011; Houge Mackenzie and Kerr, 2013).
Thrill and exhilaration are reported by many adventure
practitioners (Cater, 2006; Sicard et al., 2007; Tung and Ritchie,
2011; Buckley, 2012; Kim et al., 2012; Chen et al., 2013;
Monasterio, 2013; Schlegelmilch and Ollenburg, 2013; Tsaur
et al., 2013). High scores on the adventure and thrill-seeking
subscale of the sensation-seeking personality scale (Zuckerman,
2007) have been reported, though not uniformly, for outdoor
adventure activities including skydiving, paragliding, hanggliding, bungy jumping, rodeo riding, skiing, surfing, and
whitewater kayaking (Straub, 1982; Rainey et al., 1992; Campbell
et al., 1993; Chirivella and Martinez, 1994; Wagner and Houlihan,
1994; Michel et al., 1997; Zarevski et al., 1998; Gomà-i-Freixanet,
1999; Pierson et al., 1999; Franques et al., 2003; Diehm and
Armatas, 2004; Zuckerman, 2007, pp. 97−100; Barbieri and
Sotomayor, 2013). For skilled outdoor sport, recreation and
adventure, there are ethnographic and autoethnographic analyses
of emotions such as fear and thrill in a wide range of activities
(Holyfield, 1999; Houge Mackenzie and Kerr, 2013; Buckley,
2014).
No previous formal studies, however, by any method, have
set out specifically to examine links between fear and thrill.
Analyzing such links is not straightforward. These are human
emotions, experienced only by the individuals concerned, often
only briefly and under conditions of considerable stress. They
are not directly quantifiable by observers. They are not recorded
except in individual memories, and indirectly through recorded
observations of any outward expressions. Here I report a
robust approach that compares four independent sources of
data, from different individuals at different times and places: a
quadrangulation of qualitative methods.

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Ethics Statement
Some of the data presented here were obtained during
commercial adventure tours. Assistance and sponsorship of
tour operators is gratefully acknowledged. All quotations from
individual interviews are used here with the informed written
consent of those concerned. All of the research reported here,
including that drawn from previous publications by the same
author (Buckley, 2006, 2007, 2010a,b, 2012, 2014, 2015a,b),
as well as new research conducted specifically for the current
publication, was conducted in strict compliance with the research
ethics requirements of Griffith University, including adherence
to the Griffith University Research Ethics Manual and the
Australian National Statement on Ethical Conduct in Human
Research, and approvals by the Griffith University Human
Research Ethics Committee as required.

Quadrangulation
Four different methods were compared, a quadrangulation of
approaches. These were: participant observation, practitioner
interviews, retrospective autoethnography, and experimental
autoethnography. All four used voluntary participants in outdoor
recreation and adventure tourism. Participant observation,
practitioner interviews, and retrospective autoethnography are
established methods (Spradley, 1980; Dewalt and Dewalt, 2002;
Buzard, 2003; Anderson, 2006; Dauphinee, 2010; Silverman,
2010; Tolich, 2010; Denzin, 2014; Punch, 2014; Buckley, 2015a).
Experimental autoethnography is a recently proposed method
(Buckley, 2015a), used here for the first time.
The four methods were applied for similar outdoor adventure
activities, but over different time periods, in different places,
with different subjects. For participant observation, practitioner
interviews, and retrospective autoethnography, multiple
activities were studied: surfing, sailboarding, and kiteboarding,
helicopter snowboarding, whitewater kayaking and rafting,
hang-gliding, climbing and mountaineering, off-road driving
in remote areas, and watching large and potentially dangerous
wildlife. For experimental autoethnography, only two activities
were examined, namely surfing and kiteboarding. Each approach
provides a different combination of breadth and depth. Results
were compared to provide reliability and additional insight.
All observations, document and video analyses, and interviews
were conducted and analyzed in accordance with institutional
research ethics requirements and national research ethics
rules (see Ethics Statement), and with international best
practice, including those for interviews, ethnographic, and
autoethnographic approaches (Silverman, 2010; Tolich, 2010).
Interviewees were informed of the purpose of the research and
the identity of the researcher, gave prior informed consent to
take part, and gave written permission for individual quotes
to be used. Anonymity of all interviewees and participants has
been strictly preserved, even when individual participants gave
permission to be identified. Some of the data used here were
compiled during previously published research (Buckley, 2006,
2007, 2010b, 2012, 2014, 2015a,b), and the re-use and re-analysis

3

August 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1187

Buckley

Qualitative Analysis of Emotions: Fear and Thrill

each involving fear, thrill and related emotions. Each recollection
was written out factually at length, reconsidered and mentally
replayed multiple times, and examined and compared iteratively,
focussing on intensity and timing of fear and thrill. Retrospective
analyses use memories, voluntary or involuntary (Berntsen,
2002, 2009; Rubin, 2014). Memories of highly emotional
events, also known as critical incidents (Flanagan, 1954)
remain intense and detailed for decades, and recollecting the
events can re-create the original emotions (Mattley, 2002;
Levine and Pizarro, 2004), even when the brain was not
focused on the emotions at the time (Avila and Lin, 2014;
Dehaene, 2014). Such memories record only specific brief
events from a lifetime of experience, but these are precisely
the events needed to study high-intensity emotions. Outdoor
recreation practitioners have historically claimed that the intense
emotions experienced during high-risk, high-skill outdoor
recreation are ineffable, impossible to communicate to nonpractitioners (Allman et al., 2009; Brymer and Oades, 2009).
Recent approaches, however, have shown that they can be
analyzed using retrospective autoethnography (Buckley, 2012,
2015a).

of the data also complies with institutional ethics requirements
(see Ethics Statement).

Participant Observation
Participant observation data were compiled from >4,000 persondays’ activities over a period of a decade. Participants ranged in
experience from novices to longstanding international guides and
instructors. They represent the particular population of people
who choose, and are able, to take part in adventure activities.
This group is studied here specifically to provide information
on links between fear and thrill. Actions, vocalizations and
facial expressions were observed directly, and also recorded
using multiple hand-held and head-mounted video cameras. As
outlined earlier, both fear and thrill are commonly recognizable
through facial expressions and vocalizations (Chen et al., 2011;
Van den Stock and de Gelder, 2014; Martinez et al., 2015), but
these outward expressions can sometimes be suppressed (Gross
and Barrett, 2011). Analysis of observations and recordings
includes conversations where participants reveal or refer to
emotions, which may not have been apparent from actions and
expressions alone. Emotions recognized in the field from facial
expressions and vocalizations, were necessarily classified only by
the author, or by the author and participant where conversations
were also involved. Where video recordings were made, emotions
were recognized jointly by the entire participant group during
playbacks on the same day or at the end of the trip: effectively,
a focus-group approach to cross-coding.

Experimental Autoethnography
Experimental autoethnography involves deliberately repeating
the same actions, and observing one’s own emotions as they
are experienced (Buckley, 2015a). The observer is still reliant on
memory to record the emotions experienced, but it is short rather
than long-term, and it is cued by an external trigger rather than
an emotional threshold. I used two actions to test the relation
between fear and thrill: catching a steep fast wave on a surfboard,
and jumping a kiteboard in surf and high wind. Each of these
requires learned skills to undertake the maneuvre successfully;
and in each case, failure or insufficient skill leads to a wipe-out,
a loss of control followed by a fall. In large waves or strong winds,
wipeouts can be violent and may cause injury or worse (Buckley,
2012). Each of these maneuvres involves quick, precise, and
carefully timed judgements and actions, adjusted through sensory
feedback and cognitive control, at subsecond timescales (Buckley,
2012). To track one’s emotions during these processes involves
switching one’s attention, for very brief intervals, from observing
action to observing emotion. This technique is not automatic,
and has to be learned gradually during multiple repetitions of the
same action.

Practitioner Interviews
Expert practitioner interviews were derived ethnographically
from semi-structured face-to-face and electronic interviews with
skilled guides, instructors and practitioners, over a 3-year period.
These individuals have carried out adventure activities over many
years, often involving high danger and high risk of immediate
death. No inducements were used; interviewees were informed
of the research context; procedures followed requirements for
research rigor and ethics (Tong et al., 2007; Dauphinee, 2010;
Tolich, 2010); and standard emic qualitative analysis approaches
were used (Silverman, 2010; Punch, 2014). Ethnographers can
use their own experiences, shared with others, to interpret those
others’ experiences (Hammersley and Atkinson, 2007), because
emotional experiences are comprehensible between individuals
(Johnson-Laird and Oatley, 1989; Izard, 2010). Individuals
reporting similar emotional experiences exhibit similar changes
in brain biochemistry and electrical activation, and similar
though culturally mediated facial expressions and bodily postures
and gestures; and brain parameters and reported emotions
respond consistently to experimental manipulation (Frank and
Temple, 2009; Niedenthal and Brauer, 2012; Dehaene, 2014).
Despite these strong similarities, however, individual sensory and
emotional experiences and responses are not identical (JohnsonLaird and Oatley, 1989; Dmitrieva et al., 2010; Gross and
Canteras, 2012; Bushdid et al., 2014).

RESULTS
Participant Observation
Participant observations were compiled from >4,000 persondays activities over a period of a decade. These included: 273
days, >300 separate individuals, and >3000 participant-days of
moderate to high-risk white-water rafting and kayaking, much
of it in remote and unknown areas; 83 days, >90 individuals,
and >440 participant-days of wildlife watching in potentially
dangerous circumstances, such as watching bear, rhino, elephant,
buffalo, lion, leopard, or tiger at close or very close range, on foot
or in open vehicles, by night as well as day; 72 days, 46 individuals,

Retrospective Autoethnography
Retrospective autoethnographic analyses are based on 50
individual incidents experienced over a period of four decades,

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

4

August 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1187

Buckley

Qualitative Analysis of Emotions: Fear and Thrill

(3) Fear before an activity, anxiety, is different from
fear during an activity, which may include panic. “Fear.. in
anticipation..” “there’s pre-adventure fear and ‘in the moment’
fear. . .” “Fear can hit suddenly.. like ‘I could die here’.” (4) Fear
must be faced, assessed and overcome. “Stay centred . . . lay the
fear that you have in the palm of one hand and the risk that you
face in the other, don’t let go of either.” “Fear.. is an alert system
for my judgement process.” “Overcoming fear so as to act.” Panic
or terror are experienced as extreme fear which clouds judgment
and blocks action. The ability to avoid panic and overcome fear
increases with skill and experience.
(5) Fear can disappear during intense concentration.
“Fear increases focus and concentration.” “During the activity,
concentration is so intense that fear drops off.” “During the run
there’s no time for fear.” (6) Thrill sometimes occurs after fear,
but not always. “Fear comes before the activity. Thrill comes at the
end.. a mixture of relief, exultation, satisfaction and adrenaline.”
“Thrill comes, once I’m in it and once I’ve completed it.” (7) For
some interviewees, fear itself is not enjoyable, but thrill is. “Fear
itself is not at all pleasurable . . . but moving beyond the shackles of
fear . . . is deeply rewarding.”
The key result from this approach is that for most
practitioners, fear increases thrill, but only up to a point.
Expert practitioners agree that: fear must be faced, assessed and
overcome; fear can disappear during intense concentration; and
fear is often, but not always, followed by thrill. They differentiate:
fear before an activity starts from fear once the activity is under
way; fear from risks beyond one’s control, from fear associated
with one’s own capability and performance; and manageable fear,
which improves focus, from unmanageable panic, which induces
paralysis. The paralyzing consequences of panic match those
reported by Adolphs (2013).

and 365 participant-days of high-risk surfing on shallow tropical
reef breaks; and 70 days, 55 individuals, and 350 participantdays of helicopter snowboarding, including steep, densely treecovered, and heavily cliffed terrain with high avalanche risk at
altitudes to 5000 m.
Participant observations provide a relatively coarse
understanding of individual emotional experiences. More
experienced participants rarely showed fear, even though they
freely showed exhilaration and other strong emotions, e.g.,
when concerned for others’ safety. Less experienced participants
showed frequent thrill and fear and occasional panic, as revealed
by behavior, expressions and vocalizations. Highest fear was
shown by first-time participants during unfamiliar high-risk
activities. Where the same individuals were observed repeatedly,
either on successive days of multi-day activities, or in multiple
trips over successive years, incidence of panic decreased as
experience increased.
The key result from this approach is that different individuals
experience different degrees of fear and thrill, and the same
individual may experience different fear and thrill during
different events. Participants generally displayed fear or anxiety
before a potentially risky event, focus within the event, and thrill
afterward. They showed no fear after the event, only relief or
triumph; no thrill before it, only anticipation; but sometimes,
both fear and thrill during the event itself. Fine-scale sequences
of fear and thrill during the event were generally not discernible
using this method. That is, it did not prove possible to resolve,
using participant observation alone, whether or not fear increases
thrill.

Practitioner Interviews
Individual interview data were derived ethnographically
from semi-structured face-to-face and electronic interviews
during 2012−2016 with 40 skilled guides, instructors and
practitioners: rafters, kayakers, mountaineers, rock and ice
climbers, surfers, sailboarders, kiteboarders, and snowboarders.
Except for mountaineering and climbing, I had sufficient
expertise in each of these activities to be accepted as a competent
intermediate practitioner, able to exchange technical and
emotional experiences with interviewees. However, my skills
have always been well below those of the interviewees themselves.
These expert practitioner interviews yielded seven main results,
illustrated by the quotations below. The views expressed during
these interviews are also reflected in quotations from expert
practitioners published in the popular literature of adventure
recreation (Davis, 2012; Moriarity, 2012; Yogis, 2013).
(1) For most individuals, fear increases thrill, but only up
to a point. “If there’s no fear, the achievement is not nearly as
fulfilling.” “Fear makes the thrills better.. take on being scared and
try and conquer it.” “The thrill of being scared... the real thrill
is conquering the fear.” “Fear definitely adds to the enjoyment
. . . a feeling of accomplishment.” “Fear increases thrill sometimes,
but not always.” “Fear does increase thrill, but there is a fine
line between excitement and terror”. (2) Only one informant
disagreed, a polar explorer who experiences months rather than
moments of risk: “I get no thrill from fear.” “Moments of fear . . .
add no pleasure.”

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

Retrospective Autoethnography
This approach was used here to examine emotions experienced
during infrequent dangerous incidents in high-skill high-risk
outdoor recreation activities. The activities were: hang-gliding,
whitewater kayaking, surfing, off-road driving, snowboarding,
surfing, and wildlife watching. Most of the time, these activities
produce thrills with little or no risk or fear, and are not
recalled as critical incidents. The data for this approach comprise
50 individual incidents, over four decades, which did involve
substantial fear, and sometimes also thrill and other powerful
emotions. Most incidents lasted only minutes, seconds, or less.
A selection of the more extreme incidents are summarized
below. Some of these incidents occurred during individual private
recreation, others during guided commercial adventure tours. At
the time when each incident took place, my experience qualified
me in the higher categories of recognized expertise, such as
Class V whitewater and equivalent levels for hang-gliding and
snowboarding. However, my expertise has always been far below
that of extreme or internationally competitive athletes in any of
these activities.
Nine of the incidents involved hang-gliding. In two, I
witnessed fatal crashes during cliff take-offs, and then flew off the
same cliffs myself. This involved high fear, extreme concentration
and intense awareness, overriding thrill. Four involved unusual,

5

August 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1187

Buckley

Qualitative Analysis of Emotions: Fear and Thrill

They may be broadly memorable, but are not recalled in high
detail as critical incidents.
Seven incidents involved off-road travel in four-wheel-drive
vehicles, days away from any other people, or any chance of
rescue. In one, the wheels cut through the crust of a desert
salt lake, and I barely escaped. There was a moment of fear,
followed by intense emotionless concentration. In another, I
became lost in a desert flooded by cyclonic rains. I felt not fear,
but exhaustion and determination. When I eventually escaped, I
was overcome by powerful and incoherent relief. Other incidents
involved driving through windblown dunes with unstable slipfaces and sand-traps, or deep river crossings with water up to the
windows of the 4WD. These involved trepidation before starting,
intense concentration during the event, and relief and triumph
on completion.
Thirteen incidents involved close encounters with large or
potentially aggressive animals, either marine or terrestrial. Two
humpback whales swam in circles, at close range and high
speed, around my unstable racing surfski, several kilometers
offshore. This generated thrill but also trepidation. Diving with
unaggressive shark species in shallow water, or swimming with
seals and sealions, generates thrill rather than fear. Diving with
hammerhead sharks at depth or at night, however, does generate
fear. Several times I have been within arm’s length of lion or
elephant, either in an open vehicle or on foot, sometimes at night.
This involves very close attention to the animal’s behavior, and a
certain degree of both fear and thrill. I have been attacked by a
baboon, and bitten by a troop of monkeys. On one occasion I and
two companions on foot were charged at short range by a black
panther, a melanistic leopard. On that occasion I felt no fear but
very rapid mental processing.
The principal results from this approach may be summarized
as follows. From a methodological perspective, memories are
most intense and detailed for incidents involving powerful fear,
and the selection of incidents necessarily reflects that. Incidents
involving thrill more than fear were far more numerous, but
are not recalled so specifically. Acknowledging this intrinsic
selectivity, these 50 critical incidents support the conclusions
from the expert practitioner interviews, and add further detail.
Thrill can be experienced without fear, and fear without thrill.
Where both are experienced during the same incident, then
fear increases thrill up to a certain threshold, but beyond that,
thrill disappears. During brief intense incidents where perceived
risk is high and immediate, there is a sequence of emotions
or perceptions: fear before the event, emotionless focussed
concentration during the event; and thrill, relief, and/or triumph
after the event. During more extended incidents, lasting seconds,
or minutes, fear can reappear during the event, and fear and
thrill may alternate in response to very short-term actions and
perceptions.

unanticipated and dangerous circumstances. In one, an error in
harness attachment caused over 100 involuntary stalls in 10 min,
before I could reach the ground. In another incident, I was hit
by a powerful storm front lasting 15 min, and crawled into the
nose wires of the hang-glider to maintain tenuous control. Under
normal flight conditions this would cause a nosedive and crash. In
a third incident, I crashed into a 30m tree and fell out backward
and upside down, still attached to the hang-glider. In a fourth,
a military jet flew beneath my hang-glider, at supersonic speed.
There was no thrill in any of these, but very intense awareness.
A number of incidents involved powerful thrill as well as fear.
These include: rapid height gain in very turbulent thermal lift;
semi-inverted acrobatic maneuvres at the limits of the hangglider’s flight capabilities; and once, two large eagles flying below
my wingtip.
Nine incidents involved surfing. Surfing large steep waves
breaking violently over shallow seafloor involves substantial
risk of injury, concussion or drowning, especially in crowded
conditions over coral reefs. Apprehension and continuous
cognitive reappraisal of risk (Dunsmoor et al., 2012) is
commonplace whilst paddling into position. The moment of
commitment to take-off can generate “heart in mouth” fear, but
the actual take-off, which may involve balanced free-fall down
the wave face, involves very intense concentration, overriding all
emotions. Successful take-offs onto steep fast waves, either long
open walls or hollow barrels, yield thrill or joy (Buckley, 2012;
Hosany, 2012). Fear and thrill may often be felt on the same
wave.
Seven incidents involved backcountry snowboarding,
including heliboarding. In one, I triggered a large slab avalanche,
and barely escaped by riding at speed over the buckling and
cracking slab, and jumping from moving to stationary snow
at the edge. There was an instant of fear followed by intense
concentration. In another, I made an emergency stop in soft
snow, 20 cm from a 30-m vertical cliff onto rocks. Recalling
this still produces a cold sweat. There was no thrill in either of
these incidents. Intentional jumps onto steep snow slopes, in
contrast, produce high thrill as well as fear. The same applies
to high-speed descents down narrow snow-filled couloirs with
high avalanche risk, or through dense trees on deep dry powder
snow, with risk from tree-wells or tree collisions. There were also
many occasions that generated thrill without fear, e.g., riding
large open bowls or steep faces in deep dry powder snow with
low avalanche risk.
Fifteen incidents involved white-water kayaking through river
rapids, waves, and complex turbulent hydraulic features studded
with rocks. Most of the time this generates high thrill and
low fear. Features such as whirlpools, waterfalls, and more
difficult and extended rapids generate fear beforehand, intense
concentration during the maneuvre, and high thrill afterward.
Paddling rapids that have never been run before (Van Beek, 1998)
or where other kayakers have drowned, generates additional fear.
Some incidents generated fear without thrill, notably several
where I was trapped under water for extended periods. Running
long complex rapids, one has time to become aware of both
fear and thrill. Other manoeuvres, such as kayak-surfing large
standing river waves with low risk, generate thrill without fear.

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

Experimental Autoethnography
Both surfing and kiteboarding depend on ambient wind and wave
conditions, so they can only be carried out when conditions are
appropriate. In addition, only a very small proportion of the
time spent surfing and kiteboarding involves take-offs and jumps,
respectively. Most of a surfing or kiteboard session, which may

6

August 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1187

Buckley

Qualitative Analysis of Emotions: Fear and Thrill

after the maneuver itself. If the latter part of the wave is easier
to ride, or the kite jump involves a smooth maneuver lasting
several seconds or longer, however, then one can feel thrill
whilst still on the wave or in the air. This corresponds to
results from retrospective analytical autoethnography involving
snowboarding on long steep slopes, or whitewater kayaking on
long rapids. The key finding is that the emotionless state persists
as long as full concentration on controlled action is required.
If the maneuver is failing, however, then a powerful burst of
“in-the-moment” fear can return instantaneously, overcoming
the emotionless sensation. That is, if fear returns because of
incipient failure, it does so much faster than thrill is felt following
success. This burst of fear, however, is commonly short. Either it
vanishes, if one regains control; or it is replaced by concentration
on escaping danger and minimizing damage, if one does not. This
corresponds to the findings of Noyes and Kletti (1972) that falling
climbers “acted with lightning-quickness in accord with accurate
judgment”. In such cases, there is no subsequent thrill, but only
relief once one is out of immediate danger. It also corresponds
to the findings from retrospective analytical autoethnography,
as above, for the life-threatening incidents related to hanggliding, snowboarding and whitewater kayaking. This result was
not available from participant observation or expert practitioner
interviews.

typically last one or more hours, is spent paddling into position or
sailing back and forth. Each individual surf take-off or kite jump
typically takes a few seconds at most, often less for surf take-offs,
and rarely up to 15 s for a large jump. For both surf take-offs and
kite jumps, control is needed throughout the maneuvre. In each
case, however, the crux component is shorter still, and requires
precise perceptions and physical movements at timescales of a
10th of a second. This approach thus generates only a few seconds
of data from many hours of activity over an elapsed period of
more than 2 years. There are no absolute thresholds of perceived
risk, fear, or thrill, distinguishing surf take-offs or kiteboard
jumps which provide data, from those which do not. There is thus
no absolute count of the number of incidents. There were at least
30 incidents in each activity, however, where both fear and thrill
were distinctly recognizable.
Results from experimental autoethnography support
those from expert practitioner interviews and retrospective
autoethnography, and provide additional insights at finer
timescales. In contrast to retrospective autoethnography, the
experimental approach is intrinsically biased toward events
with lower risk and hence lower fear, since the manoeuvres are
deliberate and the author is not an extreme outdoor athlete.
In this approach, fear was low, thrill was high, and there were
no incidents involving fear without thrill. This approach also
supports the sawtooth relation between fear and thrill, where
fear boosts thrill up to a certain threshold but not beyond. Whilst
many of the incidents used in retrospective autoethnography,
however, were beyond that upper threshold, all of the incidents
in experimental authoethnography were well below it. The
experimental approach also shows that the sawtooth threshold
can differ with conditions, for the same activity and individual.
Experimental autoethnography showed that different combinations or categories of fear and thrill may be distinguished.
This is consistent with findings from other approaches, but
more detailed. On days with a large surf or a strong wind,
such as during cyclonic conditions, there is a generalized preevent anxiety and excitement in deciding whether to enter the
water at all, and in getting ready to do so. This is essentially
a recognition of risk related to ambient conditions, which one
judges carefully, assesses against one’s own capabilities, and
overcomes by paddling out or rigging up. Once one is in the
water, paddling the surfboard or riding the kiteboard, there
is a very careful attention to conditions, which may include
apprehension as well as awareness.
The most significant result from experimental autoethnography is that there are different short-term sequences of
emotions, depending on actual outcomes and cognitive sense of
control. This confirms analogous suggestions from practitioner
interviews and retrospective autoethnography. As one starts the
surf take-off or kite jump, the focus is entirely on control, and
all emotions disappear. If the maneuver is successful, then this
absence of emotion lasts for as long as powerful concentration
is needed, throughout the entire maneuver and any subsequent
components such as riding a fast and difficult section of a wave,
or flying the kite through a jump and landing. Once this is
completed, then emotions flood back in a powerful surge of
thrill and triumph, which may not be felt until several seconds

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

Comparisons
Each of these four methods and datasets demonstrate links
between fear and thrill under risk, but each reveals difference
insights and nuances in that relation. The principal results from
each approach are summarized in Table 1. Considered jointly,
these four approaches yield two central conclusions, which do not
seem to have been reported previously.
Firstly, the relation between fear and thrill has a sawtooth
format. If fear is low, it is possible to experience thrill without fear;
and if fear is high, it is possible to experience fear without thrill;
but within a certain range of intensity of fear, increased fear leads
to increased thrill. As fear increases beyond an upper threshold,
fear overwhelms thrill, thrill falls suddenly to zero, and only fear
is experienced. The sawtooth threshold may occur at different
fear intensities for different people, activities and circumstances.
This sawtooth relationship has apparently not been identified
previously.
Secondly, during brief intense incidents where perceived
risk is high and immediate, there is a sequence of emotions
or perceptions: fear before the event, emotionless focussed
concentration during the event; and thrill, relief and/or triumph
after the event. During more extended incidents, lasting seconds,
or minutes, fear can reappear during the event, and fear and
thrill may alternate in response to very short-term actions and
perceptions. If so, the fear felt during the event is perceived as
qualitatively different from fear felt before starting.
There are several apparently novel conclusions derived
specifically from retrospective autoethnography. The first result
relates to a researcher’s ability to recall their own emotions.
There are three different measures of the intensity of emotion
experienced during a past event (Mattley, 2002; Bywaters et al.,
2004; Levine and Pizarro, 2004). The first measure is the

7

August 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1187

Buckley

Qualitative Analysis of Emotions: Fear and Thrill

TABLE 1 | Comparison of results from four qualitative methods in analyzing emotions.
Methodological approach

Participant
observation

Practitioner
interviews

Retrospective
autoethno

Experimental
autoethno

Activities

4

8

7

2

Years

10

3

40

2

Scale

>4000
person-days

38 expert
practitioners

50 critical
incidents

60 incidents
triggered

Individuals differ in fear and thrill responses

∗

∗

Same individual may have different responses on different
occasions

∗

∗

Scope and data

Principal findings

∗

Three measures of past emotional intensity correlate only
weakly
Fear boosts performance, panic paralyses

∗

∗
∗

Pre-event fear differs from fear during event

Fear must be faced, assessed, and overcome in order to
act

∗

Thrill can occur during and/or after event

∗

∗

Thrill can occur without fear, and fear without thrill
Below a lower threshold, thrill can occur without fear

∗

∗

∗

Fear increases with immediacy of risk, and time to
contemplate it

∗

Between a lower and upper threshold, thrill increases with
fear

∗

∗

∗

∗

∗

∗

∗

∗

∗

∗

∗

∗

∗

∗

Beyond the upper threshold, thrill vanishes but fear remains
Perceived danger generates intense focus and awareness

∗

∗

Fear can disappear during intense concentration and focus

∗

∗

∗

∗

∗

∗

∗

Absence of emotion extends only during most intense
concentration
∗

Under high risk, emotional sequence is fear, focus,
thrill/relief/triumph
∗

∗

Finding demonstrated by method concerned.

that for the author, the three measures of the intensity of
past emotions are not well correlated. If this also applies more
generally, it affects all conventional ethnographic studies of
emotion.
The second new result from retrospective analytical autoethnography is that the degree of fear is driven by three factors.
The first factor is the perceived probability of immediate death.
Almost riding a snowboard off a high rock-strewn cliff is an
example. The second factor is a longer period to contemplate
death before a critical action, even if the risk during that period is
low. An example is the period before a hang-glider cliff take-off,
or before paddling over a waterfall or into a Class V whitewater
rapid. Sometimes both these factors can occur simultaneously, for
example when my hang-glider harness was incorrectly attached
and I suffered an extended series of stalls, each with the risk of
death. The third factor is that fear can be blocked or overridden
by intense concentration on actions to avoid immediate death.
This occurred during a number of these incidents, including
being trapped underwater whilst surfing or kayaking, or driving
a 4WD across a remote arid salt lake. The third of these factors
is also supported by expert practitioner interviews, but that
approach did not provide data on the first two. Now that these
factors have been identified, it would be possible to test them

remembered intensity of any involuntary physiological response
that occurred during the past event. Involuntary physiological
responses to fear include sensations perceived as big-eyes,
prickly-skin or falling-stomach. Involuntary responses indicating
other emotions include yells of excitement, roars of triumph,
or gasps of relief. For example, in one of the off-road driving
events, when I finally found a way out after being stuck in the
desert, I recall leaping from the vehicle and roaring incoherently
and involuntarily at the top of my voice. That is, I recall a very
powerful emotion, but the process of remembering it is free of
emotion.
The second measure of past emotion is the level of very fine
detail in the memory, indicating heightened awareness during
the event. For example, for one of the hang-glider cliff takeoffs shortly after another participant had been killed, I have
a very intense memory of sun on wildflowers, as I strove
to overcome fear before hooking up my harness. The third
measure of past emotion is the degree to which involuntary
physiological responses are created by the process of recollecting
the event. For example, when I recall nearly snowboarding
off a cliff onto rocks, the recollection itself produces a cold
sweat, though I have no memory of any such response at the
time. The analytical autoethnographic approach thus indicates

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

8

August 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1187

Buckley

Qualitative Analysis of Emotions: Fear and Thrill

more broadly through new expert interviews, as suggested by
Buckley (2015a).
The third result from retrospective analytical autoethnography is that there are identifiable sequences of emotions,
differing between more and less intense events. For activities
with an extended series of moves, fear can intrude suddenly on
thrill, depending on cognitive sense of control. Examples include:
multiple manoeuvres in a long and complex whitewater rapid;
high-speed linked snowboard turns around close-set trees on a
steep powder slope; or a long sailboard or kiteboard ride on a
large steep wave breaking fast. This fear is of the in-the-moment
type. If one regains control, fear disappears again, leaving only a
brief aftermath. This matches recent neurological findings (Agren
et al., 2012). When the threat of death or other powerful fear is
successfully overcome, fear gives way to relief or triumph. Again,
this could be tested more broadly through new expert practitioner
interviews.
Retrospective and experimental approaches to analytical
autoethnography produce different insights. Since the incidents
generating highest fear involved high perceived risk, and
I have not experienced such incidents deliberately, they
are only available for retrospective analysis. Experimental
autoethnographic approaches with an external-cue trigger
(Buckley, 2015a), in contrast, involve greater focus on thrill, at
much lower intensities of risk and fear. This approach provides
more reliable and detailed data on changes between emotions
over very short time-scales. In addition, the experimental
approach can provide successive sets of increasingly focussed
observations.
It is difficult for an individual to recall, or describe in
a later interview, exactly what sequence of emotions they
experienced during a move or manoeuver which is at once
difficult, dangerous, exciting, but frightening. In recollection, the
various emotions may seem to have been mixed or confused,
or to have followed each other at such short timescales that
one cannot be sure of the order. It is also difficult for an
observer to detect such a sequence, because it occurs too rapidly
and may be revealed only weakly through facial expressions,
especially if the observer cannot get very close to the person
undergoing the experience. By repeating and remembering
such experiences oneself, however, and deliberately paying
attention to the emotions involved, it is possible to distinguish
such a sequence. This is the key benefit of experimental
analytical autoethnography in the analysis of emotions (Buckley,
2015a).
Fear and thrill are both extensively studied. The approaches
used here add: a distinction between pre-event fear and inthe-moment fear; a distinction between empowering fear and
paralyzing panic; and a sawtooth relationship between fear and
thrill, with upper and lower thresholds which differ between
individuals. Analytical autoethnography, both retrospective and
experimental, shows that during high-risk, high-skill activities,
fear, and thrill may occur jointly or succeed each other at very
short timescales, and that there are multiple different pathways
or trajectories, depending on timing, physical circumstances, and
perceived control. No other approach has revealed this level of
detail.

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

DISCUSSION
From the practical perspective, the sequence and drivers of
emotions during outdoor adventure recreation are especially
valuable if they can be used to analyze and improve emotional
control during emergency services and military combat, where
it is a great deal more difficult to conduct research. The expert
ethnography, in particular, indicates that through practice, one
can learn to avoid panic so as to think and act rapidly, decisively,
and appropriately under high risk. It appears, though this
requires further testing, that this approach only succeeds if the
danger and fear are real (cf. Morreall, 1993).
Currently, emergency services and military personnel achieve
this by practicing their skills during high-risk events in their
actual professions, so-called combat hardening (Fenz and
Epstein, 1967; Friedland and Keinan, 1992; Taverniers et al.,
2011; Foster and Fletcher, 2013). To reduce injury and mortality,
military and emergency services organizations use training
approaches which simulate combat or emergencies (Cohn et al.,
2010; Bouchard et al., 2012; Johnson et al., 2014). These, however,
generally do not involve real fear. The results presented here
suggest that it would be more effective to combine such training
with practice in overcoming real fear, e.g., through adventure
training. Many such organizations do engage in adventure
recreation, but not yet for this purpose.
From a research perspective, three significant new avenues
arise from the results reported here. The first is that they may help
to elucidate how humans perceive the passage of time (Arstila,
2012; Wittmann, 2013; Buckley, 2014; Li and Yuen, 2015). The
second is that, especially if it could be coupled with biochemical,
neurological and musculoskeletal observations, analytical
autoethnography could help to elucidate how we learn physical
skills which require very fine coordination of observation and
control. There are now mobile electroencephalographic devices
such as those manufactured by Emotiv (2016), but to date these
cannot be used in water, especially salt water. I look forward
to the day when surf and kite helmets can be fitted with EEGs.
Meanwhile, perhaps such a helmet could be constructed for use
while snowboarding or bungy jumping.
The third question is: what is the evolutionary origin of thrill?
Fear in the face of danger has clear ecological and evolutionary
advantages (Nesse and Ellsworth, 2009; Adolphs, 2013; de Valk
et al., 2015; Lu et al., 2015). But what is gained through thrill?
Thrill drives individuals to perform actions that involve risk and
fear. Why should this provide an evolutionary advantage? Is it,
perhaps, a mechanism to induce juvenile humans, and perhaps
other animal species, to practice the skills they need to survive,
thrive, and reproduce in adult life? Humans experience both fear
and thrill from a young age (Sandseter, 2009). It appears that as
skill increases, the degree of risk and fear needed to generate the
same level of thrill also increases (Buckley, 2012). It also appears
that when thrill is coupled with the successful performance of
a skilled activity under risk, generating what Buckley (2012)
referred to as rush, this becomes addictive. These would both be
consistent with a strong role in learning.
Similarly, it seems that when circumstances require maximum
attention and concentration because of high risk, neither
R

9

August 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1187

Buckley

Qualitative Analysis of Emotions: Fear and Thrill

fear nor thrill nor any other emotion is experienced at that
moment. This is not shock, because it is accompanied either
by very rapid mental processing, or complete calm. If emotions
have evolved to increase individual survival, why would they
disappear at moments of highest risk? Could it be, perhaps,
that biochemical aspects of emotion are valuable in long-term
behavioral conditioning, but that they interfere with short-term
neurological processing, so that when high-speed logical thought
is critical for survival, emotions are temporarily shut down?
This might be analogous to the recently described mechanism
showing interferences between memory and stress (Sekine et al.,

2015). More generally, perhaps high-risk adventure activities
could contribute to understanding of links between emotion and
cognition (Okon-Singer et al., 2015) if we could monitor very
short-term changes in brain biochemistry and neurophysiology
as individuals undertake activities with high risk, skill, fear and
thrill.

REFERENCES

Buckley, R. C. (2006). Adventure Tourism. Wallingford: CAB International.
Buckley, R. C. (2007). Adventure tourism products: price, duration, size, skill,
remoteness. Tour. Manag. 28, 1428–1433. doi: 10.1016/j.tourman.2006.12.003
Buckley, R. C. (2010a). Adventure Tourism Management. London: Elsevier.
Buckley, R. C. (2010b). Communications in adventure tour products: health
and safety in rafting and kayaking. Ann. Tour. Res. 37, 315–332. doi:
10.1016/j.annals.2009.10.011
Buckley, R. C. (2012). Rush as a key motivation in skilled adventure tourism:
resolving the risk recreation paradox. Tour. Manag. 33, 961–970. doi:
10.1016/j.tourman.2011.10.002
Buckley, R. C. (2014). Slow time perception can be learned. Front. Psychol. 5:209.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00209
Buckley, R. C. (2015a). Autoethnography helps analyse emotions. Front. Psychol. 6,
209. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00209
Buckley, R. C. (2015b). Adventure thrills are addictive. Front. Psychol. 6:1915. doi:
10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01915
Bushdid, C., Magnasco, M. O., Vosshall, L. B., and Keller, A. (2014). Humans can
discriminate more than 1 trillion olfactory stimuli. Science 343, 1370–1372. doi:
10.1126/science.1249168
Buzard, J. (2003). On auto-ethnographic authority. Yale J. Crit. 16, 61–92. doi:
10.1353/yale.2003.0002
Bywaters, M., Andrade, J., and Turpin, G. (2004). Determinants of the vividness
of visual imagery: the effects of delayed recall, stimulus affect and individual
differences. Memory 12, 479–488. doi: 10.1080/09658210444000160
Campbell, J. B., Tyrrell, D. J., and Zingaro, M. (1993). Sensation seeking among
whitewater canoe and kayak paddlers. Pers. Individ. Dif. 14, 489–491. doi:
10.1016/0191-8869(93)90319-X
Caputo, P. (1977). Rumor of War. New York, NY: Ballantine Books.
Carnicelli-Filho, S., Schwartz, G. M., and Tahara, A. K. (2010). Fear
and adventure tourism in Brazil. Tour. Manag. 31, 953–956. doi:
10.1016/j.tourman.2009.07.013
Cater, C. I. (2006). Playing with risk? Participant perceptions of risk and
management implications in adventure tourism. Tour. Manag. 27, 317–325. doi:
10.1016/j.tourman.2004.10.005
Celsi, R., Rose, R., and Leigh, T. (1993). An exploration of high-risk leisure
consumption through skydiving. J. Consum. Res. 29, 1–23. doi: 10.1086/209330
Chang, L. J., Gianaros, P. J., Manuck, S. B., Krishnan, A., and Wager, T. D. (2015).
A sensitive and specific neural signature for picture-induced negative affect.
PLoS Biol. 13:e1002180. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1002180
Chen, D., Katdare, A., and Lucas, N. (2006). Chemosignals of fear enhance
cognitive performance in humans. Chem. Senses 31, 415–423. doi:
10.1093/chemse/bjj046
Chen, W., Lander, K., and Liu, C. H. (2011). Matching faces with emotional
expressions. Front. Psychol. 2:206. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00206
Chen, Y., Guo, Y. Z., Liu, H. B., and Liu, J. (2013). An empirical study in adventure
tourism management: a balance between risk and thrill in China. Ann. Grad.
Conf. Proc. 18, 31–33.
Chiao, J. Y., Iidaka, T., Gordon, H. L., Nogawa, J., Bar, M., Aminoff, E., et al. (2008).
Cultural specificity in amygdala response to fear faces. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 20,
2167–2174. doi: 10.1162/jocn.2008.20151
Chirivella, E. C., and Martinez, L. M. (1994). The sensation of risk and motivational
tendencies in sports: an empirical study. Pers. Individ. Dif. 16, 777–786. doi:
10.1016/0191-8869(94)90219-4

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
RB conceived, designed and conducted research, wrote article.

Ackerl, K., Atzmueller, M., and Grammer, K. (2002). The scent of fear.
Neuroendocrinol. Lett. 23, 79–84.
Adams, R. B., Franklin, R. G., Kveraga, K., Ambady, N., Kleck, R. E., Whalen,
P. J., et al. (2011). Amygdala responses to averted vs direct gaze fear vary as
a function of presentation speed. Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci. 7, 568–577. doi:
10.1093/scan/nsr038
Adolphs, R. (2013). The biology of fear. Curr. Biol. 23, R79–R93. doi:
10.1016/j.cub.2012.11.055
Agren, T., Engman, J., Frick, A., Bjorkstrand, J., Larsson, E. M., Furmark, T., et al.
(2012). Disruption of reconsolidation erases a fear memory trace in the human
amygdala. Science 337, 1550–1552. doi: 10.1126/science.1223006
Allman, T., Mittelstaedt, R. D., Martin, B., and Goldenberg, M. (2009). Exploring
the motivations of BASE jumpers: extreme sport enthusiasts. J. Sport Tour. 14,
229–247. doi: 10.1080/14775080903453740
Anderson, L. (2006). Analytic autoethnography. J. Contemp. Ethnogr. 35, 373–395.
doi: 10.1177/0891241605280449
Arnould, E. J., and Price, L. L. (1993). River magic: extraordinary experience and
the extended service encounter. J. Consum. Res. 20, 24–45. doi: 10.1086/209331
Arstila, V. (2012). Time slows down during accidents. Front. Psychol. 3:1–10. doi:
10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00196
Avila, I., and Lin, S. C. (2014). Motivational salience signal in the basal forebrain
is coupled with faster and more precise decision speed. PLoS Biol. 12:e0110811.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001811
Barbieri, C., and Sotomayor, S. (2013). Surf travel behavior and destination
preferences: an application of the Serious Leisure Inventory and Measure. Tour.
Manag. 35, 111–121. doi: 10.1016/j.tourman.2012.06.005
Baucom, L. B., Wedell, D. H., Wang, J., Blitzer, D. N., and Shinkareva, S. V. (2012).
Decoding the neural representation of affective states. Neuroimage 59, 718–727.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.07.037
Beedie, P., and Hudson, S. (2003). Emergence of mountain-based adventure
tourism. Ann. Tour. Res. 30, 625–643. doi: 10.1016/S0160-7383(03)00043-4
Berko, A., and Erez, E. (2005). “Ordinary people” and “death work”: palestinian
suicide bombers as victimizers and victims. Violence Vict. 20, 603–623.
Berntsen, D. (2002). Tunnel memories for autobiographical events: central details
are remembered more frequently from shocking than from happy experiences.
Mem. Cogn. 30, 1010–1020. doi: 10.3758/bf03194319
Berntsen, D. (2009). Involuntary Autobiographical Memories: An Introduction
to the Unbidden Past. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. doi:
10.1017/CBO9780511575921
Boccignone, G., and Cordeschi, R. (2015). Coping with levels of explanation in the
behavioral sciences. Front. Psychol. 6:213. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00213
Bouchard, S., Bernier, F., Boivin, E., Morin, B., and Robillard, G. (2012).
Using biofeedback while immersed in a stressful videogame increases the
effectiveness of stress management skills in soldiers. PLoS ONE 7:e36169. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0036169
Brymer, E., and Oades, L. G. (2009). Extreme sports: a positive transformation
in courage and humility. J. Humanist. Psychol. 49, 114–126. doi:
10.1177/0022167808326199
Brymer, E., and Schweitzer, R. (2013). Extreme sports are good for your health: a
phenomenological understanding of fear and anxiety in extreme sport. J. Health
Psychol. 18, 477–487. doi: 10.1177/1359105312446770

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

10

August 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1187

Buckley

Qualitative Analysis of Emotions: Fear and Thrill

Cohn, J., Weltman, G., Ratwani, R., Chartrand, D., and McCraty, R. (2010). “Stress
inoculation through cognitive and biofeedback training,” in Proceedings of
Interservice/Industry Training, Simulation and Education Conference No. 10293,
Orlando, FL, 1–11.
Curtin, S. (2010). Managing the wildlife tourism experience: the importance of tour
leaders. Int. J. Tour. Res. 12, 219–236. doi: 10.1002/jtr.747
Dauphinee, E. (2010). The ethics of autoethnography. Rev. Int. Stud. 36, 799–818.
doi: 10.1017/S0260210510000690
Davis, S. (2012). Fear. Inside Game, Ep. 2. Available at: https://vimeo.com/39503546
(accessed June 01, 2015).
de Groot, J. H. B., Smeets, M. A. M., and Semin, G. R. (2015). Rapid stress system
drives chemical transfer of fear from sender to receiver. PLoS ONE 10:e0118211.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0118211
de Montigny, C. (1989). Cholecystokinin tetrapeptide induces panic-like attacks
in healthy volunteers: preliminary findings. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 46, 511–517.
doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.1989.01810060031006
de Valk, J. M., Wijnen, J. G., and Kret, M. E. (2015). Anger fosters action. Fast
responses in a motor task involving approach movements toward angry faces
and bodies. Front. Psychol. 6:1240. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01240
Dehaene, S. (2014). Consciousness and the Brain. New York, NY: Viking.
Denzin, N. K. (2014). Interpretive Autoethnography, 2nd Edn. London: Sage.
Dewalt, K. M., and Dewalt, B. R. (2002). Participant Observation: A Guide for
Fieldworkers. Walnut Creek, CA: Altamira Press.
Diehm, R., and Armatas, C. (2004). Surfing: an avenue for socially acceptable
risk-taking, satisfying needs for sensation seeking and experience seeking. Pers.
Individ. Dif. 36, 663–677. doi: 10.1016/S0191-8869(03)00124-7
Dmitrieva, J., Chen, C. S., Greenberger, E., Ogunseitan, O., and Ding,
Y. C. (2010). Gender-specific expression of the DRD4 gene on adolescent
delinquency, anger and thrill seeking. Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci. 6, 82–89. doi:
10.1093/scan/nsq020
Dunsmoor, J. E., Martin, A., and LaBar, K. S. (2012). Role of conceptual knowledge
in learning and retention of conditioned fear. Biol. Psychol. 89, 300–305. doi:
10.1016/j.biopsycho.2011.11.002
Ebner, N. C., Johnson, M. K., and Fischer, H. (2012). Neural mechanisms of
reading facial emotions in young and older adults. Front. Psychol. 3:223. doi:
10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00223
Emotiv R (2016). Emotiv EPOC/EPOC+. Available at: https://emotiv.com/epoc
(accessed June 01, 2015).
Faullant, R., Matzler, K., and Mooradian, T. A. (2011). Personality, basic emotions,
and satisfaction: primary emotions in the mountaineering experience. Tour.
Manag. 32, 1423–1430. doi: 10.1016/j.tourman.2011.01.004
Fenz, W. D., and Epstein, S. (1967). Gradients of psychological arousal of
experienced and novice parachutists as a function of an approaching
jump. Psychosom. Med. 29, 33–51. doi: 10.1097/00006842-19670100000005
Flanagan, J. C. (1954). The critical incident technique. Psychol. Bull. 51, 327–358.
doi: 10.1037/h0061470
Foster, R. E., and Fletcher, J. D. (2013). Toward training transformation. Mil.
Psychol. 25, 308–317. doi: 10.1037/h0094971
Frank, C. K., and Temple, E. (2009). Cultural effects on the neural basis of
theory of mind. Prog. Brain Res. 178, 213–223. doi: 10.1016/S0079-6123(09)
17815-9
Franques, P., Auriacombe, M., Piquemal, E., Verger, M., Brisseau-Gimenez, S.,
Grabot, D., et al. (2003). Sensation seeking as a common factor in opioid
dependent subjects and high risk sport practicing subjects: a cross-sectional
study. Drug Alcohol Depend. 69, 121–126. doi: 10.1016/S0376-8716(02)00309-5
Friedland, N., and Keinan, G. (1992). Training effective performance in stressful
situations: three approaches and implications for combat training. Mil. Psychol.
4, 157–174. doi: 10.1207/s15327876mp0403_3
Gardner, R. S., Mainetti, M., and Ascoli, G. A. (2015). Older adults report
moderately more detailed autobiographical memories. Front. Psychol. 6:631.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00631
Gomà-i-Freixanet, M. (1999). Personality profile of subjects engaged in high
physical risk sports. Pers. Individ. Dif. 12, 1087–1093. doi: 10.1016/01918869(91)90038-D
Graham, R., and LaBar, K. S. (2012). Neurocognitive mechanisms of
gaze-expression interactions in face processing and social attention.
Neuropsychologia 50, 553–566. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2012.01.019

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

Grillon, C., and Charney, D. R. (2011). In the face of fear: anxiety sensitizes
defensive responses to fearful faces. Psychophysiology 48, 1745–1752. doi:
10.1111/j.1469-8986.2011.01268.x
Gross, C. T., and Canteras, N. S. (2012). The many paths to fear. Nat. Rev. Neurosci.
13, 651–658. doi: 10.1038/nrn3301
Gross, J. J., and Barrett, L. F. (2011). Emoption regulation and emotions
suppression: one or two depends on your point of view. Emot. Rev. 3, 8–16.
doi: 10.1177/1754073910380974
Grupe, D. W., and Nitschke, J. B. (2013). Uncertainty and anticipation in anxiety:
an integrated neurobiological and psychological perspective. Nat. Rev. Neurosci.
14, 488–501. doi: 10.1038/nrn3524
Gu, Y., Mai, X., and Luo, Y. J. (2013). Do bodily expressions compete with facial
expressions? Time course of integration of emotional signals from the face and
the body. PLoS ONE 8:e66762. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0066762
Habib, M., Cassotti, M., Moutier, S., Houdé, O., and Borst, G. (2015). Fear and
anger have opposite effects on risk seeking in the gain frame. Front. Psychol.
6:253. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00253
Haegler, K., Zernecke, R., Kleemann, A. M., Albrecht, J., Pollatos, O., Brückmann,
H., et al. (2010). No fear no risk! Human risk behavior is affected
by chemosensory anxiety signals. Neuropsychologia 48, 3901–3908. doi:
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2010.09.019
Hamann, S. (2012). Mapping discrete and dimensional emotions onto the
brain: controversies and consensus. Trends Cogn. Sci. 16, 458–466. doi:
10.1016/j.tics.2012.07.006
Hammersley, M., and Atkinson, P. (2007). Ethnography: Principles in Practice.
Oxford: Routledge.
Harrison, L., and Loui, P. (2014). Thrills, chills, frissons, and skin orgasms: toward
an integrative model of transcendent psychophysiological experiences in music.
Front. Psychol. 5:790. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00790
Haviland-Jones, J. M., McGuire, T. R., and Wilson, P. (2016). Testing for individual
differences in the identification of chemosignals for fear and happy: phenotypic
super-detectors, detectors and non-detectors. PLoS ONE 11:e0154495. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0154495
Holyfield, L. (1999). Manufacturing adventure: the buying and selling of emotions.
J. Contemp. Ethnogr. 28, 3–32. doi: 10.1177/089124199129023352
Holyfield, L., and Fine, G. A. (1997). Adventure as character work: the collective
taming of fear. Symb. Interact. 20, 343–363. doi: 10.1525/si.1997.20.4.343
Hosany, S. (2012). Appraisal determinants of tourist emotional responses. J. Travel
Res. 51, 303–314. doi: 10.1177/0047287511410320
Houge Mackenzie, S., and Kerr, J. H. (2013). Stress and emotion at work:
an adventure tour guide’s experiences. Tour. Manag. 36, 3–14. doi:
10.1016/j.tourman.2012.10.018
Howlett, J. R., and Paulus, M. P. (2015). The neural basis of testable and
non-testable beliefs. PLoS ONE 10:e0124596. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.
0124596
Izard, C. (2010). More meanings and more questions for the term ‘emotion’. Emot.
Rev. 2, 383–385. doi: 10.1177/1754073910374670
Jackson, M. C., Linden, D. E., and Raymond, J. E. (2014). Angry
expressions strengthen the encoding and maintenance of face identity
representations in visual working memory. Cogn. Emot. 28, 278–297. doi:
10.1080/02699931.2013.816655
Johnson, D. C., Thom, N. J., Stanley, E. A., Haase, L., Simmons, A. N., Shih,
P. A., et al. (2014). Modifying resilience mechanisms in at-risk individuals: a
controlled study of mindfulness training in marines preparing for deployment.
Am. J. Psychiatry 171, 844–853. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2014.13040502
Johnson-Laird, P. N., and Oatley, K. (1989). The language of emotions: an analysis
of a semantic field. Cogn. Emot. 3, 81–123. doi: 10.1080/02699938908408075
Jonas, L. M. (1999). Making and facing danger: constructing strong character on
the river. Symb. Interact. 22, 247–268. doi: 10.1525/si.1999.22.3.247
Kassam, K. S., Markey, A. R., Cherkassky, V. L., Loewenstein, G., and Just, M. A.
(2013). Identifying emotions on the basis of neural activation. PLoS ONE
8:e66032. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0066032
Kendrick, W. (1991). The Thrill of Fear. New York, NY: Grove Press.
Kim, J. H., Ritchie, J. R. B., and McCormick, B. (2012). Development of
a scale to measure memorable tourism experiences. J. Trav. Res. 51,
12–25. doi: 10.1177/0047287510385467
Kliemann, D., Rosenblau, G., Bölte, S., Heekeren, H. R., and Dziobek, I.
(2013). Face puzzle—two new video-based tasks for measuring explicit and

11

August 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1187

Buckley

Qualitative Analysis of Emotions: Fear and Thrill

implicit aspects of facial emotion recognition. Front. Psychol. 4:376. doi:
10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00376
Kragel, P. A., and LaBar, K. S. (2013). Multivariate pattern classification reveals
autonomic and experiential representations of discrete emotions. Emotion 13,
681–690. doi: 10.1037/a0031820
Kret, M., Stekelenburg, J., Roelofs, K., and de Gelder, B. (2013). Perception of
face and body expressions using electromyography, pupillometry and gaze
measures. Front. Psychol. 4:28. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00028
Kruschwitz, J. D., Simmons, A. N., Flagan, T., and Paulus, M. P. (2012). Nothing to
lose: processing blindness to potential losses drives thrill and adventure seekers.
Neuroimage 59, 2850–2859. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.09.048
Lane, A. M., Bucknall, G., Davis, P. A., and Beedie, C. J. (2012). Emotions
and emotion regulation among novice military parachutists. Mil. Psychol. 24,
331–345. doi: 10.1080/08995605.2012.678244
LeDoux, J. E. (2000). Emotion circuits in the brain. Ann. Rev. Neurosci. 23,
155–184. doi: 10.1146/annurev.neuro.23.1.155
LeDoux, J. E. (2012b). Evolution of human emotion: a view through fear. Progr.
Brain Res. 195, 431–442. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-53860-4.00021-0
LeDoux, J. E. (2012a). Rethinking the emotional brain. Neuron 73, 653–676. doi:
10.1016/j.neuron.2012.02.004
Levine, L. J., and Pizarro, D. A. (2004). Emotion and memory: a grumpy overview.
Soc. Cogn. 22, 530–554. doi: 10.1521/soco.22.5.530.50767
Lewinski, P. (2015). Don’t look blank, happy, or sad: patterns of facial expressions
of speakers in banks’ YouTube videos predict video’s popularity over time.
J. Neurosci. Psychol. Econ. 8, 241–249. doi: 10.1037/npe0000046
Li, W. O., and Yuen, K. S. (2015). The perception of time while perceiving dynamic
emotional faces. Front. Psychol. 6:1248. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01248
Lindquist, K. A., and Barrett, L. F. (2012). A functional architecture of the human
brain: emerging insights from the science of emotion. Trends Cogn. Sci. 16,
533–540. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2012.09.005
Lindquist, K. A., Wager, T. D., Kober, H., Bliss-Moreau, E., and Barrett, L. F.
(2012). The brain basis of emotion: a meta-analytic review. Behav. Brain Sci.
35, 121–143. doi: 10.1017/S0140525X11000446
Lu, Z., Guo, B., Boguslavsky, A., Cappiello, M., Zhang, W., and Meng, M. (2015).
Distinct effects of contrast and color on subjective rating of fearfulness. Front.
Psychol. 6:1521. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01521
Maner, J. K., and Gerend, M. A. (2007). Motivationally selective risk judgments:
do fear and curiosity boost the boons or the banes? Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis.
Process. 103, 256–267. doi: 10.1016/j.obhdp.2006.08.002
Martinez, L., Falvello, V. B., Aviezer, H., and Todorov, A. (2015). Contributions
of facial expressions and body language to the rapid perception of dynamic
emotions. Cogn. Emot. 11, 1–11. doi: 10.1080/02699931.2015.1035229
Mattley, C. (2002). The temporality of emotion: constructing past emotion. Symb.
Interact. 25, 363–378. doi: 10.1525/si.2002.25.3.363
Meeren, H. K. M., Heijnsbergen, C. C., and de Gelder, B. (2005). Rapid perceptual
integration of facial expression and emotional body language. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 102, 16518–16523. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0507650102
Michael, J. (2016). What are shared emotions (for)? Front. Psychol. 7:412. doi:
10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00412
Michel, G., Carton, S., and Jouvent, R. (1997). Sensation seeking and anhedonia in
risk taking behaviors: study in bungee jumpers. Encéphale 23, 403–411.
Monasterio, E. (2013). “Personality characteristics in extreme sports athletes:
morbidity and mortality in mountaineering and base jumping,” in Adventure
and Extreme Sports Injuries, eds O. Mei-Dan and M. R. Carmont (London:
Springer), 303–314.
Montag, J. M., Patterson, M. E., and Freimund, W. A. (2005). The wolf viewing
experience in the Lamar Valley of Yellowstone National Park. Hum. Dimens.
Wildl. 10, 273–284. doi: 10.1080/10871200500292843
Moriarity, J. (2012). “Fear is healthy, panic is deadly,” in Chasing Mavericks, eds C.
Hanson and M. Apted (Los Angeles, CA: 20th Century Fox).
Morin, A., Runyan, J. D., and Brinthaupt, T. M. (2015). Editorial: inner experiences:
theory. Measurement, frequency, content, and functions. Front. Psychol. 6:1758.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01758
Morreall, J. (1993). Fear without belief. J. Philos. 90, 359–366. doi: 10.2307/2940792
Mujica-Parodi, L. R., Strey, H. H., Frederick, B., Savoy, R., Cox, D., Botanov,
Y., et al. (2009). Chemosensory cues to conspecific emotional stress
activate amygdala in humans. PLoS ONE 4:e6415. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.
0006415

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

Muloin, S. (1998). Wildlife tourism: the psychological benefits of whale watching.
Pac. Tour. Rev. 2, 199–213.
Mura, P. (2010). ‘Scary . . . but I like it!’ Young tourists’ perceptions of fear on
holiday. J. Tour. Cult. Change 8, 30–49. doi: 10.1080/14766825.2010.482209
Nesse, R. M., and Ellsworth, P. C. (2009). Evolution, emotions and emotional
disorders. Am. Psychol. 64, 129–139. doi: 10.1037/a0013503
Niedenthal, P., and Brauer, M. (2012). Social functionality of human emotion. Ann.
Rev. Psychol. 63, 259–285. doi: 10.1146/annurev.psych.121208.131605
Noyes, R., and Kletti, R. (1972). The experience of dying from falls. Omega 3, 45–52.
doi: 10.2190/96XL-RQE6-DDXR-DUD5
Okon-Singer, H., Hendler, T., Pessoa, L., and Shackman, A. J. (2015). The
neurobiology of emotion–cognition interactions: fundamental questions
and strategies for future research. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 9:58. doi:
10.3389/fnhum.2015.00058
Pierson, A., le Houezec, U., Fossaert, A., Dubal, S., and Jouvent, R. (1999).
Frontal reactivity and sensation seeking: an ERP study in skydivers.
Prog. Neuropsychopharm. Biol. Psychol. 23, 447–463. doi: 10.1016/S02785846(99)00008-1
Pomfret, G. (2006). Mountaineering adventure tourists: a conceptual framework
for research. Tour. Manage. 27, 113–123. doi: 10.1016/j.tourman.2004.08.003
Punch, K. (2014). Introduction to Social Research: Quantitative and Qualitative
Approaches, 3rd Edn. London: Sage.
Rainey, D. W., Amunategui, F., Agocs, H., and Larick, J. (1992). Sensation seeking
and competitive trait anxiety among rodeo athletes. J. Sport Behav. 15, 307–317.
Robinson, O. J., Vytal, K., Cornwell, B. R., and Grillon, C. (2013). The impact of
anxiety upon cognition: perspectives from human threat of shock studies. Front.
Hum. Neurosci. 7:203. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00203
Rubin, D. C. (2014). How quickly we forget. Science 346, 1058–1059. doi:
10.1126/science.aaa2341
Sandseter, E. B. H. (2009). Children’s expressions of exhilaration and fear in risky
play. Contemp. Issues Early Child. 10, 92–106. doi: 10.2304/ciec.2009.10.2.92
Scherer, K. R., and Meuleman, B. (2013). Human emotion experiences can be
predicted on theoretical grounds: evidence from verbal labeling. PLoS ONE
8:e58166. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058166
Schlegelmilch, F., and Ollenburg, C. (2013). Marketing the adventure: utilizing the
aspects of risk/fear/thrill to target the youth traveller segment. Tour. Rev. 68,
44–54. doi: 10.1108/TR-03-2013-0010
Schnädelbach, H., Egglestone, S. R., Reeves, S., Benford, S., Walker, B., and Wright,
M., (2008). Performing Thrill: Designing Telemetry Systems and Spectator
Interfaces for Amusement Rides. Available at: http://www.cs.nott.ac.uk/∼pszsre/
papers/chi2008/author_version.pdf (accessed June 01, 2015).
Sekine, Y., Zyryanova, A., Crespillo-Casado, A., Fischer, P. M., Harding, H. P.,
and Ron, D. (2015). Mutations in a translation initiation factor identify
the target of a memory-enhancing compound. Science 348, 1027–1030. doi:
10.1126/science.aaa6986
Sharpe, R. (2005). “Going above and beyond”: the emotional labor of adventure
guides. J. Leis. Res. 37, 29–50.
Sicard, B., Jouvre, E., and Blin, O. (2007). “Extreme risk-taking and decision
making,” in Decision Making in Complex Environments, eds M. Cook, J. Noyes,
and J. Masakowski (Burlington, VT: Ashgate), 53–62.
Silverman, D. (2010). Qualitative Research, 3rd Edn. London: Sage.
Slanger, E., and Rudestam, E. (1997). Motivation and disinhibition in high risk
sports: sensation seeking and self efficacy. J. Res. Personal. 31, 355–374. doi:
10.1006/jrpe.1997.2193
Spradley, J. (1980). Participant Observation. New York, NY: Holt, Rinehart and
Winston.
Stets, J. (2006). Emotion and Sentiments. Boston, MA: Springer. doi: 10.1007/0-38736921-x_13
Stout, D. M., Shackman, A. J., and Larson, C. L. (2013). Failure to filter: anxious
individuals show inefficient gating of threat from working memory. Front.
Hum. Neurosci. 7:58. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00058
Straub, W. F. (1982). Sensation seeking among high- and low-risk male athletes.
J. Sport Psychol. 4, 246–253.
Sussman, T. J., Szekely, A., Hajcak, G., and Mohanty, A. (2015). It’s all in the
anticipation: how perception of threat is enhanced in anxiety. Emotion 16,
320–327. doi: 10.1037/emo0000098
Swarbrooke, J., Beard, C., Leckie, S., and Pomfret, G. (2003). Adventure Tourism:
The New Frontier. Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann.

12

August 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1187

Buckley

Qualitative Analysis of Emotions: Fear and Thrill

Taverniers, J., Smeets, T., Lo Bue, S., Syroit, J., Van Ruysseveldt, J., Pattyn, N.,
et al. (2011). Visuo-spatial path learning, stress, and cortisol secretion following
military cadets’ first parachute jump: the effect of increasing task complexity.
Cogn. Affect. Behav. Neurosci. 11, 332–343. doi: 10.3758/s13415-011-0043-0
Thomson, C. J., Hanna, C. W., and Carlson, S. R. (2013). The -521C/T variant in the
dopamine-receptor gene (DRD4) is associated with skiing and snowboarding
behavior. Scand. J. Med. Sci. Sports 23, 108–113. doi: 10.1111/sms.12031
Tolich, M. (2010). A critique of current practice: ten foundational
guidelines for autoethnographers. Qual. Health Res. 20, 1599–1610. doi:
10.1177/1049732310376076
Tong, A., Sainsbury, P., and Craig, J. (2007). Consolidated Criteria for Reporting
Qualitative Research (COREQ): A 32-Item Checklist for Interview and Focus
Groups. Available at: http://intqhc.oxfordjournals.org/content/intqhc/19/6/349.
full.pdf (accessed June 01, 2015).
Tordjman, K., Constantini, N., and Hackney, A. C. (2013). “Endocrine aspects and
responses to extreme sports,” in Adventure and Extreme Sports Injuries, eds O.
Mei-Dan and M. R. Carmont (London: Springer), 315–324. doi: 10.1007/9781-4471-4363-5_15
Tsaur, S. H., Lin, W. R., and Liu, J. S. (2013). Sources of challenge for adventure
tourists: scale development and validation. Tour. Manage. 38, 85–93. doi:
10.1016/j.tourman.2013.03.004
Tung, V. W. S., and Ritchie, J. R. B. (2011). Exploring the essence of
memorable tourism experiences. Ann. Tour. Res. 38, 1367–1386. doi:
10.1016/j.annals.2011.03.009
Van Beek, S. (1998). The power of one. Explor. J. 1998, 22–29.
Van den Stock, J., and de Gelder, B. (2014). Face identity matching is influenced
by emotions conveyed by face and body. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 8:53. doi:
10.3389/fnhum.2014.00053
Van Dijk, P. A., Smith, L. D. G., and Cooper, B. K. (2011). Are you real? An
evaluation of the relationship between emotional labour and visitor outcomes.
Tour. Manage. 32, 39–45. doi: 10.1016/j.tourman.2009.11.001
Van Westerloo, D., Choi, G., Löwenberg, E. C., Truijen, J., de Vos, A. F., Endert, E.,
et al. (2011). Acute stress elicited by bungee jumping suppresses human innate
immunity. Mol. Med. 17, 180–188. doi: 10.2119/molmed.2010.00204
Vermeir, K., and Reynier, V. (2007). “Style” de pratique, sentiment d’appartenance
communautaire et représentations sociales du risque en stations de sports
d’hiver. Loisir Soc. 29, 347–376. doi: 10.1080/07053436.2006.10707723
Vytal, K., and Hamann, S. (2010). Neuroimaging support for discrete neural
correlates of basic emotions: a voxel-based meta-analysis. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 22,
2864–2885. doi: 10.1162/jocn.2009.21366
Wagner, A. M., and Houlihan, D. D. (1994). Sensation seeking and trait anxiety in
hang-glider pilots and golfers. Pers. Individ. Dif. 16, 975–977. doi: 10.1016/01918869(94)90240-2
Wallenius, C., Larsson, G., and Johansson, C. R. (2004). Military observers’
reactions and performance when facing danger. Mil. Psychol. 16, 211–229. doi:
10.1207/s15327876mp1604_1

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org

White, C. N., Skokin, K., Carlos, B., and Weaver, A. (2016). Using decision models
to decompose anxiety-related bias in threat classification. Emotion 16, 196–207.
doi: 10.1037/emo0000109
Wilutzky, W. (2015). Emotions as pragmatic and epistemic actions. Front. Psychol.
6:1593. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01593
Wittmann, M. (2013). The inner sense of time: how the brain creates
a representation of duration. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 14, 217–223. doi:
10.1038/nrn3452
Woo, C. W., Koban, L., Kross, E., Lindquist, M. A., Banich, M. T., Ruzic, L., et al.
(2014). Separate neural representations for physical pain and social rejection.
Nat. Commun. 5:5380. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6380
Wu, G. H. J., and Liang, R. D. (2011). The relationship between whitewater rafting experience formation and customer reactions: a flow theory
perspective. Tour. Manage. 32, 317–325. doi: 10.1016/j.tourman.2010.
03.001
Yogis, J. (2013). The Fear Project. New York, NY: Rodale.
Zald, D. H., Cowan, R. L., Riccardi, P., Baldwin, R. M., Ansari, M. S.,
et al. (2008). Midbrain dopamine receptor availability is inversely
associated with novelty-seeking traits in humans. J. Neurosci. 28,
14372–14378. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2423-08.2008
Zarevski, P., Marusic, I., Zolotic, S., Bunjevac, T., and Vukosav, Z. (1998).
Contribution of Arnett’s inventory of sensation seeking and Zuckerman’s
sensation seeking scale to the differentiation of athletes engaged in highand low-risk sports. Pers. Individ. Dif. 25, 763–768. doi: 10.1016/S01918869(98)00119-6
Zhao, K., Yan, W. J., Chen, Y. H., Zuo, X. N., and Fu, X. (2013). Amygdala
volume predicts inter-individual differences in fearful face recognition. PLoS
ONE 8:e74096. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074096
Zhou, W., and Chen, D. (2009). Fear-related chemosignals modulate recognition
of fear in ambiguous facial expressions. Psychol. Sci. 20, 177–183. doi:
10.1111/j.1467-9280.2009.02263.x
Zimmer, C., and Clark, R. (2014). Secrets of the brain. Nat. Geogr. 28–58. Available
at: http://ngm.nationalgeographic.com/2014/02/brain/zimmer-text
Zuckerman, M. (2007). Sensation Seeking and Risky Behavior. Washington DC:
American Psychological Association. doi: 10.1037/11555-000
Conflict of Interest Statement: The author declares that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2016 Buckley. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms
of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or
reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) or licensor
are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance
with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted
which does not comply with these terms.

13

August 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 1187

