International Workshop of Advanced Manufacturing and Automation (IWAMA 2016)

A Novel Method for the Evaluation of Fashion
Product Design based on Neuro analysis
Baorui Li

Kesheng Wang

Yi Wang

Shanghai Key Laboratory of
Intelligent Manufacturing and
Robotics
Shanghai University
Shanghai, China
lbr2013@shu.edu.cn

Knowledge Discovery Laboratory
Department of Production and
Quality Engineering
Norwegian University of Science
and Technology,
Trondheim, Norway
kesheng.wang@ntnu.no

School of Materials
University of Manchester
Manchester, UK
yi.wang-2@manchester.ac.uk

system is discussed in section 3. In section 4, The principle of
evaluation method for product design based on neuro-based
design is discussed. Case study in section 5 and Conclusions
are provided in section 6.

Abstract—It is difficult to qualitatively analyze the design
effect of the product. This paper will be applying the
mathematical fundamentals of the fuzzy theory to create a novel
evaluation model. The neuro attributes are used to quantify the
factors of affecting the product appearance and the evaluation
indicators. This paper will use EEG Emotive and Tobii mobile
eye tracking to monitor and acquire subject's brain activity and
eye gaze to quantify evaluation factors. This method can
scientifically evaluate the uniqueness of product appearance
design quality, and provide objective reference for improving
product design.

II.

A. Evaluation Method for Product Design
Product design evaluation is an important part of product
development. The meaning of the product design evaluation is
not only can fully guarantee the quality of the product design,
but also reduce the bug in design. The design efficiency was
improved by design evaluation [6]. The result of evaluation is
an important basis of product quality, production planning and
management and investment decisions for manufacturing. The
traditional product design evaluation methods are organizing
experts by product manufacturers, and then according to the
product grade evaluation that submitted by experts to identify
outstanding product design.

Keywords—product design; evaluation method; EEG; eye
tracking; fuzzy model

I.

INTRODUCTION

Evaluating the design effect of the product consists of the
process to compare the product design, assess the value of
various solutions and select the best design [1]. Effective
design evaluation of the product can improve design
efficiency and reduce the shortage of the time and resources
[2]. The traditional methods that solely on experience and
intuition to evaluate the design has been gradually cannot
satisfy the development requirements of the product design.

With the improving of the product design technology, the new
product is complicated, the evaluation method has played
more important role [7]. Meanwhile, the disadvantages of
traditional evaluation methods are subject to design
uncertainty, simple indicators and can't from multiple
perspectives and more scientific for the product evaluation [8].
Due to the need of product design evaluation, and the
continuous development
of multidisciplinary cross
technology. More and more experts and scholars at home and
abroad gradually introduce some new technology and theory
to apply in product design evaluation area. Adopting new
technologies combined with traditional evaluation methods to
evaluate the product design have become the focus in the
current [9].

It is necessary to research and develop the more reasonable
and advanced theories and methods of evaluation. Neurobased design is an emerging discipline that developed based
on the cognitive science and neuroscience [3]. It can use
neuroimaging technology combined with the eye tracking
technology to study consumer behavior, to explore the
mechanism of consumer decision-making on neural activity
level and find the real driving force behind the consumer's
behavior [4,5]. The concrete method is to use the EEG
equipment and eye movement tracking device to monitor and
acquire subject's brain activity and eye gaze to quantitative
evaluation factors. This method can scientifically evaluate the
superiority of product appearance design quality.

B. Neuro-based design
The development of neuroscience allowed researchers to
dynamically observe human brain activity from different
aspects and angles, uncover the direct reasons behind human

The paper is organized as follows. In section 2, the
background for evaluation method and neuro-based design is
provided. The construction of fuzzy model of evaluation

© 2016. The authors - Published by Atlantis Press

LITERATURE REVIEW

317

represented as a fuzzy subset of the a= (a1,a2, …,an). The
value of 'a' satisfies (2).

behavior. Neuroscience studies of human brain structure and
function of each structure is the physiological basis of neurobased design research [10]. Generally the EEG devices has the
characteristics of cheap, low requirement to the experimental
environment and easy to popularize, so it become one of the
main technical means of neuroscience research [11]. Eye
movement instrument as an important equipment of vision
research, play an important role in cognitive science and
psychology research [12]. Combined EEG signals with eye
tracking signals to study the consumer's decision-making
process become one of the hot issues at present neuro-based
design research.
The EEG signal is the weak electrical potential difference
that measured on the scalp when a large number of neurons
(Mainly the cone cells) discharge at the same time in the brain
neural system [13]. Rami n. Khushaba et. al. [9] choose the
Emotiv EPOC to collect the EEG signals when researched
people's decision-making process of select preferred crackers
according to their own preferences from the crackers
described by different characteristics.
Wei-Long Zheng et al. adopts SMI eye tracking glasses to
record pupil size changes under different emotional stimuli in
the aspects of research human emotional cognitive [14]. In this
paper, we choose Tobii eye tracking glasses to record the
eyeball fixation time.
III.

n

a j 1
j 1

When the fuzzy evaluation matrix 'E' and the factorial
weight sets 'a' be known, so the comprehensive evaluation
model can be defined as B=a⊕R. '⊕' as the weighted average
fuzzy analytic operator; 'B' is the comprehensive evaluation
results and the bj represent evaluation objects' membership
degree at the j grade in the evaluation sets. The evaluation
corresponding to the largest object from bj = (j = 1, 2,..., m) as
the evaluation conclusion.
IV.

THE PRINCIPLE OF EVALUATION METHOD FOR PRODUCT
DESIGN BASED ON NEURO-BASED DESIGN

A. The overall framework
According to the development of the classic mode S-O-R
(Stimulus-Organism-Response) of people's behavior [15, 16],
people's behavior can be divided into perception, judgment,
decision and action stages. In the face of numerous products,
people tend to choose their favorite, so subjects' choice
behavior includes a kind of evaluation of the design effect of
product. As shown in Fig.1, the principle of evaluation method
for product design based on neuro-based design [17]. Using
the neuro-based design technology to monitor all choice
behavior of the subjects.

THE CONSTRUCTION OF FUZZY MODEL OF EVALUATION
SYSTEM

We usually use the multiple factors to describe a product,
and define the main factors of the product as the evaluation
factors set F, so F={f1,f2, …,fn}. And then the evaluation set be
created, This is the evaluation set S which from the evaluation
system to evaluate the each factor of the product, so S=
{s1,s2,…, sm}. Through the neuro-based design technology to
establish the mapping relationship between F and S.
The specific approach is employ the EEG equipment and
eye movement tracking device collecting the subjects' brain
activity data and eye gaze time to quantitative evaluation
factors. For each fi ∈ F, si ∈ S, using the eij to represent the
characteristic indexes of fi on the si (Possible degree).
Obtained a vector (ei1,ei2, …eim) for each fi is the feature index
vector of fi on S, where i∈(1,2,…n). chosen the vector as line
to form m × n matrix, E= (eij )m × n,. The fuzzy relationship
matrix (1) of F to S was obtained, called the single factor
evaluation matrix.

 e11, e12 ,, e1n 
 e , e ,, e 

2n 
E   21 22




 


em1 , em 2 ,,emn 


(2)

Fig. 1. The principle of fashion design effect evaluation based on neurobased design

B. Data acquisition and processing
Adopt Emotiv EPOC with 14 channels to collect EEG data,
analyzed the EEG data which collected by Emotiv EPOC in
the Matlab. Detailed process of EEG signal is shown in
Fig.2.Firstly, the collected EEG signals into the signal
preprocessing stage. In order to filter the noise and remove the
artifacts, the EEG data was processed with a bandpass filter
after detrending analysis. In signal denosing stage, adopted
the combination of Independent Component Analysis (ICA)

(1)

Because of the influence on the effect of each factor to the
product focus is different, For the multi-factor evaluation,
According to the integral value of the EEG excitement power
and the effective observation time by many times experiments
and combined with statistical knowledge to distribute the size
of the weight of each evaluation factor. the weight can be

318

and discrete wavelet transform (DWT) to clean the EEG
signals[18,19].

Fig. 3. Eye movement heat map and brain topographic map
Fig. 2. Detailed process of EEG signal

Assume that the EEG signals is Y(t) after processing, and
the effective fixation time is t∈(t1,t2) that extracted by the eye
tracking glasses. Then the basis of the feature elements
evaluation is
. According to repeated experiments
combined with the principle of mathematical statistics to divide
the scope of each level W.

The clean EEG signal is
,then extracted the
excited EEG signal for specific factor, Using Y(t) represent the
excited EEG signal.
Tobii eye tracking glasses has a very wide range of
applications [20]. In this experiment, we selected the Tobii eye
tracking glasses to record the subjects' eye movement and
fixation points. Participants' eye movement situation will be
recorded into the form of a continuous video for storage [21].
According to the subjects' excited situation in the EEG signal
when them accept the stimulation of evaluation factor to
determine the starting point time t1 and the finish point time t2.
So the subjects' excitement period is t ∈ (t1,t2) under the
stimulation of the specific factor.

Tab. 1 is the evaluation test result for the M shirts:
TABLE I.

THE TEST RESULT FOR EVERY FEATURE ELEMENTS

C. The principle of evaluation
Chosen
as the basis of evaluation in this
study. According to the size of the W value under the situation
of repeat experiments combined with expert system to define
evaluation levels and the scope of each level W value, Created
the evaluation set S. To test each evaluation factor, Measured
Y(t) and t ∈(t1,t2) of each evaluation factor. Obtained Wi of
specified evaluation factor fi by integral formula
. Matched the Wi with the value range the
evaluation level W, to determine the level of evaluation factor
of fi. Statistical analysis many times experiment, to gain the
evaluation item eij of the evaluation elements and constructs
the evaluation matrix E.

The (3) is the evaluation matrix E：

(3)

The weights of feature of every feature elements is a=
(0.25,0.15,0.11,0.14,0.10,0.16,0.09). Using the weighted
average fuzzy analytic operator, It balanced consideration the
size of the weights of all factors, and more suitable for the
overall optimization. It's suitable for this shirts evaluation, So
the mathematical model for comprehensive evaluation is:

V. CASE STUDY
This paper selects ladies shirts as research object. The
object is divided into seven feature elements for study, created
the evaluation factors set F=(Overall f1, Neckline f2, Shoulder
f3, Front skirt f4, Cuff f5, Waist f6, Sweep f7). The evaluation set
was created according to the evaluation system, S=( Grade A
s1,Grade B s2, Grade C s3, Grade D s4,Grade E s5,Grade F,s6).
Choose 15 women as subjects whom suit the shirt, the 15
women are from consumer groups of this kind shirt. Adopt
Emotiv EPOC and Tobii eye tracking glasses to carry out the
experiment. Processing and analysis eye movement data and
EEG data to obtain eye movement heat map and brain
topographic map, as shown in Fig.3. Eye movement heat map
reflects the length of time of the subjects' eye fixed on the
characteristic elements in the process of experiment. Brain
topographic map reflects the strength of the brain excitability
when subjects' eye gaze the characteristics.

(4)

The (4) is the evaluation results: 54.7% subjects think this
shirts is grade A; 25.1% subjects think this shirts is grade B;
10.3% subjects think this shirts is grade C; 4.5% subjects think
this shirts is grade D; 3.0% subjects think this shirts is grade E
and only 0.9% subjects think this shirts is grade F. According
to the principle of the maximum membership degree, the final
evaluation result of this shirts is Grade A. Meanwhile
A+B+C=90.1%, So we can identify the shirts design is very
successful.

319

[8]

VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, the effect of evaluation methods is studied by
applying fuzzy logic. The characteristics of the product are
analyzed, then a product evaluation factor is established. The
evaluation set is created according to the evaluation of product
features. Preference degree of subjects for product various
characteristics was quantified by neuro-based design means.
From the level of the brain response to the product
characteristics and the fixation time of eye to product
characteristics to analysis subjects' preference degree for the
characteristics of each product.

[9]

[10]

[11]

The subjects' evaluation conclusion for product are obtained
from the comprehensive evaluation result of each feature in
mathematical method. The method will allow the designer to
avoid the influence of external factors and subjective factors on
the test results. The evaluation accuracy of the product design
effect is improved. Provides a more scientific reference for
designers to improve their design, meanwhile provide accurate
reference for enterprise managers to make production decisions
and adjust the product strategy.

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

Varun Tiwaria, Prashant Kumar Jainb& Puneet Tandon, “Product design
concept evaluation using rough sets and VIKOR method”, Advanced
Engineering Informatics.vol. 30, pp.16-25, January 2016.
Songhua Ma, Zhaoliang Jiang & Wenping Liu, “Evaluation of a design
property network-based change propagation routing approach for
mechanical product development”, Advanced Engineering Informatics.
vol. 30, pp. 633-642, Apirl 2016.
Nick Lee, Amanda J. Broderick & Laura Chamberlain, “What is ‘neurobased design’? A discussion and agenda for future research”,
International Journal of Psychophysiology, vol. 63, pp. 199-204,
February 2007.
Hilke Plassmann, Thomas Zoëga Ramsøy & Milica Milosavljevi,
“Branding the brain: A critical review and outlook”, Journal of
Consumer Psychology, vol. 22, pp. 18-36, January 2012.
Mostafa, M. M. “Brain processing of vocal sounds in advertising: A
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study”, Expert Systems
with Applications, vol. 39, pp. 12114–12122, November 2012.
Sawitree Kalakul, Stefano Cignitti, Lei Zhang & Rafiqul Gani,
“Integrated
Computer-aided
Framework
for
Sustainable
Chemical Product Design and Evaluation”, Computer Aided Chemical
Engineering, vol. 38, pp. 2343-2348, December 2016.
Yang Xu, Alain Bernard & Nicolas Perry, “Knowledge evaluation in
product lifecycle design and support”, Knowledge-Based Systems, vol.
70, pp. 256-267, November 2014.

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

320

Khushabaa, R. N., Greenacreb, L., Kodagodaa, S., Louviereb, J.,
Burkeb, S., & Dissanayake, G. “Choice modeling and the brain: A study
on the Electroencephalogram (EEG) of preferences”, Expert Systems
with Applications, vol.39, pp. 12378–12388, November 2012.
Rami N. Khushaba, Chelsea Wise, Sarath Kodagoda et al. “Consumer
neuroscience: Assessing the brain response to marketing stimuli using
electroencephalogram (EEG) and eye tracking”, Expert Systems with
Applications, vol, 40, pp. 3803–3812, July 2013.
Tony Tien BSc, Philip H. Pucher, MRCS & Mikael H. Sodergren. PhD.
FRCS, Eye tracking for skills assessment and training: systematic
review. Journal of Surgical Research, vol. 191, pp. 169-178, September
2014.
Akhtar, M. T., Mitsuhashi, W., & James, C. J. “Employing spatially
constrained ICA and wavelet denoising for automatic removal of
artifacts from multichannel EEG data”, Signal Processing, vol. 92, pp.
401–416, February 2012.
Michael Plöchl, José P. Ossandón & Peter König, “Combining EEG and
eye tracking: identification, characterization, and correction of eye
movement artifacts in electroencephalographic data”, Frontiers in
Human Neuroscience, October 2012.
E Maris, R Oostenveld, “Nonparametric statistical testing of EEG- and
MEG-data”, Journal of Neuroscience Methods, vol.164, pp. 177–190 ,
August 2007.
Wei-Long Zheng, Bo-Nan Dong, Bao-Liang Lu, “Multimodal Emotion
Recognition Using EEG and Eye Tracking Data”, IEEE Engineering in
Medicine and Biology Society, pp:5040-5043, 2014
Babiloni, F., D. Mattia, C. Babiloni, L. Astolfi, S. Salinari, A. Basilisco,
et al. “Multimodal integration of EEG, MEG and fMRI data f or the
solution of the neuroimage puzzle”, Magnetic Resonance Imaging , vol.
22, pp. 71–76, December 2004.
Deppe, M., W. Schwindt, H. Kugel, H. Plassman, and P. Kenning,
“Nonlinear responses within the medial prefrontal cortex reveal when
specific implicit infor mation influences economic decision making”,
Journal of Neuroimaging, vol. 15, pp. 171–182, April 2005.
Mostafa, M. M. “Brain processing of vocal sounds in advertising: A
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study”, Expert Systems
with Applications, vol. 39, pp. 12114–12122, November 2012.
M Brunori, A Colosimo, MT Wilson, “EEG signal processing.
Computational Intelligence & Neuroscience”, vol. 2007, pp. 1178–1181,
February 2012.
MA Qing-guo & WANG Xiao-yi, “From Neuroeconomics and Neurobased design to Neuromanagement”, Journal of Industrial Engineering
Management, vol. 20, pp. 129-132, March 2006.
DU Jian-gang & WANG Lin, “Research on Neuro-based designintroduction of fMRI”, Economic Management Journal in China, vol. 34,
pp. 189-199, March 2012.
Hilke Plassmann, Thomas Zoëga Ramsøy & Milica Milosavljevi,
“Branding the brain: A critical review and outlook”, Journal of
Consumer Psychology, vol. 22, pp. 18-36, January 2012.

