Heliyon 6 (2020) e03425

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Heliyon
www.elsevier.com/locate/heliyon

Research article

A feasibility study of a complete low-cost consumer-grade brain-computer
interface system
Victoria Peterson a,b,∗ , Catalina Galván b , Hugo Hernández b , Ruben Spies a,c
a
b
c

Instituto de Matemática Aplicada del Litoral, IMAL, CONICET-UNL, Santa Fe, Argentina
Facultad de Ingeniería, Universidad Nacional de Entre Ríos, FIUNER, Oro Verde, Entre Ríos, Argentina
Departamento de Matemática, Facultad de Ingeniería Química, Universidad Nacional del Litoral, Santa Fe, Argentina

A R T I C L E

I N F O

Keywords:
Biomedical engineering
Brain-computer interfaces
Consumer-grade EEG
Motor imagery
Open-source software

A B S T R A C T
Brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) are technologies that provide the user with an alternative way of communication. A BCI measures brain activity (e.g. EEG) and converts it into output commands. Motor imagery (MI), the
mental simulation of movements, can be used as a BCI paradigm, where the movement intention of the user
can be translated into a real movement, helping patients in motor recovery rehabilitation. One of the main limitations for the broad use of such devices is the high cost associated with the high-quality equipment used for
capturing the biomedical signals. Diﬀerent low-cost consumer-grade alternatives have emerged with the objective of bringing these systems closer to the ﬁnal users. The quality of the signals obtained with such equipments
has already been evaluated and found to be competitive with those obtained with well-known clinical-grade
devices. However, how these consumer-grade technologies can be integrated and used for practical MI-BCIs has
not yet been explored. In this work, we provide a detailed description of the advantages and disadvantages of
using OpenBCI boards, low-cost sensors and open-source software for constructing an entirely consumer-grade
MI-BCI system. An analysis of the quality of the signals acquired and the MI detection ability is performed. Even
though communication between the computer and the OpenBCI board is not always stable and the signal quality
is sometimes aﬀected by ambient noise, we ﬁnd that by means of a ﬁlter-bank based method, similar classiﬁcation performances can be achieved with an MI-BCI built under low-cost consumer-grade devices as compared to
when clinical-grade systems are used. By means of this work we share with the BCI community our experience on
working with emerging low-cost technologies, providing evidence that an entirely low-cost MI-BCI can be built.
We believe that if communication stability and artifact rejection are improved, these technologies will become a
valuable alternative to clinical-grade devices.

1. Introduction

A brain-computer interface (BCI) provides an alternative way of
communication between the brain of a person and the outside world.
More speciﬁcally, a BCI measures the brain activity and converts it into
an artiﬁcial output which is able to replace, restore, enhance, supplement or improve the natural central nervous system outputs used by a
person to communicate with or control his/her external or internal environment [1]. For improving motor loss functions, BCIs based on motor
imagery (MI), i.e. the mental simulation of movement, can be used as a
complement to facilitate neurorehabilitation after neurological injures
[2].

*

As a communication system, a BCI treats the measured brain activity as input. Although diﬀerent non-invasive brain imaging technologies can be used to measure neuronal activity, electroencephalography
(EEG) is one of the predominant tools in the BCI ﬁeld to safely acquire
electric brain signals with high temporal resolution [3]. For a correct
interpretation of the registered brain activity, a good signal quality is
required. Most of the existing works make their EEG registration in controlled environments with prepared shielded labs, where the subject is
free of any visual or auditory external noise. The electrode montage is
generally a multi-channel setup with high quality gel-based electrodes
connected to a clinical-grade ampliﬁer. In addition, the EEG ampliﬁer
is usually wire-connected to a computer, where the signals are saved
and processed to ﬁnally perform the BCI communication. These con-

Corresponding author.
E-mail address: vpeterson@santafe-conicet.gov.ar (V. Peterson).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2020.e03425
Received 26 June 2019; Received in revised form 9 December 2019; Accepted 12 February 2020
2405-8440/© 2020 Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

V. Peterson et al.

Heliyon 6 (2020) e03425

ditions, are obviously highly impractical for most of the typical BCI
end-users, who not only spend most of their time in noisy environments,
but also might feel their mobility restricted due to the wire-connections
[4]. In addition, due to the high cost of such ampliﬁers, the usability of
EEG-based BCI systems is limited to research and clinical environments,
reducing BCI applications outside the lab.
Wolpaw deﬁnes the “perfect” BCI as a safe and aﬀordable system
which works all the time, does not require the permanent assistance of
a technician or a scientist, restores communication at “normal” speed, is
aesthetically acceptable, is reliable and, for the same function, does not
require more concentration for a patient user than what it does for an
able-bodied person [1]. Despite recent development aimed at improving the current state of BCI systems, there are still several challenges
that must be overcome before building an usable and eﬀective BCI, like
for example, the high cost associated with the required EEG recording
system.
Diﬀerent aﬀordable consumer-grade EEG devices have appeared in
both Academia (e.g. [5, 6, 7, 8]) and the market (e.g. B-Alert X10, NeuroSky, OpenBCI, Emotiv), oﬀering diﬀerent alternatives from easy-tomount electrode systems to low-cost ampliﬁers. Considering the rapid
development and advancement of such devices there is a growing need
for exploring the feasibility of using low-cost EEG ampliﬁers for possible
motor therapy in natural environments. Several authors have studied
the advantages and disadvantages of both types of devices for BCI applications, from electrode-skin contact interface issues (dry, gel-based
or saline-based electrodes) to signal quality matters [7, 9, 10, 11, 12],
as well as from the user’s comfort perspective [4, 13, 14]. As a drawback, most of the existing low-cost consumer EEG systems present a
low electrode count with ﬁxed localization (generally not covering the
whole sensorimotor cortex of interest for MI detection) and they are
all-in-one black box devices depriving of a user-friendly interplay and
precluding the addition for further development tools. OpenBCI1 is an
open-source, versatile and aﬀordable biosensing system which can be
used to acquire not only EEG signals but also to measure electrical activity of muscle (EMG) and heart (ECG). All OpenBCI boards are based
on the open-source electronic platform Arduino with wireless connection to the computer. OpenBCI oﬀers a variety of low-cost ampliﬁers
(boards), electrode systems (e.g. 3D-printed headware) and a software
for viewing and recording the biosignals (OpenBCI GUI).2
The use of OpenBCI for aﬀordable BCI applications has already
been studied. While some authors have shown that low-cost BCIs could
be built [15, 16], others have compared the quality of the acquired
signals by the OpenBCI board with those obtained by research-grade
ampliﬁers [17, 18]. However, for the BCI community it is of interest to know how to integrate and use these devices for constructing
a complete consumer-grade low-cost BCI. In addition, there is a need
for reporting the accuracy and reliability of these systems for in-home
measurements [12]. In this work, we aim at evaluating the applicability and feasibility of the OpenBCI devices in informal real-world
environments for intended home MI-BCI use. Thus, following the aforementioned Wolpaw’s deﬁnition and taking advantages of the current
aﬀordable OpenBCI boards, we have designed, implemented and evaluated a consumer-grade low-cost open-source robust MI-BCI system in
an uncontrolled-environment, encouraging motor function rehabilitation at home. By means of this work we share with the BCI community
our experience in the construction of a consumer-grade BCI system, being of highly relevance for aﬀordable BCI use. A critical evaluation of
OpenBCI systems from the user’s point of view, as well as in regard to
communication stability and MI detection performance is made. For
a better contribution to the BCI community, the raw data, the syntax and settings used for acquisition and post-processing will be pub-

licly available together with the ﬁnal low-cost EEG dataset at https://
github.com/vpeterson/MI-OpenBCI.
The organization of this paper is as follows. In Section 2 we give
detail on how the database was built. A brief review of the low-cost
hardware and open-source software used is made in Subsection 2.1.
Subsection 2.2 describes the protocol and experimental design. Experiments and results are detailed in Section 3, while discussions and
concluding remarks are presented in sections 4 and 5, respectively.
2. An MI-BCI dataset based on consumer-grade systems
Is it possible to construct a complete low-cost BCI? Can we use it for
MI detection in real-time? Which are the advantages and disadvantages
of using consumer-grade devices? Is the signal quality good enough to
establish communication in uncontrolled environments? For answering
these and other related questions, we developed a complete consumergrade MI-BCI system based on low-cost devices and free multi-platform
software. In particular, the OpenBCI Cyton + Daisy Module (OpenBCI, USA) together with the Electrocap System II (Electrocap, USA)
were used for the EEG signal recording. For EMG monitoring the OpenBCI Ganglion board (OpenBCI, USA) connected to the Myoware sensors (Advancer Technologies, USA) were used. The EEG and EMG data
recording was made by the OpenViBE and the OpenBCI GUI software,
respectively, on diﬀerent computers, the former one running on a Linux
based-platform and the latter one on a Window based computer. Fig. 1
summarizes the consumer-grade devices and free software used for both
EEG and EMG acquisition.
2.1. Hardware and software description
2.1.1. The OpenBCI boards
OpenBCI is an open-source, low-cost and programmable platform
based on the ADS1299 Texas Instrument micro-controller. OpenBCI is
speciﬁcally designed for biopotential measurements, mainly oriented to
make BCI aﬀordable to everyone. Two diﬀerent battery-powered boards
(ampliﬁers), named Cyton and Ganglion, have been developed by the
OpenBCI team. Both biosensing ampliﬁers can be used to measure cardiac, muscle and brain electrical activity. They wirelessly connect to
PCs, laptops, smartphones and to any bluetooth compatible device.
Multi-channel acquisition is possible by both OpenBCI boards. In
particular, the Cyton board allows a maximum of 8 electrodes with a
sampling frequency of 250 Hz. By using the expansion Daisy Module
(Cyton + Daisy) 16 channels can be recorded at 125 Hz. On the other
hand, the Ganglion board is built to record with up to 4 channels at a
sampling frequency of 200 Hz. If for some reason, a higher sampling
frequency is desired, a WiFi shield can be added to the boards in order
to increase the communication rate of the devices.
The electrode connection of the OpenBCI boards is quite simple.
They can be used either with the OpenBCI 3D-printed headset (Ultracortex Mark IV) or with any traditional gold cup electrode system. In
addition, Myoware Muscle Sensor,3 Pulse Sensor4 and the Electro-Cap
International cap5 are also compatible with these boards.
2.1.2. Low-cost sensors
The Ultracortex Mark IV is a 3D printable headset developed by
OpenBCI team that has dry electrodes attached at ﬁxed locations. For
acquiring good quality signal, the electrodes must be in contact with
the scalp. This might produce some degree of discomfort and pain after several minutes of usage as well as information loss due to bad
electrode-skin contact. In addition, this headset has only 8 electrodes

1

3

2

4

http://www.openbci.com.
Visit http://docs.openbci.com/FAQ/02-HowProductsGoTogether for a better understanding of the OpenBCI oﬀers and products.

5

2

http://www.advancertechnologies.com/p/myoware.html.
https://pulsesensor.com/.
https://electro-cap.com/.

V. Peterson et al.

Heliyon 6 (2020) e03425

Fig. 1. Schematic representation of the hardware and software used for EEG (top) and EMG (bottom) acquisition, respectively.

Fig. 2. Ampliﬁer and electrodes systems used for measuring brain (a) and muscle (b) activity. A 3D-printed case was built for protecting the boards.

localized over the sensorimotor area, and since for MI the more covered the sensorimotor cortex the better, we decided to look for another low-cost alternative. Electro-Cap International Inc. oﬀers low-cost
electro-caps made of an elastic spandex-type fabric with recessed, pure
tin electrodes attached to the fabric (see Fig. 2a). The standard cap
comprises 20 electrodes positioned following the International 10-20
electrode placement. In particular, the Electro-Cap System II, provides
two electro-caps with all the needed supplies (electro-gel, ear electrodes, disposable sponge disks and electrode board adapter).
The MyoWare are Arduino-powered all-in-one EMG sensors. These
sensors provide the raw EMG signal as well as the ﬁltered and rectiﬁed
electrical activity of a muscle as output. The system is built with embedded electrode connectors and since it is powered by the board being
used, it does not require of any external energy supply, leading to a
more wearable EMG acquisition.

regard, diﬀerent neurofeedback software alternatives can be used to
present and acquire the signal of interest in real-time. OpenViBE6 is a
free open-source multi-platform software which is very easy to use and
it does not require any technical programming knowledge, making it
accessible to almost everyone. The OpenViBE Acquisition Server acquires
data from an EEG device and sends them to the other OpenViBE client
on the network. In the OpenViBE Designer application, the acquisition
client is the main block of any OpenViBE scenario, where the signal can,
for example, be visualized, ﬁltered, on-line processed and sent to other
program at the same time that the stimulus are presented and the data,
with mark time stamps, are being recorded. Given that OpenViBE supports the OpenBCI drivers and has compatibility with other high-level
programming languages (e.g. Matlab and Python), we decided to use
OpenViBE for EEG acquisition.
In summary, for the present work, brain and muscle activity have
been measured by using low-cost devices and free multi-platform software. In particular, for the EEG acquisition the OpenBCI Cyton + Daisy
board together with wet EEG electrodes attached to the Electro-Cap
were used. A dedicated computer with the OpenViBE software was
utilized for signal acquisition, visualization and stimulation protocol
presentation. In the case of the EMG signal, measured only for MItask control purposes (more information below), the OpenBCI Ganglion

2.1.3. Free software
The OpenBCI team has also developed its own multi-platform software called OpenBCI GUI. This software can be used for visualizing,
recording and streaming data from the diﬀerent OpenBCI boards. As a
drawback, this GUI does not provide the possibility of acquiring data
under a particular BCI paradigm nor does it allow for the on-line process of the biosignals.
For exogenous and synchronized BCI paradigms, the mental task
should be performed after a cue is presented to the subject. In this

6

3

http://openvibe.inria.fr/.

V. Peterson et al.

Heliyon 6 (2020) e03425

board with two attached MyoWare sensors were used. The EMG signal was streamed and saved to another computer (Laptop) by using the
OpenBCI GUI software. Fig. 2 shows both the ampliﬁer and their corresponding sensor systems for EEG and EMG data recording, respectively.
A 3D-printed cover was built for protecting the boards.
2.2. Experimental paradigm
The experiment was approved in Feb. 2018 by the “Comité Asesor de
Ética y Seguridad en el Trabajo Experimental” (CEySTE, CCT-CONICET,
Santa Fe, Argentina).7 Twelve healthy subjects (four females, righthanded, mean age ± SD = 25.9 ± 3.7 years) without any previous
BCI experience participated in the experiment and gave their informed
consent. The study was conducted in a non-shielded oﬃce, with a room
divider between the experimenters and the participant. Each subject
participated in one single session, of about 1.5 hours.
The EEG signal was acquired by using the Electro-Cap connected to
the OpenBCI Cyton + Daisy board. Fifteen (15) electrodes covering the
sensorimotor cortex (Fz, F3, F4, F7, F8, Cz, C3, C4, T3, T4, Pz, P3, P4,
T5, T6), were selected. The reference and ground electrodes were placed
at the left and right ear lobes, respectively (see Fig. 3). The sampling
frequency of the OpenBCI ampliﬁer was 125 Hz. The OpenBCI board
was wirelessly connected to a dedicated PC (OS Linux, Intel® CoreTM
i7-6700K CPU @ 4.00 GHz × 8) by the USB Dongle. The OpenViBE
platform, acquisition server and designer, was used for the protocol
presentation, visualization and storage of both the EEG signals and the
time mark stamps. During acquisition, the EEG signals were ﬁltered between 0.5 and 45 Hz with a 3rd order Butterworth bandpass-ﬁlter. In
order to ensure that the subject was not making any hand movement
during the MI trial, surface EMG was also acquired during the experiment. For the EMG signal recording the OpenBCI Ganglion board was
set at 200 Hz. It was connected to two MyoWare sensors located at two
forearm antagonist muscles, compromised in ﬁnger ﬂexion and extension movement (ﬂexor digitorum superﬁcialis and extensor digitorum).
Disposable pre-gelled Ag-AgCl foam electrodes were employed. Due to
stability problems for simultaneous acquisition of both EEG and EMG,
the Ganglion board was wirelessly connected to another dedicated laptop (OS Windows 10, Intel® CoreTM i7-6500U CPU @ 2.50 GHz × 2 ),
where the OpenBCI GUI was running for visualization and storage of
the EMG signals. Care was taken in manually synchronizing the EMG
and EEG data recording.
The BCI protocol consisted of two conditions, namely the kinesthetic
imagination of grasping movement of the dominant hand and rest/idle
condition. The session comprised four (4) runs of 40 trials (20 trials per
class, randomly presented), yielding a total of 160 trials at the end of the
session. A modiﬁed version of the Graz protocol [19] was used for the
EEG data acquisition. Before the stimulation protocol began, 20 seconds
of baseline EEG were registered. Each trial of the stimulation protocol
began with a ﬁxation cross (𝑡 = −3 s), followed by an audible beep cue
two seconds later (𝑡 = −1 s). At 𝑡 = 0 s, the subject was asked to imagine
either grasping movements of the dominant hand or just to relax for
a period of 4 s. The visual cue, red arrow pointing to the right, was
presented only for the MI trials. Between trials, a break of randomly
selected duration (between 2.5 and 4.5 s) followed. At the end of each
run, the subject could distend and relax for a longer period of time
(>2 min). The stimulation protocol used is schematically depicted in
Fig. 4.
At the beginning of the session each subject was clearly instructed
about the tasks. To assess motor imagery ability, ﬁve kinesthetic mental exercises of the KVIQ-10 questionnaire [20] were performed. The
KVIQ-10 is a fast questionnaire which aims to assess the intensity of MI
sensation on a ﬁve-point ordinal scale, ranging from 1 (“no kinesthetic
sensation”) to 5 (“as clear as executing the action”). At the end of the

7

Fig. 3. Electrode conﬁguration of the Electro-cap. Red colored circles illustrate
the location of the 15 electrodes used for acquisition. The A1 (left ear lobe) and
the A2 (right ear lobe) electrodes were used as reference and ground, respectively.

questionnaire the ability of each subject to perform MI was evaluated
according to his/her ﬁnal score value (maximal value: KVIQ-10=25).
Before the experiment started, the EMG rest signal was acquired for
a period of 20 seconds. During the experiment, the subject was comfortably seated in front of a computer screen with both arms resting on
a desk. In order to ensure kinesthetic (and no visual) MI, the dominant
hand was placed inside a cardboard box, as shown in Fig. 5. Five experimental protocol runs were made. The ﬁrst one (called RUN0), was
used for better explaining the protocol to the subject. In addition, in
this run the subject was asked to actually perform the grasping movement, to focus on the sensation of such movement in order to further
try to invoke those feelings in the following MI runs. Fig. 6 summarized
the experiment’s stages in a block diagram design.
3. Data analysis and results
3.1. Detection of corrupted EEG trials with actual muscle activity
The database comprised EEG and EMG signals of 12 healthy subjects
under the MI-BCI paradigm. The EMG signals were acquired in order
to determine if any EEG trial was corrupted by real hand movement.
The most commonly used method for detecting EMG activation is based
on the single-threshold method, where the envelope of an EMG signal
is compared to a ﬁxed threshold based on the envelope of a rest EMG
period (no activity) [21]. Since during the EMG acquisition no ﬁlter was
used, a digital IIR Notch ﬁlter was applied for the 50 Hz power-noise,
and then a high-pass 5th order Butterworth with 10 Hz cutoﬀ frequency
was implemented. The envelope of the EMG signal was estimated by
means of a low-pass 3rd order zero-phase Butterworth ﬁlter with 40 Hz
cut-oﬀ frequency applied to the zero-mean rectiﬁed EMG signals. Since
we were interested in detecting muscle activation within an MI trial,
we extracted forty (40) EMG segments of 5 s length in correspondence
with each EEG trial. Given that EEG and EMG acquisition was manually
synchronized, each EMG segment was extracted starting 0.5 s before,
and ending 0.5 s after, each EEG trial began and ended, respectively.
The onset activity threshold was calculated as the standard deviation of
the envelope of a rest segment of 0.25 s extracted from RUN0. A sliding
window of 0.05 s was considered as having EMG activity if its mean
value was greater than 5 times the prescribed threshold. An EEG trial
was considered contaminated with EMG activity if 50% or more of the
sliding windows detected muscle activity. For one of the subjects, more
than 50% of the trials were contaminated with EMG activations, reason

https://santafe.conicet.gov.ar/ceytse/.
4

V. Peterson et al.

Heliyon 6 (2020) e03425

Fig. 4. Stimulation protocol used, with timing references, in seconds.

much as possible the electrode-to-skin contact resistance [22]. In our
experiments, data were recorded in a non-shielded oﬃce. Before signal recording, the electrode impedance was checked to be below 5 KΩ.
During acquisition a digital bandpass ﬁlter (implemented in OpenViBE)
was applied. Despite all these cautions regarding signal quality acquisition, in some situations the electromagnetic artifacts were high enough
to wrap the ongoing EEG signal. Fig. 7 shows the temporal and frequency domain information of four selected EEG data segments in four
diﬀerent signal-to-noise conditions. The plots are ordered from lower
(𝑎) to higher (𝑑) 50 Hz amplitude noise component (AC frequency in
Argentina). In order to get rid of such noise, in a post-processing step
a backward-forward bandpass 5th order Butterworth ﬁlter between 1
and 40 Hz was applied to the acquired signal. Note how after ﬁltering, the signal quality in the temporal domain improves and the 50 Hz
frequency component is discarded, as expected.
3.3. MI detection performance
The most commonly and widely used method for MI detection is the
well-known common spatial patterns (CSP) algorithm. The CSP method
performs feature extraction based on learned spatial ﬁlters. Given a set
𝑛𝑐
of 𝑛𝑐 band-pass ﬁltered EEG trials {𝐗𝑖𝑐 }𝑖=1
, let 𝐗𝑐 ∈ ℝ𝑛𝑐 ×𝑝 be the ma𝑖
trix whose 𝑖th row is 𝐗𝑐 , where 𝑐 = 1, 2 represents each one of the two
considered MI conditions. The 𝑝 spatial ﬁlters 𝐰1 , … , 𝐰𝑝 ∈ ℝ𝑝 , are optimized by maximizing the variance for one class while minimizing it for
the other class:

Fig. 5. Experiment set-up. The subject seated in front of a computer screen,
where the stimulation protocol was being presented. The EEG cap was connected to the OpenBCI Cyton + Daisy board and the EMG Myoware electrodes
were connected to the OpenBCI Ganglion board. Each board was wirelessly connected to a dedicated PC.

𝐰𝑗 = arg max
𝐰∈ℝ𝑝

for which this subject was not taken into account in the subsequent
analyses. In addition to this, due to a bad wire welding in one Myoware,
for one subject the EMG data information was lost in the middle of
the session. Thus, our OpenBCI dataset ﬁnally includes EEG recording
coming from 10 subjects.

‖𝐰𝐗′1 ‖
‖𝐰𝐗′2 ‖

,

𝑗 = 1, … , 𝑝,

where “′ ” denotes transpose. The projections of the bandpass ﬁltered
EEG signals into the spatial ﬁlter space are called “spatial patterns”, and
they can be easily computed by 𝐙 = 𝐖′ 𝐗. Since 𝐖 is non-singular, 𝐗
can be obtained as 𝐗 = (𝐖−1 )′ 𝐙, where each column 𝐚𝑗 ∈ ℝ𝑝 , 𝑗 = 1, … , 𝑝,
of the matrix 𝐀 = (𝐖−1 )′ ∈ ℝ𝑝×𝑝 is a spatial pattern.
As shown in Fig. 8 the spatial patterns inherit the variance separation property of the spatial ﬁlters. Given that the variance of a bandpass
ﬁltered signal is similar to its bandpower, the CSP features are obtained
as the variance of a small number of pairs of spatial patterns [23].
Since motor imagery, as well as motor execution, produces amplitude
increments (event related synchronization, ERS) and decrements (event
related desynchronization, ERD) on the ongoing EEG signal, namely

3.2. Temporal and frequency information
The signal quality of the EEG data can be compromised by physiological and non-physiological noise. In most hospitals and laboratories,
the use of electromagnetic shields can reduce such noise level. If such
equipment is not available, it is highly recommended to reduce as
5

V. Peterson et al.

Heliyon 6 (2020) e03425

Fig. 6. Schematic representation of the experiment in a block diagram. The experiment started with the KVIQ questionnaire. After the electrode setting, the EMG
rest signal was acquired. Five protocol runs were asked to be performed by the user. The ﬁrst run, called RUN0, involved real grasping movement in order to better
explain the protocol and to help the subject to focus on the sensation of making the movement. The rest of the runs (RUN1-RUN4) were equal, consisting of MI vs.
Rest conditions.

Fig. 7. Time and frequency domain information of the EEG acquired signals corresponding to four diﬀerent subjects, showing four diﬀerent levels of noise artifacts
during acquisition.

in the mu (8-12 Hz) and beta (13-30 Hz) bands [24], CSP constitutes
an easy to implement tool for distinguishing between two MI conditions in terms of their corresponding bandpowers [25]. Unfortunately,
the success in detecting MI highly depends on both the prescribed
time segment and frequency band used to process the EEG signal. In
this direction, the penalized time-frequency band common spatial pattern (PTFBCSP) method [26] has been proposed in order to improve
MI detection. Roughly speaking, by means of PTFBCSP, multichannel
EEG data are decomposed into predeﬁned 𝑇 temporal and 𝐹 frequency
bands. Then, pairs of CSP features are extracted at each 𝑡-𝑓 band. The

selection and classiﬁcation of the most discriminative features are simultaneously made by means of the generalized sparse discriminant
analysis (GSDA) algorithm [27], a fast procedure which allows the inclusion of a-priori discriminative information into the model.
In order to answer whether it is possible to detect MI by using lowcost EEG acquisition devices, we oﬀ-line evaluated the classiﬁcation
performance of each subject by using both the traditional CSP method
and PTFBCSP in two conﬁgurations: by using a single-time window
(called PFBCSP) and multiple-time windows. For the single-time window approach, EEG segments were extracted from 0.5 to 2.5 s after each
6

V. Peterson et al.

Heliyon 6 (2020) e03425

Fig. 8. Spatial patterns obtained by projection of the ﬁrst two (CSP:F1 and CSP:F2) and the last two (CSP:L1 and CSP:L2) spatial ﬁlters which discriminate between
hand MI and rest condition. The graphs show two band-pass ﬁltered EEG segments after applying CSP. The spatial patterns associated to CSP:F1 and CSP:F2 present
larger variances for the rest condition, while CSP:L1 and CSP:L2 have larger variances for the MI EEG segment.

stimulus onset. In the case of the CSP method, each EEG segment was
bandpass ﬁltered between 8 and 30 Hz with a 5th order Butterworth ﬁlter. The number of spatial ﬁlters in CSP was set to 3, as recommended
in [28]. On the other hand, for PFBCSP, 17 sub-bands (𝐹 = 17) between
4 and 40 Hz with 4 Hz bandwith with overlapping of 2 Hz were extracted (𝑓 𝑏1 = 4 − 8 Hz, 𝑓 𝑏2 = 6 − 10 Hz , … , 𝑓 𝑏𝐹 = 36 − 40 Hz). Here
only one CSP pair of spatial ﬁlters was used for feature extraction. For
the multiple time-windows approach, PTFBCSP was implemented following the methodology used in [26]. Thus, ﬁve time segments of 2 s
length and overlapping of 1.5 s were extracted. At each time segment
the same ﬁlter-bank and feature extraction procedure implemented in
PFBCSP was followed. For the CSP implementation the Matlab RCSP8
toolbox was used [28].
The binomial cumulative distribution function (BCDF) can be used
to provide the minimum classiﬁcation accuracy threshold (MCAT)
needed for BCI control [29, 30]. For a balanced binary classiﬁcation
problem, the percentage of theoretical chance level of classiﬁcation is
50%. This threshold only holds for an inﬁnite number of samples. In
practice, the minimum chance level depends on the available number
of samples. For Subject 1, due to communication problems between the
boards and OpenViBE, the 4th run (RUN4) presents only 30 trials instead of 40. Thus, for this subject we have 150 trials to compute the
MCAT, and 160 trials for all the other subjects. By using BCDF with a
conﬁdence level of 95%, and based on the number of trials performed
by each subject, the minimum threshold is found to be 56.66% for Subject 1 and 56.25% for all the other subjects.
The algorithms were implemented by 10 × 10-fold cross-validation.
The accuracy achieved for each subject and each tested method is
presented in Fig. 9. In addition, the minimum classiﬁcation accuracy
thresholds are plotted as horizontal red lines. The last columns show
the average performance over all subjects yielded by each method considered.

Fig. 9. Mean and standard deviation of the classiﬁcation performance (accuracy
%) for each subject and each method considered. Horizontal red lines represent
the minimum accuracy level for conﬁdent MI-BCI control for each subject.

pattern (associated to the most relevant feature) for a randomly selected
trial of Subject 2 for each method considered.
3.5. Motor imagery assessment via KVIQ results
The ability of each subject in performing MI was measured by ﬁve
kinesthetic items classiﬁed from “poor” (between 5 and 10) to “very
good” (from 20 to 25) MI ability. In order to investigate whether correlation exists between classiﬁcation accuracy and the reported MI ability,
a pairwise correlation analysis was performed between the mean accuracy value reached by CSP, PFBCSP and PTFBCSP for each subject (over
the 10×10 cross-validation) and the corresponding KVIQ-10 score (sum
of the 5 items considered). The pairwise correlation, or Pearson’s correlation, is a measure of the strength and direction of association between
two variables. The method attempts to draw the line that best ﬁt the two
data variables and the associated Pearson correlation coeﬃcient 𝑅 indicates how far away all the data points are from this line of best ﬁt. In
our analyses, as presented in Fig. 11, no statistically signiﬁcant correlation was found between the KVIQ-10 score and either one of the three
methods considered.

3.4. Topographical maps
The topographical maps of the most relevant spatial ﬁlters and spatial patterns learned by CSP allow for a neurophysiological interpretation of the solution [31]. In fact, while the spatial ﬁlter maps may
resemble the brain patterns associated to a speciﬁc MI task, the spatial
pattern maps illustrate how the presumed brain sources are projected
into the scalp [25]. Fig. 10 shows the most signiﬁcant spatial ﬁlter and

8 Available at https://sites.google.com/site/fabienlotte/research/code-andsoftwares.

7

V. Peterson et al.

Heliyon 6 (2020) e03425

Fig. 10. Topographical maps of the most relevant spatial ﬁlter and pattern corresponding to the most signiﬁcant feature for a right-handed subject. a) CSP, b)
PFBCSP, c) PTFBCSP.

Fig. 11. Correlation analysis between KVIQ score and classiﬁcation accuracy yielded by CSP (a), PFBCSP (b) and PTFBCSP (c). The 𝑅-correlation coeﬃcient and the
associated 𝑝-value appear on the upper right corner of each subﬁgure.

4. Discussion

Although by eye inspection the quality of the EEG signal was not
always good enough, after a proper post-processing ﬁltering step the
signal quality improved by discarding the high frequency noise components (mainly 50 Hz), as shown in Fig. 7. In addition, the reached
average classiﬁcation levels are comparable to those reported in the literature for commercial BCI systems. In fact, in a previous work [26]
a 10-subject MI-BCI dataset was acquired following exactly the same
protocol used here, but using clinical-grade devices. In particular, this
dataset was recorded by using a 64-channel EEG system (eego™rt Ant
Neuro, Netherlands) at 512 Hz. A bandpass 3rd order Butterworth ﬁlter
from 0.5 and 45 Hz was also applied within acquisition by using also
OpenViBE designer. At the processing stage, a bandpass ﬁlter was applied between 0.5 to 40 Hz and the signals were downsampled at 128
Hz. An analysis of the classiﬁcation results provided on average by this
high-quality system, allows us to compare (from a user concern point
of view) the MI detection ability of the OpenBCI system. Thus, for fair
comparison purposes, following the methodology used here, CSP, PFBCSP and PTFBCSP were evaluated over this Ant Neuro MI dataset by
using the 15 electrode positions employed for the OpenBCI MI dataset.
For this clinical-grade dataset the average accuracy reached by each
method was 77.12 ±1.46, 78.29 ±1.95 and 84.84 ±2.62, respectively, while
for the OpenBCI dataset those values were found to be 73.15 ± 2.12,
77.21 ± 1.82 and 83.80 ± 3.08, respectively (see Fig. 9). This high accuracy values were possible in spite of the noisy signals due to the fact
that the MI detecting algorithms are based on ﬁltered EEG data segments within the frequency bands of interest. In fact, from the classiﬁer

In this work a complete consumer-grade low-cost BCI system was
built and evaluated. A detailed description of the materials and methods used for constructing an MI-BCI dataset acquired in an uncontrolled
environment was made. Two biomedical signals were registered using
low-cost devices and open-source software. The muscle activity, measured by the MyoWare sensors connected to the OpenBCI Ganglion
board, was used for protocol controlling reasons. Thus, we were only
interested in detecting muscle movement within an MI trial. In the case
of the EEG signal, the OpenBCI Cyton + Daisy board connected to the
Electro-Cap were used. Both temporal and frequency information of the
EEG signals were shown in Fig. 7. Although eﬀorts were made in order
to reduce at a minimum level the noise artifacts, we noticed that during
acquisition, in some situations (sessions, subjects) the electromagnetic
noise amplitude (50 Hz) was from 2 to 4 times higher than the ongoing EEG (e.g. Figs. 7 c and d). This can be explained by the fact that the
electronic components of the boards are not physically isolated from
the outside, being in direct contact with the air. It is well-known that
certain climate conditions (humidity, temperature and pressure) aﬀect
the behavior of the electronic components and their connections. Although a 3D-printed case for the boards was built (see Fig. 2), those
boxes cannot be considered as electromagnetic isolations but only as
handle protectors. In spite of the fact that this is far beyond the scope of
this manuscript, an analysis of the impact of humidity-room conditions
on the OpenBCI boards functionality might better explain this issue.
8

V. Peterson et al.

Heliyon 6 (2020) e03425

point of view, no diﬀerences were found when using the clean signals
or the noisy ones. Although by performing artifact detection due to eye
movement and heart beats better signal-to-noise ratio can be obtained,
this pre-processing step could lead to signal deviation and information
loss if data is not clean enough and the electrode count is small, such as
in the presented dataset.
By analyzing the topographical maps of the ﬁlter and spatial patterns, a strong correlation between the MI mental task and the motor
brain area is observed for the single time window methods (CSP and
PFBCSP). For a right-handed subject, changes over the contralateral
sensorimotor brain area (around electrode C3) should emerge while
performing MI of the dominant hand. On the contrary, for the rest/relax condition the brain associated patterns may vary between subjects,
which it is expected to be better characterized by the multiple timewindows approach (PTFBCSP) [26]. In this sense, the maps presented
in Fig. 10 increase the credibility and conﬁdence of the acquired signals
for MI-BCI control.
By observing the classiﬁcation performances presented in Fig. 9, we
see that Subject 9 does not reach the minimum classiﬁcation accuracy
threshold (MCAT) when CSP is used for MI detection. This may be a
case of BCI-illiteracy [32]. For naive BCI users, it may be diﬃcult at
ﬁrst to learn how to modulate their brain signals for controlling a BCI
system. Several works ([32, 33, 34], to name a few) have tried to address this issue by ﬁnding a neurophysiological marker to predict the
MI-BCI performance of the participants. On the other hand, the KVIQ10 questionnaire was built to assess MI ability and help to detect “bad”
BCI users to avoid frustrating training procedures. Although the authors
in [20] claim that this type of questionnaires present good psychometric properties and can be reliably used for assessing the subject’s MI
ability, in this work, no statistical signiﬁcant correlation was found between the KVIQ score and the classiﬁcation accuracy reached by the
three methods considered, raising the question if KVIQ is a reliable MI
assessment tool for MI-BCI control.
The accuracy levels reached by the traditional CSP and our two
ﬁlter bank-based methods encourage the use of the OpenBCI technology for MI detection. In fact, from the product-cost point of view, we
show that it is possible to construct a complete BCI (with simultaneous
EEG and EMG recording) by spending between 10 and 20 percent of
the cost of a clinical-grade device. By no means we are saying that by
these low-cost technologies the commercial equipment can entirely be
replaced. Actually, one limitation for the use of such consumer-grade
devices is that they do not possess any certiﬁcation, and thus medical
applications are not possible. In addition to this, and based on our own
experience, the user may ﬁnd the use of these technologies in long-term
applications not always practical. This is so because during the experiments, several communication problems between the boards and the
computer appeared. Besides the fact we were using a Linux OS computer, which may aﬀect communication due to driver dependences,
there was always the need to reboot the board for reestablishing the
wireless communication. Although in the end the communication could
always be established and the experiment was always successfully conducted, this problem hindered the acquisition of the signals by adding
delays to the experiment and stress to the practitioners. In addition to
this, simultaneous acquisition of both EEG and EMG was not possible.
Several conﬁgurations of OpenViBE were designed for acquiring the
EEG and EMG in a synchronized manner. These conﬁgurations not only
occasionally frozen the computer, but also added delays to the streaming of the signals, reason for which we decided to use two diﬀerent
computers to make the recordings. Nevertheless, this could also be another consequence of using a computer running Linux OS. Besides these
software issues, another limitation regarding the boards is the care that
must be taken to handle the devices. For instance, we had problems during EMG acquisition due to a welding disconnection, which produced
data loss in one session.
A clear limitation of this work is that we were not able to test the
consumer-grade device with a clinical-grade device neither simultane-

ously (one electrode, two ampliﬁers) nor with the same control group.
In addition, a quantiﬁed analysis of the noise level of the non-shielded
oﬃce should be performed to detect the sources of the main artifact.
On the other hand, no feedback was presented to the users during the
experiments, thus we cannot predict how accurate the user-interface
communication will be in on-line settings. Future works include the
analysis of on-line communication, feedback strategies, multi-class MIBCI applications and the study of wavelet transform for performing the
ﬁlter-bank analysis, among others.
Anyhow, even with those limitations in mind, this work provides
strong evidence that the OpenBCI technology constitutes a good alternative to traditional EEG ampliﬁers for BCI control, yielding similar
accuracy levels for MI detection in oﬀ-line experiment. In addition, with
an improvement in the communication stability and artifact rejection,
we strongly believe that these technologies will become a valuable alternative to clinical-grade devices, spreading the realm of applications
and increasing the number of potential BCI users.
5. Conclusions
Low-cost, easy-to-use systems make BCIs more accessible to not only
researchers, but also to clinicians and their ﬁnal users: patients. In this
regard, as the system becomes more portable and practical it increases
the number of possible applications in which a BCI can be used. In
this work a complete low-cost consumer-grade BCI was built. Although
in some situations noise level was high enough to mask the ongoing
EEG, good classiﬁcation performances were achieved (> 73%) even with
traditional CSP, rising up to 83% when multiple time-frequency bands
were used for MI detection. Despite of the communication problems perceived by the practitioners during acquisition, the OpenBCI boards oﬀer
user-friendly interfaces, allowing to non-EEG experimented researchers
to acquire their own biosignals in non-controlled environments. In this
work we have shown that it is possible to successfully construct an entirely low-cost BCI system for MI detection. We strongly believe that
by this research, practitioners of all over the world will feel invited to
use this technologies in their class-rooms, laboratories and/or any other
research activities. In order to contribute to the BCI community, the acquired dataset will be made publicly available.
Declarations
Author contribution statement
V. Peterson: Conceived and designed the experiments; Analyzed and
interpreted the data; Wrote the paper.
C. M. Galván, H. S. U. Hernández: Performed the experiments; Analyzed and interpreted the data; Wrote the paper.
Funding statement
This work was supported in part by Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Cientíﬁcas y Técnicas, CONICET, Argentina, through PIP
2014-2016 No. 11220130100216-CO, the Air Force Oﬃce of Scientiﬁc
Research, AFOSR/SOARD, through Grant FA9550-14-1-0130, by Universidad Nacional del Litoral, UNL, through CAI+D-UNL 2016 PIC No.
50420150100036LI and by Universidad Nacional de Entre Ríos through
PID NOVEL 6215.
Competing interest statement
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Additional information
No additional information is available for this paper.
9

V. Peterson et al.

Heliyon 6 (2020) e03425

References

[17] J. Frey, Comparison of an open-hardware electroencephalography ampliﬁer with
medical grade device in brain-computer interface applications, preprint, arXiv:1606.
02438, 2016.
[18] U. Rashid, I. Niazi, N. Signal, D. Taylor, An EEG experimental study evaluating the
performance of texas instruments ADS1299, Sensors 18 (11) (2018).
[19] G. Pfurtscheller, C. Neuper, Motor imagery and direct brain-computer communication, Proc. IEEE 89 (7) (2001) 1123–1134.
[20] F. Malouin, C.L. Richards, P.L. Jackson, M.F. Laﬂeur, A. Durand, J. Doyon, The
kinesthetic and visual imagery questionnaire (KVIQ) for assessing motor imagery in
persons with physical disabilities: a reliability and construct validity study, J. Neuro.
Phys. Ther. 31 (1) (2007) 20–29.
[21] M.B.I. Reaz, M. Hussain, F. Mohd-Yasin, Techniques of EMG signal analysis: detection, processing, classiﬁcation and applications, Biol. Proced. Online 8 (1) (2006)
11.
[22] M. Teplan, et al., Fundamentals of EEG measurement, Meas. Sci. Rev. 2 (2) (2002)
1–11.
[23] H. Ramoser, J. Muller-Gerking, G. Pfurtscheller, Optimal spatial ﬁltering of single
trial EEG during imagined hand movement, IEEE Trans. Rehabil. Eng. 8 (4) (2000)
441–446.
[24] R.P. Rao, Brain-Computer Interfacing: An Introduction, Cambridge University Press,
2013.
[25] B. Blankertz, R. Tomioka, S. Lemm, M. Kawanabe, K.-R. Muller, Optimizing spatial
ﬁlters for robust EEG single-trial analysis, IEEE Signal Process. Mag. 25 (1) (2008)
41–56.
[26] V. Peterson, D. Wyser, O. Lambercy, R. Spies, R. Gassert, A penalized time-frequency
band feature selection and classiﬁcation procedure for improved motor intention
decoding in multichannel EEG, J. Neural Eng. 16 (1) (2019) 016019.
[27] V. Peterson, H.L. Ruﬁner, R.D. Spies, Generalized sparse discriminant analysis for
event-related potential classiﬁcation, Biomed. Signal Process. Control 35 (2017)
70–78.
[28] F. Lotte, C. Guan, Regularizing common spatial patterns to improve BCI designs: uniﬁed theory and new algorithms, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 58 (2) (2011) 355–362.
[29] G. Müller-Putz, R. Scherer, C. Brunner, R. Leeb, G. Pfurtscheller, Better than random:
a closer look on BCI results, Int. J. Bioelectromagn. 10 (1) (2008) 52–55.
[30] E. Combrisson, K. Jerbi, Exceeding chance level by chance: the caveat of theoretical
chance levels in brain signal classiﬁcation and statistical assessment of decoding
accuracy, J. Neurosci. Methods 250 (2015) 126–136.
[31] S. Haufe, F. Meinecke, K. Görgen, S. Dähne, J.-D. Haynes, B. Blankertz, F. Bießmann,
On the interpretation of weight vectors of linear models in multivariate neuroimaging, NeuroImage 87 (2014) 96–110.
[32] B. Blankertz, C. Sannelli, S. Halder, E.M. Hammer, A. Kübler, K.-R. Müller, G. Curio,
T. Dickhaus, Neurophysiological predictor of SMR-based BCI performance, NeuroImage 51 (4) (2010) 1303–1309.
[33] C. Jeunet, B. N’Kaoua, S. Subramanian, M. Hachet, F. Lotte, Predicting mental
imagery-based BCI performance from personality, cognitive proﬁle and neurophysiological patterns, PLoS ONE 10 (12) (2015) e0143962.
[34] M. Ahn, H. Cho, S. Ahn, S.C. Jun, High theta and low alpha powers may be indicative
of BCI-illiteracy in motor imagery, PLoS ONE 8 (11) (2013) e80886.

[1] J. Wolpaw, E.W. Wolpaw, Brain-Computer Interfaces: Principles and Practice, Oxford University Press, USA, 2012.
[2] J.d.R. Millán, R. Rupp, G. Mueller-Putz, R. Murray-Smith, C. Giugliemma, M.
Tangermann, C. Vidaurre, F. Cincotti, A. Kubler, R. Leeb, et al., Combining braincomputer interfaces and assistive technologies: state-of-the-art and challenges,
Front. Neurosci. 4 (2010) 161.
[3] T.O. Zander, C. Kothe, S. Jatzev, M. Gaertner, Enhancing human-computer interaction with input from active and passive brain-computer interfaces, in: BrainComputer Interfaces, Springer, 2010, pp. 181–199.
[4] T. Radüntz, Signal quality evaluation of emerging EEG devices, Front. Physiol. 9
(2018) 98.
[5] L.-D. Liao, C.-Y. Chen, I.-J. Wang, S.-F. Chen, S.-Y. Li, B.-W. Chen, J.-Y. Chang, C.T. Lin, Gaming control using a wearable and wireless EEG-based brain-computer
interface device with novel dry foam-based sensors, J. NeuroEng. Rehabil. 9 (1)
(2012) 5.
[6] M. De Vos, M. Kroesen, R. Emkes, S. Debener, P300 speller BCI with a mobile EEG
system: comparison to a traditional ampliﬁer, J. Neural Eng. 11 (3) (2014) 036008.
[7] C.M. McCrimmon, J.L. Fu, M. Wang, L.S. Lopes, P.T. Wang, A. Karimi-Bidhendi, C.Y.
Liu, P. Heydari, Z. Nenadic, A.H. Do, Performance assessment of a custom, portable,
and low-cost brain–computer interface platform, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 64 (10)
(2017) 2313–2320.
[8] T. Uktveris, V. Jusas, Development of a modular board for EEG signal acquisition,
Sensors 18 (7) (2018).
[9] S. Pathirana, D. Asirvatham, G. Johar, A critical evaluation on low-cost consumergrade electroencephalographic devices, in: 2018 2nd International Conference on
BioSignal Analysis, Processing and Systems (ICBAPS), IEEE, 2018, pp. 160–165.
[10] W.D. Hairston, K.W. Whitaker, A.J. Ries, J.M. Vettel, J.C. Bradford, S.E. Kerick,
K. McDowell, Usability of four commercially-oriented EEG systems, J. Neural Eng.
11 (4) (2014) 046018.
[11] F. Nijboer, B. Van De Laar, S. Gerritsen, A. Nijholt, M. Poel, Usability of three
electroencephalogram headsets for brain–computer interfaces: a within subject comparison, Interact. Comput. 27 (5) (2015) 500–511.
[12] E. Ratti, S. Waninger, C. Berka, G. Ruﬃni, A. Verma, Comparison of medical and
consumer wireless EEG systems for use in clinical trials, Front. Human Neurosci. 11
(2017) 398.
[13] D. Lacko, J. Vleugels, E. Fransen, T. Huysmans, G. De Bruyne, M.M. Van Hulle, J.
Sijbers, S. Verwulgen, Ergonomic design of an EEG headset using 3D anthropometry,
Appl. Ergon. 58 (2017) 128–136.
[14] S. Verwulgen, D. Lacko, H. Justine, S. Kustermans, S. Moons, F. Thys, S. Zelck, K.
Vaes, T. Huysmans, J. Vleugels, et al., Determining comfortable pressure ranges for
wearable EEG headsets, in: International Conference on Applied Human Factors and
Ergonomics, Springer, 2018, pp. 11–19.
[15] Y. Han, Y. Ma, L. Zhu, Y. Zhang, L. Li, W. Zheng, J. Guo, Y. Che, Study on mind controlled robotic arms by collecting and analyzing brain alpha waves, in: 2018 2nd
International Conference on Applied Mathematics, Modelling and Statistics Application (AMMSA 2018), Atlantis Press, 2018.
[16] R. Spicer, J. Anglin, D.M. Krum, S.-L. Liew, REINVENT: a low-cost, virtual reality
brain-computer interface for severe stroke upper limb motor recovery, in: 2017 IEEE
Virtual Reality (VR), IEEE, 2017, pp. 385–386.

10

