Wearable Devices in Clinical Trials: Hype and
Hypothesis
Elena S. Izmailova1, John A. Wagner1 and Eric D. Perakslis1
The development of innovative wearable technologies has raised great interest in new means of data collection in
healthcare and biopharmaceutical research and development. Multiple applications for wearables have been identified in
a number of therapeutic areas; however, researchers face many challenges in the clinic, including scientific methodology
as well as regulatory, legal, and operational hurdles. To facilitate further evaluation and adoption of these technologies, we
highlight methodological and logistical considerations for implementation in clinical trials, including key elements of
analytical and clinical validation in the specific context of use (COU). Additionally, we provide an assessment of the maturity
of the field and successful examples of recent clinical experiments.

WHY CONSIDER USING DIGITAL DEVICES IN CLINICAL
TRIALS?

Use of (and hype surrounding) wearable technologies has skyrocketed in recent years. We deﬁne here wearable technologies as
sensors and/or software applications (apps) on smartphones and
tablets that can collect health-related data remotely, i.e., outside
of the healthcare provider’s ofﬁce. The data can be collected passively or may require a user’s input. An accelerometer embedded
in a wristband or a cell phone is an example of a sensor passively
collecting data about a person’s physical activity and movement.
Software (e.g., ePRO (electronic Patient Reported Outcome))
can output a patient’s report capturing health-related information, collected by means of a cell phone app or a web-based interface. Additionally, some technologies, such as smart-cap bottles
designed to monitor medication adherence, can use a combination of a sensor and app-based data collection. The event recording is triggered by a user action (opening the bottle), but the data
are transmitted from a sensor to a server passively via Bluetooth.
The transmission is mediated by a cell phone app.
Ten years on since the introduction of the iPhone, we have
witnessed an almost complete change in how people communicate with each other, access media/content, and interact with
that content. Most noticeably, in healthcare and beyond, this
shift has led to a complete change in the expectations surrounding reporting of events. Digital disease detection has shifted
outbreak-detection timeframes from months to hours with social
media.1 The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) now
encourages safety adverse event reporting via mobile apps. Hospitals are using Fitbits on inpatients to monitor recovery and

mobility. Patients interact regularly online with healthcare facilities. Twitter and other social media can report and post opinions
on products and services far faster and more broadly than almost
any business.2,3
At the same time, rising costs of healthcare are of immense concern and the possibility of healthcare virtualization via digital devices has been heralded by relentless hype. For remote monitoring of
cardiovascular parameters, activity (including gait, balance, and
many other forms of motion measurement), body temperature, galvanic skin response, blood oxygen saturation, and multisensor/
multisystem monitoring,4 advanced wearable device research and
development is continuously improving. Common form factors
include wearable watches/bracelets, patches, textiles, and garments
(Table 1). All of these sensor devices are being built with the ability to monitor continuously and communicate data in real time or
intermittently. While maturity, promise, and quality all vary greatly
at the moment, clearly these sensors and devices have the potential
to become an integral part of the future of healthcare and biopharmaceutical development.
PROMISES AND CHALLENGES OF USING WEARABLES IN
CLINICAL TRIALS
Promises in healthcare

Wearable devices can collect data on a 24/7 basis in natural settings as people go through their daily routines at home and work.
The data collection can be enhanced by digital diaries depicting
key features of personal health and lifestyle. The best-known
wearable devices are commercial ﬁtness trackers that collect
mobility and some vital sign data.5 Similar wearables cannot be

1

Takeda Pharmaceuticals International Co., Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. Correspondence: Elena S. Izmailova (elena.izmailova@takeda.com)

Received 10 October 2017; accepted 29 November 2017; advance online publication 2 April 2018. doi:10.1002/cpt.966
42

VOLUME 104 NUMBER 1 | JULY 2018 | www.cpt-journal.com

Table 1 Examples of wearable sensors
Device type

Data collected

Examples

Wrist worn

Actigraphy, HR (Heart Rate), BP (Blood Pressure),
EDA (Electrodermal activity)

Actiwatch Spectrum by Phillips, ActiGraph Link by ActiGraph,
E4 by Empatica, ViSi Mobile by Sotera Wireless

Skin patch

ECG (Electrocardiography), actigraphy,
skin temperature

BioStampRC by MC10, HealthPatch by Vital
Connect, BodyGuardian by Preventice

Cuffs

BP, HR

Intellisense Digital BP Monitor by Omron Healthcare

Finger worn

HR, SpO2

iSpO2 Pulse Oximeter by Massimo

Clothing embedded sensors

HR, HRV (Heart Rate Variability), ECG,
Breathing Rate, actigraphy

Smart shirts by Hexoskin

Headbands

EEG (Electroencephalogram), EMG (Electromyography)

EMOTIV EPOC by Emotiv, 4D FORCE by 4D FORCE

marketed as medical devices unless the device performance has
been established prior to release to the market. This is a big step
forward compared to the traditional means of health-related data
collection. For example, basic physiological data, e.g., vital signs
and telemetry, are traditionally collected only during doctor’s
ofﬁce visits or as a part of medical product clinical trial procedures. These data represent a very limited snapshot of a person’s
phenotype and physiology. Inferences about a person’s health are
made based on the extrapolation of such a snapshot to extended
periods of time, potentially weeks and months. This extrapolation is also based on patients’ memory recall of incidents preceding the ofﬁce visit. Decisions about the patient’s health, disease
status, and treatments are made comparing data collected in
doctor’s ofﬁces to population averages, which may or may not be
relevant to a particular individual. Additionally, there are
well-known issues related to in-clinic measurement of vital signs,
including white-coat hypertension.6 There is a growing recognition that population-based values need to be adjusted for factors
such as age, gender, medication status, demographics, and other
factors.7,8 These adjustments can be made if there are data available for speciﬁc subpopulations of interest. This may also be
done using the individual’s own baseline data collected over
extended periods of time, which would enable a precision medicine approach. Data frequently collected over extended periods of
time can provide deeper understanding of disease variability,
which is likely to be an important contributor to treatment
response variability. Having larger and denser datasets will help
to characterize intra- and interpatient variability. Additionally,
there is growing evidence that replacing paper diaries with electronic versions can greatly improve the quality of subjectively
reported outcome data,9–11 such as pain and functional status, by
ensuring compliance, timely collection of the data, avoidance of
secondary data entry errors, and reduced administrative burden.11
Replacing paper diaries and patient memory recall with electronic
means of data collection is likely to continue and expand with
technological advances in the future. Moreover, wearable device
data combined with other data such as genomics or other highthroughput technologies have the potential to create a comprehensive multilayer picture of a person’s health and can deepen
our understanding of how to combine genotyping with deep
phenotyping.

The applications mentioned above are also attractive for drug
development in both early- and late-stage clinical trials. Collecting dense data from trial participants using wearables in natural
settings—often not collectible otherwise—may fundamentally
change how clinical trials are designed and conducted. In early
clinical drug development, collection of dense physiological data
may identify early safety issues and inform dose adjustments and
dosing frequencies, or lead to discontinuation of development of
certain drug candidates. The study subjects would not have to be
conﬁned to the pharmacology units all the time to have the data
collected. In the late stages of clinical development, creating novel
endpoints by means of wearable technologies has applications in
multiple disease areas (Table 2). These novel endpoints may provide more sensitive measures of disease activity compared to traditional scales, enabling faster and more objective readouts in
clinical trials. Additionally, sensors can provide objective measures of traditionally subjectively reported outcomes, such as pain
and fatigue, complementing or even completely replacing selfreports. Another attractive feature includes portability to home
settings and simpliﬁcation of measures traditionally done in hospitals. Sleep data collection by means of actigraphy can serve as
an example.12 Important parameters of sleep, such as sleep duration and number and duration of awakenings, can be collected by
wrist-worn actigraphy devices. This could replace sleep studies
that are not practical for long-duration monitoring and provide
data collected in natural home settings, which are more likely to
represent a person’s regular sleep patterns. Although actigraphy
data do not provide details on a deeper level, e.g., sleep phases,
the procedure is very noninvasive and easy to implement.
Actigraphy-based sleep data also highlights the need for clinical
validation of new wearable-based endpoints.
Other promising wearable technology can be seen in phone/
tablet apps. The best-known examples include medication adherence monitoring, medication reminders, and patient engagement.
Medication adherence is a big area of concern in multiple therapeutic areas.13 The reasons behind nonadherence are multifaceted and include socioeconomic factors, access to health care,
communication means with healthcare professionals, patients’
education, and understanding of the impact of nonadherence to
the treatment outcome.14 Moreover, cell phone apps can provide
data to monitor medication adherence and help with timely

CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY & THERAPEUTICS | VOLUME 104 NUMBER 1 | JULY 2018

43

Promises in drug development

Table 2 Novel endpoints: application, benefits, and examples
Application

Benefit

Examples and references

Safety monitoring/patient
phenotyping

 Early safety signal, dose and frequency adjustments,
discontinuation of certain drug candidates
 Better understanding of mechanistic and pharmacological
drug profile if combined with PK and wet lab test data

Vital sign, e.g. HR, RR, skin temperature,
BP, and actigraphy37,39

Novel endpoints

 Mobility as a measure of quality of life
 Sleep studies in the home settings for
extended periods of time
 More sensitive measures than traditional clinical scales in
movement disorders

 Actigraphy in Oncology53
 Actigraphy as a measure sleep in a
home settings54–56
 Gait and tremor in Parkinson’s
disease57,58

Medication adherence monitoring
and intervention

 Improved adherence
 Informed decisions about dose adjustments
 Increased efficiency in postmarket data collection

 Adherence surveys
 Drug intake reminder apps
 Objective data on drug
intake - smart cap bottles

Patient enrollment and retention
in clinical trials

 Fewer obstacles to enroll in clinical trials
 Reduced burdens for patients to participate
 Increased patient outreach

 Remote enrollment and consent apps
 Reminder apps about study procedures
and clinical trial progress

intervention by medical personnel and caregivers.15 Medication
reminder apps, enhanced by alert personalization and available to
both patients and caregivers, were found to improve medication
adherence.16 Additionally, a number of digital technologies were
developed to collect objective adherence data with smart-cap bottle and blister pack technologies. However, the effectiveness of
these technologies in improving patient adherence has yet to be
conﬁrmed in well-powered, controlled studies.17
Cell phone apps and web-based interfaces are increasingly used
for remote patient enrollment, patient consent, and retention in
clinical trials, making the process more convenient and enabling
better outreach to remote patients. Clinical trial patient retention
may be enhanced by delivering app-mediated reminders, providing information about upcoming visits and operational updates
about clinical trial conduct, encouraging compliance, facilitating
communication with medical personnel, and making the logistics
of participation easier.
The totality and combination of applications can provide a
basis for telemedicine and enable partially or completely remote
clinical trials, bringing drug development to difﬁcult-to-reach
populations. Time and cost could be reduced by decreasing the
number of clinic visits and potentially by avoiding use of other
expensive medical devices such as telemetry. Time, convenience,
and cost savings are big potential beneﬁts of wearable devices,
although currently development and adoption costs are militating
against such savings. Nonetheless, data delivered by wearable
technologies have the potential to improve detection of treatment effects and demonstrate how these effects relate to underlying disease characteristics, improving our understanding of the
treatment–response relationship and enhancing personalized
medicine.
CHALLENGES

The promising potential of wearable devices has attracted enormous attention, including the start of experiments,18 and a number of deals between biopharmaceutical, contract research
organization (CRO), and device companies have been
44

announced.19,20 Nevertheless, the major impact expected from
digital technologies on biopharmaceutical R&D has not yet
materialized.21 The reasons behind the lack of major transformation include scientiﬁc, regulatory, ethical, legal, data management,
infrastructure, analysis, and security challenges.
Scientific

Many devices, particularly consumer-grade, are marketed with
promises to improve health and wellness with no scientiﬁc evidence behind this claim.5 Properly designed, well-powered studies
with a clear statement of a medical problem are required, rather
than technology choice-seeking applications.22 Moreover, drug
development and device engineering are historically separate scientiﬁc ﬁelds. On the one hand, biopharmaceutical R&D scientists are generally not familiar with devices, which creates a
barrier for adoption of wearable technologies in drug development clinical trials. On the other hand, device engineers are not
conversant with the drug development process and regulatory
requirements for drug approvals. The solution would be to bring
device engineers into drug development to educate biopharmaceutical R&D and enable adoption of device technologies.
Regulatory

In the US, the drug and device marketing approval paths are separate and the oversight is done by different divisions of the FDA.
The majority of wearable devices are classiﬁed as Class II devices
cleared as 510(k), which requires establishing technical performance in comparison to a predicate (i.e., legally marketed) device
that uses a similar engineering solution. The requirement doesn’t
include establishing an association with a clinical outcome such
as a disease condition. This requirement exists only for 510(k) de
novo devices when there is no predicate device available. Therefore, a device under consideration needs to be tested in a speciﬁc
population relevant to the device label claims in order to establish
an association with a disease condition. If such a 510(k)-cleared
device is intended to support an efﬁcacy claim on a drug label, a
link between the device readout and an efﬁcacy parameter of
VOLUME 104 NUMBER 1 | JULY 2018 | www.cpt-journal.com

Figure 1 The timeline for market release of technologies enabling wearable device use in healthcare.

interest needs to be established in the context of drug development. It also has to be supplemented by the device analytical performance data indicating that the device is appropriate for an
intended use. Additionally, the ﬁeld is plagued by a lack of shared
understanding of methodologies and terminology. A similar issue
was successfully overcome in the ﬁeld of laboratory biomarkers
with the widely accepted concept of “ﬁt-for-purpose validation”
and well-developed and shared terminology.23–25 The same
approach can be adopted by the wearable device ﬁeld and several
precompetitive initiatives have made signiﬁcant progress towards
achieving this goal.26,27
Data infrastructure, processing, analysis, and interpretation

The infrastructure challenges are multifaceted. Drug development clinical teams are not familiar with the massive amounts of
24/7 data to be processed and integrated with the rest of study
data. The sensor data structure is very different compared to traditional data collected at predeﬁned timepoints by clinical sites
and consists of multiple layers: raw unﬁltered data, raw ﬁltered
data to eliminate invalid data in accordance with the scoring
algorithms, data consisting of the secondary derivatives, and data
derived from the secondary derivatives for interpretation. The
outstanding questions include: who is the data originator, what
constitutes source data, which datasets are required to maintain
an audit trail, and what should be reported as a ﬁnal result. These
are the topics of debate by the industry and the regulators, but
the recommendations that would help to harmonize the ﬁeld
have not been established. Moreover, the processing and analysis
of massive data, as well as result visualization and interpretation,
presents a formidable challenge. Machine-learning methods
enabling automated data processing and an improved signal recognition were demonstrated to be useful in solving this issue.11
Additionally, there are no well-developed standards that would
help to organize, annotate, and standardize the data and provide
data mapping tools to electronic data capture (EDC) databases.
The lack of mobile technology data standards is exacerbated by
CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY & THERAPEUTICS | VOLUME 104 NUMBER 1 | JULY 2018

the fact that wearable devices sometimes report variables pertinent to the same phenomenon (e.g., mobility) but use different
terminology, and data processing algorithms are not disclosed.
The solution should include industry-wide standards for data and
terminology, processing principles for similar sets of data, and
transparency requirements around data processing algorithms.
Ethical and legal

This category of challenges includes data ownership and sharing,
consent requirements, privacy, security, and substantial geographical differences in approaches to addressing these challenges. US
and European legislation seems headed in different directions
concerning scope, consent, data sharing, and processing.28 In the
US, consumer-grade and medical devices are regulated differently.
The data obtained via medical devices are covered by HIPAA
and require patient consent for data collection and sharing. On
the other hand, the data obtained by consumer-grade devices,
although it may contain legitimate health information such as
disease condition, lifestyle, biometric, mobility, and behavioral
patterns, can be shared in a deidentiﬁed, aggregate manner without explicit stipulation concerning who will have access to the
data. In the EU, new General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR) regulations do not draw distinctions pertaining to a
device type and cover all data generated by wearable devices or
apps in the medical context.29 Additionally, the EU requires
clearly deﬁned purposes for data use, consent for data reuse and
sharing, and allows patients to withdraw their consent at any
time.
Data security

In the practical consideration of privacy, security, and compliance, it can be helpful to separate compliance from privacy and
security, as compliance tends to be retrospective in nature, but
ensuring privacy and security must be proactive and forwardlooking.30 Much has been written about general and advanced
privacy and security with respect to medical data and devices.31,32
45

Table 3 New families of privacy and security controls
Control family

Key example controls

Access Control

Account Management, Access Enforcement, Information Flow Enforcement

Awareness & Training

General Awareness Training, Role-based Training

Audit & Accountability

Audit Event Management, Audit Review Analysis & Reporting

Assessment, Authorization & Monitoring

Annual Assessments, Assessment Guidelines, Independent Assessment

Configuration Management

Baseline Configuration, Configuration Change Control

Contingency Planning

Contingency Plan, Contingency Training, Contingency Plan Testing

Identification and Authentication

User Management, Device Management, Management of Unique Identifiers

Individual Participation

Individual Consent, Redress, Access, Privacy Notices and ACT Statements

Incident Response

Incident Response Policies & Procedures, Training, Testing, Handling, Monitoring

Maintenance

Controlled Maintenance, Maintenance Tools, Personnel, Local & Non-local

Media Protection

Media Access, Media Marking, Storage & Transport, Sanitization and Use

Privacy Authorization

Authority to Collect, Purpose and Sharing

Physical and Environmental Protection

Physical Access Authorization & Control, Monitoring

Planning

Security & Privacy Plans, Updates, Rules of Behavior, Impact Assessments

Program Management

Program Plan, Roles, Resources, Inventory, Architecture and Performance

Personnel Security

Personnel Screening, Risk Designation, Transfer and Termination

Risk Assessment

Security Categorization, Assessment and Vulnerability Scanning

System and Services Acquisition

Resource Allocation, Systems Lifecycle, Acquisition and Documentation

System and Communications Protection

Application Partitioning, Security Function Isolation, Boundary Protection

System and Information Integrity

Flaw Remediation, Malicious Code Protection, Monitoring, Alerts & Advisories

Fortunately, guidance recently released by the US National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) details new families of
privacy and security controls that can be used as the basis of
design and audit, as shown in Table 3.33 Focusing speciﬁcally on
wearable sensors and devices, the guidance deems it essential that
all personally identiﬁable information (PII) and all personal
health information (PHI) must be protected, and that the devices
themselves be protected from any form of outside interference,
whether accidental or malicious. The predominant generic issues
include: the device security of any mobile devices, tablets, and cell
phones that are used to collect, store, or transmit information;
the potential complications of commingling study sponsorcollected PHI on the personally owned device of a research study
participant; secure data transmission and receipt; secure account
management; data encryption; data blinding; and data backup
and device ﬁdelity. It is essential to understand that these concepts are generic by necessity. Speciﬁc solutions will always be
required depending on the exact device model, the speciﬁc device
operating system, the intended method of network connectivity,
the intended data capture and processing strategy, and many
other variables that will be study-speciﬁc. Using several potential
methods of network connectivity as examples, Figure 2 illustrates
just some of the most common and potential cyber threat vectors
that exist for the three primary types of device connection: Bluetooth, WiFi, and cellular as described by the NIST. The takehome message here is simply that cyber security is increasingly
46

complex, but also well understood and manageable. Success
requires a thorough beneﬁt–risk assessment by experts just like
any other medical intervention.
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR CLINICAL TRIALS

The application of wearable devices to clinical trials and drug
development is in a similar state to that of biomarkers in the early
2000s. At that time, considerable confusion abounded regarding
the appropriate use and validation of biomarkers. Tremendous
efforts were applied to biomarker activities resulting in reﬁned
approaches, particularly the deﬁnition and framework for analytical validation, clinical validation, and qualiﬁcation.24,25,34 Considerations for the use of wearable devices in a clinical trial
should include primarily scientiﬁc aspects with a patient-centric
approach in mind (Figure 3). However, operational aspects, such
as patient and site personnel training, device acceptability to
patients and patient compliance, data reporting, and transfer and
management are critical for obtaining valid and interpretable
data. In addition, there is a critical role for validation, both analytical and clinical, in the utility of wearable devices (Figure 3).
Scientific considerations

The scientiﬁc approach should start with a health condition or
an aspect of health important to patients that has not been
addressed to a satisfactory level by current standards of disease
management care. Once it is deﬁned, a scientiﬁc hypothesis
VOLUME 104 NUMBER 1 | JULY 2018 | www.cpt-journal.com

Wi-Fi Threats

Bluetooth Threats

Technical vulnerabilities:

Technical vulnerabilities:

-Data interception
-Denial of service attacks
-Rogue access points (APs)
-Wireless intruders
-Misconfigured and ad hoc APs
-Misbehaving clients
-Endpoint attacks
-Phishing
-Passive capturing

-Inadequate PINs
-Links with discoverable devices
-Poor user authentication
-Encryption key lengths negotiable
-Link keys can be stored improperly
-Shared master encryption key
Which can lead to:
-Software vulnerabilities
-Eavesdropping
-Denial of service attacks
-Battery draining

Which can lead to:
-Software vulnerabilities
-Eavesdropping
-Battery draining

Cellular Threats and Outcomes
-Persistent spyware
-Mobile botnets
-Poor encryption
-Intrusion
-Ad & click fraud
-Dead Apps
-Network spoofing
-Hijacking
-Unauthorized modifications

Figure 2 Most common and potential cyber threat vectors.

Scientific considerations and validation

Operational

Health aspect/Condition/Need Statement

Consumer or medical device

Hypothesis /Scope/Need Statement

Acceptability to study subjects and site personnel

Select technology

Analytical validation

Data process and collection logistics

Clinical study design*

Clinical validation

Data type and collection frequency

Analysis plan

Analysis

Data interpretation
Conclusion about technology fit-for-purpose
* Appropriate for COU and intended study population

Figure 3 Scientific, validation, and operational considerations for wearable device implementation in clinical trials.
CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY & THERAPEUTICS | VOLUME 104 NUMBER 1 | JULY 2018

47

should be formulated to deﬁne the scope of an experiment to be
conducted. For example, current assessment of morning stiffness
and sleep in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients is based on selfreports. The standard tools of data collection include patient selfreports during the doctor’s ofﬁce visits based on memory recalls
and patient diaries. Having objective data reﬂective of these
health parameters can be very informative for patient care management including management of adverse events, medications,
and dose adjustments. Once the scope is deﬁned, the next step
would entail ﬁnding a suitable technology to capture the data of
interest. In the case of RA, study results indicate that wrist-worn
actigraphy devices can differentiate RA patients from healthy
controls and can provide useful information about mobility in
the context of drug treatment.35,36 The hypothesis should be
tested as one of the objectives in a clinical study. The hierarchical
order of an objective of interest, e.g., primary, secondary, or
exploratory, will depend on the strength of evidence supporting
the hypothesis. The testing can be achieved in an observational
or an interventional study. An observational study would be
appropriate when no data or limited data about the link between
a disease/health aspect and device-derived readouts exist. An
interventional study is more appropriate if the goal is to establish
a process for wearable data collection in the context of drug treatment and to support efﬁcacy claims or guide treatment decisions.
Additionally, a device under consideration should be appropriate
for a given study population.
The general validation framework includes a need statement,
context of use (COU), analytical validation, clinical validation,
and qualiﬁcation, if necessary for a regulatory purpose (Figure 3).
A need statement is a concise and coherent description of the
knowledge gap or drug development need (e.g., improved safety
monitoring) and interfaces with the scientiﬁc aspect of the wearable. The COU, which also interfaces with the scientiﬁc aspects
of a wearable, is a concise description of how a wearable is
intended to be used in drug development. With a particular
COU, analytical validation establishes if the device performance
characteristics are acceptable. Analytical validation or technical
performance established for purposes of 510(k) clearance would
entail establishing device performance parameters under conditions as close as possible to real-life use. This goal can be achieved
by comparing device performance to a traditional tool for collecting the data if available,37 or another device with well-established
performance.7 Some of the analytical validation parameters may
be already established during device calibration done by the
device manufacturer and may include important information
such as conformity to a gold standard and sensor precision under
various testing conditions, but may require an independent validation in the COU. Understanding performance characteristics
is necessary for deciding if a device can measure what is needed in
a particular COU. If a medical device is under consideration,
device performance is established for the purposes of device clearance. However, it may not be appropriate in an intended study
population or COU. For instance, if a device has been tested in
normal healthy volunteers but is intended for future use in a particular disease, both the hardware and the software performance
need to be established in the context of disease to render the
48

device use as “ﬁt-for-purpose.” The lack of testing in the intended
study population may result in inappropriate data processing and
even loss of the data.38 Also, with a particular COU, clinical validation establishes that the wearable device acceptably identiﬁes,
measures, or predicts the concept of interest. Clinical validation
includes establishing an association with a speciﬁc disease condition to make sure that the data are interpretable and provide useful information for patient care management.37,39 Both analytical
and clinical validation can be done in dedicated device evaluation
studies or can be incorporated as one of the endpoints in drug
development clinical trials. In the ﬁrst scenario, multiple devices
may be evaluated with appropriate controls embedded in the
study, e.g., drugs modulating blood pressure for blood pressure
monitoring devices. The disadvantage of this study type is the
lack of assessment of device impact on other study procedures
routinely performed in drug development, such as frequent blood
draws for pharmacokinetics (PK) or imaging procedures. In the
second scenario, adding devices to drug development clinical
studies as exploratory endpoints provides an opportunity to
establish tolerability and acceptability of the device by the study
participants and sites in the context of other study procedures.
These considerations are a starting place, but require input from
stakeholders and a further discussion between the biopharmaceutical industry, device manufacturers, and regulators. It is conceivable that qualiﬁcation will ultimately be necessary for wearables,
similar to surrogate endpoints. Based on a formal regulatory process, it is a conclusion within the stated COU that a drug development tool can be relied upon to have a speciﬁc interpretation
and application in medical product development and regulatory
review. We are not aware of any instances of wearable use requiring this level of scrutiny.
Device choice and logistical considerations

Both consumer and medical-grade devices can be considered for
drug development clinical trials. Medical-grade devices require
less work prior to inclusion in clinical trials, as their performance
may be established for the purpose of a clearance or approval process and the information is available on the device label. That
said, consideration of the intended COU is necessary prior to
application. However, consumer-grade devices may not yet have
established performance, and device analytical and clinical validation studies are needed to ascertain that a device of interest is ﬁtfor-purpose. The raw and derivative data availability from the
device should be considered carefully, as often only secondary
derivatives and summary data are available; this may provide an
incomplete audit trail. Device acceptability by study subjects is
critical to successful implementation. Device technical characteristics such as size, convenience to wear, battery life, and impact
on daily life activities should be considered carefully. These characteristics may require patients’ input prior to study initiation to
ensure successful adoption of a technology. If technology acceptance by users is not known before the study start, a small pilot
study may be warranted to obtain these data, as acceptance will
have a major impact on patients’ compliance. We found that having hands-on experience by clinical scientists directly involved in
clinical study design and conduct is highly beneﬁcial. It accelerates
VOLUME 104 NUMBER 1 | JULY 2018 | www.cpt-journal.com

In theory, wearables can be used broadly across therapeutic areas
for deep phenotyping, detection and interpretation of adverse
events, assessment of quality of life, and measurement of efﬁcacy.
Wearable and digital approaches could provide signal detection
for conditions such as depression by measuring increases in sleep
or decrease in activity, signs associated with depression. For example, wearables were recently suggested to be helpful in the detection of early signs of Lyme disease.7 Any therapeutic intervention
that may impact quality of life could beneﬁt from measurement

of movement or in some cases where a patient diary is required.
One example is a collaboration between PatientsLikeMe and Biogen to better characterize multiple sclerosis patients,40 where
activity and mobility are clearly tied to quality of life. Some therapeutic areas may not require use of a wearable, but rather simple
mobile phone applications such as Apple’s ResearchKit.
Since many wearable devices can readily measure heart rate as
well as blood pressure, the cardiovascular therapeutic area is a
major focus for use of wearable devices. Cardiac monitoring in
both healthy individuals and speciﬁc disease populations allows
monitoring for cardiac events 24/7 and enables better-informed
care. Cardiovascular disease areas in which wearable devices have
been or could be used include congestive heart failure, hypertension, and dysrhythmias. For example, The Zio Patch (iRhythm
Technologies, San Francisco, CA) is a single-lead electrocardiographic, continuously recording ambulatory adhesive patch,
recently approved by the FDA. In a recent study, the device’s 14day monitoring of beat-to-beat cardiac rhythm had a 57% greater
diagnostic yield than the standard 24-h Holter monitoring.41
Neuroscience uses of wearable devices are manifold, including
the monitoring of sleep, cognition, and movement disorders.
Wearable devices commonly measure selected sleep parameters
and activity. To assess patients for obstructive sleep apnea outside
the laboratory setting, use of medical devices has been steadily
increasing.42 IBM Watson Health and the American Sleep
Apnea Association have launched the SleepHealth app to conduct a study identifying connections between sleep habits and
health outcomes. This app will record movement and heart rate
during sleep and track connection between sleep quality and daytime activities, alertness, productivity, general health, and medical
conditions. It will amass the largest collection of sleep data to
date. Parkinson’s disease is another area that has shown promising results and insight via wearables and machine-learning techniques. The sensors in wearable devices can be paired with mobile
phone apps to measure symptoms such as tremor, balance, gait,
memory, and some vocal characteristics.
There are examples of wearable use in respiratory diseases,
immunology, and rheumatology. For example, GlaxoSmithKline
(GSK Philadelphia, PA) (in collaboration with Medidata and
POSSIBLE Mobile) are starting an RA trial called PARADE8.43
It is expected to evaluate 300 patients through a mobile application that tracks common RA symptoms such as joint pain and
fatigue, and gathers these data through a mix of surveys and
sensor-enabled tests (e.g., recording motion through wrist exercises). This trial is gathering data on the everyday lives of people
with RA to gain insight and learn more about the condition.
WristOx2 by Nonin Medical (Plymouth, MN) is a pulse oximeter that monitors and measures heart rate and blood oxygen levels, and is targeted towards people who have asthma and are at
risk of chronic pulmonary obstruction disease. In 2014, Novartis
(Hanover, NJ) launched an observational trial with Qualcomm
Life (San Diego, CA) collecting biometric data from chronic
lung disease patients in their homes using smartphones connected
to Qualcomm’s cloud-based 2net Platform.19
Another therapeutic area addressed by wearable devices is metabolic disorders, including diabetes and obesity. A recent

CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY & THERAPEUTICS | VOLUME 104 NUMBER 1 | JULY 2018

49

device implementation by clinical teams and allows scientists to
rule out early devices that are unlikely to be easily accepted by
study participants and may not provide interpretable data. Devices
are usually administered by clinical site personnel, trained to pass
information to the subjects and be available to help if study subjects are experiencing difﬁculties. In addition to subject and site
personnel training, the data process ﬂow should be mapped before
the study start to evaluate the impact of data ﬂow on study participants and other clinical trial procedures. Examples include requiring a cell phone for data synchronization, speciﬁc phone models
compatible with apps, translations if needed, frequency of data synchronization, and speciﬁc computer models for device docking.
Compliance of study subjects contributing data should be monitored. Interventions such as reminders to the subjects should be
implemented to improve compliance if it falls below a certain
threshold.
Decisions need to be made up front about the timing of data
processing into secondary derivatives and data review. If data
need to be reviewed in near real-time, the data processing, analysis, and visualization need to be established and tested before the
study start. Follow-up procedures, if warranted, need to be determined as a part of a clinical study protocol. Retrospective data
processing and analysis are more suitable for exploratory endpoints, as they provide more room for experimentation with raw
data processing and visualization options, and can be done in an
iterative manner. Data use should be clearly deﬁned in the study
protocol and it should be stipulated whether such use has any
impact on patient care or any other study procedures. In addition, decisions would have to be made on how to handle subjects
who may have an allergic or any other adverse reaction to the
components of wearable devices. Depending on the intended use
of the data, subjects with known adverse reactions to the components of a device may be excluded from the study or allowed to
participate in other study procedures; this is appropriate if consent to the wearable device portion of the study is optional and
the lack of participation does not have a major impact on overall
study data integrity.
Considerations for including devices in the clinical studies are
multidimensional (Figure 3). R&D and healthcare organizations
have a number of hurdles to overcome to make wearable technology implementation a routine procedure. Further development of
analytical and clinical validation methodologies and the wide
adoption of devices according to the ﬁt-for-purpose principle will
remain critical for future success.
WHAT THERAPEUTIC AREAS ARE MOST APPROPRIATE
AND WHY?

systematic review of mHealth (Mobile Health)-related studies on
diabetes and obesity treatment and management found that over
half of the reported positive effects of interventions based on primary outcomes.44 Accurate glucose monitoring is something currently in development, as it is not readily available in
smartwatches, but several companies are developing prototypes.
For example, Dexcom (San Diego, CA) have developed a continuous glucose monitoring application that uses a dermal implant
with a probe capable of monitoring blood glucose every 5 min,
eliminating the need for ﬁnger sticks. The Freestyle Libre Flash
Glucose Monitoring System by Abbott (Abbott Park, IL) is a
wearable skin sensor that has received regulatory approval.
Recently, a pilot study of a patient-centered, smartphone-based,
diabetes care system found that a 12-week application of the system to patients with inadequately controlled type 2 diabetes
resulted in a signiﬁcant HbA1c reduction.44
PROGRESS IN CLINICAL TRIALS TO DATE

Recent reviews of wearable monitoring systems have shown that
the key implementation challenges are patient and provider
engagement, connectivity and device communication, and clinical
validation.45 Per earlier discussion, we have emphasized the
importance of rigorous clinical investigation in a stepwise manner
where devices are tested in successively less controlled circumstances prior to full investigation in patients’ homes. Several wearable
devices (ViSi Mobile and HealthPatch) designed for continuous
vital signs monitoring were studied in a general hospital ward
and compared with vital signs measurements by nurses.37 The
study showed generally promising results, including patient and
clinician experiences, but the number and types of artifacts/errors
demonstrated the need for signiﬁcant improvement before equivalence with traditionally used measures can be achieved.
We conducted similar experiments in interventional clinical
studies. Our goal was to evaluate 510(k)-cleared wearable devices
in the context of drug development clinical trials and ascertain
whether devices of interest are ﬁt-for-purpose for vital sign and
cardiac rhythm monitoring; this was done in normal healthy volunteers for the purposes of deep phenotyping and expanded
safety monitoring. Our experimental design included establishing
both analytical and clinical validation by comparing device performance with conventional measures done at the sites, and testing devices in experiments with certain clinical positive controls
such as an increased heart rate after certain drug administration.
Additionally, we queried important operational parameters such
as acceptability by the study subjects and site personnel, and we
collected data on subjects’ compliance and gained institutional
experience with logistics of implementation of wearable technologies. Our data indicate that the technologies are acceptable to the
study subjects; however, compliance may decrease when subjects
use the devices at home. The feedback from the site personnel
indicated high rates of adoption and eagerness of use with a clear
need for dedicated technical training and hands-on experience
before the launch. Analytical validation experiments demonstrated variable concordance with traditional measures, depending on the variable of interest. Higher concordance was observed
with the data collected by another device vs. data collected
50

manually. Consistent with the ﬁndings reported by other
groups,37,39 these devices have a propensity to generate a number
of artifacts that should be reduced before further broad implementation of technology for safety monitoring. Additionally, we
found that a combination of vital sign monitoring with actigraphy readouts, such as mobility counts, facilitates interpretation of
vital sign values not collected at the resting state. Overall, our
results demonstrated feasibility of collection of vital sign data
using wearable devices; however, implementation of such devices
for safety monitoring should proceed with caution and should
include mandatory veriﬁcation that a technology of interest is ﬁtfor-purpose.
Looking at ours and others’ studies, we see a common theme
of great progress and promise but also of technologies that are
not quite ready for prime time. Looking at other sensor/device
domains, we see similar themes. For example, in a recent in-clinic
validation study of a cufﬂess device for measuring blood pressure,
the device demonstrated less than a 5-mmHg variance from conventional measurement in 46% of the study population, but 23%
of the originally recruited subjects had to be excluded upfront
due to device calibration error.39
As previously discussed, there is a sharp difference in measurement accuracy and data/device ﬁdelity between clinical and
consumer-grade motion detecting devices but we are hopeful that
this gap will eventually disappear. Within the clinical setting,
motion detection sensors are being successfully used in increasingly complex observation and analysis scenarios. In one recent
motion measurement study of early Parkinson’s disease patients,
timed “Up and Go” tasks were measured with far greater than
90% sensitivity, but this level of clinical-grade motion measurement required the wearing of special suits that had 17 sensors per
body segment.46
CONCLUSION

Wearable technologies are promising and have the potential to
fundamentally change healthcare and drug development by
changing the means of collecting, processing, and visualizing
health data. Potential applications are diverse, have utility in multiple therapeutic areas, and are likely to evolve rapidly. The ultimate goal should be a better understanding of disease variability,
responses to treatment along with a reduction of healthcare costs,
and increasing efﬁciency in conducting clinical trials. Additionally, adopting new ways of remote data collection can bring new
treatments and care management to all patients in need. Challenges presented by adoption of wearable technologies are not
insigniﬁcant. The scientiﬁc community would beneﬁt from frequent information exchange to share the results and learning
experiences; this would facilitate the development and adoption
of best practices for technology implementation, data collection,
analysis, and interpretation. Currently, the ﬁeld is full of enthusiasm, but more data are needed from rigorously designed studies
to displace the hype and adopt scientiﬁc methodologies to generate and test scientiﬁc hypotheses. Further dialog between the biopharmaceutical industry and device manufacturers to develop
methodological approaches and shared understanding of the
experiments is required to fulﬁll the requirements of analytical
VOLUME 104 NUMBER 1 | JULY 2018 | www.cpt-journal.com

and clinical validation. This conversation would constitute a
major step forward facilitating the adoption of wearable technologies in clinical trials.
Definitions
Analytical validation. Establishing that the performance characteristics of a test, tool, or instrument are acceptable in terms of its
sensitivity, speciﬁcity, accuracy, precision, and other relevant performance characteristics using a speciﬁed technical protocol
(which may include specimen collection, handling and storage
procedures). This is validation of the test’s, tool’s, or instrument’s
technical performance, but is not validation of the item’s
usefulness.24
Clinical validation. Establishing that the test, tool, or instrument

acceptably identiﬁes, measures, or predicts the concept of
interest.24
Consumer devices are devices marketed directly to individuals.
An example would be a Fitbit wrist-worn device or an iPhone.
The individuals are responsible for managing their devices,
including data backup and the decisions around software
upgrades. Some of these devices fall under the FDA deﬁnition of
general wellness products and are considered low-risk devices.47
There is no requirement to establish device performance before
the release to the market.

economic beneﬁt of the health plans and purchasers or for the
convenience of the patient, treating physician, or other health
care provider.”52
Wearable technologies are sensors and/or software applications on smartphones and tablets that can collect health-related
data remotely.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Mike Mangiapane for help with editing the article, and
Justo Torres for help with Figures 1 and 3 graphical designs.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
Elena Izmailova, Eric Perakslis, and John Wagner are employed by
Takeda Pharmaceuticals International Co.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Concept and design: Izmailova, Perakslis, Wagner. Drafting of the article:
Izmailova, Perakslis, Wagner. Editing and final revision of the article;
Izmailova, Perakslis, Wagner.
C 2018 The Authors. Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics published by
V

Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of American Society for Clinical
Pharmacology and Therapeutics
This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial License, which permits use, distribution and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited and
is not used for commercial purposes.

Context of use (COU). A statement that fully and clearly describes

1.

the way the medical product development tool is to be used and
the medical product development-related purpose of the use.21
Medical devices are deﬁned by the FDA as is “an instrument,
apparatus, implement, machine, contrivance, implant, in vitro
reagent, or other similar or related article, including a component
part, or accessory which is . . . intended for use in the diagnosis of
disease or other conditions, or in the cure, mitigation, treatment,
or prevention of disease, in man or other animals.”48
Medical devices have to be approved/cleared by the FDA
before they can be released to the market. The approval/clearance
path depends on the intended use of the device and also upon
indications for use. Devices are classiﬁed into Class I, II, and III
devices based on the risk the device poses to the patient and/or
the user.49 Depending on the device classiﬁcation, a Premarket
Approval (PMA) or 510(k) clearance is required before release to
the market.50 The FDA stipulates 510(k) as: “a premarket submission made to FDA to demonstrate that the device to be marketed is at least as safe and effective, that is, substantially
equivalent, to a legally marketed device. Submitters must compare
their device to one or more similar legally marketed devices and
make and support their substantial equivalency claims.”51 Medical devices are also a subject to HIPAA security and privacy rules.

2.

3.

4.
5.

6.

7.

8.
9.

10.

11.

12.

Medical need/necessity. The AMA deﬁnes medical necessity as:

“Health care services or products that a prudent physician would
provide to a patient for the purpose of preventing, diagnosing or
treating an illness, injury, disease or its symptoms in a manner
that is: (a) in accordance with generally accepted standards of
medical practice; (b) clinically appropriate in terms of type, frequency, extent, site, and duration; and (c) not primarily for the
CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY & THERAPEUTICS | VOLUME 104 NUMBER 1 | JULY 2018

13.

14.
15.

Anema, A. et al. Digital surveillance for enhanced detection and
response to outbreaks. Lancet Infect. Dis. 14, 1035–1037 (2014).
Brownstein, J.S., Freifeld, C.C. & Madoff, L.C. Digital disease
detection—Harnessing the Web for public health surveillance. N.
Engl. J. Med. 360, 2153–2155, 7 (2009).
Rudner, J., McDougall, C., Sailam, V., Smith, M. & Sacchetti, A.
Interrogation of patient Smartphone activity tracker to assist
arrhythmia management. Ann. Emerg. Med. 68, 292–294 (2016).
Majumder, S., Mondal, T. & Deen, M.J. Wearable sensors for remote
health monitoring. Sensors (Basel) 17, (2017).
Piwek, L., Ellis, D.A., Andrews, S. & Joinson, A. The rise of consumer
health wearables: promises and barriers. PLoS Med. 13, e1001953
(2016).
Schwartz, J.E. et al. Clinic blood pressure underestimates ambulatory
blood pressure in an untreated employer-based US population:
results from the masked hypertension study. Circulation 134, 1794–
1807 (2016).
Li, X. et al. Digital health: tracking physiomes and activity using
wearable biosensors reveals useful health-related information. PLoS
Biol. 15, e2001402 (2017).
SPRINT challenge <https://challenge.nejm.org/pages/winners>
Stone, A.A., Shiffman, S., Schwartz, J.E., Broderick, J.E. & Hufford,
M.R. Patient compliance with paper and electronic diaries. Controll.
Clin. Trials 24, 182–199 (2003).
Lee, S.J., Kavanaugh, A. & Lenert, L. Electronic and computergenerated patient questionnaires in standard care. Best Pract. Res.
Clin. Rheumatol. 21, 637–647 (2007).
Coons, S.J., Eremenco, S., Lundy, J.J., O’Donohoe, P., O’Gorman, H.
& Malizia, W. Capturing patient-reported outcome (PRO) data
electronically: the past, present, and promise of ePRO measurement
in clinical trials. Patient 8, 301–309 (2015).
Martin, J.L. & Hakim, A.D. Wrist actigraphy. Chest 139, 1514–1527
(2011).
Cutler, D.M. & Everett, W. Thinking outside the pillbox—medication
adherence as a priority for health care reform. N. Engl. J. Med. 362,
1553–1555 (2010).
Brown, M.T. & Bussell, J.K. Medication adherence: WHO cares?
Mayo Clin. Proc. 86, 304–314 (2011).
Basch, E. et al. Overall survival results of a trial assessing patientreported outcomes for symptom monitoring during routine cancer
treatment. JAMA 318, 197–198 (2017).
51

16. Thakkar, J. et al. Mobile telephone text messaging for medication
adherence in chronic disease: a meta-analysis. JAMA Intern. Med.
176, 340–349 (2016).
17. Volpp, K.G. et al. Effect of electronic reminders, financial incentives,
and social support on outcomes after myocardial infarction: The
HeartStrong randomized clinical trial. JAMA Intern. Med. 177, 1093–
1101 (2017).
18. Steinhubl, S.R. et al. Rationale and design of a home-based trial
using wearable sensors to detect asymptomatic atrial fibrillation in a
targeted population: The mHealth Screening To Prevent Strokes
(mSToPS) trial. Am. Heart J. 175, 77–85 (2016).
19. Novartis and PPD partnership news. Available at: <http://www.
fiercebiotech.com/medical-devices/novartis-ppd-conduct-clinicalpilot-study-using-medical-device-connectivity-via-a>
20. GSK partnership news. Available at: <http://www.mobihealthnews.
com/38325/glaxosmithkline-is-testing-mobile-health-sensors-forclinical-trials>
21. Perakslis, E.D. Strategies for delivering value from digital technology
transformation. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 16, 71–72 (2017).
22. Developing Novel Endpoints Generated by Mobile Technology for Use
in Clinical Trials. Available at: <https://www.ctti-clinicaltrials.org/
projects/novel-endpoints>
23. Lee, J.W. et al. Fit-for-purpose method development and validation for
successful biomarker measurement. Pharmaceut. Res. 23, 312–428
(2006).
24. Group, F.-N.B.W. In: BEST (Biomarkers, EndpointS, and other Tools)
Resource (Food and Drug Administration (US)/National Institutes of
Health (US), Maryland, 2016).
25. Amur, S., LaVange, L., Zineh, I., Buckman-Garner, S. & Woodcock, J.
Biomarker qualification: toward a multiple stakeholder framework for
biomarker development, regulatory acceptance, and utilization. Clin.
Pharmacol. Ther. 98, 34–46 (2015).
26. Scientific and Technological Issues Surrounding the Use of Mobile
Devices in Clinical Trials. Available at: <https://www.ctticlinicaltrials.org/projects/mobile-devices>
27. RADAR-CNS Remote Assessment of Disease and Relapse in Central
Nervous System Disorders. Available at: <https://www.imi.europa.
eu/content/radar-cns>
28. A comprehensive report concerning US and EU privacy matters can
be found at: <https://www.democraticmedia.org/CDD-WearableDevices-Big-Data-Report>
29. CIPL GDPR Interpretation and Implementation Project. <https://
www.informationpolicycentre.com/uploads/5/7/1/0/57104281/
cipl_gdpr_project_risk_white_paper_21_december_2016.pdf>
30. Perakslis, E.D. & Stanley, M. A cybersecurity primer for translational
research. Sci. Transl. Med. 8, 322ps2 (2016).
31. Perakslis, E.D. Cybersecurity in health care. N. Engl. J. Med. 371,
395–397 (2014).
32. Martin, G., Martin, P., Hankin, C., Darzi, A. & Kinross, J. Cybersecurity
and healthcare: how safe are we? BMJ (Clin. Res. Ed.) 358, j3179
(2017).
33. NIST Special Publication 800-53 Revision 5. <https://www.google.
com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=
rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwin-de0yrnWAhULqFQKHboMDPgQFgg-MAAurl=https%3A%2F%2Fcsrc.nist.gov%2Fpublications%2Fdrafts%
2F800-53%2Fsp800-53r5-draft.pdf&usg=AFQjCNGdIfjvpf-cqYzqa7
ddeFmuzLoIkw>
34. Leptak, C. et al. Evidentiary criteria framework to advance biomarker
qualification. Sci. Transl. Med. (2017).
35. Clarke, L.L., Wilson, S. & Kirwan, J.R. Using actigraphy to measure
sleep patterns in rheumatoid arthritis: a pilot study in patients taking
night-time prednisone. Musculoskeletal Care 11, 179–185 (2013).
36. Hashimoto, T. et al. Physical activity of elderly patients with
rheumatoid arthritis and healthy individuals: an actigraphy study.
BioPsychoSocial Med. 9, 19 (2015).
37. Weenk, M. et al. Continuous monitoring of vital signs using wearable
devices on the general ward: pilot study. JMIR mHealth uHealth 5,
e91 (2017).

52

38. Hernandez-Silveira, M. et al. Assessment of the feasibility of an ultralow power, wireless digital patch for the continuous ambulatory
monitoring of vital signs. BMJ Open 5, e006606 (2015).
39. Schoot, T.S., Weenk, M., van de Belt, T.H., Engelen, L.J., van Goor,
H. & Bredie, S.J. A new cuffless device for measuring blood pressure:
a real-life validation study. J. Med. Internet Res. 18, e85 (2016).
40. PatientsLikeMe Study Monitors Walking Activity in People with MS.
<http://news.patientslikeme.com/press-release/patientslikemestudy-monitors-walking-activity-people-ms>
41. Barrett, P.M. et al. Comparison of 24-hour Holter monitoring with 14day novel adhesive patch electrocardiographic monitoring. Am. J.
Med. 127, 95.e11–17 (2014).
42. Kirsch, D.B. PRO: sliding into home: portable sleep testing is
effective for diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea. J. Clin. Sleep Med.
9, 5–7 (2013).
43. GSK starts RA trial on Apple ResearchKit, advancing industry use of
iPhone-run studies. <http://www.fiercebiotech.com/it/gsk-starts-ratrial-apple-researchkit-advancing-industry-use-iphone-run-studies>
44. Wang, Y., Xue, H., Huang, Y., Huang, L. & Zhang, D. A systematic
review of application and effectiveness of mHealth interventions for
obesity and diabetes treatment and self-management. Adv. Nutr.
(Bethesda, MD) 8, 449–462 (2017).
45. Baig, M.M., GholamHosseini, H., Moqeem, A.A., Mirza, F. & Linden,
M. A systematic review of wearable patient monitoring systems —
current challenges and opportunities for clinical adoption. J. Med.
Syst. 41, 115 (2017).
46. Nguyen, H.P. et al. Auto detection and segmentation of physical
activities during a Timed-Up-and-Go (TUG) task in healthy older
adults using multiple inertial sensors. J. Neuroeng. Rehab. 12, 36
(2015).
47. General Wellness: Policy for Low Risk Devices Guidance for Industry
and Food and Drug Administration Staff. <https://www.fda.gov/
downloads/MedicalDevices/NewsEvents/WorkshopsConferences/
UCM519701.pdf>
48. FDA medical device. <https://www.fda.gov/aboutfda/transparency/
basics/ucm211822.htm>
49. FDA device classification. <https://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/
DeviceRegulationandGuidance/Overview/ClassifyYourDevice/
default.htm>
50. PMA and 510K. <https://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/
DeviceRegulationandGuidance/Overview/default.htm#510k>
51. 510(K) premarket notification. <https://www.fda.gov/
MedicalDevices/DeviceRegulationandGuidance/
HowtoMarketYourDevice/PremarketSubmissions/
PremarketNotification510k/default.htm>
52. Medical necessity definition by AMA. <http://www.
nationalacademies.org/hmd/~/media/
8D03963CAEB24450947C1AEC0CAECD85.ashx>
53. Beg, M.S., Gupta, A., Stewart, T. & Rethorst, C.D. Promise of
wearable physical activity monitors in oncology practice. J. Oncol.
Pract. 13, 82–89 (2017).
54. Sarkanen, T.O., Alakuijala, A.P.E., Dauvilliers, Y.A. & Partinen, M.M.
Incidence of narcolepsy after H1N1 influenza and vaccinations:
Systematic review and meta-analysis. Sleep Med. Rev. (2017) [Epub
ahead of print].
55. Filardi, M., Pizza, F., Martoni, M., Vandi, S., Plazzi, G. & Natale, V.
Actigraphic assessment of sleep/wake behavior in central disorders
of hypersomnolence. Sleep Med. 16, 126–130 (2015).
56. Alakuijala, A., Sarkanen, T. & Partinen, M. Polysomnographic and
actigraphic characteristics of patients with H1N1-vaccine-related and
sporadic narcolepsy. Sleep Med. 16, 39–44 (2015).
57. Silva de Lima, A.L. et al. Large-scale wearable sensor deployment in
Parkinson’s patients: The Parkinson@Home Study Protocol. JMIR
Res. Protoc. 5, e172 (2016).
58. Peterson, D.S. & Horak, F.B. The effect of levodopa on improvements
in protective stepping in people with Parkinson’s disease.
Neurorehab. Neural Repair 30, 931–940 (2016).

VOLUME 104 NUMBER 1 | JULY 2018 | www.cpt-journal.com

