Brain Monitoring Devices in Neuroscience
Clinical Research: The Potential of Remote
Monitoring Using Sensors, Wearables, and
Mobile Devices
Bill Byrom1, Marie McCarthy2, Peter Schueler3 and Willie Muehlhausen2
The increasing miniaturization and affordability of sensors and circuitry has led to the current level of innovation in the area
of wearable and microsensor solutions for health monitoring. This facilitates the development of solutions that can be used
to measure complex health outcomes in nonspecialist and remote settings. In this article, we review a number of
innovations related to brain monitoring including portable and wearable solutions to directly measure brain electrical
activity, and solutions measuring aspects related to brain function such as sleep patterns, gait, cognition, voice acoustics,
and gaze analysis. Despite the need for more scientific validation work, we conclude that there is enough understanding of
how to implement these approaches as exploratory tools that may provide additional valuable insights due to the rich and
frequent data they produce, to justify their inclusion in clinical study protocols.
Brain function is highly complex. As Emerson M. Pugh stated:
“If our brains were simple enough for us to understand them, we’d
be so simple that we couldn’t.”1 Consequently, a wide variety of
tools exist to assess different components and aspects of brain
activities. These include tools that directly measure brain functioning, such as via electroencephalography (EEG), and those
measuring aspects related to brain function such as sleep patterns,
gait, cognition, and gaze analysis.
In this article we focus on the emerging area of remotemonitoring sensors, wearable devices, and mHealth (mobile
health—the use of mobile devices, such as smartphones and tablet
computers, in medical care) applications, and how these might be
leveraged in large-scale clinical trials and patient monitoring
beyond marketing approval.
WEARABLE AND MOBILE APPLICATIONS

A sensor is a device or device component that detects and measures physical or chemical information from a surrounding physical environment, and translates this into an electrical output
signal.2 Microsensors are miniature sensors that have electrical
and mechanical operation components, also termed microelectromechanical systems (MEMS). These are usually produced by integrated circuit manufacturing from silicon or similar materials.

A wearable device contains one or more sensors that are integrated into clothing or other accessories that can be worn on the
body,3 such as on a wrist band, belt, headband, adhesive patch,
contact lens, or glasses. In the context of brain monitoring, a
wearable device may be, for example, a forehead headband
containing sensors able to measure EEG signals associated with the
frontal cortex. The use of reliable, high-performance microsensors
in the area of medicine is of growing importance for patient health
monitoring,4 personal wellness, and clinical research.
The miniaturization of sensors and circuitry has led to the current proliferation in wearable devices. The ability to manufacture
smaller, faster, and smarter processors and sensors has generated a
huge growth in the availability of affordable consumer devices
associated with the personal health and wellness market. The
global connected health and wellness devices market was
estimated to be $123.2 billion in 2015 and is expected to reach
$612.0 billion by 2024.5
In the consumer wellness arena, we already see wearables and
mHealth applications directed towards the monitoring and maintenance of brain health. Aspects of brain health include the way
we think, feel, play, work, recall information, and sleep. Ensuring
that we continually exercise our brains is thought to improve
these aspects of brain health, although recent research indicates

1

ICON Clinical Research, Marlow, UK; 2ICON Clinical Research, Dublin, Ireland; 3ICON Clinical Research, Cologne, Germany. Correspondence: Bill Byrom (bill.
byrom@crfhealth.com)
Received 7 December 2017; accepted 18 March 2018; advance online publication 18 April 2018. doi:10.1002/cpt.1077

CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY & THERAPEUTICS | VOLUME 104 NUMBER 1 | JULY 2018

59

this activity may be less important than other aspects such as
exercise, healthy eating, and positive social interactions.6 Braintraining applications, delivered on mobile and cloud-based web
platforms, are aimed at increasing and maintaining aspects of cognitive function. Most use game and puzzle play to test, measure,
and help to improve and maintain focus, processing speed,
memory, attention, and problem-solving skills. Popular examples
include Fit Brains Trainer (Rosetta Stone, Arlington, VA), Elevate Brain Training (Elevate, San Francisco, CA), and Lumosity
(Lumos Labs, San Francisco, CA). Importantly, the NeuroNation brain-training application (NeuroNation, Berlin, Germany)
is reimbursed by German health insurance. Some clinical research
studies have shown positive improvements of executive function
associated with brain training, for example, in reducing the cognitive deﬁcits associated with chemotherapy in breast cancer
survivors.7
Also popular in the consumer market are applications enabling
brain training through neurofeedback. Using wearable headsets
that enable EEG measurement of brain activity, it is possible to
provide immediate feedback to users in the pursuit of brain
health, in particular the combat or control of certain states or
emotions. During neurofeedback, EEG signals received are summarized and presented to the user in a simple, visual format. For
example, when training to improve attention, visual feedback
may illustrate the degree of EEG activity associated with both
efﬁcient active thinking (beta brain wave activity) and slow and
inefﬁcient brain wave activity. In normal circumstances, we have
no way of differentiating between aspects of our brain wave activity. However, providing immediate feedback through neurofeedback applications provides this immediate insight and enables the
subject, over time, to learn how to modify their brain activity,
and hence modify their brain wave patterns to consciously adjust
the pattern of activity presented on screen. The ultimate aim is
to enable the user to continue to recognize and modify brain
activity for periods of time when the device is not worn. This
kind of consumer application is commercially available for areas
of brain wave training including the management of stress and
anxiety and improving focus and concentration.8

In most cases, the solutions we consider are emerging technologies that show merit for use in clinical trials, at least in the provision of exploratory endpoints and data that support other study
endpoints measuring the same concepts of interest. We summarize the main technologies considered in Table 1, with an indication of whether there is a sufﬁcient body of validation work and
other evidence to support their use in clinical trials.
CONSIDERATIONS FOR EVIDENCE TO SUPPORT DEVICE
USE AND ENDPOINT DEVELOPMENT

In clinical trials, a study endpoint is deﬁned as a characteristic or
variable that reﬂects how a patient feels, functions, or survives.9
An endpoint description includes information deﬁning how and
when they are measured, how they are calculated, rules for missing data, and how they are analyzed. In the absence of formal regulatory guidance, the Critical Path Institute’s ePRO Consortium
reported consensus recommendations on the evidence required
to support wearable device selection and endpoints derived from
wearables data.2
When using any sensor or device to measure health outcomes
and endpoints in clinical research, it is important to demonstrate
the reliability and validity of outcome data collected, the ability
of the outcome measures to reﬂect one or more concepts of interest as deﬁned by the clinical trial objectives, and to demonstrate
the suitability and interpretability of endpoint measures derived
from these data. Some of this evidence may be available through
market clearance/certiﬁcation processes, but it is not a requirement for devices to be market cleared or certiﬁed when used in
clinical research.
Reliability

Intra- and interdevice reliability should be demonstrated by assessment of test–retest reliability using the same and different units of
the same device. Typically, this will be assessed using the intraclass
correlation coefﬁcient. To ensure reliability is maintained, device
manufacturers must be able to demonstrate that devices are
produced in adherence to a quality system to ensure equivalence of
devices between batches and with the reliability data provided.

APPLICATION TO CLINICAL TRIALS

Concurrent validity

It is feasible that the same technology could be leveraged for the
study and measurement of treatment interventions in clinical
trials. However, in our highly regulated industry, the validity of
outcomes data collected using wearable and remote devices, and
mHealth applications, must be subject to appropriate levels of
rigorous examination. This has recently been comprehensively
examined by the Critical Path Institute’s Electronic PatientReported Outcome (ePRO) Consortium who have put forward
recommendations for the evidence needed to support the
selection of a wearable device or remote sensor for use in clinical
trials to support labeling claims.2 We provide a summary of these
recommendations later in this article.
The focus of this article is on the use of wearable devices and
mobile applications that measure electrical brain activity directly,
and that measure aspects related to brain function such as sleep
patterns, cognition, gaze analysis, and speech acoustical analysis.

Concurrent validity is important to demonstrate that the
approach is truly measuring what is intended. This is typically
performed by comparing results to a gold standard methodology
that is regarded as an accurate measure of the concept of interest.

60

Content validity

It is important to demonstrate that the endpoint(s) derived are
considered important to patients and a relevant outcome within
the disease/treatment studied. In the case that outcomes are not
already well understood, this content validity can be obtained
through qualitative data collection in patients or other reporters
such as physicians or other caregivers.
Ability to detect change

Outcome measures and derived endpoints should, when used in a
clinical trial, be seen to be sensitive enough to detect change
VOLUME 104 NUMBER 1 | JULY 2018 | www.cpt-journal.com

CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY & THERAPEUTICS | VOLUME 104 NUMBER 1 | JULY 2018

61

Beddit 3 Sleep monitoring system
(Apple, Cupertino, CA)

Non-contact sleep sensor

GazeCapture (MIT, Boston, MA)

Right Eye (Bethesda, MD)

Eye tracking endpoints

Multitasking

HIGH: regular use for at-home tests

HIGH: regular use for at-home tests

HIGH: regular use for at-home tests

HIGH: regular use for multiple days

MEDIUM: use for short in-clinic
performance tests

C

B

B

C

B

C

A

B

A

B

Strength of recommendation
for clinical trial useb

The authors selected a sample from the ever growing portfolio of available devices to illustrate the level of confidence for different concepts. Grade B or C does not disqualify the device, but is only indicating that a rather
new concept is used, still requiring further validation. bA: Ready for use to derive trial endpoints based on validation evidence reported and/or existing use. B: Recommended for exploratory use and supportive data, more validation data and experience needed. C: Approach has merit but more research and evaluation is needed to make solid recommendations for use in clinical research.

a

SensoMotoric Instruments
(SMI, Teltow, Germany)

Mobile eye tracking solutions

Tobii (Stockholm, Sweden)

Project EVO (Akili Interactive Labs,
Boston, MA)

Moticon insole (Moticon GmbH,
Munich, Germany)

F-Scan system (Tekscan Inc.,
South Boston, MA)

Detailed gait measurements

HIGH: regular use for multiple days

MC10 (Boston, MA)
TM

HIGH: regular use for short in-clinic
performance tests

APDM Wearable Technologies (Portland, OR)

HIGH: regular use for short in-clinic
performance tests

HIGH: regular use for multiple days

MEDIUM: Use of periods of one or
two consecutive nights at intervals
throughout study

HIGH: regular use for short
intervals of time daily

HIGH: regular use for multiple days

HIGH: regular use for short
intervals of time daily

Usability

HIGH: regular use for multiple days

Detailed gait measurements

Sleep quality and quantity
and circadian rhythms

EEG, EOG, EMG, ECG

Sleep architecture

Sleep quality, quantity
and circadian rhythms

Event-related brain potential

Measurement(s)

McRoberts (The Hague, The Netherlands)

Kinesis Health Technologies (Dublin, Ireland)

ES contact-free sensor (EarlySense,
Ramat Gan, Israel)

Cognitive function

Gait monitoring insole

Wearable gait monitor

Sleep Profiler (Advanced Brain
Monitoring, Carlsbad, CA)

Forehead worn sleep monitor

S 1 sleep sensor (ResMed, San Diego, CA)

WatchPAT (Itamar Medical, Caesarea, Israel)

Motionwatch 8 (CamNtech, Cambridge, UK)

Actiwatch 2 (Philips Respironics,
Murrysville, PA)

Emotiv EPOC (Emotiv Inc., Sydney, Australia)

MUSE (InteraXon Inc., Toronto, Canada)

Examples of relevant devicesa

Peripheral arterial tone wrist/
hand-worn device

Wrist-worn actigraphy device

Portable EEG headband

Device type

Table 1 Remote-monitoring devices and their applicability for use in clinical trials

Figure 1 The principle of EEG-mapping.

when a change exists. This is normally demonstrated by controlled studies involving an intervention that is understood to
create a change in the outcome of interest.

subjective patient self-report, any pain study is exposed to a high
level of placebo response16 and qEEG may provide an objective
pain measurement.

Endpoint interpretability

Wearable devices to measure EEG and EP data

For an endpoint to be suitable for use in a clinical drug submission,
it is important to understand meaningful change. In other words,
it should be understood what degree of change in the endpoint
can be interpreted as clinically relevant to the patient. This may be
represented by the minimal important difference (MID) or minimally clinically important difference (MCID), or the minimal
individual change that distinguishes a responder from a nonresponder. There are well-established methodologies used to estimate
MCID and responder deﬁnition (see Ref. 10, for example).
In the remaining sections of this article, we review some of the
validation evidence supporting the use of emerging wearable and
remote monitoring technologies that aim to directly or indirectly
assess aspects of brain activity.

Wearable devices that measure EEG brain activity are worn predominantly around the forehead. Signals collected by a series of
dry electrodes are ﬁltered and interpreted by ﬁrmware within the
device, to provide a continuous EEG signal trace. In health and
wellness, mobile EEG applications are typically associated with
two main development areas. The ﬁrst uses measured brain activity to enable the user to control a product to produce a physical
action or enable communication. A good example is the “Mind
Speller” application, developed by researchers at the Catholic
University of Leuven and IMEC, Belgium.17 The second main
area, particularly for consumer applications, is development of
brain-training applications using neurofeedback as described
above.
There are a number of good examples of portable EEG headband devices (Figure 2) suitable for consumer product development of smartphone and PC applications by leveraging their
established software development kits. Examples include MUSE
(InteraXon, Toronto, Canada), Emotiv EPOC (Emotiv, Sydney,
Australia), and ZenZone (NeuroSky, San Jose, CA). The MUSE
device, for example, comprises a headband worn across the forehead that contains seven sensors positioned across the forehead
and behind each ear. Newer developments also include in-ear
EEG recording using several electrodes positioned in the outer
ear canal and on the concha by means of an ear piece. This provides the possibility of continuous recording for longer periods of
time due to good user acceptance, comfort, and discrete positioning.18 Although not initially intended for clinical research,
most devices on the market also offer software development kits
that allow researchers to access the raw signal data for research
purposes.
Providing a highly portable solution that can be used to collect
frequent data from patients in remote settings, such as the home,
and continuous mobile monitoring promises the translation of
neuroscientiﬁc knowledge into clinical and daily life applications.19 However, the reliability, accuracy, and precision of EEG
trace data collected in this way must be examined to ensure that

ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHY (EEG) AND EVOKED
POTENTIALS (EP)

The ﬁrst scientist to record human EEG data was Hans Berger in
1924.11 Since then, its fundamental principle has not changed.
Electrodes placed typically on the scalp measure voltage ﬂuctuations resulting from ionic current ﬂows within the neurons of the
brain as a result of brain activity. Signals are ﬁltered and computerized analysis helps with the visualization of the recordings, known
as quantitative EEG (qEEG) or EEG-mapping (Figure 1).
EEG mapping has found some application in clinical research
to explore the pattern of brain activity resulting from psychotropic drugs and mental disorders,12 which have typical signatures in
qEEG, but this has not been accepted as a surrogate endpoint in
central nervous system (CNS) clinical drug development. The
“pharmaco-EEG,” i.e., the analysis of different EEG patterns
under the inﬂuence of psychotropic pharmaceuticals, still has
some place in the determination of cerebral bioavailability utilizing time- and dose-efﬁcacy relations, as well as the evaluation of
bioequipotency of different formulations of compounds.13–15
One further potential application of qEEG is the analysis of
different EEG patterns under different external stimuli and sensations such as pain. Since pain is typically assessed based on
62

VOLUME 104 NUMBER 1 | JULY 2018 | www.cpt-journal.com

Figure 2 The EMOTIV EPOC EEG device. Image reproduced with permission of Emotiv Inc, Sydney, Australia.

they are ﬁt for use to provide exploratory data in clinical trials
and regulatory submissions. One key difference is in the number
of electrodes and the way they attach to the skin. A conventional
clinic-based EEG is typically recorded using 21 electrodes
positioned across the scalp. This enables electrical activity to be
detected across much of the brain regions (Figure 1). However, a
forehead headband device, for example, relies predominantly on
measurement from the frontal cortex and on a well-ﬁtting device
to ensure electrodes are held in contact correctly and do not
detach or generate electrical disturbances that may affect the
EEG measurement through movement. Device ﬁrmware, however, may be able to identify and ﬁlter out some electrical disturbances detected.
Only a small quantity of research has been reported to validate
the reliability of these systems for event-related brain potential
(ERP) research.20–28 Research to date, however, has shown the
promise of these techniques. A study using the Emotiv EPOC
headband solution compared continuous EEG measurements
using the portable headband and a research-grade EEG device
(Neuroscan v. 4.3), using an EEG electrode cap (EasyCap,
Herrsching, Germany) ﬁtted with 14 Ag-AgCl electrodes.21 The
Emotive EPOC EEG Headset samples the EEG signal at a rate
of 120 samples per second from 14 different electrodes, and its
ﬁrmware ﬁlters out artifacts outside the bandwidth range of
0.2–45 Hz. The authors reported very good concordance between
the systems for the P1, N1, P2, N2, and P3 ERP peaks in 19 6–
12-year-old children under passive and active listening conditions. While the proportion of accepted measurement epochs was
CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY & THERAPEUTICS | VOLUME 104 NUMBER 1 | JULY 2018

lower using the headset in comparison to the Neuroscan device,
likely due to the differences in stability of electrode placement,
there were sufﬁcient acceptable epochs measured with the Emotiv
headband to provide reliable ERPs. This study showed greater
association between headband and full EEG system measurements, in comparison to an earlier study that showed only moderate associations when measured in adults.20
A validation study using the MUSE technology showed that the
portable headband was able to accurately quantify the N200,
P300, and reward positivity ERP components in two experimental
paradigms.27 These tests were conducted rapidly (taking less than
10 minutes to perform), illustrating the utility of low-cost portable
EEG systems in the conduct of ﬁeld and clinical research.
Artifact and noise ﬁltering is an important aspect of obtaining
reliable data from portable EEG headsets. The causes of biological artifacts include eyelid and eye movement, pulse artifacts due
to electrode placement close to blood vessel, frontal scalp muscle
activity, head or body movements, and sweat/skin artifacts caused
by changes in skin potential.26 Many of these are easily differentiated from the EEG and can be removed by ﬁltering, although
eyelid and eye movement artifacts are more difﬁcult but can be
controlled by ﬁxed gaze or subtracting eye artifacts by measurement using electrodes on or near the eyebrows. This was illustrated by one study using the MUSE and Neurosky headbands,
which were unable to detect blinking signals.26 Common sources
of technical artifacts include electrostatic and electromagnetic
interference.
We consider the use of portable headset and earpiece devices
for the measurement of EEG data remotely and/or continuously
as an emerging opportunity where more research is needed to
demonstrate the reliability and validity of data collected in this
way (Table 1). Particular opportunity areas are discussed below.
Pain measurement

EEG data has been successfully used to provide objective measurement of pain.29 Increased alpha and theta power at spontaneous EEG and low amplitudes of ERP during various stimuli seem
to be clinical characteristics of individuals with chronic pain.30
PainQx (New York, NY) uses research-grade and portable EEG
to assess neural brain activity and uses proprietary algorithms to
interpret and describe the patient’s pain state. This objective
measurement of pain may be useful alongside traditional selfassessment scales and patient-reported outcomes instruments,
and may be useful in evaluating the real-time effects of analgesic
and narcotic drugs.
Using EEG-mapping, PainQx provides quantitative measures
of activity in different regions of the brain that are involved in
the sensation and perception of pain, termed the “Pain Matrix,”
ﬁltering out areas not related to the sensation and perception of
pain. Areas of interest are isolated, identiﬁed, correlated, and
weighted to produce an objective measurement of a patient’s pain
state. This approach seems to allow a differentiation between
high and low pain condition in chronic pain—similar to the use
of heart rate in acute pain. Future research will show whether it
may also help to more reliably identify responders than current
subjective pain scales.
63

Alzheimer’s disease

PORTABLE SLEEP ASSESSMENT TECHNOLOGIES

ERPs may also provide objective information about processes in
the brain. In a typical ERP protocol, a stimulus sequence of frequent (standard) and infrequent (target) tones are played, and an
unexpected (distractor) tone is included occasionally. The subject
is instructed to respond on hearing the infrequent target tone.
This protocol generates a waveform that consists of a series of
ERP components that produce positive and negative deﬂections
in the ERP waveform. This provides a direct measure of cortical
synaptic activity, indexing sensory and cognitive processes. The
P300 component (a positive deﬂection 300 ms after the target
tone) reﬂects attention and working memory and has been
shown to be useful in detecting clinically relevant changes in
cognitive function in Alzheimer’s disease patients.31 ERPs provide a real-time physiological measure of fundamental cognitive
processes, which can be used in proof-of-concept studies, but also
is not yet accepted as a surrogate endpoint in pivotal trials.

We spend a third of our lives asleep; it is an essential element of all
of our lives. It is well established that there is a bimodal relationship between sleep disturbance and clinical disease both in terms
of cause and effect. While there is still signiﬁcant debate as to the
deﬁnition, diagnosis, and measurement of sleep, perhaps the simplest deﬁnition of sleep focuses on the behavioral deﬁnition that
describes sleep as “a reversible behavioral state of perceptual disengagement from and unresponsiveness to the environment.”35
Measuring aspects of sleep and its effect can be important in clinical drug development where improvements or worsening in sleep
may be observed as a direct or indirect response to treatment. Different objective measurements of aspects of sleep may be important,
depending on the concept of interest for the clinical investigation.
Measures of sleep architecture and sleep continuity may be beneﬁcial
in the monitoring of brain health related to neurodegenerative disorders. Sleep spindles (short bursts of high-frequency brain activity)
during nonrapid eye movement sleep have been shown to relate to
cognitive decline in Parkinson’s disease, and reduced slow wave sleep
is associated with Alzheimer’s disease.36

Traumatic brain injury/contusion

Another ﬁeld currently lacking a sufﬁciently easy to use and objective measure of disease stage and outcome is mild brain contusion, a
traumatic event occurring frequently during sporting activities such
as American football, rugby, and soccer. Today, the diagnosis and
management of contusion is performed using subjective tools and
self-reports of symptoms limiting the clinical impact of these tests.
However, companies such as Cerora (Bethlehem, PA) have developed biosensors, mainly based on EEG methodology, which when
used together with traditional cognitive tests empower researchers
and clinicians to make better and more informed decisions about
disease stage and outcomes.32,33 However, no data yet exist which
would support this concept, thus the speciﬁcity and sensitivity of the
approach remains uncertain.
Epilepsy

Mobile EEG may facilitate long-term monitoring in an outpatient or home environment. If usage for reasonably long periods
can be enabled through unobtrusive wearable devices, this longterm monitoring ability may be particularly interesting in the
study of epilepsy, where seizure incidence is unpredictable and
needs to be recorded outside the clinic environment. This kind
of continuous monitoring data may be valuable in the detection
and characterization of seizures, the recognition of subtle seizures
that may otherwise go unrecognized by the patient, or determining seizure incidence in the event that a patient presents with
seizure-like symptoms. Due to the importance of monitoring and
characterizing seizure incidence in clinical trials to assess new
interventions, the ability to generate objective data through continuous monitoring will be of great value. Long-term EEG measurement in an ambulatory setting has already shown promise in
the assessment of patients who are difﬁcult to diagnose or manage following evaluation of routine in-clinic EEG assessments.
Examples include: differentiating between nocturnal epilepsy and
other sleep disorders such as abnormal movements during sleep,
and accurate characterization of seizure and frequency.34
Currently, more work is needed to understand if this is a reliable,
valid, and practically feasible approach.
64

Sleep outcome measures/parameters

Sleep architecture refers to the basic structural organization of
normal sleep. Normal adult sleep consists of alternating periods
of rapid eye movement (REM) and non-REM (N-REM) sleep,
with N-REM sleep accounting for 75–80% of the sleep period.
Sleep consists of four episodes or stages of N-REM sleep followed
by REM sleep, the N-REM and REM sleep cycles being progressively longer throughout the course of the full night’s sleep cycle.
In addition to sleep architecture, sleep quality, sleep quantity,
circadian rhythmicity, sleep consolidation, regularity, and napping are also important factors in assessing sleep and wake patterns. The following outcome measures are commonly estimated
to assess sleep quality and quantity: sleep onset latency, wake after
sleep onset, sleep efﬁciency, number of awakenings, and total
sleep time.
Depending on the sleep parameter under investigation, there
are different technologies and methodologies that can be
employed. An important consideration in technology selection is
the recommendations from the International Classiﬁcation of
Sleep Assessment.37 These are generally adopted by the biopharmaceutical industry in the conduct of clinical development
programs, and have particular importance where sleep data will
be used as a primary or secondary endpoint in a regulatory new
drug application.
Polysomnography

Polysomnography (PSG) has been considered the gold standard
technology for measuring sleep architecture. PSG is a simultaneous multiparametric assessment that is carried out overnight
and consists of the following physiological parameters: EEG, electrooculography (EOG), and surface electromyography (EMG). It
can also include measurement of pulse oximetry, respiratory
effort, and core temperature. Because of its complexity and the
quantity of instrumentation needed, PSG has until recently been
VOLUME 104 NUMBER 1 | JULY 2018 | www.cpt-journal.com

Figure 3 An actogram showing changes in daily activity and sleep patterns. Black bars represent periods of activity. Shaded blue areas represent
resting/sleep periods. Image reproduced with permission of Philips Respironics, Murrysville, PA.

Actigraphy is the use of an accelerometer to measure gross motor
movements and is based on the simple premise that when there is
no activity the probability is that the individual is asleep, and
when there is movement the probability is that the individual is
awake38 (Figure 3). The use of accelerometers to identify sleep
and rest patterns dates back to the 1970s.39 Since its conception,

a number of devices have been developed with sophisticated algorithms that ﬁlter ambient noise and have been validated against
PSG in their ability to reliably assess certain sleep parameters,
leading to its use as a tool to assess sleep quality and quantity outside of the clinical laboratory setting.40 The low-burden nature of
the technology, its suitability as a means of capturing real-life
sleep and activity data over weeks and months has meant that
this technology is widely used both by the research community
and in drug development to assess changes in sleep and activity
patterns.
Actigraphy has been demonstrated to provide good sleep
parameter estimates to assess sleep quality, quantity, and circadian
rhythms,41 but it is not a validated technology for assessing sleep
architecture (REM and N-REM Sleep). Actigraphy-determined
sleep is highly correlated with PSG outcomes in normal adults
(>90%),42 but less so for other populations such as insomniacs,
where the correlation can be as low as 50% for some of the
parameters such as sleep onset latency.41,43 Different devices and
their associated ﬁrmware and software have different sensitivities
to immobility and movement. Sensitivity to immobility allows
the device to identify periods of sleep. Sensitivity to mobility

CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY & THERAPEUTICS | VOLUME 104 NUMBER 1 | JULY 2018

65

restricted to specialized sleep laboratories and requires skilled
sleep laboratory technicians for analysis and interpretation.
Despite being considered a gold standard, it is not without limitations for use in clinical development, in particular the cost and
the need to access heavily subscribed specialist laboratory services.
A major issue is the “ﬁrst night affect,” where subjects sleeping in
an abnormal environment may affect the sleep parameters measured. In addition, the manual assessment of data can result in
high interrater variability in assessments.
To overcome the cost and specialist services needed with PSG,
much attention has been given to alternative approaches and
technology to facilitate the assessment of sleep in nonclinical settings. We review the key technologies below.
Remote sleep assessment: Actigraphy

pulse rate, air ﬂow, respiratory movement/effort, and oxygen saturation, its use can be expensive and may require specialist teams
to manage and implement. A practical alternative device, Sleep
Proﬁler (Advanced Brain Monitoring, Carlsbad, CA), is worn on
the forehead overnight and measures EEG, EOG, EMG, ECG,
pulse rate, head position, head movement, and snoring incidence
using a variety of sensors held in place with a headband
(Figure 4). Studies have successfully demonstrated the concurrent validity of sleep biomarkers recorded using data from only
one or two nights in comparison to PSG,36 indicating the
validity of the approach for use in clinical or research applications. This enables the monitoring of sleep architecture and
continuity for multiple nights at home, or for continuous periods in an ICU. Automated sleep staging algorithms associated
with the use of Sleep Proﬁler have been shown to provide reliable results in comparison to manual ratings.36,48,49
Noncontact sensor technology

Figure 4 Sleep Profiler EEG device to assess sleep architecture and continuity. Image reproduced with permission of Advanced Brain Monitoring,
Carlsbad, CA.

allows the device to identify periods of wakefulness. In general,
actigraphy devices are very good predictors of sleep, but less
sensitive to wakefulness, and as a result can overestimate total
sleep time. When selecting a device for use in a clinical trial, it is
important to ensure that the device has been validated in the
population being studied.
Actigraphy with additional physiological channels

More recently, some newer actigraphy devices also incorporate
the capability to measure additional physiological parameters
such as heart rate, respiration rate, galvanic skin response, skin
temperature, and pulse oximetry. This has enabled the assessment
of sleep architecture in addition to sleep quality and quantity.
One example among this class of devices is the WatchPAT (Itamar Medical, Caesarea, Israel) which measures peripheral arterial
tone (PAT), along with actigraphy and other measures. While
developed for home-based assessment of sleep apnea,44–46 there is
emerging research suggesting that good agreement between PAT
and polysomnography data, and that speciﬁc PAT patterns can
be observed during different sleep stages, which enables the recognition of REM and N-REM sleep, including detection of lighter
stages from deeper, slow wave sleep.46,47
Ambulatory PSG and EEG

While it is possible to conduct more extensive testing in the
home environment using ambulatory PSG that can monitor and
record a number of aspects including EEG, EOG, EMG, ECG,
66

A new class of sleep assessment tools have recently emerged that
claim to measure sleep parameters without the requirement to be
worn.
The Beddit 3 Sleep monitoring system (Apple, Cupertino,
CA) uses a ﬂexible piezoelectric ﬁlm sensor that is placed beneath
the bed sheet. This is able to measure the forces caused by the
body on the bed to detect tiny movements that can be interpreted to estimate pulse (heart pumping), breathing effort (thorax extension), and overall body movement. Validation work
comparing heart rate estimates to ECG50 and breathing effort to
the respiration effort signal in PSG51 show some promise but
more work is needed. The Beddit system uses a BlueTooth connection with a mobile phone hub to transmit the data to a central server and apply algorithms to estimate heart rate, respiratory
variation, activity, sleep stages, and stress reactions. A validation
study of a similar piezoelectric sensor device, the ES contact-free
sensor (EarlySense, Ramat Gan, Israel) showed good reliability of
total sleep time estimates compared to PSG.52
A second approach, the S 1 sleep sensor (ResMed, San Diego,
CA), uses a bedside sleep monitor to detect ultralow-power radiofrequency waves to monitor the movements of the subject in bed,
such as the expansion and relaxation of the chest during respiration, and overall body movements such as positional changes,
arm twitches, and shrugs. The device uses novel proprietary algorithms to identify sleep stages (wake (W), light sleep (N1, N2
sleep), deep sleep (N3 sleep), REM or N-REM). Robust validation work is needed for this approach to be of use in clinical
research (Table 1).
GAIT ASSESSMENT

Assessment of gait provides signiﬁcant insights into the progression and treatment of neurodegenerative diseases. For example,
the predictive value of gait abnormalities as a risk factor for the
development of dementia has been identiﬁed,53 and more
recently, evidence from clinical practice and epidemiological studies show that gait and cognition are interrelated.54 Similar associations have been identiﬁed in Parkinson’s disease, where an
VOLUME 104 NUMBER 1 | JULY 2018 | www.cpt-journal.com

Figure 5 Moticon insole system for gait analysis. Image reproduced with permission of Moticon GmbH, Munich, Germany.

association between global cognitive function and pace-related
measures of gait, turning, and postural sway has been identiﬁed.55
In-clinic assessment of temporal and spatial gait parameters
can be achieved using performance tests conducted on pressure
pad systems such as GaitRITE (CIR Systems, Franklin, NJ) and
Zeno Walkway (ProtoKinetics, Havertown, PA), or using 3D
motion capture solutions such as the Vicon marker-based camera
system (Vicon Motion Systems, Oxford, UK). These solutions
provide robust gait parameter estimates, but often require
conduct at specialist centers, which may limit the scale at which
they can be used in clinical trials.
Alternative approaches, measuring gait parameters remotely in
free-living settings, may provide a richer and more informative
picture of gait in comparison to a clinic performance snapshot.56
Newer approaches that facilitate the collection of robust, objective, and sensitive measurements of a variety of gait parameters
include the capability to measure both in-clinic or outside the
clinic setting. The rich data that these provide may enable establishment of new and more responsive gait endpoints. Kinesis
Health Technologies (Dublin, Ireland), McRoberts (The Hague,
The Netherlands), APDM Wearable Technologies (Portland,
OR), and MC10 (Boston, MA) offer easy-to-use in-clinic and
remote systems for objective assessment and estimation of gait
parameters such as cadence, gait speed, double support, lateral
step variability, foot strike angle, toe off angle, stance, step duration, stride length, swing velocity, and toe out angle. Most employ
multiply located sensors along with algorithms to interpret simultaneous signals to provide gait parameters and assessments.
Promising areas of innovation include the embedding of pressure sensors and accelerometers into footwear insoles such as the
F-Scan system (Tekscan, South Boston, MA) and Moticon’s insole
(Moticon, Munich, Germany) (Figure 5). These approaches, in
addition to other e-textile applications, may provide a patientcentric approach to enable the collection of gait assessment data in
a frictionless manner in free-living settings. Studies using the Moticon sensor-instrumented insole solution, for example, have demonstrated good validation and reliability of gait parameters
collected.57,58 In addition, the use of the 3D depth cameras associated with motion-based gaming platforms and other applications
CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY & THERAPEUTICS | VOLUME 104 NUMBER 1 | JULY 2018

to track 3D joint coordinates and movements, such as Microsoft
Kinect (Redmond, WA) and Intel RealSense (Santa Clara, CA) have
shown promise in measuring gait parameters based on simple inclinic performance tests, reducing reliance on specialist centers.59,60
One limitation of the collection of rich free-living gait assessment data is the understanding of the context associated with the
data. Changes in external factors such as terrain, footwear, clothing, the size and shape of living space, ease of access to outside
spaces, and the weather all may potentially impact remote gait
assessment.
COGNITIVE FUNCTION TESTING

Cognition is the ability to perceive and react, process, and
understand, store, and retrieve information, make decisions, and
produce appropriate responses.61 Many mental disorders are
associated with disrupted cognitive function such as dysfunctions
of attention, concentration, and memory. Cognitive function
testing can help to identify which brain mechanisms are involved
in the symptoms, and can help determine, and assess the impact
of, treatment. Cognitive function in clinical trials is traditionally
measured in laboratory conditions using a battery of computerized tests, for example, using the CDR (Bracket, Arlington,
VA) 62 and CANTAB (Cambridge Cognition, Cambridge, UK)63
systems.
Nonlaboratory measurement of cognition

While a huge body of work exists validating the use of the main
cognitive function testing platforms in the study of many CNS
and other conditions, including the collection of large banks of
normative data to provide reference, for practical reasons laboratory tests are typically limited to smaller studies and infrequent
assessment. More recently, approaches to testing have been developed that enable more frequent assessment in nonlaboratory settings and in larger groups of patients. This offers the possibility
of continued testing in clinical trials and postmarket evaluations.
Some approaches to the measurement of reaction times, memory, and problem-solving have been executed through the context
of video game play, leveraging smartphone and tablet technology.
Project:Evo, for example, is a game application developed by Akili
Interactive Labs (Boston, MA) that can be used to measure and
67

Figure 6 A volunteer wearing an EEG cap in front to the Tobii Pro Spectrum eye tracking platform. Image reproduced with permission of Acuity ETS Ltd.,
Reading, UK.

improve interference processing, a key component of executive
function. The premise of the game, which operates on mobile
phones and tablets, is to provide an environment where a player’s
ability to process out distractions during the focused conduct of a
speciﬁc action can be assessed and measured. It is intended to be
an engaging alternative to conventional cognitive test batteries.64
This game platform is currently being tested in a variety of global
clinical studies in multiple patient populations, including attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), autism, depression,
and traumatic brain injury. Pﬁzer (New York, NY), for example,
has reported that outcomes measures derived from gameplay on
the platform were able to distinguish between amyloid-positive
older healthy subjects vs. an age-matched comparison group of
amyloid-negative subjects; suggesting the game may be valuable as
a noninvasive biomarker for Alzheimer’s disease screening and
tracking.65 Shire (Dublin, Ireland) is also funding investigations
on the use of the game in ADHD clinical trials.
Smartphones offer great potential to present visual cognitive
function tests in a remote setting. Initial work has shown the
approach can provide reliable estimates of aspects of cognitive
function and good concurrent validity when compared to gold
standard approaches.66 The Apple ResearchKit provides a platform to develop a variety of patient performance tests and assessments, including a number of tests of cognition such as the paced
visual serial addition test, a spatial memory test, and a simple
reaction time test.67 While some basic validation work has been
reported on the use of these tests,68 more work is required to
demonstrate reliable and valid measurement.
Wearable devices, in particular smart watches, may also offer
the ability to frequently deliver and measure simple tests of cognition in a remote setting. Cambridge Cognition has expanded
their laboratory-based testing solutions to include remote testing
via a wearable device. A preliminary study of a two-back symbol
memory test delivered on the Microsoft Band 2 provided data
that supports the feasibility of cognitive assessment on wearable
devices.69
68

EYE TRACKING

Eye-tracking measures provide valuable, noninvasive insights into
brain function and cognition. For example, gaze analysis is useful
in assessing attention and cognitive strategies; pupil dilation is
modulated by noradrenaline and is related to arousal and mental
activity; and blink rate is modulated by dopamine, which is
related to learning and goal-oriented behavior.70
Pupillometry has increasing value as a marker of physiological
state. Pupil diameter ﬂuctuations have been shown to track rapid
changes in adrenergic and cholinergic activity in the cortex in animal models,71 and to provide a measure of task disinterest in
studies of mental fatigue and task disassociation.72
Spontaneous blink rate can provide an indirect measure of
dopamine activity in the CNS,73 and reductions in blink rate are
observed with the administration of dopamine receptor antagonists.74 Studies on infants have shown that eye movement can be
used as an early diagnostic tool for autism diagnosis; with children on the autistic spectrum favoring focusing on images of geometric design rather than those of human faces.75
Measuring ﬁxation stability and saccadic movements (rapid
movements of the eyes that abruptly change the point of ﬁxation)
have been shown to have clinical signiﬁcance for a number of
CNS disorders such as Huntington’s disease, progressive supranuclear palsy, and Parkinson’s disease.76 In the early stages of
dementia, saccadic eye movement recording may help discriminate between Lewy body dementia and Alzheimer’s disease.77
Eye tracking is gaining increasing interest as a potential biomarker for brain injury. Studies assessing treatments in traumatic
brain injury are difﬁcult to conduct for various reasons, including
heterogeneity in the study population due to the lack of accurate
diagnosis and classiﬁcation schemes, and the lack of robust objective outcome measures. One of the reasons for the failure of the
ProTECT III and SyNAPSe clinical trials of progesterone treatment of acute traumatic brain injury was cited as a lack of adequate
biomarkers for brain injury.78 Eye tracking, however, has been proposed as an objective biomarker for brain injury and concussion.79
VOLUME 104 NUMBER 1 | JULY 2018 | www.cpt-journal.com

Portable eye tracking technology

Eye tracking is still the preserve of a small number of specialist
companies that supply validated eye-tracking technology; SensoMotoric Instruments (SMI, Teltow, Germany; now owned by
Apple) and Tobii (Stockholm, Sweden) are considered leaders in
this space. Both offer lab-based camera systems (Figure 6) and
more portable solutions by incorporating their technology into
glasses and virtual reality headsets. Right Eye (Bethesda, MD) is a
newer eye tracking provider with a cloud-based solution, and has
been shown to provide reliable estimates of some eye-tracking
parameters.80
Researchers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, the
University of Georgia, and the Max Planck Institute for Informatics have developed a mobile application, GazeCapture, operating on Apple mobile devices, which displays a sequence of dots
that the user is able to track and ﬁxate. The mobile device’s
front-facing camera simultaneously captures eye movements
during the performance task. The associated machine-learning
algorithms have been shown to be capable of robustly predicting
gaze with low errors on both smartphone and tablet devices,81
and this approach enables the collection of rich eye-tracking performance test data remotely in large-scale studies.
The increasing use of eye tracking to assess consumer behavior,
and its use in gaming platforms and Virtual Reality, means significant continued investment in the technology solutions servicing
this area. This is likely to result in increasing capabilities and
mobile-enablement of eye-tracking technology, which will beneﬁt
applications for clinical research.
VOICE ACOUSTICAL ANALYSIS

An area of ongoing research involves the capture and acoustical
analysis of the speech patterns of patients. Studies of voice acoustical analysis of patients with extremely early-stage Parkinson’s
disease suggested that voice acoustical changes can be good predictors of early onset of the disease.82 In depression, certain voice
acoustical parameters such as speaking rate and pitch variability
have been shown to correlate well with conventional measures of
disease severity such as the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale.83
A methodology study comparing the acoustical measures made
from recordings obtained using state-of-the-art laboratory recording equipment and simultaneous recording over the telephone
using an Interactive Voice Response system indicated that the
data obtained by both methods were highly comparable, enabling
the possibility of large-scale longitudinal testing from home settings.84 More recently, phonation tests for Parkinson’s disease
patients have been developed in clinical research mobile apps
using both Apple ResearchKit67 and on the Android platform.85–87 This opens the possibility of using such inexpensive
techniques in large-scale clinical trials.

monitoring, as described in this article, these developments are
leading to opportunities to develop and leverage innovative devices to make measurements normally conﬁned to the clinic. Rapid
technological developments can be seen in the area of portable
EEG monitoring, and in other areas related to brain function
including sleep assessment, gait analysis, cognitive function testing, eye tracking, and voice analysis.
Aside from the measurement of sleep parameters by wrist actigraphy, which already provides well-accepted endpoints for clinical
trials, the technologies described in this article are emerging and
the subject of continued research providing validation and utility
evidence. It is acknowledged that more research is needed to better understand the reliability and validity of these emerging technologies, and to generate the required understanding of new
endpoints derived from their data. Despite this, there is enough
understanding of how to implement these approaches as exploratory tools, which may provide additional valuable insights due
to the rich and frequent data they produce, to justify their inclusion in clinical study protocols.
FUNDING
No funding was received for this work.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare no competing interests for this work.
C 2018 The Authors. Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics published by
V

Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of American Society for Clinical
Pharmacology and Therapeutics
This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial License, which permits use, distribution and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited and
is not used for commercial purposes.

The rapid developments in the wearable device and remote sensor market are driven predominantly by the miniaturization of
sensors and circuitry and the improvements in functionality and
processing power of mobile devices such as smartphones and
tablet computers. In the area of health, and speciﬁcally in brain

Pugh, G.E. The Biological Origin of Human Values. Abingdon-onThames, UK: Routledge & Kegan Paul; 1978.
2. Byrom, B. et al. Selection of and evidentiary considerations for
wearable devices and their measurements for use in regulatory
decision making: recommendations from the ePRO Consortium.
Value Health (in press).
3. Wright, R. & Keith, L. Wearable technology: If the tech fits, wear it. J.
Electron. Resources Med. Libraries 11, 204–216 (2014).
4. Tsoukalas, D., Chatzandroulis, S. & Goustouridis, D. Capacitive
microsensors for biomedical applications. In: Encyclopedia of Medical
Devices and Instrumentation (ed. Webster, J.G.) 1–12. Hoboken, NJ:
John Wiley & Sons; 2006.
5. Grand View Research. Connected health and wellness devices
market report. August 2016.
6. Souders, D.J., Boot, W.R., Blocker, K., Vitale, T. & Roque, N.A.,
Charness, N. Evidence for narrow transfer after short-term cognitive
training in older adults. Front. Aging Neurosci. 9, 41–50 (2017).
7. Kesler, S. et al. Cognitive training for improving executive function in
chemotherapy-treated breast cancer survivors. Clin. Breast Cancer
13, 299–306 (2013).
8. Byrom, B. Brain monitoring devices in clinical trials. App. Clin. Trials
<http://www.appliedclinicaltrialsonline.com/brain-monitoring-devices-clinical-trials> (2015). Accessed 28 November 2017.
9. Biomarkers Definitions Working Group. Biomarkers and surrogate
endpoints: Preferred definitions and conceptual framework. Clin.
Pharmacol. Ther. 69, 89–95 (2001).
10. Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for Industry: PatientReported Outcome Measures—Use in Medical Product Development
to Support Labeling Claims. <http://www.fda.gov/downloads/
Drugs/.../Guidances/UCM193282.pdf> (2009). Accessed 14
November 2017.

CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY & THERAPEUTICS | VOLUME 104 NUMBER 1 | JULY 2018

69

CONCLUSION

1.

11. Collura, T.F. History and evolution of electroencephalographic
instruments and techniques. J. Clin. Neurophysiol. 10, 476–504
(1993).
12. Saletu, B. Pharmaco-EEG profiles of typical and atypical
antidepressants. Adv. Biochem. Psychopharmacol. 32, 257–268
(1982).
€nberger, J. Topographic
13. Saletu, B., Anderer, P., Kinsperger, K. & Gru
brain mapping of EEG in neuropsychopharmacology. Part II. Clinical
applications (pharmaco EEG imaging). Methods Find. Exp. Clin.
Pharmacol. 9, 385–408 (1987).
14. Jobert, M. et al. Guidelines for the recording and evaluation of
pharmaco-EEG data in man: the International Pharmaco-EEG Society
(IPEG). Neuropsychobiology 66, 201–220 (2012).
15. Jobert, M. et al. Guidelines for the recording and evaluation of
pharmaco-sleep studies in man: the International Pharmaco-EEG
Society (IPEG). Neuropsychobiology 67, 127–167 (2013).
16. Waber, R.L., Shiv, B., Carmon, Z. & Ariely, D. Commercial features of
placebo and therapeutic efficacy. JAMA 299, 1016–1017 (2008).
17. Katholic University of Leuven. Campus Insight Magazine. <www.
kuleuven.be/ci/28/28.pdf> (May 2010). Accessed 28 November
2017.
18. Looney, D.P. et al. The in-the-ear recording concept user-centered and
wearable brain monitoring. IEEE Pulse 3, 32–42 (2012).
19. Bleichner, M.G. et al. Exploring miniaturized EEG electrodes for braincomputer interfaces. An EEG you do not see? Physiol. Rep. 3, 1–9
(2015).
20. Badcock, N.A., Mousikou, P., Mahajan, Y., de Lissa, P., Thie, J. &
McArthur, G. Validation of the Emotiv EPOC EEG gaming system for
measuring research quality auditory ERPs. PeerJ 1, e38 (2013).
21. Badcock, N.A. et al. Validation of the Emotiv EPOC EEG system for
research quality auditory event-related potentials in children. PeerJ 3,
e907 (2015).
22. Debener, S., Minow, F., Emkes, R., Gandras, K. & de Vos, M. How
about taking a low-cost, small, and wireless EEG for a walk?,
Psychophysiology 49, 1617–1621 (2012).
23. Duvinage, M., Castermans, T., Petieau, M., Hoellinger, T., Cheron, G.
& Dutoit, T. Performance of the Emotiv Epoc headset for P300-based
applications. Biomed. Eng. Online 12, 56–70 (2013).
24. Wascher, E., Heppner, H. & Hoffmann, S. Towards the measurement
of event-related EEG activity in real-life working environments. Int. J.
Psychophysiol. 91, 3–9 (2014).
25. Gramann, K., Ferris, D.P., Gwin, J. & Makeiq, S. Imaging natural
cognition in action. Int. J. Psychophysiol. 91, 22–29 (2014).
26. Maskeliunas, R., Damasevicius, R., Martisius, I. & Vasiljevas, M.
Consumer-grade EEG devices: are they usable for control tasks?
PeerJ 4, e1746 (2016).
27. Krigolson, O.E., Williams, C.C., Norton, A., Hassall, C.D. & Colino,
F.L. Choosing MUSE: Validation of a low-cost, portable EEG system
for ERP research. Front. Neurosci. 11, 109–118 (2017).
28. Kuziek, J.W., Shienh, A. & Mathewson, K.E. Transitioning EEG
experiments away from the laboratory using a Raspberry Pi 2. J.
Neurosci. Methods 277, 75–82 (2017).
29. Prichep, L.S., John, E.R., Howard, B., Merkin, H. & Hiesiger, E.M.
Evaluation of the pain matrix using EEG source localization: a
feasibility study. Pain Med. 12, 1241–1248 (2011).
30. dos Santos Pinheiro, E.S. et al. Electroencephalographic patterns in
chronic pain: a systematic review of the literature. PLoS ONE 11:
e0149085 (2016).
31. Drago, V. et al. Disease tracking markers for Alzheimer’s disease at
the prodromal (MCI) stage. J. Alzheimers Dis. 26, 159–199 (2011).
32. Simon, A.J. & Devilbiss, D.M. Sports concussion and mild traumatic
brain injury assessment is enhanced with portable, non-invasive
biosensor arrays. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 47, 11 (2015).
33. Simon, A.J. & Devilbiss, D.M. multivariate models of biosensor data
to actively assess sports concussion and mild traumatic brain injury.
Neurology 86, 011 (2016)
34. Smith, S.M.J. EEG in the diagnosis, classification and management
of patients with epilepsy. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 76, ii2–ii7
(2005).
35. Carskadon, M.A. & Dement, W.C. Monitoring and staging human
sleep. In: Principles and Practice of Sleep Medicine, 5th ed. (eds.
Kryger, M.H., Roth, T., & Dement, W.C.) 16–26. St. Louis, MO:
Elsevier Saunders; 2011.
70

36. Levendowski, D., Ferini-Strambi, L., Gamaldo, C., Cetel, M.,
Rosenberg, R. & Westbrook, P.R. The accuracy, night-to-night
variability, and stability of frontopolar sleep electroencephalography
biomarkers. Clin. Sleep Med. 13, 791–803 (2017).
37. Institute of Medicine (US) Committee on Sleep Medicine and
Research. Sleep physiology. In: Sleep Disorders and Sleep
Deprivation: An Unmet Public Health Problem (eds. Colten, H.R. &
Altevogt, B.M.) 33–54. Washington, DC: National Academies Press;
2006.
38. Schenck, C.H., Mahowald, M.W. & Sack, R.L. Assessment and
management of insomnia. JAMA 289, 2475–2479 (2003).
39. Kripke, D.F., Mullaney, D.J., Messin, S. & Wyborney, V.G. Wrist
actigraphic measures of sleep and rhythms. Electroencephalogr. Clin.
Neurophysiol. 44, 674–676 (1978).
40. Morgenthaler, T. et al. Practice parameters for the use of actigraphy
in the assessment of sleep and sleep disorders: an update for 2007.
Sleep 30, 519–529 (2007).
41. Martin, J.L. & Hakim, A.D. Wrist actigraphy. Chest 139, 1514–1527
(2011).
42. Ancoli-Israel, S., Cole, R., Alessi, C., Chamber, M., Moorcroft, W. &
Pollak, C.P. The role of actigraphy in the study of sleep and circadian
rhythms. Sleep 26, 342–392 (2003).
43. Sivertsen, B. et al. A comparison of actigraphy and polysomnography
in older adults treated for chronic primary insomnia. Sleep 29, 1353–
1358 (2006).
44. Yalamanchali, S., Farajian, V., Hamilton, C., Pott, T.R., Samuelson,
C.G. & Friedman, M. Diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea by
peripheral arterial tonometry: meta-analysis. JAMA Otolaryngol. Head
Neck Surg. 139, 1343–1350 (2013).
45. Pinto, J.A., Mello de Goday, L.B., Ribeiro, R.C., Mizoguchi, E.I.,
Hirsch, L.A.M. & Gomes, L.M. Accuracy of peripheral arterial
tonometry in the diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea. Braz. J.
Otorhinolaryngol. 81, 473–478 (2015).
46. Pepin, J.L., Tamisier, R., Borel, J.C., Baquet, J.P. & Levy, P. A critical
review of peripheral arterial tone and pulse transit time as indirect
diagnostic methods for detecting sleep disordered breathing and
characterizing sleep structure. Curr. Opin. Pulm. Med. 15, 550–558
(2009).
47. Herscovici, S., Pe’er, A., Papyan, S. & Lavie, P. Detecting REM sleep
from the finger: an automatic REM sleep algorithm based on
peripheral arterial tone (PAT) and actigraphy. Physiol. Meas. 28, 129–
140 (2007).
48. Stepnowsky, C., Levendowski, D., Popovic, D., Ayappa, I. & Rapoport,
D.M. Scoring accuracy of automated sleep staging from a bipolar
electroocular recording compared to manual scoring by multiple
raters. Sleep Med. 14, 1199–1207 (2013).
49. Levendowski, D.J., Popovic, D., Berka, C. & Westbrook, P.R.
Retrospective cross-validation of automated sleep staging using
electroocular recording in patients with and without sleep disordered
breathing. Int. Arch. Med. 5, 21–29 (2012).
50. Paalasmaa, J., Toivonen, H. & Partinen, M. Adaptive heartbeat
modeling for beat-to-beat heart rate measurement in
ballistocardiograms. IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inform. 19, 1945–1952
(2015).
€korpi, L. & Partinen, M. Quantifying respiratory
51. Paalasmaa, J., Leppa
variation with force sensor measurements. 33rd Annual International
Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society
(2011).
52. Tal, A., Shinar, Z., Shaki, D., Codish, S. & Goldbart, A. Validation of
contact-free sleep monitoring device with comparison to
polysomnography. J. Clin. Sleep Med. 13, 517–522 (2017).
53. Beauchet, O., Allali, G., Launay, C., Herrmann, F.R. & Annweiler, C.
Gait variability at fast-pace walking speed: a biomarker of mild
cognitive impairment?, J. Nutr. Health Aging 17, 235–239 (2013).
54. Verghese, .J, Lipton, R.B., Hall, C.B., Kuslansky, G., Katz, M.J. &
Buschke, H. Abnormality of gait as a predictor of non-Alzheimer’s
dementia. N. Engl. J. Med. 347, 1761–1768 (2002).
55. Montero-Odasso, M., Verghese, J., Beauchet, O. & Hausdorff, J.M.
Gait and cognition: a complementary approach to understanding
brain function and the risk of falling. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc. 60, 2127–
2136 (2012).
56. Pal, G., O’Keefe, J., Robertson-Dick, E., Bernard, B., Anderson, S. &
Hall, D. Global cognitive function and processing speed are
VOLUME 104 NUMBER 1 | JULY 2018 | www.cpt-journal.com

associated with gait and balance dysfunction in Parkinson’s disease.
J. NeuroEng. Rehabil. 13, 94–101 (2016).
Braun, B.J. et al. Validation and reliability testing of a new, fully
integrated gait analysis insole. J. Foot Ankle Res. 8, 54–60 (2015).
Oerbekke, M.S., Stukstette, M.J., Schutte, K., de Bie, R.A., Pisters
M.F. & Vanwanseele, B. Concurrent validity and reliability of wireless
instrumented insoles measuring postural balance and temporal gait
parameters. Gait Posture 51, 116–124 (2017).
Eltoukhy, M., Kuenze, C., Jeonghoon, O., Jacopetti, M., Wooten, S. &
Signorile, J. Microsoft Kinect can distinguish differences in overground gait between older persons with and without Parkinson’s
disease. Med. Eng. Phys. 44, 1–7 (2017).
Breedon, P., Byrom, B., Siena, L., Muehlhausen, W. Enhancing the
measurement of clinical outcomes using Microsoft Kinect.
International Conference on Interactive Technologies and Games
(iTAG) 2016. IEEE Xplore. <http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/
7782516> (2016). Accessed 20 November 2017.
Cambridge Cognition. What is Cognition? <http://www.
cambridgecognition.com/blog/entry/what-is-cognition> (2015).
Accessed 20 November 2017.
Wesnes, K.A., Simpson, P.M. & Christmas, L. The assessment of
human information processing abilities in psychopharmacology. In:
Human Psychopharmacology, Measures and Methods (eds.
Hindmarch, I. & Stonier, P.D.) 79–92. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell;
1987.
R [Cognitive assessment software].
Cambridge Cognition. CANTABV
<www.cantab.com> (2017). Accessed 28 November 2017.
Byrom, B. Clinical trials Re-spec: The role of games and gamification
in clinical trials. International Conference on Interactive Technologies
and Games (iTAG) 2015. IEEE Xplore. <http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
document/7399486> (2015). Accessed 20 November 2017.
Goodman, J. et al. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial to study difference in cognitive learning associated with repeated
self-administration of remote computer tablet-based application
assessing dual-task performance based on amyloid status in healthy
elderly volunteers. J. Prev. Alzheimers. Dis. 3, 280–281 (2016).
Brouillette, R.M. et al. Feasibility, reliability, and validity of a
smartphone based application for the assessment of cognitive
function in the elderly. PLoS One 8, e65925 (2013).
Apple Inc. Apple ResearchKit. <www.apple.com/uk/researchkit>
(2017). Accessed 28 November 2017.
Byrom, B. et al. Applicability of Apple Research Kit to deliver cognitive
testing in clinical trials: results of a pilot study. Presented at ISPOR
22nd Annual International Meeting, Boston, MA, 20–24 May 2017.
<www.ispor.org/ScientificPresentationsDatabase/Presentation/
71452> Accessed 28 November 2017.
Cormack, F.K., Taptikllis, N.T., Barnett, J.H., King, J. & Fenhert, B.
High-frequency monitoring of cognition, mood and behaviour using
commercially available wearable devices. Alzheimers Dement. 12,
159 (2016).
Eckstein, M.K., Guerra-Carrillo, B., Miller Singley, A.T. & Bunge, S.A.
Beyond eye gaze: What else can eye tracking reveal about cognition
and cognitive development? Dev. Cogn. Neurosci. 25, 69–91 (2017).

71. Reimer, J. et al. Pupil fluctuations track rapid changes in adrenergic
and cholinergic activity in cortex. Nat. Commun. 7, 13289–13295
(2016).
72. Hopstaken, J.F., van der Linden, D., Bakker, A.B. & Kompier, M.A.J. A
multifaceted investigation of the link between mental fatigue and
task disengagement. Psychophysiology 52, 305–315 (2015).
73. Jongkees, B.J. & Colzato, L.S. Spontaneous eye blink rate as
predictor ofdopamine-related cognitive function—a review. Neurosci.
Biobehav. Rev. 71, 58–82 (2016).
74. Karson, C.N., Berman, K.F., Donnelly, E.F., Mandelson, W.B.,
Kleinman, J.E. & Wyatt, R.J. Speaking, thinking, and blinking.
Psychiatry Res. 5, 243–246 (1981).
75. Pierce, K., Conant, D., Hazin, R., Stoner, R. & Desmond, J.
Preference for geometric patterns early in life as a risk factor for
autism. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 68, 101–109 (2011).
76. Termsarasab, P., Thammongkolchai, T., Rucker, J.C. & Frucht, S.J.
The diagnostic value of saccades in movement disorder patients: a
practical guide and review. J. Clin. Mov. Disord. 2, 14–23 (2015).
€ri, R.M., Burn, D.J., Felblinger, J., O’Brien, J.T. &
77. Mosimann, U.P., Mu
McKeith, I.G. Saccadic eye movement changes in Parkinson’s
disease dementia and dementia with Lewy bodies. Brain 128, 1267–
1276 (2005).
78. Schwamm, L.H. Progesterone for traumatic brain injury — resisting
the sirens’ song. N. Engl. J. Med. 371, 2522–2523 (2014).
79. Samadani, U. Will eye tracking change the way we diagnose and
classify concussion and structural brain injury. Concussion 1, 1–3
(2015).
80. Murray, N.P., Hunfalvay, M. & Bolte, T. The reliability, validity, and
normative data of interpupillary distance and pupil diameter using
EyeTracking technology. Trans. Vis. Sci. Tech. 6, 2–13 (2017).
81. Krafka, K. et al. Eye tracking for everyone. IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2016.<http://
ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7780608/> (2016). Accessed 28
November 2017.
82. Harel, B., Cannizzaro, M. & Snyder, P.J. Variability in fundamental
frequency during speech in prodromal and incipient Parkinson’s
disease: a longitudinal case study. Brain Cogn. 56, 24–29 (2004).
83. Cannizzaro, M., Harel, B., Reilly, N., Chappell, P. & Snyder, P.J. Voice
acoustical measurement of the severity of major depression. Brain
Cogn. 56, 30–35 (2004).
84. Cannizzaro, M.S., Reilly, N., Mundt, J.C. & Snyder, P.J. Remote
capture of human voice acoustical data by telephone: A methods
study. Clin. Linguist. Phon. 19, 649–658 (2005).
85. Roche. Roche app measures Parkinson’s disease fluctuations.
<www.roche.com/media/store/roche_stories/roche-stories-201508-10.htm> (2017). Accessed 28 November 2017.
86. Roche. Smart biomarkers and innovative disease-modifying therapies
for Parkinson’s disease. <www.nature.com/nature/outlook/
parkinsons-disease/pdf/roche.pdf> (2017). Accessed 28 November
2017.
87. Gravitz, L. Technology: Monitoring gets personal. Nature 538,
S8–S10 (2016).

CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY & THERAPEUTICS | VOLUME 104 NUMBER 1 | JULY 2018

71

57.
58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.
64.

65.

66.

67.
68.

69.

70.

