International Journal of Scientific Research in Computer Science, Engineering and Information Technology
© 2018 IJSRCSEIT | Volume 3 | Issue 4 | ISSN : 2456-3307

Using Braingate Technology (BCI) for Recognizing Emotion and
Control a Device
1Anand Manikpure, 1Nihal Tadas, 1Aishwary Gawande, 1Mahesh Gudadhe, 2Dr. Narendra Narole,
3Prof. Ganesh Padole

1

BE Scholars, Department of Electronics Engineering, Rajiv Gandhi College of Engineering and Research, Nagpur, Maharashtra, India
Assistant Professor, Department of Electronics and Telecommunications, Rajiv Gandhi College of Engineering and Research, Nagpur,
Maharashtra, India
3
Assistant Professor, Department of Computer Technology, Rajiv Gandhi College of Engineering and Research, Nagpur, Maharashtra, India
2

ABSTRACT
Stroke is the main source of long haul inability in grown-ups and influences around 20 million individuals for
each year. Five millions stay impeded and subject to help with day-by-day life. Almost 30% of all stroke
patients are younger than 60. Different ailments bringing about loss of motion at such early age incorporate
Multiple Sclerosis (MS), influencing in excess of 2.5 million individuals around the world, or spinal string
damage (SCI) with 12.1 to 57.8 cases for each million. BPI, the disturbance of the upper appendage nerves
prompting a limp loss of motion of the hands, influences a large number of individuals consistently. Immobile
patients are additionally called as "secured" patients. Because of a stroke brain damage, cerebral degenerative
neurological ailment, for example, amyotrophic sidelong sclerosis their whole framework is incapacitated. The
main beam of expectation is as of now the improvement of brain-computer interfaces (BCI), an immediate
correspondence pathway between the brain and an outer gadget that records neural procedures. This gadget is
utilized to assist those with serious handicaps, for example, the individuals who have lost the control of their
appendages and other substantial capacities. There is a computer chip, which is connected into the brain of the
patient, to screen the brain movement. This gadget can perceive patient's expectation by breaking down their
brain action.
Keywords : SCI, BCI, EEG, CNS, Electroencephalography

I.

INTRODUCTION

dementia

chiefly

influence

more

established

individuals: just 2% of cases begin before the age of
The number of inhabitants in incapacitated in India

65 years. After this the commonness duplicates with

is assessed to be 90 million and 30 million are kids

each ﬁve year increase in age. Dementia is one of the

underneath the age of 14 years. One in each 10

real reasons for inability

youngsters is conceived with or obtains a physical,
mental or tactile handicap. India has roughly 450

pervasiveness of dementia in India is 1.9% beyond 60

million kid populaces and the predominance rate

right now the advancement of brain-computer

mental hindrance is 0.5 to 1% (Planning commission

interfaces (BCI), an immediate correspondence

of India). In each one lakh people in our aggregate

pathway between the brain and an outside gadget

populace, 94 are people with mental impediment.

that records neural procedures. To a specific degree,

Then again neurological scatters, for example,

BCI can be made with non-intrusive procedures.

in later life. The

years old years. The main beam of expectation is

CSEIT1833351| Received : 15 March 2018 | Accepted : 26 March 2018 | March-April-2018 [ (3) 4 : 372-378]

372

EEG accounts are the most altogether considered

complete the client's aim. Flag securing, pre-

potential interface and have the upside of superb

processing, include extraction and characterization

worldly determination, usability and convenientce.

are the four fundamental parts of the brain computer
interfacing (Figure 1).

Because of the loss of usefulness, muscles can't react
to the charges send by the Central Nervous System
(CNS). Brain Computer Interface (BCI) enables the
clients to control a robotized outer gadget like a
computer cursor, prosthesis or robot without
requiring any strong development. Brain computer
interface

enables

the

client

to

discuss

straightforwardly with an electronic or mechanized
gadget. Physiological action in the projections of the
brain can be distinguished, recorded, recognized,

Figure 1: BCI Components

handled and translated through BCI frameworks.

EEG is the most regularly utilized framework for flag

Different flag recording frameworks with various flag

procurement though obtrusive frameworks are

quality are accessible for flag obtaining. Flag securing

additionally accessible for different applications.

procedure can be acknowledged through obtrusive or
non-intrusive systems. Following sections give more

Computer applications possess a noteworthy place in
recognizing the client's enthusiastic state. Flag

data with respect to the flag recording and BCI

handling for highlight extraction, interpretation,

applications.

calculation, arrangement and development control
requires a framework skilled to process every one of

As a novel innovation, the BCI draws in light of a

the information quick and precisely continuously.

legitimate concern for some agents who will direct
examinations concentrated on enhancing the lives of

Amid the pre-processing, the framework dismisses all
antiques and the pre-processed information are

patients experiencing serious neuromuscular issue

utilized for highlight extraction so as to recognize the

like loss of motion and other physical impedances.

contrast between two properties. At that point the

Since organic signs have a urgent part in building up

framework changes over the information into a

correspondence

control summon for proposed application (Figure 2).

amongst

brain

and

computer,

numerous examiners that engaged with solution, data
innovations and therapeutic designing keep on
conducting thinks about on checking brain signals
and physiological action by utilizing intrusive or
non-invasive systems. Flag obtaining grants flag
handling including highlight extraction, design
acknowledgment, understanding and interpretation
for BCI applications.
II. BRAIN COMPUTER INTERFACE
A Brain Computer Interface is fit to process the
recorded brain flags and change over them into
control orders for human-computer association to
Volume 3, Issue 4 | March-April-2018 | http:// ijsrcseit.com

Figure 2: Processing control command for intended
application

373

III. EMOTION AND EMOTION RECOGNITION
METHODS

B. Emotion Classification

1. EEG Recording

A. Comparison of Emotion Theories

Three essential methodologies gather the feelings
into three classes; physiological, neurological, and
subjective. Each human encounters positive or
negative feelings every day.
William James and Carl Lange projected that human
nervous system reacts to the events happening in the
surroundings by developing physiological reactions
such as stomach ache, trembling, increased heart rate
or

relaxation.

According

to

their

theory,

physiological arouses create emotions such as
happiness, calmness, anger, fear, etc. Then Bradley
and Lang proposed that emotional valence (positive
versus negative) and arousal accounts for the most
variance (P. J. Lang, 1995).
According to Cannon and Bard Theory, emotional
respond
and
physiological
arousal
occur
simultaneously following a stimulating event and
they are not dependent on each other. The SchacterSinger theory has a cognitive approach and comprises
components from both James-Lange theory and
Cannon-Bard theory.

Introduction of sound or visual jolts drives the
terminating of the neurons, which comes about as an
electrical

action

inside

the

brain.

Electroencephalography (EEG) is a non-invasive test
that used to peruse brain waves through cathode
framework. The greater part of the EEG frameworks
that utilized generally in our days are fit to increase
the brain flags and change over the simple
information into advanced information. High and
low-pass channels separate low and high recurrence
antiquities. The enhanced and separated brain signals
are put away and showed on the computer. The
International 10– 20system (Towle VL et al, 1993)
determines and names the anode areas on the scalp.
Additionally other non-invasive or intrusive
strategies can be utilized for the strategy. Gathering
crude information by means of non-invasive or
obtrusive procedures and changing over them into
important information for different objectives can be
acknowledged through full of feeling processing by
means of brain computer interface frameworks.
Numerous researchers and specialists have realized
an awesome number of concentrates significant to
the issue, up until now.
2.

EEG Features

By assessment EEG flags and utilizing diverse
techniques, a wide assortment of highlights related
with the client's enthusiastic state can be removed
and translated by means of novel emotional figuring.
3. EEG-based feeling acknowledgment and order
In the line with the acceptable outcomes, full of
feeling figuring has picked up significance as a novel
interdisciplinary field that spotlights on perceiving,
Figure 3: Emotion Theories

handling and reproducing human effects. Outward
appearance is a known and basic route in recognizing
human feelings. Be that as it may, bringing out

Volume 3, Issue 4 | March-April-2018 | http:// ijsrcseit.com

374

feelings by utilizing sound or visual jolts and

were utilized to initiate feelings for flag securing

remembering

process. The vast majority of these boosts have been

them

through

brain

signals

is

developing as another and promising methodology

gotten from the IADS and the IAPS.

for future applications went for fulfilling the client's
needs determined by feelings and connections.

Utilizing sound or/and visual boost to summon

Computer applications towards foreseeing feelings

feelings and recording brain signals by means of EEG

through brain signals by means of cathodes are in a
developing pattern. Numerous investigations have

top for include extraction and characterization or
further applications can be condensed as

just been directed on the issue. Nevertheless, few

demonstrated Figure 5.

generally precise conclusions have been determined.
The

examinations

on

EEG

based

feeling

acknowledgment and grouping through visual, sound
or varying media boosts have been closed with 75-98 %
exactness) (G. Chanel et al, 2006).
Feeling forecast and trait extraction by investigating
the

gathered

information

through

different

examination techniques constitute a noteworthy
piece of the examinations on brain computer

Figure 5: Emotion Grouping Process

interface. As EEG is a straightforward and in addition,
a quick technique with no ancient rarities, numerous
examiners advantage from EEG top to record,
measure and assess the neurophysiologic action of
the brain. Figure 4. demonstrates an EEG recorded
brain flag.

Figure 6: Emotiv EPOC Headset
As the abrogating point of this investigation is to
perceive and arrange feelings, the most plausible
Figure 4: A recorded EEG flag
Feeling acknowledgment through EEG has picked up
significance and the examinations on BCI constitute
the linchpin of concentrates in view of bringing out
feelings. Picking the suitable boosts to bring out the
coveted feeling is a procedure that requirements
extraordinary consideration. When we observe on
the EEG based feeling acknowledgment contemplates
completed up until this point, we can undoubtedly
observe that sound, visual or varying media jolts
Volume 3, Issue 4 | March-April-2018 | http:// ijsrcseit.com

cathode framework, Emotiv EPOC headset with 16
anodes (Figure 6), was picked and the terminals were
put at the fitting areas that in charge of sound related
and visual engine capacities. Emotiv EPOC is an info
gadget that exceptionally competent to record brain
flags and give information and control signs to a
computer for data process. The high limit of
changing data from one shape into another through
algorithmic process guarantees a high exactness for
include extraction and for controlling any outside
gadget by considering.

375

4. Info and yield capacities

development of the current is towards the anode and

Signs from the brain fill in as a contribution to the

a descending (negative) redirection when the present

framework. As the computer gets crude information

moves from the terminal. The positive or negative

from the brain through anodes, the computer fills in

avoidances can increase meaning just when electrical

as the processor. It stores and changes the crude

capability of two combined cathodes are thought

information into advanced data, and insights through

about. Unbiased electrode(s) that set on the ear lobe(s)

algorithmic methodology. Qualities, arrangement,
and comparable data that handled by the computer is

encourage the examination methodology (Malmivuo
J. furthermore, Plonsey R. 1995).

the yield. The procedure can be characterized as
gathering

and

controlling

information

into

IV. IMPLEMENTATION

significant data (Figure 7).
The EEG neurosheadset gives access to crude
electroencephalography information. The EPOC
brain head protector has eighteen attachments and
can hold sixteen hubs or sensor cushions. The staying
two attachments generally hold elastic cushions, and
are known as the optional reference sensors, which
are found instantly beneath and behind the ears. The
essential reference sensors, which largely hold an
ordinary sensor cushion, are found quickly above and
behind the ears. The sensors cushions recognize
electrical action on the surface of the brain. OpenFigure 7: Collecting crude information and handling

source Matlab tool compartments, for example,

it into important data through computer

EEGLAB, Fieldtrip, and the Neurophysiologic
Biomarker Toolbox (NBT) can be utilized to process

utilization

information from the electroencephalography.

The

of

computers

for

electronic

information handling or as such computerized
information preparing or data innovation speaks to a



Conscious considerations (Cognitiv suite): The

noteworthy advancement and it is broadly utilized as

gadget distinguishes 13 sorts of development - six

a part of numerous spaces running from feeling

headings (left, ideal, up, down, forward, and

acknowledgment, industry to drug. Most computers

"pull/zoom") and six pivots (hostile to clockwise

are outfitted with novel projects that include simple

revolution, turn left and right, and influence in

to computerized converter, separating piece, control
unit, rationale unit and other programming like SPSS

reverse and forward), in addition to one other

and

SAS

(Statistical

Analysis

System)

representation ("vanish").


(http://www2.hawaii.edu/~halina/603/SASintro.pdf)

Emotions
(Affectiv
suite):
"Fervor",
"Engagement/Boredom", "Contemplation", and

competent

"Disappointment" can presently be estimated.

to

process

information

and

make


significant data accessible.

Individual eyelid and eyebrow positions, eye
position in the flat plane, grinning, giggling,

5. EEG recording and Potential Difference

gripping, and smiling can as of now be identified.
Different articulations might be added preceding

Amid EEG records, the computer shows the

discharge. The EEG sensors grabbing signs to

electrical

facial muscles, as opposed to by perusing

possibilities;

an

upward

(positive)

avoidance shows up on the show when the
Volume 3, Issue 4 | March-April-2018 | http:// ijsrcseit.com

376



brainwaves recognize the articulations. Dissimilar

incorporate frameworks for noting Yes/No inquiries,

to perusing mental action, these locations are

overseeing essential ecological control (e.g., lights,

quick passing on a conclusive favorable position

temperature), controlling a TV, or moving a wheel

and rendering them appropriate for quick-paced

seat. The proposed exhibit has been intended for

amusements in the FPS classification.

physical cripple patient and individual who are

Head pivot: The precise speed of one's head can

incapacitated.

be estimated in the yaw and pitch (however not
move) headings. This is identified by gyros, and

VI.REFERENCES

isn't identified with the EEG highlights.
A brain– computer interface (BCI) is an immediate

[1]

Computer and Information Science, Norwegian

correspondence pathway between the brain and an

University

outer gadget. BCIs are frequently coordinated at
helping, expanding, or repairing human subjective or
sensorymotor capacities the long haul target of this
research is to make a multi-position, brain-controlled
switch that is initiated by signals estimated
straightforwardly from a person's brain. We trust that
such a switch will permit a person with a serious
incapacity to have compelling control of gadgets, for
example, assistive machines, computers, and neural

significantly

enhanced

an all-inclusive, viable and proficient interface,

feed itself with robotic arm." Pitt Chronicle.
http://www. chronicle. pitt. edu (2008).
[4]

BrainGate - Turning Thought into Action.
Available at: http://www. braingate.org/.

[5]

Chanel, G., Kronegg, J., Grandjean, D., & Pun,
T.

autonomy

and

consequently,

for such a perfect interface, researchers have been

[6]

V. CONCLUSION
In this study, it comprises of six sections where the
Bluetooth interface and the Mindset Interface are

EEG’s

signals.

and

Multimedia

Arousal
peripheral
content

Cyberkinetics.

Available

at:

http://en.

wikipedia.org/wiki/Cyberkinetics.
[7]

Hochberg, L. R., Serruya, M. D., Friehs, G. M.,
Mukand, J. A., Saleh, M., Caplan, A. H., &
Donoghue, J. P. (2006). Neuronal ensemble
control of prosthetic devices by a human with
tetraplegia. Nature, 442(7099), 164.

[8]

Hjelm, S. I., & Browall, C. (2000, October).
Brainball-using

brain

activity

for

[9]

Jarosiewicz, B., Chase, S. M., Fraser, G. W.,
Velliste, M., Kass, R. E., & Schwartz, A. B.
(2008). Functional network reorganization
during learning in a brain-computer interface
paradigm.

Proceedings

of

the

National

Academy of Sciences, 105(49), 19486-19491.

given by Emotive. Straightforward BCI applications
Volume 3, Issue 4 | March-April-2018 | http:// ijsrcseit.com

cool

competition. In Proceedings of NordiCHI (Vol.
7, No. 9).

brain possibilities to specifically convey to gadgets,
arm and UI applications.

using

assessment:

representation, classification and security, 530537.

contemplating the practicality of using electrical
for example, a PC framework, mechanical, humanoid

Emotion

physiological

an

extraordinarily enhanced personal satisfaction for
even the most seriously handicapped people. In quest

(2006).

evaluation

current innovation has the capacity of giving
considerable

Technology

Baum, Michele."Monkey uses brain power to

satisfaction and lessen social expenses. Frequently the
with extreme physical handicaps (as above) is the
insufficiency of the human-machine interface. With

and

[3]

personal

best coming up short of specialized guides for people

Science

[2]

brain interface would expand a person's freedom,
a

of

Trondheim, Norway
Emotive neuroheadset SDK forum

prostheses in indigenous habitats. This sort of directprompting

Alf Inge Wang, Erik Andreas Larsen Dept.

377

[10] Lang, P. J. (1995). The emotion probe: Studies
of

motivation

and

attention.

American

psychologist, 50(5), 372.
[11] Levine, S. P., Huggins, J. E., BeMent, S. L.,
Kushwaha, R. K., Schuh, L. A., Rohde, M.
M.,.& Smith, B. J. (2000). A direct brain
interface based on event-related potentials.
IEEE
Transactions
on
Rehabilitation
Engineering, 8(2), 180-185.
[12] Malmivuo,

J.,

&

Plonsey,

Bioelectromagnetism:

R.

(1995).

principles

and

applications of bioelectric and biomagnetic
fields. Oxford University Press, USA.
[13] Mukamel, R., & Fried, I. (2012). Human
intracranial

recordings

and

cognitive

neuroscience. Annual review of psychology,
63, 511-537.

Volume 3, Issue 4 | March-April-2018 | http:// ijsrcseit.com

378

