Computer Science and Information Technology 3(4): 122-126, 2015
DOI: 10.13189/csit.2015.030405

http://www.hrpub.org

Implementing Remote Presence Using Quadcopter
Control by a Non-Invasive BCI Device
Jzau-Sheng Lin*, Zi-Yang Jiang
Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering, National Chin-Yi University of Technology, Taiwan

Copyright © 2015 Horizon Research Publishing All rights reserved.

Abstract Extracting neural signals to control a
quadcopter using wireless manner is proposed in this paper
for hands-free, silence and effortless human-mobile
interaction with remote presence. The brain activity is
recorded in real-time and discovered patterns to relate it to
facial-expression states with a cheap off-the-shelf
electroencephalogram (EEG) headset-Emotic Epoc device.
A tablet based mobile framework with Android system is
developed to convert these discovered patterns into
commands to drive the quadcopter-AR Drone 2.0 through
wireless interface. First, neural signals are sequentially
extracted from headset and transmitted to the tablet mobile
system. In the tablet mobile system, large number of feature
vector of EEG can be reduced by using Principle
Component Analysis (PCA) to recognize the facial
expression to generate suitable commands and driving the
quadcopter through wireless interface. Finally, the
quadcopter can fly smoothly in accordance with the
commands converted by the EEG signals. The experimental
results show that the proposed system can easily control
quadcopters.
Keywords EEG, BCI, PCA

1. Introduction
Instead of clinic-used BCI headset system, the recent
availability of portable low-cost wireless EEG headsets is
focused in the applications of several fields such as electric
wheelchair, computer games, mobile phones, robot arms,
and so on. In accordance with the extracted neural signals,
embedding low-cost EEG sensors into wireless headsets
gives improved authentication and becomes a practical
opportunity. There are several techniques like
electroencephalogram (EEG), Magnetoencephalogram
(MEG), functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI),
Positron Emission Tomography (PET), Diffusion Tensor
Imaging (DTI), and Near-Infra-Red Spectroscopy (NIRS)
have been utilized to extracted neural signals for analyzing
the thinking, behaviors, and diseases of human. Each

technology has its own advantages and disadvantages. EEG
measurement is inexpensive, non-invasive and popular
Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) instrumentation with
highly accurate recording and exceptional time resolution
for neural signals extraction.
In the research of signal transformation in brain science,
BCI system is created to obtain the human EEG signals in
order to build an interactive system, and converted them
into commands that enable advanced algorithms, or
computer system to identify and deal with these commands.
BCI provides a communication channel that allows the user
by the strength of brain wave signals to communicate with
the outside world through the brain activity to directly infer
the
subject's
intention
to
transform
into
a
computer-controlled signal. Communication and control are
some of them, notably by allowing to spell words, to use a
web browser or to control a system just by thought. Several
research areas are the study of motor substitution or motor
rehabilitation whose main applications are hand grasping
[1], Short Message Service (SMS) in mobile phone [2], and
wheelchair control [3, 4]. Additionally, for healthy
end-users, BCIs have also been used to augment
interactivity in games by using multimodality from the EEG
signals [5, 6].
A well-established tool in studying the neural-function
correlates of cognitive processes, the EEG provides
much-needed insight into human brain. An EEG headset
has several advantages like wireless manner with Bluetooth
or Wi-Fi, fast data refresh rate, real-time data acquisition
and exchange in a well-organized system. Additionally, it
plays a role in diagnosis and health management with low
cost. While bearing in mind for short-time development of
EEG-based BCI, low-cost devices for brain wave extraction
with uncomplicated mechanisms and less time utilization is
required. NeuroSky Mindset [7] has fixed position of Fp1
and one reference channel A1. It can extract brain waves
only. Emotive Epoc neuro, a low-cost headset, has 14
electrodes with 2 reference channels, in which revealing of
blinks, horizontal glances left/right, eyebrow raise, left/right
winks, smile left/right, laugh, clench teeth and several
expressions as well as cognitive states can be real-time
recorded.

Computer Science and Information Technology 3(4): 122-126, 2015

There have been some applications that successfully
utilize this technology in several fields [8-11]. In 2013,
Duvinage et al. [8] proposal a BCI system to discussed the
performance of the Emotiv Epoc headset for P300-based
applications. Ramirez and Vamvakousis [9] used Emotive
Epoc device to detect emotion from EEG signals. They
extracted features from the EEG signals in order to
characterize states of mind in the arousal-valence 2D
emotion model. Using these features they classified EEG
signals into high/low arousal and positive/negative valence
emotional states. Szar and Signorile [10] used Emotiv
system to extract the EEG signals from the headset to
categorize them into one of several groups, to translate that
group to a robotic command, and finally controlled the
robot. Thobbi et al. [11] achieved remote presence using the
Emotiv Epoc headset to control a humanoid robot.
Because of the application of Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
(UAV) and Micro Aerial Vehicle (MAV) can apply to
variety of area such as military, rescue mission, film
making, agriculture and others, research and development
of UAV and MAV are recently getting high encouragement.
Quadcopter is one of the UAV that is major focuses of
active researches in recent years. In 2012, a low-cost hover
control mechanism was developed and implemented on a
low-cost microcontroller for a quadcopter [12]. Hanafi et al.
[13] presented the development of remotely controlled
quadcopter system through a Graphical User Interface (GUI)
where the communication between GUI and quadcopter is
constructed by using wireless communication system. In
this paper, remote presence was implemented to control a
quadcopter (AR Drone 2.0) [14] by the Emotiv EPOC [15]
device. The motivation in this paper is that to develop a
non-invasive BCI device to control suitable systems, such
as wheelchair or electrical bed, through the experimental
results in the quadcopter control.
PCA [16], an orthogonal-transformation procedure, is
used to convert a set of observations of possibly correlated
data into a set of values of linearly uncorrelated data called

123

principal components. The number of principal components
is less than or equal to the number of original data. The
PCA was used to reduce the data dimension of EEG signal
in this paper.
This paper is organized as follows. The system
architecture is introduced in Section 2. Section 3 shows the
implementation of the proposed system. Section 4
demonstrates the feature extraction, Experimental results
are displayed in Section 5, Finally, Section 6 is the
discussion and conclusions.

2. System Architecture
The proposed remote presence to control the AR Drone
2.0 quadcopter by the Emotive EPOC device is shown as in
Fig. 1. The architecture includes an EEG signal acquisition
unit with 16-elctrode headset, signal processing unit with
the development kit EmoEngine, Emotiv API, wireless
interface, and a wireless-controlled quardcopter.

3. Implementation
3.1. Emotiv EPOC device
In the proposed system, the Emotiv EPOC headset ,
shown as in Fig. 2, is used to extract the EEG signals. It
consists of 14-channel bio potential sensors with
gold-plated electrodes offer optimal positioning for accurate
spatial resolution. Additionally, CMS/DRL reference
locations are also utilized. Based on the international 10-20
locations, these 14 EEG names are AF3, AF4, F7, F8, F3,
F4, FC5, FC6, T7, T8, P7, P8, O1, and O2 which are shown
as in Fig. 2. In the Emotiv headset, the sampling rate is 128
Hz on the output as well as the internal sampling rate is
2048 Hz with 1.95- µV Least Significant Bit (LSB)
voltage resolution. The extracted 14-channel waveforms are
shown as in Fig. 3.

Figure 1. The proposed system diagram

124

Implementing Remote Presence Using Quadcopter Control by a Non-Invasive BCI Device

In the Emotiv headset, EPOC control panel collects
sequentially sampled data and supplies the data to an
application. Three built-in outputs, named Affective,
Cognitive, and Expressive suits are processed. Affective suit
detects positive mental states such as concentration,
meditation and excitement. Cognitive suit stores user’s
neutral or relaxed mental states. Expressive suit measures
facial movements and detects different states such as
left/right smile, raise/frown brow, left/right wink, etc.
3.2. Quardcopter Subsystem

(a)

(b)
Figure 2. (a) Emotiv Epoc; (b) Locations of Emotiv electrodes

The quadcopter model used in this research is the AR
Drone 2.0 Quadflyer. The quadcopter subsystem consists of
a receiver module with wireless interface, a gyroscope unit,
Ultrasonic Height Sensor (UHS), accelerometer circuits,
four propeller DC motors and a Lithium-Polymer battery.
Fig. 4 shows the components of the quadcopter subsystem.
The command signal is a Pulse-Width Modulated (PWM)
signal that is received by the receiver module. The gyroscope
unit will modify received signals by incorporating the
attitude (roll, pitch and yaw angles) information before
transmitting the signal to the accelerometer circuits. The
UHS provides a value of the distance between the bottom of
the drone and the object below. The accelerometer circuits
give the drone an awareness of its acceleration in each
direction of the four DC motors.

Figure 3. Extracted brain waves from 14 channels on Emotive headset

Computer Science and Information Technology 3(4): 122-126, 2015

4. Feature Extraction
In the proposed system, we extracted facial states such as
left/right smile, raise/frown brow, and left/right wink from 6
locations such as AF3, AF4, F3, F4, F7, and F8.
PCA is an approach used to condense the properties of
multivariate analysis in a set of data samples. It is a linear
transformation scheme frequently used for feature
extraction or data compression. PCA, also known as the
Karhunen-Loeve transformation [17] in communication
theory, maximizes the rate of decrease of variance. From
the viewpoint of statistical pattern recognition, the practical
value of PCA is that it supplies an effective way for
dimensionality reduction. The number of features needed
for effective data representation can be reduced. On the
other hand, it discards those terms that have small variance
and retains only those terms that have large variance [18].

125

with those principle components of different facial
expression states to indicate which state is displayed.

5. Experimental Results
In this study, eight healthy subjects with an average age
of 23.3 years old were participated in experiments. For
these eight subjects, we extracted EEG signals form AF3,
AF4, F3, F4, F7, and F8 locations to collect six sets
indicated six facial expression states such as left/right smile,
raise/frown brow, and left/right wink. And every set
occupies 20 principle components. The definition of control
commands for the flying quadcopter is shown as in Table I.
The Information Transmission Rate (ITR) is generally
used to estimate the performance of the communication and
control for brain-computer interfaces [19]. The higher value
indicates the more performance. The proposed method is
also used ITR to assess the performance of the system. The
ITR is defined by

1− P
Bits
= log 2 N + P log 2 P + (1 − P) log 2
Command
N −1
ITR =

Bits
⋅ dr
Command

(3)
(4)

where N is the total number of commands (N=6 in our
system), P is the accuracy, and d r , expressed as decision
rate, is the average commands during an unit time.
Table 1. Control commands for the flying quadcopter
Control
commands

left

right

smile
fly left

Figure 4. System architecture of AR Drone 2.0 quadflyer

PCA technique can be modeled as follows. There exists k
samples
with
n-dimensional
input
vectors
X1 , X 2 ,..., X k ∈ R n . The expected vector is defined as
k

ψ = ∑ Xi .
i =1

C = ΦΦT

brow
forward

(1)

An array [Φ1 , Φ 2 ,...., Φ k ] is calculated where Φ i is
defined as the difference between X i and Ψ . Then the
covariance matrix can be computed as follows
(2)
Then the first m (m < n) eigenvectors of C are named as
principle components and computed. For different facial
expression states, different principle components can be
extracted. When an unknown EEG is extracted, we can
compute its covariance matrix and principle components.
Finally, the unknown principle components are compared

fly right

backward

wink
take off

landing

In the experimental scenario, we defined 4 points from
take-off to loading locations in a 3-D open area. Every
subject had to finished complete path from start location to
end location through these 4 points with 3 times. The
average ITRs for different subjects can obtain suitable
values.

126

Implementing Remote Presence Using Quadcopter Control by a Non-Invasive BCI Device

6. Discussion and Conclusions
In this paper, a Non-Invasive BCI device with expressive
manner on face is implemented in remote presence using
quadcopter control with Emotive EPOC headset. For
subjects, EEG signals were extracted from locations on AF3,
AF4, F3, F4, F7, and F8 respectively. The principle
components were detached from these six EEGs to transfer
one of six commands such as left/right smile, raise/frown
brow, and left/right wink to control a quadcopter. From the
experimental results, the proposed strategy can be suitably
used to naturally control a quadcopter through this low-cost
wearable device.

Acknowledgements
In this paper, the research was sponsored by the National
Science Council of Taiwan under the Grant
NSC103-2221-E-167 -027-.

REFERENCES
[1]

Pfurtscheller G., Müller G. R., Pfurtscheller J., Gerner H. J.,
and Rupp R. 2003. Thought’ - Control of Functional
Electrical Stimulation to Restore Hand grasp in a Patient with
Tetraplegia, Neurosci Lett, 351, 33–36.

[2]

Lin J.-S., Wang M., Lia P.-Y., and Li Z. 2014. An
SSVEP-Based BCI System for SMS in a Mobile Phone,
Applied Mechanics and Materials, 513-517, 412-415, 2014.

[3]

Lin J.-S., Wang M., and Hsieh C.-H. 2014. An
SSVEP-Based BCI System with SOPC Platform for Electric
Wheelchairs, Trans. On Computer Science and Technology,
3(2), 35-40.

[4]

Lin J.-S., and Huang S.-M. 2013. An FPGA-Based
Brain-Computer Interface for Wireless Electric Wheelchairs,
Applied Mechanics and Materials, 283-287, 1616-1621.

[5]

Nijholt A., Bos D. P. O., and Reuderink B. 2009. Turning
Shortcomings into Challenges: Brain-Computer Interfaces for
Games,” Entertainment Comput., 1(2), 85–94.

[6]

Mühl C., GürkökH, H. Plass-Oude Bos D., Thurlings M.,
Scherffig L., Duvinage M., Elbakyan A., Kang S., Poel M.,
and Heylen D. 2010. “Bacteria Hunt,” J. of Multimodal. User
Interfaces, 4, 11–25.

[7]

Hal B. Van, Rhodes S., Dunne B., Bossemeyer R., Low-Cost
EEG-based Sleep Detection, The 36th IEEE Annual Int. Conf.,
4571-4574, 2014.

[8]

Duvinage M., Castermans T., Petieau M., Hoellinger T.,
Cheron G., and Dutoit T. 2013. Performance of the Emotiv
Epoc Headset for P300-Based Applications, BioMedical
Engineering OnLine, 12:56, http://www.biomedical-enginee
ring-online.com /content/12/1/56.

[9]

Ramirez R. and Vamvakousis Z. 2012. Detecting Emotion
from EEG Signals Using the Emotive Epoc Device, Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, 7670, 175-184.

[10] Szar D. and Signorile R., An Exploration of the Utilization of
Electroencephalography and Neural Nets to Control Robots,
Human-Computer Interaction- INTERACT 2011, 186-194,
2011.
[11] Thobbi A., Kadam R., and Sheng W. 2010. Achieving
Remote Presence Using a Humanoid Robot Controlled by a
Non-Invasive BCI Device, Int. J. on Artificial Intelligence
and Machine Learning, 10, 41-45.
[12] Leong B. T. M., Low S. M., and Ooi M. P.-L. 2012.
Low-Cost Microcontroller-based Hover Control Design of a
Quadcopter, Procedia Engineering, 41, 458 – 464.
[13] Hanafi D., Qetkeaw M., Ghazali R., Than M. N. M., Utomo
W. M., and Omar R. 2013. Simple GUI Wireless Controller
of Quadcopter, Int. J. Communications, Network and System
Sciences, 6, 52-59.
[14] “ARDrone_Developer_Guide”,
https://projects.ardrone.org/wiki/ardrone-api/Developer_Gu
ide.
[15] Stytsenko K, Jablonskis E, Prahm C, Evaluation of consumer
EEG Device Emotiv EPOC, Proceedings of the MEi:CogSci
Conference; 2011.
[16] Lin J.-S. and Liu S.-H., 2004. Still Color Images Encoding
through a Rough PCA Net and Interpolative Approaches with
a Feed Forward Net, Int. J. of electrical Engineering, 11,
87-95.
[17] Effros M. and Chou P., Weighted Universal Transform
Coding: Universal Image Compression with the
Karhunen-Loeve Transform, Proc. Of Int. Conf. on Image
Processing, 61-64, 1995.
[18] Oja E., Subspace Methods of Pattern Recognition,
Letchworth, UK:Research Studies Press, 1983.
[19] Wolpaw J. R., Birbaumer N., McFarland D. J., Pfurtscheller
G., and Vaughan, T. M. 2002. Brain–Computer Interfaces for
Communication and Control, Clinical Neurophysiology, 113,
67–79.

