Going Beyond “Beyond Being There”: An Inquiry
into the Use of Brain-Computer Interface
Technologies and Intelligent Machine Agents to
Facilitate Inconspicuous Communication
Sidas A. Saulynas

Ravi Kuber

Department of Information Systems
UMBC
Baltimore, USA
saulyn1@umbc.edu

Department of Information Systems
UMBC
Baltimore, USA
rkuber@umbc.edu

POSTER PAPER
available. In this regard, technology may offer a fourth
advantage to Hollan and Stornetta’s list: the ability to
communicate inconspicuously, even when the communication
is synchronous and the humans are co-located.

Abstract—In this paper, we present a discussion on the potential
use of intelligent machine agents and brain-computer interface
(BCI)
technologies
to
help
facilitate
inconspicuous
communication. Members of a university marching band
participated in interviews and two focus groups to examine how a
marching band needs to communicate during a live performance.
Results showed the need for an inconspicuous communication
channel that goes beyond the normal human communication
modalities. Some insights regarding the use of BCI as a means of
inconspicuous communication, such as how it can be used to
facilitate both one-to-one and one-to-many communication nodes
as well as the need for further research and education as to its use
and potential were gleaned. In addition, how intelligent agents
might be used as mediators of communication, and implications
for the design and the future direction of research are also
discussed.

Brain-computer interface (BCI) technologies which provide
the brain with a non-muscular communication and control
channel [2], have the potential to facilitate this fourth
advantage. While BCI has been used extensively for supporting
individuals with disabilities and also for domains like computer
gaming, its use has yet to be exploited as a communication
channel for interaction between humans. One reason for this is
that BCI technology has yet to advance commercially to the
point where BCI devices can send more than the most basic of
signals from human to computer. An electronic autonomous
machine agent, acting as an “electronic switchboard operator”,
could offer potential to enhance the utility and efficiency of the
information being transmitted.

Keywords: BCI; intelligent machine agents; inconspicuous
communication

I.

This paper is an initial discussion towards the potential
development of technology that will facilitate inconspicuous
communication and how intelligent machine agents could be
developed to aid in that facilitation. To create initial
phenomenological data that would help describe the needs
and/or reasons for technology-facilitated inconspicuous
communication, semi-structured interviews and focus groups
were conducted using members of a university marching band.
In this domain, precise actions and covert communication are
required. The ability to communicate is diminished as the result
of several situational factors (e.g. inability to communicate as
the result of holding/playing an instrument, occlusion, or
ambient noise). After defining several themes, describing how
communication is currently conducted during a live
performance and how BCI technology could be used to
improve that communication, this paper then discusses
implications for the design of an inconspicuous communication
system.

INTRODUCTION

Technology can be used, not only to augment existing
modalities of human communication and collaboration, but to
create modalities that could not exist in direct human-human
interaction. In their seminal 1992 paper, “Beyond Being
There”, Hollan and Stornetta [1] suggested that, in identifying
communication needs, technology offers three advantages that
cannot be present in the absence of technology. These include
(1) support for asynchronous communication, (2) the ability to
communicate anonymously, and (3) the capability to
automatically archive communication.
In addition, there are some instances where communication
cannot be overt, for example, when information must be
disseminated so that the signal is inconspicuous to anyone
other than the intended target(s) or perhaps in a noisy
environment where other communication channels are not

978-1-4673-7648-8/15/$31.00 ©2015 IEEE

454

It is important to note that the authors are not suggesting
that the state of technology discussed can currently facilitate
such a system. Rather the goal of this paper is, through
qualitative analysis, to address the following research question:
In what ways can technology be used to facilitate
inconspicuous communication? We then suggest that the
potential exists for BCI along with intelligent machine agents
to facilitate that need.
II.

display containing the 26 letters of the alphabet and a few oneword commands, to communicate the word “BRAIN” to the
computer.
Most studies have tested the capabilities of BCI devices
while the participant is in a controlled laboratory environment
and while sitting down and stationary. However, for a BCI
device to be used effectively in active communication, it may
need to function while the users are moving. De Vos et al. [8]
conducted a study where participants used BCI to record the
counting of a “target” tone while ignoring two other tones on
two separate trials: (1) while the subject and experimenter sat
on two chairs positioned in a relatively quiet location and (2)
while walking along a predefined route escorted and guided by
the experimenter. The results showed an accuracy (P300 to
target tone) rate of 71% for the seated condition compared to
64% for the walking condition.

RELATED WORK

For a communication device to be inconspicuous, it must be
able to be used without the need to occupy one’s hands. While
various technologies have been both researched and developed
that go beyond the need of “hand-intensive” modes like the
keyboard and mouse model that has been prevalent for over 30
years, all have potential weaknesses applied to a problem space
with limited communication resources or situational
impairments.

Research has shown the potential for BCI to be used as a
means of communicating at least basic data bits and even the
potential for such communication to be feasible while in
motion. But such rudimentary capabilities may not be
sufficient when communication is required from human to
human and/or in a multiple actor problem space. If a human
needs to send a “command” to one of many humans in a group,
or to a specific sub-group within a group, the BCI signal will
need an “intermediary” or “switch board operator” that will be
able to receive and interpret the signal, then channel a response
only to the intended target(s) of the command. Software agents
could be used as “operators” of that “switch board”.

Smart phones and tablets can be used for voice
communication, but must either be held while speaking, or
technologies such as a Bluetooth wireless headset must be
deployed. If one is attempting to enter data, either hands are
required or automated speech recognition (ASR) needs to be
used. Speech and/or speech recognition, when used in public,
is not inconspicuous and may not work at all in noisy
environments. Gesture based interfaces overcome the issue of
having to type or point to a screen, but might be ineffective
when the user’s hands are otherwise occupied.

The use of intelligent autonomous agents has its roots in the
more general research area of artificial intelligence (AI), and
suggests that a cooperative environment would exist between
human and machine agent where both can initiate
communication, monitor events, and perform tasks [4]. Agent
software is personalized, proactive, autonomous, and adaptive
and can act on the “users behalf” while they are involved with
other tasks [11]. An example of an architecture that has been
developed is a web mining intelligent agent called the
“Evolutionary Virtual Agent” (EVA) which sought to create an
autonomous agent that responds to human interaction in real
time appearing to “think”, make decisions, and act on its own
volition [5].

All types of interfaces have advantages and disadvantages
depending on the situation in which they are being used.
However, all have at least one aspect that make them less than
ideal when it comes to seamless and inconspicuous
communication: All of them require at least one perceptive
“sense” for information to be perceived and processed. When
that sense cannot be utilized, whether it is the result of a
physical, mental, or situational disability, the interface will not
function or at least not function seamlessly and
inconspicuously. BCI is an interface modality that does not
rely on any of the traditional modes of human perception.
BCI uses electroencephalographic (EEG) signals, such as
event-related evoked potential (ERP). When visual, auditory or
somatosensory infrequent stimuli are mixed with frequent
stimuli, the former evoke a potential in the EEG that is
typically recorded by the electrodes covering the parietal lobe,
usually appearing around 300ms after stimulation which is why
this type of ERP is called P300 [9].

Previous research suggests that BCI and intelligent
autonomous agents have the potential for incorporation in a
system that can facilitate inconspicuous communication. A
system can be designed to receive data through a non-muscular
channel, have that signal autonomously and proactively adapt
to the needs and intentions of a human actor, and send an
appropriate signal to the intended target(s). But does there
exist a need for such communication? The following section of
the paper highlights a qualitative study which gathered
phenomenological data to help determine the needs of a
marching band for inconspicuous communication where
traditional channels were not available.

Much of the early research regarding the use of BCI has
focused on the area of assistive technology. For example, BCI
has been used as a means of communication for patients that
have locked-in syndrome [8]. Recent studies, however, have
begun to examine the use of BCI outside of the realm of
assistive technology. For example, Finke et al. [3] created
“MindGame”, a BCI game where P300 events are translated
into movements that navigate a character on a game board.
Farwell and Donchin [10] showed that the P300 can be
employed as a switch by means of which the subject can toggle
a binary choice. In their study, four healthy subjects were able
to use BCI, when presented with a 6-by-6 matrix on a computer

III.

STUDY DESIGN

The study was designed in the phenomenological tradition
in order to help discover meaning and ideas for potential
design. Eight (four male) members of a university marching

455

band took part in the study. Two of the members also served as
drum majors (one female). The female drum major recruited
the other seven participants. The data collection consisted of
three interviews followed by two focus groups.

Examples of scenarios presented to focus groups included:
1.

The person in front of you has just messed up and is
about to cause a cascading collision effect. How would
you communicate to get the situation back on track?

A. Interview Procedure
Three band members (one drum major/two musicians)
participated in 30 minute individual semi-structured interviews.
All three also participated in the focus groups. The data
gathered from the initial interviews helped create open-ended
questions and scenarios which were used in the focus groups.
All interviews were recorded with handwritten notes.

2.

You are looking straight ahead but missed a gesture
performed by the drum major because your instrument
blocked your vision. Now you are potentially going to
create a cascading error. How do you recover?

3.

Added to Focus Group 2 - You notice that someone
five places in front of you is in the wrong spot. How
would you communicate the error to avoid a collision?

B. Focus Group Procedure
Each 60 minute focus group consisted of four band
members (each group with three musicians/one drum major).
Band communication during a live performance was discussed
and scenarios based on the findings from the interviews were
used to facilitate ideas from the participants in regard to the
need for ad hoc communication and possible situational
impairments to communication. To inform participants to the
potential and limitations of BCI technologies, a 5 minute video
was shown describing the Emotiv EPOC BCI headset (Figure
1) which was then passed around. The remainder of the session
focused on the use of BCI as a means to communicate with
each other. The main difference between the groups was that
data gleaned from the first group was used to refine the content
and flow of the second group in the tradition of theoretical
sampling.

IV.

FINDINGS

A. Interviews
Participants suggested that the drum major is responsible
for communicating with members of the band. He/she signals
timing and pace via gestures and eye contact. The band must
always be looking “straight ahead” at the drum major (Figure
2). Occlusion can disrupt communication due to the size of
some instruments resulting in missed gestures from the drum
major. “Listening across the band” was described as a kind of
distributed situational awareness achieved by hearing the
volume and tempo of the band as a collective to help in the
adjustment of individual performance.
Mistakes were described as being prevalent in
performances. The most common, a “collision”, occurs when
someone collides with another creating a cascading error.
During these events, non-drum major controlled ad hoc
communication within the ranks occurs which often consists of
physically coming into contact with the band member in need
of redirection by means of a touch or a push in an effort to
create redirection.
B. Focus Group 1
Much of what was learned during the interviews was
confirmed. In addition to gestures/eye contact, a
communication tool called “dutting” (literally uttering a “dut”
sound several times in tempo) is used to make sure that
members of the marching band are where they are needed. The
music itself and how it is being played also contains
information regarding where to be positioned and the pace of
movement.

Figure 1. Emotiv EPOC device. Data from 14 EEG channels can be
collected to determine emotional information, conscious thought and identify
subtle facial gestures made (www.emotiv.com).

Participants described what they would do if a collision
occurred. Because they need to look straight ahead, they are
very dependent on peripheral vision. The remedy is usually eye
contact, or if not possible, actual physical contact usually in the
form of pushing the out-of-position band member with a free
hand in the correct direction. For example, one participant
noted, “This person who went the wrong way…I put my hand
out to show him go this way because I was in the middle of
playing and couldn’t talk…I didn’t push him noticeably but I
pushed him enough so that he knew to go that particular way. It
still put everyone around us two or three counts behind the
move.”

Figure 2. Marching band moving in formation (www.stevenson.edu).

National Science Foundation – Award No. 1352924.

456

About halfway into the session, the Emotiv EPOC BCI
headset video was shown followed by the passing around of the
headset. The group was then asked to comment on BCI
technology and then its potential use within a live performance
setting. It was evident that the concept of BCI was a novel idea
that went beyond the mental models the participants had
regarding the interface. For example, the first two reactions
were somewhat extreme ranging from “Scary” to “Great idea.”
Part of the concern seemed to be fear of loss of locus of
control. One participant noted, “It starts with a game and then it
will eventually evolve into everyone being able to read each
other’s minds.”

technology-assisted collaboration occurring both in one-to-one
as well as one-to-many communication situations.
Add to this, the complexity of situational impairments for
loud and/or chaotic environments, such as is usually
experienced by a marching band during a live performance.
Because ad hoc adjustments are often needed, but the
communication sources are limited or non-existent, the need to
explore the development of such a system is clear. The problem
space in which humans must work is becoming more complex
with an increasing number of issues and tasks that users must
constantly keep track of [11]. Since machine agents can be
designed for autonomy as well as adaptability, some of the
cognitive processes required to achieve a desired goal can be
effectively offloaded to the system. This is an example of one
of the motivations for the creation of machine agents. Having a
personal assistant, human or machine, eases the burden of an
increasingly crowded problem space.

Participants also thought of ways that a section leader could
send adjustments with his/her mind. For example, one
participant noted, “…your section leader is the one that is
giving the commands…that will help…it will create more
precision on the field”. Even the band members who were
reticent about the technology stated that BCI use would
eliminate the need for verbal communication reducing
collisions. As one participant noted, “It will stop us from
saying, ‘stop’ or having to yell”. When discussing sending and
receiving signals, even the reticent participants were beginning
to see value.

The value of this assistance is certainly not limited to the
“non-expert” user. The members of a marching band can
certainly be considered experts in their domain, yet they still
encounter minutia that must be addressed in a timely and often
inopportune situation. In baseball, the team’s manager can be
considered an expert in their domain, but still needs the
assistance of a “bench coach” to keep track of important
minutia like pitch count, or a particular batter’s tendencies
against a right-handed pitcher. Expert and novices alike
operate in an ocean of cognitive overload. The life raft offered
by an assistant can provide a valuable resource to keep them
afloat.

C. Focus Group 2
This group began with brainstorming possible ways that
humans communicate. Then they were asked which of the
suggestions could be used to communicate during a live
performance. The remainder of the session was structured as
Group 1 with additional, more focused scenarios.

With this clear desire to improve communication, it was
interesting to note the dichotomy of reactions to the use of BCI
as a means for that facilitation. However, it is also not
completely surprising. The interview questions never
mentioned BCI. The focus groups were structured so that the
first half focused on the problem space, then only in the second
half was the potential technology solution introduced and
discussed. It was hoped that a rich discussion of the problem
would then lead to a healthy discussion of a potential solution.
What was clearly gleaned from the discussion was a lack of
understanding of the capabilities of BCI. Resistance was
expressed with the fear of the unknown as its source, but
perhaps more importantly, the fear of loss of locus of control.
Not understanding how BCI works, lead to fears of mind
reading and/or the transmission of thoughts that were not meant
for transmission.

Group 2 confirmed the observations of Group 1, often
strengthening ideas presented. The first comment regarding
BCI after the video was shown was, “Is it real?” Then during
the continuing discussions, several suggestions for BCI
potential use to support communication were offered. For
example, one participant suggested, “…the drum major could
wear a piece like this. He could potentially look at a person and
say ‘hey, take three steps back’…and only that person would
hear it…” suggesting that a BCI transmission would replace the
need to both “look” and “say”.
In addition, discussions of formation and tempo, and even
suggestions that and intelligent system might be able to train
and adjust itself were considered. As one participant
speculated, “If there were a way to [have access to] an external
metronome where only we can hear it…we [could] get the
audio of just the tempo.”
V.

When this concern is extrapolated to consider the use of
machine agents the locus of control issue might be exacerbated.
Ben Shneiderman, in a debate with Pattie Maes, indicated that
one of the goals for effective human-computer interaction
should be to provide the user with a “feeling of being in control
and therefore…responsible for the decisions they make.” [11]
One of the concerns with the use of machine agents is the
potential of relinquishing of that control to the machine.
Perhaps this concern is echoed in the trepidation expressed by
the study participants over the use of BCI.

DISCUSSION AND DESIGN IMPLICATIONS

It was clear as the result of the interviews and focus groups
that there is a desire and need for additional open channels of
communication that are not always available when performing
live. The concept of a “collision”, for example, was mentioned
often and appeared to be universally accepted as a major issue.
Using technology as a means to collaborate to overcome the
inability to adequately signal for correction, or the use of
potentially unprofessional “workarounds” was welcomed by all
who participated. Participants saw the potential value for such

All this being said, even those initially reticent to the
technology began, by the end of the sessions, to acknowledge
the potential utility of such a system in their domain. The

457

participants identified the value that such a system would add
to the collaborative process. However, it is evident that they
would need to be convinced that their concerns regarding the
potential misuse of the technology were addressed.

E. Augmenting existing equipment
BCI and intelligent machine agents could also perhaps be
used to augment the use of existing equipment. If the drum
major is “feeling” the tempo of his/her metronome, BCI could
be used to send the tempo globally so that all members of the
band are “feeling” a uniform tempo and reduce the burden on
the drum major. If the intelligent machine agent could also
“learn” through situational awareness, adjustments could occur
without the need for direct involvement of the drum major
which could further reduce his/her load.

The progression from semi-structured interviews to the two
focus groups provided insight into the group communication
needs and also to the potential of BCI as a means of facilitating
that communication in situations that available modalities do
not provide ideal support. Both groups were open and active to
keeping the discussion on point. Scenarios helped inspire more
thoughtful and focused discussion. As a result of the qualitative
data that was gathered, the following implications for design
may be considered.

VI.

LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK

Current BCI technology is limited in its capabilities. It is
slow relative to more traditional control schemes and
preliminary evaluations of commercially viable headsets such
as the Emotiv EPOC device have consisted largely of proofsof-concept rather than true empirical research [6]. There is also
the issue of being able to send signals from areas of the brain in
such a way as to not create cognitive dissonance with any
active cognitive brain function. While machine agents may
have not developed to the point where they are capable of the
semantic level of interpretation necessary to provide seamless
interaction, given the potential cognitive overload issue with
using BCI in an active situation, their role in an eventual
solution is important.

A. Education and training of BCI
BCI is still a relatively new technology and it was clear that
it is not very well understood. The worry about using BCI
erroneously and reactions ranged from disbelief to fears of
“mind-reading”. It is clear that consideration must be given to
help educate users as to what BCI can and cannot do as well as
its functional feasibility. For example, showing how BCI could
be used to only transmit conscious thought, as well as
demonstrating how BCI can be controlled, might allay worries
regarding the transmission of involuntary commands.
B. Headset customization and design
Any headset that would be used by a group, such as a
marching band, would have to be worn in a way to fit
underneath and within the structure of that group’s clothing
and/or equipment. For example, the BCI headset would need to
be designed so that it could fit under the headgear currently
worn by band members.

BCI technology cannot currently be used for
communication between individuals. However, intelligent
machine agents may be developed that can act as “intelligent
switchboard operators”; by which EEG signals sent from the
brain are captured by a BCI device then directly interpreted and
translated into useful output. Saulynas et al. [7] proposed a
system for intelligent assistance during live presentations
where a machine agent could be used in conjunction with either
BCI or automated speech recognition (ASR) to interpret a
presenter’s need for ad hoc material. In their proposed system,
the machine agent would be able to (either by direct command
or semantic understanding) determine that a new slide, or a
slide from a previously archived presentation, is needed by the
presenter and incorporate that slide seamlessly into a live
presentation.

C. One-to-many communication
BCI could be used when a drum major needs to
communicate only to a certain section of the band in a way
where the communication signal is delivered only to the
intended targets and that no other band member can
misinterpret as a communication meant for them. In addition,
the drum major or section leader can send simple worded
commands globally as needed. In terms of output, even if direct
brain-to-brain communication could not be developed, some
form of audio or even tactile signal could be received. A
situationally aware intelligent machine agent could be used to
make a determination as to the most appropriate signal type
based on the ambient conditions.

If seamless assistance could be developed and incorporated
with BCI, the ability to communicate inconspicuously can be
facilitated in ways that face-to-face communication, or other
technological modalities could not accommodate. This
preliminary study has shown that there exists the need to
support inconspicuous communication for activities such as
communication in a marching band during a live performance.

D. One-to-one communication to various group nodes
BCI could be used for ad hoc one-to-one communication
within the ranks in order to communicate any live adjustments
that might be required. This would eliminate the need for the
current, less professional workarounds such as direct physical
contact. These adjustments can also occur from band leaders as
well creating a communication channel that cannot exist
without the use of technology.

There are implications, however, that reach beyond the
domain of a marching band. Conditions that result in situational
impairments for all traditional perceptual channels: improper
lighting conditions that can affect visual signals; ambient noise
that can affect aural signals, ambient tactile stimulation that can
affect haptic communication, can all have an effect on our
ability to both send and receive information. There are
situations were traditional modes of communication could be
dangerous if used. If one is driving an automobile,
communication using any traditional modality could be a
distraction from the actual driving task. Or if one is engaged in

458

covert activity, for example, during a military operation, the
use of, or detection of, any attempt at communication could
prove fatal.
Given this, future directions of this research would include
a deeper examination of the BCI technology in any domain
where communication is needed. Perhaps more global
inconspicuous communication themes exist that could inform
the design of technology designated to facilitate those needs.
VII. CONCLUSION
This paper has provided a preliminary theoretical inquiry
into the need for inconspicuous communication and how
technology might be used to facilitate that need in ways that
would not be possible in face-to-face communication. In
particular, we examined the use of BCI and intelligent machine
agents as the technological facilitators for any potential system
that would be developed for use in inconspicuous
communication. The hope of the authors is that this inquiry will
inspire discussion and lead to additional research.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research is supported by the National Science
Foundation – Award No. 1352924.
REFERENCES
[1]

J. Hollan and S. Stornetta, "Beyond being there," in Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
Monterey, California, 1992.
[2] J. R. Wolpaw, N. Birbaumer, D. J. McFarland, G. Pfurtscheller and T.
M. Vaughan, "Brain–computer interfaces for communication and
control," Clinical Neurophysiology, vol. 113, no. 6, pp. 767-791, 2002.
[3] A. Finke, A. Lenhardt and H. Ritter, "The mindgame: a P300-based
brain-computer interface game," Neural Networks, vol. 22, no. 9, pp.
1329-1333, 2009.
[4] P. Maes, "Agents that reduce work and information overload,"
Communications of the ACM, vol. 37, no. 7, pp. 30-40, July 1994.
[5] P. Millet and J.-C. Heudin, "Web mining in the EVA intelligent agent
architecture," in Web Intelligence and Intelligent Agent Technology
Workshops, IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conferences on, Silicon
Valley, 2007.
[6] G. S. Taylor and C. Schmidt, "Empirical evaluation of the Emotiv EPOC
BCI headset for the detection of mental actions," in Proceedings of the
Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, 2012.
[7] S. A. Saulynas, A. F. Norcio and L. E. Burgee, "Towards a personal
autonomous presentation assistant: applying technology for intelligent
assistance during live presentations," in Proceedings of the International
Conference on Innovative Practices in Business and Information
Technology, Bangalore, India, (ISBN: 978-1-63452-467-4) 2014.
[8] M. De Vos, K. Gandras and S. Debener, "Towards a truly mobile
auditory brain-computer interface: exploring the P300 to take away,"
International Journal of Psychophysiology, pp. 46-53, 2013.
[9] Y. V. Atum, J. A. B. Manresa, L. Rufiner and R. C. Acevedo, "Genetic
feature selection for a P300 brain computer interface," in VI Latin
American Congress on Biomedical Engineering CLAIB 2014, Parana,
Argentina , 2015.
[10] L. A. Farwell and E. Donchin, "Talking off the top of your head: toward
a mental prosthesis utilizing event-related brain potentials,"
Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, vol. 70, no. 6,
pp. 510-523, 1988.
[11] B. Shneiderman and P. Maes, "Direct manipulation vs. interface agents,"
Interactions, vol. 6, no. 42-61, p. 4, 1997.

459

