

    


                  

        



an author's
  

    https://oatao.univ-toulouse.fr/16443

 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2016.01.013

  

 

Charbonnier, Sylvie and Roy, Raphaëlle N. and Bonnet, Stephane and Campagne, Aurelie EEG index for control
operators’ mental fatigue monitoring using interactions between brain regions. (2016) Expert Systems with
Applications, vol. 52. pp. 91-98. ISSN 0957-4174







              

      

EEG index for control operators’ mental fatigue monitoring using
interactions between brain regions
Sylvie Charbonnier a,b,∗, Raphaelle N. Roy a,b, Stephane Bonnet a,c, Aurelie Campagne a,d
a

University of Grenoble Alpes, F-38000 Grenoble, France
CNRS, Gipsa-Lab, F-38000 Grenoble, France
c
CEA, LETI, MINATEC Campus, F-38054 Grenoble, France
d
CNRS, LPNC, F-38000 Grenoble, France
b

a r t i c l e
Keywords:
Mental fatigue
EEG
Spatial covariance
Distance

i n f o

a b s t r a c t
Mental fatigue is a gradual and cumulative phenomenon induced by the time spent on a tedious but
mentally demanding task, which is associated with a decrease in vigilance. It may be dangerous for operators controlling air traﬃc or monitoring plants. An index that estimates this state on-line from EEG
signals recorded in 6 brain regions is proposed. It makes use of the Frobenius distance between the EEG
spatial covariance matrices of each of the 6 regions calculated on 20 s epochs to a mean covariance matrix learned during an initial reference state. The index is automatically tuned from the learning set for
each subject. Its performance is analyzed on data from a group of 15 subjects who performed for 90 min
an experiment that modulates mental workload. It is shown that the index based on the alpha band is
well correlated with an ocular index that measures external signs of mental fatigue and can accurately
assess mental fatigue over long periods of time.

1. Introduction
Monitoring mental states using physiological signals has received more and more attention from researchers during the last
years. Lots of articles were published on systems that detect
drowsiness in drivers and, to a lesser extent, on systems that detect mental fatigue in operators. Drowsiness is deﬁned as a state of
impaired awareness associated with a desire or inclination to sleep
whereas mental fatigue is a physiological state that arises when
someone spends a long time on a tedious task or on a task requiring sustained attention, such as air traﬃc control or monitoring
of nuclear plant. The consequence of mental fatigue is a diﬃculty
to process incoming information in a fast and eﬃcient way, which
makes it a dangerous state for process operators. It was shown that
the persons that spent a long time on a task were more prone
to make errors and their reaction time was increased (Paus et al.,
1997).
Physiological modiﬁcations can be observed when mental fatigue increases. The ocular activity is modulated. Blinks are more

∗
Corresponding author at: University of Grenoble Alpes, F-38000 Grenoble,
France. Tel.: +33476826415.
E-mail addresses: Sylvie.Charbonnier@gipsa-lab.grenoble-inp.fr (S. Charbonnier),
Raphaelle.Roy@gipsa-lab.grenoble-inp.fr (R.N. Roy), Stephane.Bonnet@cea.fr (S. Bonnet), aurelie.campagne@upmf-grenoble.fr (A. Campagne).

frequent and their duration is longer (Akerstedt & Gillberg, 1990).
Several ocular recorded via (near) infra-red eye-tracking systems,
high frame rate cameras or electro-oculography (EOG) were proposed in the literature and used as features to classify mental fatigue (Hu & Zheng, 2008; Hu & Zheng, 2009). One of the most
eﬃcient ocular features for estimating the mental fatigue is the
perclos (percentage of eyelid closure), which increases with fatigue (Knipling, 1998). This feature was deﬁned by Wierwille and
Ellsworth, 1994. It measures the percentage of eyelid closure over
the time. Mental fatigue is also known to alter the cerebral activity. The EEG signal is traditionally analyzed in ﬁve frequency bands,
namely delta [< 4 Hz], theta [4–8 Hz], alpha [8–13 Hz], beta [13–
30 Hz] and gamma [> 30 Hz]. An increase of activity in the alpha
and theta bands predominantly in the parietal and central regions
of the brain is generally observed when the subject is fatigued or
tired, in association with a decrease in higher frequency bands
(Akerstedt & Gillberg, 1990; Klimesch, 1999; Lal & Craig, 2002;
Tanaka et al., 2012; Trejo, Kubitz, Roispal, Kochavi, & Montgomery,
2015).
Many research works were conducted recently to develop automatic systems to detect drowsiness or mental fatigue from EEG signals. Most often, spectral features are
extracted from the EEG signals (or from linear combinations of the signals obtained by principal component analysis
(Cao, Sun, Zhu, & Yan, 2010; Jung, Stensmo, & Sejnowski, 1997),

independent component analysis (Lin et al., 2005) or sparse
representation (Yu, Lu, Ouyang, Liu, & Lu, 2010), recorded with
1–32 electrodes, using either a Short Time Fast Fourier transform
(Shi & Lu, 2013), a wavelet transform (Subasi, 2005; Khushaba,
Kodagoda, Lal, & Dissanayake, 2011; Yu et al., 2010) or auto
regressive models (Zhao, Zheng, Zhao, Tu, & Liu, 2011). Then,
the features are merged into two to ﬁve levels of fatigue by
a classiﬁer. The most popular classiﬁers are Gaussian linear or
quadratic classiﬁers (Ji, Li, Cao, & Wang, 2012; Rosipal, Peters,
Kecklund, Akerstedt, Gruber, & Woertz, 2007), neural networks
(Jung et al., 1997, Subasi, 2005) or kernel-based classiﬁers such
as SVM (Cao et al., 2010; Shen, Li, Ong, Shi-Yun, & Wilder-Smith,
2008; Zhang et al., 2009; Zhang, Zheng, & Yu, 2009; Zhao et al.,
2011). More recently, Roy, Charbonnier, & Bonnet, 2014 used a
common spatial ﬁlter associated with a Fisher Linear Discriminant Analysis classiﬁer. Some authors use a regression model to
merge the features, which provides a continuous index of mental
fatigue (Lin et al., 2005; Lin et al., 2008a, 2008b). Trejo et al.,
2015 used a kernel partial least square decomposition combined
with a linear regression classiﬁer. The major drawback of these
methods is the necessity to learn the models. Because of the
large inter-subject variability, learning an inter-subject model that
can ﬁt any new individual is very diﬃcult. The model must be
learnt for each subject to be accurate. This requires a training
session to be planned for any new individual before using the
system, which is hardly practical for an everyday use. Indeed, the
subject should reach advanced states of mental fatigue during
the training session to allow the classiﬁer to be trained on these
classes.
To avoid learning a model, some papers propose indices calculated from EEG signals to estimate mental fatigue (Dasari, Shou, &
Ding, 2013; Jap, Lal, Fischer, & Bekiaris, 2009), such as the ratio
of slow waves to fast waves computed as the sum of the average
power in α and θ divided by the average power in β , or the frequency of occurrence of alpha bursts (Borghini et al., 2012 ). But
they do not quantitatively relate these indices to levels of mental fatigue. Lin et al. (2008a, 2008b) and Picot, Charbonnier, and
Caplier, 2012 propose to analyze the driver’s drowsiness by comparing the EEG signals measured on line to an initial state estimated at the beginning of a driving session. They both use the EEG
power spectrum in the alpha and theta bands recorded with one
electrode (Oz or P3). The ﬁrst ones propose to calculate the Mahalanobis distance between a feature vector formed of the spectral
power in 1 Hz bins of frequency in the alpha (4 bins) or theta band
(5 bins) during an epoch to the same mean vector calculated during the initial state and show that this distance is correlated with
fatigue. The second ones convert the proposed index into a classiﬁcation in 2 classes: alert/drowsy.
In the same idea, this paper presents an indicator to monitor
operators’ mental fatigue. In this work, mental fatigue is deﬁned as
the gradual and cumulative process induced by the time spent on
a tedious but mentally demanding task, which is associated with
a decrease in vigilance. The indicator compares the EEG spectral
content recorded on line with 32 electrodes to the EEG spectral
content recorded in an initial state, when the subject is not fatigued. The EEG signals are averaged in 6 regions of interest (ROIs)
and then ﬁltered in a frequency band of interest. The mean spatial
covariance of the ﬁltered signals is computed from a short period
at the beginning of the session, which forms the initial state. For
the rest of the session, the Frobenius distance between the initial
state mean covariance and the covariance calculated on 20 s sliding epochs is transformed into a mental fatigue index that varies
between 0 and 1. The index performance is analyzed by comparison with an ocular index using the Perclos on a data set formed of
EEG and EOG signals that were recorded from 15 subjects who underwent an experiment manipulating mental workload. During the

Fig. 1. Trial structure. Participants memorize a list of 2 or 6 digits, and answer
whether the probe item was in the list.

experiment, the subjects had to keep their attention focused on a
screen and perform a boring but mentally demanding task during
one hour and a half. The EEG index is also compared to the participants’ answers to a questionnaire evaluating their level of fatigue.
The method is a self-tuned one, which can provide a mental
fatigue index from a very short training period, recorded when
the subject begins his/her task and is thus not mentally tired. The
training is straight forward. It does not require any trial and errors
to set tuning parameters. This is a major advantage compared to
methods that use supervised classiﬁcation methods such as neural networks, SVM or regression kernels. Those methods need to
be trained on a learning set formed of examples of all the classes
to recognize, which includes data gathered during a high mental
fatigue state. The index that is provided is continuous and has a
value between 0 and 1. It has a clear meaning, which allows its
direct use to assess the subject’s mental fatigue state, contrary to
methods that provide a ratio of averaged powers or a distance that
still have to be related to the subject’s mental fatigue.
The paper is organized as follows. The experimental design and
the data used to evaluate the performances of the index are described in Section 2. The method to produce the index is detailed
in Section 3. Results are presented in Section 4 and discussed in
Section 5.
2. Material
2.1. Ethic statement
This research was promoted by Grenoble’s clinical research direction (France) and was approved by the French ethics committee (ID number: 2012-A00826-37) and the French health safety
agency (B120921-30). It was conducted according to the principles
expressed in the Helsinki Declaration.
2.2. Participants
Fifteen healthy volunteers performed the experiment (25 years
old ± 3.5 years; 9 females). They were right handed, had normal or
corrected-to-normal vision, had no neurological or psychiatric disorders, nor were they under any medication. They signed a written
consent and received an 80-euro compensation. They were asked
to have a normal amount of sleep the day before the experiment
to avoid sleep deprivation.
2.3. Experiment
The experiment consisted of 750 consecutive trials. A trial
lasted 7.3 s in average. For each trial, the participant had to memorize a list of sequential digits visually presented on a computer
screen. Then, a probe item ﬂanked with question marks was displayed (Fig. 1). The participant had to answer as quickly and as
accurately as possible whether the probe was present or not in

3. Method
3.1. Preprocessing
Let X ∈ R32×10,000 be a 20-s EEG epoch. First, ocular artefacts
are removed by applying the blind source separation algorithm
SOBI (Belouchrani, Abed-Meraim, Cardoso, & Moulines, 1997). The
EEG signal is written as the instantaneous linear combination of
source signals: X = AS with S ∈ R32×10,000 , the matrix of source
signals.
The 32 EEG signals are at ﬁrst transformed into 32 sources:

Fig. 2. Time course of the experiment.

the memorized list using a response box. Two levels of workload
were considered, i.e. 2 and 6 digits to memorize (low and high
workload respectively). Two 9-min. blocks and four 18-min. blocks
were performed, for a total of 90 min. of recording (Fig. 2). The
participants were allowed short breaks of 5 min between blocks.
At the end of the session, each participant had achieved 750 trials, 375 in low and 375 under high workload conditions, presented
in a random order. Given that the task was repetitive, boring but
mentally engaging, mental fatigue was supposed to increase with
time-on-task. This was conﬁrmed thanks to behavioral and subjective measures. The participants had to assess their mental fatigue
using Karolinska Sleepiness Scale (Akerstedt & Gillbert, 1990) before, in the middle and at the end of the experiment. Their subjective answers, as well as an increase in reaction times and a decrease in accuracy, showed that the participants felt increasingly
tired.

S = WT X with WT A ≈ I32

(1)

where W is the demixing matrix calculated with SOBI. This algorithm assumes stationary and uncorrelated sources for any time
lag.
The 10 sources the most correlated with the EOG signal are
then selected as ocular sources and set to 0 prior to reconstructing
the EEG signal.

X̃ = W−T DS

(2)

where D is a diagonal matrix with binary diagonal elements where
the corresponding index of the sources selected as ocular sources
are set to 0 and the other sources set to 1.
After this denoising step, each epoch is ﬁltered in the theta, alpha, and beta bands using a 5th order Butterworth ﬁlter. The EEG
signals are further averaged in six regions of interest (ROIs), which
are displayed Fig. 3:


2.4. Data acquisition and pre-processing
Participants’ EEG activity was recorded using a BrainAmpTM
system (Brain Products, Inc.) and an Acticap® equipped with 32
Ag–AgCl active electrodes that were positioned according to the
extended 10–20 system. The reference and ground electrodes
used for acquisition were FCz and AFz respectively. The data were
sampled at 500 Hz. The EOG activity was also recorded using two
electrodes positioned at the eyes outer canthi, and two respectively above and below the left eye. Moreover, the EEG signal was
band-pass ﬁltered between 1 and 40 Hz and re-referenced to a
common average reference.

Thus, each epoch X is transformed into a 6 × 10,000 epoch
formed of 6 signals ﬁltered in the b band. For implementation
purposes, each epoch is further split into 2-second epochs Xbi
(6 × 1000) where b stands for θ , α or β .
3.2. Creation of the initial reference state
Let T be a period of time when the subject is not tired. It forms
the learning period and it is composed of NL 2 s epochs Xbi which
contain 6 zero mean signals.
The covariance of the signals in each epoch is calculated by:

i =

1
X X T
1000 bi bi

Fig. 3. Regions of interest (ROIs).

(3)

Fig. 4. Transformation of FDj into a fatigue index.

The mean covariance during the learning period is:

L =

NL
1 
k
NL

(4)

k=1

And the covariance of the signals during a 20 s epochs is:
j
1 
l j =
k
10

Fig. 5. Mean value per block of the EEG index using signals ﬁltered in the alpha
band in function of the mean value of the EOG index, for the 15 subjects.

(5)

k= j−9

The Frobenius distance between  L and  lj is calculated as:







F Dj =  L −  l j  = (trace ( L −  l j )( L −  l j )
F

T



1

)2

(6)

N

N = 10L Frobenius distances can be computed from 20 snonoverlapping epochs during the learning period. The empirical distribution of these N values FDj is computed. Let us note FD90 the
90th percentile and FD98 the 98th percentile of the distribution.
3.3. Mental fatigue index
The mental fatigue index makes use of the Frobenius distance
between  L and the covariance  lj calculated during a 20 s epoch.
The distance FDj is compared to the empirical distribution estimated during the learning period using the function presented in
Fig. 4.
If FDj is below the 90th percentile, the index is equal to 0. Its
meaning is that the distance calculated is in the same range as
the distances measured during the learning set. If FDj is above the
98th percentile, the index is 1, which means that the distance is
signiﬁcantly higher (and thus the covariance matrix is signiﬁcantly
different) than what was measured during the learning set. For a
gradual change of the fatigue index, any value of FDj between FD90
and FD98 gets a value between 0 and 1. The 98th percentile is chosen because it is an estimate of the highest value reached by the
distance during the learning state, more robust to outliers than the
maximum. The 90th percentile is chosen because it gives a fair assessment of the distance highest values without being too close to
the 98th percentile. It thus limits the index switches between 0
and 1 and allows the index to change gradually.
For an on-line implementation, the mental fatigue index is
computed on a sliding window with an overlap of 2 s. A current
epoch X of 20 s is recorded, preprocessed as in 3.1 and split in 2 s
epochs. The index is calculated backward, every 2 s, from 2 s after the beginning of X until the current time, using the 2 s epochs
calculated on the previous epoch X and on the current one.
4. Results
As explained in 2.3, each experiment lasts for 90 min and is
split into 6 different blocks of 9 or 18 min separated by a short
break. The learning set is formed of the last 15 min of block 1. The

ﬁrst 3 min are removed to avoid transitory effects due to the participant’s getting used to the task. Therefore, a total of 45 epochs
is available to learn the empirical distribution ofFDj . The 98th percentile is close to the second highest value of FDj .
4.1. Comparison with an EOG index
The EEG index is compared to an EOG index calculated per subject and per block. For each subject, blinks are extracted from the
vertical EOG signal and the percentage of closure (Perclos) is calculated for each blink (Wierwille, 1994). The mean value of the Perclos is calculated for each of the 6 blocks. The ratio between the
mean value in each block on the mean value in the ﬁrst block is
calculated. This ratio is calculated so as to have comparable measures between subjects. It measures the evolution of the Perclos
compared to the ﬁrst block, in percentage.
The mean value of the EEG index is calculated for each subject
and each block. The correlation between the EEG index and the
EOG index is calculated using the 90 values obtained (6 blocks, 15
subjects). Fig. 5 displays the EOG index in function of the EEG index using signals ﬁltered in the alpha band.
The EOG index is higher than 1 from block 2 to blocks 6 for
all the blocks of the 15 subjects except for 2 blocks where it decreased below 1. This conﬁrms the fact that mental fatigue globally
increased during the experiment, since the Perclos increases. Fig. 5
shows that an increase in the EOG index is associated with an increase in the EEG index and that the increase is higher in blocks
4–6.
The correlation reaches 0.71 when the signals are ﬁltered in the
alpha band. However, it decreases to 0.47 when the signals are ﬁltered in the theta band and to 0.35 when the signals are ﬁltered
in the beta band. This is consistent with the results reported in the
literature where changes in the alpha band, and in a lesser extent
in the theta band, were observed when mental fatigue increased.
Various combinations of the theta and alpha indices were tried :
the mean, the maximal or the minimal value of the two indices.
The highest performance was obtained using the mean. The correlation with the EOG index reached 0.69, which is slightly lower
than the correlation value obtained with the alpha index.
Fig. 6 displays the EEG index in the 3 bands for one subject.
The green marks show the beginning and end of each block. One
can see the increase of the alpha EEG index in function of the time
spent on the task. An increase in the theta band can also be seen

Fig. 6. Time evolution of the EEG index in the alpha, theta and beta bands, for one
subject.

Fig. 8. Boxplot of the EOG index and the variation of the KSS score for the 2 groups
of subjects.

Fig. 7. Mean value EEG index per block, for the 15 subjects.

when the time on task increases but in a lesser extent than in the
alpha band. On the other hand, no gradual increase nor decrease is
observed in the beta band.

Fig. 9. Time evolution of the EEG index in the alpha band for subjects no. 4, 5, 6
and 15.

4.2. Analysis of the index in the alpha band

external signs of mental fatigue associated with a subjective perception of fatigue.

Results in the alpha band are now further analyzed. Fig. 7 displays the averaged value of the EEG index in each block, for each
subject. One can see that a group of 7 subjects seems to get increasingly tired, with an EEG index higher than 0.4 (which means
that more than 40% of the epochs forming the block are different
from the learning set), while the rest seems to be unaffected by
the time spent on the task.
The subjects are now separated in two groups: the group with
an index higher than 0.4 in the last block (6 subjects) and the others (9 subjects). For these two groups, the value of the EOG index
in the last block as well as the difference between the KSS score
at the end and at the beginning of the experiment are displayed
in a boxplot in Fig. 8. The variation of the KSS score and the value
of the EOG index are higher in the group with an index above 0.4.
This shows that the group with a higher EEG index does exhibit

4.3. Analysis of 4 subjects representative of the two groups
In what follows, the EEG indices of 4 subjects representative of
their group (2 from the ﬁrst group - n°4 and 5, 2 from the second
group - n°6 and 15) are further analyzed. Their evolutions in time
are displayed in Fig. 9. The 4 subjects exhibit two very distinct
behaviors. The EEG indices of the ﬁrst 2 subjects do not increase
in time. They remain equal to 0 except for brief periods of times.
On the other hand, the indices of the last two increase with the
time spent on the task. Once the index has reached a high value,
it remains globally high except when the subject stops for a short
break. The index gets shortly back to 0 just after the break before
increasing again. Moreover, the longer the time spent on the task,
the shorter the effect of the break. The variation of the KSS score

from 7 to 12 to the matrices in block 6. Subjects 4, 5, 6 and 15 are
displayed in columns. The columns from 1 to 6 are the matrices of
subject 4, then columns 7 to 12 are the matrices of subject 5 and
so on. All the matrices are normalized by dividing each matrix of
one subject by the trace of the covariance in block 1 of the same
subject.
One can see almost no changes between block1 and block 6 for
subjects 4 and 5. For subjects 6 and 15, the changes can be seen
mostly in ROIs 3 (Fronto-central right), 4 and 6 (Parieto-occipital
median and right). The variance in the alpha band increases in
the 3 ROIS, as well as their covariance. The covariance with ROI
1 (Fronto-central median) also increases. On the other hand, ROIs
2 (Fronto-central left) and 5 (Parieto-occipital left) seem unaltered.
5. Discussion

Fig. 10. EEG index per block, KSS variation (divided by 10; blue line) and EOG index
minus 1 per block for subjects 4, 5, 6 and 15. (For interpretation of the references to
color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article).

Fig. 11. Normalized mean covariance matrices in block 1 and block 6 for subjects
no. 4, 5, 6 and 15.

and the EOG index displayed in Fig. 10 conﬁrms the evolution towards a fatigue state for the last two subjects.
To analyze the changes that occurred in the EEG signals for
these 4 subjects, the mean covariance matrices in block 1 and in
block 6 are analyzed. The trace of the covariance matrix divided by
the number of ROIs provides information on the global energy of
the EEG signals. It is equal to 5.7, 3, 0.86 and 10.4 μV2 for subjects
4, 5, 6 and 15 in block 1 and to 6, 3.5, 1.4, and 20.1 μV2 in block
6. One can see that they are very different from one subject to another and cannot be directly compared. An inter-subject classiﬁer
able to detect mental fatigue for any subject will get poor results
on these subjects. It shows the necessity to learn a classiﬁer for
any new subject or, as proposed in this paper, to analyze the evolution of the EEG signals from an initial state. Fig. 11 displays the
covariance matrices for these 4 subjects as a unique image. The
lines from 1 to 6 correspond to the matrices in block 1, the lines

A method to monitor operators’ mental fatigue is proposed. The
method analyzes the evolution of the current covariance matrix,
calculated using a 20 s epoch and 6 different ROIs, from the mean
covariance learned at the beginning of the session, when the subject is assumed not to be fatigued. The statistical distribution of
the distance between the mean covariance of the learning set and
the covariance calculated from 20 s epochs is learned and used
to transform the distance into a binary index. For this index, 1
means that the distance currently measured is signiﬁcantly different (higher than the 98th percentile) from what was observed during the learning set while 0 means that it is similar. The analysis
of the mean covariance matrices in block 1 for 4 subjects shows
that the covariance matrix in the initial state is very different for
each individual. However, the computation of a deviation from an
original state makes it possible to overcome this inter-individual
variability issue. All the information required to calculate the fatigue index is gathered at the beginning of the session: the mean
spatial covariance matrix, which provides information on the energy of the signals in each ROI as well as their interaction, and the
variations of the covariance matrix during the initial state. The parameters that convert the distance into a fatigue index (the 90th
and 98th percentiles of the distance) are tuned for each subject in
an automatic way, without any assumption on the distance distribution function.
The on-line implementation of the index is rather easy. EEG
is recorded during 20 s, de-noised and ﬁltered, then split in 2 s
epochs. The mean covariance can be calculated at the end of the
learning period as well as the distance distribution function and
the 2 percentiles that tune the conversion of the distance into an
index. Then, the covariance on the next 20 s epochs can be calculated every 2 s using two consecutive 20 s epochs when the sliding
window overlaps two epochs. Thus, the index is calculated every
2 s but updated every 20 s.
Epochs of 20 s were chosen in concordance with the literature.
Moreover, considering the experiment’s design, in which mental
workload varies a lot over short periods of time, 20 s ensure that
the EEG variations due to changes in workload are smoothed out.
In this paper, the EEG indicator was compared to an external
sign of mental fatigue, the Perclos, calculated using the EOG, to
evaluate its performance. The Perclos is known to be well correlated with fatigue (Wierwille & Ellsworth, 1994). The KSS score
variation was also used to analyze the performances of the EEG indicator. Another common way to evaluate a subject’s fatigue state
is to use the behavior parameters. In this study, both the accuracy
and the reaction time were measured. However, though some
signiﬁcant differences were observed at the group level between
reaction times and accuracies in the block 2 and the block 5, no
correlation was obtained between changes in Perclos and changes
in accuracies or reaction times per block, for the different subjects. No correlation between the EEG indicator and the behavior

parameters was observed either. This may be because the task was
rather simple and could still be achieved with acceptable performances, even when the subjects were tired. The same observation
was made by Trejo et al., 2015 who conducted a rather similar
experiment.
The results showed that the EEG index based on the alpha band
was signiﬁcantly correlated with changes in Perclos. Also, 6 subjects out of 15 seemed to be increasingly tired, with an index gradually changing from 0 to 1 with increasing time-on-task. The other
subjects’ index remained globally close to 0, with only very short
periods when the index reached 1. Using KSS questionnaires, these
subjects reported to feel globally less tired than the other 6. The
proposed index is not meant to be used as an instant indicator of
fatigue that would raise an alarm whenever it gets higher than 1.
Indeed, sudden changes in the covariance matrix can be observed
even in the initial state though they are not related to increased
fatigue. Mental fatigue is seen as a gradual and cumulative process
induced by time on task. A high index can be seen as fatigue only
if it remains high for some time. Therefore, the index mean value
computed over a period of time can give an overall assessment of
fatigue. In the case of these experiments, it can inform us on which
participant is still ﬁt to perform the task at the end of each block.
In the same idea, its mean value during periods of, say, 10–15 min
could be used to assess the global fatigue state of an operator who
has to concentrate on information displayed on a screen and to
decide if it is time for him/her to have a break. In the same idea
as Trejo et al., 2015, the evolution of the subjects toward the fatigued state can be observed over time. However, contrary to Trejo
et al., the index is not a regression index learnt from data gathered at the beginning and at the end of the session but it measures a statistical deviation from the initial not fatigued state. The
refreshing effect of the breaks can be observed on the time evolution of the index. Indeed, for subjects who feel tired at the end of
the session (reported by KSS questionnaire), the index gets back to
0 during the period following the break. It was also observed that
the freshening effect of the break diminished over time with the
subject becoming tired more quickly.
The fact that the index makes use of the covariance matrix of
EEG signals recorded at 6 different locations on the scalp is quite
innovative as it makes it rather sensitive to changes in interactions
in brain regions. Indeed, covariance can be seen as a simple connectivity measure. The index is not only sensitive to changes in
the EEG energy in the alpha band (the diagonal terms of the covariance matrix) but also to the changes in the interrelationship
between the signals measured in the ROIs. The ROIs were selected
to cover all the areas of the scalp. For the 4 subjects that were
further analyzed, the main changes are observed in ROI1 (Frontocentral median), ROI3 (Fronto-central right), ROI4 (Parieto-occipital
median) and ROI6 (Parieto-occipital right). The variance of EEG in
ROI3, ROI4 and ROI6 globally increases as well as their covariance.
The variance of ROI1 (Fronto-central median) does not increase
much but its covariance with ROI3, ROI4 and ROI6 increases. Globally, this means that, as expected from the literature, alpha activity
from fronto-central and parieto-occipital sites is a good indicator of
one’s mental fatigue state in a general manner. Yet here only median and right electrode sites seem really relevant. But most importantly, this study shows that not only is alpha activity relevant
at the electrode site level, it is also a good marker for mental state
estimation based on inter-electrode connectivity.
This paper showed that it is possible to assess mental fatigue
using EEG signals. Ocular indices are another eﬃcient way to assess fatigue. They are well correlated with fatigue (Hu & Zheng,
2009) and are used as a reference in this paper. The extraction
of ocular indices can be done through EOG signals. However, this
requires for the operator to wear EOG electrodes near his eyes,
which can be very uncomfortable and can impair her/his perfor-

mance. Ocular signals can be also extracted using high frame cameras Picot, Charbonnier, Caplier, and Vu, 2012. However, with a
frame rate of 30 fpm, standard cameras record about 5 frames during a standard blink (duration about 15 ms) and may provide only
a very inaccurate estimation of the blink duration. In addition, high
frame rate cameras are expensive, which makes this solution less
competitive. The advantage of using EEG signals is that an accurate
fatigue indicator can be calculated at a low cost. The new technology that is now emerging to record EEG in a friendly way, such
as EEG headsets (like the Emotiv headset for instance) or caps,
makes it possible to imagine a system that would monitor operators’ mental fatigue using EEG analysis during long periods of operation. Moreover, the wealth of information provided by EEG signals
makes it possible to combine the indicator proposed with indicators estimating other mental states, such as workload levels (Roy,
Bonnet, Charbonnier, Campagne, & Jallon, 2015) to have a global
assessment of the operator’s ability to fulﬁll her/his mission.
6. Conclusion
In this paper, an on-line innovative EEG index is proposed to
assess operators’ mental fatigue over long periods of time. It uses
the EEG signals recorded from 24 electrodes merged into 6 regions
of interest. The index measures the deviation of the spatial covariance matrix calculated on 20 s from a mean spatial covariance matrix learned during an initial state. It is automatically tuned using
the 90th and 98th percentiles of the distance distribution calculated during the initial state. The index performance was analyzed
on a group of 15 subjects who performed a tedious but mentally
demanding task on a computer during 90 min. The index was compared with an ocular index measuring the external signs of mental
fatigue as well as with the subject’s fatigue evaluation using the
Karolinska Sleepiness Scale. It was shown that it can be used based
on the alpha activity to make an eﬃcient assessment of an operator’s mental fatigue state. The correlation with the ocular index
was as high as 0.7.
References
Akerstedt, T., & Gillberg, M. (1990). Subjective and objective sleepiness in the active
individual. International Journal of Neuroscience, 52, 29–37.
Belouchrani, A., Abed-Meraim, K., Cardoso, J.-F., & Moulines, E. (1997). A blind
source separation technique using second-order statistics. IEEE Transactions on
Signal Processing, 45(2), 434–444.
Borghini, G., Vecchiato, G., Toppi, J., L. , Astolﬁ, Maglione, A., Isabella, R., et al.
(2012). Assessment of mental fatigue during car driving by using high resolution
EEG activity and neurophysiologic indices. In Proceedings of the annual international conference of the ieee engineering in medicine and biology society (EMBC).
Cao, L., Sun, J.-L. Y., Zhu, H., & Yan, C. (2010). EEG-based vigilance analysis by using
ﬁsher score and PCA algorithm.. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on progress in informatics and computing (PIC).
Dasari, D., Shou, G., & Ding, L. (2013). Investigation of independent components
based EEG metrics for mental fatigue in simulated ATC task. In Proceedings of
the6th International IEEE/EMBS Conference on Neural Engineering (NER).
Hu, S., & Zheng, G. (2008). A partial least squares regression-based fusion model
for predicting the trend in drowsiness ieee transactions on systems. Man, and
Cybernetics - Part A: Systems and Humans, 38(5), 1085–1092.
Hu, S., & Zheng, G. (2009). Driver drowsiness detection with eyelid related parameters by support vector machine. Expert Systems with Applications, 36(4), 7651–
7658.
Jap, B. T., Lal, S. S., Fischer, P., & Bekiaris, E. (2009). Using EEG spectral components to assess algorithms for detecting fatigue. Expert Systems with Applications,
36(2), 2352–2359.
Ji, H., Li, L., Cao, L., & Wang, D. (2011). A EEG-based brain computer interface system
towards applicable vigilance monitoring sixth international conference on intelligent
systems and knowledge engineering. Shanghai, China (ISKE2011).
Jung, T., Stensmo, M., & Sejnowski, T. (1997). Estimating alertness from the EEG
power spectrum. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, 44(1), 60–69.
Khushaba, R. N., Kodagoda, S., Lal, S., & Dissanayake, G. (2011). Driver drowsiness
classiﬁcation using fuzzy Wavelet-Packet-Based feature extraction algorithm.
IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, 58(1), 121–131.
Klimesch, W. (1999). EEG alpha and theta oscillations reﬂect cognitive and memory
performance: a review and analysis. Brain Research Reviews, 29, 169–195 Apr.
Knipling, R. (1998). PERCLOS: a valid psychophysiological measure of alertness as
assessed by psychomotor vigilance. Federal Highway Administration (FHWA).

Lal, S. K., & Craig, A. (2002). Driver fatigue: Electroencephalography and psychological assessment. Psychophysiology, 39, 313–321 May.
Lin, C.-T., Chen, Y.-C., Huang, T.-Y., Chiu, T.-T., Ko, L.-W., Liang, S.-F., et al. (2008a).
Development of wireless brain computer interface with embedded multitask
scheduling and its application on real-time driver’s drowsiness detection and
warning. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, 35(5), 1582–1590.
Lin, C.-T., Pal, N. R., Chuang, C.-Y., Jung, T.-P., Ko, L.-W., & Liang, S.-F. (2008b). An
EEG-based subject-and session-independent drowsiness detection Neural Networks. In IEEE international joint conference on neural networks, IJCNN 2008.(IEEE
world congress on computational intelligence).
Lin, C.-T., Wu, R.-C., Liang, S.-F., Chao, W.-H., Chen, Y.-J., & Jung, T.-P. (2005). EEGbased drowsiness estimation for safety driving using independent component
analysis. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, 52(12),
2726–2738.
Paus, T., Zatorre, R. J., Hoe, N., Caramanos, Z., Gotman, J., Petrides, M., & Evans, A. C.
(1997). Time-related changes in neural systems underlying attention and
arousal during the performance of an auditory vigilance task. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 9, 392–408 May.
Picot, A., Charbonnier, S., & Caplier, A. (2012). On-line detection of drowsiness using
brain and visual information. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics,
Part A, 42(3), 764–776.
Picot, A., Charbonnier, S., Caplier, A., & Vu, N. S. (2012). Using retina modelling to
characterize blinking: comparison between EOG and video analysis. Machine Vision and Applications, 23(6), 1195–1208.
Rosipal, R., Peters, B., Kecklund, G., Akerstedt, T., Gruber, G., Woertz, M., et al.
(2007). EEG-based drivers’ drowsiness monitoring using a hierarchical gaussian
mixture model. Human Computer Interaction, 16, 294–303 2007.
Roy, R.N., Bonnet, S., Charbonnier, S., Campagne, A., & Jallon, P. (2015). A comparison
of ERP spatial ﬁltering methods for optimal mental workload estimation, EMBC
2015, Milan, Italy, August.

Roy, R. N., Charbonnier, S., & Bonnet, S. (2014). Detection of mental fatigue using an
active BCI inspired signal processing chain. In 19 World IFAC Congress. Le Cap,
Afrique du Sud 24-29 August.
Shen, K.-Q., Li, X.-P., Ong, C.-J., Shi-Yun, Shao, & Wilder-Smith, E. P. V. (2008). EEGbased mental fatigue measurement using multi-class support vector machines
with conﬁdence estimate. Clinical Neurophysiology, 119(7), 1524–1533.
Shi, L. C., & Lu, B. L. (2013). EEG-based vigilance estimation using extreme learning
machines. Neurocomputing, 102, 135–143.
Subasi, A. (2005). Automatic recognition of alertness level from EEG by using neural
network and wavelet coeﬃcients. Expert Systems with Applications, 28(4), 701–
711.
Tanaka, M., Shigihara, Y., Ishii, A., Funakura, M., Kanai, E., & Watanabe, Y. (2012).
Effect of mental fatigue on the central nervous system : an electroencephalography study. Behavioral and Brain Functions, 8(1), 8–48.
Trejo, L. J., Kubitz, K., Roispal, R., Kochavi, R., & Montgomery, L. D. (2015). EEG-based
estimation and classiﬁcation of mental fatigue. Psychology, 6, 572–589.
Wierwille, W. W., & Ellsworth, L. A. (1994). Evaluation of driver drowsiness by
trained raters. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 26, 571–581.
Yu, H., Lu, H., Ouyang, T., Liu, H., & Lu, B.-L. (2010). Vigilance detection based on
sparse representation of EEG. In Annual international conference of the ieee engineering in medicine and biology society (EMBC).
Zhang, C., Zheng, C.-X., & Yu, X. L. (2009). Automatic recognition of cognitive fatigue from physiological indices by using wavelet packet transform and kernel
learning algorithms. Expert systems with applications, 36, 4664–4671.
Zhao, C., Zheng, C., Zhao, M., Tu, Y., & Liu, J. (2011). Multivariate autoregressive models and kernel learning algorithms for classifying driving mental fatigue based on electroencephalographic. Expert Systems with Applications, 38(3),
1859–1865.

