International Journal of Recent Technology and Engineering (IJRTE)
ISSN: 2277-3878, Volume-8 Issue-4, November 2019

Detection of EEG Signal and De-Noising for
Hypoglycemia detection by Brain Wave Sensor
Praveena Sindagi, Mahesh P K,
Abstract: Electroencephalography (EEG) signs have
remained proven an identical adaptable apparatus for
recognition of dissimilar types of Brain infections. Nevertheless
through footage of these signs, EEG records gets soiled by
different clatter signs produced through supply line interfering,
base-line-wander, probe association, muscle-movement etc. Such
sound signs misinform analysis of brain that is not anticipated.
To circumvent such problematic elimination of the sound signals
been develop crucial. Owing to development of data and
information equipment tele-medicine and e-health have
developed prevalent in emerging and urbanized republics. In the
examination drudgery we partake verified three dissimilar
categories of adjustable filtering procedures to associate the
presentations for scheming EEG signal as of arbitrary and
Gaussian-noise. The main idea of the work is to interface the
human brain signals and machine in an easy and cheapest
manner to find out the various abnormalities in him. The
methodology is as follows, we took brain-wave senor for
acquiring of data from the person, and this is standard device
available in market. The senor is connected to the laptop or
system with the help of Bluetooth and the signals are acquired.
The acquired signal will be a noisy signal which is to be denoised and filtered for further process of detection. Random and
white-Gaussian-noise is added with EEG signal and Adaptive
filter with three different algorithms have been tested to reduce
the noise that is added during transmission through the
telemedicine system. Further based on the sum, mean and
standard deviation parameters the individual is been evaluated
the condition is been predicted. After an experimental learning of
teenagers with type-1-diabetes (T1D), accompanying with
hypoglycemic incident night, centroid, alpha-frequency
condensed meaningfully and the centroid theta-frequency
augmented meaningfully. The complete data remained
prearranged hooked on a preparation set and examination
customary arbitrarily designated. By means of proposed
methodology, which was resultant as of teaching set through
maximum log indication, projected blood-glucose summaries
created a noteworthy relationship in contradiction of measured
standards in assessment set.
Keywords: Electroencephalography, Adaptive filtering
algorithms, T1D, Gaussian noise, optimal Bayesian neural
network

I. INTRODUCTION
EEG restrained through an electro-encephalograph, is the
bio-medical signal enchanting on superficial of physique
correlated to reduction & reduction of brain. And the signal
signifies an enormously vital amount for doctors as it
affords vigorous info about patient brain disorder with
overall fitness. Usually, frequency group of EEG is 1 - 60
Hz. Inside brain there exist a particular electrical

Revised Manuscript Received on November 15, 2019
Praveena Sindagi, Assistant Professor, Dept. of Electronics and
Communication, Government Engineering College Raichur,
Dr. Mahesh P K, Professor and HOD. Dept. of Electronics and
Communication, ATME College of Engineering, Mysuru,

Retrieval Number: D9715118419/2019©BEIESP
DOI:10.35940/ijrte.D9715.118419

transmission structure which safeguards brain to reduce &
contract in synchronized & operative style. EEG footages
might have mutual relics with noise instigated by
topographies such as power-line intrusion, exterior
electromagnetic arena, arbitrary body activities & breathing.
Diverse kinds of alphanumeric filters might be used to
eliminate signal apparatuses from unsolicited frequencyranges. Since it is problematic to smear filters with constant
co-efficient to decrease biomedical-signal sounds since
human behavior is not meticulous liable on time, adaptivefiltering method is obligatory to overawe the problem.
Adaptive-filter is designed by means of dissimilar
algorithms such as least-mean-square (LMS), Recursiveleast-square (RLS), Normalized-least
means-square
(NLMS). In telemedicine system diverse kinds of
biomedical signals like ECG and EEG wants to be
transmitted over communication structure [7]. Through
transmission of this kind of biomedical signals the chance of
getting corrupted by common noise is identical high.Hypoglycemia is furthermost mutual side-effect of insulin &
sulphonyl urea in conduct of diabetes, & is a main fence to
upholding reasonable long period glycaemic governor.
Hypoglycaemia is a detail of life for maximum people by
T1D. In average patient agonizes three chapters of indicative
hypoglycaemia for every week & agonizes one or more
chapters of unadorned, provisionally deactivating
hypoglycaemia [8], frequently counting a coma or seizure.
Hypoglycaemia is incapacitating for patients & their carers
since of its related indisposition, loss of control & risk of
demiseBrain hinge on a frequent fund of glucose & is
defenceless to any glucose scarcity. Incapable to creäte or
stock this main source of energy, brain is solitary of the
primary organs pretentious to sank blood glucose-levels.
Hypoglycaemia advances when rates of glucose-entry
interested in organized circulation are abridged comparative
to glucose acceptance by tissues. Hypoglycaemia is
generally modified certainly by the mixture of a amount of
defence mechanisms. Primarily, a diminution in insulin
excretion in retort to deteriorating blood glucose-levels
arises [9]. As glucose-levels last to fall, a numeral of
dismissed glucose pawn regulatory features are
consecutively initiated at definite verges to ensure adequate
glucose up-take to brain & other central nervous-system
tissue-metabolism.
II. LITERATURE SURVEY
The removal of high resolution EEG-signals from recording,
filthy with system-noise is a vital issue to examine in
Telemedicine-system.
The
goal
for
EEG-signal
augmentation is too distinct the valid signal-components
from the un-desired relics, so as to contemporary an EEG
that eases easy & precise construal. In our literature-review
we found that “De-noising
EEG-signal by means of
Wavelet-Transform,
where
Published By:

8936 Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering
& Sciences Publication

Detection of EEG Signal and De-Noising for Hypoglycemia detection by Brain Wave Sensor
Wavelet is been castoff for de-noising EEG-signal but no
further associated exploration paper has not originate
wherever Mutual adaptive filter processes is not castoff. In
such broadside the LMS process functions on an instant
origin such that the weight-vector is efficient every new
model with in the manifestation, grounded on an instant
gradient estimation. There are firm clinical-application of
EEG-signal dispensation that necessitate adaptive-filters
with huge number of taps. In such request the conformist
LMS [5] is computationally costlier to implement.The LMS
system need little additions which are accordingly,
extensively
practical
for
acoustic-echo-cancellers.
Nevertheless, there is strong necessity to advance the
merging speed of LMS & NLMS procedures. The RLS
algorithm, who’s merging doesn’t be contingent on the I/P
signal, is fastest of all conservative adaptive-algorithms. The
main disadvantage of RLS process is its large-computational
cost. Though, fast RLS processes is studied in recently. In
this broadside we goal to obtain a relative study of fasteralgorithm. Distinct the NLMS & projection-algorithms, the
RLS doesn’t have a scalar step-size. So, the difference
physiognomies of an EEG-signal cannot be replicated
unswervingly in the RLS process [10]. Now, we study the
RLS process from view-point of adaptive-filter since (a) the
RLS can be viewed as a special-version of the adaptive-filter
& (b) every limitation of the adaptive-filter has corporeal
connotation. Computer models prove that this system meets
faster double as conservative system.
Robotic glaucoma acknowledgment classification
originated on wavelet dynamism edifices and ANN [1]:
Glaucoma is eye-disease it damages the optic-nerve of
the eye & becomes severe over-time. It is instigated due to
build-up of pressure-inside the eye. Glaucoma inclines to be
inherited & may not show-up until far along in life. The
recognition of glaucomatous-progression is one of the
utmost important & most-challenging facets of main openangle-glaucoma (OAG) management. The premature
recognition of glaucoma is significant in directive to allow
suitable treatment, monitoring, & to minimize the danger of
irretrievable visual-field loss. Even though advances in
visual imaging proposition the potential for former
diagnosis, the best way is to encompass an amalgamation of
info from structural & functional-tests. In this proposedmethod both structural & energy features are well-thoughtout then examined to categorize as glaucomatous-image.
Energy supply over wavelet sub-bands were functional to
find these significant texture-energy features. Lastly mined
energy-features are practical to Rear Proliferation neuralnetwork and Multi-layer Percept for operative grouping by
seeing usual subject's extracted-energy features. NaïveBayes categorizes the images in database with accurateness
of 91%. MLP-BP ANN system categorizes [3] the imageries
in database with accurateness of 96%.
Instant brainwave meticulous interface by means of
P323 module in EEG signal dispensation [2]:
EEG is a developing held of digital-signal processing.
EEG is electrical sigs which is recorded with the help of
sensors attached on humanoid scalp to sense human brain
actions along scalp. EEG sig dispensation is a theoretically
puzzling problem for scholars due to tremendously noisy
environment associated to other dissimilar kinds of digital-

Retrieval Number: D9715118419/2019©BEIESP
DOI:10.35940/ijrte.D9715.118419

data comparable voice or image. Nevertheless, EEG-signals
also make auspicious re-search areas & applications for
human-being. This paper drives at designing braincontrolled edge by means of P323 constituent in EEG-signal
processing. The EEG signal P323 constituent is the event
associated probable component provoked by the human
brain in progression of decision-making. We practice the
odd-ball architype accessible by P300 Speller to make the
brain computer interface for topic to direct their intent of
thoughtful via computer-screen. The device castoff to record
the brain-signal is the Emotiv EPOC-headset. We deed the
Bayesian-linear-discriminant-analysis (BLDA) to categorize
the P300-signals [4]. We demeanor the tests to aid people
express-thought in two out of six choice edges in real-time.
The selections, which are obtainable on the computerscreen, might be any-thing from letters to the specific
symbols or images. The investigational outcomes disclose
the acceptable precision of correct-classification to be 88%
& the best bit-rate of over 10-bits per minute.
III. PROPOSED METHOD
Hypoglycemia or fear of hypoglycemia establishes a
significant-barrier to the accomplishment of good-glycemic
governor the insulin treated diabetic-patients. Thru
measuring physical responses resulting from EEG &
analyzing these, we found that hypoglycemia can be sensed
non-invasively.
As defined in flow-chart inward EEG-signal is digitized
to progression by DSP. Signal is Initially de-noised, then
permit over progression of frequency-shaping & amplitude
restraining to retain signal-amplitude within perimeter. The
detail explanation of method is as follows: Step1- The main use is to advance a system to sense the
hyper-glucomatic role of a person grounded on EEGsignals.
Step2 -The EEG-signal has been I/P as text-file.
Step3 -Initially, de-noise function is used to eliminate noise
from EEG-signal.
Step4 - Frequency-shaping Filter Primed the frequencyvector for frequency range 1000 -10,000 Hz. Time realm
signal was rehabilitated to frequency field by means of FFTfunction. Prepared the gain-vector of length-N, with zero, to
stock gain co-efficient. The mini & max limit of chosen gain
was 1 & 45 dB correspondingly. Set the gain for 1st set of
frequencies

8937

Published By:
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering
& Sciences Publication

International Journal of Recent Technology and Engineering (IJRTE)
ISSN: 2277-3878, Volume-8 Issue-4, November 2019

EEG Signal Input

De-Noising: Removal of noise
in input

Frequency Modelling: Desired
freq. is assigned

Gain modification: Obtained
gain values is added
Fig. 2. Input Brain Wave raw data
Amplitude regulating: Gain of
signal is compared

Display of input and Output
signal

Apply methodology with
different function
Fig 1. Proposed process flow
Step5 - After gaining frequency-shaping function, gain coefficient from gain-vector is added to inward-signal to shape
the signal conferring to transfer-function.
Step6 - Amplitude-Shaping.
To bound amplitude-signal, amplitude level of distinct
model has remained associated through least & highest
threshold-levels
If the signal-level is greater than Psat at that time decrease
the signal-level to Psat.
If signal-level is lesser than Pmin at that time decrease the
signal-level to zero.
Step7 - By means of above method frequency-shaping
transfer function, magnitude and spectrogram versus time is
plotted.
Step8 - By inspection the frequency-shaping function the
condition for normality is plaid.

Fig. 3. Noisy data after adding Gaussian noise

IV. RESULTS & DISCUSSION
Initially the EEG values are been extracted into text file in
a PC/ Laptop, from the brain wave sensor which is fixed to
the human brain and interlinked with Bluetooth. These text
file data is further processed with proposed algorithm and
analysed for defect.

Retrieval Number: D9715118419/2019©BEIESP
DOI:10.35940/ijrte.D9715.118419

Fig. 4. De-noised Signal

Published By:

8938 Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering
& Sciences Publication

Detection of EEG Signal and De-Noising for Hypoglycemia detection by Brain Wave Sensor
patient. By means of frequency-shaping function show in
Fig 3, gain of EEG signal is revised on precise frequency
range, & with amplitude restraining function the treated
signal has increased the gain inside limits, Fig 4 displays the
relative-magnitude of I/P EEG signal & processed O/P
signal/adjusted signal with no noise.
Spectrogram is conspiracy of short period Fouriertransform of signal diverse frequency on time-axis.
Spectrogram for I/P exhibitions skewed frequency in
additional noise & spectrogram of attuned signal has shown
the allied frequencies as exposed. The brighter colour
exhibitions more energy.
V. CONCLUSION
In this exploration, we remain verified three dissimilar
kinds of Adaptive-filtering procedures to associate the
performances for scheming EEG signal as of arbitrary and
Gaussian-noise. We have engaged brain wave senor for
obtaining data from the person, this is the standard device
obtainable in the market. senor is linked to the system or
laptop with the help of Bluetooth. The attained signal will be
a noisy-signal which has to be de-noised & filtered for
supplementary process of recognition. Arbitrary noise &
white Gaussian noise is additional with EEG signal &
Adaptive-filter with dissimilar algorithms have been tested
to lessen the noise that is additional during transmission
over the tele-medicine system. The outcome of the
experiment was good enough to extract the signal from
human with a very least time consumption of 1 min. Further
Gaussian noise addition and de-noising gave good
spectrogram picture of the signal with an average bandwidth
of 9 db. The de-noised signals were further used to classify
the presence or absence of hyper glycaemia based on the
mean and standard deviation thresholds. The classification
of the abnormal signal is been done with an additional
threshold of standard deviation and entropy values. The
results were tested on 20 T1D patients and the accuracy was
up to 95%.

Fig. 4. Input Signal Spectrogram

Fig. 5. Output Signal Spectrogram

VI. FUTURE SCOPE
With the proposed methodologies and algorithms we were
able to achieve the desired outcomes in an effective manner.
Hence forth the module can be further be used to compare
the methodology with the other types of methodologies to
predict the accuracy and effectiveness of algorithms. The
system can be used in future telemedicine applications with
computerized equipment’s in real time.

Fig 6 Final output

REFERENCES
1.

Fig 7 GUI of Complete software module
In this unit, performance of the projected tactic has been
assessed by the simulations in MATLAB. The I/P EEG
signal is altered to digital-signal, then treated by MATLAB
coding to de-noise signal, generate frequency-shaping
function to shape-frequencies & by amplitude restrictive
produce the attuned or modified-signal which is presented to

Retrieval Number: D9715118419/2019©BEIESP
DOI:10.35940/ijrte.D9715.118419

2.

3.

8939

Pichet Srisangngam, Sorawat Chivapreecha, Kobchai Dejhan, “A
Design of IIR Based Digital Hearing Aids Using Genetic Algorithm”,
The 8th Electrical Engineering/ Electronics, Computer,
Telecommunications and Information Technology (ECTI)
Association of Thailand - Conference 2011, ISBN: 978-1-4577-04246.
Gayathri R. ; P.V. Rao ; Aruna S, “Automated glaucoma detection
system based on wav elet energy features and ANN”, 2014
International
Conference
on
Advances
in
Computing,
Communications and Informatics (ICACCI)24-27 Sept. 2014, ISBN:
978-1-4799-3080-7.
Ha Hoang Kha, “Real-time
brainwave-controlled interface
using P300 component in EEG
signal processing”, 2016 IEEE
Published By:
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering
& Sciences Publication

International Journal of Recent Technology and Engineering (IJRTE)
ISSN: 2277-3878, Volume-8 Issue-4, November 2019
RIVF International Conference on Computing &Communication
Technologies, Research, Innovation, and Vision for the Future
(RIVF)7-9 Nov. 2016. ISBN: 978-1-5090-4134-3
4. Robert W. B¨auml and Wolfgang S¨orgel, “Uniform Polyphase Filter
Banks For Use In Hearing Aids:Design And Constraints”, 16th
European Signal Processing Conference (EUSIPCO 2008), Lausanne,
Switzerland, August 25-29, 2008,
5.
Trudy Stetzler, Neeraj Magotra,Pedro Gelabert, Preethi
Kasthuri,Sridevi Bangalore, “Low-Power RealTime Programmable
DSP Development Platform for Digital Hearing Aids”,application
report published by Texas Instrument ,2000.
6. Robert W. B¨auml and Wolfgang S¨orgel, “Uniform Polyphase Filter
Banks For Use In Hearing Aids:Design And Constraints”,16th
European Signal Processing Conference (EUSIPCO 2008), Lausanne,
Switzerland, August 25-29, 2008, ISSN: 2219-5491.
7.
Lien B. Nguyen, Anh V. Nguyen, Sai Ho Ling, “An Adaptive
Strategy of Classification for Detecting Hypoglycemia using Only
Two EEG Channels”, 34th Annual International Conference of the
IEEE EMBS San Diego, California USA, 28 August - 1 September,
2012, pp3515-3518.
8.
H. T. Nguyen and T. W. Jones, "Detection of nocturnal hypoglycemic
episodes using EEG signals," in 32nd Annual International conference
of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, Argentina,
pp. 4930-4933, 2010
9.
A. Delorme and S. Makeig, "EEGLAB: an open source toolbox for
analysis of single-trial EEG dynamics including independent
component analysis," Journal of Neuroscience Methods, vol. 134, pp.
9-21, 2004.
10. W. Clarke, T. Jones, A. Rewers, D. Dunger, and G. J. Klingensmith,
"Assessment and management of hypoglycemia in children and
adolescents with diabetes," Pediatric Diabetes, vol. 10, pp. 134-145,
2009.

AUTHORS PROFILE
Author 1: Mr. Praveena Sindagi is a
Assistant Professor in the Department of
Electronics
and
Communication
Engineering of Government Engineering
College Raichur, since 2011. He is
pursuing Ph.D from visveshwaraya
Technological University, Belagavi in the
field
of
Biomedical
signal/image
processing. He obtained his M.Tech
(Digital Communication) from BMS
College of Engineering Bangalore in 2008.
He obtained his BE (Electronics and
Communication
Engineering)
from
Visveshwaraya Technological University,
Belagavi in 2003. He has both industrial as well as academic exposure
owing to his earlier services in industries and academic institutes spread
over the states of Karnataka.
Mr Praveen Sindagi having total 14 years of teaching experience in
Electronics and Communication Engineering. His fields of interests are:
Signal processing, Image processing, Speech processing, Communication,
Networking.
Author 2: Dr. Mahesh P K is a diligent
techno savvy Professor with excellent
academic and research track record having
16 years of experience in the area of
Electronics and Communication. Dr.
Mahesh carries his academic credentials
with Bachelors of Engineering in
electronics and communication, Masters of
Technology VLSI Design and Embedded
Systems and PhD in Electronics from
University of Mysore, Mysore.Dr. Mahesh
has extended his service at various levels in
teaching, initially as Lecturer, then Assistant Professor, Associate Professor
and now as Professor and Head. Dr. Mahesh has been into research for the
last 9 years working in the field of Image processing, Signal Processing and
VLSI. He also authored more than 40 research articles at both National and
International levels. His research articles have been referred and cited by
other contemporary researchers across globe more than 50 times for the last
4 years. He currently is guiding6 students for their PhD.Dr. Mahesh has
been identified as an expert at International level in his area of research for
many journals. He has delivered Special lectures on Image processing,
Pattern recognition, and VLSI. Prof. Mahesh is known for his lecturing in
his area of research interest. He is the Editor-in-Chief for many
international and national conference/Journals, also acted as Chairpersons.

Retrieval Number: D9715118419/2019©BEIESP
DOI:10.35940/ijrte.D9715.118419

Published By:

8940 Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering
& Sciences Publication

