Proceedings of 2012 IEEE
International Conference on Mechatronics and Automation
August 5 - 8, Chengdu, China

Design of Wearable Intelligent Mind
Controlled Prosthetic Hand
Yaonan Li

Xiaodong Zhang

Zhaoxiang Huang, and Qingran Hu

Suzhou Academy

School of Mechanical Engineering

Xi’an Jiaotong University

Xi’an Jiaotong University

State Key Laboratory of Robotics
Shenyang Institute of Automation
Chinese Academy of Sciences
Shenyang, Liaoning Province 110016
China
hsm15257@126.com

Soochow, Jiangsu Province 215123
China
lyntjy@gmail.com

Xi’an, Shaanxi Province 710049 China
amct@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract - This paper presented the prosthetic humanoid
operation model which is controlled by the brain. According to
the humanoid operated mechanism, the brain signals detection,
intelligent prosthetic control, and the man-machine cooperation
prosthetic model were studied. The wearable intelligent mind
controlled prosthetic hand (IMCPHand) was designed with
integration of multi-point tactile and slippery sensors in the
prosthetic space and three-dimensional acceleration sensor
information fusion. And also a method based on Hidden Markov
Model for IMCPHand’s man-machine cooperation control
addressed which provided a feasible way for the IMCPHand
completing more complex tasks autonomously.

rehabilitation training system with Event Related
Desynchronization/ Synchronization (ERD/S) and Functional
electrical stimulation(FES) in 2005. The patients controlled
the movements of grasp and releasing by performing the
imageries of feet movement and right hand movement, and the
online recognition accuracy reached 100% after training. By
2010, Pfurtscheller [7-9] proposed a prosthesis control method
which was based on motor imagery ERD/S Temporal coding.
Nitish [10-12] reported a prosthesis control system using
ERD/ERS combining with vibrotactile biofeedback for haptic
information.
With the development of sensor technology and artificial
intelligence technology, intelligent prosthetic develops fast in
the past few years. XY Zhu [13-14] published a new high
under-actuated integrated EMG anthropomorphic robot in
2008. Humanoid prosthetic hand uses four motors to drive 15
joints to solve the problem which the finger’s flexible is not
enough. It also reduces the power consumption, which will
help the small robot weighs just over 400 grams. The hand
grabs objects with good shape adaptability and the ideal force
distribution characteristics in case of part of the finger
movement are limited. Scotland, Touch Bionics [15], the
world's first true sense of each of its fingers in 2008 , known
as the i-Limb, a bionic hand that each joint can activities. The
i-Limb, electronic hand is composed of five motor-driven
fingers. This bionic hand combines a variety of advanced
technology which is strictly mimicking the activity of the
human finger. It can mimic dozens of people in their lives
using the fingers grip. Electrodes attached to the skin surface
can be connected with the residual arm muscles and nerve
tissue which can direct receive the induction brain signals, and
make the appropriate movement.
He Gao C, in Harbin Institute of Technology [16-17],
announced its development of the third generation of the DLR
/ HIT series of humanoid dexterous hand in 2009, which is
based on mechatronic design ideas and the latest drive
technology. The latest series of dexterous hand is made of 5
modular fingers of the same structure and an independent
hand. We use the new transmission which reduces the volume
and quality and the finger has a position, force / torque,
temperature and other perceived function. Dexterous handϝs
size and appearance is similar to the true hand. It is 1.5kg and
the fingertip output force is 10N.

Index Terms – Intelligent Control; Prosthetic Hand;
Wearable; Brain Computer Interface.

I. INTRODUCTION
With the advent of brain computer interface (BCI), the
combination of BCI and prosthesis has been a researched
widely. On the one hand, as a broadly adaptive control source,
the control based on electroencephalograph (EEG) signal is a
new method for more patients [1-2]. On the other hand, the
development of upper limb prostheses has entered the
intelligent stage which is advantage for the development of the
prosthetic hand. From the ergonomic point of view, prosthesis
and human constructed a human-machine cooperative system.
Therefore, not only it is necessary to study the method of the
brain control prosthesis, but also in-depth study of intelligent
prosthesis information fusion and control technology.
Meanwhile the intelligent wearable prosthetic system is an
inevitable trend for mind control method.
In recent years, many researches were conducted to use
BCIs for controlling robotic arm or prosthesis. On the
consideration of risk and ethical, many experiments with
invasive BCIs have been completed on primates. Vikram [3]
completed the experiment which realized the precision motion
control of the prosthesis by implanting different number of
micro-electrodes in different regions of the rhesus monkey
brain to identify the action of finger, wrist and grasp in 2008.
In non-invasive, the Steady State Visual Evoked Potential
(SSVEP) based BCIs can be used in control of robotic arm or
prosthesis [4]. In 2007 Scherer [5] reported a system about
controlling a prosthesis wrist rotation and the hand open and
close with SSVEP. By using of spontaneous EEG
Pfurtscheller [6] provided patients an arm function

978-1-4673-1278-3/12/$31.00 ©2012 IEEE

2462

Research on brain signal source and prosthetic intelligent

described above indicates that, research of brain control

Fig. 1 System diagram of the intelligent mind control prosthetic hand (IMCPHand).

prosthetic hand has entered a preliminary stage. Researchers
have found some brain signal types for prosthetic control and
conducted analysis and recognition on them, while the
proposing of some smart intelligent structure and the
application of some sensor technology on prosthetic
developed the prosthetic intelligence. Traditional smart
prosthetics research mainly focused on the analysis and
recognition on control source signal, or in a prosthetic body.
These research results have laid a good foundation for the
relating follow-up work, and new research ideas can be
recognized in them. Direction of the development of
intelligent prosthetic needs to conform to the requirements
made by the actual human-computer interaction, and more
freedom can be given to prosthetics to support the disabilities
and reduce the workload of people. While EEG detection and
wearable computing of prosthetic hand controller were also
significant for the application of intelligent prosthetic.

designed modeling the machinery form of human hands'
movements as far as possible.
The wearable intelligent mind control prosthesis system
designed, involving mechanics, electrical, life science and
other fields, makes the portable, wearable intelligent mind
controlled prosthesis become possible, and also provides a
new choice for the upper limb disabled populations. The
working principle of the system is: Firstly, the dry skin
electrodes in the cerebral cortex detect EEG signals; Secondly,
the detected EEG signals are transmitted to the amplifier and
EEG signals are also collected, filtered and amplified, then
through the radio equipment the signals will be transmitted to
the EEG recognition device; In recognition device, the
processed EEG signals will be feature extraction and brain
intention pattern recognition, eventually the identified EEG is
transmitted to intelligent prosthesis, so it can be realized to
control the prosthesis according to the intention. In intelligent
prosthesis part, identified EEG signals activate the drive
control device to control corresponding motor, according to
the result of identification, so as to realize intelligent
prosthetic machine body’s movement. Intelligent prostheses
designed integrate a variety of sensors including tactile and
slip sensor, gyroscope, etc., when they grab, move and do
other actions, the sensors can get signals and feedback to the
drive control system, to realize intelligent prosthetic precision
adaptive control process.The basic idea of the IMCPHand is
presented in Fig.1.

II. RESEARCH STRATEGY
Around the target of human- collaborative operation of
the prosthetic control by human brain, this research firstly
focuses on human hands action and perception mechanism,
and then the system model of IMCPHand was established.
Studies of the key technology problem of the intelligent
prosthetic and multi-sensing intelligent system meeting the
requirements were presented. The prosthetic designed needs to
possess a certain degree of intelligence and adaptation in some
typical work independently, while the portability of prosthetic
controlled system should be also taken into account, as the
wearable problem.
The nervous system and interaction mechanisms for
various perceptions affect the whole course of human hands
actions. Brain controlled prosthetic model should be modeled
on the human hands actions in the brain-nerve-muscle-sensing
mechanism. For different human hands operations, kinematics
and dynamics parameter models are different. From the actual
situation of human hands actions, the action between each
finger joint are not isolated, generally speaking, movement of
fingers under the natural state follows certain rules, that is, for
example, when fingers move from straight state to bent state,
their joints action in a certain angle and speed in common. In
order to better follow the habit of human hands when the
prosthetic structures was designed, the prosthetic should be

III. DESIGN
A. Wearable Mind Detection
The Emotiv EPOC[18] which is released by a neural
technology company can collects EEG signals. Emotiv
EPOCTM EEG headset has a high degree of integration,
where the sensors and amplifier are both integrated in the EEG
headset, making the system portable. EEG headset has 16
sensors. On one hand, sensors placed on the scalp detect
neural signals; on the other hand, the detected signals are
transmitted to the signal amplifier, beginning preliminary
filtering and amplification, then sending the signals to the
receiving device through the wireless way. Emotiv EPOC
itself has three different input signal detection methods:
Expressive, reading facial expression; Affectiv, reading the
user's emotional state; Cognitiv, reading the motion state of
consciousness. Emotiv EPOC is simple to wear, and has high

2463

Fig. 2 Mechanical structure of the IMCPHand’ body.

resolution and friendly man-machine interface. The congitiv
recognition results can be used to control the IMCPHand.

PVDF sensor

B. IMCPHand machine design
There are difference between the mobility of finger
joints , metacarpophalangeal joints and near joints have the
best flexibility .and in a finger near joint and far joint is
difficult to do a separate movement, they are always complete
the bend and stretch action together. When hand complete the
crawl action the use of the thumb, index finger and middle
finger is of the highest frequency, hand can grab objects stable
with these three fingers, therefore we use under actuated
mechanism and DC motor as driving element to control the
action of thumb, index finger and middle finger, at the same
time with the link gear, the ring finger, little thumb can
complete the same action with middle finger.
Increasing the degree of freedom and independence of
drive hand unit number is undoubtedly the most direct
approach to improve the flexibility of the artificial hand. But
each drive units increased difficulties of coordination control
and the complexity of artificial hand structure, by using under
actuated mechanism, on one hand the artificial hand have
enough freedom to meet requirements to grab, on the other
hand reduce independent drive unit control complexityBy
using the plane 4-linkage mechanism as the coupling structure
finger joints, the agency inherits the light and reliable
advantages of rigid connecting rod transmission, and become a
whole with finger joints transmission mechanism. Every
finger consist of two four bar linkage Near joint and palm as
slider-crank mechanism, finger realize the flexion and stretch
with metacarpophalangeal joints as axis. In order to grasp the
different objects of different size and achieve better
enveloping ability, we choose elastic rod as the link of four
bar linkage, makes the envelope curve smoother. The designed
IMCPHand body is given in Fig.2.

3D acceleration and
3D angular velocity sensor
Fig. 3 Sensor arrangement on ICMPHand

Grasping process is closed loop. Human’s perception
system of motion adjusts the muscle tissue of hands via visual,
tactile and force sense’s feedback and controls the hands’
position, gesture and dynamics to ensure the accuracy and
stability of grasping. The planning of this closed-loop motion
is independent of the predetermined control program, which
uses human body and environment information to build realtime motion transformation, and has self-adaptive regulation
and control for the different operating. Through increasing the
sensor system which imitates human’s perception; a bionic
control of the prosthesis can be realized. The design of the
sensor system needs to consider two major problems. First,
which human perception needs to be imitated for prosthetic
hand? Secondary, how to arrange perception in continuous
perception space? For the first point, the tactile sense is
undoubtedly the most important kind of perception of the
hand, and at the same time the real-time changes of tactile
sense will form a slip feeling. In addition, the human body but
also through visual and motion perception gets a more
accurate judgment of the hand position. We use PVDF tactile

C. Sensor System Design

2464

Fig. 4 Processing diagram of the sensor system on IMCPHand.

Fig. 5 Decision and control method block diagram of the IMCPHand.

occurrence is different in different states, and this prediction
can be represented by the Hidden Markov Model (HMM).
HMM has been widely used in voice, handwriting and other
pattern recognition. By grabbing different objects in the
experiment we can record probability of every movement’s
occurrence, which sets up the initial HMM. IMCPhand control
strategy is composed of three parts, 1) using Emotiv EPOC to
recognize the human mind; 2) estimating the most likely next
sequence by HMM; 3) driving the finger autonomously with
perception feedback. The basic idea of the strategy is shown in
Fig.5Emotiv EPOC can recognize human mind, but the
recognition rate cannot reach very high, so we should use
HMM to evaluate the recognition result and obtain the united
command output. IMCPhand controller will perform the
received brain instructions and complete the whole control
process. In the process, through the prosthetic hand sensor
system’s feedback, controller will automatically adjust hand’s
position.

Fig. 6 Relation between hand state and next movement .

and slip sensor to imitate hand’s touch and slip feeling, and
also use three-dimensional acceleration and three-dimensional
angular velocity sensors to acquire the feedback of
prosthesis’s position and orientation. For another, arranging
tactile and slip feeling film in the main point of contact
between the prosthesis (the finger tip, the finger root and
palm) captures touch information of the prosthesis and objects
in grasping process as far as possible. As shown in Fig. 3 ,
each finger’s tip and root are decorated with tactile and slip
feeling film, palm also, which makes up the tactile and slip
feeling space matrix consisting of 11 channels. Threedimensional acceleration and three-dimensional angular
velocity sensors are mounted in the IMCPHand, used to detect
together the position and orientation of the IMCPhand. The
sensor system block diagram is shown in Fig.4. Through the
conditioning circuits, A/D converter, the signals of tactile and
slip sensor and acceleration transducer are transmitted to
DSP5000 processor, and analyzed to provide feedback
ultimately.

IV. CONCLUSION
This paper introduced the design of a wearable intelligent
artificial limb. Through the research of humanoid hand
operation and the brain controlled prosthetic hand mechanism
model, decision-making methods, intelligent control of the
prosthetic hand and the man-machine coordinated method
were studied. Wearable intelligent prosthetic hand was
designedΔincluding the fusion of PVDF on the prosthetic
hand and the information fusion of 3d-mems acceleration
transducer. And also a method based on hide markov model
for IMCPHand’s man-machine cooperation control addressed
which provided a feasible way for the IMCPHand completing
more complex tasks autonomously. IMCPHand can receive
intention and instructions of human, then according to the
context to evaluate the instructions automatically. And finally
the IMCPHand complete the required action with processing

D. Control strategy
Actions of hand are not completely arbitrary, but under
sequential constraints and have certain rules. The next action
occurred is related to the current state of the hand, as shown in
Fig.6. The probability of a variety of nest movement’s

2465

[14] MAO Yi-chun, ZHU Xiang-yang, LI Shun-chong, YANG Fei-hong.
Design of a Naw Underactuated Prosthetic Hand. MACHINE DESIGN
AND RESEARCH[J],2008,24(3).
[15] http://www.touchbionics.com/products/active-prostheses/.
[16] Yi-Wei Liu, Ming-He Jin, Shao-Wei Fan. Five-finger Dextrous Robot
Hand DLR/HIT Hand ҈ . JOURNAL OF MECHANICAL
ENGINEERING[J],2009,45(11).
[17] Liu, H,Wu, K,Meusel, P,Seitz, N,Hirzinger, G,Jin, M.H,Liu, Y.W,Fan,
S.W,Lan, T,Chen, Z.P. Multisensory five-finger dexterous hand: The
DLR/HIT Hand II[J]. Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2008. IROS 2008.
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on,3692-3697.
[18] http://www.emotiv.com/

the feedback information. The intelligent design of the
prosthetic hand improved its process abilities, reduced the
peoples workload in the control of the prosthetic hand and
improved the operation efficiency.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This research was supported by Jiangsu Natural Science
Foundation (BK2011046) and State Key Laboratory of
Robotics Open Fund (RLO200801).
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]
[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

Ou Bai a, Varun Rathi a, Peter Lin b, Dandan Huang a, Harsha
Battapady a, Ding-Yu Fei a, Logan Schneider b, Elise Houdayer b,
Xuedong Chen c, Mark Hallett b. Prediction of human voluntary
movement
before
it
occurs[J].
Clinical
Neurophysiology,122(2011),364–372
C Brunner,B Z Allison,C Altst¨atter,C Neuper.A comparison of three
brain–computer interfaces based on event-related desynchronization,
steady state visual evoked potentials, or a hybrid approach using both
signals[J]. JOURNAL OF NEURAL ENGINEERING,2011.
Chatterjee A (Chatterjee, Aniruddha), Aggarwal V (Aggarwal, Vikram),
Ramos A (Ramos, Ander), Acharya S (Acharya, Soumyadipta), Thakor
NV (Thakor, Nitish V.). A brain-computer interface with vibrotactile
biofeedback
for
haptic
information[J].
JOURNAL
OF
NEUROENGINEERING AND REHABILITATION,2007,(04)
R.Wang,X.Gao,and S.Gao. Frequency Selection for SSVEP-based
Binocular Rivalry[J]. NeuralEngineering, 2005.:600–603.
Scherer,R.,Müller-Putz,G.R.,and Pfurtscheller,G.(2007).Self-initiation
of EEG-based brain–computer communication using the heart rate
response. [J]. Neural Eng. 4, L23–L29.
G Pfurtscheller. EEG-Based Asynchronous BCI Controls Functional
Electrical Stimulation in a Tetraplegic Patient[J]. Journal on Applied
Signal Processing, 2005, (19):3152-3155.
Muller-Putz,Gernot;Scherer,Reinhold;Pfurtscheller,Gert;Neuper,Christa.
Temporal coding of brain patterns for direct limb control in humans[J].
Front Neurosci,2010(04).
Pfurtscheller G (Pfurtscheller, Gert),Solis-Escalante T (Solis-Escalante,
Teodoro), Ortner R (Ortner, Rupert), Linortner P (Linortner, Patricia),
Muller-Putz GR (Mueller-Putz, Gernot R.). Self-Paced Operation of an
SSVEP-Based Orthosis With and Without an Imagery-Based "Brain
Switch:" A Feasibility Study Towards a Hybrid BCI[J]. IEEE
TRANSACTIONS
ON
NEURAL
SYSTEMS
AND
REHABILITATION ENGINEERING,2010,(04): 409-414.
Pfurtscheller Gert, Allison BrendanZ, Brunner, Clemens, Bauernfeind,
Gunther, Solis-Escalante, Teodoro, Scherer Reinhold, Zander, Thorsten
O, Mueller-Putz, Gernot, Neuper, Christa, Birbaumer, Niels. The hybrid
BCI[J]. Front Neurosci,2010,(04).
Murguialday,A.R. Aggarwal,V. Chatterjee,A. Thakor N.V. Braincomputer interface for a prosthetic hand using local machine control and
haptic feedback[C]. 2007 IEEE 10th International Conference on
Rehabilitation Robotics,2007,(07):609-622.
Acharya
S
(Acharya,
Soumyadipta),Aggarwal
V
(Aggarwal,Vikram),Tenore F (Tenore, Francesco),Shin HC (Shin,HyunChool), Etienne-Cummings R (Etienne-Cummings,Ralph), Schieber MH
(Schieber,Marc H.),Thakor NV (Thakor,Nitish V.).Towards a braincomputer interface for dexterous control of a multi-fingered prosthetic
hand[C]. 2007 3rd International IEEE/EMBS Conference on Neural
Engineering,Vols 1 and 2,2007,(05):200-203.
Aggarwal V,Singhal G,He JP, Schieber MH, Thakor NV.Towards
Closed-Loop Decoding of Dexterous Hand Movements using a Virtual
Integration Environment[C]. 2008 30TH ANNUAL INTERNATIONAL
CONFERENCE OF THE IEEE ENGINEERING IN MEDICINE AND
BIOLOGY SOCIETY, VOLS 1-8,2008.:1703-1706.
SONG Rui-Ling, ZHU Xiang-yang. Kinematics and Static Simulation of
Underactuated
Prosthetic
Hand.
MACHINERY
&
ELECTRONICS[J],2008(3).

2466

