IEICE TRANS. INF. & SYST., VOL.E103–D, NO.9 SEPTEMBER 2020

2032

LETTER

Evaluation of EEG Activation Pattern on the Experience of Visual
Perception in the Driving
Keiichiro INAGAKI†a) , Member, Tatsuya MARUNO† , Nonmember, and Kota YAMAMOTO† , Member

SUMMARY
The brain processes numerous information related to traffic scenes for appropriate perception, judgment, and operation in vehicle
driving. Here, the strategy for perception, judgment, and operation is individually diﬀerent for each driver, and this diﬀerence is thought to be arise
from experience of driving. In the present work, we measure and analyze human brain activity (EEG: Electroencephalogram) related to visual
perception during vehicle driving to clarify the relationship between experience of driving and brain activity. As a result, more experts generate α
activities than beginners, and also confirm that the β activities is reduced
than beginners. These results firstly indicate that experience of driving is
reflected into the activation pattern of EEG.
key words: EEG, visual cognition, driving skill, driving experience

While relationship brain activity and driving task is gradually uncovered; however, the eﬀect of level of skill reflecting
experience of vehicle driving is still mystery.
In the present work, we measure and analyze human
brain activity (EEG: Electroencephalogram) during performing the visual perception in the vehicle driving to clarify the relationship between driving experience and brain
activity.

1.

2.1 Experimental Setup

Introduction

Intelligent Transport Systems is aiming reduction of traﬃc
accidents by developing various types of driving support infrastructures. It is reported that traﬃc accidents are reduced
along with the growth of ITS technologies [1]. In the field
of ITS, much technologies are usually developed in terms of
improvement of traﬃc environment and vehicle functions
to reduce traﬃc jam and accidents using latest information,
communication, and sensor technologies. To further improvement of ITS technology, it is necessary to understand
driver’s conditions including brain activities during vehicle
driving.
In the vehicle driving, drivers percept and judge traﬃc
situations, and then appropriately operate vehicle. Here, the
brain processes numerous information related to those. On
the other hand, the strategy for perception, judgment, and
operation is individually diﬀerent for each driver, and this
diﬀerence is thought to be arising from level of driving skill
acquired by experience. It is reported that occurrence of
traﬃc accident during driving is frequent in beginner drivers
than more experts [2]. It also indicated that the level of driving skill is crucial factor in driving. To date, several approaches to understanding brain signal processing regarding
vehicle driving have been performed in previous study (e.g.
[3]–[6]). In those study, the relation between brain activities
and driver’s distraction during driving are evaluated. Schier
evaluated EEG in the driving task and reported that increasing alpha band activity related to less attention activity [7].
Manuscript received February 5, 2020.
Manuscript revised April 27, 2020.
Manuscript publicized June 3, 2020.
†
The authors are with College of Engineering, Chubu University, Kasugai-shi, 487–8501 Japan.
a) E-mail: kay@isc.chubu.ac.jp
DOI: 10.1587/transinf.2020EDL8020

2.

Experimental Methods

Figure 1 summarized experimental environment for measuring EEGs and eye movement in the custom made experimental setup. In the experiment, 2 ∼ 3 minutes of driving
scenes captured using video camcorder are utilized in the PC
display (1920 × 1080). The level of driving skill is thought
to be related traﬃc scene. Therefore, we utilized diﬀerent
three types of driving scenes (Traﬃc jam, Urban area, and
Highway).
16 healthy subjects (15 males and 1 female) aged from
20 to 23 years with having normal vision or corrected to
normal with glasses or contact lenses were participated in
EEGs measurement. All of subjects has drivers’ licenses. In
this study, the level of driving skill in the subjects was determined based on the driving frequency due to that perception
skill for the driving is accompanied with the frequency of
the driving [8]; beginner subjects were categorized based on
who drives less than once in every week, and others were
categorized as experts. Based on this criterion, there were

Fig. 1

Experimental setup for measurement of EEG and eye movement.

c 2020 The Institute of Electronics, Information and Communication Engineers
Copyright 

LETTER

2033

eight beginner subjects and eight experts, where the mean
number of driving in a week was 0.38 ± 0.17 at beginner and
5.63 ± 0.63 at expert. That indicates that beginners in our
subjects have almost no opportunity to drive while experts
drive frequently.
In the experiments, firstly the experimental outline was
explained for subjects to obtain informed consent. The
EEGs and eye movements of all subjects were measured
during watching three diﬀerent driving scenes and a stated
of relaxation with closing both eyes for control. The driver’s
sheet was adjusted for each subject to easily watch the projection monitor. The distance between the projection monitor and a subject is 60 cm and this distance is imitate watching traﬃc scenes from driver’s sheet in the vehicle. In this
condition, the field of view is ±30 deg which covers the
functional field of view during the driving (∼±20 deg) [9].
The experiment was performed in silent condition with using earplug to avoid auditory eﬀects. In the experiment,
we asked the subjects to prevent body movement to reduce
artifact. After watching each traﬃc scene, we also asked
arousal level. The experimental procedures were approved
by the Ethics Committee of Chubu University.
2.2

Measurement of EEG and Eye Movement

EEGs of all subjects were measured using Emotiv EPOC+
(Emotive, CA, US). To record EEG data, the electrodes (14
channels) were placed according to the International 10–
20 electrode position systems [10]. When the placement
of the electrodes, scalp of subject was cleaned using alcohols to avoid EEG signal deterioration due to scalp oil. The
sampling frequency was 128 Hz. In this study, we used
EEGs measured from O2 located at the occipital area of
the brain for the analysis in terms of consideration of reflection of activity related to visual attention and perception [11], [12], and less noise from eye blinking and eye
movement. Eye movements were simultaneously measured
using Pupil Lab (Pupil Labs, Berlin, Germany) with a sampling rate of 128 Hz.
2.3

3.

Results

First of all, we evaluated power spectrum during watching driving scene in beginner subjects and experts. Figure 2 illustrates averaged power spectrum in beginner subject (Blue) and experts (Red) in all scenes. We confirmed
that the experts generated more alpha band activities than
beginner subjects, and also confirmed that the beta band activities were less generated in the experts than beginners. In
the all experiment, there were no subjects reporting a decrease in alertness.
Figure 3 summarized alpha band activity (5∼12 Hz) of
the all subjects in Traﬃc jam, Urban area, and Highway. In
the all driving scene, the larger alpha band activities were
observed in experts than beginner subjects. We statistically
compared alpha band activity between experts and beginner
subjects using Student’s t-test, and found significance in all
scenes (p < 0.05).
Figure 4 summarized beta band activity (12∼40 Hz) of
the whole subjects in Traﬃc jam, Urban area, and Highway.
In the all driving scene, the smaller beta band activities were
observed in experts than beginner subjects. We statistically
comparted beta band activity between experts and beginner
subjects using Student’s t-test, and funded significance in all
driving scenes (p < 0.01 in Scene-A, p < 0.05 in Scene-B
and C).
Figure 5 summarized the distribution of eye position

Analysis

Fast Fourier transform (FFT) was used to obtain power frequency spectrum. In the application of FFT, the DC component of EEG data was removed, and FFT was applied for
every 1 second with Hanning filter in whole data. Finally,
the obtained every power frequency spectrum was averaged.
For the depiction, averaged power spectrum was normalized. In the analysis, EEG data including artifact due to eye
blink and eye movement was removed.
Recorded horizontal and vertical eye position was calibrated into the size of the traﬃc scene (0.031 deg = 1 pixel).
After removing saccade and eye blinking, we calculated the
distribution of horizontal and vertical eye position including
pursuit and fixation for each scene, and also computed those
standard deviations and skewness.

Fig. 2 Power spectrum in the experts (red) and the beginners (blue) during driving scene viewing in the custom made experimental setup. Pale red
and blue area indicate ±1SD.

Fig. 3 Alpha band activity of EEG in the experts (red) and beginners
(blue). (*: p < 0.05)

IEICE TRANS. INF. & SYST., VOL.E103–D, NO.9 SEPTEMBER 2020

2034

Fig. 4 Beta band activity of EEG in the experts (red) and beginners
(blue). (*: p < 0.05, **: p < 0.01)

to concentrating for visual search, also this process reproduces the narrow distribution of eye position as previously
reported [14]. Along with the concentration into searching
information in the driving scene, the alpha band activity was
also decreased in beginner subjects. On the other hand, experts know how to grasping the place to be noticed by experience; therefore, this appropriate strategy in visual perception leads opposite responses in alpha and beta band activity and relatively wider distribution of eye position. From
those, we conclude that the experience of perception during driving is reflected into the activation pattern of EEG.
Future works will consider the other driving behavior (e.g.
pedal and handle work) to investigate the relationship between driving experience and brain activities.
Acknowledgments
The part of this work supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant
Number 17K12781 (KI).
References

Fig. 5 Distribution of horizontal (A) and vertical (B) eye position in the
experts (red/exp) and the beginners (blue/beg) during driving scene viewing. Pale red and blue areas indicate ±1SD. Std and skew in each panel
denote standard deviation and skewness.

for beginners and experts during experiments (partly reported in [13]). It is reported [14] that the range of visual
search in beginner drivers is relatively narrow than one in
experts. Moreover, beginners tend to see the left side of the
scene during driving in the urban area. In agreement with
this report, the relatively narrower distribution of eye position that especially biased to the left side in the traﬃc jam
and urban area was observed in the beginners than the experts in our experiment. Note that no big diﬀerence was
observed for the vertical eye position, and also individual
diﬀerence was not found in our subjects’ group as indicated
by the small standard deviation for the density of distributions.
4.

Discussion and Conclusion

During watching driving scenes, we confirmed that significant lower alpha activity and higher beta activity was observed in the beginner subjects than experts. At these, the
distribution of the eye position which was accompanied with
the range of visual search was narrower than one for the experts.
It is known that the beta activity is related to concentration. Therefore, beginner subjects considered to be more
concentrate on the driving scenes than experts. One of the
possibilities of this is that the beginner subjects try to search
limited target information such as pedestrians and road signs
etc.; as this result, the beta band activities are increased due

[1] National Police Agency, “The occurrence of traﬃc accidents and the
traﬃc violation control in 2017,” 2017.
[2] S. Wako, “ITS: R & D and perception as the open information
and telecommunications infrastructure,” IEICE Trans. Fundamentals, vol.J81-A, no.4, pp.467–474, April 1998 (in Japanese).
[3] C.-T. Lin, S.-A. Chen, L.-W. Ko, and Y.-K. Wang, “EEG-based brain
dynamics of driving distraction,” The 2011 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks, pp.1497–1500, 2011.
[4] H. Almahasneh, W.-T. Chooi, N. Kamel, and A.S. Malik, “Deep
in thought while driving: An EEG study on drivers’ cognitive distraction,” Transportation Research Part F: Traﬃc Psychology and
Behaviour, vol.26, Part A, pp.218–226, 2014.
[5] M. Karthaus, E. Wascher, and S. Getzmann, “Eﬀects of visual and
acoustic distraction on driving behavior and EEG in young and older
car drivers: A driving simulation study,” Front. Aging Neurosci.,
vol.10, 2018.
[6] G. Bajwa, M. Fazeen, and R. Dantu, “Detecting driver distraction
using stimuli-response EEG analysis,” arXiv, 1904.09100v1, 2019.
[7] M.A. Schier, “Changes in EEG alpha power during simulated driving: A demonstration,” International Journal of Psychophysiology,
vol.37, no.2, pp.155–162, 2000.
[8] Japan Safe Driving Center, “Research on consciousness and actual
driving situation for beginner drivers,” Report from Japan Safe Driving Center, 1991.
[9] R. Tanishige, K. Doman, D. Deguchi, Y. Mekada, I. Ide, and H.
Murase, “A study on the prediction of driver’s pedestrian detectability considering characteristics of human fields-of-view while driving,” IEICE PRMU2014-196, vol.114, no.520, pp.223–228, 2015.
[10] H.H. Jasper, “The ten twenty electrode system of the international
federation,” Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology,
vol.10, pp.371–375, 1958.
[11] R. Desimone and J. Duncan, “Neural mechanisms of selective visual
attention,” Ann. Rev. Neurosci., vol.18, pp.193–222, 1995.
[12] Y.-C. Lee, W.-C. Lin, F.-Y. Cherng, and L.-Y. Ko, “A visual attention
monitor based on steady-state visual evoked potential,” IEEE Trans.
Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol.24, no.3, pp.399–408, 2016.
[13] T. Maruno, K. Yamamoto, and K. Inagaki, “Evaluation of relationship between EEG and visual field characteristics in visual cognition,” IEICE-NC2019-6, vol.119, no.88, p.27, 2019.
[14] K. Sato, “Visual search and peripheral vision performance by novice
and experienced drivers,” IATSS Review, vol.19, pp.191–199, 1993.

