International Journal of Recent Technology and Engineering (IJRTE)
ISSN: 2277-3878, Volume-8 Issue-6, March 2020

Brain Computer Interface Controlled Voice
Assistant
Rahul Sarkar, M. Prakash

Abstract: A brain-controlled robot using brain computer
interfaces (BCIs) was explored in this project. BCIs are systems
that are able to circumvent traditional communication channels
(i.e. muscles and thoughts), to ensure the human brain and
physical devices communicate directly and are in charge by
converting various patterns of brain activity to instructions in real
time. An automation can be managed with these commands. The
project work seeks to build and monitor a program that can help
the disabled people accomplish certain activities independently of
others in their daily lives. Develop open-source EEG and
brain-computer interface analysis software. The quality and
performance of BCI of different EEG signals are compared.
Variable signals obtained through MATLAB Processing from the
Brainwave sensor. Automation modules operate by means of the
BCI system. The Brain Computer Interface aims to build a fast
and reliable link between a person's brain and a personal
computer. The controls also use the Brain-Computer Interface for
home appliances. The system will integrate with any smartphones
voice assistant.
Keywords: Brain Computer Interface (BCI), Smartphone
Automation, Electro-Encephalogram (EEG), Android, Google
Assistant.

I. INTRODUCTION
Multimillions of related neurons form the human brain. The
pattern of interaction is portrayed as thoughts and emotional
states between these neurons. This pattern changes according
to human thoughts, resulting in different electric waves in
turn. A contraction in muscles will also produce a single
electric signal. The brain wave sensor senses all these electric
waves and converts the data into packets and transmits the
Bluetooth medium. [1]. The analyzer (LAU) level unit
receives raw information on the brain wave and extracts and
processes the signal using the MATLAB platform. Home
automation is an environment that can use BCI and that can
easily control our entire house through our brain [2]. This
invention will prove to almost everyone on the planet to be a
great boon. Less energy is wasted in menial tasks such as
lighting, electrical equipment and other electrical equipment
[3].
The neural tracts of the muscle tissues, which control or
affect muscle mass themselves, are affected by Amyotrophic
Lateral Sclerosis (ALS), brain stroke, talent or spinal twin
damage, brain paralysis, muscle dystrophy and a few sclerosis
problems and various diseases. In the United States alone,
Revised Manuscript Received on February 29, 2020.
* Correspondence Author
Rahul Sarkar*, MTech, Department of Computer Science &
Engineering, SRM Institute of Science & Technology, Chennai, India.
Email: rsrahulsarkar6@gmail.com
Dr. M. Prakash, Associate Professor, Department of Computer Science
& Engineering, SRM Institute of Science & Technology, Chennai, India.
Email: prakashm2@srmist.edu.in

Retrieval Number: E6779018520/2020©BEIESP
DOI:10.35940/ijrte.E6779.038620

they affect nearly two million people. Those affected most
seriously may lose all voluntary muscle control and may be
locked up completely in their bodies.
In this article, we are going to discuss more than a few
inputs are available to help people with physical difficulties
manipulate a computer, an exchange machine or a wheelchair.
It consists of a simple lever, which can be triggered by a
variety of body parts, gazing structures or head motion
structures, primarily based on a range of sizes between teeth,
buttons or joysticks. The cursor can be applied on a computer.
All of these systems do not represent locked men, however.
The only solution for locked people is to create contact and
control canals from the brain at once, bypassing the peripheral
nerve and muscle outputs of the brain's impaired odium.
Alerts on intelligence are obtained and processed in a brain
computer interface (BCI) to identify specific aspects which
represent the purpose of the user. They are then converted into
instructions for running a computer.
II. TECHNIQUES FOR BCI CONTROLLED
ASSITANT
Two main steps in the transmitter stage and the receiver
stage are the system design. The circuit comprises the
following phases which are described below:
A. Brain wave sensor
We will use dry non-invasive scalp sensors to test our
brain's electrodes. In order to measure the brain activity,
similar electrodes would be positioned in region of motor
cortex and rest in several different areas of the brain.
B. EEG power spectrum processing
The power spectral density of the signal or signal power
distribution via the frequency is the "energy quality" of the
signal. Most EEG-based monitoring systems are (at least in
part) based on spectral EEG analysis for anesthesia depth
evaluation. The spectral resolution used to digitize the signal
normalizes the PSD amplitude.
C. P300 Signal Detection
Given the importance of the P300 signal in this thesis, a
brief assessment of strategies to detect it will be presented
here. The main problem of the signal P300 is the very low
signal-to-noise ratio. The pinnacle table indicates that the
EEG sign is uncooked from 10 electrodes. The vertical traces
indicate the stimulus times, red / thick. Gadgets on 6 and 6
matrix in the P300 speller via Farwell and Donchin.

2370

Published By:
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering
& Sciences Publication

Brain Computer Interface Controlled Voice Assistant
Rows and columns are flashed at random and a P300 signal
is produced three hundred m after the key is flashed in line
with the target stimulus the user wants to pick.

F. Functional Near-Infrared Imaging (fNIR)
Near-infrared (fNIR) functionality is a highly revolutionary
primary technology based on the idea that tissue optical
homes (including absorption and dispersion) are alternating
when the tissue is involved. Two types of alarms may be
recorded: rapidly scattered signals associated with changes in
oxy and deoxy-hemoglobin concentrations, likely because of
neuronal exercise and lenient absorption signals. FNIR has
never been able to measure deep-seated intelligent thinking
and the spatial judgment of fMRI.
G. μ and β Rhythms
Intelligent oscillation is produced in neural compound
networks via feedback loops. For example, neuron
synchronization provides an increase in oscillation frequency.
Sensorimotor cortices are of particular interest in EEG, μ
(8-12Hz) and β (18-26Hz) rhythms steps. The laws of μ and β
are seen as an alternative to "operational conditions," i.e. they
are voluntary. Therefore, until it wants to achieve control
/communications through the GUI, the subject will suppose
something or nothing.

Figure 1

Figure 2
D. Slow Cortical Potential (SCP)
Slow Cortical Potential (SCP) is a modulation of the
worldwide EEG (very low frequency) achievable. It is
registered on the top of the head using a single electrode.
Because SCPs indicate the standard preparatory excitement of
a cortical network, they are universally present in the human
brain. As a consequence, a brain laptop interface device
called the Thought Translation Device (TTD), which reflects
the vertical position of a comment cursor, is developed at Tu
Burbingen University. Birbaumer's group reflects the
amplitude of a SCP change. After a person has handled their
SCP changes with trust, the answers can be used to pick items
on a pc screen.
A constant left to right cursor movement is controlled by
Genius activity of the user; vertical movement is controlled.
This software was supplemented with a dictionary supply
phrase after only a few letters have been selected to speed up
communication.
E. Dry electrode unit
The benefits of the new dry electrode are no skin
preparations or conductive material, lower resistance to
motion and an improved signal to noise ratio. The results
show that the dry electrode performs all types of EEG signals
comparably with conventional electrodes.

Retrieval Number: E6779018520/2020©BEIESP
DOI:10.35940/ijrte.E6779.038620

Figure 3
H. Steady-States Visually Evoked Potentials (SSVEP)
The Visible cortex's response to retinal stimulation by a
blinking light source is consistent with the visually evoked
potentials (SSVEP). Gives a response to the 7 Hz stimulation
to the amplitude spectrum of SSVEP. It is possible to identify
three peaks of 7 Hz, 14 Hz, and 21 Hz. Column (a)
demonstrates the number of single trials, with column (b)
indicating the average amplitude range of over 40. The
favored variation is the vertical strains.2D manipulating the
use of a μβ-BCI with a cursor by using four people with
disabilities (Wolpaw et al). "Topics are recommended to
move a cursor to one of eight objectives.
In a usual SSVEP BCI configuration, the visible subject is
arranged with a range of LEDs (or button on a computer
screen), which blink at exclusive frequencies and are
associated with commands. If a command is to be selected the
individual must definitely concentrate on the desired click.
SSVEP is, just as with the P300 signal, a normal brain
response, so it takes no preparation. In the order of a few
seconds is the typical response time.

2371

Published By:
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering
& Sciences Publication

International Journal of Recent Technology and Engineering (IJRTE)
ISSN: 2277-3878, Volume-8 Issue-6, March 2020
1. Real-time "Soft" systems have reduced "lateness"
constraints but must still run very quickly and repeatably.
2. For instance, the system for rail booking–it takes a
couple of seconds to re-validate the data.
K. ZIGBEE receiver
ZigBee is an IEEE 802.15.4-based specification for a set of
high-level communication protocols designed for small-sized
digital radio networks in the personal sector, such as home
automation, medical equipment selection and other
low-bandwidth uses, intended for small-scale, wireless
connectivity projects. ZigBee is therefore a weak, low data
rate and wireless ad hoc network close to (i.e. personal area).
Figure 4
I. Design of embedded system
Like each other, the embedded cycle machine's creation
gadget has a diagram loop as well. The waft of the device shall
be as indicated in steps. The configuration considerations
must take account of the software program and the equipment,
the sensor, entry and output, from the pre-minimum country to
the ultimate production process. Typically, both the
microprocessor and a micro conductor are used in the
electronics. Many broad or old organizations use computer
systems or minicomputers for general purposes.
J. Classification
Real time networks. Real time networks. RTS has to react
within a specific time period to events.

L. Relay
A relay is a circuit operated electrically. This consists of a
set of input terminals and a variety of working touch terminals
for single or multiple control signals. The transition may have
several contact types with any number of contacts, like make
contacts, interruptions or combinations.
M. Arduino micro-controller
The microcontroller processes the signals and produces the
output by means of the appropriate algorithm after the
amplification and filtering. The following operations are done
by the microcontroller:
1. Take the ADC digital signals and process them
according to the specified procedure. The microcontroller is
connected directly to the user interface to show the selected
data and information such as the concentration level.
2. The microcontroller transmits the interpreted data to a
wireless broadcasting system.
N. User – interface
The user interface acts as an interface that informs the user
of the device. This allows the user to choose which computer
he or she wants to use. Furthermore, other additional details
including focus are included in the user interface. The user
interface can be fully adjusted by the user. The system the user
wants to control can be attached and named. The UI can be
designed to make it more user friendly as a mobile
application.
O. Arduino and Google Assistant
By sending a chain from the Google Assistant, we want to
search various parts of an Arduino including I / O pins, PWM,
serial port and so on. First, to find out what we mean, we must
define certain specific sentences to the Google Assistant.
Then we create an applet and connect Google Assistant to our
database on the IFTTT website. Afterwards, we read and send
data from the database to the Arduino using the ESP8266
module. Therefore, an Android/iOS device can be used to pair
them
up
for
connection
between
BCI-Arduino-Smartphone-Assistant.

Figure 5
1. A correct reply is a wrong reply to the deadline
2. Classifying RTS
3. Difficult real time schemes
4. Hard Real Time Systems
Real-time "fast" systems are very strong. E.g. Nuclear power
device, pacemaker cardiac. Unit Soft Real Time

Retrieval Number: E6779018520/2020©BEIESP
DOI:10.35940/ijrte.E6779.038620

2372

Published By:
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering
& Sciences Publication

Brain Computer Interface Controlled Voice Assistant
IV. LITERATURE SURVEY

Figure 6
III. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
1. Block Diagram
Transmitter Side

Figure 7 : Diagram of Transmitter Side
Receiver Side

Figure 8 : Diagram of Receiver Side
2. Feature Extraction and Classification
We use the EEGLA B, an EEG signal for ceasing toolbox
based on MATLAB, for the treatment of EEG data, which
includes preprocessing by band-pass filtering and band-power
extraction. The gdf file from the Open Vibe acquisition
scenario was used to analyze EEG data offline. The data are
filtered with a band pass with a Butterworth filter in fifth
order. The band power features for the trials are then
extracted. We use SVM classification technique once the
features are collected. The open-source implementation of
SVM uses LIBSVM.

Retrieval Number: E6779018520/2020©BEIESP
DOI:10.35940/ijrte.E6779.038620

Khaleel Alhalaseh et al [1] introduces a new approach for a
system that controls basic electrical equipment such as a kettle
of water or a coffee maker, depending on consumer values of
attention calculated by the handheld EEG sensor of NeuroSky
MindWave. In addition to being a technological advancement
in IoT, this new approach to control simple home devices can
be tailored to several purposes, including those that are being
proposed here to better help people with disabilities, so that it
breaks the barriers to the handicapped and enables them to
work freely around the home.
Marwan Nafea et al [2] the electroencephalogram (EEG)
system is presented for a smart house intended to help people
with disabilities and seniors. The system is made up of a
NeuroSky MindWave EEG module coupled with an Android
app that allows the user to monitor four home appliances. The
Android app is coupled with an Arduino Uno board that
controls appliances via the HC-05 Bluetooth module.
Bluetooth connects the EEG sensor, the Android app and the
Arduino board, providing low power consumption as well as a
portable solution for smart home applications. The system
allows the user to turn the four machines on and off with blink
and focus. The EEG signal is extracted during the experiment
to analyze the activity of the brain. The results are consistent
with the power, standby, concentrate and running modes used
for the study. The system can be installed effectively in clever
homes and has a high potential for smart automation and
biomedical wireless applications.
P.Saranya et al [3] introduces BCI's main motive is to help
people with physical disabilities regain balance, interact and
navigate their surroundings. There are different brain states
due to different patterns of neural connections. "Waves with
different amplitudes and frequencies result in these patterns.
The contact between neural neurons takes place. The patterns
of interaction are represented as thoughts and feelings
between these neurons. The pattern will now change in
accordance with human thoughts, producing different electric
waves. This project deals with the specific electric signals
generated by the different brain states, whereby the brain
wave sensor senses these signals. The received data will then
be translated into packets and transmitted via Bluetooth
devices. The level analyzer unit will receive raw information
about the brain wave and will ex-tract and process the signal
via the MATLAB platform. "The following step will involve
sending the instructions to the section concerned to operate
modules including bulbs, fan and many other electrical
devices.
R.Piyare et al [4] focuses on the remote monitoring and
security of the smart home when the user is away. Wireless
technology, such as Wi-Fi, is the SMS system used to
revolutionize living standards. Fuxing Yang et al [5] they
present Smart home is a big application for the network of
wireless sensors. This paper incorporates a Zigbee and
GPRS-based remote wireless acquisition and control system.

2373

Published By:
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering
& Sciences Publication

International Journal of Recent Technology and Engineering (IJRTE)
ISSN: 2277-3878, Volume-8 Issue-6, March 2020
The system is a star network that includes sensors,
electronic devices, acquisition and control nodes of terminals,
family gateways and data viewing platforms. The device is
low-cost, energy efficient, easy to deploy and very wide in
scope. The whole device not only acquires and shows ambient
data, but can also question and monitor remotely, the
experiment displays a strong remote alarm and control.
Manual operation and automatic control mode are included in
the control system. This paper also presents the structure and
composition of the system, hardware and software design.
The energy efficiency was concentrated in the design process.
A ElShafee and et al [6] presents that it is a very attractive
idea of a smart home with built-in cameras, actuators, a
wireless network, and an interface. In this paper, a robust,
scalable, safe and economical sensor network is designed and
implemented, to transform conventional houses into a smart
home. Indoor use is made of heterogeneous sensor and
actuator nodes based on wireless network technologies. These
nodes are attached to a middleware that operates home
automation servers and acts as a broker to facilitate the
MQTT protocol communication. The central device allows
wireless node control over both local and remote networks.
The system proposed is low-cost and scalable to
accommodate a range of controlled devices.
Nicholas D et al [7] present a system that incorporates the
smartphone, cloud, wireless, electricity-based connectivity
multi-touch de-fails to ensure that users have remote control
over different lights and devices in their own homes. This
system uses a consolidation of mobile telephone app,
hand-held remote and PC-based software for the user to use.
The home automation system differs from other systems in
that the user operates the system on the internet wireless
remote without depending on a mobile carrier or Internet
connection. This system is designed to be cost-effective and
expandable to operate various devices.
T. Yashiro et al [8] proposes a new architecture for hosting
IoT services on common embedded systems, such as the usual
consumer appliances, uID-CoAP architecture. Often in
comparison with simple sensor nodes, they require a number
of sophisticated functions, so we combine the limited
application protocol (CoAP) with an omnipresent ID (uID)
structure. The latter plays a key role in preserving the
knowledge and information needed for complex IoT services.
Additionally, we provide an embedded device nodes
development platform that decreases the burden of built-in
system producers by offering an intuitive, reliable and easy to
use API. In addition to the low-level communication API, our
framework provides functions in this context for building
RESTful services. We assessed our system through a case
study and demonstrated that our framework can be efficiently
utilized to implement practical IoT applications with little
programming effort on existing embedded systems.
Deepali Javale et al [9] presents the Conceived and
implemented an intelligent electricity consumption
monitoring system based on the real-time monitoring of the
INTEL GALILEO 2ND developed a choice board generation
devices used in house-and company buildings at home. The
system is designed to monitor and control electronic devices
and switches with or without Android-based applications in
real time. Different sensors are used not only to monitor the
Retrieval Number: E6779018520/2020©BEIESP
DOI:10.35940/ijrte.E6779.038620

monitoring of real time devices but also to keep your home
safe. The Internet or Intranet Connectivity is monitored and
controlled remotely via an Android app. The proposed
outcome of the project is to save on the electricity bills of the
house and also to keep users up to date on their domestic
safety by using an alternative means of controlling the
switching on of the devices via the use of their speech or
simply by pressing a touch on their smartphone.
S. Aishwarya et al [10] presents The BCI (brain machine
interface) technology is based on the device. The BCI is a new
and unique method for transmitting the human brain to an
external device such as light, fan, and television. The
impulses of the human brain wave include millions of neuron
patterns. This interaction between patterns generates an
electric wave of various kinds. The Neurosky headset consists
of a sensor to feel at a level of attention, which ensures that
human concentration and guided mental activity occur during
intense concentration. The signal is converted into a raw data
packet and is transmitted via the Bluetooth medium into the
Arduino (microcontroller unit). The Arduino processes the
signal received and drives the device's relay circuit to
automatically start and run. The lamp, the fan along with the
voice module are used for demonstration.
V. EXISTING SYSTEM
In this system, In contrast with functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fRI) methods, EEG has a minimal spatial
resolve. The electrodes are used to measure brain operations
from a certain scalp region, which makes measurements from
the measured areas of the skull not assured. Signals may
originate and be captured by other electrodes in neighboring
brain areas. Due to the poor signal-to-noise ratio of small
signals, a complicated data analysis and large numbers of
subjects is necessary to ex-tract useful information from EEG.
Gels, saline solutions and/or pastes and electrodes may cause
discomfort to the user.
Disadvantages:
1. No remote-control operation available.
2. It always depends on others to operate so not future
proof.
3. Also, it always depends upon user‟s manual
implementation.
VI. PROPOSED SYSTEM
EEG-based equipment may be mobile, the procedure is
relatively cheap, easy-to-use, rapid, quiet and safe, with no
real safeguards and no risk. No pain is caused by the EEG
invasive procedure. EEG provides a large time resolution or
the ability to better understand the moment when the event
took place with respect to stimuli. EEG-based equipment can
be designed for consumer and non-medical use to be
accessible. The phases of a BCI pipeline are listed in this
section. Actually, there is a sub-section of an EEG signal
acquisition procedure, followed by pre-processing techniques
in sub-section, sub-section extraction of features and
sub-section classification.

2374

Published By:
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering
& Sciences Publication

Brain Computer Interface Controlled Voice Assistant
1. EEG Signal Earned Paradigm We acquire a
high-resolution Wireless neuroheadset. Signals by
Emotiv EPOC. In order to detect users ' thoughts, feeling
and expressions in real time, EPOC uses a set of 14
sensors, plus 2 references to measure electrical activity
from signals generated from the brain. It is ideal for
collecting EEG data from 14 channels on 10-20
International locations.
2. The Emotiv headset pro-vides uses basic signal
processing for the pre-processing of EEG signals, which
includes a low pass filter of the EEG data with a cut-off
frequency of 85 Hz and a high-pass filter at a cut-off
frequency of 0.16 Hz. Finally, a noise filter of 50-60 Hz
is used to eliminate the noise generated by interference
with the supply lines. In addition, our procedure
includes the detection of the eye blinks, the right wink of
the eye and the left wink of the eye. The EEG activity in
the alpha frequency band determines these attempts and
thus the EEG signal is subjected to a band pass filter in
the range 1 to 4 Hz. For band passing of information we
use a Butterworth filter.
3. The feature extraction technique used in our application
is covered in this chapter. We use the band power of the
EEG signal as an easy to calculate and computer-cheap
feature. In BCI systems, band power computation as a
method has already occurred. We measure the features
of the EEG signals in a study, which are presented as
matrix X size [ channel-samples] (where channels reflect
the number of channels recorded) for the band power
features against traditional feature extract techniques.
EEG data and measurements are calculated by the
sample rate for the EEG purchasing tool multiplied by
the time frame in which the test data is collected, as
shown in Equation 2 for the I the channel band capacity.

We take the band power logarithm as features in
practice. The size vector FV of feature [ channelsX1 ] is
calculated for the EEG data denoted with X as displayed
in Equation 3 on the i th channel.

4. Using the Google-developed, primarily on smart home
devices, artificial intelligence-driven virtual aid. In contrast,
the Google Assistant can engage in two-way discussions, as
opposed to the company's previous virtual assists. You can
better recognize your words than other apps and answer your
commands quickly and correctly. Users interact mainly with
the Google Assistant via a natural voice, although they also
support keyboard input. The Wizard is able to search the
Internet, schedule events and alarms, change the system
hardware and display details on the Google user, in the same
way as Google Now does. Google also revealed that it will be
Retrieval Number: E6779018520/2020©BEIESP
DOI:10.35940/ijrte.E6779.038620

possible for the Assistant to identify objects and collect visual
information via the device's camera, and to support goods,
money, and the identification of songs. The service runs on
iOS and Android as well as the web-based platform.
VII. RESULT ANALYSIS
The result obtained from the work is that the device can
now be connected to a subject‟s brain having all the signals
which would provide feedback to the Arduino
micro-controller which output is showed below. The Arduino
micro-controller will then provide a connection to the mobile
device, this would control the Google Voice Assistant and
hence the subject can perform several activities with the AI.
This provides a feedback from the cortex of the brain to the
AI.

Figure 9
The main aim of this research work is to provide a user the
benefit of utilising a Brain Computer Interface to interact with
the environment around him/her ,the result can be described
briefly below as follows :
1. BCI to Arduino :
A function has been formulated to connect and plot raw
EEG data , which includes
data_blink
data_meditation
data_attention
A pre-allocation of buffer is produced , Bluetooth sensor is
connected TG_Connect() and Baud rate is set up as
TG_SetBaudrate() and values is being generated as
TG_GetValue()
Values of TG_GetValue() are :
TG_DATA_BATTERY
TG_DATA_POOR_SIGNAL
TG_DATA_ATTENTION
TG_DATA_MEDITATION
TG_DATA_RAW
TG_DATA_DELTA
TG_DATA_THETA
TG_DATA_ALPHA1
TG_DATA_ALPHA2
TG_DATA_BETA1
TG_DATA_BETA2
TG_DATA_GAMMA1
TG_DATA_GAMMA2

2375

Published By:
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering
& Sciences Publication

International Journal of Recent Technology and Engineering (IJRTE)
ISSN: 2277-3878, Volume-8 Issue-6, March 2020
TG_DATA_BLINK_STRENGTH
2. TG_DATA_READYZONE
These values will be stored from the BCI device and
triggered to Arduino UNO and therefore processed in
MATLAB & there will be threshold limit stored for each of
these values stored from the device.
Each of the values generate EEG values from different
parts of the brain with the help of the BCI device . Hence , the
feature extraction is complete and can be processed further for
more relative use by the micro processor .
3. Arduino to MATLAB:
The feature extracted data provided from the BCI now can
be implemented in MATLAB for analysis.
The MATLAB code than resolves the analysis of each
(Figure)of the electric signal data to output as :
Attention:
Meditation:
Blink:
4. Arduino to Voice Assistant:
The result obtained from connecting to a Voice Assistant to
control the environment as follow:
“OK Google” > saying a phrase > “Turn on the lights” >
ON .
IFTTT applet is then used to trigger and webhook request
is made to Blynk server to send this text as authentication
token.
Blynk app is receiving such texts in the app.
Text will be received in Arduino code through the given
predefined methods of Blynk library when Arduino board is
connected to Blynk via internet.
Finally lights , fans , etc are connected
Hence, the whole device will work as mentioned, a small
result table would give more relevance to the research given
below:
RESULT TABLE
Table 1 : Shows the result analysis of the research
Sr no. Task As Thought Google Assitant
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3

FAN

LIGHT
CALL

Mode

EEG Data Action By Arduino

ATTENTION
"Switch on fan" MEDITATION
BLINK
ATTENTION
MEDITATION
"Switch on light"
BLINK
"Call 911"
ATTENTION
MEDITATION
BLINK

Figure 10

Retrieval Number: E6779018520/2020©BEIESP
DOI:10.35940/ijrte.E6779.038620

40
43
50
44
40
71
81
41
64

FAN(ON/OFF)

LIGHT (ON/OFF)
CALL EMERGENCY

Figure 11
VIII. CONCLUSION
The proposed system will give the result on basis of the
data sets which we will train and test. It is expected to give
much better result as this system will analyze the historical
data and find the most suitable place to cultivate paddy
according to the soil type, weather condition, rainfall,
maximum and minimum temperature, etc. The accuracy level
is also good. In future I will try to enhance the accuracy level
and do the same for all states of India instead of four states.
The proposed system will give the result which will provide
additional access to the disabled or patients suffering from
heart ailments who will require to call for help without the
possibility or the need of speech, rather than just thinking and
asking Google Assistant to make the call and hence would be
very useful outcome for the people/users in need.
REFERENCES
1.

Khaleel Alhalaseh, Hassan Migdadi, Ra- Nia Al Halaseh Y,Mohammad
Al-Gara, “Home Automation Application Using Eeg Sensor” IRES
International conference January 2018.
2. Marwan Nafea, Amirah „Aisha Badrul Hisham, Nu- rul Ashikin
Abdul-Kadir, Fauzan Khairi Che Harun, “Brainwave-Controlled
System for Smart Home Ap- plications” 978-1-5386-1278-1/18/$31.00
©2018 IEEE.
3. P.Saranya, Santhi Ghanta, “A Brain Computer Interface For
Automation Control” Volume 118 No. 22 2018 .
4. R.Piyare and M. Tazil, “Bluetooth Based Home Automation System
Using Cell phone”, in IEEE 15th International Symposium on
Consumer Electronics, Singapore:2019.
5. Fuxing Yang, Chan Yuan Liu, Zhongcai Pei, Zhiyong Tang, “ The
Design Of Wireless Remote Intelligent Home System Based On Zigbee
And GPRS”, School of Automation Science and Electrical
Engineering, Bee Hang University, Beijing 100191, China, Proceedings
of ICCTA 2018.
6. A. ElShafee and K. A. Hamed,“ Design and Implementation of a Wi-Fi
Based Home Automation System”, World Academy of Science,
Engineering and Technology, pp. 2177-2180, 2019.
7. Nicholas D., Darrell B., SomsakS.,“ Home Automation using Cloud
Network and Mobile Devices”, IEEE Southeastcon 2018, Proceedings
of IEEE.
8. T. Yashiro, S. Kobayashi, N. Koshizuka, and K. Sakamura, “An internet
of things (IOT) architecture for embedded appliances”, in Humanitarian
Technology Conference (R10-HTC), 2019 IEEE Region 10. IEEE,
2019.
9. Deepali Javale, Mohd. Mohsin, ShreerangNandan- war, “Home
Automation and Security System Using Android ADK”, in International
Journal of Electronics Communication and Computer Technology
(IJECCT) Volume 3 Issue 2 (March 2013).
10. S.Aiswarya1, K.Moogambikai1, K.Abarna, M.Deepa1, SMenaga2 (AP)
“EEG -Based Brain Controlled Home Automation System”
International Journal of Inter- net of
Things 2019

2376

Published By:
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering
& Sciences Publication

Brain Computer Interface Controlled Voice Assistant
AUTHORS PROFILE
Rahul Sarkar, has completed his Bachelor of
Technology in computer Science and Engineering from
SRM Institute of Engineering & Technology in year
2014-18 with first division. Now he is a final year
student of Master of Technology in Computer Science
and Engineering of SRM Institute of Science &
Technology. This is the first time for him when he is
going to publish a paper on his research under the guidance of his guide Dr.
M. Prakash (Associate Professor) regarding his project in the Scopus journal
IJRTE. He is doing a research in Brain Computer Interface connected device
with the implementation with Google Assistant.
Dr. M. Prakash, has completed his Master of
Technology in Information Technology from Anna
University, Chennai and PhD in Information and
Communication Engineering (Data Mining) from
Anna University, Chennai. Currently, he is working
as Associate Professor in the department of CSE,
SRM IST. He is having more than 10 years of academic experience and have
published 35 papers in various International Journals and Conferences. He
has also received various achievements and awards.Many details about him
can
be
found
her
https://www.srmist.edu.in/engineering/cse-department/faculty/prakash-m

Retrieval Number: E6779018520/2020©BEIESP
DOI:10.35940/ijrte.E6779.038620

2377

Published By:
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering
& Sciences Publication

