On Usage of EEG Brain Control for Rehabilitation of Stroke Patients
Tom Verplaetse∗ , Filippo Sanfilippo† , Adrian Rutle‡ , Ottar L. Osen§ , and Robin T. Bye§
∗ Faculty of Engineering and Architecture
Department of Industrial Technology and Construction
Ghent University
Valentin Vaerwyckweg 1, BE-9000 Gent, Belgium
Email: tom.verplaetse@ugent.be
† Department of Engineering Cybernetics
Norwegian University of Science and Technology
NO-7491 Trondheim, Norway
Email: filippo.sanfilippo@ntnu.no
‡ Department of Computing, Mathematics and Physics
Bergen University College
P.O. Box 7030, NO-5020 Bergen, Norway
Email: adrian.rutle@hib.no
§ Software and Intelligent Control Engineering Laboratory
Faculty of Engineering and Natural Sciences
Norwegian University of Science and Technology
NTNU in Ålesund, Postboks 1517, NO-6025 Ålesund, Norway
Email: {robin.t.bye,ottar.l.osen}@ntnu.no

K EYWORDS
Motor imagery, brain-computer interface, virtual reality,
game-stimulated rehabilitation, low-cost commercial-offthe-shelf products.
A BSTRACT
This paper demonstrates rapid prototyping of a stroke
rehabilitation system consisting of an interactive 3D virtual
reality computer game environment interfaced with an
EEG headset for control and interaction using brain waves.
The system is intended for training and rehabilitation
of partially monoplegic stroke patients and uses lowcost commercial-off-the-shelf products like the Emotiv
EPOC EEG headset and the Unity 3D game engine. A
number of rehabilitation methods exist that can improve
motor control and function of the paretic upper limb in
stroke survivors. Unfortunately, most of these methods are
commonly characterised by a number of drawbacks that
can limit intensive treatment, including being repetitive,
uninspiring, and labour intensive; requiring one-on-one
manual interaction and assistance from a therapist, often
for several weeks; and involve equipment and systems
that are complex and expensive and cannot be used at
home but only in hospitals and institutions by trained
personnel. Inspired by the principles of mirror therapy
and game-stimulated rehabilitation, we have developed a
first prototype of a game-like computer application that
tries to avoid these drawbacks. For rehabilitation purposes,
we deprive the patient of the view of the paretic hand
Corresponding author: Robin T. Bye.

while being challenged with controlling a virtual hand
in a simulated 3D game environment only by means of
EEG brain waves interfaced with the computer. Whilst our
system is only a first prototype, we hypothesise that by
iteratively improving its design through refinements and
tuning based on input from domain experts and testing on
real patients, the system can be tailored for being used
together with a conventional rehabilitation programme to
improve patients’ ability to move the paretic limb much
in the same vain as mirror therapy. Our proposed system has several advantages, including being game-based,
customisable, adaptive, and extendable. In addition, when
compared with conventional rehabilitation methods, our
system is extremely low-cost and flexible, in particular
because patients can use it in the comfort of their homes,
with little or no need for professional human assistance.
Preliminary tests are carried out to highlight the potential
of the proposed rehabilitation system, however, in order
to measure its efficiency in rehabilitation, the system
must first be improved and then run through an extensive
field test with a sufficiently large group of patients and
compared with a control group.
I NTRODUCTION
A stroke is a medical condition when blood supply to
the brain is interrupted or reduced, usually because a blood
vessel bursts or is blocked by a clot (Stroke, Cerebrovascular Accident | World Health Organization, 2016). As a
consequence, brain cells are deprived of oxygen and begin
to die, resulting in a loss of control of muscles that are
controlled by the dead area of the brain. The effects of a

stroke may vary from minor problems, such as temporary
weakness of an arm or leg, to permanently paralysis on one
side of the body or losing the ability to speak, depending
on which part of the brain is injured and how severely it
is affected. Some people recover completely from strokes,
but more than 2/3 of survivors will have some type of
disability (What is Stroke? | National Stroke Association,
2016). A typical result of stroke is monoplegia, where the
patient loses control over a single limb, usually an arm.
The focus of this paper is on the development of
a first prototype of a rehabilitation system for partially
monoplegic patients with a paretic hand. Such patients
have not completely lost all motor function of the limb
and therefore have the potential for rehabilitation. The
main components of our system are a computer application
with a game-like 3D virtual environment, and an electroencephalography (EEG) brain-computer interface (BCI)
providing control inputs to the application by means of
brain waves.
In the following sections, we first provide some background on existing stroke rehabilitation methods, with a
particular focus on mirror therapy and game-stimulated
rehabilitation; EEG and BCI; the steady state visually
evoked potential (SSVEP); and our motivation and aim.
We proceed with presenting our proposed method, before
turning our attention to the implementation details of our
system. Finally, we present some preliminary test results
and a discussion of our work.
BACKGROUND
Stroke Rehabilitation
Whilst stroke rehabilitation has come a long way since
the early ages of medicine, it is still an active field of research with room for improved methodologies. Before the
1950s, stroke rehabilitation was practically non-existent
and damage control was the only approach. Thomas
Twitchell was one of the first to accurately describe the
possible recovery after a stroke (Twitchell, 1951). He
posed that it was possible to achieve full recovery within
a certain period of time if stroke patients underwent a
suitable rehabilitation programme. Around the same time
Signe Brunnstrom developed the Brunnstrom approach
(Brunnstrom, 1966; Brunnström, 1970), an approach to
determine the stage of the recovery and consequently
evaluate different rehabilitation techniques.
As noted by Nudo and Duncan (2004), an increasing
number of studies demonstrate the property of neuroplasticity in the brain, with sensorimotor regions of the brain
undergoing both structural and functional alterations as a
function of use and injury. The development of interventions for stroke rehabilitation have been shown to result
not only in adaptive reorganization in the cerebral cortex
but may also invigorate recovery in the impaired limb
months or years after the stroke (Nudo and Duncan, 2004).
A number of various rehabilitation methods and their
effects in improving upper-extremity motor control and
functioning have been reported in the literature, including

exercise training of the paretic arm (Kwakkel, Wagenaar, Twisk, Lankhorst and Koetsier, 1999), impairmentoriented training of the arm (Platz, Eickhof, Van Kaick,
Engel, Pinkowski, Kalok and Pause, 2005), functional
electric stimulation (Ring and Rosenthal, 2005), roboticassisted rehabilitation (Masiero, Celia, Rosati and Armani,
2007), and bilateral arm training (Summers, Kagerer,
Garry, Hiraga, Loftus and Cauraugh, 2007). However, as
pointed out by Yavuzer, Selles, Sezer, Sütbeyaz, Bussmann, Köseoğlu, Atay and Stam (2008), most of the rehabilitation methods that exist for the paretic upper extremity
are labour intensive, and require personal interaction and
instructions from trained personnel such as therapists
for several weeks, which makes it difficult to ensure
proper intensive treatment for all patients. In addition, the
equipment and systems used in stroke rehabilitation are
often expensive, non-portable, and complex, thus requiring
being located in a hospital or institution and operated by
trained medical personnel.
Mirror Therapy
Contrary to most rehabilitation methods, mirror therapy
is a simple, inexpensive, and patient-directed rehabilitation
method that has been shown to improve hand functioning
when used in conjunction with conventional stroke rehabilitation programmes (e.g., Yavuzer et al., 2008). Yavuzer
and colleagues instructed patients to perform wrist and finger extension and flexion movements simultaneously with
both their paretic and nonparetic hand, whilst the paretic
hand was hidden from sight. While doing the movements,
patients watched a mirror image of their normal functioning hand, thus tricking the brain into believing that the
paretic hand was actually able to perform the movements.
Compared with a control group of patients who received
sham treatment, the patients who received mirror treatment
significantly improved their motor recovery as measured
by Brunnstrom stages.
The findings of Yavuzer et al. (2008) have later been
enforced in a metastudy by Thieme, Mehrholz, Pohl,
Behrens and Dohle (2013), who examined 14 studies
that compared mirror therapy with other interventions,
and found that compared with all the other interventions,
mirror therapy had a significant effect on motor function,
although effects were dependent on the type of control
intervention. Thieme and colleagues also found that mirror
therapy was found to significantly improve everyday living
activities and reduce pain but found limited evidence for
improving visuospatial neglect.
Game-Stimulated Stroke Rehabilitation
There are several studies in the literature of using
serious games for game-stimulated stroke rehabilitation
(e.g., Burke, McNeill, Charles, Morrow, Crosbie and McDonough, 2009a,b; Alankus, Lazar, May and Kelleher,
2010; Yavuzer, Senel, Atay and Stam, 2008; Vogiatzaki
and Krukowski, 2014; Lewis, Woods, Rosie and McPherson, 2011; Joo, Yin, Xu, Thia, Chia, Kuah and He,
2010). Effective stroke rehabilitation requires intensive

and repetitive exercises that can be demotivating for
the patient, however, game-stimulated rehabilitation can
improve patient motivation, enjoyment, and engagement
(e.g., Yavuzer, Senel, Atay and Stam, 2008; Lewis et al.,
2011; Joo et al., 2010).
For example, Joo et al. (2010) found that using the
Nintendo Wii as an adjunct to conventional rehabilitation
of patients with post-stroke upper limb weakness was more
enjoyable than conventional therapy and showed that there
were small but statistically significant improvements in the
Fugl-Meyer Assessment and Motricity Index scores.
Another example is that of Yavuzer, Senel, Atay and
Stam (2008), who examined the effects of using the Playstation EyeToy Games on upper extremity motor recovery
and upper extremity-related motor functioning of patients
with subacute stroke. They found that the functional
independence measure (FIM) significantly improved in the
patients with the EyeToy intervention compared to the
control group. However, no significant differences were
found between the groups for the Brunnstrom stages for
hand and upper extremity.
Another advantage of using serious games is that the
therapy can take place in the patient’s home, making it
easier for the patient to complete the necessary number of
exercise repetitions in her own time, and with the game
easily customized to the patient’s needs and progression
(Alankus et al., 2010).
In addition to the use of game development platforms
such as the PlayStation and Nintendo Wii mentioned
above, the Unity 3D game engine has also been used, as
have control interfaces such as Microsoft Kinect, Cyber
Glove, Rutgers RMII Master, Leap Motion, Emotiv EPOC
EEG, the Viacon camera system, and electromyography
(EMG) measurements, and 3D projectors, thus enabling
a great variety of game-stimulated stroke rehabilitation
methods (e.g., see Vogiatzaki and Krukowski, 2014).

Electroencephalography (EEG)
EEG is an electrophysiological monitoring method that
measures the natural electric potential on the scalp (Niedermeyer and da Silva, 2005). Physiologically, EEG power
reflects the number of neurons that discharge synchronously (Klimesch, 1999). This electric potential is a result
of brain activity and behaves in a periodic, wavelike
fashion referred to as brain waves and can be recorded
with a portable EEG headset such as the Emotiv EPOC
EEG (e.g., Duvinage, Castermans, Petieau, Hoellinger,
Cheron and Dutoit, 2013). The brain waves are divided
into frequency bands, where each band corresponds to
different brain functions. The EEG frequency bands are
categorised as the delta (< 4 Hz), theta (4–7 Hz), alpha
(8–15 Hz), beta (16–31 Hz), and gamma (> 32 Hz) bands,
of which the alpha band, which is active during an alert
and cognitive state of the patient (Klimesch, 1999), and the
beta band, which is closely related to purposive movement
(Niedermeyer and da Silva, 2005), are most important with
respect to stroke rehabilitation.

Brain waves and brain wave pattern recognition have
been widely investigated in the recent literature. For instance, this technology has been employed for monitoring
and prevention purposes, motivated by the fact that there
is physiologic coupling of EEG morphology, frequencies,
and amplitudes with cerebral blood flow (Ueki, Linn
and Hossmann, 1988). Intraoperative continuous electroencephalographic monitoring (CEEG) is an established
modality that is used to detect cerebral ischemia during
carotid surgery. These facts have generated interest in
applying EEG/CEEG in the intensive care unit to monitor
cerebral ischemia. There is also evidence that EEG and
CEEG add value to early diagnosis, outcome prediction,
patient selection for treatment, clinical management, and
seizure detection in acute ischemic stroke (AIS) (e.g,
Jordan, 2004).
Motor Imagery Brain-Computer Interface (MI-BCI)
In a large clinical study on the ability of stroke patients
to use an EEG-based motor imagery brain-computer interface (MI-BCI) presented by Ang, Guan, Chua, Ang, Kuah,
Wang, Phua, Chin and Zhang (2011), it was shown how
BCI technology has the prospects of helping stroke survivors by enabling the interaction with their environment
through brain signals rather than through muscles, and
restoring motor function by inducing activity-dependent
brain plasticity. The same work presented a clinical study
on the extent of detectable brain signals from a large
group of 54 stroke patients in using an EEG-based MIBCI. A clinical study that investigated the ability of
hemiparetic stroke patients in operating an EEG-based
MI-BCI was also presented in (Ang, Guan, Chua, Ang,
Kuah, Wang, Phua, Chin and Zhang, 2010). This work
also assessed the efficacy in motor improvements on the
stroke-affected upper limb using EEG-based MI-BCI with
robotic feedback neuro-rehabilitation compared to robotic
rehabilitation that delivers movement therapy.
Recent studies have found distinct cortical physiology
associated with contralesional limb movements in regions distinct from primary motor cortex (e.g., see Fok,
Schwartz, Wronkiewicz, Holmes, Zhang, Somers, Bundy
and Leuthardt, 2011). These findings allow researchers to
implement closed-loop interaction systems with valuable
kinesthetic feedback for the user. For instance, based on
these findings, a BCI that localises and acquires these brain
signals to drive a powered hand orthotic was designed
and implemented in (Fok et al., 2011). In this work, the
patient’s hand was guided with appropriate force feedback,
thus enabling the hand to open and close.
Steady State Visually Evoked Potential (SSVEP)
Evoked potentials are specific patterns in brain activity
which are caused by inputs to the patient from the inside
or the outside of the body. These potentials can be recorded through the use of EEG. Steady state potentials are
recorded potentials which show a phase, frequency and
amplitude that are directly related to the input that caused
the potential. If the patient is exposed to an input method

which delivers the input at a steady frequency and brain
activity is recorded at the same or a related frequency,
this brain activity is called a steady state evoked potential.
If for example the input in question is a flashing screen
placed in front of the patient, it is called a steady state
visually evoked potential (SSVEP) (Misulis, Fakhoury and
Spehlmann, 2001), and may be used to increase brain
activity in certain desired EEG bands.
According to a survey by Zhu, Bieger, Molina and
Aarts (2010), BCI systems based on the SSVEP provide a
higher level of information throughput and require shorter
training than BCI systems using that are not augmented
with SSVEP. On the negative side, repetitive visual stimuli
modulated at certain frequencies can provoke epileptic
seizures or induce fatigue (Fisher, Harding, Erba, Barkley
and Wilkins, 2005).
With the increased activation of selected EEG bands,
we hypothesise that in line with the previously mentioned
properties of neuroplasticity and adaptive reorganization of
the cerebral cortex (Nudo and Duncan, 2004), employing
SSVEP could result in a faster rehabilitation process.
Motivation and Aim
Most of the stroke rehabilitation methodologies described in previous sections require technical assistance
to be provided to the patient by professional and skilled
personnel. In addition, these methods typically are dependent on systems and equipment that are normally very
costly and therefore only available at specialised medical
centres. Hence, patients cannot perform their rehabilitation
programmes at home but instead have to physically commute to reach these centres, with accompanying cost, time
expenditure, and physical stress. However, as we describe
above, stroke rehabilitation methods like mirror therapy
and game-stimulated rehabilition are able to counteract
some of these drawbacks and improve motor functioning
when used as an adjunct to conventional rehabilitation
therapy.
Inspired by mirror therapy and game-stimulated rehabilition, our aim is to combine the two and present a first
prototype of a flexible and easy-to-use stroke rehabilitation
system for the paretic hand consisting of an interactive
3D virtual reality computer game environment interfaced
with an EEG headset for control and interaction using
brain waves. Our proposed solution is a customisable
and extensible low-cost framework that allows patients to
perform their rehabilitation programme in the comfort of
their house, with potentially no need for human assistance,
adapting to patients’ progression and skill, and that can be
extended to other interfaces and external devices, e.g., a
robotic exoskeleton for manipulating the paretic hand.
M ETHOD
The following sections provide details on the Emotiv
EPOC EEG headset, including data acquisition, training of
mental commands, 3D modelling of the paretic hand, and a
description of the first prototype of a computer application
containing the 3D virtual environment using the Unity 3D
game engine.

EEG Data Acquisition
The Emotiv EPOC EEG headset is a high resolution,
multi-channel, portable system that has been designed for
practical research applications (Emotiv, 2016b). It has 14
EEG channels with its sensors placed according to the
international 10-20 system1 such that EEG activity from
the following brain areas is measured (see Figure 1): AF3,
F7, F3, FC5, T7, P7, O1, O2, P8, T8, FC6, F4, F8,
and AF4. Each channel samples the small variations in
electric potential on the scalp with a dynamic range of
±4.17 mV, a resolution of 0.51µV, and at a frequency of
2048 Hz, subsequently filtered and downsampled to 128
Hz (Emotiv, 2016a). The EEG signal data are transmitted
wirelessly via bluetooth to a USB receiver that connects
to a computer.

Figure 1: Positions of electrodes.

Training of Mental Commands
Emotiv software is able to perform pattern recognition
of the received EEG data, thus building up a library of
trained mental commands calibrated to each user of the
equipment. Up to four different user-defined commands
can be learnt and stored by the software. These commands
typically have labels such as ’push’, ’pull’, ’lift’, ’drop’,
’left’, ’right’, however, by employing the application programming interface (API), one is free to access these
commands and use them for whatever purpose the software
developer finds suitable.
In our case, we used the Emotiv API to interface such
commands to Unity for controlling a virtual hand in a
3D virtual environment but restricted to the 2D horizontal
plane. In the reaching phase of a hand movement, the
commands to be learnt by a user is therefore ’left’ and
’right’ (along the x-axis) and ’forward’ and ’back’ (along
the y-axis), whereas in the grasping phase, the commands
are ’open’ and ’close’.
1 Wikipedia:

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/10-20_system_(EEG)

Whilst Emotiv provide their own software training
environment (in the Emotiv Control Panel), we have
conveniently integrated this environment in our own Unity
application. This serves the purpose of making our application standalone, but more importantly, lets us design our
own training environment tailored for stroke rehabilitation
patients.
It is well known from the literature (e.g., Pfurtscheller,
Flotzinger and Kalcher, 1993) that EEG signals will display characteristic changes just prior to making a physical
movement. Indeed, Emotiv (2016b) make use of this
property in their own software, whereby making a facial
expression such a lifting an eyebrow or blinking an eye
will elicit a particular EEG pattern that the software
can easily recognise and convert to a mental command.
Therefore, as for mirror therapy, we believe it is crucial
that patients try to physically move both the paretic
and nonparetic hand while performing EEG training. The
purpose of this is to link the particular EEG patterns that
emerge when patients move their hands with brain control
of the virtual hand.
3D Model of the Paretic Hand
The success of mirror therapy is based on tricking
the brain of the patient into believing that the paretic
hand moves without any problem when in fact it is just
the mirror image of the functioning nonparetic hand that
the patient observes. Whilst a 3D virtual representation
can never be made as perfect as a mirror image, we
hypothesise that by using a virtual hand that is very
realistic both in behaviour and in looks, coupled with
direct brain control using EEG, we can get a positive effect
in rehabilitation similar to that of mirror therapy.
For creating a realistic 3D model of the paretic hand, we
used Blender,2 which is a free and open source 3D creation
suite. It supports a variety of 3D modelling aspects,
including rigging, animation, simulation, rendering, compositing, and motion tracking. The resulting virtual hand is
visually realistic and equipped with an internal set of finger
joints that can be accessed and individually controlled
by a computer programme. Importantly, however, to be
realistic, the virtual joints must programmed to move in a
synergy, that is, a coordinated manner, just like real hand.
After development, the 3D hand model was imported into
Unity.
Unity 3D Application
The Unity 3D application is made up of four different
scenes: a main menu, a settings panel, a training environment, and a game rehabilitation environment. Navigation
between these scenes is done by using buttons that are
readily available during the game. Fig. 2 shows some
screenshots of scenes from the application, and how they
are connected.
Main Menu: The main menu is the boot scene of the
application, and is used to navigate to all the other scenes.
2 www.blender.org

Settings Panel: The purpose of the settings panel is to
calibrate the application to have the best possible effect
on the patient. There are four different settings: (i) Hand
movement speed, which is the speed with which the hand
moves in an in the horizontal x-y plane. The faster the
hand moves the more difficult it becomes for the patient
to control the hand; (ii) The hand close speed, which is the
time it takes for the hand to close and grasp target object
(a ball, in this case) inside the environment. The longer the
hand close speed, the longer the patient has to focus on
the close command; (iii) target score, which is the number
of objects (balls) the patient must succesfully be able to
graps before the game ends; and (iv) SSVEP frequency,
which is the frequency with which the screen’s background
colour will flash in order to evoke the SSVEP. The ideal
frequency will have to be determined by physicians, likely
through an experimental procedure, in order achieve the
optimal level of brain activation.
Training Environment: The training environment has
been developed by Emotiv. It is basically the same training
environment they use in their own native software but
ported to the Unity game platform, thus enabling us to
use it as a separate scene in our Unity application. The
EEG headset can be set up in this scene and the different
mental commands can be trained. Since EEG patterns vary
across users, the software stores and maintains a calibrated
profile for each user of the headset.
Game Rehabilitation Environment: To limit the initial
work, we have only fully implemented a virtual game
rehabilitation environment for the left paraplegic hand, and
only for a single kind or exercise. The extension to the
right hand is straight forward due to the dual properties
of the left and right hand and intended for future work.
The developed environment can also serve as a template
if other limbs need to be considered.
In the game rehabilitation environment, the patient is
presented with a top view of the virtual hand and a
randomly positioned target object, which in the current
implementation is a ball. The purpose of the game is for
the patient to move the hand in the horizontal x-y plane.
This is achieved by the patient simultaneously sending two
mental movement commands (e.g., ’right’ and ’forward’
for a movement in the positive x and y directions).
When the target is approached, the game view zooms
in to a close-up and the hand speed slows. The patient
must then send a mental ’close’ command in order to
grasp the target object. The ’close’ command must last
for a minimum duration (can be adjusted in the settings
menu) for the virtual hand to successfully grasp the object,
otherwise, the hand will open and the patient will have to
try again.
After successfully having grasped the object, the score
counter is incremented and the game resets with the target
in a new random position. The exercise is repeated until
the desired number of successful reach-and-grasps have
been reached (can be adjusted in the settings menu).
Importantly, for both the reaching phase and the grasping phase of the exercise, we hypothesise that the patient
should also try to move his physical paretic hand and

Objects grabbed: 0

Main menu

Settings

Score counter

Left hand start view

Left hand close-up grasping view

Figure 2: Selected scenes from the stroke rehabilitation application: main menu (top left); settings panel (top middle);
and game rehabilitation environment, consisting of left hand start view (bottom left), left hand close-up grasping view
(bottom right), and score counter (top right).

his well-functioning nonparetic hand, in order for the
rehabilitation to get a positive effect similar to mirror
therapy.
Finally, we highlight that during the rehabilitation exercise, the background can be set to be constantly flashing
between two colours with the purpose of evoking the SSVEP for higher EEG activation and better mental control.
Application Overview and System Diagram
A high-level overview of the application is shown in
Fig. 3, which shows how the application is built on top
of the Emotiv EPOC EEG headset interfaced by an API
with the Unity 3D game engine. Some of the features of
the application are highlighted.
The system diagram in Fig. 4 shows the different
system modules, data flow and usage modes of the stroke
rehabilitation system. The top box in stapled blue line
shows modules that provide the system setup. The SSVEP
module is used for setting SSVEP parameters such as
colours and flashing frequency. Blender is used to create
3D models such as a virtual hand. Data (settings and
3D model) is passed as inputs to the Unity 3D game
environment. The game environment is presented to the
user via the display. The user’s EEG brain waves are
sampled by the EEG headset and pattern-matched with

Game-based
learning

Mirror
therapy

Customisable

EEG

SSVEP

Realistic
visualisation

Figure 3: System overview.

a library of brain wave patterns and corresponding actions
in order to generate the correct action, which is fed to
back to Unity.
P RELIMINARY T EST R ESULTS
Having partially monoplegic patients testing this first
prototype of our stroke rehabilitation system would have
been unethical, as the system needs further development
in close cooperation with medical experts before being
tested on real patients. Nevertheless, the first author, a
healthy 22-year-old male at the time, constantly tested the

System setup

SSVEP

Display

3D model

Blender

Unity 3D

Matching

Action

Action
Library
Action
Initial training
Figure 4: System diagram.

system during development and was able to achieve very
precise control of the virtual hand only by using EEG brain
waves, that is, without simultaneously moving his physical
hands. Had the participant added physical movement we
would have likely observed stronger EEG activation, easier
brain wave pattern recognition, and even better control.
Unfortunately, this was never tested.
To demonstrate proof-of-concept, we report below on
the effects of including SSVEP on EEG activation and on
game completion time for this single participant. We emphasise, however, that much more testing, under guidance
of medical expertise, with a set of different exercises and
execution regimes, and with many more participants, both
healthy and partially monoplegic patients, is needed before
any scientific conclusions can be made.
Effect of SSVEP on EEG Activation
Fig. 5 shows the typical effect on EEG activation with
and without SSVEP that we observed for our single
participant while performing the stroke rehabilitation game
exercise. The effect was present both in early and late
stages of testing. The magnitude of brain activity at brain
locations is indicated by the spectrum of colours, with the
highest activity shown in red and the lowest in blue.
Without the SSVEP, the AF4 and F8 (right frontal lobe)
and FC5 (left frontal lobe) regions were the most active
in both the alpha and beta bands.
Employing the SSVEP raised the EEG activity markedly
across the entire scalp. For alpha waves with SSVEP, the
increase in activity was greatest in the right frontal lobe

Figure 5: EEG activation with and without SSVEP.

in the AF4, F4, F8, FC6 regions but also the FC5 activity
in the left frontal lobe increased. For beta waves with
SSVEP, there was a great increase in activity across both
frontal lobes (particularly left regions F3, F7, FC5 and

right regions AF4, F4, F8, FC6) but also a marked increase
in P7 (left parietal lobe) and O1 (left occipital lobe).
Effect of SSVEP on Game Completion Time
The participant had been using the rehabilitation system
extensible before the trials and the effect of improvement
due to practice during trials can likely be neglected.
The rehabilitation game was configured to finish upon
completion of four successful reach-and-grasp exercises.
A single reach-and-grasp exercise typically took about
half a minute, hence, completing a game would typically
take about two minutes. The effect of SSVEP on game
completion time is summarised in Table 1.
Trial

Without SSVEP (mm:ss)

With SSVEP (mm:ss)

1
2
3
4
5

02:04
01:58
02:34
02:16
01:52

01:43
01:46
02:06
01:55
01:59

Average
St. dev.

02:09
00:16

01:54
00:09

Table 1: Game completion times with and without SSVEP.
The participant completed the rehabilitation game five
times with SSVEP turned on and five times with SSVEP
turned off. With SSVEP turned on, the completion time
was lower in four trials, whilst the average completion
time was 01:54 with a standard deviation of 9 sec. With
SSVEP turned off, the average completion time was 02:09
with a standard deviation of 16 sec. Hence, with SSVEP
turned on, the average completion time was improved by
15 sec, corresponding to a 12% reduction.
The measurements may suggest that using SSVEP reduces game completion time and its variability as observed
by the standard deviation and average completion time,
respectively, however, we strongly emphasise that these
results are obtained from a single participant and are meant
only as an encouragement for further studies when stroke
rehabilitation system has been largely improved.
D ISCUSSION
This paper has demonstrated fast prototyping of a stroke
rehabilitation system consisting of an interactive 3D virtual
reality computer game environment interfaced with an
EEG headset for control and interaction using brain waves.
The system is intended for training and rehabilitation of
partially monoplegic stroke patients, was developed over
the course of only a few months, and uses low-cost COTS
products like the Emotiv EPOC EEG headset and the
Unity 3D game engine.
Preliminary testing of a first prototype of the system
highlights its potential, however, in order to validate its
efficiency in stroke rehabilitation, the system must first be
adjusted and improved in close cooperation with medical
experts and then run through an extensive field test with
a sufficiently large group of patients for comparison with
a control group.

C OMPARISON WITH E XISTING M ETHODS
A number of rehabilitation methods exist that can improve motor control and function of the paretic upper limb
in partially monoplegic stroke survivors. Unfortunately,
most of these methods are commonly characterised by a
number of drawbacks that can limit intensive treatment, including being repetitive, uninspiring, and labour intensive;
requiring one-on-one manual interaction and assistance
from a therapist, often for several weeks; and involve
equipment and systems that are complex and expensive
and cannot be used at home but only in hospitals and
institutions by trained personnel. Mirror therapy, on the
other hand, is a simple, inexpensive, and patient-directed
rehabilitation method that has been shown to improve hand
functioning when used in conjunction with conventional
stroke rehabilitation programmes.
Inspired by the principles of mirror therapy, we have
developed a game-like computer application in which we
deprive the patient of the view of the paretic hand while
being challenged with controlling a virtual hand in a 3D
game environment only by means of EEG brain waves
interfaced with the computer.
We hypothesise that by adopting a rehabilitation scheme
similar to mirror therapy, where patients try to physically
move their paretic and nonparetic hands whilst using EEG
brain waves to control the virtual hand, patients may
improve motor control and functioning of their paretic
hand.
F UTURE W ORK
Whilst our system is only a first prototype, we hypothesise that by iteratively improving its design through refinements and tuning based on input from domain experts
and testing on real patients, the system can be tailored
for being used together with a conventional rehabilitation
programme to improve patients’ ability to move the paretic
limb much in the same vain as mirror therapy.
Such an improved system would have several advantages over mirror therapy and other conventional rehabilitation methods, namely being (i) game-based and immersive,
counteracting laborious and repetitive training exercises
and providing a rewarding environment that strengthens
and improves rehabilitation; (ii) customisable, allowing
for a library of different training exercises not limited
by physical equipment; (iii) adaptive and stand-alone,
removing the need for instructions from a therapist as
the patient progresses and different exercises must be
performed; and (iv) extendable, for example by interfacing
to a robotic exoskeleton on the paretic limb. In addition,
when compared with conventional rehabilitation methods,
our system is extremely low-cost and flexible, in particular
because patients can use it in the comfort of their homes,
with little or no need for professional human assistance.
With respect to extending the system with external
physical devices, using Unity as virtual environment enables initial virtual protyping of the devices. That is, a
device first be first modelled, simulated, and interfaced and

controlled by brain waves inside Unity, before an actual
physical device is built and connected to the system.
For example, we could provide the user with valuable
kinesthetic feedback by connecting the rehabilitation system to a hand exoskeleton or a low-cost haptic glove,
such as the one presented by Sanfilippo, Hatledal and
Pettersen (2015). With this integration, the patient’s hand
may be guided with appropriate force feedback for a more
engaging learning experience.
Another example is to use EEG brain waves for controlling a prosthetic hand, similar to the mind-controlled,
low-cost modular manipulator system presented by Sanfilippo, Zhang and Pettersen (2015). Such a robotic hand
may be used for compensating hand function in chronic
stroke patients.
Finally, we would like to draw attention to an accompanying paper we submit concurrently, in which we use a
similar system as described here, designed to provide tetraplegic patients a training platform for EEG brain control
of a virtual electric wheelchair (Hjørungdal, Sanfilippo,
Osen, Rutle and Bye, 2016).
R EFERENCES
Alankus, G., Lazar, A., May, M. and Kelleher, C. (2010),
Towards customizable games for stroke rehabilitation,
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, ACM, pp. 2113–2122.
Ang, K. K., Guan, C., Chua, K. S. G., Ang, B. T.,
Kuah, C. W. K., Wang, C., Phua, K. S., Chin, Z. Y.
and Zhang, H. (2011), A large clinical study on the
ability of stroke patients to use an EEG-based motor
imagery brain-computer interface, Clinical EEG and
Neuroscience 42(4), 253–258.
Ang, K. K., Guan, C., Chua, K. S. G., Ang, B. T.,
Kuah, C., Wang, C., Phua, K. S., Chin, Z. Y. and
Zhang, H. (2010), Clinical study of neurorehabilitation in stroke using EEG-based motor imagery braincomputer interface with robotic feedback, Engineering
in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), 2010 Annual
International Conference of the IEEE, IEEE, pp. 5549–
5552.
Brunnstrom, S. (1966), Motor testing procedures in hemiplegia: based on sequential recovery stages., Physical
Therapy 46(4), 357.
Brunnström, S. (1970), Movement therapy in hemiplegia:
a neurophysiological approach, Facts and Comparisons.
Burke, J. W., McNeill, M., Charles, D. K., Morrow, P. J.,
Crosbie, J. H. and McDonough, S. M. (2009a), Optimising engagement for stroke rehabilitation using serious
games, The Visual Computer 25(12), 1085–1099.
Burke, J. W., McNeill, M., Charles, D., Morrow, P. J.,
Crosbie, J. and McDonough, S. (2009b), Serious games
for upper limb rehabilitation following stroke, Games
and Virtual Worlds for Serious Applications, 2009. VSGAMES’09. Conference in, IEEE, pp. 103–110.
Duvinage, M., Castermans, T., Petieau, M., Hoellinger,
T., Cheron, G. and Dutoit, T. (2013), Performance of
the Emotiv Epoc headset for P300-based applications,
Biomedical Engineering Online 12(1), 56.

Emotiv (2016a), Emotiv EPOC Brain Computer Interface
and Scientific Contextual EEG, http://www.emotiv.com.
Specifications pamphlet, accessed 29 February 2016.
Emotiv (2016b), Emotiv website, http://www.emotiv.com.
Accessed 2 February 2016.
Fisher, R. S., Harding, G., Erba, G., Barkley, G. L. and
Wilkins, A. (2005), Photic-and pattern-induced seizures:
A review for the epilepsy foundation of america working group, Epilepsia 46(9), 1426–1441.
Fok, S., Schwartz, R., Wronkiewicz, M., Holmes, C.,
Zhang, J., Somers, T., Bundy, D. and Leuthardt, E.
(2011), An EEG-based brain computer interface for
rehabilitation and restoration of hand control following
stroke using ipsilateral cortical physiology, Proc. of the
IEEE Annual International Conference of the Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC’2011),
pp. 6277–6280.
Hjørungdal, R.-M., Sanfilippo, F., Osen, O. L., Rutle, A.
and Bye, R. T. (2016), A game-based learning framework for controlling brain-actuated wheelchairs, Proceedings of the 30th European Conference on Modelling
and Simulation (ECMS ’16) (submitted for publication),
Regensburg, Germany.
Joo, L. Y., Yin, T. S., Xu, D., Thia, E., Chia, P. F., Kuah,
C. W. K. and He, K. K. (2010), A feasibility study using
interactive commercial off-the-shelf computer gaming in
upper limb rehabilitation in patients after stroke, Journal
of Rehabilitation Medicine 42(5), 437–441.
Jordan, K. G. (2004), Emergency EEG and continuous
EEG monitoring in acute ischemic stroke, Journal of
Clinical Neurophysiology 21(5), 341–352.
Klimesch, W. (1999), EEG alpha and theta oscillations
reflect cognitive and memory performance: a review and
analysis, Brain Research Reviews 29(2), 169–195.
Kwakkel, G., Wagenaar, R. C., Twisk, J. W., Lankhorst,
G. J. and Koetsier, J. C. (1999), Intensity of leg and arm
training after primary middle-cerebral-artery stroke: a
randomised trial, The Lancet 354(9174), 191–196.
Lewis, G. N., Woods, C., Rosie, J. A. and McPherson,
K. M. (2011), Virtual reality games for rehabilitation of
people with stroke: perspectives from the users, Disability and Rehabilitation: Assistive Technology 6(5), 453–
463.
Masiero, S., Celia, A., Rosati, G. and Armani, M. (2007),
Robotic-assisted rehabilitation of the upper limb after
acute stroke, Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation 88(2), 142–149.
Misulis, K. E., Fakhoury, T. and Spehlmann, R.
(2001), Spehlmann’s evoked potential primer, Butterworth/Heinemann.
Niedermeyer, E. and da Silva, F. L. (2005), Electroencephalography: basic principles, clinical applications, and
related fields, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Nudo, R. J. and Duncan, P. W. (2004), Recovery and
rehabilitation in stroke introduction, Stroke 35(11 suppl
1), 2690–2690.
Pfurtscheller, G., Flotzinger, D. and Kalcher, J. (1993),
Brain-computer interface: a new communication device

for handicapped persons, Journal of Microcomputer
Applications 16(3), 293–299.
Platz, T., Eickhof, C., Van Kaick, S., Engel, U., Pinkowski,
C., Kalok, S. and Pause, M. (2005), Impairmentoriented training or bobath therapy for severe arm
paresis after stroke: a single-blind, multicentre randomized controlled trial, Clinical Rehabilitation 19(7), 714–
724.
Ring, H. and Rosenthal, N. (2005), Controlled study of
neuroprosthetic functional electrical stimulation in subacute post-stroke rehabilitation, Journal of Rehabilitation Medicine 37(1), 32–36.
Sanfilippo, F., Hatledal, L. I. and Pettersen, K. Y. (2015),
A fully-immersive hapto-audio-visual framework for
remote touch, Proc. of the 11th IEEE International
Conference on Innovations in Information Technology
(IIT’15), Dubai, United Arab Emirates.
Sanfilippo, F., Zhang, H. and Pettersen, K. Y. (2015),
The new architecture of ModGrasp for mind-controlled
low-cost sensorised modular hands, Proc. of the 2015
IEEE International Conference on Industrial Technology
(ICIT’2015), Seville, Spain, pp. 524–529.
Stroke, Cerebrovascular Accident | World Health
Organization
(2016),
http://www.who.int/topics/
cerebrovascular_accident/en/. Accessed on 12 February
2016.
Summers, J. J., Kagerer, F. A., Garry, M. I., Hiraga, C. Y.,
Loftus, A. and Cauraugh, J. H. (2007), Bilateral and
unilateral movement training on upper limb function in
chronic stroke patients: a TMS study, Journal of the
Neurological Sciences 252(1), 76–82.
Thieme, H., Mehrholz, J., Pohl, M., Behrens, J. and Dohle,
C. (2013), Mirror therapy for improving motor function
after stroke, Stroke 44(1), e1–e2.
Twitchell, T. E. (1951), The restoration of motor function
following hemiplegia in man, Brain 74(4), 443–480.
Ueki, M., Linn, F. and Hossmann, K.-A. (1988), Functional activation of cerebral blood flow and metabolism
before and after global ischemia of rat brain, Journal of
Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism 8(4), 486–494.
Vogiatzaki, E. and Krukowski, A. (2014), Serious games
for stroke rehabilitation employing immersive user interfaces in 3D virtual environment, Journal of Health
Informatics 6, pp. 105–113.
What is Stroke? | National Stroke Association (2016), http:
//www.stroke.org/understand-stroke/what-stroke. Accessed on 12 February 2016.
Yavuzer, G., Selles, R., Sezer, N., Sütbeyaz, S., Bussmann, J. B., Köseoğlu, F., Atay, M. B. and Stam,
H. J. (2008), Mirror therapy improves hand function in
subacute stroke: a randomized controlled trial, Archives
of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation 89(3), 393–
398.
Yavuzer, G., Senel, A., Atay, M. and Stam, H. (2008),
”Playstation EyeToy Games” improve upper extremityrelated motor functioning in subacute stroke: a randomized controlled clinical trial, European Journal of
Physical and Rehabilitation Medicine 44(3), 237–244.

Zhu, D., Bieger, J., Molina, G. G. and Aarts, R. M. (2010),
A survey of stimulation methods used in SSVEPbased BCIs, Computational intelligence and neuroscience 2010, 1.
AUTHOR B IOGRAPHIES
T OM V ERPLAETSE received the BSc degree in electromechanical engineering from Ghent University and is
currently studying for a MSc in automation engineering at
the same university.
F ILIPPO S ANFILIPPO3 received the BSc degree in
computer engineering from the University of Catania,
Catania, Italy, in 2009 and the MSc degree in computer
engineering from the University of Siena, Siena, Italy, in
2011. In 2008, he was a Visiting Scholar at the School of
Computing and Intelligent Systems, University of Ulster,
Londonderry, United Kingdom and in 2010 a Visiting
Fellow at the Technical Aspects of Multimodal Systems
(TAMS) research group, Department of Mathematics, Informatics and Natural Sciences, University of Hamburg,
Hamburg, Germany. In 2015, he received a PhD degree
from the Department of Engineering Cybernetics, Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU),
Trondheim, Norway. For his PhD studies, he was awarded
a research scholarship from the IEEE Oceanic Engineering
Society (OES) Scholarship program. He is currently working as a Post-Doctoral Researcher at the Department of
Engineering Cybernetics, NTNU in Trondheim, Norway.
His research interests include control methods, robotics,
artificial intelligence and modular robotic grasping.
A DRIAN RUTLE4 holds PhD and MSc degrees in
Computer Science from the University of Bergen, Norway.
Rutle is an associate professor at the Department of
Computing, Physics and Mathematics at the Bergen University College, Norway. Rutle’s main interest is applying
theoretical results from the field of model-driven software
engineering to practical domains and has expertise in
the development of formal modelling frameworks and
domain-specific modelling languages. He also conducts
research in the fields of modelling and simulation for
virtual prototyping purposes.
OTTAR L. O SEN is MSc in Cybernetics from the
Norwegian Institute of Technology in 1991. He is the head
of R&D at ICD Software AS and an assistant professor at
NTNU in Ålesund.
ROBIN T. B YE5 graduated from the University of New
South Wales, Sydney with a BE (Hons 1), MEngSc, and
a PhD, all in electrical engineering. Dr. Bye began working at NTNU in Ålesund (formerly Aalesund University
College) as a researcher in 2008 and has since 2010
been an associate professor in automation engineering.
His research interests belong to the fields of artificial
intelligence, cybernetics, and neuroengineering.

3 filipposanfilippo.inspitivity.com
4 www.rutle.no
5 www.robinbye.com

