Telemedicine System for Game-Based Rehabilitation
of Stroke Patients in the FP7-“StrokeBack” Project
Emmanouela Vogiatzaki1, Yannis Gravezas1, Nikos Dalezios1, Dwaipayan Biswas2, Andy Cranny2, Steffen Ortmann3,
Peter Langendörfer3, Ilias Lamprinos4, Gioula Giannakopoulou4, Josy Achner5, Jasmin Klemke5 and Holger Jost6
1

Research for Science, Art and Technology (RFSAT), United Kingdom, {emmanouela, wizgrav, dalezios}@rfsat.com
2
University of Southampton, School of Electronics and Computer Science, UK, {db9g10, awc}@ecs.soton.ac.uk
3
IHP, Germany, {Ortmann, Langendoerfer}@ihp-microelectronics.com
4
Intracom S. A. Telecom Solutions, Greece, {labil, pgian}@intracom-telecom.com
5
Berlin-Brandenburg-Klinik, Germany, {Josy.Achner, Jasmin.Klemke}@brandenburgklinik.de
6
University of Potsdam, Germany, jost@cs.uni-potsdam.de

Abstract — Stroke is a disease with very high socio-economic
impact. In average, the healthcare expenditure cost for Strokes
across different countries in Europe and USA exceeds 3% of
their entire healthcare expenditure, including inpatient
treatments, outpatient hospital visits and long-term rehabilitation
and care1. Therefore, there is an urgent need for devising an
effective long-term care and rehabilitation strategy for stroke
patients, which would actively involve patients in the
rehabilitation process while minimizing costly human support.
This paper reports on the results of the FP7-StrokeBack project
where game-based training system has been proposed allowing
physicians to supervise the rehabilitation of patents at home. The
proposed approach empowers the patients and their caretakers
for effective application of rehabilitation protocols in their home
settings, while leading physicians are enabled to supervise the
progress of the rehabilitation (and intervene if needed) through
the use of Personal Health Record (PHR) system. The increased
rehabilitation speed and ability to perform training at home
directly improves quality of life of patients.
Keywords — e-Health; rehabilitation; stroke; virtual reality;
immersive user interfaces; Kinect; Personal Health Record; PHR

I.

INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION

Stroke affects about 2 Million [1] people every year in
Europe. For these people the effect of stroke is that they lose
certain physical and cognitive abilities at least for a certain
time. More than one third of these patients i.e. more than
670,000 people return to their home with some level of
permanent disability leading to a significant reduction of
quality of life, which affects not only the patients themselves
but also their relatives. This also increased cost of the health
care services associated with hospitalisation, home services and
rehabilitation. Therefore, there is a strong need to improve
ambulant care model, in particular, at the home settings,
involving the patients into the care pathway, for achieving
maximal outcome in terms of clinical as well as quality of life.
The StrokeBack project addresses both of the indicated
problem areas. The goal of the project is the development of a
telemedicine system, which supports ambulant rehabilitation at
home settings for the stroke patients with minimal human
1

How can we avoid Stroke crisis:
http://www.stopafib.org/downloads/News221.pdf

intervention. With StrokeBack, the patients would be able to
perform rehabilitation in their own home where they feel
psychologically better than in care centres. In addition, the
contact hours with a physiotherapist could be reduced thus
leading to a direct reduction of healthcare cost. By ensuring
proper execution of physiotherapy trainings in an automated
guided way modulated by appropriate clinical knowledge and
in supervised way only when necessary, StrokeBack aims to
empower and stimulates patients to exercise more while
achieving better quality and effectiveness than it would be
possible today. This way StrokeBack system is expected to
improve rehabilitation speed, while ensuring high quality of
life for patients by enabling them to continue rehabilitation in
their familiar home environments instead of subjecting them to
alien and stressful hospital settings. This offers also means
reducing indirect healthcare cost as well.
The StrokeBack project aims at increasing the rehabilitation
speed of stroke patients while patients are in their own home.
The benefit we expect from our approach is twofold. Most
patients feel psychologically better in their own environment
than in hospital and rehabilitation speed is improved.
Furthermore, we focus on increasing patients’ motivation when
exercising with tools similar to a gaming console. The concept
puts the patient into the centre of the rehabilitation process. It
aims at exploiting the fact the patients feel better at home, that
it has been shown that patients train more if the training is
combined with attractive training environments. First, patients
learn physical rehabilitation exercises from a therapist at the
care centre or in a therapists’ practice. Then the patients can
exercise at home with the StrokeBack system monitoring their
execution and providing a real-time feedback on whether the
execution was correct or not. In addition, it records the training
results and vital parameters of the patient. This data can be
subsequently analysed by the medical experts for assessment of
the patient recovery. Furthermore, the patient may also receive
midterm feedback on her/his personal recovery process. In
order to ensure proper guidance of the patient, the therapist also
gets information from the PHR to assess the recovery process
enabling him to decide whether other training sequences should
be used that are then introduced to the patient in practice again.
The research leading to these results has received funding from the European
Union Seventh Framework Program (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement
n° 288692-StrokeBack.

II.

GAME-STIMULATED REHABILITATION CONCEPT

Use of virtual, augmented and/or immersive environments
for training and rehabilitation of post-stroke patients opens an
attractive avenue in improving various negative effects
occurring because of brain traumas. Those include helping in
the recovery of the motor skills, limb-eye coordination,
orientation in space, everyday tasks etc. Training may range
from simple goal-directed limb movements aimed at achieving
a given goal (e.g. putting a coffee cup on a table), improving
lost motor skills (e.g. virtual driving), and others. In order to
increase the efficiency of the exercises advanced haptic
interfaces are developed, allowing direct body stimulation and
use of physical objects within virtual settings, supplementing
the visual stimulation. Immersive environments have quickly
been found attractive for remote home-based rehabilitation
giving raise to both individual and monitored by therapists
remotely. Depending on a type of a physical interface, different
types of exercises are possible [7]. Virtual environments are
often used for functional training and simulation of natural
environments, e.g. home, work, outdoor. Exercises range from
simple goal-directed movements [8] to learn everyday tasks.
Current generation of post-stroke rehabilitation systems,
although exploiting latest immersive technologies tend to
proprietary approaches concentrating on a closed range of
exercise types, lacking thoroughly addressing the complete set
of disabilities and offering a comprehensive set of
rehabilitation scenarios. The use of technologies is also very
selective and varies from one system to another. Although there
are cases of using avatars for more intuitive feedback to the
patient, the use of complicated wearable devices makes it
tiresome and decreases the effectiveness of the exercise. In our
approach we have been exploring novel technologies for body
tracing that exploit the rich information gathered by combining
wearable sensors with visual feedback systems that are already
commercially available such as Microsoft Kinect2 or Leap
Motion3 user interfaces and 3D virtual/augmented vision.
Immersive environment aims to support full 3D physical
and visual feedback through Mixed-Reality interaction and
visualisation technologies placing the user inside of the training
environment. This way the training exercises become more
intuitive in their approach by using exercise templates with
feedback showing correctness of performed exercises.
Therapists are then able to prescribe a set of the rehabilitation
exercises as treatment through the PHR platform(s) thus
offering means of correlating them with changes of patient’s
condition, showing effectiveness in patients’ recovery process.
III. STROKEBACK ARCHITECTURE
The StrokeBack concept system architecture is shown in
Fig. 1. It contain a Patient System deployed at home supporting
physiological remote monitoring of patient wellbeing, runs the
rehabilitation games and offers full integration with online
Personal health Record (PHR) used as a data repository for
sharing information between the patient and his/her
physician(s). It offers full support to immersive user interfaces
2
3

Microsoft Kinect SDK: http://kinectforwindows.org
Leap Motion: http://www.wii.com

like Kinect, Leap Motion, Emotiv EEG and other ones,
combined with a range of virtual and augmentation systems in
order to enable fully immersive gaming experiences.

Fig. 1. The conceptual architecture of the StrokeBack system.

The clinician part provides access to back-office PHR data
repository for constant monitoring of patients’ condition, the
progress of their rehabilitation and other relevant physiological
data including audio-visual connection if needed. The system
supports 3D Smart TVs, AR/VR visors and 3D projectors. The
system is geared to support use also on mobile devices like
smartphones, tablets etc. An affordable integrated gaming
solution for both near field and full-body rehabilitation
exercises is developed into table platform by Meytec (Fig. 2).

Fig. 2. The rehabilitation table design from Meytec.

IV.

WEARABLE EMBEDDED SENSOR DEVICES

Considering that detecting activities during daily life of
patients cannot be achieved without wearable device support,
our partner in the project, IHP GmbH, has been developing a
customizable lightweight embedded sensor device allowing
short-range wireless transmission of most required parameters.
Our key goals for developing this platform are mainly driven
by the end-user (patients) requirements considering:
 Plug-and play feeling so that no cables or other connectors
– not useable by stroke patients – are needed to use the
sensor node. The integration of standardized Qi wireless
power supply gets rid of cables and the necessity to plug-in
the sensor nodes for charging. The patient only needs to
place the sensor node on a wireless charging station when
not worn, e.g. during the night. The node automatically
starts gathering data again when removed from the charging
station, i.e. most likely after getting up in the morning.
 Low power consumption of the whole platform, especially
during wireless transmission between the sensor nodes
themselves and/or a base station when in reach. To achieve

this, we integrated the Bluetooth Low-Energy (4.0)
transceiver CC2541 from Texas Instruments (TI) with a
tiny integrated antenna on-board. Its maximum power
consumption is less than 20 mA at 3.3V at 0 dBm.
 Extremely compact and very flat design since sensor nodes
were attached to the wrist and arm reducing the disturbing
feeling when worn throughout the day. Our complete sensor
platform including the lithium battery packaged in a hard
case with a size of 52 x 32 x 15 mm only.
A low cost sensing device empowered by a MSP430F5528
microcontroller of TI has been developed. The senor node
further provides 128 MB flash memory for storing sensor data,
support for lithium-polymer battery cells (250mAh single cell
used for StrokeBack) and a couple of initial sensors, i.e. 3-axis
acceleration, 2-axis gyroscope, 3-axis magnetometer as well as
vibration and tilt sensor. The StrokeBack sensor platform is
depicted in Fig. 3.

Fig. 3. The StrokeBack sensor platform used for monitoring activities of
daily life in comparison to a 5 Eurocent coin, see (a). The fully packed variant
of a single sensor node including receiver coil for wireless power transfer and
lithium-battery pack is shown in (b).

The primary focus was on inertial and acceleration sensors
in the first version of our sensor platform to perform body
motion sensing. However, due to given extensibility other
common parameters including EMG, critical medical signs like
ECG, Blood Pressure, heart rate etc., can be included as
adapter-boards later. This part of work is ongoing.
V.

BODY MOTION SENSING

The development of wireless Body Area Networks
(wBANs) comprised of low-cost, miniaturized, wearable
wireless sensors has enabled recording of kinematic movement
and physiological data in a ubiquitous and continuous manner
within natural environments over long durations. This has
enabled efficient and unobtrusive patient activity monitoring
while they perform their daily living activities using a minimal
number of sensors [12-13]. A prime requirement of such a
system is therefore to ensure its long-term operability. It has
been shown that in such wearable systems it is preferable that
the data analysis be performed directly at the sensor node to
yield energy efficient solutions. With this approach, it is
imperative to select data analysis algorithms of low complexity
since energy consumption is directly proportional to
computational complexity [14]. Project partners at the
University of Southampton are developing a low power,
wBAN to detect, classify and assess the patient’s use of their
stroke-impaired arm during normal daily activities. In
particular, low-complexity classification algorithms based on

the k-means clustering technique are being developed to detect
patient-specific arm movements that have been prescribed by
the physician as part of a rehabilitation program. The wBAN
consists of two sensor nodes worn on the wrist and elbow of
the affected arm, and a third sensor node worn on the chest.
Each sensor node continuously generates kinematic data from
tri-axial accelerometers and gyroscopes, which are processed
by the on-board classifier in (near) real-time. Specifically, 10
time domain features are extracted from segments of data from
each axis of each sensor, from which an optimum number of
features are identified from a ranked list using a sequential
feature selection technique.
A minimum distance classifier uses these features as
coordinates to generate a point in multi-dimensional feature
space, and determines if the originating data is indicative of a
target movement by measuring the distance between the point
and each centroid of a number of pre-defined clusters in the
feature space that characterize each of the prescribed
movements. The classifier is initially trained (and then
continuously trained) to identify sensor data patterns
corresponding to the prescribed movements while the patient
plays games or performs instructed movements at the Patient
System. This allows it to adapt as the patient regains mobility
in the arm. At the end of each day, data is uploaded from the
BAN to the Patient System where a quality of movement
analysis is performed. This includes movement fluidity, degree
of tremor, angle of flexion/extension, abduction/adduction of
the elbow and shoulder and compensatory trunk movements.
To minimize power consumption, the minimum distance
classifier and the associated feature extraction and selection
techniques have been coded into a hardware description
language (Verilog) aimed at developing an ASIC to be
embedded on board the sensors for real time arm movement
recognition. This is one of the novel aspects of the StrokeBack
system, which provides a quantitative measure on the
occurrence of fine-grain movements, performed in daily life.
VI.

UPPER BODY REHABILITATION

An exercise evaluation tool has been developed to give
real-time feedback while a stroke patient performs an exercise
with the upper body. The tool uses the sensor information from
Microsoft Kinect and provides an interface to Answer Set
Programming (ASP) [15], a popular declarative solving
approach in the field of knowledge representation, which is
utilized to check the proper execution of rehabilitation training
sequences. The tool supports a physiotherapist in creating an
individualized rehabilitation training for the upper body. Under
supervision of the therapist, movements of upper and lower
arms can be recorded and stored as a reference for later. When
executing the training without the presence of a therapist, the
patient's movements are compared to the reference on the fly
with the help of ASP. The accuracy needed to count as a
successfully performed exercise can be easily configured.
Furthermore, partially completed movements can be detected.
It has also been shown that some compensating movements,
which hinder the rehabilitation process, can be spotted in the
process. The occurrence of a compensation is a crucial piece of
information for the patient's therapist.

VII. IMMERSIVE USER INTERFACES
The principal user interface for controlling games was
chosen to be Microsoft Kinect for Windows, released in 2012.
Its combination of distance sensing with the RGB camera
proved perfectly suitable for both full body exercises as well as
for near-field exercises of upper limbs. However since Kinect
has not been designed for short range scanning of partial
bodies, the skeleton tracking could not be used and hence we
had to develop our own algorithms that would be able to
recognise arms, palms and fingers and distinguish them from
the background objects. This has led to the development of the
“Kinect Server” an adaptation of open source algorithms from
GitHub45 by RFSAT, made to run with MS Kinect SDK. The
main features of our implementation offers the capabilities of
restricting the visibility window, filtering the background
beyond prescribed distance, distinguishing between separate
objects etc. This way we were able to implement the Kinect
based interface where following the requirements of our
physiotherapists we replaced the standard keyboard arrows
with gestures of the palm (up, down, left, right and open/close
to make a click). Such an interface allowed for the first gamebased rehabilitation of stroke patients suffering from limited
hand control. The tests were first made with Arcady games
developed by the University of Pannonia [16-17] where all
controls were achieved purely with movements of a single
palm. An alternative gaming approach to mixing virtual and
real objects was a game where patients were requested to
through a paper ball at the virtual circles displayed on the
screen (Fig. 4).

motion capture and its projection onto a virtual body (avatar).
A prototype system is being developed to feature different
environments, e.g. familiar photo-quality spaces (Fig. 5).
Scenes with one and two avatars were implemented. The first
one was intended as a base for self-training exercises where
instruction would be overlaid over the avatar to indicate the
movements such that to pass the exercise.

Fig. 4. Game concept #1: real paper ball & virtual targets

Fig. 6. Concept game played online in WEB browser by real patient.
Avatar motion is controlled in Unity3D using a ZigFu plug-in.

Such a game allows patients to exercise the whole arm, not
just the wrist. Hitting the circle that represented a virtual
balloon was rewarded with an animated explosion of the
balloon and a respective sound. Such a game proved to be very
enjoyable for the patients letting them concentrate on
perfecting their movements while forgetting about their motor
disabilities, hence increasing the effectiveness of their training.
More advanced classes of games for stroke patients have been
investigated for full-body exercises, built with Unity3D6
gaming engine and employing avateering that is patient’s body
4
5
6

Open Kinect on Git Hub: https://github.com/OpenKinect/libfreenect
Intrael server: https://code.google.com/p/intrael
Unity3D game engine: http://unity3d.com

Fig. 5. Game scenario: real patient controlling patient avatar using
Kinect in a home environment replicated in virtual world

An important advantage of Unity3D is the possibility to run
games either as stand-alone or under from inside a WEB page.
The latter approach makes it easier for integrating games as
therapies within the PHR system accessible and controllable
via WEB browser, as in Fig. 6.

VIII. CARE PLANNING TOOL AND PERSONAL HEALTH
RECORD SYSTEM (PHR-S)
A StrokeBack concept is complemented with a set of WEB
based tools developed by Intracom Telecom facilitating
clinicians and patients in tele-rehabilitation routine, namely the
Care Planning Tool and Patient Health Record System ((PHRS), respectively. Care Planning Tool (Error! Reference source
not found.) is used by the clinicians and therapists to set up
and monitor the execution of training plans by their patients. At
the clinical assessment phase, healthcare professionals are
given the option to fill in standard questionnaires related to the
status of their patients (e.g. Barthel Index, Stroke Specific
Quality of Life and Wolf Motor Function Test questionnaires).

They can review past entries and get info about what impact
has the rehabilitation intervention in these indexes. They can
also define specific goals for their patients, in accordance with
the International Classification of Functioning, Disability and
Health (ICF)7.
The therapists use the tool to schedule training periods and
introduce their suggestions for activities pursued by their
patients (e.g. serious games, music-supported therapy). These
recommendations are stored in the PHR-S database and
transferred to the Patient Station upon request. Subsequently,
an overview of the executed activities is presented to clinicians.
The PHR-S includes all the necessary medical and personal
information for the patient that rehabilitation experts might
need in order to evaluate the effectiveness and success of the
rehabilitation, e.g. to deduce relations between selected
exercises and rehabilitation speed of different patients as well
as to assess the overall healthiness of the patient. In addition,
the PHR can be used to provide the patient with mid-term
feedback e.g. her/his, rehabilitation speed compared to average
as well as improvements over last day/weeks, in order to keep
the motivation of patients high.
IX.

VALIDATION AND PRELIMINARY EVALUATIONS

Both technical system validation tests and preliminary
evaluations by other project partners have been performed.
Regarding the evaluations of the home rehabilitation system,
we have used the following regime:
 Patient switches on the rehabilitation gaming table shown
in Fig. 2 and starts the „Tele-rehabilitation“ session
 Patient selects an exercise and runs it. She/he may consider
former trainings scores. All actions follow a set of
permissions that have been configured by the therapist and
adapted to patient’s abilities/progress.
 Patient executes the exercise in the autonomous modus. The
PHR analyses the result of tasks and exercises and
generates respective feedback. Finally, training results and
acquired scores are uploaded to PHR.
 Patient executes the exercise once a week with livesupervision of the therapist. She/he is observed by the
therapist in real-time, may see the therapist on the screen
via bidirectional video link (implemented by Meytec).
 Patient sees the final score of an exercise after finishing it.
Initial tests have proven initial technical assumptions and
compliance with pre-defined user requirements. As expected
Kinect has proven great for full body motion and less attractive
for near field upper limb tracking. Hence, alternative
approaches, e.g. using Leap Motion devices have been also
investigated that offer better precision for upper limb exercises,
especially when it comes to fingers, palm and hand tracking.

X.

The initial technical validation tests have proven the
viability of the design approach adopted. The suitability of
Leap Motion for “Touch-Screen”-like applications and game
development under Unity3D has been confirmed. Following
the success of the technical system tests, clinical trials with real
patients will be conducted between March and September of
2014. Primarily the focus will be made on the motion capture
and recording of the real person (therapist) for subsequent use
for demonstration of correct exercises by animating his/her
avatar. Subsequently the overall integration of the gaming
system will be performed whereby selection of games and the
necessary data exchange mechanism with the PHR-S will be
developed. The most difficult work will be related to the realtime comparison of avatar movements for providing an
accurate scoring of the correctness of exercises, to be achieved
in liaison with the physiotherapists.
REFERENCES
[1]
[2]

[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]

[7]
[8]

[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]
[16]

[17]

7

ICF classification: http://www.who.int/classifications/icf/en

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

P. Kirchhof, et al, “How Can We Avoid a Stroke Crisis?”, ISBN 978-1903539-09-5, 2009.
R. Edwards and O. Lippold, “The relation between force and integrated
electrical activity in fatigued muscle”, Journal of Physiology, Vol. 28,
pp. 677-681, 1956.
R. Enkona and D. Stuart, “The contribution of neuroscience to exercise
studies”, Federation Proceedings, Vol. 44, pp. 2279-2285, 1985.
J. Giles, “Inside the race to hack the Kinect”, The New Scientist,
Volume 208, Issue 2789, pp. 22-23, ISSN 0262-4079, 2010.
MIT Media Lab Hacks, “Kinect for Browser Navigation with Gestures”:
http://www.readwriteweb.com/archives/kinect_browser_navigation.php#
“Next-generation remote healthcare: A practical system design
perspective”, edited by Koushik Maharatna et al, Chapter 6 by Artur
Krukowski, Emmanouela Vogiatzaki et al, “Patient Health Record
(PHR) system”, Springer Science and Business Media New York, 2013
Virtual Technologies Inc. (WEB site):
http://www.cyberglovesystems.com/all-products
M. McNeill, et al “Immersive virtual reality for upper limb rehabilitation
following stroke”, Systems, IEEE International Conference on Man and
Cybernetics, ISBN: 0-7803-8566-7, 2004
Seikowave (WEB site): http://seikowave.com
Lloyd Hooson, “Unity 3D Stereoscopic Development”:
http://lloydhooson.co.uk/2010/01/12/unity-3d-stereoscopic-development
Human Interface Technology Laboratory Australia (HIT Lab),
“Stereoscopic 3D”, http://www.hitlab.utas.edu.au/wiki/Stereoscopic_3D
J. Parkka et al., “Activity classification using realistic data from
wearable sensors,” IEEE Trans. Info. Technol. Biomed., vol.10, no.1,
pp.119–128, Jan. 2006.
B. Najaﬁ et al., “Ambulatory system for human motion analysis using a
kinematic sensor: Monitoring of daily physical activity in the elderly,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 711–723, Jun. 2003.
K. Maharatna et al., “Towards the development of next-generation
remote healthcare system: Some practical considerations,” IEEE Int.
Symposium Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), Seoul, 2012, pp. 1–4
C. Baral, “Knowledge Representation, Reasoning and Declarative
Problem Solving”, Cambridge University Press, 2003
C. Sik Lányi, V. Szűcs, T. Dömők, E. László: Developing serious game
for victims of stroke, 9th Intl Conf. on Disability, Virtual Reality and
Assoc. Technologies, pp. 503-506, Laval, France 10-12 Sept. 2012
V. Szücs, C. Sik Lanyi: Abilities and limitations of assistive
technologies in post-stroke therapy based on virtual/augmented reality,
Assistive Technology: From Research to practice, 12 th European
AAATE conference, IOS Press, pp. 1087-1091, Portugal, Sep. 2013.

