EasyChair Preprint
№ 933

Investigating the Neurophysiological Effect of
Thermal Environment on Individuals’ Performance
Using Electroencephalogram
Xi Wang, Da Li, Carol Menassa and Vineet Kamat

EasyChair preprints are intended for rapid
dissemination of research results and are
integrated with the rest of EasyChair.

April 25, 2019

Investigating the Neurophysiological Effect of Thermal Environment
on Individuals’ Performance Using Electroencephalogram
Xi Wang1, Da Li2, Carol C. Menassa3, Vineet R. Kamat4
1

MSE Student, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2125; e-mail: wangix@umich.edu
2
Ph.D. Candidate, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2125; e-mail: dliseren@umich.edu
3
Associate Professor, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2125; e-mail: menassa@umich.edu
4
Professor, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI 48109-2125; e-mail: vkamat@umich.edu
ABSTRACT
The thermal environment has a great influence on individuals’ performance; however, factors
such as one’s motivation to perform well under experimental conditions cause difficulties in
assessing how room temperature affect subjects’ performance. One approach to overcome this
problem is to understand the changes in individuals’ neurophysiological conditions. This paper
reports on the results of an experiment where electroencephalogram (EEG) data were collected
from 5 subjects while they performed four computerized cognitive tasks. Power spectral density
of EEG signals in three different thermal environments, slightly cool, neutral, and slightly warm,
was compared within-subjects. In most cases, significant differences in PSD of the frontal theta
(4-8Hz) activity are observed, indicating individuals’ mental effort varies with room temperature.
In the long run, the increased mental workload will reduce individuals’ performance and be
detrimental to their productivity. The study indicates that the proposed method could be
implemented on a larger scale for further studies.
1. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
Temperature is one of the most important factors of indoor environmental quality (IEQ), which
can significantly affect occupants’ thermal comfort, health, and well-being (Li et al. 2017a). An
undesirable thermal environment may lead to sick building syndrome symptoms such as eye,
nose and throat irritation and affects occupants’ performance and productivity (Witterseh et al.
2004). Previously, researchers investigated how different IEQ factors including lighting,
acoustics, indoor air quality, and thermal comfort affect occupants’ performance (Al Horr et al.
2016). Providing a comfortable work environment is considered an effective way to improve
office workers’ performance and well-being (Seppänen and Fisk 2006, Li et al. 2018).
Meanwhile, it was shown that the high costs of improving those IEQ factors are offset by
improved worker health (e.g., reduced absenteeism) and productivity (Djukanovic et al. 2002).

1

There are three most-commonly-used methods to measure the effect of IEQ on office
workers’ performance. The first method asks workers to subjectively rate their perceived
performance (Tanabe et al. 2015). This method is convenient to implement and independent of
the type of task. Although the rating is direct and comparable, it is highly biased and subjective.
Therefore, this method has very limited value on evaluating the actual performance of occupants
in different indoor environments. In the second method, workers' productivity in real working
conditions is directly measured to evaluate their performance (Kekalainen et al. 2010); however,
most office work (e.g., management, research) involves a variety of different tasks and skills and
does not have clearly measurable and comparable output. Therefore, it is impractical to quantify
office worker performance by directly measuring their productivity. The third method involves
simulating office work using performance tests that represent the typical office activities in a
laboratory environment (Lan et al. 2009). It enables us to directly understand the effect of IEQ
on individuals’ different cognitive and executive functions. Nevertheless, test results are
significantly influenced by people’s high motivation to perform better under experimental
conditions (McCarney et al. 2007). In addition, experimental performance tests have short
durations (e.g., range from 30 minutes to 2 hours) compared to real office work (e.g., 8 hours per
day), which give subjects motivation to maintain high performance through the experiment.
Among all the IEQ factors, controlling room temperature is one of the simplest ways to
achieve optimal workplace environments (Seppanen et al. 2005, Li et al. 2017b). Previous
studies mainly focused on the effect of thermal environment on occupants’ performance on the
behavioral level, which is reflected by their productivity and psychometric test results (Toftum et
al. 2005, Lan et al. 2009). However, subjects tend to maintain their performance under moderate
thermal stress (typical of office environment) throughout the short experimental duration (Holm
et al. 2009). Therefore, there are underlying changes in the occupants’ neurophysiological level
that are not reflected behaviorally, and thus could not be directly detected through the
measurement of task performance (Hocking et al. 2001). In real office settings, neglecting these
neurophysiological activities will eventually result in reduced long-term performance and
detrimental health effects. As a result, developing a method to understand the neurophysiological
effect of workplace thermal environment on workers’ mental workload is of great significance. It
could provide us with insights into setting workplace temperature in order to achieve the highest
worker overall performance and well-being in the long run.
The objective of this paper is to understand how indoor thermal environment influences
occupants’ performance by investigating the neurophysiological effect of room temperature on
subjects while they perform four different types of computerized cognitive tasks. In this paper,
neurophysiological activity was measured using a low-cost, wireless EEG headset while the
subjects performed tasks under three different thermal conditions, slightly warm, neutral and
slightly cool, derived from Fanger’s Predicted Mean Vote (PMV) model (Fanger 1970). After
preprocessed the data, the PSD for each segment of data was obtained, and a within-subject
comparison between PSD of the slightly cool/warm environment (PMV=-1/PMV=1) and PSD of
the neutral environment (PMV=0) using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test was performed.

2

2. METHODOLOGY
In this study, a comprehensive framework was developed to study the neurophysiological effect
of three different thermal environments on occupants, as shown in Figure 1. The temperature
setpoints of the environment are based on the PMV model, representing the occupants’ thermal
sensation ranged from slightly cool to slightly warm. The subjects were asked to perform four
selected cognitive tasks representing different cognitive functions (detailed in Section 2.1).
The neurophysiological activity was captured by Emotiv EPOC+, a low-cost wireless
EEG headset that can record brain activities with reasonable quality. EEG is a non-invasive
technique to monitor and record the electrical activities of the brain, typically through the
electrodes placed on the scalp surface. By directly capturing the activities of the central nervous
system, EEG can accurately reflect brain neural activities and subjects’ cognitive states. EEG can
capture the subtle variations in subjects’ cognitive states with a high time resolution which
cannot be reflected from subjects’ behavioral responses (Cohen 2011). Several studies can be
found using EEG to investigate the effect of temperature on individuals. However, Lan et al.
(2010) and Yao et al. (2009) did not record the EEG signals in real-time while the occupants
were performing tasks. Choi et al. (2019) asked subjects to study for their own work and did not
control the difficulty of the task subjects performed under each thermal conditions.
To address the limitations mentioned above, in this study the EEG signal was measured
at the same time while subjects were performing the given tasks with same difficulty levels and
compared among three different moderate thermal conditions typical to the office environment.

Figure 1: Framework to study the neurophysiological effect of the thermal environment
2.1 Cognitive tasks
In this study, we selected four computer-based cognitive tasks to arouse subjects’ functions on
thinking, working memory, perception, and choice reaction. All the tasks were developed with
acceptable difficulty level for graduate students using the Javascript. The number addition (NA)
task asked subjects to mentally add up columns of four 3-digit numbers (see Figure 2a) shown on
the computer screen in a given time. In the digit span (DS) task, a sequence of eleven single-digit
number series appeared on the screen one digit at a time (see Figure 2b). After all the digits
showed up, subjects were asked to recall the number series and input it using the number pad. In
3

the choice reaction (CR) task, the name of color appeared in the center of the screen one at a
time. The subjects were requested to respond to the font color of the word as soon as possible
regardless of the meaning of the word by pressing the first letter of the color on the keyboard
(see Figure 2c). The visual search (VS) task required subjects to rapidly and accurately search for
the target object on the right side of the screen from the 9x9 grid on the left side of the screen
(see Figure 2d). All trials in the four tasks were randomly generated by a computer to ensure that
the task difficulties remained the same each time it was conducted.

Figure 2: Overview of Cognitive tasks (a) Number addition (b) Digit Span (c) Choice
Reaction (d) Visual Search
2.2 Experiment design
In our experiment, the temperature settings were derived from the PMV model, which is an
international standard to evaluate the occupants’ indoor thermal comfort based on the human
body’s thermal balance equation (Fanger 1970). Given the fact that the temperature in an office
environment is usually controlled within a moderate range, we set the thermal condition to be
PMV=-1 (69.8 ℉/21 ℃), PMV=0 (76.3 ℉/24.61 ℃), and PMV=1 (82.7 ℉/28.17 ℃), which
corresponds to slightly cool, neutral, and slightly warm on the ASHRAE thermal sensation scale,
respectively. The experimental protocol was approved by the Institutional Review Board at the
University of Michigan. All subjects recruited were graduate students. Each subject was required
to participate in the experiment at the same time every day for three consecutive days with same
clothing level and good rest the night before to eliminate the circadian effects.
In each experimental condition, the subjects followed the procedures shown in Figure 3.
Before the experiment started, the subjects spent 30 minutes relaxing to adapt to the
environment. Then, the authors had 15 minutes to set up the EEG headset on subjects with a
good connection. The four cognitive tasks were divided into two sections, with two in each
section. The order of the cognitive tasks was randomly shuffled among different subjects, while
each subject performed the tasks in the same order on different days. Between the two cognitive
task sections, the subjects had a fifteen-minute rest with the EEG headset removed from their
heads. After the cognitive tasks, the subjects conducted a short survey about their thermal
sensation and thermal comfort in the experiment. Due to the scope of this paper which focuses
on the EEG data itself and its analysis, the results of this survey will not be discussed.

4

Figure 3: Experiment procedure for each day
2.3 Data analysis
The raw EEG data collected were divided into segments according to the start and end time the
subjects conducted the task recorded by the computer. Each segment corresponds to the dataset
of a subject to perform a task in a thermal environment. To preprocess the raw data, we first
removed the DC (direct current) offset and limited the slew rate. Next, the finite impulse
response bandpass filter with 1 Hz low-pass and 55 Hz high-pass was applied to remove
extrinsic artifacts from the data. Eye artifacts (i.e. eye blink, eye movement) and muscular
artifacts were removed by implementing the Independent Component Analysis algorithm
(Comon 1994). After that, we calculated the PSD for each dataset. PSD is the power of the signal
as a function of frequency. In our study, we used the Welch's average periodogram method with
Hanning window that returns 2048 discrete Fourier Transform points. Since the previous study
suggested that theta band power (4-8 Hz) of frontal region increases with the growing task
demands, which require higher mental effort, and the left cerebrum hemisphere is detail-oriented
and responsible for the logical, mathematical and scientific skills (Holm et al. 2009, Klimesch
1999), we only focused on the PSD in theta frequency band of the F3 channel (placed over the
left frontal lobe). The Wilcoxon signed-rank test was then used to compare PSD of the same type
of task in different thermal environments within-subject because different subjects’ individual
differences cause their EEG signal patterns not comparable to each other.
3. RESULTS
For each dataset, we calculated the PSD and selected 65 data points with an equal interval (1/16
Hz) in the theta frequency band. The Wilcoxon signed-rank test was used to compare the theta
PSD of the neutral thermal environment (PMV=0) to the slightly cool (PMV=-1) and slightly
warm (PMV=1) environments for each type of task. The mean PSD is given in Table 1. Values
in bold means the PSD of that dataset is significantly different (p<0.05) with the PSD in the
corresponding neutral environment (PMV=0). In most cases, significant differences could be
observed on theta band PSD of the F3 channel when thermal condition went from neutral to
slightly cool or slightly warm. Since frontal theta PSD is positively correlated with task demands
and subjects’ mental effort exerted, we concluded that subjects had different mental workloads in
different thermal environments even though task demands are the same. Therefore, the method
enabled us to understand how thermal environment influence office workers’ performance
through its effect on their neurophysiological activities.
Bar charts in Figure 4 show the change of mean frontal theta PSD for each subject on
different types of tasks. In most cases, subjects’ mean PSD was relatively low when PMV=0,

5

which implies relatively less mental effort was spent in the neutral thermal condition. It could be
found that subjects have different sensitivity to the room temperature. For example, Subject 2
was not sensitive to the slightly warm environment since his/her frontal theta PSD have little
difference for all types of tasks. The effect of the thermal environment also depends on the task
type. Taking Subject 5 for example, he/she was very sensitive when the thermal condition
deviated from neutral for the number addition, digit span and visual search task. However,
his/her PSD did not change significantly for the choice reaction task. In addition, he/she had
lower mental workload in the cooler environment than in the warmer one for the digit span and
visual search task, while vice versa for the other two tasks.
Table 1: The Wilcoxon signed-rank test results
Subject 1
Subject 2
Subject 3
Subject 4
Subject 5
PMV 0
-1
1
0
-1
1
0
-1
1
0
-1
1
0
-1
1
NA 2.324 2.007 1.267 0.570 0.589 0.689 0.372 1.752 0.761 1.486 1.920 1.393 1.392 2.497 2.198
DS 1.543 1.439 1.525 0.632 2.026 0.565 0.587 1.183 0.636 1.381 2.465 1.143 0.885 1.559 2.673
CR 1.884 1.495 2.879 0.781 1.065 0.682 0.455 1.352 0.828 1.358 1.451 0.980 1.044 1.281 0.849
VS 1.628 1.436 2.883 0.507 1.810 0.389 0.516 1.249 0.633 1.542 2.556 1.684 0.439 1.038 1.670
Bold represents a significant difference (p<0.05)

Figure 4: Mean PSD and task performance comparison for each task
Subjects’ task performance data are shown in the tables above the bar charts. We used the
average response time (10ms) for correct responses to quantify subjects’ task performance for

6

the choice reaction task and the number of correct trials to quantify performance for the other
three tasks. In most cases, subjects had the worst performance in the slightly warm environment
and better performance in the neutral or the slightly cool environment. It could be found that
additional mental effort exerted did not necessarily result in better performance on the tasks,
which warrants additional data analysis which is part of our future work.
4. CONCLUSIONS
In this study, we proposed a method to measure the neurophysiological effect of thermal
environments on individuals when they were performing different types of cognitive tasks.
Based on the conclusion of the previous study that frontal theta PSD raised with increasing task
demands and higher mental workload, we investigated how thermal environment affect subjects’
performance by studying its effect from the neurophysiological perspective. Even though the
task difficulties remained the same in different thermal conditions, the tasks had different
demands on subjects’ mental effort when the thermal conditions varied and subjects tend to have
worse performance in the slightly warm environment. We also found that subjects did not
achieve better performance with higher mental effort. The study shows the potential of using the
neurophysiological effect measured by the EEG to acquire optimal office environments so as to
achieve the lowest workers’ mental workload considering individual differences and types of
work they are performing. A limitation of the proposed method is that the subjects need to be
relatively static while performing tasks to keep the EEG data clean. In the future, more elaborate
index to reflect mental effort could be reached by including more EEG channels and wider
frequency range, which will enable us to dive deeper into the effect of temperature on
individuals’ performance by studying on more subjects.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to acknowledge the ﬁnancial support for this research received from the
U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF) CBET 1349921 and CBET 1804321. Any opinions and
ﬁndings in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the NSF.
REFERENCES
Al Horr, Y., Arif, M., Kaushik, A., Mazroei, A., Katafygiotou, M., and Elsarrag, E. (2016).
“Occupant productivity and office indoor environment quality: A review of the literature.”
Building and Environment, 105, 369–389.
Choi, Y., Kim, M., and Chun, C. (2019). “Effect of temperature on attention ability based on
electroencephalogram measurements.” Building and Environment, 147, 299–304.
Cohen, M. X. (2011). “It’s about Time.” Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 5, 1-15.
Comon, P. (1994). “Independent component analysis, A new concept?” Signal Processing, 36(3),
287–314.
Djukanovic, R., Wargocki, P., and Fanger, P. (2002). “Cost-benefit analysis of improved air
quality in an office building.” Indoor Air, 6.
Fanger P.O. (1970). Thermal Comfort: Analysis and Applications in Environmental Engineering,
McGraw-Hill, Berkeley, CA
7

Hocking, C., Silberstein, R. B., Lau, W. M., Stough, C., and Roberts, W. (2001). “Evaluation of
cognitive performance in the heat by functional brain imaging and psychometric testing.”
16.
Holm, A., Lukander, K., Korpela, J., Sallinen, M., and Müller, K. M. I. (2009). “Estimating
Brain Load from the EEG.” The Scientific World JOURNAL, 9, 639–651.
Kekäläinen, P., Niemelä, R., Tuomainen, M., Kemppilä, S., Palonen, J., Riuttala, H., Nykyri, E.,
Seppänen, O., and Reijula, K. (2010). “Effect of reduced summer indoor temperature on
symptoms, perceived work environment and productivity in office work.” Intelligent
Buildings International, 17.
Klimesch, W. (1999). “EEG alpha and theta oscillations reflect cognitive and memory
performance: a review and analysis.” Brain Research Reviews, 29(2–3), 169–195.
Lan, L., Lian, Z., Pan, L., and Ye, Q. (2009). “Neurobehavioral approach for evaluation of office
workers’ productivity: The effects of room temperature.” Building and Environment,
44(8), 1578–1588.
Lan, L., Lian, Z., and Pan, L. (2010). “The effects of air temperature on office workers’ wellbeing, workload and productivity-evaluated with subjective ratings.” Applied Ergonomics,
42(1), 29–36.
Li, D., Menassa, C. C., and Kamat, V. R. (2017a). “A Personalized HVAC Control Smartphone
Application Framework for Improved Human Health and Well-Being.” Computing in
Civil Engineering 2017, American Society of Civil Engineers, Seattle, Washington, 82–
90.
Li, D., Menassa, C. C., & Kamat, V. R. (2017b). “Personalized human comfort in indoor
building environments under diverse conditioning modes.” Building and
Environment, 126, 304-317.
Li, D., Menassa, C. C., and Kamat, V. R. (2018). “Non-intrusive interpretation of human thermal
comfort through analysis of facial infrared thermography.” Energy and Buildings, 176,
246–261.
McCarney, R., Warner, J., Iliffe, S., van Haselen, R., Griffin, M., and Fisher, P. (2007). “The
Hawthorne Effect: a randomised, controlled trial.” BMC Medical Research Methodology,
7(1).
Seppänen, O., Fisk, W. J., and Faulkner, D. (2005). “Control of Temperature for Health and
Productivity in Offices.” 680–686.
Seppänen, O., and Fisk, W. (2006). “Some Quantitative Relations between Indoor
Environmental Quality and Work Performance or Health.” HVAC&R Research, 12(4),
957–973.
Tanabe, S., Haneda, M., and Nishihara, N. (2015). “Workplace productivity and individual
thermal satisfaction.” Building and Environment, 91, 42–50.
Toftum, J., Wyon, D., and Svanekj, H. (2005). “Remote performance measurement (RPM) – a
new, Internet-based method for the measurement of occupant performance in office.”
Indoor Air, 5, 357-361.
Witterseh, T., Wyon, D. P., and Clausen, G. (2004). “The effects of moderate heat stress and
open-plan office noise distraction on SBS symptoms and on the performance of office
work.” Indoor Air, 14(s8), 30–40.
Yao, Y., Lian, Z., Liu, W., Jiang, C., Liu, Y., and Lu, H. (2009). “Heart rate variation and
electroencephalograph - the potential physiological factors for thermal comfort study.”
Indoor Air, 19(2), 93–101.

8

