Affective Classification of Gaming Activities
Coming From RPG Gaming Sessions
Fabrizio Balducci, Costantino Grana
Dipartimento di Ingegneria “Enzo Ferrari”
Università degli Studi di Modena e Reggio Emilia
Via Vivarelli 10, Modena MO 41125, Italy
{name.surname}@unimore.it

Abstract. Each human activity involves feelings and subjective emotions: different people will perform and sense the same task with different outcomes and experience; to understand this experience, concepts
like Flow or Boredom must be investigated using objective data provided
by methods like electroencephalography. This work carries on the analysis of EEG data coming from brain-computer interface and videogame
“Neverwinter Nights 2”: we propose an experimental methodology comparing results coming from different off-the-shelf machine learning techniques, employed on the gaming activities, to check if each affective state
corresponds to the hypothesis fixed in their formal design guidelines.
Keywords: classification, EEG, brain-computer interfaces, games

1

Introduction

The concepts of ‘play’ and ‘learn’ are strictly connected at various degrees: the
best method to learn how to safely execute a task is to transform an assignment
in a playing activity from which to gain experience for future goals [7]: this is
the basis of the gamification and serious gaming theories which try to introduce
playful aspects in all the daily interactive tasks. Lindley [4] defines a game as
a goal-directed and competitive activity conducted with agreed rules: “to play”
involves learning the internal rules and mechanics that characterize its dynamics
and denote each game genre (the gameplay); it becomes crucial to consider
player’s feelings and preferences to personalize the player experience tailoring
each gaming session to specific needs and desires.
Studies from Mandryk et al. [11] have successfully demonstrated how psychophysiological techniques (like EEG) evidence human emotions and cognitive
activity. The terms “affect” and “emotion” are often used interchangeably and
refer to a short-time emotional peak while a “mood” or “affective state” denotes
a continuous lasting emotional trend which may involve more emotions and may
influence the reactions [6]. Brainwaves allow to evaluate basic emotions and infer the affective states that a subject experiences. A useful scheme to evaluate
basic emotions is the Circumplex model of affect by Russell et al. [14]. In the

Challenge / difficulty of the game

II

competence increase of the player (potentially giving rise to
anxiety) or the competence of the player have increased while the
game remained at the same difficulty (potentially giving rise to
boredom). In both cases, the challenge should be corrected to
maintain a state of pleasure and involvement, showing the
importance of having games that increase their difficulty
according to the competence and emotions of the player. Based on
this theory, we defined three emotional states of interest that
corresponds to three well separated areas of the valence arousal
space: boredom (negative-calm), engagement (positive-excited)
and anxiety (negative-excited).

Anxiety

Flow channel

(negative excited)
Engagement

(postive excited)
Boredom
(negative calm)

Competence of the player
Change in player’s competence
Change in game’s difficulty

Figure 1. Flow chart and the suggested automatic adaptation
Fig.
1. The reactions
flow zone
to emotional

acquisition sensors.

20 participants (mean age: 27, 13 males, all rig
part in this study. After signing a consent form,
played Tetris several times to determine the ga
he/she reported engagement. This was done
threshold method, starting from a low level an
increasing it until engagement was reported or
high level and decreasing it. The average of the
was then considered as the participant skill leve
this skill level, three experimental conditions w
medium condition (game difficulty equal to th
level), easy condition (lower difficulty, computed
levels of difficulty from the player’s skill l
condition (higher difficulty, computed by adding

Participants were then equipped with several sen
their peripheral physiological activity: a GSR
Response)sensor to measure skin resistance, a
device to record relative blood pressure, a res
estimate abdomen extension and a temperature se
palmar changes in temperature. Those sensors
measure signals that are related to particular emo
as well as usable for emotion detection [2, 3, 8]
EEG system was used to record central sig
participants. As demonstrated in other studies, EE
assess emotional states and is also useful to pro
task engagement. However, their analysis is still w
only results from peripheral signaling are present
Our preliminary results related to the fusion of p
with EEG’s for classifying emotional states ho
improvement with respect to using peripheral sign
signals were recorded at a 1024Hz sampling
Biosemi Active 2 acquisition system.

This work attempts to verify the validity and usefulness of the
Once equipped with the sensors, participants play
three definied emotional sates by using a Tetris game where the
field of computer
science
BCI has
been used
with
various SelfpurposesTetris.
like Each
mea-session lasted for 5 minutes and corr
challenge
is modulated
by changing
the level
of difficulty.
of usability
the three experimental conditions. Each experi
sure mnemonicreports
and cognitive
[8], classify
[10] and
improve
as well as efforts
physiological
activity tasks
were obtained
from
was applied twice and in a random order to a
players.
data, three
hypotheses
were tested:
[15]. In this paper
weUsing
usethose
different
machine
learning
approaches to infer,
from
effects of time in questionnaires and physiologica
- H1: playing at different levels of difficulty will give rise to
organized EEG data,
the
affective
state
(namely
Boredom
or
Flow)
experienced
of participants was to perform the highest score
different emotional states;
them toward this goal, a prize was offere
by the player: - different
are compared
and tested
on two motivate
game levH2: thoseclassifiers
emotional states
(and the underlying
conditions)
the highest score in three competence categ
can be assessed
and peripheral
els designed to induce
specificusing
setscentral
of emotions.
Insignaling;
this study we usewith
a virtual
session, participants filled in a questionnaire w
- H3:
as the skill increases,
player
willand
switch
from
world as research
environments
becausethe
it is
cheap
easy
tothe
monitor
and conrelated to both the emotions they felt and
engagement state to the boredom state.
trol, but it is easy to extend the proposed methodology to real-worldinvolvement
(learning)in the game. The answer to each qu
The protocol
used to gather
self-reported
and physiological
dataof them
on aand
7 points
tasks, for example
by designing
different
time-limited
versions
in- Likert scale. Additionally, partici
as well as methods used to analyse those data are described in
emotion
in the valence-arousal space using
tegrate the classic
evaluation
methodologies
(interviews,
think
aloud,
cognitive
section 2. Results of those analysis and validation of the different
manikin [12] scales.
walkthrough) with
objective
evaluation
from
physiological
data.
hypothesis
are presented
in sectioncoming
3. Finally,
this study
open the
way to new reasearch
paths proposed
in section 4. game levels and Section
Section 2 summarizes
the two
2.23 briefly
Data analysis
To and
test forthe
hypothesis H1, a factor analysis was p
illustrates the 2.
technical
system
architecture,
the
experimental
setup
METHODS
questionnaires to find the axes of maximum v
data format. Section 4 describes the proposed methodology for data analysis and
answers were projected in this new space. An A
2.1 Data collection
Section 5 showsIn the
classification results from three machine learning applied
classifiers;
to those new variables to check for
order to test hypotheses, a gaming protocol was designed for
finally, conclusions
andphysiological
suggestions
for and
future
workself-reported
are drawn
in Section
6.
distributions
of judgment for the different conditio
acquiring
signals
gathering
data.
The Tetris game was chosen in this experiment for the following
Prior to analyze physiological data it is necessa
reasons: it is easy to control the difficulty of the game (speed of
signals and extract features that are known t
2 Affective
design
Role-Playing
videogames
falling
blocks), itfor
is a widely
known game so that
we could expect
emotion activation. All signals were first filtere
to gather data from players with different skill levels (which
average filter to remove noise. For this purpose w
occured), and
is playable
using only
one hand.
last reasonobjectlength
As shown in Lankoski
[9] itthe
RPG genre
is based
on The
statistics,
inventory
512 for GSR, 128 for blood pressur

and environmental exploration and its gameplay focuses on strong story plot,
choices, skill progression, proactive and interactive allies, world exploration, people collaboration, interaction based on dialogues.
The works of Balducci et al. [1, 2] takes inspiration from what Nacke et al. [12]
has experienced with First-Person Shooter (FPS) genre: two sets of formal design
guidelines, with one of their possible development, were proposed
14 for a RPG
game with the aim to induce the Boredom affective state and the Flow one.
Csı́kszentmihályi [5] defines Boredom like a state in which player’s skills are
greater than required: the proposed game level features linearity and repeti-

III

Fig. 2. The same activity (dialogue) differently developed for the two game levels

Fig. 3. Activities in the flow game level: “chest opened” and “group fight” with allies

tiveness with poor gratification, minimal plot-story, weak visual assets, plain
dialogues (Fig. 2) and unnecessary allies.
The notion of Flow is characterized by constant balance between challenges
and skills: hard challenges will produce anxiety while very high skills will increase the perceived boredom (Chanel et al. [3], Fig. 1). The proposed game
level features complex dialogues and multiple goals, proactive and interactive
allies which helps to accomplish profitable activities while the level structure
and the visual assets encourage environmental exploration (Fig. 3).

3

Experimental setup

The Emotiv EPOC headset is a wireless neuro-signal system with 14 wet sensors
(+2 reference) capable of detecting brainwaves at 128 Hz sequential sampling
rate; sensors are placed around the pre-frontal and frontal brain regions according to the international 10-20 standard system The headset exposes two type of
data: the raw (from each sensor) and the pre-classified by internal algorithms
(Engagement, Excitement, Frustration, Meditation, Long-Term Excitement); to
characterize the gaming activities we will consider the second set.
Neverwinter Nights 2 has a visual level editor with a scripting language that
allows to manage internal game variables and permits to customize the User
Interface. We used the NWNX [16] tool to deploy a C++ plugin that permits
the communication between the game and the headset allowing textual messages
exchange in the server version of the game; in this way, a game script calls

IV
Neverwinter Nights 2
(CLIENT)

Neverwinter Nights 2
(SERVER)
Game Level
scripts

( game data )

XML widgets (UI)

NWNX4
C++ plugin

text data
text data

( external data )
text data

Emotiv API
( sensors data )

internal
classification

Logs

- Events log
- Affective log
- Raw log

Emotiv EPOC

Fig. 4. The architecture for the data gathering tool

the extern plugin to iteratively manage the internal (game variables) and the
external (EEG) data. The scheme of the system architecture is in Fig. 4.
The experiment has a two-treatment (boredom/flow) within-subject design,
with ‘game level’ as independent variable factor; the dependent variables are the
five pre-classified emotion summarized and controlled by our method.
The subjects involved are 19 students (13 male, 6 female) which play both
game levels in each session. The Setup step consists in headset and sensors
placing with signal tuning and, after this, a brief explanation about the study
is provided followed by a pre-questionnaire about subject’s gaming preferences;
next the Tutorial game level allows to familiarize with the commands and the
user-interface (we also consider this steps a way to induce relaxation and a
neutral initial affective mood, similarly to [17, 13]). Each subject plays with the
same game character with all RPG statistics set to average values and, at the
end of a session, a post-questionnaire about the player experience is compiled.
After each experiment we have different data sources: a video capture of the
gaming session, the pre- and post- questionnaires and three textual files featuring
the synchronized game and EEG data.
The events log contains at each row the timestamp and the tag of the occurred
event; an entry in affective log contains the same timestamp, the game area
in which the player was (XY coordinates) and the punctual values of the five
internal pre-classified emotions (values in range 0-1) while each row of the raw
log, similar to the previous, collects the values of the 14 sensors.

4

Proposed methodology

In order to interpret data which greatly change over time, analyzing a gaming
session using all the log entries results impractical due to the time length; furthermore each game activity can have different duration and it is hard to identify
a precise moment in which an affective stimulus appears.
Our approach is to split the log, identifying limited sequences for each activity
faced during the gaming session: we remove the rows that don’t belong to the

V

tasks and events designed with the formal guidelines and, in this way, we can
isolate those semantic units of time and make them more easily treatable.
The boredom game level has an average of 14 activities while the flow one
offers the double having more activity types (which are simple/dubbed/riddle
dialogue, single/group fight, chest open, skills upgrade and stealing task ); notice
that the second game level results longer since reaching a flow state requires
more time to evolve the RPG gameplay in a natural way to the player’s eyes.
We obtain our data by crossing the events log with the affective log: the first
one provides the identifier and the initial time of each activity, while the second
provides the affective values, synchronized by the same timestamp.
The fact that each game level has been designed and developed with formal
guidelines permits to label as “Flow” or “Boredom” each of their activities depending on the membership: in this way we have a dataset implicitly annotated
and so, using binary classification algorithms, it is possible to check if the the
affective data of an activity are characteristic enough to differentiate among the
two levels; if this occurs for a substantial number of activities, then player’s
emotions have been well manipulated between the gaming sessions.
To describe the affective mood of an activity and use it in a machine-learning
algorithm, we take the five pre-classified EEG emotions and, for each of them,
we compute five numerical features:
– the angular coefficient β and the intercept α from a regression line, calculated
considering the time T as a positive variable which constantly increases on
the x-axis; it suggests the presence of an affective trend for the emotion E
– the Pearson correlation coefficient between time T and an emotion E: for
a sample of n rows, if re > ±0.7 then there is evidence of strong local
correlation, direct (positive sign) or inverse (negative sign).
2
that give quantitative informa– the arithmetic mean E and the variance σE
tion on the affective values of emotion E.
This results in a 790x25 predictors matrix M : rows represent the labeled
activities (277 boredom, 513 flow) and columns the features (five for each emotion); we balance this training dataset increasing the boredom cases by randomly
sampling 236 examples from the original ones, finally giving a 1026x25 matrix.

5

Classification and Results

Three supervised classification techniques have been tested, trained with a “leaveone-out” setup: two employ Support Vector Machines (linear and Radial Basis
Function kernel) and the third consists in binary Decision Trees. Results are
provided in Table 1, Table 2 and Table 3 respectively.
The Decision Trees method has the best performance: it is able to correctly
separate 96% of the gaming activities, confirming the correctness of design and
development phases by following the guidelines and, moreover, the validity of
the proposed methodology.

VI
Table 1. SVM-linear classification results

Table 2. SVM-RBF classification results

boredom flow Tot.

boredom flow Tot.

original events 513 (ext.) 513 1026

original events 513(ext.) 513 1026

classified events

610

416 1026

true positives

408

311

false negatives

105

202

accuracy

classified events

542

484 1026

719

true positives

489

460

949

307

false negatives

24

53

77

0.73%

accuracy

0.92%

Table 3. Decision Trees classification results
boredom flow

Tot.

original events 513 (ext.) 513

1026

classified events

507

519

1026

true positives

488

494

982

false negatives

25

19

44

recall

0.95%

0.96%

f1-score

0.96%

0.96%

accuracy

5.1

0.96%

Classification for game level areas

Considering the areas by which each game level is composed, from Table 4 and 5
we can understand the best-designed parts: the 90% good classification for boredom areas suggests that they were constantly recognized as repetitive and tedious; it is also remarkable that while the first two areas have the same structure,
the third reduces the perceived boredom introducing very small variations.
For the flow game level, the classification performance varies, but it is always
above 95%: the correlation grows from 95.4% for the first area up to 98.3% for
the fourth one; the second area contains the largest number of activities (163) so
we observe a slight decrease with respect to the typical progressive involvement
associated to the flow affective state (the fifth smallest area is not significant
since it was reached by only 3 subjects).
5.2

Classification for activity types

Table 6 and Table 7 show which activity types are the best classified: in the boredom game level chest opened is the best classified (96.7%) followed by dialogue
(95.5%) while all classification ratings are over 93%.
In the flow game level, with the activities specifically developed for its gameplay, stealing action, skills upgrade and dubbed dialogue are 100% but the first

VII

Table 4. Mood-congruent events by
area: boredom game level
total (ext.) correct

Table 5. Mood-congruent events by
area: flow game level
total correct

rate

rate

area1 130

124

95.4%

area1

176

165

93.7%

area2 163

159

97.5%

area2

211

207

98.1%

area3 157

150

95.5%

area3

126

116

92.1%

area4 60

59

98.3%

Tot.

513

488

95.1%

area5

2

66.7%

494

96.3%

3

Tot. 513

Table 7. Mood-congruent events by
type: flow game level
Table 6. Mood-congruent events by
type: boredom game level
total (ext.) correct

rate

dialogue

224

214

95.5%

single fight

136

127

93.4%

chest opened

153

147

96.7%

Tot.

513

488

95.1%

total correct
dubbed dialogue 46

rate

46

100%

riddle dialogue 18

17

94.4%

dialogue 159

152

95.6%

single fight 153

144

94.1%

fight vs. a group 37

36

97.3%

chest opened 85

84

98.8%

skills upgrade 11

11

100%

4

100%

494

96.3%

stealing action

4

Tot. 513

two have a reduced extent; also here chest opened (98.8%) is the best of the
activities followed by group fight (97%); all classification ratings are over 94% .

6

Conclusions and Future work

The positive results prove that well-designed formal guidelines can manipulate
player’s emotions and feelings and that, by using the proposed methodology,
good affective experimentations are possible, even with cheap and easy-to-buy
headsets; moreover it appears that physiological data as EEG (although with a
pre-classification of frequencies) can be effectively treated by the reliable machine
learning methods exploited here.
The next step will expand this study to the gamification of real-world serious
tasks (medical, teaching), even managing the raw EEG data; analyzing differences between male and female subjects can also help market product-placement.

VIII

References
1. Balducci, F., Grana, C., Cucchiara, R.: Classification of affective data to evaluate
the level design in a role-playing videogame. In: Games and Virtual Worlds for
Serious Applications (VS-Games), 2015 7th International Conf. on. pp. 1–8. Skovde
2. Balducci, F., Grana, C., Cucchiara, R.: Affective level design for a role-playing
videogame evaluated by a brain–computer interface and machine learning methods. The Visual Computer 33(4), 413–427 (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s00371-016-1320-2
3. Chanel, G., Rebetez, C., Bétrancourt, M., Pun, T.: Boredom, engagement and
anxiety as indicators for adaptation to difficulty in games. In: Proceedings of the
12th International Conference on Entertainment and Media in the Ubiquitous Era.
pp. 13–17. MindTrek ’08, ACM, New York, NY, USA (2008)
4. Craigh, L.: Game taxonomies: A high level framework for game analysis and design.
Gamasutra www.gamasutra.com/features/20031003/lindley_01.shtml
5. Csikszentmihalyi, M.: Beyond boredom and anxiety. Jossey-Bass (2000)
6. Frasca, G.: Simulation versus narrative: Introduction to ludology. In: The Video
Game Theory Reader, pp. 221–236. Routledge, New York (2003)
7. Gee, J.P.: Learning and games. The ecology of games: Connecting youth, games,
and learning 3, 21–40 (2008)
8. Grimes, D., Tan, D.S., Hudson, S.E., Shenoy, P., Rao, R.P.: Feasibility and pragmatics of classifying working memory load with an electroencephalograph. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. pp.
835–844. ACM (2008)
9. Lankoski, P.: Models for story consistency and interestingness in single-player rpgs.
In: Proceedings of International Conference on Making Sense of Converging Media.
pp. 246:246–246:253. AcademicMindTrek ’13, ACM, New York, NY, USA (2013)
10. Lee, J.C., Tan, D.S.: Using a low-cost electroencephalograph for task classification
in hci research. In: Proceedings of the 19th Annual ACM Symposium on User
Interface Software and Technology. pp. 81–90. UIST ’06, New York, NY, USA
11. Mandryk, R.L., Inkpen, K.M.: Physiological indicators for the evaluation of colocated collaborative play. In: Proceedings of the 2004 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work. pp. 102–111. ACM (2004)
12. Nacke, L., Stellmach, S., Lindley, C.: Electroencephalographic assessment of player
experience: A pilot study in affective ludology. Simulation and Gaming 42(5), 632–
655 (2011)
13. Obbink, M., Gürkök, H., Bos, D.P.O., Hakvoort, G., Poel, M., Nijholt, A.: Social
interaction in a cooperative brain-computer interface game. In: Intelligent Technologies for Interactive Entertainment, pp. 183–192. Springer (2012)
14. Russell, J.A.: A circumplex model of affect. Journal of personality and social psychology 39(6), 1161 (1980)
15. Smith, M.E., Gevins, A., Brown, H., Karnik, A., Du, R.: Monitoring task loading
with multivariate eeg measures during complex forms of human-computer interaction. Human Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society
43(3), 366–380 (2001)
16. Stieger, I.: Neverwinter nights extender v.4. http://www.nwnx.org/, http://www.
nwnx.org/
17. Vachiratamporn, V., Moriyama, K., Fukui, K., Numao, M.: An implementation
of affective adaptation in survival horror games. In: 2014 IEEE Conference on
Computational Intelligence and Games, CIG 2014, Dortmund, Germany, August
26-29, 2014. pp. 1–8 (2014)

