Proceedings of the 50th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences | 2017

Emotion and Concentration Integrated System: Applied to the Detection and
Analysis of Consumer Preference
Wei-Yen Hsu
National Chung Cheng
University
shenswy@gmail.com

Jun-Yi Lu
National Chung Cheng
University

Chih-Chia Chien
National Chung Cheng
University

alex42132000@hotmail.com

owo2dog8@yahoo.com.tw

Meng-Chiu Hsieh
National Chung Cheng University
mengchiu36@gmail.com

Yu-Hsiang Wang
National Chung Cheng University
thumbg92626@hotmail.com.tw

Abstract
With the expansion of consumer market, the
appearance becomes an important issue when
consumers make decisions under the situation of
similar qualities and contents. Accordingly, to
attract consumers, companies cost and take much
attention on product appearance. Compared to
using questionnaires individually, obtaining
humans’ thoughts directly from their brains can
accurately grasp the actual preference of
consumers, which can provide effective and
precious decisions for companies.
In this study, consumers’ brainwaves which
are related to concentration and emotion are
extracted by wearing a portable and wireless
Electroencephalography (EEG) device. The
extracted EEG data are then trained by using
perceptron learning algorithm (PLA) to make the
judgments of concentration and emotion work well
with each subject. They are then applied to the
detection and analysis of consumer preference.
Finally, the questionnaires are also performed and
used as the reference on training process. They are
integrated with brainwaves data to create one
prediction model which can improve the accuracy
significantly. The Partial Least Squares is used to
compare the correlation between different factors
in the model, to ensure the test can accurately meet
consumers’ thoughts.
Keywords: brainwave; consumer preference;
Electroencephalography(EEG);
concentration;
emotion; training; perceptron learning algorithm
(PLA)

1. Introduction

URI: http://hdl.handle.net/10125/41335
ISBN: 978-0-9981331-0-2
CC-BY-NC-ND

Making products stand out in the market and
catch consumers’ attentions is a key factor to
increase profits for companies, and become a storm
to sweep the consumer market.
There is a recognition that product design is
emerging as a key marketing element [1-3]. The
visual appearance of a product plays a significant
role in determining responses of consumers [4] and
is recognized as an opportunity for differential
advantage in the market place [5].
In our daily lives, there are many factors
affecting consumers’ selections before purchasing.
The various aspects of product design play a vital
role in the interaction between consumer and
product and thus may affect consumer preference
[6]. The response from respondents can reflect that
the consumer preference will be affected by the
appearance of packaging during their buying
process. Therefore, Packaging is crucial because it
is able to create emotional attachment in consumers’
minds during their first glimpses [7]. Generally,
enterprises will use questionnaire or telephone to
investigate consumer preference, and use the
statistical data of selling to help managers make
strategies. But there is a difference between
interview and actual buying action because the
emotion at interview may be different from looking
at the physical product. Invalid or bad results of a
questionnaire may cause the decision makers to
make the wrong decision [8].
The goal of the research is to accurately grasp
the preference of product appearance. For example,
in consumer behavior, when there are different
products with same prices and consistent features,
consumers may choose according to the
appearances of products. Sometimes consumers

1512

cannot make decisions by themselves. It is
generally accepted that the look of a product or its
package has an important effect on consumer
choice at the point of purchase [9]. In the situation
of consumers not considering prices or functions,
product appearance plays the most important role.
Garber's (1995) model emphasizes the effects of
product appearance on consumer attention [10]. It
also makes it more difficult to establish a reference,
because there is no way of knowing what
consumers’ preferences are. In the case of
unpredictable preference, it is important to know
how to let companies get more powerful evaluation
criteria for them to design and build the direction of
product appearance. We want to find a way to
achieve this goal, so we try to build this system, to
detect brainwaves, to help make further analysis in
consumer preference [11].
To efficiently and accurately understand the
emotional reactions and degrees of concentration of
consumers when they are making response, we use
a brain-computer interface device to collect the
consumers’ brainwaves. It generates EEG data to
help analyzing and discussing the corresponding
relationships between mood swings and the replied
answers [12]. Depending on the different
correspondences, companies can make different
marketing strategies to make product sales achieve
maximum benefits. Comparing with those complex
and inconvenient brainwave devices which are
time-consuming and uncomfortable to wear, the
device we adopt can be more quickly and
efficiently test every subject. In addition, the
system is executed on computer, so it can be
performed anytime and anywhere with our easy and
accurate brainwave device. The computer system
quickly generates analyzing results, and quickly
gives reference data of the testing.
In this research, we focus on the use of
electroencephalogram to detect and integrate
subjects’ concentration degrees with emotion
changes. With a series of training process, we use
incremental steps to assess consumers’ reactions
when they are answering different questions, and
quickly judge the result of preference degree. In the
future, we expect to use our system to precisely
detect the preference of products from consumers
and contribute the data to support company to build
the direction of appearance design. It does not only
reduce the risk of release of a new product design,
but also catches consumers’ eyes more precisely.

2. Theoretical background

2.1. Brainwave
In human brains, numerous neurons
communicate with each other. The action potential
which is generated after activation is transmitted to
the synapse (Synapse) via axons (Axon). [13] The
release of neurotransmitters can cause the next
neuron to generate postsynaptic potentials, which
further stimulate the neuron to generate action
potentials. Brainwave intensity under normal
circumstances is 100uV less, and usually only
dozens of uV. The frequency ranges from 0.1Hz to
40Hz. It can be applied in the detection of depth of
sleep, mental status and mentation.

2.2. Electroencephalography (EEG)
EEG is typically a non-invasive (however
invasive electrodes are often used in specific
applications) method to record electrical activity of
the brain along the scalp. EEG measures voltage
fluctuations resulting from ionic current within the
neurons of the brain. In clinical contexts, EEG
refers to the recording of the brain's spontaneous
electrical activity over a period of time, as recorded
from multiple electrodes placed on the scalp.
Diagnostic applications generally focus on the
spectral content of EEG, that is, the type of neural
oscillations that can be observed in EEG signals
[14].

2.3. Emotiv EPOC
The Emotiv EPOC is a high resolution, neurosignal acquisition, processing wireless headset that
monitors 16 channels of EEG data. EPOC
internally samples at a frequency of 2048 Hz,
which then gets down-sampled to 128 Hz sampling
frequency per channel, and sends the data to a
computer via Bluetooth.
It utilizes a proprietary USB dongle to
communicate using the 2.4 GHz band. Prior to use,
all felt pads on top of the sensors have to be
moistened with a saline solution.
The Emotiv Software Development Kit (SDK)
provides a packet count functionality to ensure no
data is lost, a writable marker trace to ease single
trial segmentation tasks, and real-time sensor
contact display to ensure quality of measurements.
The effectiveness of the EPOC headset as a
real-time brain EEG scanner was demonstrated in a
number of recent publications [15].

2.4. Emotion influence decisions

1513

Because of the emotional impact of brainwave
is determined by many factors, of which the most
important are Alpha (α) waves, Theta (θ) waves
and Gamma (γ). Studies have shown that in the
case of the good mood, Alpha (α) waves will show
a positive correlation; Theta (θ) waves are used as
the basis of subjects determining shapes and colors
[16]. The literature of the marketing points out that
when we observe pleasant or unpleasant
advertisings, it will increase Theta (θ) waves and
Alpha (α) waves activity asymmetry respectively in
the right and left hemispheres [17].
People in positive emotion will tend to
maintain the status and make use of general
knowledge in the past and rule of thumb to process
messages resiliently. However, when people in a
negative mood state, they will tend to change the
status quo to change the negative mood of the
moment and do more logical and careful thinking to
deal with the messages. Emotion is also seen to
influence decisions [18].

2.5. Concentration influence decisions
Alpha (α) waves and Theta (θ) waves are the factors
that influence the mindfulness. Alpha (α) waves are
the excitation of the mindfulness state and Theta (θ)
waves maintain the mindfulness state [19-20].
A psychological research shows that
“mindfulness” is a finite resource. Also,
mindfulness doesn’t just work when sitting in
stillness. It’s also a fantastic tool for making key
decisions, including high speed, “on the fly”
decisions [19]. Mindfulness can help you filter out
mental chatter, weigh your options objectively, tune
into your intuition and ultimately make a decision
that you can stand behind completely [20].
When we force ourselves to focus on doing
something, we will start to consume energy of
mindfulness. With more and more things that need
to be handled, there are less and less energy
reserves. Less energy means the ability to deal with
things will be lower. This phenomenon is called
“mental depletion”. In other words, because the
focus force is limited, every day the transactions we
are able to handle are limited.
According to the study [21], a judge has to
deal with a number of cases in one day, so the
judge's decision will be influenced by “non-legal
factors”. When the judge’s mindfulness is
exhausted, he will tend to avoid the complex
decision-making, back to the safer “default” mode.

2.6. Partial least squares

Partial least squares (PLS) regression is a
popular method for soft modeling in industrial
applications [22]. PLS regression is a method for
constructing predictive models when the factors are
many and highly collinear. Note that the emphasis
is on predicting the responses and not necessarily
on trying to understand the underlying relationship
between the variables.
For example, PLS is not usually appropriate
for screening out factors that have a negligible
effect on the response. However, when prediction is
the goal and there is no practical need to limit the
number of measured factors, PLS can be a useful
tool.
If the number of factors gets too large (for
example, greater than the number of observations),
you are likely to get a model which fits the sampled
data perfectly but that will fail to predict new data
well. This phenomenon is called over-fitting. In
such cases, although there are many manifest
factors, there may be only a few underlying or
latent factors that account for most of the variation
in the response. The general idea of PLS is trying to
extract these latent factors, accounting for as much
of the manifest factor variation 1 as possible while
modeling the responses well. For this reason, the
acronym PLS has also been taken to mean
“projection to latent structure”. It should be noted,
however, that the term “latent” does not have the
same technical meaning in the context of PLS as it
does for other multivariate techniques. In particular,
PLS does not yield consistent estimates of what are
called “latent variables” in formal structural
equation modeling.

2.7. Consumer behavior
The study of consumer behavior is about the
processes that consumers use to choose and dispose
of products and services. The deeper definition of it
will also include how that process impacts the
world. Consumer behavior incorporates ideas from
several sciences including psychology, biology,
chemistry and economics [23].
“ All marketing decisions are based on
assumptions and knowledge of consumer
behavior.”[24]. Researching consumer behavior is a
complex process, but understanding consumer
behavior is critical for companies.
Consumer behavior attempts to understand the
decision-making processes of buyers, both
individually and in groups, such as how emotion
affects buying behavior. It studies characteristics of

1514

individual consumers such as demographics and
behavioral variables in an attempt to understand
people's demands. It also tries to assess influences
on the consumers from groups such as family,
friends, sports, reference groups, and society in
general [25].

2.8. Perceptron Learning Algorithm (PLA)
PLA is developed by Frank Rosenblatt in 1957.
This algorithm is used in machine learning which
focuses on the case of binary classifier [26]. The
algorithm will initial the weight to random number
and decide an input which represents numbers into
one group or the other by vector W = W + y * X|.
When the input does not belong to the right class,
the vector will be adjusted and make every input
conform their class exactly. The formula applied in
our system is h(x) = sign (w0 + w1*concentration +
w2*emotion). By learning from the system, we
divide concentration and emotion into two areas,
and find the best vector W in our experiment.

3. Method
3.1. Capturing brainwaves
The goal we want to achieve is to grasp the
consumer preference accurately. Hence, we
develop this system by using the brain-computer
interface which knows the effects of consumers’
emotion and degrees of concentration. To know the
consumer preference on appearances of products,
we ask for some subjects to extract their
brainwaves as internal brainwave data and use
questionnaires to get their external options. In our
experiment, we focus on using the comparison
between internal brainwave data and external
option to find the best weight to calculate the
preference value and use it to find the preference
interval for the actual test in the future.
Each experiment needs ten to fifteen minutes.
At first, we will let them wear EEG, and detect
their brainwaves by these 16 channels. After the
contact quality of each sensor is good (represented
by a color code), we can gain the Alpha(α), Beta(β),
Theta(θ) and Gamma(γ) from brainwaves and store
them into database for the following comparison
and analysis. In next step, we use discrete wavelet
transform to gain the wave bands we want.

3.2. Discrete wavelet transform
It Discrete wavelet transform is used to divide
a continuous time function into several wavelets.

Using discrete wavelet transform can build a timefrequency signal with well localized time domain
and frequency domain. Through the algorithm of
filters, we can find the needed wave brands
gradually. The methods are shown below:
x[n]: Discrete inputted signal, the length is N.
g[n]: It is a low pass filter, which can filter the high
frequencies of inputted signals and output low
frequencies.
h[n]: It is a high pass filter, which is opposite to the
low pass filter. It can filter the low frequencies of
inputted signals and output high frequencies.

3.3. Design an experiment
We find 50 subjects to conduct the experiment.
Because people have the different sensitive degrees
of brainwaves, these 50 fixed subjects will become
the decision makers in the future actual test after
training their brainwave data. Hence, we need to
extract their brainwave data to do training and
machine learning, so the computer can improve the
data quality when every time subjects do the test
again. The subjects need to do 50 times of test at
the beginning. Each test lasts for 40 seconds. We
will combine external options by using
questionnaire of subjects with brainwaves data, and
detect signal stability of brainwaves at the same
time. At the first 10 seconds, the system will filter
out the instability brainwaves. The system will
select two pictures randomly to be a group after the
experiment starts. The pictures are drawn just by
black line, because the reference of our test is using
shapes. It is because we want to reduce other
variables in order to focus on the brainwave
detecting. Each picture runs for 20 seconds. The
system will grasp each four brainwave values of
concentration and emotion every second, totally
each 80 values. It detects the validity of each value
and records them into the result table for us to
calculate the mean of each brainwave value of
concentration and emotion. In the test, the system
will record the brainwaves of concentration and
brainwaves of emotion, making them to be the
factors and supposing concentration will influence
the development of emotion. Hence, we build a

1515

model of experiment process. Figure 1 is the
structural model of test.
According to different ages and genders, we
will find 50 subjects: 25 men and 25 women. It is
because companies aim different consumer
segmentation of age to promote their products. We
will divide the subjects into segments based on age.
Each group has five men and five women and the
age difference between each group is ten-year.

The system uses EMOTIV EPOC &
EMOTIVE EEG to get users’ brainwave signals. It
also puts the needed brainwave data into the
database to be the standard that used to determine
people’s preference degree. The system architecture
is shown in Figure 2.

Figures2. System architecture

4. Result

Figure 1. Structural model of experiment

3.4. Determine an interval of preference
At first, in order to get the best weight to find
the interval of preference, we use PLA to integrate
brainwaves of concentration with brainwaves of
emotion to do the training. The function is h(x) =
sign (w0 + w1*concentration + w2*emotion).
Every subject has his own learning h(x). Every time
when one subject input the new brainwave data of
concentration and brainwave data of emotion, the
computer will put dot (concentration, emotion) into
subject’s coordinate of preference value and
compare with the external option which came from
the previous questionnaire. In this coordinate,
normal vector W will be divided into two areas, one
is “like” and the other is “dislike”. If this dot is out
of the right area, computer will adjust the normal
vector W = W + y * X| and change the weight of
concentration and emotion. Using this function can
let the system improve the quality of data and learn
by itself. Hence, we can get the different interval of
preference of each subject.
According to our previous model of
experimental architecture, we use PLS to estimate
the brainwaves of concentration, brainwaves of
emotion and external options to access the
significance between each other.

According to the value from the system and
options we collect from the experiment, we
aggregate the data
In the table of results, we can
divide two parts. First one is the report table
including the processed data of brainwaves and
external options of subjects. The external options in
the table show the chosen result of subjects. We use
external options to be the input reference of
machine learning for helping the system do training
and get the best weight to find the interval of
preference. Second is the correlation between
different factors on the model. We want to find a
preference interval from brainwave data by
repeatedly testing. According to the external
options and find each subject’s preference degree
for the actual test of products.
Table 1.Part result of brainwave and
questionnaire

3.5. System architecture

1516

Figure 3. PLS result:
Result *P<0.05, **P<0.01, ***P<0.001

4.1. Correlation analysis of model
We design a model to research the preference
correlation. In this structure of experiment, we use
a progressive step to detect the thoughts of subjects.
We consider that when subjects are looking at the
appearance of a product or a mark, they must
decide one with different objects. For example,
color, shape or pattern. So we focus on the shape,
using a group of pictures to test. There are two
pictures in one group. We think that concentrations
will influence emotion. In addition, we also think
the external options and brainwaves data might
influence the preference value which is calculated
by the function. Therefore, we use PLS analysis to
analyze the correlation between every step of the
structure. The result of PLS analysis is shown in the
Figure 2. The R2 values indicate that the amount of
variances that dependent variables are explained by
independent variables.

The total sample we used is 50. From the
model, we can find that the R2 value of brainwave
data of emotion is 0.474, meaning that brainwave
data of concentration explains more than 45 percent
of variance in brainwave data of emotion, proving
that emotion is influenced by concentration
significantly. The R2 value of internal and
preference value is 0.590, meaning that other
variables explain almost 60 percent of variance
inpreference value. It represents that the external
options will significantly affect the internal and
preference value.
The average variance extracted values (AVEs), are
three of all above recommended threshold of 0.5
[27]. The result is shown in Table 2. Table 2 has
AVE and correlation coefficient of each variable.
Three squares of root are higher than the
correlations among the measures. In conclusion, it
indicates that the model can almost conform to the
data.
Table 2. Correlation, and average variance
extracted

4.2. Actual test
In this step, we will let enterprises test their
products in their target market by our fifty subjects.
This test will be based on the standard which we
studied upon. In this test, the subjects only need to
put on the device and watch the pictures to do the
simple test. At the same time, the data will be saved
in database and be calculated. Simultaneously, the

1517

system will use this new data to improve the quality
of data. The output “preference value” can
determine the final preference degree. Using this
method, the extensive testing can be easier. For
different consumer groups, we can get the different
information as references. After testing, the new
strategy or decision can be made on the basis of the
reports. Now we do several times of actual test. To
verify our system which precisely grasps the
consumer preference, we find more than 900
samples to test their preference in each actual test
and compare with the result of actual test from the
fifty subjects.

4.3. Commodity decision
After finding the subjects according to the
enterprise strategy of the different target market
and the test is done, the system will give the results
of these different pictures. Then the report with
different statistic charts comes out. The report
should include the different consumer groups’
results and see which kind of products has the most
consumers’ highest preference value in the target
market. With the report, the enterprise can have one
more reference when they need to make the better
decision, or launch some different kinds of products
for different target markets.

5. Discussion
Our study shows that the concentration
situation of a subject can let us know his or her
degree of preference. When someone is fond of a
thing, he or she must be concentrating on this thing.
We can assert that emotion will be influenced by
concentration and it will help determine the
consumer preference in product design. Therefore,
we build model and use PLS to prove the
correctness of our assertion. This is a very
important key for a company to know consumers’
emotion of several designs and make the correct
decisions to attract consumers. The design of a
product might affect someone’s reactions deeply,
so a company has to watch carefully on the design.
In this study, we can see subjects’ degree of
preference on different objects and colors. This
kind of difference can help a factory, a seller, or a
company to understand consumers’ preferences and
decide what kind of shapes and colors should be
designed to be sold.
When we go to a market or a store to shop, we
do not always choose the product that we certainly
feel good or really be fond of. Sometimes we just

think that this product might be my favorite thing
but actually not like it very much. This condition
will not make consumers come back to buy this
product again. The perfect design on a product can
make consumers keep an eye on it, so this is a
useful way to make them keep buying the products
they have produced.
Actually, when we test the subjects we can
find many interesting facts. A man chose and
circled the first design but in his mind, this man
actually had more excitement on the second design.
In contrast, someone thought the first design was
the prettiest and the data shows that he really
thought as the same as what he chose. These two
conditions are very different to each other. The first
condition shows the person’s answer is different
with his mind, it means the external degree of
preference is different with the internal degree of
preference. The other shows that the person’s mind
is similar to his answer, that is, the external degree
is consistent with the internal degree. Therefore, we
hope to use EMOTIV EPOC & EMOTIV EEG to
compare the internal and external degree of
preference to understand the subjects.

5.1. Implications for research
We believe this system can bring more
benefits to a company. A company always does not
have any idea of what consumers like and doesn’t
know how to design a product that will attract more
consumers to come back to the store to consume it
again. A company usually wastes a lot of time on
surveying consumers.
What companies do now to know consumers’
minds is bringing questionnaires to people on the
street or in the stores to ask them some questions.
For example, there might be two or three different
products show on the questionnaire paper to make
people choose their favorite products. Companies
believe deeply that this way can help them get the
answers they want. They think it is a good way for
their companies to produce products that can allure
these consumers. Sometimes, this is not a reliable
way to understand consumers. What they choose
are not always as the same as what they really like.
The purpose of our research is to detect
people’s degrees of preference and help companies
to actually provide consumers’ needs. It is very
crucial for companies because they can make the
right decisions as soon as they realize consumers’
thoughts. When the products fascinate consumers
very well, the possibilities of consumers who turn
heads will increase very rapidly.

1518

In our research, we can find out that someone
chooses the first design, and the data shows that he
or she actually likes the other one than the one he
chooses. This is useful information for companies
to compare the traditional questionnaire method
with the new method that uses EMOTIV EPOC &
EMOTIV EEG. The traditional questionnaire
method will not realize the true emotion of people.
But with the new method by using EMOTIV EPOC
& EMOTIV EEG, we can know what subjects
answer and also what they are really thinking about
it. That can be a new opportunity for companies to
understand consumer preference.

5.2. Implications for practice
Our results show that knowing consumer
preference is a crucial part of a company to make
products or designs that can perfectly surprise
consumer and prompt them to buy the products. We
have several implications.
The first implication is that those useful data
can let us know a lot of helpful information about a
person’s emotion. Not only what things they like
but also the things they dislike. A company has to
avoid designing products that would be
disagreeable or would disturb the public [28]. The
emotion helps realize a lot of details.
The second implication is that companies need
to concern more about their consumers. However,
companies need to clearly know what their
consumers like and make some strategies by
guessing their thoughts rather than making the
decision by themselves. Consumers’ preference
changes rapidly, it represents that targeting the
expectation of consumers is significant. Without
wasting time and losing accuracy using traditional
investigation, our system can provide quick time of
concern and precise reference of strategies for
companies. These concerns can help us do machine
learning and adjust our weight of concentration and
emotion brainwave data to help system learn by
itself, so that companies can get more precise and
high quality data again and again. In the word,
consumers’ emotion plays an important role in a
company’s decision making. Only understanding
consumers can make companies capture consumers’
hearts. A proper management of consumer behavior
is a strong competitive advantage for the companies
[29].

5.3. Limitations and future directions

Although this study helps a lot in decision
making and analyzing consumer preference, there
might be some factors that affect subjects’ thoughts,
so it causes that we can’t detect the deeper emotion
of the subjects. This might not be that correct when
there are too many factors influencing someone.
Therefore, we have some directions we want
to do in the future research. To reduce the factors
which will affect the detection of brainwave data,
we want to make a strict standard of experiment,
such as the environment of the experiment and
living habits of subjects, ensuring the experiment
will not be disturbed by the external factors and
consumers will not be influenced by their mental
states. The second direction is that we want to make
the analysis between consumer preference and
consumer segmentation, such as age or gender. We
want to find the related rules between these two
variables, expecting to provide more business
insights for companies. The third direction is that
we make an actual test after finishing the system.
Now we test four times, but we want to increase to
more than 10 times to prove the effect of our
system more certainly.

6. Conclusion
This study provides a function to detect the
inside thought of the people. Combining the
concentration and emotion brainwave data to
increase the accuracy of the product preference. We
use computer learning and training skill to
automatically improve the quality of data, ensuring
the actual performance of product survey can
precisely make the decision. Besides, we use the
PLS analysis method to discuss the relation
between the concentration and emotion, proving
that concentration will influence the emotion and
deeply change the decision of the product
preference. Based on our detecting function,
company can more clearly to meet the expectation
of consumer.
After finishing the building of system and
repeatedly training the data, we make a verified
actual test for knowing the goal we achieve. At
result, four times of test all reach our goal and the
result from subjects of actual test conforms to the
results of our fifty subjects, proving that our system
can grasp the consumer preference precisely by a
series of trainings from the fifty subjects’
brainwave data. The contribution of our system can
provide business a novel and a different function to
investigate the consumers and support a precise

1519

reference to make the strategies on their appearance
design.

7. References
[1] P. Kotler and G Alexander Rath, “Design: A powerful
but neglected strategic tool”, Journal of business strategy,
5, 2, 1984, pp. 16-21.
[2] M.B. Holbrook and R.B. Zirlin, “Artistic creation,
artworks, and aesthetic appreciation: Some philosophical
contributions to nonprofit marketing”, Advances in
nonprofit marketing, 1, 1, 1985, pp. 1-54.
[3] M. Wallendorf, “The formation of aesthetic criteria
through social structures and social institutions”,
Advances in consumer research, 7, 1, 1980, pp. 3-6.
[4] N. Crilly, J. Ltrie, and P.J. Clarkson, “Seeing things:
consumer response to the visual domain in product
design”, Design studies, 25, 6, 2004, pp. 547-577.
[5] M.E. Creusen and J. P. Schoorman, “The different
roles of product appearance in consumer choice”, Journal
of product innovation management, 22, 1, 2005, pp. 6381.
[6] W. Robert and Jr. Veryzer, “The Place of Product
Design and Aesthetics in Consumer Research”, Advances
in Consumer Research, 22, 1995, pp. 641-645.
[7] Z.T. Harith., et al. “Coffee packaging: Consumer
perception on appearance, branding and pricing”,
International Food Research Journal, 21, 3, 2014, pp.
849-853.
[8] D. Ergu and G. Kou, “Questionnaire design
improvement and missing item scores estimation for
rapid and efficient decision making”, Annals of
Operations Research, 197, 1, 2012, pp. 5-23.
[9] L.L. Garber, “The Package Appearance in Choice.”
Advances in Consumer Research, 22, 1995, pp. 653-660.
[10] J.P. Schoorman and H.S. Robben, “The effect of
new package design on product attention, categorization
and evaluation”, Journal of Economic Psychology, 18, 2,
1997, pp. 271-287.
[11] K.S. CHEN and S.J. HE, “Application of brainwave
instrument research in various fields”, Taiwan Academic
Network Conference, 2013, pp. 1011-1016.
[12] T.W. Tsai and W.L. Shih, “Using brain wave
measuring instruments analysis of visual images of
emotional recognition”, Conference of Taiwan Institute
of Kansei, 2013.
[13] Lodish H, Berk A, Zipursky SL, Molecular Cell
Biology. 4th edition, 2000
[14] L. F. Nicolas-Alonso and J. Gomez-Gil, "Brain
computer interfaces A review", Sensors, 12, 2, 2012, pp.
1211-1279.
[15] R. N. Khushaba , C. Wise , S Kodagoda , J
Louviere , B. E. Kahn, and C. Townsend, Consumer
neuroscience: Assessing the brain response to marketing
stimuli using electroencephalogram (EEG) and eye
tracking, 40, 9, pp.3803-3812, 2013.
[16] M.C.M. Bastiaansen, R. Oostenveld, O. Jensen, and
P. Hagoort, “I see what you mean: theta power increases
are involved in the retrieval of lexical semantic
information”, Brain Lang, 106, 1, 2008, pp.15-28.

[17] G. Vecchiato, J. Toppi, L. Astolfi, F. D. V.Fallani, F.
Cincotti,D. Mattia, F. Bez, and F. Babiloni, “Spectral
EEG frontal asymmetries correlate with the experienced
pleasantness of TV commercial advertisements”, Med
Biol Eng Comput, 49, 5, 2011, pp.579-583.
[18] N. Schwarz and G. Clore, “Feelings and phenomenal
experiences. In E. T. Higgins & A. W. Kruglanski
(Eds.)”, Social Psychology: Handbook of Basic
Principles, 1996, pp. 433- 465.
[19] W. Klimesch,“EEG-alpha rhythms and memory
processes”, International Journal of Psychophysiology, 26,
1–3,1997, pp 319–340
[20] M. Doppelmayra, T. Finkenzellerb,P. Sausenga,
“Frontal midline theta in the pre-shot phase of rifle shooting:
Differences between experts and novices”, 46, 5, 2008, pp
1463–1467
[21] How to use mindfulness to make key decision
Available from: https://siyli.org/2013/08/
[22] C. Gregoire, 10 Things Highly Intuitive People Do
Differently,
2015,
Available
from:
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/03/19/the-habits-ofhighly-intu_n_4958778.html
[23] Shai Danzigera, Jonathan Levavb & Liora AvnaimPesso, “Extraneous Factors in Judicial Decisions”,
PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ACADEMY OF
SCIENCES 6889, 108, 17, 2011.
[24] Randall D. Tobias. “An Introduction to Partial Least
Squares Regression”, SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC
[25] Kuester and Sabine (2012), “MKT 301: Strategic
Marketing & Marketing in Specific Industry Contexts”,
University of Mannheim, p. 110.
[26] Del I. Hawkins, David L. Mothersbaugh, Roger J.
Best (2007), “Consumer Behavior: Building Marketing
Strategy”
[27] Elizabeth A. Minton, Lynn R. Khale (2014), “Belief
Systems, Religion, and Behavioral Economics”, New
York: Business Expert Press LLC.
[28] Freund, Y. Schapire, R. E, “Large margin
classification using the perceptron algorithm”, Machine
Learning, 37, 3, pp. 277–296
[29] D. Barclay, R. Thompson, and C. Higgins, “The
partial least squares (PLS) approach to causal modeling:
Personal computer adoption and use an illustration”,
Technology Studies, 2, 2, 2015, pp. 285-309.
[30] George Ad”r, Victor Adr” and N.E. Pascu , Logo
Design and the Corporate Identity, Procedia-Social and
Behavioral Sciences, 51,2012, pp. 650-654.
[31] M.A. Revilla-Camacho, M. Vega-Vázquez1, and F.
José Cossío-Silva, “Customer participation and
citizenship behavior effects on turnover intention”,
Journal of Business Research, 68, 2015, pp. 1607-1611.
[32] M.C.CHEN, A.L.CHIU, and H.H. CHANG,
“Mining changes in customer behavior in retail
marketing.” Expert Systems with Applications, 28, 4,
2005, pp. 773-781.
[33] A. Porcelli and M. Delgado, “Acute stress modulates
risk taking in financial decision making”, Psychological
Science, 20, 3, 2009, pp.278.
[34] Shai Danzigera, Jonathan Levavb & Liora AvnaimPesso, “Extraneous Factors in Judicial Decisions”,

1520

PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ACADEMY OF
SCIENCES 6889, 108, 17, 2011.
[35] J. Wong and C. Yeh, “Tourist hesitation in
destination decision making”, Annals of Tourism
Research, 36, 1, 2009, pp. 6-23.
[36] F. Rosenblatt, The Perceptron--a perceiving and
recognizing automaton. Report 85-460-1, Cornell
Aeronautical Laboratory, 1957.
[37] S. Chena, J. Liua, H. Wanga, and J.C. Augustob, “A
group decision making model for partially ordered
preference under uncertainty”, Information Fusion, 25,
2015, pp. 32-41.
[38] N. Nishino, T. Takenaka, H. Koshiba, and K.
Kodama, “Customer preference based optimization in
selecting product/service variety”, CIRP Annals Manufacturing Technology, 63, 1, 2014, pp. 421-424.
[39] R. Attri and S. Grove, “Application of preference
selection index method for decision making over the
design stage of production system life cycle”, Journal of

King Saud University - Engineering Sciences, 27, 2,
2015, pp. 207-216.
[40] A. Yousfia, A.K. Dey, R. Saidi, and J.H. Hong,
“Introducing decision-aware business processes”,
Computers in Industry, 70, 2015, pp. 13-22.
[41] J.R. McColl-Kennedy, P. G. Patterson, A. K. Smith,
and M. K. Brady, “Customer Rage Episodes: Emotion,
Expressions and Behaviors”, Journal of Retailing, 85, 2,
2009, pp. 222-237.
[42] A. Floh and M. Madlberger, “The role of
atmospheric cues in online impulse-buying behavior”,
Electronic Commerce Research and Applications, 12, 6,
2013, pp. 425-439.
[43] K. Crowley, A. Sliney, I. Pitt,and D.Murphy,
“Evaluating a brain-computer interface to categorise
human emotional response.” In: 2010 10th IEEE
International Conference on Advanced Learning
Technologies, 2010, pp. 276-278.

[44]
G.Garcia-molina,
T.TSONEVA,
and
A.Nijholt, ”Emotional brain–computer interfaces”,
International journal of autonomous and adaptive
communications systems, 6, 1, 2013, pp.9-25.
[45] R.Horlings, D.Datcu, and L.J.Rothkrantz,
“Emotion recognition using brain activity.” In:
Proceedings of the 9th international conference on
computer systems and technologies and workshop for
PhD students in computing, 2008, pp. 6.
[46] T. Costa, E. Rognoni, and D. Galati, “EEG phase
synchronization during emotional response to positive
and negative film stimuli”, Neuroscience Letters, 406,
2006, pp. 159-164.
[47] Rami N. Khushaba,Chelsea Wise,Sarath
Kodagoda , Jordan Louviere,Barbara E. Kahn,Claudia
Townsend, “Consumer neuroscience: Assessing the
brain response to marketing stimuli using
electroencephalogram (EEG) and eye tracking”, Expert
Systems with Applications, 40, 9, 2013, pp. 3803-3812.
[48] P. Bobrov, A. Frolov, C. Cantor, I. Fedulova, M.
Bakhnyan,
A.
Zhavoronkov,
“Brain-Computer
Interface Based on Generation of Visual Images”,PLoS
ONE 6(6): e20674. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020674
[49] S.P. Kellya and R.G. O’Connell, “The neural
processes underlying perceptual decision making in
humans: Recent progress and future directions”,
Journal of Physiology-Paris, 109, 1, 2015, pp. 27-37.
[50] I. Nunes, S. Miles, M. Luck, S. Barbosa, amd C.
Lucena, “Decision making with natural language based
preferences and psychology-inspired heuristics”,
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence, 42,
2015, pp. 16-35.
[51] J.S. Lerner, D.A. Small, and G. Loewenstein,
“Heart strings and purse strings”, Psychological
Science, 15, 5, 2004, pp. 337-341.

1521

