ISSN 1870-4069

Exploring Digital and Manual Modalities in Educational
Activities for Children with ADHD
Raymundo Cornejo1, Fernando Martinez2
1 CONACYT,

2 Facultad

Universidad Autónoma de Chihuahua,
Chihuahua, Mexico

de Ingeniería, Universidad Autónoma de Chihuahua,
Chihuahua, Mexico
rcornejo@conacyt.mx, fmartine@uach.mx

Abstract. Planning and conducting educational activities for children with
ADHD represents a methodical and precise endeavor. Teachers plan the
educational activities but also have to adapt each educational session based on
the child’s emotional state. Digital technologies are often suggested as a means
to provide engaging learning resources and to help children with their academic
achievements. Therefore, we developed a supportive software based on an
educational activity where we aim to help children reinforce learning abilities.
We conducted a controlled study to compare the manual and digital modalities
of the educational activity. Our analysis reveals sentiment findings when new
technology is introduced. Our findings suggest that using educational activities
enhanced with digital technology has potential benefits and may allow teachers
and children achieve academic goals yet providing a ludic educational experience
for children.
Keywords: Ludic experiences, affective states, attention deficit disorder,
learning difficulties.

1

Introduction

Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is the most common neurobehavioral
disorder diagnosed in U.S. children. In 2011–2013, 13.3% of boys and 5.6% of girls
aged 4–17 had ever been diagnosed with ADHD [1]. Prior research [2, 3] have found
similar prevalence percentages worldwide suggesting geographic location plays a
limited role in ADHD prevalence. Particularly, the Mexican Psychiatric Services Office
estimates 3.5% of Mexican children have been diagnosed with ADHD [4].
Children diagnosed with ADHD experience a wide range of challenges with daily
life and their education, compromising the expectations from parents and teachers
according to skills presented in neurotypical children of the same age [5]. For instance,
they face problems identifying individual graphemes or words while constructing
meaningful sentences related to reading assignment. Furthermore, short term memory
pp. 37–44; rec. 2016-07-14; acc. 2016-09-16

37

Research in Computing Science 129 (2016)

Raymundo Cornejo, Fernando Martinez

issues may arise and contribute to dyslexia or dysgraphia diagnosis [6], leading to low
average grades, failed grades, expulsions, or increased school dropout rates. Along with
learning challenges these children have issues while interacting with others peers due
to inattention to what is happening around them or what others are saying [7].
Therefore, there seems to be a need to support the efforts teachers have to do to
implement strategies and approaches to engage children in educational and social
activities.
Digital technologies have been suggested as a means to provide creative, intuitive
and engaging learning experiences, which can help teachers better planning their
students’ educational goals [8]. However, designing technological yet instructional
content for children with ADHD is challenging. In this paper we present the findings
of an initial technological approach, where children are encourage to play with digitaleducational resources. We argue that with our digital instructional resource, children
can practice memory, attention and reasoning skills while the activities’ design and
technology keeps them engaged. Furthermore, the design and implementation of these
kinds of technologies might be an alternative to physicians who often rely on
pharmacological interventions as initial and/or sole treatment for children with
ADHD [9].

2

Related Work

Digital technologies are conceived as a vehicle to deliver instructional educational
content [10]. Especially during early childhood, playing positively influences important
psychological, sociological, and intellectual developments. For instance, by means of
video games researchers have studied how seven-years-old children make connections
around mythology assignments. Users confront problems and make use of their
expertise to solve puzzles before moving to the next challenge, and this engaging
activity would never stops because of the ludic approach to deliver learning content
[11]. Technology is also seen as a mediator for teaching cognitively demanding tasks.
An example of these are educational tools that support the teaching of mathematics
skills such as the manipulation of fraction equivalence [12].
The use of these and other technology-based instructional resources offer new
options for children with ADHD. For instance, effective instruction might be reached
using graphics, words and sounds, given that the recreation of real world scenarios is
possible. Computers also allow repeated trials and let instructors organize content into
smaller chunks of information [13]. The review offered by this author indicates that
technology could create highly stimulating instructional environment, could envisage a
promising approach for helping students gain self-control over their behaviors, or
provide biofeedback training so that both students and therapists’ are informed about
brain activity.
Nevertheless one of the main symptoms exposed by children with ADHD is their
short attention span, which leads to poor academic performance. For therapists the
measuring of this neurobiological condition is commonly based on a subjective
observational approach. Assistive technologies can help therapists make the inattentive
Research in Computing Science 129 (2016)

38

ISSN 1870-4069

Exploring Digital and Manual Modalities in Educational Activities for Children with ADHD

behavior assessment easier given that current gaze tracking devices localize the focus
of attention on a display. In [14] authors, explored the design of a system aiming to
evaluate a gaze-based attentive user interface that monitors the child eyes. Such a
system could be used to manage educational content based on the level of attention the
child keeps with the instructional material. A more robust technology-based approach
is proposed by [15] to detect divided attention in reading activities. While children were
reading the environment was fueled with distractors in the format of multitasking
instructions or environmental noise.

3

Technological Solution

During period of four months we conducted a case study using user centered design
techniques to design and implement an educational software tool for children diagnosed
with ADHD at the Instituto José David in Chihuahua, México. The software was
designed as a ludic experience with educational tasks aimed to reinforce learning
abilities such as: attention, cognition, memory, and visuospatial memory. The software,
for example, uses iconic cards to stimulate short term memory. Cards are presented to
the player during a few seconds and the child has to select the previously shown cards
immediately after cards disappear. Cards are in an unordered and larger set of cards to
evaluate short term memory (see Figure 1a). In addition, visuospatial memory is
reinforced when children have to summarize and recall information about the spatial
location of objects on a grid (see Figure 1b).

Fig. 1. Software’s games: a) memory and b) visuospatial.
ISSN 1870-4069

39

Research in Computing Science 129 (2016)

Raymundo Cornejo, Fernando Martinez

4

Methods and Evaluation

Researchers conducted a controlled between subjects experiment to evaluate children’s
attention and frustration levels while conducting one short term memory activity.
Participants (N=15) were students between 8 and 11 years old (6 female). Students were
recruited from among ADHD patients at Instituto José David in Chihuahua, México
and consent was obtained from their parents. Evaluation consisted in four phases: 1)
playing session with a digital game modality, 2) answer a questionnaire about the game,
3) play with the manual modality, and 4) answer a questionnaire about the game.
Participants were taken to Gesell room and assigned to start either with the digital or
physical version of the game. A therapist on language and learning explained to each
participant the dynamics of the game and how to play it during each playing session.
Based on the child’s excitement level, each child was given a specific time (avg. 5 min)
to calm down and understand how to play and short after the therapist initiated the
game. The digital modality was played with the Leap Motion1 device and the manual
modality was played with tangible game cards.
All playing sessions were video recorded with a webcam and a video camera and
observed by a psychologist who analyzed each session independently. Furthermore, we
used the Emotiv EEG device to track and generate real time reports on children
affective state. EEG data was additionally analyzed in order to understand frustration
(FM, FD), excitement (EM, ED), and engagement (EBM, EBD). Children were moved
to a waiting area after each playing session and one researcher applied a questionnaire
to assess each game modality.
The questionnaire evaluates user experience on attention and satisfaction for both
manual and digital. It consisted on 9 questions for each modality and each question had
a Likert scale with answers from “never” to “very frequently”. Children played with
both modalities of the educational activity (N Sessions = 60, Total of Questionnaires =
60). Questionnaire’s data was analyzed using median values to understand satisfaction
and attention levels between manual (AM) and digital (AD) modalities. We conducted
Wilcoxon signed-rank test due to the non-normal distribution of data.
Table 1. Wilcoxon signed rank test of FD and FM.

N
Mean Rank Sum of Ranks
Negative Ranks
1a
2.50
2.50
Positive Ranks
11b
6.86
75.50
Ties
3c
Total
15
Z
-2.915d
.004
Asymp. Sig. (2-tailed)
a. FD < FM; b. FD > FM; c. FD = FM; d. Base on negative ranks
FD-FM

1

https://www.leapmotion.com/

Research in Computing Science 129 (2016)

40

ISSN 1870-4069

Exploring Digital and Manual Modalities in Educational Activities for Children with ADHD

5

Findings

Developing educational tools entails aspects from supporting teachers to creating
engaging, yet educational, activities for children. In this section we present an overview
of how current technology can be used for educational purposes based on sentiments.
5.1

Sentiment Analysis

During our study, children with ADHD showed important levels of frustration while
playing the educational game in digital mode. Our findings indicate notorious
differences on medians of frustration levels on both modalities. The Leap Motion
modality has a higher frustration median than the manual activity (FM=2.0 and
FD=4.0). This difference is further validated with the Wilcoxon signed rank test that
indicates to what extent frustration levels with the Leap Motion interaction are
statistically significant higher than the frustration levels with the manual activity (see
Table 1, Z = -2.915, p < 0.004). To our knowledge, frustration has not been related with
learning performance. Nevertheless, it may leads to children unwillingness to perform
the educational activity. Frustration might arise due to the novelty of technology.
During our study, this was the first time children used the Leap Motion technology and
at times the Leap Motion did not perform as children would had expected, thus creating
these significant levels of frustration. Even with these levels of frustration, we observed
how there is also a significant difference between the digital (ED) and manual (EM)
excitement levels (Medians: ED=4.0, EM=2.0). The Wilcoxon signed rank test
indicates to what extent excitement levels are significantly higher with the Leap Motion
technology than excitement levels with the manual activity (see Table 2, Z= -2.004, p
< 0.045). This entails an interesting scenario where children feel frustrated with the new
digital learning activities but also are more excited and motivated to complete them.
Table 2. Wilcoxon signed rank test of ED and EM.

N
Mean Rank Sum of Ranks
Negative Ranks
4a
3.5
14.00
Positive Ranks
8b
8.00
64.00
Ties
3c
Total
15
Z
-2.004d
.045
Asymp. Sig. (2-tailed)
a. ED < FM; b. ED > EM; c. ED = EM; d. Base on negative ranks
ED-EM

In this regard, we believe that children might adapt to the technology interaction
mode over time and with dynamic learning activities we might sustain excitement
levels. Therefore, we can expect lower levels of frustration across a longitudinal study.
In sum, a digital version with ludic excitement interactions might be the best option for
educational and digital processes.
ISSN 1870-4069

41

Research in Computing Science 129 (2016)

Raymundo Cornejo, Fernando Martinez

5.2

Digital Modality or Manual Preference

Although children presented significant levels of excitement over digital learning
activity, we did not find a clear preference over the manual modality. Analyzing
satisfaction data we observed how median satisfaction for manual activity was 5.0 as it
was for the median satisfaction for the digital activity. We can infer that ludic learning
activities provide a positive affective state since both modalities had the highest
satisfaction level from our survey. In addition, both ludic modalities present high
median attention level (AD = 5.0, AM = 5.0). Nonetheless children diagnosed with
ADHD are characterized with inattention during learning activities, our participants
were satisfied while playing both modalities and were attentive to the dynamics of the
game despite the frustration levels due to digital technology. Median levels for the
engagement state show how children were enthusiastic players (EBD = 4.0, EBM =
4.0) with few instances of boredom while playing. Regardless of these sentiment
findings, there is not a clear children’s preference over one modality of the learning
activity. Further research is needed to monitor attention and satisfaction levels across
time and exploit the benefits of using game-based learning technologies to promote
excitement while learning.

6

Discussion

While prior work has highlighted the importance of technologically enriching
classrooms or learning therapy sessions, our analysis focuses on identifying
opportunities to support ludic learning activities with emergent technology.
Technology provides important information around children’s sentiments that can be
used to enrich the learning experience. Nonetheless, abstract concepts such as attention
can be difficult to monitor or infer. Therefore there is the opportunity to design and
develop robust solutions to create intelligent learning management systems supported
by sentiment analysis. In the next sections, we describe current limitations as
opportunities of improvement but also alternative technologies to create more robust
solutions.
6.1

EEG Limitations & Complementary Technologies

Teachers plan ahead the learning activities according the children’ ADHD diagnosis
but also make adjustments on daily basis based on the emotional state of each child.
Adapting the learning activities might be troublesome since teachers might not be
exactly certain how the emotional state of the child is. Teachers have to react when they
observe the child presents a negative attitude (e.g. inattention). Throughout our analysis
we observed how current EEG technology allows to analyze and determine the
emotional state of the child while conducting certain educational activity. Providing
this information to teachers in real time might alleviate or reassure the emotional
assessment conducted during therapy or educational sessions. Nonetheless, current
mobile EEG technology can be somewhat invasive or inaccurate for complex cognitive
processes (e.g. attention). During our study, children were asked to wear a headset in
Research in Computing Science 129 (2016)

42

ISSN 1870-4069

Exploring Digital and Manual Modalities in Educational Activities for Children with ADHD

order to conduct our EEG data gathering, this is somewhat intrusive and not transparent
for the children with the risk of inducing the sentiment of feeling observed or evaluated.
Furthermore, identifying complex cognitive processes with the EEG data was
challenging since identifying the sensory brain signals generated by such processes is
still an open problem. Even for experienced psychologists this represents a challenging
endeavor, for example, the psychologist involved in our participants’ sessions stated
how difficult is to determine if children were attentive to the learning activity or just
their eyes were fixed on the activity but not paying attention to it. Therefore, current
educational activities might benefit from incorporating complementary technologies to
enhance accuracy detection of emotional states. Biometrics technology (e.g. eyetracking or facial recognition) can be introduced to supplement emotional information
and help detect when children are frustrated or are losing focus on the educational
activity. Providing robust and less invasive mechanisms to infer emotional states on
children have the potential benefits of conducting meaningful educational activities
where children diagnosed with ADHD can be engaged and attentive.
6.2

Tradeoffs of New Technology vs ADHD

Children diagnosed with ADHD have been socially considered vulnerable since they
might be subject to disadvantages compared with neurotypical children. In our study
we decided to focus our efforts to empower and support learning activities for this
population. Our findings showed higher frustration levels when using technology than
those with the manual activity. Although these preliminary findings might suggest
manual activities should be preferred over a digital one, we argue that these frustration
levels were due to the novelty of the technology, and once the novelty wears off
children will get accustomed to interact with such interfaces. Nevertheless, enriching
learning environments with technology also conveys additional benefits to improve
educational sessions. First, our findings illustrate how children experienced significant
levels of excitement while using the digital modality of the educational activity. This
experienced enjoyment alleviates the teacher’s concerns of keeping children engaged
on the learning activity and motivates students to keep assisting to the Institute.
Furthermore, through sentiment analysis, intelligent learning management systems can
be implemented to adequate the learning activity based on the emotional state of each
child. For example, our system can log the emotional state over time and adapt
dynamically the activity based on the emotions to keep the child engaged with the
memory activity. Future learning management systems might also have a user input to
avoid uncertainty when the teacher can disagree with the evaluation made by the system
and input new values based on their expertise. Even with the high levels of frustration,
we believe future learning systems should take into account the integration of different
mechanisms to identify emotional state of the child and dynamically adequate digital
learning activities which could help alleviate the teachers’ burden.

7

Conclusion

Planning and executing educational activities for children with ADHD is a challenging
endeavor. Developing ludic and digital tools to support teachers on their daily sessions
ISSN 1870-4069

43

Research in Computing Science 129 (2016)

Raymundo Cornejo, Fernando Martinez

uncovers new challenges but also provides benefits. We acknowledge the length of the
study as a limitation; nevertheless our findings suggest potential benefits of enriching
educational activities with technology. Future learning systems can adapt educational
activities with machine learning algorithms by analyzing emotional states to reduce the
levels of frustration and maintain children engaged with the activities. Nevertheless,
teachers are employing ludic activities to instruct children diagnosed with ADHD.

References
1.

2.

3.

4.
5.

6.
7.
8.

9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.

15.

Pastor, P., Reuben, C., Duran, C., Hawkins, L.: Association between diagnosed ADHD and
selected characteristics among children aged 4-17 years: United States, 2011-2013. NCHS
Data Brief, 201 (2015)
Thomas, R., Sanders, S., Doust, J., Beller, E., Glasziou, P.: Prevalence of AttentionDeficit/Hyperactivity Disorder: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. Pediatrics,
(2015)
Polanczyk, G., de Lima, M. S., Horta, B. L., Biederman, J., Rohde, L. A.: The worldwide
prevalence of ADHD: a systematic review and metaregression analysis. Am. J. Psychiatry,
164, pp. 942–948 (2007)
Posa-Diaz, M. del P., Valenzuela-Moreno, M. V., Becerra-Alcantara, D.: Guía clínica:
Transtorno por déficit de atención e hiperactividad
Romero-Ayuso, D. M., Maestu, F., Gonzalez-Marques, J., Romo-Barrientos, C., Andrade,
J. M.: Executive dysfunction in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder in childhood. Rev.
Neurol, 42, pp. 265–271 (2006)
Pineda, D. A.: La función ejecutiva y sus trastornos. Rev. Neurol, 30, pp. 764–768 (2000)
Barkley, R. A.: Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. In: Child psychopathology, pp.
75–143 (2003)
Baker, R. S., Corbett, A. T., Koedinger, K. R., Wagner, A. Z.: Off-task behavior in the
cognitive tutor classroom. In: Proceedings of the 2004 conference on Human factors in
computing systems, CHI ’04, ACM Press, New York, New York, USA, pp. 383–390
(2004)
Zasler, N. D., Martelli, M. F., Jacobs, H. E.: Chapter 32 - Neurobehavioral disorders. In:
Neurology, Neurological Rehabilitation, Elsevier, pp. 377–388 (2013)
Amory, A.: Game object model version II: a theoretical framework for educational game
development. Educ. Technol., Res. Dev., 55, pp. 51–77 (2007)
Gee, J. P.: What Video Game Have to Teach Us About Learning and Literacy. Comput.
Entertain., 1, pp. 1–4 (2003)
Kong, S. C., Kwok, L. F.: A cognitive tool for teaching the addition/subtraction of common
fractions: a model of affordances. Comput. Educ., 45, pp. 245–265 (2005)
Xu, C., Reid, R., Steckelberg, A.: Technology Applications for Children with ADHD:
Assessing the Empirical Support. Educ. Treat., Child, 25, pp. 224–248 (2002)
Asiry, O., Shen, H., Calder, P.: Extending Attention Span of ADHD Children through an
Eye Tracker Directed Adaptive User Interface. In: Proceedings of the ASWEC 2015 24th
Australasian Software Engineering Conference on - ASWEC ’ 15, ACM Press, New York,
New York, USA, Vol.II, pp. 149–152 (2015)
Rodrigue, M., Son, J., Giesbrecht, B., Turk, M., Höllerer, T.: Spatio-Temporal Detection
of Divided Attention in Reading Applications Using EEG and Eye Tracking. In:
Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces - IUI ’15,
ACM Press, New York, New York, USA, pp. 121–125 (2015)

Research in Computing Science 129 (2016)

44

ISSN 1870-4069

