International Journal of Engineering and Advanced Technology (IJEAT)
ISSN: 2249 – 8958, Volume-8, Issue-6S2, August 2019

An Innovative Way by Manipulating Things
using the Power of Thought
Kalaiselvi B, Vijayan T, Sridharraja D, Abinethri R

Abstract: Using the force of thought to control the earth might
appear like a thing removed from sci-fi books. Be that as it may,
the advancements we see today were once sci-fi beginning from
man arriving on the moon to examine in teleportation. Thus
controlling the surroundings through musings is likewise one of
the apexes of that development called Brain Computer Interface.
Utilizing cerebrum waves measured of an EEG to control PC. The
contemporary remote control is supplanted by the force of one's
idea which couldturn considerations into reality. The application
ranges from utilizing contemplations to play diversions to
re-wiring of the brain.The numerous unending potential
outcomes extrapolated from this innovation could be of
Controlling prosthetic appendages, robots, PC and practicing the
cerebrum to rewire itself in stroke patients. The thought of this is
basic, utilizing the typical EEG estimation that distinguishes the
electrical yield of the cerebrum and utilizing them as a data to
different gadgets As no persons contemplations are same; this
framework gives distinction to the one utilizing it. Deadened
patients who can't utilize their appendages and persons
experiencing 'secured disorder' whose cerebrum action are all the
same can connect utilizing this kind of non intrusive BCI. This
paper is a tricky study that considers in the domain of this
advancement distinguishing both its advantages and
disadvantages as it prompts another time of savvy advances for
what's to come. [1],[ 3],[5]
Keywords : Brain Computer Interface(BCI);
Electroencephalogram(EEG) ;General Terms-Paralysis;Locked
in syndrome;

I. INTRODUCTION
The way human beings engage with computer systems has
reformedconsiderablyin the past many years. within the
starting human to gadget interfaced turned into performed the
usage of keyboards, then later thru hand movements using a
computer mouse, other capability enter sources had been
spread out allowing more in-constructed and clean
manipulate, as an example, based on speech, gestures or eye
moves all relying on a functional motor device. [2 ],[ 4],[6]
BCI is a manner of taking the interaction to the following
stage. It uses the notion waves which are normally produced
at some stage in an movement capacity and makes use of it as
a supply of enter to interface with machines. the leading edge
of this revolutionary idea is a transportable non-invasive EEG

headset from Emotiv EPOC system that could flip mind into
fact. [7],[ 9] ,[11]
II. BACKGROUND
EEG waves are made by using the terminating of neurons
inside the cerebrum and have been to start with measured with
the aid of Vladimir Pravdich-Neminsky who measured the
electric motion inside the brains of mutts in 1912,although the
term he utilized waselectrocerebrogramTen years after the
reality Hans Berger became the first to gauge EEG waves in
people and, notwithstanding giving them their advanced call,
started the examination of the use of these electric
approximations in the base of neuroscience and mind studies.
EEG waves are measured utilizing anodes joined to the scalp
that are touchy to modifications in postsynaptic opportunities
of neurons in the cerebral cortex. Postsynaptic possibilities
are made by the combination of inhibitory and excitatory
opportunities located inside the dendrites. those opportunities
are made in degrees of close by depolarization or polarization
taking after the adjustment in film conductance as
neurotransmitters is discharged. one of the chronicled
drawbacks of EEG estimation has been the debasement of
EEG statistics by using antiques which might be electric signs
which might be gotten by means of the sensors that do not
start from cortical neurons. A standout among the maximum
extensively identified reason for curios is eye improvement
and flickering, however one of a kind reasons can contain the
improvement distinctive muscle mass or maybe terrible
contact among the scalp and the electrodes.Many EEG
frameworks enterprise to diminish antiquities and preferred
commotion through the usage of reference anodes installed
areas where there's minimal cortical motion and endeavoring
to sift thru related patterns. [8],[ 10] ,[12]

Revised Manuscript Received on August 22, 2019.
B.Kalaiselvi, Department of EIE, Bharath Institute of Higher education
and research, Tamilnadu, India. Email: kalaiselvi.eie@bharathuniv.ac.in
Sridhar Raja D Department of EIE, Bharath Institute of Higher
Education
and
Research,
Tamilnadu,
India.
Email:
sridharraja.eie@bharathuniv.ac.in
T.Vijayan, Department of EIE,Bharath Institute of Higher education and
research, Tamilnadu, India. Email: vijayan.eie@bharathuniv.ac.in
R.Abinethri, Department of EIE, Bharath Institute of Higher education
and research, Tamilnadu, India. Email: abi.eie@bharathuniv.ac.in
Retrieval Number: F11240886S219/2019©BEIESP
DOI: 10.35940/ijeat.F1124.0886S219

Figure2. Electrode

In figure 1 the Electrode Placement in line with the
international 10-20 gadget is
proven. peculiar numbers at
the proper,even numbers on

439

Published By:
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering
& Sciences Publication

An innovative wayby manipulating things using the power of thought

the left. Letters correspond to lobes – (Frontal), (Temporal),
(Parietal), and (Occipital). C stands for vital (there's no
primary lobe).For achieving the EEG, the special tactics
carried are 6 electrodes, 21 electrodes with 10 – 20 lead
structures, 27 electrodes overlie the sensory motor areas, sixty
four scalp electrodes overlie on scalp or even more wide
varietyof electrode in array fashion. type of the capabilities is
accomplished by using using certainly one of Bayer’s
classifier, Adaptive good judgment community,
threshold detection, again Propagation neural network.
maximum applicable component in EEG-signals are extracted
via FFT analysis, autoregressive (AR) models, spatial pattern
technique, Hilbert transform and so on from complete
frequency band or any of alpha, breeta or mu bands. [14],[
16], [18]

III. METHODOLOGY
The main idea of this paper is to manipulate things in real time
using the measured EEG Signal.

Figure 2. Block diagram for Brain-Computer Interface

The EEG sign extraction and otherenvironment
manipulations is accomplished inside the procedure particular
as brain-pc Interface method. Themeasured EEG waves are
Preprocessed and the specified signal on my own is extracted
leaving out Artifacts and other additives in the spectrum. With
the extracted signal the specified challenge is been achieved
thereby manipulating the matters in real international.The
concept is nicely made using The Emotiv©
SystemwhichisEPOCheadset.The
EPOC
has
14
electrodes(compared to the 19 electrodes of a wellknown
clinical EEG, and the three of OCZ's NIA geologies and a few
of Neuro Sky's unmarried anode). It likewise has a -hub gyro
for recognizing head trends. [13], [15] ,[ 17]

Retrieval Number: F11240886S219/2019©BEIESP
DOI: 10.35940/ijeat.F1124.0886S219

Figure 3.Emotiv Epoc Headset.
conscious mind (Cognitiv suite): The devicedetects thirteen
varieties of movement - six guidelines (left, proper, up, down,
forward, and "pull/zoom") and six rotations (anti-clockwise
rotation, flip left and right, and sway to and fro), plus one
other visualization ("disappear"). whilst the contemporary
motive force may additionally only be capable of pay
attention for any four of these at a time, the degrees of
freedom are larger than a joystick's 2 df. Ideomotorreactions
or the much extra grounded EMG streams apart, these thought
due to the fact about the mind boggling location calculations
blanketed, there may be a moderate slack in figuring out
musings. then again, the innovation may anyhow be helpful in
a bolster part like ringing a minimap or radar in a FPS
diversion.
• emotions
(Affectiv
suite):
"exhilaration","Engagement/Boredom", "Meditation", and
"Frustration" can right now be measured. Emotiv concedes
that the names might not impeccably replicate exactly what
the feeling is, and says that they is probably renamed before
enterprise quarter dispatch.
Facial expressions (Expressiv suite): Singular eyelid and
eyebrow positions, eye position in the level aircraft,
grinning, snickering, retaining, and smiling can at gift be
recognized. different expressions is probably introduced
preceding discharge. The expressions are identified via the
EEG sensors getting signs and symptoms to facial muscular
tissues, instead of by using perusing brainwaves. multiple to
perusing intellectual action, these region are brief
(10ms)conveying a definitive favorable function and
rendering them appropriate for quick paced recreations
within the FPS type.
• Head rotation: the suitable velocity of one's head may be
measured within the yaw and pitch (however no longer pass)
headings. that is outstanding by way of gyros, and isn't
diagnosed with the EEG highlights.

440

Published By:
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering
& Sciences Publication

International Journal of Engineering and Advanced Technology (IJEAT)
ISSN: 2249 – 8958, Volume-8, Issue-6S2, August 2019

IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

route for another time of cooperation with machines.
[19],[20],[21]

The measured EEG signal using Emotiv is been shown in
Figure 4.
REFERENCES
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

Figure 4.Measured EEG wave

9.

V. CONCLUSION

10.

The term Brain-Computer Interface initially showed up in
exploratory writing in the 1970's, however the thought of
connecting the psyche to PCs was nothing new.The extreme
objective of BCI research is to make a framework that not
just an open loopsystem that reacts to clients considerations
however a closed loopsystem that additionally offers criticism
to the client. Specialists at first centered around the engine
cortex of the cerebrum, the range which controls muscle
developments, and testing on creatures immediately
demonstrated that the normal learning practices of the mind
could without much of a stretch adjust to new boosts and
additionally control the terminating ofspecific zones of the
brain.This research managed basically with intrusive methods
however gradually calculations rose which could interpret the
engine neuronresponses in monkeys progressively and make
an interpretation of them into automated activity.Recently, a
framework created by analysts and CarnegieMellon
University and the University of Pittsburgh permitted a
monkey to encourage itself through a prosthetic arm utilizing
just its musings. This examination is amazingly encouraging
for the debilitated, and in reality by 2006 a framework was
created for a tetraplegiac that empowered him to utilize
prosthetic gadgets, a mouse cursor, and a TV through a
96-smaller scale cathode exhibit embedded into his essential
engine cortex.Thereby demonstrating it as a continuous
variable control utilizing musings. The potential outcomes
accomplished through this could be perpetual and clears a
Retrieval Number: F11240886S219/2019©BEIESP
DOI: 10.35940/ijeat.F1124.0886S219

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

441

Sharma, R.K., Irusapparajan, G. & Periyaazhagar, D. 2019,
"Three-phase symmetric cascading Z-source seven levels multilevel
inverter excited by multi carrier sinusoidal pulse width modulation
scheme", International Journal of Innovative Technology and
Exploring Engineering, vol. 8, no. 10, pp. 4269-4274.
Velavan, R., Bharanidharan, S. & Sheeba, B. 2019, "EMF pollution Causes, effects and protection", International Journal of Innovative
Technology and Exploring Engineering, vol. 8, no. 9 Special Issue 3,
pp. 1166-1168.
Saravana, S., Balaji, S., Arulselvi, S. & John Paul Praveen, A. 2019,
"Reliable power quality monitoring and protection system",
International Journal of Innovative Technology and Exploring
Engineering, vol. 8, no. 9 Special Issue 3, pp. 644-645.
Tamil Selvan, S. & Sundararajan, M. 2019, "Performance Parameters
of 3 Value 8t Cntfet Based Sram Cell Design Using H-Spice",
International Journal of Recent Technology and Engineering, vol. 8,
no. 2 Special issue 5, pp. 22-27.
Jac Fredo, A.R., Abilash, R.S., Femi, R., Mythili, A. & Kumar, C.S.
2019, "Classification of damages in composite images using Zernike
moments and support vector machines", Composites Part B:
Engineering, vol. 168, pp. 77-86.
Kathiravan, P. & Govindaraju, C. 2019, "Design and evaluation of
ultra gain isolated DC-DC converter for photovoltaic system",
International Journal of Engineering and Advanced Technology, vol. 8,
no. 5, pp. 2646-2651.
Kripa, N., Vasuki, R. & Kishore Kanna, R. 2019, "Realtime neural
interface controlled au-pair BIMA bot", International Journal of Recent
Technology and Engineering, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 992-994.
Mohanraj, Meenaa Kumari, M., Philomina, S. & Jasmin, M. 2019,
"In-situ humidity measurement of hydrogen fuel cell car using MEMS
sensor", International Journal of Recent Technology and Engineering,
vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 41-43.
Velmurugan, T. & Prakash, S. 2019, "Artificial intelligent based
distribution automation of swift fault detection isolation and power
restoration for HT network", International Journal of Innovative
Technology and Exploring Engineering, vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 1-6.
Dwarakesh, K. & Prem Kumar, G. 2019, "Five-level inverter based
sequential boost system using fuzzy logic controller", International
Journal of Innovative Technology and Exploring Engineering, vol. 8,
no. 6, pp. 12-19.
Anne Gifta, A. & Hemavathi, G. 2019, "Analysis of grid tied solar PV
system using ANFIS Algorithm", International Journal of Innovative
Technology and Exploring Engineering, vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 312-316.
Jayavel, R., Rangaswamy, T.R. & Prakash, S. 2019, "Efficient grid
management system with renewable and conventional power sources",
International Journal of Innovative Technology and Exploring
Engineering, vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 287-289.
Hemavathi, G. & Maheshwaran, S. 2019, "Proportional resonant
controlled high gain step-up converter system with improved
response", International Journal of Innovative Technology and
Exploring Engineering, vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 317-323.
Periyaazhagar, D. & Irusapparajan, G. 2019, "Design and completion
of asymmetric single phase 27 level cascaded mli for various pwm
scheme", International Journal of Innovative Technology and
Exploring Engineering, vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 792-797.
Mahalakshmi, V. & Vijayaragavan, S.P. 2019, "PV based power
electronic converters for high voltage DC applications", International
Journal of Recent Technology and Engineering, vol. 7, no. 6, pp.
670-674.
Irusapparajan, G., Periyaazhagar, D., Prabaharan, N. & Rini Ann Jerin,
A. 2019, "Experimental verification of trinary DC source cascaded
h-bridge multilevel inverter using unipolar pulse width modulation",
Automatika, vol. 60, no. 1, pp. 19-27.
Sangeetha, G., Sherine, S., Arputharaju, K. & Prakash, S. 2019, "On
Line Monitoring of Higher Rated Alternator using Automated
Generator Capability Curve Administer", Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on
&amp;quot;Recent Trends in
Electrical,
Control
and

Published By:
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering
& Sciences Publication

An innovative wayby manipulating things using the power of thought

Communication&amp;quot;, RTECC 2018, pp. 176.
18. Bycil, V.J. & Wiselin, M.C.J. 2019, "Modeling and analysis of
vibration energy harvesting system using piezo stack", International
Journal of Mechanical and Production Engineering Research and
Development, vol. 9, no. Special Issue 1, pp. 523-533.
19. Sripada, A., Warrier, A., Kapoor, A., Gaur, H. & Hemalatha, B. 2018,
"Dynamic lateral balance of humanoid robots on unstable surfaces",
International Conference on Electrical, Electronics, Communication
Computer Technologies and Optimization Techniques, ICEECCOT
2017, pp. 539.
20. Srinivasan, S., Thirumalaivasan, K. & Sivakumaran, T.S. 2018,
"Performance evaluation of double-output luo converters", Journal of
Advanced Research in Dynamical and Control Systems, vol. 10, no. 10
Special Issue, pp. 870-878.
21. Karthikayen, A. & Selvakumar Raja, S. 2018, "A skellam distribution
inspired trust factor-based selfish node detection technique in
MANETs", Journal of Advanced Research in Dynamical and Control
Systems, vol. 10, no. 13, pp. 940-949.

AUTHORS PROFILE

B.Kalaiselvi, Assistant Professor, Department of
EIE,Bharath Institute of Higher education and research,
Tamilnadu, India

T.Vijayan, Assistant Professor, Department of
EIE,Bharath Institute of Higher education and research,
Tamilnadu, India.

Sridhar raja D, Assistant Professor, Department of
EIE,Bharath Institute of Higher education and research,
Tamilnadu, India.

R.Abinethri, Assistant Professor, Department of
EIE,Bharath Institute of Higher education and research,
Tamilnadu, India

Retrieval Number: F11240886S219/2019©BEIESP
DOI: 10.35940/ijeat.F1124.0886S219

442

Published By:
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering
& Sciences Publication

