Examining Retro Marketing Ads From The Perspective Of Neuromarketing:

77

The Example Of Nestle Brand

EXAMINING RETRO MARKETING ADS FROM THE PERSPECTIVE
OF NEUROMARKETING: THE EXAMPLE OF NESTLE BRAND
Nurcan YÜCEL1
Atilla YÜCEL**
Yunus Emre GÜR***
Koray GÜNDÜZ****
ABSTRACT
As a result of the changes experienced today, importance of brands in addressing the
emotions of the consumers in order to stand out from the competitors and provide a competitive
advantage has increased. Retro marketing is used in marketing communication messages in order
to create an emotional connection with the brand and to make it a part of daily life. Thus, firms
aimed to remind consumers the past, make them to yearn for the past, and to buy the retro branded
products.
The aim of this study is determined the thoughts in subconscious of their and response
levels of the consumers to Retro ads by using the EEG Analysis Method from the neuromarketing
techniques. Therefore, the advertising by Retro marketing, which is accepted to have a significant
effect on consumers in the literature, combined with the neuromarketing approach and putting
forward the effectiveness of the Retro ads with EEG Analysis Method emphasize the importance
of the study. This study is among the very first studies connecting Retro marketing and
neuromarketing. The outcomes of the experiments performed led to conclude that the retro
marketing ad prepared successsfully has a positive effect on consumers.
Keywords: Retromarketing, Neuromarketing, EEG, Advertise.

1 Doç. Dr., Fırat Üniversitesi, İktisadi ve İdari Bilimler Fakültesi, İşletme Bölümü,
nyucel@firat.edu.tr, https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6845-1284
** Dr. Öğr. Üyesi, Fırat Üniversitesi, İktisadi ve İdari Bilimler Fakültesi, İşletme Bölümü,
ayucel@firat.edu.tr, https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8052-3236
*** Doktora Öğrencisi, Fırat Üniversitesi, İktisadi ve İdari Bilimler Fakültesi, Sosyal Bilimler
Enstitüsü, yunusemregur2323@gmail.com, https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1429-3249
**** Doktora Öğrencisi, Fırat Üniversitesi, İktisadi ve İdari Bilimler Fakültesi, Sosyal Bilimler
Enstitüsü, koray_2393@hotmail.com, https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9734-3290
Makalenin gönderilme tarihi: 16 Mayıs 2019
Kabul tarihi: 16 Aralık 2019

78

Erciyes Üniversitesi İktisadi ve İdari Bilimler Fakültesi Dergisi, Sayı: 55, Ocak-Nisan 2020

NÖROPAZARLAMA PESPEKTİFİNDEN RETROPAZARLAMA
REKLAMLARININ İNCELENMESİ: NESTLE MARKASI ÖRNEĞİ
ÖZ
Günümüzde yaşanan değişimler neticesinde, markaların rakiplerinden sıyrılmak ve
rekabet avantajı sağlamak için tüketicilerin duygularına hitap etmedeki önemi artmıştır. Retro
pazarlama, marka ile duygusal bir bağlantı kurmak ve onu günlük yaşamın bir parçası yapmak için
pazarlama iletişimi mesajlarında kullanılmaktadır. Böylelikle firmalar tüketicilere geçmişi
hatırlatmayı, geçmişe özlem duymalarını ve retro markalı ürünleri satın almayı hedeflemiştir.
Bu çalışmanın amacı, nöropazarlama tekniklerinden EEG analiz metodu kullanılarak
tüketicilerin tepki seviyelerini ve bilinçaltındaki düşüncelerini belirlemektir Bu nedenle,
literatürdeki tüketiciler üzerinde önemli bir etkiye sahip olduğu kabul edilen Retro pazarlama ile
yapılan reklamlar, nöromarketing yaklaşımı ile bir araya getirildiğinde ve Retro reklamların EEG
Analiz Yöntemi ile etkinliğinin ortaya konması, çalışmanın önemini vurgulamaktadır. Bu çalışma,
Retro pazarlamayı ve nöromarketing'i bağlayan ilk çalışmalar arasındadır. Yapılan deneylerin
sonuçları, başarılı bir şekilde hazırlanan retro pazarlama reklamının tüketiciler üzerinde olumlu bir
etkisi olduğu sonucuna varmıştır.
Anahtar Kavramlar: Retropazarlama, Nöropazarlama, EEG, Reklam.

INTRODUCTION
Companies need to apply different marketing strategies in order to keep
their brands alive and make their brands strong in the eyes of the consumers.
Nowadays, it is important to address the feelings of the consumers due to the
more emotional decisions, changing needs and desires of them. Retro marketing
is a revision of a past product or service in terms of function and performance
according to the contemporary conditions and the product or the service to be
presented. The idea behind retro marketing is to extract traces from the life of
the consumer during the purchasing behavior process (Arslan and Yetkin, 2017,
p. 95).
Retro Marketing aims to make consumers yearning for the past and
remembering it and establish an emotional relationship with their past. For this
reason, businesses need to understand the feelings and thoughts of their
consumers. In this respect, neuromarketing methods are necessary to determine
the real thoughts in the subconscious of the consumers. Neuromarketing
researchs is using to understand the brain processes related to emotions
(Fortunato, Giraldi, Oliveira, 2014, p. 216). Neuromarketing helps companies
determine their advertising strategies based on their target groups’ desires and

Examining Retro Marketing Ads From The Perspective Of Neuromarketing:
The Example Of Nestle Brand

79

measure the emotions that can provide higher consumer interest (Huszár and
Pap, 2016, p. 163).
The success of the companies that are willing to connect themselves
with the consumers by using retro marketing ads need to be evaluated by
neuromarketing methods. This underlines the significance of the study analyzing
retro marketing and neuromarketing together.
The aim of this study is to investigate the activity created by the retrothemed advertising in the consumer's mind by using EEG Analysis Method, to
give suggestions accordingly to increase the effectiveness of the advertising, and
to guide the design of the advertisements in order to ensure the effectiveness and
permanence of the future Retro-themed advertising works.
This study consists of 4 parts. In the first chapter, the literature was
examined and the concepts of retro marketing, neuromarketing were explained
and the methods used in neuromarketing were eveluated. In addition,
information were given about the studies in this field. In the second part, the
aim, method and sample of the research were explained in detail. In the third
chapter, the findings of the study were presented and interpreted. The fourth
chapter discusses the findings obtained from the study in a comprehensive
manner by taking the other studies into consideratation, projects a new
perspective for the further studies and give suggestions on design and
improvement of the retro-themed ads.
I. LITERATURE REVIEW
When the literature is examined, there is no consensus about the
definition of “Retro” concept which is widely used in different industries. The
concept of retro is derived from Latin and means “backward” or “past times”.
Retro is known as a concept that includes past and reminds the experiences
associated with them. At the same time, Retro is much more than a reference to
the past. Firstly, retro is not only associated with past events, but also implies
how the past will connect to the future. Secondly, retro is known as a
multidimensional and complicated concept. It focuses on perceptions of the
consumers and on marketing or branding. “Retro” is analyzed on strategic
perspectives in the form of entrepreneurship and at organizational level. The
retro contains the confusion between the old and the new, and provides a link
between the two (Castellano, Ivanova, Adnane, Safraou, Schiavone, 2013, p.
386-389).
Retro marketing is expressed as a general term for marketing strategies
concentrating on past in order to sell current products or services (Brown, 1999,
p. 363). Retro marketing offers consumers products or services they have longed
for and conveys the feelings they have experienced in the past. Moreover, Retro
marketing revises and presents a past product or service in terms of function and

80

Erciyes Üniversitesi İktisadi ve İdari Bilimler Fakültesi Dergisi, Sayı: 55, Ocak-Nisan 2020

performance according to today's conditions. Retro marketing is usually grouped
under three Retro product categories (Arslan and Yetkin, 2017, p. 95):





Repro: It means the derivation of products or services that were good in
the past. Converse All Star basketball shoes and Harley Davidson
Sportster motorcycles are two examples of Repro products.
Repro-retro: This tool is also called “neo-nostalgia”. Here, products or
services developed starting from nostalgia are menitoned. For example,
the advertisement made for Fiat's 110th Anniversary presented the
various models produced since 1899 and created nostalgia aobut Fiat
from the past to the present.
Retro: Retro is introducing old products or services as different product.
For example; TAG Heuter has reproduced a similar product design that
is produced in the 1930s.

Marketers have succeeded in revitalizing and strengthening these brands
by applying the Retro marketing strategy to revive and make the old brands
strong (Brown, Kozinets, Sherry, 2003, p. 19).
Neuromarketing has been proposed as an important and revolutionary
formation of marketing research. In the literature, neuromarketing has been
described by many authors in different ways. Some of these definitions are as
follows:
Neuromarketing is defined as “the application of the methods of the
neurology laboratory to the questions of the world of advertising” according to
(Thompson, 2003, p. 4).
Neuromarketing is defined as “the application of neuroscientific
methods to analyze and understand human behavior related to market and
marketing” by the International Journal of Psychophysiology (Lee, Broderick,
Chamberlain, 2007, p. 200).
The aim of neuromarketing is to examine how the brain is
physiologically influenced by advertising and marketing strategies. To evaluate
the effectiveness of these strategies, brain activity resulting from the imaging of
an ad is monitored and measured by using neuroimaging techniques such as
functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) and Electroencephalography
(EEG) (Laybourne and Lewis, 2005, p. 28). Neuromarketing studies often
measure the preference among products based on brand familiarity or product
preferences. In traditional marketing research, since the viewer may contain a
cognitive bias it is sometimes difficult to measure the reasons of a particular
product choice. In neuromarketing studies, brand familiarity and product
preferences are associated with neural activity (McClure, Li, Tomlin, Cypert,
Montague, 2004, p. 380).

Examining Retro Marketing Ads From The Perspective Of Neuromarketing:
The Example Of Nestle Brand

81

Neuromarketing provides a number of significant advantages to the
marketing sector according to Ariely and Berns. The most important of these
advantages is to help firms to distinguish the desires and the needs of the
consumers and to discover what they will purchase the most (Ariely and Berns,
2010, p. 291). However, Bercea (2013) explains that the qualitative or
quantitative classification of the research in this new area is difficult and the type
of equipment used and the research protocol adopted are determinant in this
classification ( p. 1). Though neuromarketing is of great importance as it creates
the ability to evaluate emotional processes taking place in the mind. From this
perspective, access to richer and less biased marketing information than other
traditional research techniques such as surveys, focus groups and qualitative
research (Murphy, 2008, p. 297).
Neuroscientific methods contribute to a better understanding of
consumer needs. Neuromarketing helps companies adapt their ads to their target
groups and consumers’ emotions that can provide higher interest in the ads.
These emotions cannot be measured by traditional research methods such as
surveys and interviews (Huszár and Pap, 2016, p. 163).
To better understand the field of neuromarketing and to ensure the
internalization of the studies to be carried out in this field, it is important to
know which devices are used in this field and which tool to be selected for each
method. The most common forms of grouping the measurements in
neuromarketing today are neurometrical measurements, biometric measurements
and psychometric measurements.
Neurometrical measurements is used to measure neural activity in the
brain to understand cognitive and emotional responses. The most important
types of neurometrical measurements are EEG (Electroencephalography), fMRI
(Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging), MEG (Magnetic Brain Graphy) and
PET (Positron Emission Tomography) technologies (Kenning, Plassmann,
Ahlert, 2007, p. 138).
The ability of researchers to measure and bind brain activity according
to human processes, structures, decisions and behaviors reveals the potential of
brain research for social sciences (Dimoka, 2012, p. 811).
EEG is another technique used in most marketing researchs, that uses
electrodes attached to the scalp and measures changes of the electric field in the
brain region. The EEG has very high temporal resolution (milliseconds) and can
therefore detect short neuronal events (Ariely and Berns, 2010, p. 288).
In addition to neurommetric measurements, biometric measurements are
used in many experimental studies in the field of neuromarketing. In the
neuromarketing studies, the Eye Tracking method is the most commonly used
method among biometric techniques. The integration of Eye Tracking with

82

Erciyes Üniversitesi İktisadi ve İdari Bilimler Fakültesi Dergisi, Sayı: 55, Ocak-Nisan 2020

neurometrics measurement techniques such as EEG and fMRI is more accessible
and provides more robust data (Barcea, 2013, p. 8).
Many neuromarketing studies have been performed by hundreds of
academics and numerous commercial firms. The first study, which constitutes
the basis of the researchs in the field of neuromarketing and is the source of
inspiration for the further works was made by a marketing researcher James
Vicary. Vicary added a slide to a film in a movie theater in New Jersey and he
reflected the messages “drink Coca Cola” and “eat popcorn”. After this study, an
increase of 18.8 percent in Coca Cola sales and a 57.7 percent increase in
popcorn sales were observed (Lindstrom, 2009, p. 73-74; Çubuk and Yücel,
2013, p. 175).
When the Retro-related literature is examined, it is seen that many
studies were done by traditional methods. For example, ın thesis study by
Höglund and Olsson (2019) were investigated how young consumers make
sense of their retro consumption. They were argued that young consumers’ view
of contemporary society is an underlying cause for their retro consumption. The
findings of research suggest that young consumers make sense of retro
consumption by using retro brands and retro aesthetics to mediate and express
discontent towards contemporary society. Young consumers do this by
consuming retro brands and products since they are considered as authentic,
credible and expressive, to take distance to what is perceived as modern and
fake.
Grebosz and Pointet (2015) explore the implementation of retro-style
into global brand 6 communication towards young consumers. Furthermore, they
show us that young consumers assessed retro-ads as stylish and they have a
desire for something classy, surprising and original. In addition, the researchers
stated that young consumers do not perceive retro-ads as boring and
conventional, instead, retro aesthetics which evocate the past make young
consumers feel emotional. Moreover, they also concluded that young consumers
view retro style as an authentic differentiator and retro-ads can re-enchant
disenchanted young consumers. Similarly, Güzel and Okan (2016) use a survey
method to examine the effectiveness of nostalgia advertisement. Their findings
suggest, similar to Grebosz and Pointet (2015), that nostalgia ads are effective in
triggering young consumers´ emotions, rather than directing consumers´
behavior.
Beside, the neuromarketing studies related to retro are very few. One of
these few studies was conducted in 2012 by ThinkNeuro, a neuromarketing
consultancy firm. Research was carried out by using EEG machine with 16
volunteers on the old and the new logos of Turkey's first private TV channel Star
TV and first GSM operator Turkcell. 24 logos were shown to each participant
for 3 seconds. 4 of these 24 logos consist of the old and new logos of Turkcell
and Star TV. During the measurement of these four logos 400 thousand EEG

Examining Retro Marketing Ads From The Perspective Of Neuromarketing:
The Example Of Nestle Brand

83

data were collected from 16 participants. For Turkcell logo, there is a slight
difference between the old and new logos in terms of the emotional interests of
the participants. But, in terms of attracting the attention of the consumer, the
new logo received 73.16 points, while the old logo was measured to be 69.50.
This shows that Turkcell's new logo attracts the consumer's attention more than
the old logo. For the Star TV logos, the emotional interest on the old logo was
78.28, while the new logo had 76.35. Considering the attention score, the old
logo's score was 71.92, whereas the new logo's was 65.27. Star TV had preffered
a completely different identity when designing its new logo. Nevertheless, Star
TV did not succeed in creating the same effect on consumers' minds according to
ThinkNeuro's work. Consumers have found the logo more remarkable they have
known and adopted for years, and ThinkNeuro stated that the level of emotional
interest in the old logo was higher (Neuromarketing (EEG) Analysis Star TV
and Turkcell Logo, 2012).
In addition, Uğur (2017) has carried out a study by using
neuromarketing methods and tools in order to determine the effect of Retro
marketing products and advertisements on consumer buying behavior. Uğur
(2017) utilized EEG Analysis Method which is a neuromarketing technique and
aimed to understand the consumers' reactions to the products and advertisements
of retro marketing, and their effects on the buying behavior and the thoughts of
the client's subconscious. The study has been carried out in Fırat University
Marketing and Neuromarketing Research Center with 32 volunteer participants
diverted in terms of demographic characteristics such as age, gender, occupation,
and income level. In the study, 60 seconds commercial film of the “Pınar” brand
has been showed to the participants and the electroencephalography (EEG)
outputs of the participants have been analyzed. As a result of the study, 4
advertisement visions were determined to which the participants reacted most.
These 4 ad images were seen between the seconds 0-10; 10-13; 48-51; and 51-55
and the participants has reacted within these intervals. The participants have
reacted to the visuals containing new and old packaging which is important in
terms of understanding the real reactions of the consumers. According to this
study by Uğur (2017) Retro marketing advertising of Pınar brand has found to be
effective.
II. OBJECTIVE, METHOD AND SAMPLE
The purpose of this study is to determine the reactions and subconscious
thoughts of consumers to Retro marketing products and their advertisements. In
this study, it is aimed to grasp the thouhgts in the subconscious of consumers
and measure their reactions to Retro marketing products and advertisements by
using the EEG Analysis Method. The research has been conducted at Firat
University Marketing and Neuromarketing Research Center with 30 volunteer
participants (academics, civil servants, and students) differed in terms of age,
gender, occupation, and income level. The 40 seconds Retro marketing-themed

84

Erciyes Üniversitesi İktisadi ve İdari Bilimler Fakültesi Dergisi, Sayı: 55, Ocak-Nisan 2020

advertising film of Nestle brand was shown to the participants. With EEG
Analysis Method, the brain waves of the participants were examined and their
responses to advertisement images were recorded. Then EEG analyses were
compared and the results were evaluated. 14-channels EEG device designed
according to the international 10-20 system, called Emotiv EPOC, was used in
the study (Khushaba et al., 2013, p. 3805).
In the first phase of the study, the Participants completed the Voluntary
Participation Form, which contains personal information and includes openended questions. Then the participants were asked to complete the research
declaration form and to declare their voluntarinees.
The study has continued with Electroencephalography (EEG)
measurement. The participants were not given any information about the
experiment before the research and 40 seconds Retro marketing-themed
commercial film of Nestle brand was screened. In order to increase the reliability
of the research while displaying the advertisement film, there were only an EEG
expert and voluntary participants in an experimental environment completely
free from external stimuli. The brain waves of the participants were examined
and their responses to these advertising images were observed.
This high-resolution device called Emotiv EPOC collects data at a
frequency of 2048 Hz per second. The EEG device transfers the collected data to
the computer via a wireless network in a 128 Hz frequency sample (Anderson, et
al., 2011, p. 796-797). These data reveal the emotional responses of the
volunteer participants who participated in the measurement within certain
algorithms (Sourina and Liu, 2011, p. 211). In addition, participants' EEG data
were analyzed and interpreted using Biometric software and Brain Map
software.
First of all, in the process of determining the brand to be used in the
experiment, a pilot experiment was conducted. In the pilot experiment, Retro
marketing themed advertising films of various brands have been shown to a
specific sample group by random sampling method. Based on the preferences of
the participants of the pilot experiment, the advertisement film of Nestle brand
was selected for the main experiment. In the selection of this advertising film,
factors such as better representation of retro marketing, more comprehensibility
by the sample group, more openness and awareness were taken into
consideration. Then, 40 seconds Retro Marketing-themed advertising film was
showed and the reactions of the volunteers were measured. The volunteers were
informed about the basics of the experiment during the EEG measurement.
In the first 5th seconds of the ad, there is scene in which a father and
child are walking in the cinema hall. In the background the sentence “go to the
worlds I don’t know and learn from the masters” is heard. Between the 5th and
the 10th seconds, there is the scene of a child holding the Nestle chocolate with

Examining Retro Marketing Ads From The Perspective Of Neuromarketing:
The Example Of Nestle Brand

85

old package in the cinema. In the background the expression “it was great for
me” is heard. Between the 10th and the 21st seconds, the kid from the first scene
is shown as grown after years. In the background the sentences “I set out to
explore those worlds, to give soul to different characters. I liked acting but I did
not give up being a good audience, I couldn’t". Between the 21st and the 32nd
seconds, the kid from the first scene is sharing the new packaged Nestle
chocolate with (propably) his grandson. In the background the expression “There
is one another thing that I couldn’t give up: a piece of my childhood” and he
gives a piece of chocolate to his grandson. Nestle logo is shown between 32 and
39. seconds. In the background of the last scene slogan “Nestleee!! creates
wonders with chocolates” is heard.
The 40 second ad film was evaluated in terms of timing, analyzed and
interpreted.
III. FINDINGS OF THE RESEARCH AND INTERPRETATION
Within the context of Nestle advertising, consumer responses were
found between 5-10, 11-21 and 22-32 seconds. The advertisement is including
the visual of old packaging of Nestle chocolate in 5-10 seconds range. In the 1121 seconds range, there is a scene where theater and cinema artist Çetin
Tekindor takes place as the reference force. Finally, the new packaging of Nestle
chocolate is displaying in the 22-32 seconds range of the advertisement.
Image 1. The Scene of The Child Who Holding The Old Packaging of Nestle
Chocolate In The Cinema

The Image 1 is within 5-10 seconds range of advertising. When the brain
activities of the participants are examined, it is seen that the reactions are

86

Erciyes Üniversitesi İktisadi ve İdari Bilimler Fakültesi Dergisi, Sayı: 55, Ocak-Nisan 2020

concentrated in the Frontal region. The frontal lobe provides control of voluntary
muscles such as motor skills and speech and is known as the area where
complex responses such as thinking, decision making, planning movements, joy,
happiness, calmness and grief take place (Yorgancılar, 2015, p. 146). The
measurement of the waves in the left front frontal lobe is showing positive
emotions. It is also believed that such activity is a good confirmation of the
action. On the other hand, the electrical response in the right frontal lobe is often
associated with negative emotions (Morin, 2011, p. 133-134).
When the EEG results of the participants were examined, there were 6
reactions in the Right Frontal (AF4, F4, F8, FC6) region and 9 reactions in the
Left Frontal (AF3, F3, F7, FC5) region. According to this information, the
responses of the participants were determined to be higher in the Left Frontal
region. In the direction of the data obtained, the increase in the number of
amplitudes in the video visual showed positive emotions.
Image 2. Cinema Artist Cetin Tekindor And The Scene Where The Tekindor
Together With Child (Propably His Grandson) Goes To The Cinema

The Image 2 is within 11-21 seconds of the advertising. When the
responses of the participants to the advertising image were examined, it was
observed that the response in the frontal region was high. There were 5 reactions
in the Right Frontal (AF4, F4, F8, FC6) region and 10 responses in the Left
Frontal (AF3, F3, F7, FC5) region. Within the scope of the data obtained, it was
seen that there is more reaction in the Left Frontal region. In the direction of the
data obtained, the increase in the number of amplitudes in the video visual
showed positive emotions.

Examining Retro Marketing Ads From The Perspective Of Neuromarketing:

87

The Example Of Nestle Brand

Image 3. Scene With The Child Holding New Packaged Chocolate of Nestle In
Cinema

The Image 3 is within 22-32 seconds of the advertising. When the
responses of the participants to the advertising image were examined, it was
observed that the response in the frontal region was high. 6 responses were
observed in the Right Frontal (AF4, F4, F8, FC6) region and 6 in the Left
Frontal (AF3, F3, F7, FC5) region. In the direction of the data obtained, the
increase in the number of amplitudes in the video visual showed both positive
and negative emotions.

CONCLUSION
Within the framework of the above information, the positive and
negative feelings of the participants were evaluated against the ad image based
on retro marketing. With the advertisement visual, the reactions of the
participants as a result of remembering the past were tried to be determined.
Nowadays, brands that are in intense competition are looking for various
ways to reach consumers. As a marketing strategy, companies remind consumers
of their past-related emotions through Retro marketing. Brands set consumers
forth on a journey of time and pointed the past. As a result of the revival of the
products that consumers have forgotten in their minds, the permanence of the
brand is ensured. Thus retro adds a different dimension to marketing literature.
Retro marketing is referring to the process of recalling consumers in
making purchasing decision. Retro marketing offers the consumers the products
used in the past in a different way. Thus, this forms a different approach that
brands may prefer to take place in the minds of consumers.
In line with this information, the participants' feelings were evaluated
with reference to the retro marketing-themed ad. Volunteer participants are

88

Erciyes Üniversitesi İktisadi ve İdari Bilimler Fakültesi Dergisi, Sayı: 55, Ocak-Nisan 2020

expected to remember the past through advertising. The neural activity in the
brain were tried to be determined in accordance with this purpose.
According to this information, it is seen that the participants mostly
draw attention to both old and new chocolate packaging in the ad in the specific
intervals. In other words, the old packaging of Nestle chocolate and its new
packaging were determined to be effective. In this ad the consumer was
reminded nostalgia through Retro marketing.
Furthermore, a similar of this study was performed in 2017 by Uğur. In
this study, the retro-themed ad of the Pınar brand is showed that the participants
were reacted to the scenes that emphasized the retro. These reactions were
occured at Frontal, Parietal and Occipital lobes. At the same time, the reactions
in Frontal, Parietal and Occipital lobes was observed also our study. Therefore,
the study of Uğur (2017) supports our work.
In addition, the use of Çetin Tekindor as an actor increases the
effectiveness in terms of reference power. Tekindor's childhood and maturity
periods in advertising were reflected in the scope of Retro and it was determined
that the message to be delivered to the consumer was positive in the light of the
neural reactions showed by the participants. Therefore, we can conclude that
retro marketing advertising has been successfully prepared and the effectiveness
of the work has been demonstrated.
The use of Retro Marketing and EEG Analysis in this study is important
for the literature. Because the number of the studies combining retro marketing
and neuromarketing is too few. This study would help the further related studies
to be designed and performed.
Within the scope of the study, it was determined that the participants
showed positive reactions to the advertisement image. As the advertisement
visual reminds the past of the participants, rises in amplitudes were observed. In
line with this information, Retro marketing advertisement image has been
prepared successfully. With retro marketing, brands can reveal their forgotten
products and leave positive effects on consumers.

REFERENCES
Anderson, E. W., Potter, K. C., Matzen, L. E., Shepherd, J. F., Preston, G. A.,
and Silva, C. T. (2011). A User Study of Visualization Effectiveness
Using EEG and Cognitive Load. Computer Graphics Forum, 30(3),
791–800.
Ariely, D., and Berns, G. S. (2010). Neuromarketing: The Hope and Hype of
Neuroimaging in Business. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 11(4), 284292.

Examining Retro Marketing Ads From The Perspective Of Neuromarketing:
The Example Of Nestle Brand

89

Arslan, B., and Yetkin, B. Ö. (2017). Determining The Demographic Factors
That Affect Consumer Attitudes Towards Retro Products. Nişantaşı
University, Journal of Social Science, 5(1), 92-108.
Bercea, M. D. (2013). Anatomy of Methodologies for Measuring Consumer
Behavior in Neuromarketing Research. Erişim adresi http://www.lcbronline.com/index_files/proceedingsemc12/12emc023.pdf/
Brown S. (1999). Retro-Marketing: Yesterday’s Tomorrows, Today!. Marketing
Intelligence & Planning, 17(7), 363-376.
Brown, S., Kozinets, R. V., and Sherry Jr, J. F. (2003). Teaching Old Brands
New Tricks: Retro Branding and the Revival of Brand Meaning. Journal
of Marketing, 67(3), 19-33.
Castellano, S., Ivanova, O., Adnane, M., Safraou, I., and Schiavone, F. (2013).
Back to The Future: Adoption and Diffusion of Innovation In Retroindustries. European Journal of Innovation Management, 16(4), 385404.
Dimoka, A. (2012). How to Conduct a Functional Magnetic Resonance (fMRI)
Study In Social Science Research. MIS Quarterly, 36(3), 811-840.
Fortunato, V. C. R., Giraldi, J. M. E., and Oliveira, J. H. C. (2014). A Review of
Studies on Neuromarketing: Practical Results, Techniques,
Contributions and Limitations. Journal of Management Research, ISSN
1941-899 X,
6(2), 201-220.
Grębosz, M., and Pointet, J. M. (2015). The “Retro” Trend in Marketing
Communication Strategy of Global Brands. Journal of Intercultural
Management, 7(3), 119-132.
Güzel, E., and Okan, E. (2016). Younger Generation Perspective: The Impact of
Nostalgia Advertising on Postmodern Individuals. Business and
Economics Research Journal, 7(3), 137-154.
Höglund, J., and Olsson, M. (2019). How Young Consumers Use Retro Brands
And Retro Products To Mediate And Express Discontent Towards The
Present (unprinted Masters Thesis). University of Gothenburg, The
Department of Business Administration Marketing.
Huszár, S., and Pap, K. (2016). 10. Revolutionising Marketing Research?
A Vritical View on the Promising Neuromarketing. Economics and
Management of Global Value Chain, University of Szeged, Doctoral
School in Economics, Szeged, 157-166.
Kenning, P., Plassmann, H., and Ahlert, D. (2007). Applications of Functional
Magnetic Resonance Imaging for Market Research. Qualitative Market
Research, 10(2), 135-152.

90

Erciyes Üniversitesi İktisadi ve İdari Bilimler Fakültesi Dergisi, Sayı: 55, Ocak-Nisan 2020

Khushaba, R., Wise, N., Kodagoda, C., Louviere, S., Kahn, J., and Townsend, E.
B. C. (2013). Consumer Neuroscience: Assessing The Brain Response to
Marketing Stimuli Using Electroencephalography (EEG) and Eye
Tracking. Expert Systems With Applications, 40(9), 3803-3812.
Laybourne, P., and Lewis, D. (2005). Neuromarketing: The Future of Consumer
Research?. Admap Magazine, (461), 28-30.
Lee, N., Broderick, A. J., and Chamberlain, L. (2007). What is Neuromarketing?
A Discussion and Agenda for Future Research. International Journal of
Psychophysiology, 63(2), 199-204.
Lindstrom, M. (2009). Buyology, 1st Edition, Translator: Ümir Şensoy. İstanbul:
Optimist Publication Distribution.
McClure, S. M., Li, J., Tomlin, D., Cypert, K. S., Montague, L. M., and
Montague, P. R. (2004). Neural Correlates of Behavioral Preference for
Culturally Familiar Drinks. Neuron, 44(14), 379-387.
Morin, C. (2011). Neuromarketing: The New Science of Consumer Behavior.
Society, 48(2), 131-135.
Murphy, E. R., Illes, J., and Reiner, P. B. (2008). Neuroethics of
Neuromarketing. Journal of Consumer Behaviour, 7, 293-302.
Sourina, O., and Liu, Y. (2011). A Fractal-Based Algorithm of Emotion
Recognition From EEG Using Arousal-Valence Model. In Proc,
Biosignals, Rome, 209-214.
ThinkNeuro. (2012). Neuromarketing (EEG) Analysis Star TV and Turkcell
Logo. Erişim adresi http://www.thinkneuro.net/tr/basin/mediacat/star-tvve-turkcell-logo-noeromarketing-eeg-analizi/
Thompson, C. (2003). There's a Sucker Bom In Every Medial Prefrontal Cortex.
New York Times Magazine, 1-6.
Uğur, E. (2017). Investigation of the Effect of Retro Marketing Practices on
Consumers' Purchasing Behaviors in terms of Neuromarketing
(Unpublished Master Thesis). Fırat University, Social Sciences Institute.
Yorgancılar, F. N. (2015). Consumer Behavior Neurology, 1st Edition, Konya:
Çizgi Bookstore.
Yücel, A., and Çubuk, F. (2013). Comparison of Neuromarketing and
Subliminal Advertising Approaches. Firat University Journal of Nigde
University Academic Review of Economics and Administrative Sciences,
6(2), 172-183.

