Maior, Horia A. and Wilson, Max L. and Sharples, Sarah
(2018) Workload alerts - using physiological measures
of mental workload to provide feedback during tasks.
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, 25
(2). 9:1-9:30. ISSN 1557-7325
Access from the University of Nottingham repository:
http://eprints.nottingham.ac.uk/49196/1/Feedback.pdf
Copyright and reuse:
The Nottingham ePrints service makes this work by researchers of the University of
Nottingham available open access under the following conditions.
This article is made available under the University of Nottingham End User licence and may
be reused according to the conditions of the licence. For more details see:
http://eprints.nottingham.ac.uk/end_user_agreement.pdf
A note on versions:
The version presented here may differ from the published version or from the version of
record. If you wish to cite this item you are advised to consult the publisher’s version. Please
see the repository url above for details on accessing the published version and note that
access may require a subscription.

For more information, please contact eprints@nottingham.ac.uk

1
Workload Alerts - Using Physiological Measures of Mental
Workload to Provide Feedback during Tasks.
HORIA A. MAIOR, University of Nottingham
MAX L. WILSON, University of Nottingham
SARAH SHARPLES, University of Nottingham
Feedback is valuable for allowing us to improve on tasks. While retrospective feedback can help us improve
for next time, feedback “in action” can allow us to improve the outcome of on-going tasks. In this paper, we
use data from functional Near InfraRed Spectroscopy to provide participants with feedback about their Mental
Workload levels during high-workload tasks. We evaluate the impact of this feedback on task performance
and perceived task performance, in comparison to industry standard mid-task self assessments, and explore
participants’ perceptions of this feedback. In line with previous work, we confirm that deploying self-reporting
methods affect both perceived and actual performance. Conversely, we conclude that our objective concurrent
feedback correlated more closely with task demand, supported reflection in action, and did not negatively affect
performance. Future work, however, should focus on the design of this feedback and the potential behaviour
changes that will result.
ACM Reference format:
Horia A. Maior, Max L. Wilson, and Sarah Sharples. 2018. Workload Alerts - Using Physiological Measures
of Mental Workload to Provide Feedback during Tasks.. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact. 1, 1, Article 1
(January 2018), 30 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3173380

1

INTRODUCTION

Although computers are very good at performing repetitive rule-based tasks, humans can excel at
‘knowledge-based’ tasks that involve decision-making processes, generating new solutions for rapidly
changing problems, and developing solutions based on past experience and innovation. Consequently,
as technology pervades our everyday life, our own tasks are increasingly “dominated by mental rather
than physical task components” [49]; the human role has moved towards a supervisory and decision
making role for such intelligent systems. This move has the potential to increase the demands on
people’s mental resources due to the amounts of data being generated and the amount of concurrent
tasks and decisions we take every day. Sharples and Megaw [2015] describe Mental Workload as
“the relationship between primary task performance and the resources demanded by the primary
task”, identifying operator overload as a root cause of reduced performance - humans have a limited
capacity when it comes to the number of things they can manage at any one moment. Assessing,
predicting, and managing peaks of Mental Workload, therefore, can become particularly important,
especially in the context of safety-critical domain such as Air Traffic Control.
In HCI, we are concerned with understanding users’ capabilities and limitations in terms of
their mental workload, in order to assess the demands placed upon them whilst interacting with
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the
full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the owner/author(s).
© 2018 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
1073-0516/2018/1-ART1
https://doi.org/10.1145/3173380
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2018.

1:2

H. A. Maior et al.

computer-based systems. While some work focuses on adapting the task that users need to perform
[1, 64], this work focuses on making participants more aware of their workload so that they can
better manage e.g. non-adaptable tasks. An individual’s awareness of workload, therefore, would
potentially allow them to regulate their resource allocation to the primary task, therefore avoiding
risky high (and significantly low) workload conditions as described above.
There are a variety of subjective and objective methods used for measuring mental workload,
including primary and secondary task analysis [40], physiological or psycho-physiological techniques
[24, 33, 44, 52], as well as user opinions using subjective techniques [23, 31]. The most commonly
used method for mid-task workload monitoring in industry, as a form of secondary task analysis, is
ISA (Instantaneous Self Assessment) and relies on people self reporting their levels of workload
at time intervals. Self reporting in this way is used successfully, but has also been shown to either
increase workload or negatively affect task performance itself [55]. In this paper, we evaluate the
use of functional Near Infra-Red Spectroscopy (fNIRS) data to give people feedback of their current
Mental Workload levels during tasks, as a form of unobtrusive objective feedback, in comparison to
ISA as an intrusive subjective self assessment. Such objective measures have become more realistic
in natural task conditions, as fNIRS, unlike other brain sensing techniques, is a) particularly resilient
to artefacts associated with natural computer usage and b) sensitive to changes in Mental Workload
[44, 52]. Further, by presenting feedback about current Mental Workload levels, we also explore
initial insights into how participants monitor their own performance, and respond to the feedback.
In the following sections, we first review related work on working memory, mental workload, the
methods used to measure workload, meta-cognition and feedback. We then present the workload
feedback mechanism developed and the methods used to assess workload during tasks. The paper
continues by describing a study comparing the impact of workload feedback to a traditional method
of asking users to self-assess and report their own mental workload. We then present the results of the
study, discuss the findings in terms of what we can learn about feedback of workload in general, and
recommendations for further exploring the design of feedback and potential user behaviour changes.
2

RELATED WORK

This section presents four key areas of related work: 1) Mental Workload literature, 2) techniques
for measuring workload, 3) measuring workload with Brain Sensors, including fNIRS, and 4) key
literature on reflection and meta-cognition.
2.1

The concept of Mental Workload

In order to discuss and better understand Mental Workload, we review a) literature that underlies the
concept, and b) how it relates to task demand and performance.
2.1.1 Background literature on Mental Workload. At its origins, Mental Workload is grounded
in Baddeley’s well established model of Working Memory [7], which includes a Central Executive process that manages the use of three ‘slave’ systems: 1) a visuo-spatial sketch pad holding
information in an analogue spatial form (e.g. colours, shapes, maps, etc.), 2) a phonological loop
holding verbal information in an acoustical form (e.g. numbers, words, etc.), and 3) an episodic
buffer dedicated to linking verbal and spatial information in chronological order [6]. “The concept of
working memory proposes that a dedicated system maintains and stores information in the short term,
and that this system underlies human thought processes.” (A. Baddeley [2003]). These concepts are
well established, and appear in similar models by Welford [1968] and Whiting [1969], both models
reflecting the same process, however, using slightly different terminology.
One shared characteristic in most models of Working Memory is the limited capacity that we have
as human beings, meaning that we can only process a limited amount of information at any one
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2018.

Measure and Feedback of Workload during Tasks

1:3

time. The Limited Resource Model (LRM), more recently summarised by Sharples & Megaw [2015],
highlights the impact of the limited resources on experienced workload and performance. The authors
present the concept of Mental Workload as the relationship between a) the resources allocated to the
primary task, b) the resources demanded by the primary task, and c) how performance is “affected”
at different stages of demand. Workload, therefore, is a concept that refers to the amount of resources
and necessary “effort” required by all the processes mentioned above in relation to the demands of a
task. Similar notions of limited capacity for a task are also noted by Cognitive Load Theory [41], as
a similar concept developed in the context of educational learning materials. Based on this principle,
work in HCI has considered adaptive technologies that try to dynamically match the demand of a task
with the users current Mental Workload. Yuksel et al [2016], for example, increased the difficulty of
piano music as the participants needed less mental effort to play their current piece.
Although the LRM captures the limitations of our combined mental resources, one limitation is that
it does not capture the different subsystems of Baddeley’s view of WM. Wickens proposed, therefore,
the Multiple Resource Model (MRM) [61], which highlights that verbal and spatial modalities are
handled separately at all stages, from perception, to processing (in WM), and during response. In
principle, this means that two tasks that utilise different resources (one visual and one verbal) would
utilise separate resources and thus mask or confound the experiences of underload and overload.
Again, this similar concern is present in the design of learning materials in Cognitive Load Theory
[41]. In the MRM, however, the complex interaction described between stages means that any study
of workload has to be considerate of which resources are being demanded. In related HCI work,
Maior et al showed that different physical artefacts affect spatial and verbal Mental Workloads
differently [39]. In this study, we are focusing on a purely spatial task, but the inclusion of selfreporting workload with the ISA scale (described later) might be considered a verbal task. We discuss
this complex interaction later in the paper.
2.1.2 Mental Workload, Task Demands, and Performance. To better understand the implications for evaluating Mental Workload, in relation to the study presented in this paper, we use the
framework in Figure 1 [49] to formalise the concept and set our hypotheses.

Fig. 1. A Framework for mental workload definition and evaluation [49]

The physical and cognitive task demands reflect the characteristics of a task undertaken by a
person, and thus imposed on them cognitively. To measure workload, therefore, we must quantify
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2018.

1:4

H. A. Maior et al.

the work demands the participant faces.As the demands may have different impact on different
individuals, it is important to not only capture the externally imposed demands, but also consider
measuring the perceived demand.
Operator workload is “equivalent to measures of operator strain or effort”. A lot of the workload
measurement techniques, therefore, simply focus on capturing the operator experience during and
after the task via subjective questionnaires like NASA TLX [23], but measures of effort from
behaviour indices and the impact of effort on operators’ physiology should also be measured.
Performance refers to the measures often described in terms of speed and error rates. However,
performance measures can become problematic as task complexity increases, but also when closely
analysing the relationship between the three mental workload components of demand, workload and
performance; “contrary to what is expected, as task demands increase it is not compulsory to expect
an increase in operator workload, or decrease in task performance”.
External and internal influences relates to other factors that can affect workload, such as secondary
tasks or interruptions. It is these external influences that we must consider when we change people’s
environments during tasks or ask them to perform self assessments as a secondary task.
Sharples and Megaw also identify the five key relationships between these components (numbered
in Figure 1):
(1) Operator workload is influenced by how the task is perceived by the operator, and it is not just a
simple relationship between demand and workload. It can be seen as a consequence of demand
created by not only the task demands, but also by a combination of external and internal
influences [43]. Pickup et. al. presents workload being influenced by intrinsic factors such as
operator skill and amount of training and attitude towards a task. Therefore, these intrinsic
factors can influence the strategies the operator can take towards performing a task and the
workload perceived by the operator, and indicate that measures of operator workload will not
necessarily reflect an objective measure of task demand. In this study, we will investigate the
factors that influence operator workload during tasks, by combining objective and subjective
measures of workload in contrast with measures of task demands.
(2) Although there is an expected relationship between operator workload and performance, with
higher workload associated with relatively poorer performance, this is not always the case.
Sharples and Megaw discuss that even with a highly sensitive performance measure, it is likely
to be difficult to determine differences in how hard an individual is working to maintain a good
level of performance. User performance will be monitored during this study, and insights into
the relationship between workload and performance will be presented.
(3) Feedback, both unconscious and explicit, allows operators to monitor their own performance.
This may change the way they perceive a task, but also their decision making, strategy and
attitudes towards a task. Additional to the performance, this study is focused on understanding
the impact of workload feedback on operators, therefore feedback is further discussed later in
the section.
(4) Performance outcomes may impact task demands. An error that may have occurred due to
high demands on the operator, can lead to subsequent task demands to increase, this further
increasing the demands placed upon the operator. On the other hand, a good performance may
lead to lower demands to the subsequent tasks.
(5) Sharples and Megaw present this relationship, and the whole framework, in the context of work
and therefore describe most of the external and internal influences as factors from a workspace
perspective. We will consider external factors that will influence the operator’s behaviour and
experience or perception of workload, but also internal factors, skill and motivation when
drawing hypothesis and conclusions in relation to this study.
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2018.

Measure and Feedback of Workload during Tasks
2.2

1:5

Measuring Workload

Measuring mental workload has been a long-term research challenge, and multiple attempts from
different authors have been made to establish the appropriate criteria for it. In this section, we discuss
various empirical measures, which can be divided into primary and secondary measures, subjective
and psycho-physiological techniques.
2.2.1 Primary and secondary task measures. Primary task measures of workload rely on
evaluating the performance of the primary task to estimate changes in operator workload. They have
limitations, however, when being used alone: it is difficult to discriminate between levels of effort the
operator is going trough while the demand changes and performance does not. Consequently, primary
task measures should be combined with other workload measures. Secondary task techniques involve
the inclusion of an additional task to the primary one, where allocating more resources to the primary
task might maintain performance, but reduce their capacity to handle a second task. Gwizdka, for
example, used the Stroop test as a secondary task analysis to measure spare cognitive capacity [21].
These secondary measures are used, therefore, in cases where the primary task demands would allow
enough available resources for a secondary task to be completed concurrently.
2.2.2 Subjective Measures of Mental Workload. Subjective measures of mental workload
attempt to capture users’ reflection and perspective on how much effort was expelled in completing
the task. They are currently the most popularly used and accepted techniques due to their nature
of being easy to administer, cheap, and with high face validity. NASA-TLX (Task Load Index),
developed by Hart and Staveland [1988], is an example of a widely used subjective measure of
workload. NASA-TLX is a multi-dimensional tool that uses perceived workload ratings in order
to assess a task after performing it [37, 44, 46]. This makes the measure suitable for providing an
overview of the task retrospectively, however it does not provide insight into users workload at a
given moment during the task.
Concurrent alternatives to NASA TLX exist, including ISA (Instantaneous Self Assessment),
developed by Jordan and Brennen [1992] and have been validated as being a reliable workload
measure [35, 55]. ISA was derived for use within Air Traffic Control settings, and it is one of the most
frequently used techniques for workload assessment in real-time simulations. ISA measures mental
workload using a single five-point unidimensional rating scale, to provide immediate subjective
ratings of work demands during the performance of primary work tasks. Users are prompted at regular
time intervals during the primary task to rate their current workload levels, where performance in
providing ISA ratings can be utilised as a secondary task measure. Naturally, however, any concurrent
self report measure can directly interfere with the performance of the primary task, especially
when the operators are highly engaged in the primary task due to high task demands. There are
conflicting findings in existing literature: there are cases of detectable [55] and non-detectable [35]
task intrusions. Regardless, however, the measure has been considered preferable to other measures,
such as Subjective Workload Assessment Technique (SWAT) [47], and Workload profile [56], as it
requires less mental effort and time from the operator due to its unidimensional nature.
2.2.3 Physiological measures. Research has shown that task demands can induce complex
and dynamic processes influencing a variety of physiological change [18]. Therefore, physiological
measures can be used to give an objective perspective on mental workload by not relying on subjective
scales or performance measures. Different physiological measures, however, capture various aspects
of workload [12], therefore consideration should be put in choosing the most appropriate measure
for the given task and setting. Wilson and Russell [2003] presented different ways in which the
physiological signals are known to change with the state of the operator: heart rate increases, for
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2018.

1:6

H. A. Maior et al.

example, as the cognitive demands on the operator increase, and the rate of eye blinking decreases
as the visual demands increases. Mental Workload changes, in particular, have been obtained by
recording: cardiac activity [10, 22, 62], electrodermal response (EDR) and galvanic skin response
(GSR) [14, 50], eye function (pupil diameter) [9, 32], imaging the brain [8, 52], and even facial
skin temperature [53]. As Mental Workload is a concept, each of these techniques essentially detect
the changes in the autonomic nervous systems, which are then used to infer workload levels. Most
related to this paper, are physiological measures that focus directly on the brain. There are several
key approaches to measuring Mental Workload with brain sensors, including MRI, EEG, and more
recently fNIRS. Experiments that have used Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) in a study typically
place a mirror above the participant such that they can see a display in another room. Li et. al [2013]
for example, used real time fMRI to control the animation speed of a virtual human runner. Normal
direct computer use, however, is not practical in an fMRI scanner due to the large magnetic field
and requirement that participants remain still, lying down inside it. Electroencephalography (EEG)
typically uses between 16 and 64 sensors on the scalp to detect varying electrical charge within the
brain. With the introduction of commercially available bluetooth EEG sensors, like the Emotiv1 , EEG
has become an affordable option for brain sensing [17]. Frey et al [2013] presents a review of the
technology for the detection of workload, attention, vigilance, fatigue, error recognition, emotions,
engagement, flow and immersion as being recognizable by EEG. In a different study, Frey et al [2016]
presents a framework for mental workload assessment in the context of HCI and User Experience.
For measurement of Mental Workload, however, EEG data is highly susceptible to motion artefacts,
and so formal laboratory studies typically restrict movement.
fNIRS - Functional Near Infrared Spectroscopy - uses blood oxygenation, rather than electrical
levels, for determining the activation of areas in the brain, where more blood flow indicates higher
activity. Recent research has shown that fNIRS’ related measurements of cortical oxygenation are
less affected by body movement compared to techniques that measure the electrical activity of the
brain (such as EEG). The reason EEG is more affected from motion artefacts is because of the
dominant muscle activity related noise. Therefore, fNIRS could be a more appropriate brain sensing
technology for measuring Mental Workload in HCI [25, 34, 39, 42]. Because it takes several seconds
for blood to flow to the brain [27, 58], fNIRS has been largely discounted for real-time interaction
with systems [54]. However the lightweight nature of the professional fNIRS scanners, described
below, and its resilience to movement artefacts has made it popular for evaluation of Mental Workload
in more ecologically valid contexts. Pike et al. presented a more detailed comparison of brain sensing
technologies, with a focus on their suitability for measuring Mental Workload in HCI settings [44].
2.3

Using fNIRS to measure Mental Workload in HCI

fNIRS is based on the use of near infrared spectroscopy (NIRS), introduced by F.F. Jobsis in 1977
[30], which started to be used later for functional brain imaging [13, 57, 58]. fNIRS uses near infrared
(NIR) light to measure regional hemodynamic responses associated with neuron behaviour, namely
changes in blood volume and cortical oxygenation. This is possible due to the properties of our
biological tissue, in our case the skull, that is relatively permeable to electromagnetic (EM) radiation
of different frequencies and intensities. Light penetrates the skull well at near infrared range, allowing
the NIR light to reach different molecules that are known to absorb different wavelengths of EM
radiation to different degrees (in this case light). For fNIRS imaging, the concerned molecule is
haemoglobin, which is the oxygen carrier for the red blood cells.
fNIRS has been successfully used to measure brain activity in different brain regions such as,
prefrontal cortex [5], motor cortex [26] and auditory cortex [45]. In relation to Mental Workload,
1 http://www.emotiv.com/

ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2018.

Measure and Feedback of Workload during Tasks

1:7

much research demonstrates that fNIRS can be used to reflect the demands placed upon individuals
whilst performing a task by observing the relative changed in oxygen concentration in the PFC. fNIRS
has been used in various tasks, including remotely operating vehicles [5, 16], mental arithmetic [44],
n-back tasks [5, 16], and other complex cognition tasks such as video games [5, 11, 28].
HCI researchers are typically concerned with using fNIRS to assess workload, although some
research, for example, has used fNIRS to measure anger by detecting frontal asymmetry in the PFC
[2]. Measuring Mental Workload with fNIRS, however, can then be used as an additional channel of
information about users during interaction with technology. Recent research has proven fNIRS to
be more suitable (compared to other brain sensing techniques) for assessing workload in HCI user
studies [1, 39, 52, 63] due to the robustness in noisy environments. Lukanov et al [2016] used fNIRS
to assess workload during usability testing of three versions of an insurance claim form. fNIRS
has also been used for implicit input. Afergan et al [2014] used fNIRS as implicit input to control
and dynamically adjust task difficulty based on user’s mental state. Yuksel et al [2016] used the
same technology for adapting learning during piano lessons. In this work, rather than designing a
technology that adapts the task demands given to the user, we investigate how fNIRS can be used to
provide users with feedback of their mental workload during tasks, such that they can better manage
their workload.
2.4

Feedback and Reflection

Feedback allows us to review, reflect, and improve our performance, and in this study, we provide
people with mid-task Feedback about something that is typically hidden from observation: Mental
Workload. As our study is not focused on the design of Feedback itself, but in studying how Feedback
on Mental Workload affects actual and perceived performance, we present some core literature in
this area to provide a context for reading. Starting from knowledge, Schon et al [1983] presents the
following properties of “knowing”:
• There are actions, recognitions and judgements which we do not have to think about during or
prior their performance. So knowing, we will carry these out spontaneously.
• We are often not aware of learning new things, “we simply find ourselves doing them”.
• Whether we are/were aware or not of the understandings for certain actions, we are usually
unable to describe the knowing which our action reveals.
To explain reflection, Schon then discusses the “feeling” when doing something right or wrong.
When one notices doing something good, that let him/her repeat the exact thing that he/she did before
that proved successful, one would have a “feeling” that would allow him/her to do that something
again. Schon describes that “studying the winning habits”, makes us think about the “know-how”
that enabled us to win. This process of understanding and thinking about various patterns of actions,
while we perform various tasks or after, can be referred to as reflecting on action and, in some cases,
reflecting in action.
“Reflecting-in-action. If common sense recognizes knowing-in-action, it also recognizes that we
sometimes think about what we are doing. Phrases like ‘thinking on your feet’, ‘keeping your wits
about you,’ and ‘learning by doing’ suggest not only that we can think about doing but that we can
think about doing something while doing it. Some of the most interesting examples of this process
occur in the midst of a performance”. [48]
With this in mind, the study presented in this paper investigates the impact of reflecting-in-action on
mental workload and the resulting impact on metacognition and further on participants performance
and perception. Meta-cognition is the state where one reflects upon one’s thoughts i.e. “thinking
about thinking”. Fletcher [2015] showed that when in meta-cognitive states, users can monitor their
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2018.

1:8

H. A. Maior et al.

performance, task cues and other states in order to assess their workload throughout the task and
‘act’ accordingly. One consideration of subjective measures is that rating your own mental workload
will also make you aware of this information, potentially having an impact on your meta-cognitive
state. The interest of this paper in meta-cognition, is the potential for supporting such acts by
presenting mental workload feedback, but in a way that does not require task interruption the same
way subjective rating tools do.
3

WORKLOAD FEEDBACK SYSTEM, USING FNIRS

While Brain-Computer Interfaces (BCIs) were traditionally focused on users with disabilities, providing them direct control or interface with the outside world, current advances investigate the use of
brain as an additional channel of information about healthy users interacting with technology. This
“passive” rather than “active” channel, sometimes called implicit [51], can act as a complementary
source of information about users’ state, that can be combined with traditional methods, or used as
an input to system, task, or interface. In this section, we present a Workload Feedback System (WFS
- see Figure 2) that uses passive BCI to 1) measure, 2) detect, and 3) feedback users’ workload during
tasks.

Fig. 2. Mental Workload feedback mechanism

3.1

Monitoring Mental Workload using fNIRS

The WFS measures brain activity using an fNIRS300 device and the associated Cognitive Optical
Brain Imaging (COBI) Studio hardware-integrated software platform provided by Biopac Systems Inc.
The headband shaped sensor, shown in Figure 3 [4], is a sixteen-channel transducer for continuous
Near Infrared Spectroscopy (NIRS), placed on the forehead. The headband consists of four infrared
(IR) emitters operating on a range between 700 to 900 nm, and ten IR detectors. Each channel is
defined by the relationship between a IR source and a near by IR detector pair. Oxygenated (HbO)
and deoxygenated (Hb) haemoglobin are both strong absorbers of light, whereas skin, tissue and
bone are mostly transparent to NIR light, this property is typically referred to as the optical window
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2018.

Measure and Feedback of Workload during Tasks

1:9

[29]. The tissue is radiated by the light sources and the detectors receive the light after the interaction
with the tissue.

Fig. 3. Sensor layout for the Biopac fNIRS used.

For real time use, COBI Studio requires collecting baseline signal levels that are used in order to
calculate oxygenation in real time, via the Modified Beer Lambert Law (MBLL) [57]. The resulting
data was used as an input for the WFS detection.
3.2

Detection of state

As our fNIRS device provides 16 locational channels of data with two readings per second, an
important step before the study could began was identifying localised Hb/HbO changes for each
participant. There are three reasons for this step: 1) fNIRS data is highly sensitive to individual
differences between participants, 2) the physical placement of the 16 channels varies between
participants (based on the shape and size of the forehead), and 3) different forms of workload create
changes in Hb/HbO in different regions of the forehead [39]. We used training tasks to identify the
most sensitive region, and identified the most valuable channel for the WFS system to focus on; the
post-task evaluation, however, utilised recordings from all 16 channels.
3.2.1 Configuration task. With workload having so many different aspects related to the operator
performing a specific task, instead of using e.g. N-Back tasks that are well known for eliciting
increased levels of workload, we used variations of a task intended to be more representative of the
complexity of a real world task, with manipulations corresponding to increased variation of difficulty.
This way, we observed the responses associated with increased demand to our actual task for all the
16 channels and two measures (Hb and HbO). The study task, described further below, consisted
of an Air Traffic Control game, where participants had to coordinate the landing and departure of
aeroplanes. The calibration phase, therefore, included a 30 seconds resting state of relaxing and not
performing the task, followed by two 30 second variations of increased demands: low-normal load
(3-5 aeroplanes to control), and normal-high load (>7 aeroplanes to control). Averages of HbO and
Hb values were used to calculate range thresholds for the three periods (rest, low, and high), that
were used later on in detecting significant increases and decreases of workload.
3.2.2 State Tracking. We were particularly interested in monitoring, detecting and feeding back
two states of interest: participants reaching a “high” workload state, as well as going back to a
“low” workload state. Therefore, using the most sensitive channel and using a running window of
30 seconds, we continuously calculated a rolling average based on the previous 30 seconds worth
of readings. The WFS monitored significant increases and decreases in Hb/HbO (of the selected
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2018.

1:10

H. A. Maior et al.

channel) by comparing each new real-time value with the rolling average. A high workload state
would be detected if HbO/Hb increase/decrease value was higher than the threshold set during the
calibration stage. A low workload state would be detected in the opposite conditions.
3.3

Feedback choice

Once the participant state was detected, the WFS produces a binary integer that can be used for
changing the state of a feedback mechanim. For the purpose of this study, we specifically designed
feedback to be noticeable, but at the same time transparent and in the background of the task, such
that a minimum of resources would be used by operators. For our study, the output of the WFS
was used to invoke changes in the desk lighting around the participant, using Philips Hue Bulbs
(programmable light bulbs) in desk lamps. Initially, the lighting was set as normal white lighting,
which would turn red when participants entered states detected by the fNIRS measurements to have
High Workload and return to white as participants returned to lower levels of Mental Workload. We
discuss this colour choice further, however, in the study methodology below.
4

EXPERIMENT DESIGN

As stated above, our aim was to investigate whether providing people with real-time feedback on their
mental workload, now that we can objectively and reliably measure it with fNIRS, could facilitate
a form of Reflection-in-Action during tasks: that participants, in knowing their Mental Workload
levels, can take action to manage their task or workload. Sharples & Megaw [2015], said “Operator
workload or effort is not simply a function of task demands, but is influenced by how the task is
perceived by the operator...”. In this case, we are making the Operator Workload explicit in the
model, and examining the impact on both performance, and the demands of the task. Our primary
aim, therefore, was to evaluate the effectiveness of using the Workload Feedback System (WFS) to
aid an individual’s self awareness of current workload, such that they could a) be more aware of
their mental workload, and b) achieve good performance outcomes. As a secondary aim, we wanted
to examine these outcomes against one of the widely used techniques for keeping people aware of
their workload during tasks: Instantaneous Self Assessments (ISAs); ISA, described further below,
requires people to self-report their workload at intervals in order to keep them self-aware of it.
4.1

Study Conditions

Based on the aims of the study, our two primary independent variables were: 1) the use, or not, of
the WFS and 2) the use, or not, of ISA reporting. This created four within-subject repeated-measure
conditions, as shown in Table 1. Initially, however, we designed the WFS lights to turn red (from
normal white) when participants were experiencing high workload. However, midway during the
study we noted that multiple participants reported in interviews that the red colour acted as a stressor
to their experience. We decided to identify the participants thus far as Phase 1, and introduced a 3rd
between-subjects independent variable to create a Phase 2 with the colours reversed: turning white
from red when participants experience high workload. In both lighting phases, the lights returned
to their base colour when workload reduced, and thus could change back and forth multiple times
during each task. We include the colour-based independent variable in the results, and examine the
implications of colour choice in the discussion.
4.2

Air Traffic Control (ATC) Task

For the experiment, we required a task that a) increased in difficulty, and b) could be managed by
participants taking action in response to feedback. We selected an ATC task, using the commercially
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2018.

Measure and Feedback of Workload during Tasks

1:11

Table 1. Four main conditions in the study

Condition
Task Only
Feedback
Feedback + ISA
ISA

Includes WFS
No
Yes
Yes
No

Includes ISA
No
No
Yes
Yes

available Airport Madness 4 Game2 , shown in Figure 4, in all task conditions. Participants had to
coordinate the landing and departing of as many aeroplanes as possible, without causing incidents
(e.g. collision between aeroplanes); the number of aeroplanes increased over time, thus increasing
the demand as the task progressed. Planes are managed by clicking on the desired plane icon and
selecting an appropriate action - ‘Land at runway X’, ‘Go Around’, ‘Increase/Decrease speed’,
‘change direction’. Similar options existed for planes requiring take off e.g. ‘line up’, ‘immediate take
off’. These controls allowed participants to use various strategies to reduce their mental workload
during moments of high demands by e.g. sending aeroplanes around, managing all landings on one
lane and departures on other. The task interface also presented participants with direct measures of
performance (seen in Figure 4), such as the number of landed/departed aeroplanes.
4.3

Participants and Study Protocol

A total of 32 participants were recruited to take part in the experiment. Fifteen participants (9 male, 6
female) with an average age of 25.3 (SD = 2.31) experienced the white-to-red lighting in Phase 1, and
seventeen (9 male, 8 female) with an average age of 25.5 (SD = 8.05) experienced the red-to-white
lighting in Phase 2. All participants had normal or corrected vision and reported no history of head
trauma or brain damage. Participants were given a £10 voucher as a thank you and remuneration for
their contribution to the project. The study protocol below was approved by the School of Computer
Science ethics committee.
After gaining informed consent, participants began with a task familiarisation tutorial. All participants watched the same recorded video that introduced all the interactions with the video, and then
were given the opportunity to practice the task until they felt confident in the game play; participants
determined the time when they were ready to begin the experiment. The WFS was then calibrated for
each participant, as described in Section 3.
Participants completed each of the four study conditions, which were counterbalanced using
Latin-square design to account for learning effects. In each condition, they were required to perform
the study task from scratch for a period of seven minutes. If they were to cause more than three major
incidents within a condition, the game would automatically stop and the study condition would end
(this however was not common). Seven minutes was enough to see numerous workload changes in
the lights, but keep the full length of participation, including training, calibration, four tasks and
between-task rest periods, to approximately one hour. After each condition, participants filled in a
questionnaire to record perceived performance, before moving onto the next condition. After all four
conditions, the study finished with a short interview, where participants had the chance to discuss the
study experience and the way they perceived the WFS.

2 More

information about the study task and a free trial version of the game can be found here: https://www.bigfatsimulations.
com/game/airportmadness4
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2018.

1:12

H. A. Maior et al.

Fig. 4. Airport Madness 4 - Screenshot of participant managing the landing of an aeroplane.

4.4

Measures of Dependent Variables

We collected three forms of data from each condition in the study: fNIRS data, ISA data, and
Performance Data. We also recorded debriefing interviews to gain insights into participants responses
to the conditions that were not otherwise observable in data.
4.4.1 fNIRS data. Although the WFS was only used during the Feedback conditions, participants
wore the fNIRS sensor in all conditions. While the WFS system used a single channel in the most
sensitive region to monitor workload during tasks, comprehensive fNIRS data (HbO and HO) was
recorded from all channels for the duration of all conditions. fNIRS data was further processed
for post-experiment analysis using additional filters and feature extraction techniques. fNIRS data
was processed using fnirSoft, the Comprehensive Signal Processing, Analysis and Visualization
Platform for Optical Brain Imaging [3]. A low pass filter with cut off frequencies of 0.2 Hz was
used in order to remove high-frequency noise, physiological artefacts such as heartbeats and motion
derived artefacts. Additionally, we applied the Correlation Based Signal Improvement (CBSI) filter
[15], a technique designed for fNIRS technology in order to improve detection of workload. We
named the resulting data OXY. In analysing the OXY data, we also considered the delay associated
with the hemodynamic response [57], using various techniques including: averages across blocks of
data, omitting the first few seconds of the trials when processing, and simply delaying the trial data
[42, 44].
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2018.

Measure and Feedback of Workload during Tasks

1:13

4.4.2 ISA data. During ISA conditions, participants had to respond to the 5-point rating scale
on a mobile device (Figure 5) every 30 seconds, prompted by an audible notification; 1 means very
low and 5 very high experienced workload. Although the question ‘how do you rate your workload
at present?’ had a small font on the device, all participants were instructed and familiar with the tool,
and had the chance to play with the mobile app before the start of the experiment. The ISA scores
were recorded, as was time-to-respond to the prompt. It is common for secondary task performance,
as with reporting ISA scores, to drop during periods of extremely high workload. If participants
did not respond to the ISA prompt during a 30 second period, the score was recorded as a 5 (high
workload); time-to-respond was calculated from the most recent prompt.

Fig. 5. Instantaneous Self Assessment (ISA) Recorder App

4.4.3 Performance data. The task was screen captured and recorded for subsequent analysis.
Actual performance was analysed in two ways: 1) the performance outcomes (number of planes
landed, number of take-offs) at the end of each condition, and 2) demand levels at moments during
the task either a) at each ISA interval (number of planes in the air and on the ground), or b) demand
levels when WFS lighting changed (number of planes in the air and on the ground). Informally, we
were also able to examine the actions and timing of actions taken by the user after key events such as
plane accidents, WFS changes, and after ISA responses (go around, increase speed, decrease speed,
change direction). After each condition, perceived performance scores were collected using a five
point rating scale (1 - poor, 5 - excellent performance).
4.5

Study Hypotheses

To better understand the relationship between Feedback, ISA, workload, and performance, we state
our hypotheses based on an adapted version of Sharples & Megaw’s Framework for Mental Workload
Measurement [2015], where we controlled the External Influences. Essentially, as shown in Figure 6,
our two primary independent variables are shown as alternatives to the External Influences boxes.
• H1 - Variation in task demand will create measurable differences in Mental Workload.
As a baseline, as it is generally expected that increased task demands will generate increased
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2018.

1:14

H. A. Maior et al.

Fig. 6. Framework for Mental Workload Measurement: the relationship between MWL Feedback, ISA,
performance and workload. (Adapted from [49])

levels of workload, we therefore expect that changes in task demands should be observable
in both the ISA ratings and the objective measures of workload. We expect ISA ratings (H1i
in Figure 6) to increase with increased task demand, and fNIRS measures to correlate (H2f),
either positively or negatively, with task demand.
• H2 - Participants’ performance will be affected, positively or negatively, when made aware of
their mental workload.
Ideally participants may perform better because they are more aware of their workload without
having to self-report using ISA, but may also have decreased performance if the feedback
affects their ability to focus. We expect a lower performance in the presence of ISA (H2i)
because of the activity involved in self-reporting. However, we do not expect a negative impact
on performance from the WFS lighting changes (H2f).
• H3 - Participants’ perception of performance will be affected positively or negatively, when
made aware of their mental workload.
As operators monitor their own performance, unconsciously or explicitly, having their workload
levels presented during tasks should allow operators better reflect on performance. Aside from
actual performance, participant’s perception of their performance might be affected as they
are made aware of their workload levels - increased workload could create a sense of poorer
performance or higher performance for both independent variables (H3i and H3f).
• H4 - Participants’ perception and management of the task demands will be affected, positively
or negatively, when made aware of their mental workload.
We expect that, given feedback-in-action, participants will think about their state whilst
performing the task. Participants may also then take action to manage and manipulate the
demands of the task, in order to maintain their workload levels to a particular point. In the
case of ISA, H4i in Figure 6 highlights that there is a direct connection from ISA to the task
demands, as participants have to do extra work to report their workload levels. As the WFS
does not require additional effort from participants during tasks, we expect that their task
demands will not change, however, being presented with feedback of their workload levels
more explicitly during tasks, participants perception of the task, and the decisions during the
task may be affected (H4f).
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2018.

Measure and Feedback of Workload during Tasks
5

1:15

RESULTS

Below, we address each of the four hypotheses in subsections; statistical tests were conducted across
both phases to determine whether feedback or ISA conditions had any impact on task performance
and workload. Additional between-phase tests were used, when relevant, to examine whether there
was an effect created by the tertiary variable of feedback colour (Phase1 vs Phase2).
5.1

H1) Variation in task demand will create measurable differences in Mental
Workload

To begin our analysis, we first sought to confirm that our measures of participant mental workload
were affected by and related to the task demand. To do this, task demand was quantified as the
total number of aeroplanes participant was monitoring every 30 seconds (the frequency at which
ISA scores were collected). Below we analyse how both our subjective ratings (ISA) and objective
measures (fNIRS) correlate with these task demands over time.
5.1.1 Subjective ratings from ISA. We found strong correlations between demand and ISA
measures, with examples shown in Figure 7, further showing the hypothesis H1i in Figure 6. The
average correlation value across all participants, between ISA and demand (measured every 30
seconds) was r .68 with the maximum value of r .899p .006 for Participant4 in Phase 2. This
correlation was strong for some participants, where P1’s ISA correlation with task demand in Phase 2
during the ISA Condition, for example, was r .808, p .003, and r .751, p .003 in the Feedback+ISA
condition. There were, however, several cases across participants, where ISA did not reflect well its
relationship to task demand, such as when participants were either too busy or to focused on the task
and thus did not respond to the ISA questions (Figure 7a). This range of correlations highlights one
of the known limitations of using mid-task self assessment scales, as they rely on operators rating
their workload during tasks.
5.1.2 Objective measures from fNIRS. As described in the previous subsection, ISA was not
always able to reflect the user’s state (See Figure 7a and Figure 7c), and mainly because it relies upon
users subjectively reporting how they feel. For the same conditions and the same participants, Figure
7b and Figure 7d show how OXY correlates more objectively with the task demand. The average
correlation value across participants, between fNIRS OXY and demand (measured every 30 seconds)
was r .81 with the maximum value of r .973p .001 for Participant6 in Phase 2. This shows how
fNIRS could be used to assess workload without relying on a subjective measure such as ISA.
5.1.3 Summary of H1 Results. Based on these results, we are able reject the null hypothesis
and accept H1, as both subjective and objective measures provide evidence that participants’ mental
workload was associated with task demand. We conclude, however, that our objective measure
(hypothesis H1f in Figure 6) was able to provide stronger and more consistent evidence of increased
workload than subjective ratings (hypothesis H1i).
5.2

H2) Participants’ performance will be affected, positively or negatively, when made
aware of their mental workload

Considering all participants across both phases, a series of two-way repeated measure ANOVAs
showed no statistical significance in the three performance measures (Total Departures, Total Landings and Total Performance) between the four conditions. Total Performance, shown in Figure 8 for
example, was different between the two phases. Similarly, the number of departures3 and landings
3 There

was one outlier in the Total Departures and the Total Performance data, which had a studentized residual value greater
than ±3. The outlier was removed from the analysis.
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2018.

1:16

H. A. Maior et al.

(a) Participant2: Demand VS ISA

(b) Participant2: Demand VS fNIRS-OXY

(c) Participant6: Demand VS ISA

(d) Participant6: Demand VS fNIRS-OXY

Fig. 7. Emphasizing the value and limitations of ISA (when participants fail to self-report values of their
workload (a) it becomes hard to understand what happened during the task).

varied between phases, especially during the presence of both Feedback + ISA (see Figure 9). Participants performed slightly worse in Task Only condition in Phase 2 (the mean Total Departures
was 10.2 for Phase 1 and 11.13 for Phase 2, and the mean Total Landings was 18.15 for Phase 1 and
17.36 for Phase 2), and slightly better in Feedback+ISA condition in the same study, compared to
Phase 1 (the mean Total Departures was 11.1 for Phase 1 and 9.93 for Phase 2, and the mean Total
Landings was 16.46 for Phase 1 and 18.43 for Phase 2).
5.2.1 Phase 1 performance data. To consider the performance in Phase 1 (white light changed
to red in periods of high workload as detected via fNIRS), we examine the Total Landings and Total
Departures data over the four conditions in Phase 1, shown in the blue bars of Figure 9. For all the
cases, the Total Departures, the Total Landings and the Total Performance measures, performance
appeared to decrease in the presence of ISA, suggesting that ISA might have a negative effect over
the average participants’ performance, and therefore affecting hypothesis H2i in Figure 6. This is not
the case in the presence of Feedback, therefore, hypothesis H2f presents workload feedback having
no explicit negative effects on performance.
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2018.

Measure and Feedback of Workload during Tasks

1:17

Fig. 8. Total performance difference between Phase 1 and Phase 2 - mean scores across conditions

There was no statistical significance found in the Total Departures with feedback impact F1, 12
.055, p .819, and ISA impact F1, 12 2.476, p .142 as assessed by a two-way repeated measure
ANOVA. There was also no statistically significant two-way interaction either between Feedback
and ISA effect, F1, 12 .014, p .907. For the Total Landings, the presence of feedback showed no
significant impact F1, 12 1.147, p .305, however ISA significantly reduced performance F1, 12
5.637, p .035 as assessed by a two-way repeated measure ANOVA. These results indicate that
participants who responded to the ISA scale during task performance performed less well on the task,
hence, hypothesis H2i in Figure 6 suggests a negative impact of ISA use on performance. There was
no statistically significant two-way interaction between Feedback and ISA effect, F1, 12 .014, p
.907. A two way repeated measure ANOVA additionally showed the impact of ISA on the Total
Performance measure F1, 12 5.368, p .039, and no effect of the presence of feedback was found
F1, 12 .675, p .427, nor the two way interaction between the two, F1, 12 .007, p .937. From this we
conclude that objective feedback provided via the change in lighting colour had no explicit negative
impact on performance scores, and thus all the significant differences are caused by the deployment
of ISA.
5.2.2 Phase 2 performance data. In Phase 2 (red light changed to white in periods of high
workload as detected via fNIRS), looking at the red bars in Figure 9, the negative effect of ISA was
not found to be significant. Instead, the graph suggests a higher average performance during the
presence of Feedback, after the colour change via lighting. This may suggest that workload feedback,
and hypothesis H2f in Figure 6 may have a positive impact on performance.
Feedback showed no significant impact on performance with Total Departures F1, 14 .008, p
.932, Total Landings F1, 13 0.127, p .727, and Total Performance F1, 13 0.072, p .793. ISA had
no longer significant impact on performance, with Total Departures F1, 14 .229, p .639, Total
Landings F1, 13 .011, p .919, and Total Performance F1, 13 0.064, p .804 There was a statistically
significant two-way interaction between ISA and Feedback effect on all performance measures;
Total Departures F1, 14 7.565, p .015, Total Landings F1, 13 6.475, p .024, and Total Performance
F1, 13 9.388, p .009. The average performance across participants was lower in the absence of
Feedback and ISA, compared to all other conditions as shown in Figure 9.
5.2.3 Summary of H2 Results. Based on the results above, we reject the null hypothesis and
accept H2 for ISA only, and not for our WFS. Overall, we found that performance was negatively
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2018.

1:18

H. A. Maior et al.

(a) Departures

(b) Landings
Fig. 9. Performance data across the 2 phases

impacted by ISA - an effect that was exaggerated when also being given feedback by our WFS - but
overall we did not see performance being impacted by the WFS alone.
5.3

H3) Participants’ perception of their performance and workload will be affected,
positively or negatively, when made aware of their mental workload

5.3.1 Perceived Performance Scores. A five point rating scale was used to capture participants’
subjective perception of performance after each condition. Across both phases, a Friedman test
was conducted to understand the within-subjects effects between all levels of the two factors:
Feedback and ISA on perceived performance scores with Feedback-NoFeedback x ISA-NoISA
conditions. Results showed a statistically significant difference between conditions, N 30, X 2
9.072, p .05 (Figure 10). Pairwise comparisons were performed with a Bonferroni correction for
multiple comparisons. There was a significant difference in the perceived performance scores between
Feedback+ISA and Task alone p 0.05, and between Feedback+ISA and Feedback condition p 0.05.
Figure 10 shows how participants’ perceived performance was significantly lower when ISA present.
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2018.

Measure and Feedback of Workload during Tasks

1:19

Fig. 10. Combined Phase 1 and Phase 2 mean perceived performance scores across conditions

These results show how ISA significantly reduces participants’ perceived performance (hypotheses
H2i and H3i), while the presence of feedback has no negative impact (hypotheses H2f and H3f).
For each of the two phases, the subjective performance scale generally showed lower perception of
performance during the presence of ISA as showed in Figure 11, this being somewhat expected. This
is directly related to hypotheses H4i, H2i, and H3i in Figure 6. It is interesting to observe how the
perception of performance increased during the presence of ISA for Phase 2 compared to Phase 1, this
effect being significant in Feedback+ISA condition. This suggests an impact caused by the feedback
type. To investigate the within-subjects effects between all levels of the two factors Feedback and
ISA on perceived performance scores, a Friedman test was conducted with Feedback-NoFeedback x
ISA-NoISA conditions for each phase separately.
5.3.2 Phase 1 perceived performance. In Phase 1, the test showed statistically significant
difference between conditions, X 2 12.756, p .005, d f 3. Pairwise comparisons were performed
with a Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons. This shows that ISA presence significantly
impacted the perceived performance scores in the presence of feedback p .003, but also compared
to the baseline condition p .013. However, the presence vs absence of workload feedback had no
impact on the perceived performance indicating that the presence of ISA negatively affected perceived
performance. From these results we concluded that, in contrast to feedback and the hypotheses H2f
and H3f, ISA and the hypotheses H2i and H3i significantly reduced task performance as well as
perceived task performance; this was further significantly exaggerated by objective feedback.
5.3.3 Phase 2 perceived performance. Similar to the performance data, the subjective perception of performance data increased for the Feedback + ISA condition in Phase 2 (Figure 11). The
Friedman test revealed no more significance in the perceived performance data between conditions,
the presents of ISA having no longer significant impact X 2 1.38, p .71, d f 3.
5.3.4 Comparing Phases. A Mann-Whitney U test was conducted for each of the four conditions between the two studies to determine if there were any significant differences in perceived
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2018.

1:20

H. A. Maior et al.

Fig. 11. Mean perceived performance scores across conditions

performance scores between Phase 1 and Phase 2. The test showed statistical significance between
the two studies in the presence of both workload feedback and ISA. The distribution of perceived
performance scores between Phase 1 and Phase 2 was different as assessed by visual inspection.
Mean rank value for Phase 1 was 12.47 (N=15) and for Phase 2 18.53 (N=15). The test showed
significant statistical difference in perceived performance scores between the two studies in the
Feedback + ISA condition, with N 30,U 158, and Asymptotic Sig. (2-sided test) p 0.05. This
finding suggests there was a difference between the feedback type used, with Phase 2 type having
higher perceived performance scores.
5.3.5 Summary of H3 Results. We found that the deployment of ISA significantly reduced
participants’ perceived performance (hypotheses H2i and H3i), while the presence of feedback
had no negative impact (hypotheses H2f and H3f in 6). However, as with actual performance, it is
interesting to note that the mean ISA score (across participants) revealed higher perceived workload
in the presence of our WFS (see Figure 11). We again conclude that the impact of deploying ISA
was exaggerated by additional demands, since participants’ perception of workload was affected
by presence of ISA, but not by WFS alone. Overall, we have enough evidence to reject the null
hypothesis and accept H3 for ISA, but not in the case of the WFS.
5.4

H4). Participants’ perception and management of the task demand will be affected,
positively or negatively, when made aware of their mental workload

Each participant took part in a short post-experiment interview about their experience during the
study. The focus of this was to collect opinions related to perception of mental workload feedback,
ISA, the way they foresee feedback of workload in their every day lives and their views of its use in
a critical jobs scenario, similar to the task they performed.
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2018.

Measure and Feedback of Workload during Tasks

(a) Phase 1

1:21

(b) Phase 2

Fig. 12. The impact of different feedback on participants

5.4.1 Impact of Feedback on participants. In Phase 1, 11/15 of participants reported feedback
affected them, 3/15 reported feedback did not affect them in any way and just 1/15 was not sure about
it (See Figure 12a). In Phase 2, only 6/17 reported feedback affected them, 6/17 reported feedback
did not affect them, and 4/17 were not sure about it (See Figure 12b). This finding suggests that one
particular feedback type (Phase 1) had more of an effect on participants, or the case where feedback
in Phase 2 was more transparent, hence, not directly affecting participants’ perception. However, it
does not reflect the type of effects (negative or positive) the feedback had.
Participants were affected in different ways by the feedback. Some participants described feedback
as a good indicator of “how much” is going on during the task; P11 (Phase 1) gave an example of
how he/she used the feedback during the task: “helpful in that you knew there was a lot going on and
you are concentrating, which meant you had to pay extra attention to the details. When the lights
went red, it meant that, yeah, I am probably concentrating a lot, that means I am probably miss
some of the smaller aircrafts, and I would try and go back and have a look around to see if I was
missing any small planes”. P9 (Phase 1) had similar feelings ”They did help me to figure out how I
was feeling, and how I was going. Sometimes when it went bright red, I thought to myself, I need to
be calm, and think for a second what was going on in the game again. It made me take a second and
just relax, that is all”.
In other cases participants felt that feedback was stressing them even more and making them feel
anxious: P1 (Phase 1) said “So whenever it went red, it was kind of stressful ... and I felt like why are
you showing me red if I am stressed? ... It was NOTICEABLE! So in the sense that if I was doing a
thing and I was stressed as I was playing that game, and I was trying to focus on the game, then I
am being told that I need to focus more on the game, than that does not really help me, does it?”,
and P7 (Phase 1) said “It does not really inform me about my next decision, because I did not stop
even when the lights were red. It actually added to the stress. I tried to be calm...” Similar feelings
were found in participants’ opinions for Phase 2. P17 (Phase 2) used the feedback to ‘relax’ during
stressful moments “I enjoyed the experience and I think the feedback is very... indicative. Though not
very specific... But for the person interacting with the system, is like.... oh now I am tensed... maybe I
should relax”.
Even though some participants noticed and used the feedback, others ignored it, and better focused
on the task, P22 (Phase 2) said “I did notice it. I did not pay attention to it.” and P28 (Phase 2) “I did
not worry too much because sometimes you forget about feedback”.
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2018.

1:22

H. A. Maior et al.

(a) Phase 1

(b) Phase 2

Fig. 13. The impact of ISA on participants perception.

5.4.2 Validity, Accuracy, and Delay. Participants also questioned the validity and correctness of
the feedback. There were mixed views on what the feedback was informing, and how it worked. P29
(Phase 2) said “I noticed that when I would get calmed they would change to red. But sometimes I
thought that I was working and they would still be red.”, P2 (Phase 1) said “...most of the times it was
accurate...”, and P4 (Phase 1) said “I was impressed though, they seemed what was not immediately
responsive, but accurate. They seemed to change red when I was under a higher workload. When I
was under more stress I said: crap...another plane is coming in, they will crash!”. It did seem to pick
up on that quite a lot which was cool”. These comments imply that, despite being able to perceive the
delay caused by the hemodynamic response [57], participants found the WFS to be mostly accurate
to their current perceived workload.
5.4.3 Granularity and other limitations. One of the limitations identified by participants during
the study was the granularity of the WFS feedback; P1 (Phase 1) said “I was a bit annoyed in a way,
because the changes were not gradual, it is like uh, it is now white and it is suddenly turning red
ekhhhhh (electroshock noises) ... I think if I were to align it with what I felt my workload to be at
that point in time, then the colour changes would be much more frequent”, and P13 (Phase 1) also
suggested a more transparent modality of communicating the feedback “...they seem to switch from
an extreme to another and apart from them being in my eyes and bothering me while I was looking
at the screen I didn’t really pay attention to them”. P14 (Phase 1) added to this “If it was in the
background more in the background it would have been nicer. Now it was straight in your face”.
5.4.4 Impact of ISA on participants. During the interview, participants were also asked thoughts
about ISA, its use, whether they think ISA had any impact on their performance and whether it
was ambient or distracting by nature. We found 7/15 participants in Phase 1 and 5/17 in Phase 2
believed their performance was worse because of it, 6/15 in Phase 1 and 9/17 in Phase 2 believed it
had no effects and the rest were not sure about it (see Figure 13a and Figure 13b). One participant
reported that ISA had no impact on them, however, in the presence of both, feedback and ISA, it
made him/her think: P16 (Phase 2) saying: “No. It did not bother me that much. But at times it
made me think, during the condition with feedback as well, especially when there was a discrepancy
between the two”. The majority of participants who reported ISA having a negative impact on them,
also reported losing focus when having to answer ISA questionnaire during the task. P26 (Phase 2)
said “It definitely made it worse ... because it takes you out of the action, and then it takes a little
while to figure out where you were”. P31 (Phase 2) reported that ISA had a continuous negative
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2018.

Measure and Feedback of Workload during Tasks

1:23

impact, “Sometimes I would hear the notification in my subconscious, and I did not pay attention
because I was very concentrated on the task”.
Others said they ignored answering the questions when concentrating on the task: P7 (Phase 1)
reported “I do not think I paid much of attention of answering the questions. I know I missed some,
and for some questions I did not really think about the question, I just answered it”, and similar
view was found with P9 (Phase 1) “I forgot about the questionnaire as the task demand went higher.
I completely blanked out. I focused on it when I was relaxed. When I got busy it went down my
mind. Ignored it sometimes...”. Some participants, however, considered ISA easy and fast, and ISA
presence improving their performance in some cases: P8 (Phase 1) reported “...it is very easy it took
less than a second, and the buttons were really big. I think it was a normal performance, even better
than normal”, and P13 (Phase 1) had similar feelings “just another button I had to press, I do not
think it has an impact on my performance”; P21 (Phase 2) described ISA as an “automatic move”.
5.4.5 Summary of H4 Results. This hypothesis was mostly examined through the post-experiment
interview and participants’ opinions, since we did not have any objective measurements of how
people reflected on the feedback mid-task. It is clear that both ISA and feedback had an impact on
participants’ management of the task. Although the opinions were divided, and participants were “affected” differently by the feedback and ISA, the findings were very constructive and informative. We
found insights to confirm that participants noticed the feedback and considered it at a meta-cognitive
level during the task, and therefore have enough evidence to reject the null hypothesis in case of H4.
In comparison to ISA, P24 (Phase 2) said “I think the lights are more effective, because the cellphone
app (ISA) just made me feel more busy. They lights show me when I am busy, where ISA made me
feel busy”. In the discussion section below, we consider what future work may do to investigate this
finding in more detail.
6

DISCUSSION

This paper described an alternative way to raise self-awareness of metal workload, through providing
workload feedback based upon a concurrent objective measure, and our results showed that it did so
without negatively affecting performance (as with ISA). We expected that if users are alerted that
they are approaching a drop/dip in performance because of high/low workload, then they might be
able to take action to avoid it. Table 2 summarizes the results of the study that relate to the hypotheses
visualised in Figure 6.
6.1

Impact of ISA

In line with the findings of previous work [35, 55] we found that self-reporting workload using
ISA significantly impacted both, actual and perceived performance. Participants landed significantly
fewer planes in the presence of ISA compared to all other conditions. As expected with ISA, we saw
many participants miss ISA entries when they had high workload, and were often surprised when we
showed them gaps in their self-reporting. P13, who missed several ISA responses, said: “I did not
know if there was a time limit I had to answer. I do not think I missed any”, but said ISA was “just
another button I had to press... it became a mechanical task”. Conversely, P14 said “It was annoying!
I was ok, go away, go away... It is like an alarm in the morning” and P15 said “Annoying..your
phone app workload questionnaire is really annoying... I did not notice the phone sometimes when I
was concentrating on the task, so completely ignoring ISA. Sometimes people get easily distracted
and for this kind of task it can be dangerous...”. Even though the general feeling was against ISA,
some participants’ perception of ISA was not that bad; P3 said “I do not think that ISA had an impact
on performance...”. These sentiments were generally observable in the data, and so our findings
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2018.

1:24

H. A. Maior et al.
Table 2. Summary of key findings, by hypothesis

Hypotheses Expected effects
Results
H1
Participants’ workload gen• We found both fNIRS and ISA measures
erated by the task demands
sensitive to task demands (in our case the
would have measurable efnumber of aeroplanes to control during
fects with ISA and fNIRS
an ATC game).
• We found high correlation coefficients
between fNIRS and demand, and we
showed how it can be used to assess
workload without relying on participants’
ability to self-report during the task (See
Figure 7).
H2 & H3

ISA would have a negative impact on performance.
Feedback would have no
explicit negative impact on
performance. Workload and
perception of performance
would increase or decrease
in the presence of both ISA
and our WFS.

H4

In contrast to our WFS, ISA
will create additional physical and cognitive task demands.

• We presented evidence supporting ISA’s
negative impact on both performance and
perceived performance measures.
• In contrast to ISA, we found mental
workload feedback having no explicit
negative impact.
• Figure 11 suggests similar or slightly improved performance with the WFS and
workload feedback.
• Although we found no direct evidence,
the performance and perceived performance results suggested a negative impact in the presence of ISA, most likely
due to the additional required resources.
This was not the case with our WFS.
• During the interview, participants had
mixed feelings about the impact of ISA;
views were divided into participants affected by ISA, participants who considered ISA having no negative impact (describing it “easy” and “fast”), and participants who ignored ISA when concentrating on the task.

match the consensus of prior research into both its validity for measuring workload (since it had
strong correlation scores) and the interference it has on the primary task.
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2018.

Measure and Feedback of Workload during Tasks
6.2

1:25

Impact of Objective Feedback

The aim of our study was to investigate whether presenting users with real time mental workload
feedback, would make them aware of their load without notably reducing either actual or perceived
performance. This was presented in contrast to ISA measure, which requires the user to reflect upon
their mental workload and take action to report it. In our results, feedback did not affect actual and
perceived performance in a negative way. Although not significant within our sample, feedback
appeared to slightly improve actual performance and participants perceived that they performed
slightly better (Feedback Condition - See Figure 11). The findings alone, however, do not tell us
whether participants noticed the feedback, understood their workload, and took action to reduce
them.
In interviews, some participants indicated that they did take note of the feedback: “When the
lights become red, it works as a reminder to take a big breath and relax [...] it is like a warning ...”
(P15 Phase1). For some, this was positive, with P14 (Phase 1) saying “I really liked it! The whole
experience ... If I would get another chance I would do it again”. Some, however, were frustrated
that they couldn’t do much about it: “It is actually affecting me. When the feedback is red, I try to
relax. To try to make it white. But it did not work, because I felt even more concentrated ... because I
was looking at the planes and to the lights as well, so it added up really to my concentration” (P14).
Other participants felt that feedback had no use as they already know when they are busy and when
not: P1 (Phase 1) said “I felt like: why are you showing me red if I already know that I am busy?”
even though he said later that “I am usually really bad at judging my own workload”. These insights
confirm that participants noticed the feedback and considered it at a meta-cognitive level during the
task. For some participants the feedback, however, perhaps increased the sense of anxiety (especially
in the first phase), when participants were not able to take action to change it. Because of this, P15
(Phase1) went further to suggest that although the objective measure of their workload was useful,
they would have preferred to see it afterwards, rather than during the task: “I would like to add
that it would be much more interesting for me to have a feedback to reflect on but not a concurrent
one. So maybe record it and reflect on it later on.”. This may be an interesting area of future work,
as a mental workload parallel to life-logging and tracking daily fitness activity - a form of Mental
Workload Fitness tracker. Further more participants suggested various levels of feedback would be
much more useful “rather than a cut off point ... a gradual transition in a way” (P1 Phase 1).
Overall, the results show strong support for helping people to reflect, in action, on their current
workload but without negatively impacting performance or indeed their Mental Workload. We did
not, however, manage to observe improved performance, nor changes in behaviour because of the
feedback they received. We discuss these more below.
6.3

Future Work

6.3.1 Continuously assessing workload. Beyond the challenges of real time processing of

data, there are a number of interesting events that can occur when continuously assessing workload
- we noted that mental workload fluctuated noticeably when aeroplanes crashed, and informally
participants noted feeling stressed. It is interesting to consider what participants do in these situations,
and what this might look like in workload data. We wanted to investigate what happened when
participants failed to monitor and control all aeroplanes on the screen, and two or more aeroplanes
ended up in a colliding. Figure 14a and Figure 14b show, for example, measurable changes in fNIRS
OXY signal after such a fail, and its impact on Feedback. It is clearly important to consider whether
this is cause or affect, but based on informal secondary analyses of our data, we saw many of these
dramatic shifts in mental workload around fail scenarios.
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2018.

1:26

H. A. Maior et al.

(a) Example 1

(b) Example 2

Fig. 14. Participant Oxygenation Levels measured with fNIRS after a “crash” event

In future work, we would like to more directly evaluate and, associate these reactions to events,
whilst still giving people reliable feedback about their mental workload. Such future work may also
focus on using other measures of workload, as emotional reactions are typically more observable
through other physical reactions. We used an fNIRS device, which has been shown to be suitable
for HCI user study evaluations, but more commercially available devices like the NeuroSky4 EEG
device might be more suitable for day to day feedback. Similarly, even less invasive measures of
mental workload could be taken from Heart Rate Variability [24] through smart watches, remotely
detected by pupil dilation [33] or facial skin temperature [53] with cameras. Many of these other
measures also better detect emotional responses, and perhaps concepts like stress and anxiety, and so
might better serve future work on recording both Mental Workload and emotional response.
6.3.2 Designing different feedback types. In general, the binary feedback of workload was
alerting users of a high workload when a sudden increase in Oxygenation was measured using fNIRS.
In the same way, a sudden decrease would cause a low workload alert after. The changes were visible
to participants, such that they could monitor and use their workload feedback presented by the WFS.
However, future work could first examine more granular forms of feedback, as noted qualitatively
by participants. It was interesting, however, to first informally observe, and then analytically find
differences between the choice of lighting feedback in two phases in the study. This post-hoc
independent variable in our analysis revealed interesting results that imply that confirm Sharples &
Megaw’s [2015] description that workload is closely affected by way in which participants experience
that workload. In Phase1, red colour was used for feeding back high workload states, and white
colour for low workload states, and in Phase2 the colours were swapped. Having white light to alert
of high workload made some participants feel “right” being on the white colour rather than red
making them feel they are not working enough; P29 (Phase 2) “...when they were red, I thought I am
not working enough. When they were white it felt right, it felt that I was paying a lot of attention,
it was in the right track”. On the other side, having colour red to alert of high workload generated
pressure when “being” on red, P9 (Phase 1) reported that “When the lights become red, it works
as a reminder to take a big breath and relax”. It would be extremely interesting in future work to
artificially manipulate changes in feedback, and to observe changes in workload in a similar way
to when participants experienced crashes (like in Figure 14). Such an analysis would help us to
separately examine the impact of mental workload created by feedback and mental workload created
4 http://neurosky.com/

ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2018.

Measure and Feedback of Workload during Tasks

1:27

by task demand. Future work should also, therefore, explore the design and mode of feedback, as
well as the granularity of feedback.
6.3.3 Studying behaviour change. One large research area is behaviour change, and this study
was not designed to measure and observe it. Although this study was not focused on measuring
in-task, or future-task behaviour change, qualitative anecdotes, however, imply that people did reflect
on their mental workload and consider their current status. It would be highly interesting in future
work to more directly study whether or not there are behavioural markers for when participants take
action based on their feedback. Such work would need more accommodating task conditions that
allow people to manage, delay or even share their workload with others.
7

CONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we considered whether brain sensing techniques, which are increasingly becoming
commercially available, could be used to give people concurrent feedback about their Mental
Workload levels. Although existing techniques, like the Instantaneous Self Assessment (ISA) tool,
are designed to help people to report and reflect on their current Mental Workload levels, they also
often have a negative impact on the primary task at hand. We hoped that, with objectively measuring
and providing concurrent feedback during tasks, participants would be able to reflect on the mental
workload levels, without the associated performance drops. In order to capture and understand these
effects, we have adapted the Framework for mental workload evaluation (presented in Figure 1).
We “controlled” the “external factors” presented in the relationship 5 of the framework (in our case
the presence of ISA and the presence of Feedback). Our results first confirmed both approaches to
measuring Mental Workload during tasks, accurately correlating the measures with task demands.
We then confirmed prior research findings that self-reporting techniques had an impact on both actual
and perceived performance, as well as increasing the task demands on the participants. Our results,
however, showed no such drops in performance were found with our Mental Workload Feedback
System. Using the framework, we confirmed the existing relationships between the physical and
cognitive task demands, and the operator workload (see relationship 1 in Figure 1), as well as the
direct connection between operator workload and performance (see relationship 2 in Figure 1).
Further, our interviews confirmed that feedback led participants to reflect on their mental workload
during tasks, but that the choice of feedback (using red lights to warn them of high Mental Workload)
created a negative stressor to their experience. This effect was removed after changing the choice of
colour in our feedback mechanism. The results suggested that participants do use the feedback of
workload, therefore showing the relevance of relationship 3 in the same framework. Relationship 4
was not directly studied in this paper, however, the future work section presents the authors interest
in associating various physiological reactions to events (e.g. such as task failure). We conclude that
objectively measured concurrent feedback of Mental Workload can help people to understand and
actively manage their behaviour during tasks, but without the negative affects on performance created
by self-reporting techniques. Such personal insight would be important for safety critical tasks like
Air Traffic Control, but has the potential to more broadly help us to understand and manage our own
mental workload across the many tasks that fill our lives. Future work, however, should focus on the
design of mental workload feedback mechanisms, to provide people with insight without increasing
their workload and stress levels.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by the EPSRC funded “Horizon Centre for Doctoral Training” EP/G037574/1
Ubiquitous Computing for a Digital Economy, the EPSRC “Living with Digital Ubiquity” EP/M000877/1,
and the EPSRC “Doctoral Training Partnership” EP/N50970X/1. The authors greatly thank Alexandru
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2018.

1:28

H. A. Maior et al.

Ghitulescu for the support with the development of the Workload Feedback System, Hyosun Kwon
for all the effort with Figure 3, and Christopher Ellis for the development of the fNIRS data processing
script (available here: https://github.com/Christopher51773/FNIRS_DATA_PROCESSING).
Data access statement: consent was not gained from participants to release the study data online,
and so a dataset is not openly available.
REFERENCES
[1] Daniel Afergan, Evan M Peck, Erin T Solovey, Andrew Jenkins, Samuel W Hincks, Eli T Brown, Remco Chang, and
Robert JK Jacob. 2014. Dynamic difficulty using brain metrics of workload. In Proc. SIGCHI. ACM, 3797–3806.
[2] Gabor Aranyi, Fred Charles, and Marc Cavazza. 2015. Anger-based BCI using fNIRS neurofeedback. In Proceedings of
the 28th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software & Technology. ACM, 511–521.
[3] Hasan Ayaz. 2010. Functional Near Infrared Spectroscopy based Brain Computer Interface. PhD Thesis (2010).
[4] Hasan Ayaz and Banu Onaral. 2005. Analytical software and stimulus-presentation platform to utilize, visualize and
analyze near-infrared spectroscopy measures. Drexel University.
[5] Hasan Ayaz, Patricia A Shewokis, Scott Bunce, Kurtulus Izzetoglu, Ben Willems, and Banu Onaral. 2012. Optical brain
monitoring for operator training and mental workload assessment. Neuroimage 59, 1 (2012), 36–47.
[6] Alan Baddeley. 2000. The episodic buffer: a new component of working memory? Trends in cognitive sciences 4, 11
(2000), 417–423.
[7] Alan Baddeley. 2003. Working memory: looking back and looking forward. Nature reviews neuroscience 4, 10 (2003),
829–839.
[8] Michela Balconi, Elisabetta Grippa, and Maria Elide Vanutelli. 2015. What hemodynamic (fNIRS), electrophysiological
(EEG) and autonomic integrated measures can tell us about emotional processing. Brain and cognition 95 (2015),
67–76.
[9] Jackson Beatty. 1982. Task-evoked pupillary responses, processing load, and the structure of processing resources.
Psychological bulletin 91, 2 (1982), 276.
[10] George E Billman. 2011. Heart rate variability–a historical perspective. Frontiers in physiology 2 (2011).
[11] Scott C Bunce, Kurtulus Izzetoglu, Hasan Ayaz, Patricia Shewokis, Meltem Izzetoglu, Kambiz Pourrezaei, and Banu
Onaral. 2011. Implementation of fNIRS for monitoring levels of expertise and mental workload. In Foundations of
augmented cognition. Directing the future of adaptive systems. Springer, 13–22.
[12] Brad Cain. 2007. A review of the mental workload literature. Technical Report. DTIC Document.
[13] Britton Chance, Endla Anday, Shoko Nioka, Shuoming Zhou, Long Hong, Katherine Worden, C Li, T Murray, Y
Ovetsky, D Pidikiti, et al. 1998. A novel method for fast imaging of brain function, non-invasively, with light. Optics
express 2, 10 (1998), 411–423.
[14] C Collet, E Salvia, and C Petit-Boulanger. 2014. Measuring workload with electrodermal activity during common
braking actions. Ergonomics 57, 6 (2014), 886–896.
[15] Xu Cui, Signe Bray, and Allan L Reiss. 2010. Functional near infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) signal improvement
based on negative correlation between oxygenated and deoxygenated hemoglobin dynamics. Neuroimage 49, 4 (2010),
3039–3046.
[16] Gautier Durantin, J-F Gagnon, Sébastien Tremblay, and Frédéric Dehais. 2014. Using near infrared spectroscopy and
heart rate variability to detect mental overload. Behavioural brain research 259 (2014), 16–23.
[17] Matthieu Duvinage, Thierry Castermans, Thierry Dutoit, M Petieau, T Hoellinger, CD Saedeleer, K Seetharaman, and G
Cheron. 2012. A P300-based quantitative comparison between the Emotiv Epoc headset and a medical EEG device. In
IASTED.
[18] Kingsley Fletcher. 2015. The dynamic effects of task demands on resource availability, resource allocation and
metacognitive states. (2015).
[19] Jérémy Frey, Maxime Daniel, Julien Castet, Martin Hachet, and Fabien Lotte. 2016.
Framework for
electroencephalography-based evaluation of user experience. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, 2283–2294.
[20] Jérémy Frey, Christian Mühl, Fabien Lotte, and Martin Hachet. 2013. Review of the use of electroencephalography as
an evaluation method for human-computer interaction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1311.2222 (2013).
[21] Jacek Gwizdka. 2010. Using Stroop task to assess cognitive load. In Proceedings of the 28th Annual European
Conference on Cognitive Ergonomics. ACM, 219–222.
[22] Eija Haapalainen, SeungJun Kim, Jodi F Forlizzi, and Anind K Dey. 2010. Psycho-physiological measures for assessing
cognitive load. In Proceedings of the 12th ACM international conference on Ubiquitous computing. ACM, 301–310.

ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2018.

Measure and Feedback of Workload during Tasks

1:29

[23] Sandra G Hart and Lowell E Staveland. 1988. Development of NASA-TLX (Task Load Index): Results of empirical and
theoretical research. Human mental workload (1988).
[24] Javier Hernandez, Daniel McDuff, and Rosalind W Picard. 2015. BioWatch: estimation of heart and breathing rates from
wrist motions. In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare.
ICST (Institute for Computer Sciences, Social-Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering), 169–176.
[25] Leanne M Hirshfield, Erin Treacy Solovey, Audrey Girouard, James Kebinger, Robert JK Jacob, Angelo Sassaroli,
and Sergio Fantini. 2009. Brain measurement for usability testing and adaptive interfaces: an example of uncovering
syntactic workload with functional near infrared spectroscopy. In Proc. CHI. ACM, 2185–2194.
[26] Christina Hirth, Hellmuth Obrig, Kersten Villringer, Andeas Thiel, Johannes Bernarding, Werner Mühlnickel, Herta
Flor, Ulrich Dirnagl, and Arno Villringer. 1996. Non-invasive functional mapping of the human motor cortex using
near-infrared spectroscopy. Neuroreport 7, 12 (1996), 1977–1981.
[27] TJ Huppert, RD Hoge, SG Diamond, Maria Angela Franceschini, and David A Boas. 2006. A temporal comparison of
BOLD, ASL, and NIRS hemodynamic responses to motor stimuli in adult humans. Neuroimage 29, 2 (2006), 368–382.
[28] Kurtulus Izzetoglu, Scott Bunce, Banu Onaral, Kambiz Pourrezaei, and Britton Chance. 2004. Functional optical brain
imaging using near-infrared during cognitive tasks. IJHCI 17, 2 (2004), 211–227.
[29] M. Izzetoglu, S. C. Bunce, K. Izzetoglu, B. Onaral, and K. Pourrezaei. 2007. Functional brain imaging using near-infrared
technology. IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Magazine 26, 4 (2007), 38.
[30] Frans F Jobsis. 1977. Noninvasive, infrared monitoring of cerebral and myocardial oxygen sufficiency and circulatory
parameters. Science 198, 4323 (1977), 1264–1267.
[31] Jordan and Brennen. 1992. Instantaneous self-assessment of workload technique (ISA). Retrieved from http://www.
skybrary.aero/bookshelf/books/1963.pdf. (1992).
[32] Daniel Kahneman. 1973. Attention and effort. Vol. 1063. Prentice-Hall Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
[33] Jeff Klingner, Rakshit Kumar, and Pat Hanrahan. 2008. Measuring the task-evoked pupillary response with a remote eye
tracker. In Proceedings of the 2008 symposium on Eye tracking research & applications. ACM, 69–72.
[34] M Leanne and J Robert. 2009. Using Brain Measurement to Evaluate Reality Based Interactions. Challenges in the
Evaluation of Usability and User Experience in Reality Based Interaction 5 (2009), 19–20.
[35] Andrew Leggatt. 2005. Validation of the ISA (Instantaneous Self Assessment) subjective workload tool. In Contemporary
Ergonomics 2005: Proceedings of the International Conference on Contemporary Ergonomics (CE2005), 5-7 April
2005, Hatfield, UK. CRC Press, 74.
[36] Xiaofei Li, Lele Xu, Li Yao, and Xiaojie Zhao. 2013. A Novel HCI System Based on Real-Time fMRI Using Motor
Imagery Interaction. In Foundations of Augmented Cognition. Springer, 703–708.
[37] Manja Lohse, Reinier Rothuis, Jorge Gallego-Pérez, Daphne E Karreman, and Vanessa Evers. 2014. Robot gestures
make difficult tasks easier: the impact of gestures on perceived workload and task performance. In Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, 1459–1466.
[38] Kristiyan Lukanov, Horia A Maior, and Max L Wilson. 2016. Using fNIRS in usability testing: understanding the effect
of web form layout on mental workload. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. ACM, 4011–4016.
[39] Horia A Maior, Matthew Pike, Sarah Sharples, and Max L Wilson. 2015. Examining the reliability of using fNIRS in
realistic hci settings for spatial and verbal tasks. In Proceedings of CHI, Vol. 15. 3807–3816.
[40] Natasha Merat, A Hamish Jamson, Frank CH Lai, and Oliver Carsten. 2012. Highly automated driving, secondary task
performance, and driver state. Human Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 54, 5 (2012),
762–771.
[41] Fred Paas, Alexander Renkl, and John Sweller. 2003. Cognitive load theory and instructional design: Recent developments. Educational psychologist 38, 1 (2003), 1–4.
[42] Evan M Peck, Beste F Yuksel, Alvitta Ottley, Robert JK Jacob, and Remco Chang. 2013. Using fNIRS Brain Sensing to
Evaluate Information Visualization Interfaces. In Proc. SIGCHI. ACM.
[43] Laura Pickup, John R Wilson, Beverley J Norris, Lucy Mitchell, and Ged Morrisroe. 2005. The Integrated Workload
Scale (IWS): a new self-report tool to assess railway signaller workload. Applied Ergonomics 36, 6 (2005), 681–693.
[44] Matthew F Pike, Horia A Maior, Martin Porcheron, Sarah C Sharples, and Max L Wilson. 2014. Measuring the effect of
think aloud protocols on workload using fNIRS. In Proceedings of the 32nd annual ACM conference on Human factors
in computing systems. ACM, 3807–3816.
[45] Michael M Plichta, Antje BM Gerdes, GW Alpers, W Harnisch, S Brill, MJ Wieser, and Andreas J Fallgatter. 2011.
Auditory cortex activation is modulated by emotion: a functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) study. Neuroimage
55, 3 (2011), 1200–1207.
[46] Peter Rasche, Alexander Mertens, Christopher Schlick, and Pilsung Choe. 2015. The Effect of Tactile Feedback on
Mental Workload During the Interaction with a Smartphone. In Cross-Cultural Design Methods, Practice and Impact.

ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2018.

1:30

H. A. Maior et al.

Springer, 198–208.
[47] Gary B Reid and Thomas E Nygren. 1988. The subjective workload assessment technique: A scaling procedure for
measuring mental workload. Advances in psychology 52 (1988), 185–218.
[48] Donald A Schön. 1983. The reflective practitioner: How professionals think in action. Vol. 5126. Basic books.
[49] Sarah Sharples and Ted Megaw. 2015. Definition and Mesurement of Human Workload. In Evaluation of human work,
John R Wilson and Sarah Sharples (Eds.). CRC Press.
[50] Yu Shi, Natalie Ruiz, Ronnie Taib, Eric Choi, and Fang Chen. 2007. Galvanic skin response (GSR) as an index of
cognitive load. In CHI’07 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems. ACM, 2651–2656.
[51] Erin Solovey, Daniel Afergan, Evan M Peck, Samuel W Hincks, and Robert JK Jacob. 2015. Designing implicit interfaces
for physiological computing: guidelines and lessons learned using fNIRS. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human
Interaction (TOCHI) 21, 6 (2015), 35.
[52] Erin Treacy Solovey, Audrey Girouard, Krysta Chauncey, Leanne M Hirshfield, Angelo Sassaroli, Feng Zheng, Sergio
Fantini, and Robert JK Jacob. 2009. Using fNIRS brain sensing in realistic HCI settings: experiments and guidelines. In
Proc. UIST. ACM, 157–166.
[53] John Stemberger, Robert S Allison, and Thomas Schnell. 2010. Thermal imaging as a way to classify cognitive workload.
In Computer and Robot Vision (CRV), 2010 Canadian Conference On. IEEE, 231–238.
[54] M Strait, C Canning, and M Scheutz. 2013. Limitations of NIRS-based BCI for realistic applications in human-computer
interaction. In BCI Meeting. 6–7.
[55] Andrew J Tattersall and Penelope S Foord. 1996. An experimental evaluation of instantaneous self-assessment as a
measure of workload. Ergonomics 39, 5 (1996), 740–748.
[56] Pamela S Tsang and Velma L Velazquez. 1996. Diagnosticity and multidimensional subjective workload ratings.
Ergonomics 39, 3 (1996), 358–381.
[57] Arno Villringer and Britton Chance. 1997. Non-invasive optical spectroscopy and imaging of human brain function.
Trends in neurosciences 20, 10 (1997), 435–442.
[58] A Villringer, J Planck, C Hock, L Schleinkofer, and U Dirnagl. 1993. Near infrared spectroscopy (NIRS): a new tool to
study hemodynamic changes during activation of brain function in human adults. Neuroscience letters 154, 1 (1993),
101–104.
[59] Alan Traviss Welford. 1968. Fundamentals of skill. (1968).
[60] Harold Thomas Anthony Whiting. 1969. Acquiring ball skill: A psychological interpretation. Lea & Febiger.
[61] Christopher D Wickens. 2008. Multiple resources and mental workload. The Journal of the Human Factors and
Ergonomics Society 50, 3 (2008), 449–455.
[62] Glenn F Wilson and Chris A Russell. 2003. Operator functional state classification using multiple psychophysiological
features in an air traffic control task. Human Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 45, 3
(2003), 381–389.
[63] Beste F Yuksel, Daniel Afergan, Evan M Peck, Garth Griffin, Lane Harrison, Nick WB Chen, Remco Chang, and
Robert JK Jacob. 2015. BRAAHMS: A Novel Adaptive Musical Interface Based on Users’ Cognitive State. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression NIME.
[64] Beste F Yuksel, Kurt B Oleson, Lane Harrison, Evan M Peck, Daniel Afergan, Remco Chang, and Robert JK Jacob. 2016.
Learn piano with BACh: An adaptive learning interface that adjusts task difficulty based on brain state. In Proceedings
of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, 5372–5384.

Received January 2017; revised October 2017; accepted November 2017

ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2018.

