7th International Building Physics Conference

Proceedings
Healthy, Intelligent and Resilient
Buildings and Urban Environments
ibpc2018.org #ibpc2018

7th International Building Physics Conference, IBPC2018

Field occupants’ behavior monitoring integrated to prediction models:
impact on building energy performance
Cristina Piselli1,*, Ilaria Pigliautile1 and Anna Laura Pisello1,2
1
2
*

CIRIAF – Interuniversity Research Centre, Perugia, Italy
Department of Engineering, University of Perugia, Italy
Corresponding email: piselli@crbnet.it

ABSTRACT
Given the massive scientific progress on passive and active solutions to reach near-zeroenergy targets, the necessity to consider occupants’ behavior as a key variable affecting field
energy performance of buildings has become a crucial issue to face. In this panorama, a
variety of deterministic and stochastic models, also supported by experimental investigations
have been developed in the last decade. This paper builds upon previous contributions to
analyze the real occupancy of an office building populated by peers’ offices monitored for 2
years by means of microclimate and energy-need field stations. After demonstrating that the
peers do not behave the same and do not control in equivalent ways indoors microclimate
parameters (e.g. air temperature, desk illuminance, etc.), internationally acknowledged models
and field-collected data are compared through dynamic simulation. The estimation of final
energy need of different considered scenarios is calculated and the relative difference is
highlighted as a possible indicator about the role of building occupancy profiles in affecting
energy need prediction. Additionally, EEG experimental test are used to assess the correlation
of workers’ subjective emotions with external thermal stimuli. Results of final energy need
estimation showed to vary by about 20% by only selecting the occupancy simulation scheme,
and non-consistent prediction trends are found out while investigating lighting and electric
appliances needs. Accordingly, as concerns the human psychological response to the variation
of thermal conditions, negligible emotional reactions are found among the different tested
workers when suddenly altering comfort conditions indoors.
KEYWORDS
Occupant behavior; Dynamic thermal-energy simulation; Continuous monitoring; Behavior
modeling; Scientific Contextual EEG.
INTRODUCTION
Given the acknowledged primary influence of building occupants’ behavior on indoor
microclimate and energy needs, the understanding of energy related occupant behavior in
buildings is a key issue for performance evaluation and optimization at the design stage
(Brown and Cole, 2009). In this view, researchers have been working on the understanding
and modeling of occupants’ behavior in buildings to enable more reliable predictions of
building performance (Hong et al. 2016). With the aim of comparing pre- and postperformance of building, Gupta and Gregg (2016) evaluated the actual performance of two
low-energy retrofitted buildings in UK. In both buildings, measured annual gas consumption
were lower than expected, while electricity consumption was higher as compared to
predictions made by energy models, due to occupancy pattern and occupant behavior. In order
to face standardized occupancy modeling approach, different stochastic models have been
proposed. Such models aim at realistically describing general (Diao et al. 2017) and single
energy-related occupancy behaviors, such as people’s presence (Mahdavi and Tahmasebi,

643

7th International Building Physics Conference, IBPC2018
2015), windows opening (Fabi et al. 2015), natural ventilation control, and appliances power
loads (Zhao et al. 2014). Furthermore, adaptive thermal comfort behaviors have to be
understood and taken into account. O’Brien et al. (2016) suggested that the necessary sample
size to simulate and exploit occupant diversity between building occupants and uncertainty is
dependent on the uniformity of the monitored population. Accordingly, occupants’ behavior
prediction may become particularly hard in those buildings occupied by a wide variety of
users. On the other hand, peer occupants are usually assumed to have identical response to
similar environmental conditions and in determining building thermal-energy performance.
However, different peer occupants’ personal attitudes and habits were found to differently
affect the indoor environmental behavior of buildings (Pisello et al. 2016). Therefore, peers’
actions homogeneity assumption can involve significant discrepancies in the thermal-energy
performance of different areas situated even in the same building position (Kim et al. 2016).
In fact, occupants’ actions in buildings are related not only to physical stimuli, but also to
multi-physics and non-measurable stimuli, in terms of thermal, acoustics, lighting, air quality
issues. In this view, further research efforts, in terms of methodologies and simulation tools,
are required to elaborate reliable predictive models integrating people energy needy actions
into building energy modeling programs (Yan et al. 2015).
In this panorama, the purpose of the present study is to assess the capability of different
existing deterministic and stochastic occupancy models for office buildings, usually
considered in building dynamic simulation, to comprehensively depict occupants’ behavior.
To this aim, simulations are compared against real occupancy data continuously monitored in
a research office building. Moreover, the discrepancy in terms of final building energy
requirements is verified when considering two static standard models, a recent stochastic
model, and case-specific models developed based on real monitored data. Additionally, the
correlation between occupant’s subjective emotions and comfort conditions variation is
assessed through neural response tests. Considering the existing literature, the innovative
contribution of this research is to compare the performance of different occupancy models in
simulating the influence of real offices occupants on total building energy consumption by
taking into account the mutual dependence of various occupants’ actions. Therefore, different
energy-related parameters affected by personal attitudes in office buildings are taken into
account. This work builds upon a previous study by the same authors (Pisello et al. 2016)
where energy-related peer occupants’ behaviors were investigated through field monitoring
and peers were found to behave differently based on personal habits and cultural background.
Therefore, the capability of a tool based on EEG (Electroencephalography) to assess human
perception of discomfort conditions and associated emotional states is evaluated.
METHODS
The research procedure implemented in this study consists of the following steps:
 Experimental continuous monitoring campaign of equivalent office rooms of a building
occupied by peer occupants. Analysis of occupancy-related parameters such as energy
need, indoor air temperature, illuminance over the working plane, appliances electricity
consumption, and windows and door operation;
 Development of the building model and dynamic simulation when considering various
occupancy schedules, i.e. static standard, stochastic, real monitored data-based;
 Data analysis and comparison of thermal-energy dynamic simulation results for the
different occupancy scenarios in terms of daily trends of occupant related parameters
and building total energy consumption;
 Evaluation of models representing the occupants’ behavior in the five monitored office
rooms against additional monitored data;

644

7th International Building Physics Conference, IBPC2018


EEG experimental test of selected occupants under different comfort conditions to
assess the correlation of workers’ emotional response and external thermal stimuli.

Experimental campaign
The experimental monitoring campaign has been carried out in the case study office building,
located in Perugia (central Italy) from late spring 2015. The behavior of a group of peer
employees working in 5 office rooms has been continuously monitored through dedicated
monitoring stations constituting a Wireless Sensors Network (WSN) system. The selected
office rooms presents the same characteristics in terms of geometry, energy systems, and each
one is equipped with two/three computers according to the number of workers. The
monitoring campaign investigates the main parameters related to (i) indoor microclimate and
(ii) occupants’ activity inside each office room. A more detailed description of the monitoring
campaign, setup, and sensors is reported in (Pisello et al. 2016).
Dynamic simulation and occupancy scenarios
Building modeling and thermal-energy dynamic simulation is carried out through EnergyPlus
v8.1 simulation engine (Crawley et al. 2000). Different occupancy models are considered for
dynamic simulations: two static models, conventionally implemented in building dynamic
simulation, i.e. the UK NCM (National Calculation Method for Non Domestic Buildings)
standard (UK DCLG, 2004) (“standard” scenario) and the ASHRAE model based on Standard
62.1-2007 and Standard 90.1-2016 (“ASHRAE” scenario); and the stochastic model obtained
from the “Occupancy Simulator” tool (LBNL 2011; Luo et al. 2017) (“occ_sim” scenario).
Moreover, continuously monitored data in the five offices from June 2015 to January 2016 are
considered to develop seasonal, i.e. warm and cold season, occupancy schedules to model five
scenarios representative of the different offices occupants (“office_1”, “office_2”, “office_3”,
“office_4”, and “office_5” scenarios). In particular, heating and cooling set-points, lighting
use, and appliances energy use are taken into account. Simulation results with the three
reference occupancy scenarios are compared with real monitored occupants’ behaviors in
terms of daily trend of occupancy-related physical parameters affecting building energy
consumption in summer (July) and winter (January). Additionally, the simulation of the five
experimental data-based occupancy scenarios is carried out to evaluate the discrepancy with
the reference scenarios in terms of total annual building energy requirement (including
HVAC, lighting, and appliances). Moreover, occupants’ behavior data monitored in the office
rooms during summer 2016 and winter 2016/2017, are used for the evaluation of the
developed occupancy schedules. Therefore, the developed models are evaluated when
compared against the additional experimental data.
EEG experimental tests
To assess the neural response of workers to external thermal stimuli, the EMOTIV EPOC+
neuroheadset (Figure 1) and software are used. In fact, this tool is capable, among other
things, to report the real time changes in the subjective emotions experienced by the user,
thanks to the Affectiv detection tab of the Xavier ControlPanel software. More in detail, the
neuroheadset allows to acquire the user’s EEG, which is then post-processed through the
supplied software. Therefore, the tool is tested to assess the correlation between human
emotions and the variation of external physical stimuli. To this aim, tests are performed to the
same peer occupants working in similar office rooms (“user_1” to “user_5”) when exposed to
different thermal conditions, while working at the computer. More in detail, the effect of
short-term alteration of the thermal comfort, i.e. by increasing the internal heat gains and,
therefore, the air temperature, on the different occupants’ emotions is evaluated. Therefore,
each occupant is subjected to three test sessions when varying the discomfort time:

645

7th International Building Physics Conference, IBPC2018




“base”: 30 minutes in a thermally comfortable environment;
“1/2”: 15 minutes in a thermally comfortable and 15 in a discomfortable environment;
“1”: 30 minutes in a thermally discomfortable environment.

Figure 1. EEG experimental test. Left) Test example, Right) Neuroheadset.
RESULTS
Comparison of occupancy models
Firstly, the trend of occupancy-related simulated parameters in the “standard” and
“ASHRAE” scenarios with respect to the monitored data during a summer and a winter day,
show that the standardized implemented procedures are neither representative of occupants’
individual attitudes nor of their average behavior and tends to overestimate (“standard”) and
underestimate (“ASHRAE”) occupants’ energy needs. As concerns the “occ_sim”, since only
the occupancy presence schedule is changed in this scenario, with respect to the “standard”,
negligible differences are found in a single-day-term. Switching to the total annual energy
consumption for the eight occupancy scenarios, i.e. the three reference and the five
experimental data-based, simulation results confirm the high variability of building energy
consumption depending on the considered occupancy scenario. In fact, the monitoring-based
occupancy scenarios present lower HVAC annual energy consumption with respect to the
reference “standard” scenario, up to 19.7% for “office_2”. Concerning annual lighting use, all
monitoring-based scenarios present lower energy consumption with respect to the three
reference scenarios, up to about 13.2 kWh/m2 per year (“office_4”). Additionally, although
considered as peers, the occupants of the five office rooms show notably different electricity
energy use and indoor thermal preference, especially in summer. Finally, the simplified
occupancy models developed according to the data monitored during year 2015/2016 were
evaluated when compared against the experimental data collected during the following year.
Figure 2 depicts the trend of simulated parameters with respect to measured data for an
average day in summer. The comparison of measured and simulated parameters stresses the
higher, yet still not adequate representativeness of experimental data-based occupancy
models, compared to standard and stochastic models. However, relevant discrepancies are still
noticed, since occupants’ behavior is inconstant and influenced by multi-physical and multidimensional parameters to be more deeply investigated. Similar results are obtained in winter.
EEG tests results
EEG tests are performed to verify the possibility to correlate the variation of external physical
stimuli with worker’s subjective emotions. Results (Table 1) show that the analyzed feelings
are generally not affected by alteration of thermal conditions. However, some exceptions are
noticed: one of the tested occupants experiences focus and excitement reduction in thermally
discomfortable conditions, while another one shows excitement increase when increasing the
time of exposure to discomfortable conditions. Nevertheless, this singular results cannot be
considered representative. Instead, results generally show that non-physical factors, i.e. focus
and involvement in the performed tasks, are more significant drivers of personal emotions and
behaviors than physical factors, i.e. thermal conditions. In this view, it has to be considered
the short test period and the moderate thermal alteration, which may have affected such result.

646

7th International Building Physics Conference, IBPC2018

Figure 2. Average trend of data monitored in the five office room with respect to simulated
data in a summer day. Up left) Indoor air temperature, Up right) Illuminance over the work
plane vs. lighting energy use, Bottom) Appliances electricity use.
Table 1. Variation of occupants’ subjective emotions level in different thermal conditions.

base

User_1
User_2
User_3
User_4
User_5

Engagement
61%
58%
57%
62%
58%

Excitement
17%
28%
8%
26%
28%

Interest
58%
61%
55%
61%
65%

Relaxation
30%
33%
30%
32%
30%

Stress
99%
51%
54%
52%
50%

Focus
51%
38%
26%
38%
39%

1/2

User_1
User_2
User_3
User_4
User_5

61%
48%
56%
62%
58%

24%
24%
8%
25%
16%

60%
62%
56%
60%
64%

31%
39%
30%
30%
30%

99%
53%
53%
52%
51%

55%
35%
24%
41%
33%

1

User_1
User_2
User_3
User_4
User_5

56%
59%
56%
64%
58%

53%
29%
8%
26%
10%

56%
59%
62%
59%
64%

27%
31%
30%
32%
29%

59%
47%
59%
42%
54%

70%
39%
31%
37%
26%

CONCLUSIONS
The purpose of the present study is to verify the capability of different standard static and
stochastic occupancy models to predict the behavior of real occupants of an office building.
To this aim, occupancy behavior-related environmental and energy parameters were
monitored in five rooms of a office building to develop experimental data-based occupancy
models. Moreover, an EEG based tool is tested as complementary tool to improve occupant
behavior understanding and prediction. Results show that the standard occupancy models are
neither representative of specific occupants’ preferences and peak energy demand nor of their
averaged behavior, both in the short-term and in the long-term. In fact, the standardized
existing procedures do not take into account the adaptability of human comfort and energysaving or -wasting habits of office occupants. Conversely, the occupancy scenarios developed
based on the experimental data showed to better represent the real daily occupants’ attitudes,
yet discrepancies are still noticed, due to inconstant human behavior affected by multi-

647

7th International Building Physics Conference, IBPC2018
physical and non-physical stimuli. In this view, neural response tests are demonstrated to be a
reliable tool to improve this multidisciplinary analysis. However, this method requires further
investigations, by performing several tests, to provide outstanding results that strengthen the
first findings obtained in terms of correlation between subjective emotions and environmental
conditions.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work is part of the case-study research activity of the IEA-EBC program Annex 66:
Definition and Simulation of Occupant Behavior in Buildings. Part of this research is carried
out within the framework of COLO ARTE by Fondazione Cassa di Risparmio di Perugia,
(Grant Cod. 2016.0276.02). The authors’ acknowledgements are due to the European Union's
Horizon 2020 program under grant agreement No 678407 (ZERO-PLUS).
REFERENCES
Brown Z. and Cole R.J. 2009. Influence of occupants’ knowledge on comfort expectations
and behaviour. Building Research & Information, 37(3), 227–245.
Crawley D.B, Pedersen C.O, Lawrie L.K, and Winkelmann F.C. 2000. Energy plus: Energy
simulation program, ASHRAE Journal, 42, 49–56.
Diao L, Sun Y, Chen Z, and Chen J. 2017. Modeling energy consumption in residential
buildings: A bottom-up analysis based on occupant behavior pattern clustering and
stochastic simulation. Energy and Buildings, 147, 47–66.
Gupta R. and Gregg M. 2016. Do deep low carbon domestic retrofits actually work? Energy
and Buildings, 129, 330–343.
Hong T, Sun H, Chen Y, Taylor-Lange S.C, and Yan D. 2016. An occupant behavior
modeling tool for co-simulation. Energy and Buildings, 117, 272–281.
Kim J, de Dear R, Parkinson T, and Candido C. 2017. Understanding patterns of adaptive
comfort behaviour in the Sydney mixed-mode residential context. Energy and Buildings,
141, 274–283.
LBNL. 2011. Occupancy Simulator. http://occupancysimulator.lbl.gov/ (accessed March 29,
2018).
Luo X, Lam K.P, Chen Y, and Hong T. 2017. Performance evaluation of an agent-based
occupancy simulation model. Building and Environment, 115, 42–53.
Mahdavi A. and Tahmasebi F. 2015. Predicting people’s presence in buildings: An
empirically based model performance analysis. Energy and Buildings, 86, 349–355.
O’Brien W, Gunay H.B, Tahmasebi F, and Mahdavi A. 2017. A preliminary study of
representing the inter-occupant diversity in occupant modelling. Journal of Building
Performance Simulation, 10(5-6), 1–18.
Pisello A.L, Castaldo V.L, Piselli C, Fabiani C, and Cotana F. 2016. How peers’ personal
attitudes affect indoor microclimate and energy need in an institutional building: Results
from a continuous monitoring campaign in summer and winter conditions. Energy and
Buildings, 126, 485–497.
UK Department for Communities and Local Government (DCLG). 2004. UK’s National
Calculation Method for Non Domestic Buildings. http://www.uk-ncm.org.uk/ (accessed
February 19, 2018).
Yan D, O’Brien W, Hong T, Feng X, Burak Gunay H, Tahmasebi F, and Mahdavi A. 2015.
Occupant behavior modeling for building performance simulation: Current state and
future challenges. Energy and Buildings, 107, 264–278.
Zhao J, Lasternas B, Lam K.P, Yun R, and Loftness V. 2014. Occupant behavior and schedule
modeling for building energy simulation through office appliance power consumption data
mining. Energy and Buildings, 82, 341–355.

648

