Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

Fractal Dimension Based Neurofeedback in Serious Games
Qiang Wang · Olga Sourina · Minh Khoa Nguyen

Received: date / Accepted: date

Abstract EEG-based technology is widely used in serious
game design since more wireless headsets that meet consumer criteria for wearability, price, portability and ease-ofuse are coming to the market. Originally, such technologies
were mostly used in different medical applications, Brain
Computer Interfaces (BCI) and neurofeedback games. The
algorithms adopted in such applications are mainly based on
power spectrum analysis, which may not be fully revealing
the nonlinear complexity of the brain activities. In this paper, we first review neurofeedback games, EEG processing
methods and algorithms, and then propose a new nonlinear
fractal dimension based approach to neurofeedback implementation targeting EEG-based serious games design. Only
one channel is used in the proposed concentration quantification algorithm. The developed method was compared
with other methods used for the concentration level recognition in neurofeedback games. The result analysis demonstrated an efficiency of the proposed approach. We designed
and implemented new EEG-based 2D and 3D neurofeedback games that make the process of brain training more
enjoyable.
Keywords EEG · HCI · BCI · neurofeedback · fractal
dimension · game design · medical application
1 Introduction
Electroencephalogram (EEG) is a noninvasive technique
that allows recording the electrical potentials over the scalp
which are produced by activities of brain cortex and reflect the state of the brain [31]. Nowadays, EEG-based techniques have been widely used in BCI applications that help
Q. Wang · O. Sourina · M.K. Nguyen
Institute for Media Innovation and School of Electrical & Electronic
Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, 637553
E-mail: wang0586@ntu.edu.sg

disabled people to communicate with machines [33, 34], in
video games as game controllers [25], and in neurofeedback
games [42]. With the availability of portable wireless EEG
devices, EEG-based applications are no longer confined to
the lab environment
Neurofeedback is a technique that presents the real-time
feedback to the user in the form of video display and/or
sound based on the processing results of EEG signals taken
from the scalp of the user [16]. Many researches reveal that
EEG and Event Related Potential (ERP) distortions always
reflect psychological disorders such as Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) [28, 13], Autistic Spectrum
Disorders (ASD) [9, 39, 22, 10], Substance Use Disorders
(SUD) including alcohol and drug abuse [35, 36], etc. Similar to other parts of the body, brain functions can be trained
as well. Neurofeedback (NF) is a technique for training
brain functions and it is an alternative choice for the disorders treatment besides traditional medical treatments.
Currently, EEG signal processing algorithms embedded
in the neurofeedback games extract a power spectrum or an
amplitude feature of the user’s EEG signals. These features
may not fully reveal the whole complexity of the brain process. More advanced models are needed to analyze nonlinear properties of EEG signals. In this paper, we proposed
a new nonlinear fractal dimension approach to neurofeedback implementation. We use fractal dimension algorithms
to analyze the complexity of EEG signals. Fractal dimension values are calculated and used to quantify the level of
the user concentration. Our hypothesis is that changes in the
subject’s concentration level could be noticed as changes in
fractal dimension values of the EEG signal. The experiment
results show that the fractal dimension feature can represent the brain states better than the power spectrum density.
2D and 3D neurofeedback games are implemented based on
the fractal dimension model to help the user to improve the
player concentration ability.

2

In Sect. 2, neurofeedback games, EEG processing methods and algorithms, and game engines are reviewed. In
Sect. 3, a new fractal dimension based method for neurofeedback implementation is introduced. The experiment on
concentration level detection and comparison of the proposed algorithm with other methods are described in Sect. 4.
The implementation of the proposed fractal dimension based
neurofeedback games is introduced in Sect. 5. Finally, conclusion and discussion of future work are given in Sect. 6.
2 Related work
2.1 Neurofeedback game applications
Many neurofeedback games were assessed by the healing
effect of the ADHD, one of the most known psychological disorders with significant EEG distortion. The patients
with ADHD have problems to concentrate. The abnormal
behavior in θ /β ratio was reported in [8]. Besides the ratio, the distortion in Slow Cortical Potential (SCP) was also
notified by [14]. Both frequency neurofeedback training and
SCP neurofeedback training can achieve good healing effects for ADHD patients [14, 15].
ASD is another psychological disorder associated with
abnormalities of social interactions and communications as
well as seriously restricted interests and highly repeated actions [9]. In work [10], EEG analysis during resting condition with open eyes was done for an eight-year-old girl with
ASD patterns. The α band and θ band of EEG signal acted
abnormally, and the corresponding neurofeedback scheme
was designed to rectify the abnormalities. After 21 sessions
of the treatment, the sustained attention was enhanced and
the ASD symptoms were decreased. Another research group
also achieved good results in neurofeedback treatment with
standard Quantitative EEG (QEEG) protocol where the aim
is to decrease theta band power at the central and frontal
brain areas [22]. Similar to ASD, General Anxiety Disorder
(GAD) could cause unacceptable social behaviors as well.
GAD can also be treated with EEG α band suppression and
symmetry training [20].
SUD including drug or alcohol abuse always leads to
changes in social behaviors. Neurofeedback was proved to
be an affordable alternative treatment for SUD. Chronic alcoholics show significant diminution in α band of EEG signals. The corresponding neurofeedback treatment could decrease the brain waves in this band that was effective in alcoholic patients treatment [35]. For drug abuse, a decreased
α band power and an excess of fast beta band activities
were detected. In addition, a subject with drug addiction had
lower amplitude in P300 ERP component compared to the
controlled subject. The addiction was proved to be relieved
with the long term neurofeedback treatment [36].
Besides medical applications, neurofeedback could also

Qiang Wang et al.

help a healthy person to enhance his/her brain functions. Researchers indicated that cognitive performances, e.g. cued
recall performance, can be enhanced if a healthy person
learns how to increase special components of EEG signals
with neurofeedback [40, 17].
2.2 EEG signal processing methods
The brain state recognition algorithms embedded in BCI
systems especially neurofeedback systems are mainly based
on the power spectrum analysis. EEG signal can be divided
into several different frequency bands, i.e. δ band (<4Hz),
θ band (4-8Hz), α band (8-12Hz), β band (12-30Hz) and
γ band (>30Hz). The Sensorimotor rhythm activity (1215Hz) is also used in several neurofeedback systems. Each
frequency band is related to the specific brain functions.
Generally, δ band is prevalent in infant’s EEG or EEG when
the subject is sleeping; θ band is prevalent in EEG when
the subject feels drowsiness; α band is significant when the
subject is relaxed; β band is associated with fast activities
and γ band is related to problem solving and memory work
[11]. In the feature extraction step, the power over different
bands are assessed and extracted from the user’s EEG signals and then rectified with corresponding therapy, e.g. θ /β
ratio therapy, or compared with a standard QEEG database
(QEEG protocol) to generate the adaptive recovery therapy.
In work [29], the θ /β ratio in C4 position according to
10-20 International System [19] was successfully used in
neurofeedback to improve attention. The frequency training
method is the most prevalent method used in the neurofeedback training systems and other EEG-based games because
the frequency band power is easy to be obtained and analyzed with the existing signal processing tools. Besides,
in work [32], the EEG spectrum weighted frequency also
showed the ability in attention level recognition.
ERP analysis is the process to analyze the EEG signal
synchronized with an event. Slow Cortical Potential (SCP)
and P300 are important ERP approaches applied in neurofeedback treatments. SCP reflects the changes in cortical
polarization, i.e. negative and positive trends, of EEG signals which last from 300ms to several seconds after an event
stimulus [6]. Abnormalities in SCP of ADHD patients were
studied in [14], and the corresponding neurofeedback protocol could enhance the continuous performance. The P300
component of ERP occurs during 300ms - 600 ms after an
event stimulus which is obtained by oddball paradigm in
which low probability target items are inter-mixed with high
probability non-target items. Researches indicated that the
amplitude of P300 component is related to the process of
allocation of attention resources and its latency reflects the
stimulus evaluation and classification time. The pathology
of P300 component in drug abuse patients was reported in
[36], and neurofeedback based on P300 component training

Fractal Dimension Based Neurofeedback in Serious Games

was proposed.
Although the signal processing algorithms embedded in
neurofeedback games are well applied in clinical treatments,
the linear features, e.g. power spectral density and amplitude, extracted from EEG cannot represent the brain activities perfectly due to the nonlinearity of EEG signal. Nonlinear methods, e.g. entropy analysis and fractal dimension
analysis, have become popular in EEG processing for medical applications [23, 24, 38, 37] and been applied to neurofeedback systems [41] to model brain activities and EEG
based emotion recognition system [27]. With effective nonlinear EEG features, the accuracy of brain state recognition
could be improved, thus the treatment performance of the
neurofeedback games would be enhanced.

2.3 Game Engines
EEG-based games consist of two parts: signal processing
and game implementation. Game implementation can be effectively done with the help of game engines. Game engines are tools that programmers use to design and implement games. They provide ready-made utilities or tools to
develop a game. According to Jeff Ward [43], three types of
game engines are frequently seen: roll-your-own game engines, mostly-ready game engines, and point-and-click engines.
Roll-your-own game engines, including OpenGL and
DirectX, require the game makers to be well-versed in programming, and it takes a lot of time to design a game.
However, they give the game makers flexibility and more
freedom in designing their own components for the game.
Mostly-ready game engine is most popular in the market. Renderer, physics engine, collision detection, graphic,
sound system, etc. are usually available in these game engines. OGRE, Panda3D, Unreal, etc. belong to this kind
of game engine. A point-and-click engine is the highest
level game engine that requires least programming knowledge. However, they are quite limited in the number of the
provided readymade functions. These engines include Alice, Game Maker, etc. As EEG-based games include signal processing, a game engine should support programming
language C++, Python or any other scripting environments
which allow EEG recognition and interpretation.
In our neurofeedback games, SDL [4] game engine and
Flash CS3 were adopted for 2D games; Panda3D [2] and
Unreal Engine [5] were applied in 3D games. Most of them
are open source and can be easily integrated with our EEG
signal processing methods.

3

3 Methodology
3.1 EEG-based Game Design
In the past, traditional neurofeedback games were implemented for clinical applications with complex EEG devices
which were hard to be set up. Recently, more and more
portable and wireless EEG devices became available. More
effective EEG processing algorithms which could be used
with fewer electrodes in real-time applications are on demand. In this paper, wwe proposed a design of neurofeedback concentration games based on fractal dimension model
with one-channel EEG signal. Different from traditional
neurofeedback games, we focus on the monitoring of the
brain state recognized from the EEG using fractal dimension
model. The main idea of concentration games is using the
neurofeedback to encourage the player to improve his/her
level of concentration. The proposed EEG analysis method
is based on fractal dimension model which could capture
any changes in the brain state.
In order to develop a real-time application, fewer channels and faster signal processing algorithms should be used.
In our implementation, only one channel located in occipital
lobe is selected as the occipital lobe is responsible for visual
perception and visual attention [26, 30]. Entropy based fractal dimension model [21] is used to distinguish brain states
such as relaxed and concentrated.
3.2 Previous Approaches
The main task in our research is brain state recognition, especially concentration level recognition. There are methods
for attention level recognition. In work [29], θ /β ratio is
used for attention level estimation. In work [32], so-called
brain rate is used as a reliable attention level indicator. Both
methods are based on the analysis of power spectrum density of EEG signals.
In the θ /β ratio method, a power spectrum density of
EEG signals could be estimated with periodogram method.
Discrete Time Fourier Transform (DTFT) with fixed number of samples (N) is applied to estimate the power density
spectrum (PSD) as shown in (1) and (2):
DT FT {x(n)} = X(e jω ) =

∞

∑

x(n)e− jω n

(1)

n=−∞

PSD{x(n)} = S(ω ) =

1
kX(e jω )k2
N

(2)

where x(n) is the input EEG signal, X(e jω ) is the DTFT
of EEG signal, and S(ω ) is the power spectrum density of
EEG signal. The θ and β band power could be estimated by
integrating the power spectrum within the θ band (4-8Hz)
and β band (12-30Hz) respectively. Then, the ratio of the

4

Qiang Wang et al.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 1: Mono-fractal Weierstrass signal (a) fractal dimension value is 1.1 (b) fractal dimension value is 1.7

θ band power to β band power that indicates the attention
level can be obtained as follows:
R 2π ·8/Fs

θ band power
2π ·4/Fs S(ω )d ω
θ /β ratio =
= R 2π ·30/Fs
β band power
S(ω )d ω

Lk (m) =
(3)

2π ·12/Fs

where Fs is the sampling frequency of the EEG device.
In the brain rate method, the PSD is also estimated first
with periodogram method as illustrated before. The brain
rate can be calculated as spectrum weighted frequency as
follows,
fb (brain rate) =

R

ω S(ω )d ω
2π
· R
S(ω )d ω
Fs

The length of the sequences L(k) is calculated according to
(6) and (7):

(4)

1
[(
k

⌊( N−m
k )⌋

∑

|x(m + ik) − x(m + (i − 1)k)|)

i=1

L(k) =

1 k
∑ Lk (m)
k m=1

N −1
]
⌊( N−m
k )⌋k

(6)

(7)

where k denotes the number of the sub-sequences and Lk (m)
denotes the length of the m-th sub-sequence. The total length
L(k) is proportional to k−FD :

where Fs is the sampling frequency of the EEG device.

L(k) ∝ k−FD

3.3 Fractal Dimension Model

where FD is the fractal dimension value and k is the timedelay information. The fractal dimension value could be calculated as follows,

We proposed to use fractal dimension as a feature instead
of the power of EEG signals in the implementation of
neurofeedback in serious games. Fractal dimension could
be used as a measurement of complexity and irregularity
of a signal. In signal processing, Higher fractal dimension
value means that the signal is more complex, while lower
fractal dimension (FD) value means that the signal is more
regular. In Fig.1a and Fig. 1b, examples of mono-fractal
Weierstrass signals with low FD value 1.1 and high FD
value 1.7 are shown. In our real-time implementation,
Higuchi [18] and box-counting [7] algorithms were chosen
for FD calculation.
Let us briefly describe the algorithms.
In Higuchi method, the samples are first clustered into
several sub-sequences according to the poly-phase structure
as follows:
Xkm : x(m), x(m + k), x(m + 2k), ..., x(m + ⌊(

N −m
)⌋k)
k

(5)

FD = −

log L(k)
log k

(8)

(9)

The algorithm is shown in Alg. 1.
Box-counting method can calculate the fractal dimension values of the signal in time domain without any subsequence extraction steps. The main step of box-counting
method is box construction. Unified and normalized boxes
are constructed in 2D space (time-amplitude) which can
cover one segment of the signal. Finally, the number of occupied boxes is counted. The boxes’ constructing and counting processes are shown in Fig. 2. The number of counted
boxes N(d) is proportional to d −FD :
N(d) ∝ d −FD

(10)

where d denotes the length of the side of the boxes. The
fractal dimension value could be calculated as follows:
FD = −

log N(d)
log d

(11)

Fractal Dimension Based Neurofeedback in Serious Games

Algorithm 1 Higuchi Method
kMax ← 2⌊log2 (length(x))⌋−4
xList ← emptyList() {list for storing data in x direction for calculating the slope}
yList ← emptyList() {list for storing data in y direction for calculating the slope}
for k = 1 to kMax do
sumlk ← 0
for m = 1 to k do
Xkm ← extractSubSequence(X)
lmk ← SumSubSequence(Xkm )
sumlk ← sumlk + lmk
m ← m+1
end for
lk ← sumlk/k
xListAddElement(log(1/k))
yListAddElement(log(lk))
k ← k+1
end for
f d ← getSlope(xList, yList)

Fig. 2: Boxes construction in box-counting method, the dark
boxes are counted
Algorithm 2 Box-counting Method
kMax ← ⌊log2 (length(x))⌋ − 1
xList ← emptyList() {list for storing data in x direction for calculating the slope}
yList ← emptyList() {list for storing data in y direction for calculating the slope}
for k = 1 to kMax do
d ← 2k
ConstructNormalizedBoxes {X Y directions have the same number of sides}
Nd = countBox() {Count the no. of boxes occupied by the EEG
signal}
xListAddElement(log(1/d))
yListAddElement(log(Nd))
k ← k+1
end for
f d ← getSlope(xList, yList)

5

The algorithm is shown in Alg. 2.
Higuchi and box-counting methods were compared in
both computation complexity and accuracy. Brownian Motion and Weierstrass mono-fractal signals whose theoretical
fractal dimension values are known were used for the comparison. The results are shown in Fig. 3. Although Higuchi
method is slower than box-counting method, the accuracy
of Higuchi method is better than box-counting method in
FD value evaluation for both Brownian Motion and Weierstrass signals. In our work, both algorithms were used for
neurofeedback implementation.
3.4 Classifier Comparison and Threshold Evaluation
Receiver Operating Characteristics (ROC) graph is a technique for comparing the performance of classifiers or
method of threshold selection, which is especially useful in
two classes’ case [12]. In two classes’ training situation, a
score is calculated for all samples with labels. A threshold is
needed to classify all these labeled samples into two classes
according to the score calculated in the feature extraction
process. For each specific threshold, a confusion matrix can
be constructed (shown in Fig. 4a) and the true positive (t p)
rate and false positive ( f p) rate can be evaluated as follows:
tp =

Positives correctly classified
Total positives

(12)

fp=

Negatives incorrectly classified
Total negatives

(13)

The ROC space can be constructed with the f p rate as x axis
and t p rate as y axis. The performance of the threshold could
be drawn as a point in ROC space (shown in Fig. 4b, the
threshold corresponding to point A has best performance).
If the point is closer to the northwest corner in ROC space,
the accuracy is higher. A ROC curve can be generalized
when different thresholds are used. The best threshold
is chosen according to the distance of the corresponding
ROC point to the northwest corner. The performance of the
classifier could be evaluated by the area of the southeast
ROC plane separated by the ROC curve (shown in Fig. 4c).
The bigger area means that the average performance of the
classifier is better. In Fig. 4c, the classifier with ROC curve
in red has better average performance even though the best
accuracy is worse.

4 Experiments and results
Because there is no standard database and benchmark available for the concentration (or attention) level recognition,
an experiment on brain state classification was set up to distinguish relaxation and concentration states. Five subjects

6

Qiang Wang et al.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 3: The comparison of Higuchi and box-counting algorithms for FD evaluation over (a) Brownian Motion signals and (b)
Weierstrass signals

True Positive Rate

1

ROC Space
A
C

0.8
0.6
B

0.4
0.2
0
0

0.5
False Positive Rate

(a)

1

(b)

(c)

Fig. 4: Illustration of ROC (a) Confusion Matrix (b) ROC space (c) comparison of two classifiers
Table 1: Comparison of brain state recognition methods

Accuracy
Best Threshold
Time Consuming (s)

mean
var
mean
var
mean

Higuchi

Box-Counting

Brain Rate

θ /β ratio

0.8811
0.0077
1.9331
0.0025
0.0172

0.8654
0.0140
1.6048
0.0022
0.0050

0.8493
0.0078
15.8071
35.05
0.0035

0.8026
0.0190
1.6701
0.2557
0.0043

aged from 22 to 30 were invited to participate in the experiment. In the first session, in order to induce the relaxation
state, a comfortable environment was set up to help the subject relax. In the second session, in order to induce the concentration state, the subjects were required to complete several math problems. Only one electrode was used and placed
in O1 position according to the 10-20 international system
[19] in occipital lobe which is associated with visual perception. EEG signals were recorded by the Emotiv [35] device
with sampling frequency of 128Hz and 16-bit A/D resolution. The EEG data of two sessions were divided into thousands of pieces. Each piece of data had 1024 samples and

was labeled according to the induced brain states. Four different methods, i.e. Higuchi method, box-counting method,
θ /β ratio method and brain rate, were applied for the EEG
signal processing and evaluated with ROC curve. The data
were processed with Matlab on an Intel Core 2 Quad CPU
Q9400 (2.66GHz) with a 3.25GB main memory.
The results of the brain state recognition experiment are
shown in Fig. 5 and Table 1. Fig. 5 gives an intuitive comparison of four methods we evaluated with ROC. In most
cases, the curves for Higuchi and box-counting methods
are closer to the northwest corner and cover more area in
ROC domain. This implies that Higuchi and box-counting

Fractal Dimension Based Neurofeedback in Serious Games

0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0

Higuchi
Box−Counting
θ / β ratio
Brain rate
0.5
False Positive Rate

0.8
0.6
0.4

Higuchi
Box−Counting
θ / β ratio
Brain rate

0.2
0
0

1

(a) Subject 1

0.5
False Positive Rate

0.6

0
0

0.6
0.4

Higuchi
Box−Counting
θ / β ratio
Brain rate
0.5
False Positive Rate

Higuchi
Box−Counting
θ / β ratio
Brain rate

0.2
0
0

0.5
False Positive Rate

1

(c) Subject 3

ROC curve of brain state recognition
1
True Positive Rate

True Positive Rate

0.8

0.2

0.8

(b) Subject 2

ROC curve of brain state recognition
1

0.4

1

ROC curve of brain state recognition
1
True Positive Rate

0.8

ROC curve of brain state recognition
1
True Positive Rate

True Positive Rate

ROC curve of brain state recognition
1

7

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0

1

(d) Subject 4

Higuchi
Box−Counting
θ / β ratio
Brain rate
0.5
False Positive Rate

1

(e) Subject 5

Fig. 5: ROC curve of brain state recognition methods for 5 subjects

Boxplot for Box−counting Method

Boxplot for Higuchi Method
2

1.65

1.95
1.9

1.6

1.85

1.55

1.8

1.5

Concentration State Relax State
(a)

Concentration State Relax State
(b)

Fig. 6: The comparison of (a) Higuchi method and (b) Box-counting method in FD evaluation of the EEG signals in different
brain states for all subjects

8

Qiang Wang et al.

Fig. 7: Concentration based neurofeedback flowchart
methods could achieve a better result than the θ /β ratio
and brain rate methods. Table 1 gives the mean and variance of the accuracy and best threshold for 5 subjects in
four different methods. The accuracy of Higuchi method is
88.11% with the variance of 0.0077 and the accuracy of
box-counting method is 86.54% with variance of 0.0014.
Both of them are better than θ /β ratio method of which
the accuracy is 80.26% with variance of 0.019 and brain
state method of which the accuracy is 84.93% with variance
of 0.0078. The variance in threshold also shows the boxcounting and Higuchi methods have relatively smaller difference in thresholds for different subjects. This result implies that, for different users, the changes in threshold might
be insignificant when fractal dimension model is adopted
in neurofeedback games. The average time for processing
of 1024 samples was also given in Table 1. The Higuchi
method is slower than the other methods. However, its speed
is fast enough for real-time processing when the sampling
frequency is 128Hz.
Both Higuchi and box-counting methods were implemented as fractal dimension calculation methods and then
were applied in the neurofeedback games. The efficiency of
these two methods is shown in Fig. 6 with boxplot. The
states of relaxation and concentration can be separated by
FD values for all five subjects. In both Higuchi and boxcounting algorithms, the experiment results show that concentration level can be distinguished for 80% of the sub-

jects when a default threshold is set to 1.93 in Higuchi
method and 1.60 in box-counting method. For 100% of the
subjects, the concentration level can be recognized with a
trained threshold. It is clear that fractal dimension model
can be used to distinguish the relaxation and concentration
states with a simple threshold even though there are overlaps which may be due to individual differences in EEG. A
short training session can be applied to determine the default
threshold to minimize the individual effects.

5 Neurofeedback Games Implementation
2D neurofeedback games such as “Brain Chi” and “Pipe”,
and 3D neurofeedback games such as “Dancing Robot”,
“Escape” were proposed and developed for concentration
level control. “Brain Chi” was developed with SDL game
engine [4], “Pipe”- with Flash CS3, “Dancing Robot”
- with Panda3D [2] and “Escape” was developed with
Unreal Engine [5]. All games were scripted and compiled
under Microsoft Visual C++ environment except “Escape”
and “Pipe” which were scripted with Unreal Script and
ActionScript respectively.

Fractal Dimension Based Neurofeedback in Serious Games

5.1 Neurofeedback Hardware Setting
EEG data could be acquired by Emotiv [1] or PET 2 EEG
devices. Only O1 electrode (according to the 10-20 international system) in Occipital lobe is active, and the EEG
sigmal is transmitted to computer with Bluetooth. The algorithm uses 2-42Hz band-pass filter first, then it calculates
fractal dimension values of the input EEG signals in realtime with Higuchi method or box-counting method and labels them with different brain states according to the adaptive thresholds. The default threshold used to distinguish
the concentration state and relaxation state is set up to 1.93
in Higuchi based method and 1.6 in box-counting based
method. The threshold is adaptive to the user’s current state.
The data acquisition and processing algorithm flowchart is
shown in Fig. 7, and hardware setup of the neurofeedback
games is shown in Fig. 8a. The user playing neurofeedback game “Dancing Robot” with Emotiv device is shown
in Fig. 8b.

9

reduced and hence, upon recognizing this, the player is expected to put more effort in concentrating. In Fig. 9c, water
level (green bar) serves as a time indicator and concentration
level (blue bar) serves as a concentration level. The blue bar
has effect on the rate of change of the green bar.
“Escape” is also a 3D single-player game. However, this
game has an educational purpose. The story in the game requires the player to solve the educational puzzles so he /she
could get the passwords to unlock the doors. In this game,
EEG could be used as an alternative way to get the passwords when the player can’t figure out how to solve those
puzzles. The player has to stay concentrated for a specified
time, and the password will be given to him. If the player
uses “brain power” help, the overall game time allocated for
the player to escape is reduced. The screenshot of the game
is shown in Fig. 9d.
Examples of the games are given in [3].

6 Conclusion and Future Work
5.2 Game Strategy
The proposed games have the following general game strategy. If the concentration level has been achieved by the
user, points are rewarded to encourage the player. With decrease of the concentration level the player could lose the
reward points. The concentration based game strategy is presented in the flowchart in Fig. 7. The game strategy could be
changed to relaxation game if the player wanted to be trained
how to relax.
“Dancing Robot” is a simple 3D single-player game. In
this game, the player is required to control the speed of the
robot while the robot is dancing. A screenshot of the “Dancing Robot” game is shown in Fig. 9a. The speed of the robot
dance depends on the concentration level of the player. The
player concentrates to make the robot dancing faster. The
robot dances sluggishly if the player is distracted. An adaptive threshold is used for training purpose.
“Brain Chi” is a 2D single-player EEG-based game. A
screenshot of “Brain Chi” is shown in Fig. 9b. The player
controls the game simply by using his/her “brain power” of
concentration. His/her task is to help a little boy hero to fight
against evil bats using a protection ball. The size of the protection ball is controlled by the concentration level of the
player. To win the game, the player needs to increase the
ball by concentration to eliminate all the bats.
“Pipe” is a classic pipe game where the player tries to
arrange pieces of pipes on a board so the water can be delivered between two stations without leaking. This game is
slightly different from the above two games. The recognized
brain state could influence on the game’s flow. For example,
distraction could cause the time allocated to the player to be

In this paper, we reviewed EEG-based neurofeedback
games and algorithms embedded in the neurofeedback
games. We proposed a novel fractal dimension based
method to quantify concentration level of the brain state.
The proposed method was compared with other methods
used for concentration level recognition in neurofeedback
games. The comparison results showed that both Higuchi
and box-counting algorithms could be effectively used for
feature extraction in the proposed method. The brain states
were recognizable with the difference in fractal dimension
values. Original 2D and 3D EEG-based games such as
“Brain Chi”, “Dancing Robot”, “Pipe”, and “Escape”
were designed and implemented for concentration training.
The fractal dimension algorithms were embedded in the
neurofeedback games to enhance the efficiency of the
neurofeedback.
More research is planned in the future to compare the
efficiency of the proposed fractal dimension approach and
traditional signal processing approaches in neurofeedback
games. The possibility of applying the fractal dimension
based neurofeedback in pain management would be studied
as well.

Acknowledgements This project is supported by grant
NRF2008IDM-IDM004-020 of National Research Fund of Singapore and by Institute for Media Innovation.

References
1. Emotiv. URL http://www.emotiv.com
2. Panda3d. URL http://www.panda3d.org.

10

Qiang Wang et al.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 8: Hardware setup of the game (a) neurofeedback system hardware (b) equipped user

(a) “Dancing Robot” screenshot

(b) “Brain Chi” screenshot

(c) “Pipe” screenshot

(d) “Escape” screenshot

Fig. 9: Screenshots of neurofeedback 2D and 3D games (a)“Dancing Robot” (b)“Brain Chi” (c)“Pipe” (d)“Escape”

Fractal Dimension Based Neurofeedback in Serious Games
3. Project personalized digital media experience.
URL
http://www3.ntu.edu.sg/home/EOSourina/projects.html
4. Simple directmedia layer. URL http://www.libsdl.org
5. Unreal engine. URL http://www.udk.com
6. Birbaumer, N.: Slow cortical potentials: Plasticity, operant control,
and behavioral effects. Neuroscientist 5(2), 74–78 (1999)
7. Block, A., Von Bloh, W., Schellnhuber, H.J.: Efficient boxcounting determination of generalized fractal dimensions. Physical Review A 42(4), 1869–1874 (1990)
8. Clarke, A.R., Barry, R.J., McCarthy, R., Selikowitz, M.: Electroencephalogram differences in two subtypes of attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder. Psychophysiology 38(2), 212–221
(2001)
9. Coben, R., Linden, M., Myers, T.E.: Neurofeedback for autistic spectrum disorder: A review of the literature. Applied Psychophysiology Biofeedback 35(1), 83–105 (2010)
10. Cowan, J.D., Markham, L.: Eeg biofeedback for the attention
problems of autism - a case study. Biofeedback and SelfRegulation 19(3), 287–287 (1994)
11. Demos, J.N.: Getting Started with Neurofeedback. WW Norton &
Company, New York (2005)
12. Fawcett, T.: An introduction to roc analysis. Pattern Recognition
Letters 27(8), 861–874 (2006)
13. Fuchs, T., Birbaumer, N., Lutzenberger, W., Gruzelier,
J.H., Kaiser, J.: Neurofeedback treatment for attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder in children: A comparison with
methylphenidate. Applied Psychophysiology Biofeedback 28(1),
1–12 (2003)
14. Gevensleben, H., Holl, B., Albrecht, B., Schlamp, D., Kratz, O.,
Studer, P., Wangler, S., Rothenberger, A., Moll, G.H., Heinrich,
H.: Distinct eeg effects related to neurofeedback training in children with adhd: A randomized controlled trial. International Journal of Psychophysiology 74(2), 149–157 (2009)
15. Gevensleben, H., Holl, B., Albrecht, B., Vogel, C., Schlamp, D.,
Kratz, O., Studer, P., Rothenberger, A., Moll, G.H., Heinrich, H.:
Is neurofeedback an efficacious treatment for adhd? a randomised
controlled clinical trial. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines 50(7), 780–789 (2009)
16. Hammond, D.C.: What is neurofeedback? Journal of Neurotherapy 10(4), 25–36 (2006)
17. Hanslmayr, S., Sauseng, P., Doppelmayr, M., Schabus, M.,
Klimesch, W.: Increasing individual upper alpha power by neurofeedback improves cognitive performance in human subjects.
Applied Psychophysiology Biofeedback 30(1), 1–10 (2005)
18. Higuchi, T.: Approach to an irregular time series on the basis of
the fractal theory. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena 31(2), 277–
283 (1988)
19. Homan, R.W., Herman, J., Purdy, P.: Cerebral location of international 10-20 system electrode placement. Electroencephalography
and Clinical Neurophysiology 66(4), 376–382 (1987)
20. Kerson, C., Sherman, R.A., Kozlowski, G.P.: Alpha suppression
and symmetry training for generalized anxiety symptoms. Journal
of Neurotherapy 13(3), 146–155 (2009)
21. Kinsner, W.: A unified approach to fractal dimensions. In: Proc.
ICCI 2005: Fourth IEEE International Conference on Cognitive
Informatics, pp. 58–72 (2005)
22. Kouijzer, M.E.J., van Schie, H.T., de Moor, J.M.H., Gerrits, B.J.L.,
Buitelaar, J.K.: Neurofeedback treatment in autism. preliminary
findings in behavioral, cognitive, and neurophysiological functioning. Research in Autism Spectrum Disorders 4(3), 386–399
(2010)
23. Kulish, V., Sourin, A., Sourina, O.: Analysis and visualization of
human electroencephalograms seen as fractal time series. Journal
of Mechanics in Medicine and Biology 6(2), 175–188 (2006)
24. Kulish, V., Sourin, A., Sourina, O.: Human electroencephalograms
seen as fractal time series: Mathematical analysis and visualization. Computers in Biology and Medicine 36(3), 291–302 (2006)

11
25. Lécuyer, A., Lotte, F., Reilly, R.B., Leeb, R., Hirose, M., Slater,
M.: Brain-computer interfaces, virtual reality, and videogames.
Computer 41(10), 66–72 (2008)
26. Li, Z.H., Coles, C.D., Lynch, M.E., Ma, X.Y., Peltier, S., Hu, X.P.:
Occipital-temporal reduction and sustained visual attention deficit
in prenatal alcohol exposed adults. Brain Imaging and Behavior
2(1), 39–48 (2008)
27. Liu, Y., Sourina, O., Nguyen, M.K.: Real-time eeg-based human
emotion recognition and visualization. In: Proc. 2010 Int. Conf.
on Cyberworlds, pp. 262–269 (2010)
28. Lubar, J.F., Swartwood, M.O., Swartwood, J.N., O’Donnell, P.H.:
Evaluation of the effectiveness of eeg neurofeedback training for
adhd in a clinical setting as measured by changes in t.o.v.a. scores,
behavioral ratings, and wisc-r performance. Biofeedback and SelfRegulation 20(1), 83–99 (1995)
29. Lutsyuk, N.V., Éismont, E.V., Pavlenko, V.B.: Modulation of attention in healthy children using a course of eeg-feedback sessions. Neurophysiology 38(5-6), 389–395 (2006)
30. Murray, S.O., Wojciulik, E.: Attention increases neural selectivity
in the human lateral occipital complex. Nature Neuroscience 7(1),
70–74 (2004)
31. Nunez, P.L., Srinivasan, R.: Electric Fields of the Brain. Oxford
University Press, New York (2006)
32. Pop-Jordanov, J., Pop-Jordanova, N.: Neurophysical substrates of
arousal and attention. Cognitive Processing 10(1), 71–79 (2009)
33. Rebsamen, B., Burdet, E., Guan, C., Zhang, H., Teo, C.L., Zeng,
Q., Ang, M., Laugier, C.: A brain-controlled wheelchair based on
p300 and path guidance. In: Proc.1st IEEE/RAS-EMBS International Conference on Biomedical Robotics and Biomechatronics,
pp. 1101–1106 (2006)
34. Rebsamen, B., Teo, C.L., Zeng, Q., Ang Jr, M.H., Burdet, E.,
Guan, C., Zhang, H., Laugier, C.: Controlling a wheelchair indoors using thought. IEEE Intelligent Systems 22(2), 18–24
(2007)
35. Saxby, E., Peniston, E.G.: Alpha-theta brainwave neurofeedback
training: An effective treatment for male and female alcoholics
with depressive symptoms. Journal of Clinical Psychology 51(5),
685–693 (1995)
36. Sokhadze, T.M., Cannon, R.L., Trudeau, D.L.: Eeg biofeedback as
a treatment for substance use disorders: Review, rating of efficacy,
and recommendations for further research. Applied Psychophysiology Biofeedback 33(1), 1–28 (2008)
37. Sourina, O., Kulish, V., Sourin, A.: Novel tools for quantification
of brain responses to music stimuli. In: Proc. 13th International
Conference on Biomedical Engineering, pp. 411–414 (2009)
38. Sourina, O., Sourin, A., Kulish, V., Gagalowicz, A., Philips, W.:
Eeg data driven animation and its application. In: Proc. Computer Vision/Computer Graphics Collaboration Techniques, pp.
380–388 (2009)
39. Thompson, L., Thompson, M., Reid, A.: Neurofeedback outcomes
in clients with asperger’s syndrome. Applied Psychophysiology
Biofeedback 35(1), 63–81 (2010)
40. Vernon, D., Egner, T., Cooper, N., Compton, T., Neilands, C.,
Sheri, A., Gruzelier, J.: The effect of training distinct neurofeedback protocols on aspects of cognitive performance. International
Journal of Psychophysiology 47(1), 75–85 (2003)
41. Wang, Q., Sourina, O., Nguyen, M.K.: Eeg-based “serious” games
design for medical applications. In: Proc. 2010 Int. Conf. on Cyberworlds, pp. 270–276 (2010)
42. Wang, Q., Sourina, O., Nguyen, M.K.: Fractal dimension based
algorithm for neurofeedback games. In: Proc. CGI 2010, p. SP25
(2010)
43. Ward, J.: What is a game engine? URL http:// www .gamecareerguide .com/features/529/what is a game.php

