Glyndŵr University Research Online

Conference Paper

A writing aid for dysgraphia affected people

Ahmed, W., Hasan, S., Shoaib, S., Houlden, N. and Nestiurkina, M.

This is a paper presented at 2020 IEEE NW Russia Young Researchers in Electrical and
Electronic Engineering Conference, Moscow, Russia, 27-30 Jan. 2020

Copyright of the author(s). Reproduced here with their permission and the permission of the
conference organisers.

Recommended citation:
Ahmed, W., Hasan, S., Shoaib, S., Houlden, N. and Nestiurkina, M. (2020) ‘A writing aid for dysgraphia
affected people.’ In Proc. 2020 IEEE NW Russia Young Researchers in Electrical and Electronic
Engineering Conference, Moscow, Russia, 27-30 Jan. 2020, pp. 2468-2471. doi

10.1109/EIConRus49466.2020.9039211

A Writing Aid for Dysgraphia Affected People
Waqas Ahmed1, Shams-ul-Hasan1, Sultan Shoaib2, Nigel Houlden2, Mariia Nestiurkina3
1

HITEC University, Taxila, Pakistan
Glyndwr University, Wrexham, UK
3
Moscow Institute of Electronic Technology, Moscow, Russia
2

Abstract— Dysgraphia is a writing disability due to ineffective
working of motor neurons, causing the patient to face difficulty
in writing. Many studies have been done to overcome Dysgraphia
but unfortunately, only therapies are made instead of any aid. In
this paper, a movement aid is proposed that removes the need of
any therapy. The proposed methodology comprises of acquisition
of hand movement signal from Motor Cortex and Sensory Brain
area by using EEG scanning. These signals are then processed
using Brain Computer Interface (BCI2000), which mainly
includes Features selection, extraction and translational
algorithms to convert signals into commands. These commands
are then used to control Hand Movement device. The Hand
Movement device uses the FES, applied at the forearm to
perform different hand movements. This paper focuses on the
flexion and extension of the fist.

patients to write properly and perform all the movements. The
device can be used as a regular wearable device for 20
consecutive hours without any muscle fatigue. The proposed
methodology comprises of acquisition of hand movement
signal from the Motor Cortex and Sensory Brain area using
electroencephalogram (EEG) scanning [1]. These signals will
be processed using different engineering techniques to carry
out required FES voltage patterns. These patterns will then be
fed to a hand movement instrument which will stimulate the
forearm muscles to carry out all types of finger movements.

Keywords—electroencephalogram; EEG; functional electrical
stimulation;
FES;
brain
computer
interface;
BCI;
electrocorticogram,
electromyogram;
functional
magnetic
resonance imaging

As a large proportion of the world’s population is suffering
from this disability, this product will highly serve the
dysgraphia patients not only in Pakistan but across the world.
This product will also reduce/eliminate the dependability of the
patients on others. Also, the study will open new doors towards
the Brain Computer Interface (BCI) based devices for impaired
people not only with dysgraphia but many others which are
present in this world waiting to be addressed.

I. INTRODUCTION

II. LITERATURE REVIEW

Dysgraphia is a learning disability where the standard of
handwriting is lower than required for the classified age,
calibre and academic standard. This is a hereditary disease
which is mainly categorized into two classes: perceptual and
motor. The first one is associated with the failed linkage of
symbols and signs with the spelling of the word depicting the
sound. While in the latter one, the patient can read and speak
the words properly but lacks motor skills causing hindrance in
writing. Hence evaluating that motor dysgraphia occurs due to
improper functioning of motor neurons, causing the patient to
face difficulty in writing. Considering the problem, the later
one is the most prevalent one and has the percentage of
dysgraphia-effected people all across the World has raised
from 21% to 33% in 2011. This research work aims to improve
the motor dysgraphia by fabricating a device that assists in the
natural movement of hand through brain signals. Many
approaches have been proposed in the literature of which there
are two most prevalent techniques. The first technique consists
of special-purpose applications and exercises like joining the
dots, to make patients write a word. The second consists of
different therapies which mainly include Occupational Therapy
and Educational Therapy. The results obtained from these
therapies are not up to the mark and involve muscle fatigue and
costly hectic routines ranging from $300-$400 per hour and
costs tend to be on the higher end depending upon the
condition of the patient and hospital type.

Xiao et al. [2] used EEG to distinguish between four motor
imagery (MI) types. Principal Component Analysis and
squared cross-correlations were administered for deriving the
spatial and spectral characteristics: analyzed by linear
discriminant analysis (LDA) classifier. Lu et al. [3] studied
BCI depending on EEG constitutes of Movement Related
Potentials (MRPs) feature; which is challenging to derive as it
is noisy and alters person to person. Adaptive Spatio-Temporal
(AST) filtering technique was proposed to construct MRPs
precisely in lesser space capacity where Gaussian kernel is
administered, enhancing all parameters. Liu et al. [4]
investigated ipsilateral cortical signals using EcoG, translating
finger articulations administering machine learning techniques.
The outcomes were successful depicting great accuracies in
every case by only taking a fraction of features captured. Xiao
et al. [5] proposed distinguishing the finger movements using
non-invasive EEG instead of ECoG through spectral principal
component analysis (PCA). Hence, the enhancing number of
features for control, assisting in the advancement of noninvasive BCI. Shakeel et al. [6] paraphrased certain
characteristics such as attaining signal, sorting, improving and
different electrode assortments administered through EEG
redesigning multifarious investigations using MRCPs to
anticipate the imagined movement. Patel [7] established
different algorithms to monitor hand articulation through EEG
by BCI applications. This technique was applied to two
electrodes minimizing the workload and attaining better
accuracy. The EEG signals were passed through bandpass
filter; minimizing noise and spatial filter, minimizing noise in

To overcome all these issues, a movement aid is proposed
which does not require any therapy at all and assists the

2468

978-1-7281-5761-0/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE

further enhancement was required to fulfil the limitations but
this proved an efficient tool for natural hand movement.
III. IMPLEMENTATION PROCEDURE
In order to make our system familiar with EEG signals, we
first have to process the EEG signals to obtain a full data set.
As discussed earlier, the human brain emits EEG signals at
continually. Those signals vary based on frequency and origin
of emission. Before using those signals, one has to decide
which frequency (rhythm) is required to have the particular
information, in our case we are looking for Mu/beta rhythm (as
all motor-related frequencies are present in this range).
However, the problem still remains of which electrode should
be considered and which should be ignored for EEG signal
acquisition. This problem is countered by Feature selection.
Features are valuable information that is extracted from a
signal. In case of EEG signal, we had to locate the position and
frequency for an appropriate signal which is known as feature
selection.
r2 Values Between Conditions 1 and 2

Channel

transmission. Liang and Bougrain [8] proposed that signal
processing is vital to convert brain signals into commands
through BCI. So, a technique was formulated modulating the
amplitude of band-specific ECoG accompanied by a limited
memory for anticipating finger movement. The analogy
between the predicted and recorded movements proved a high
success rate. Xiao and Ding [9] applied spectral principal
component analysis (PCA) on EEG signals acquired by moving
a finger to verify cross-frequency spectral structures. These
were analysed in spatial patterns, cross condition pattern
changes, identifying the potential of finger articulation from
rest and translation of each finger movement in contrast to
classic mu/beta rhythms. Oliveria et al. [10] proposed a
methodology to detect and omit bad channels and individual
components of EEG data by template correlation rejection
(TCR) having noise in motion. An analysis is carried out by
comparing it with the template designed. Jochumsen et al. [11]
compared the techniques of identifying and classifying of
MRCPs through EEG of healthy and stroke patients. Templates
comparing approach accompanied by a set of spatial filters
were administered from MRCPs of four hinted tasks and
employing the combination of temporal, spectral, timescale, or
entropy-based features. Wilson et al. [12] proposed that BCI
was used to detect and translate EEG signals by wearing EEG
electrode pads on the scalp. A test subject was analysed by
performing different articulations of hand and feet, and best
channels were marked for determining a significant change in
mu and beta rhythms of the brain. Morash et al. [13]
investigated neural signals prior to articulations and motor
imagery for anticipating, which motor imageries is about to
happen, accessing this through BCI applications. Pfurtscheller
et al. [14] studied BCI to monitor Functional Electrical
Stimulation (FES). These stimulations were received in one of
the EEG channels, which showed that pulse was generated
when stimulus increased the given limit resulting in hand
movement. Muralidharan et al. [15] used EEG to record
stimulus of a paralyzed hand. He gave electrical impulses to the
subject through a device to monitor the opening and closing of
a paralyzed hand and altered the threshold of the device for
smooth movement. Fifer et al. [16] used intracranial
electroencephalographic (iEEG) signals to detect the reaching
and grasping movement made by the subject in order to
recognize the specific electrodes attached to the subject’s hand.
Tamaki et al. [17] made a device that controls a human hand
using electrical pulses. The device basically stimulates the
actuating muscles of the human forehand. All the stimulation
controlling is done by a device worn on the forearm. Muller et
al. [18] illustrated wrist movements through EEG by FES. He
suggested that these induced movements were somehow
similar to natural hand movements. Giordano and Maiorana
[19] developed software in order to help dysgraphia affected
patients. The software basically uses JavaScript libraries and
gesture recognition algorithms. It assists the subjects to carry
out various exercises of handwriting like joining the dots to
complete an alphabet. Chestek et al. [20] investigated if the
impulses by FES provided ample information to ECoG of
varying hand postures. Mangold et al. [21] studied different
cases by providing them with the treatment of FES for hand
movement and grasping. He carried out various tests on
different subjects to attain results regarding the positive and
negative outcomes of this technology. The results proved that

Af4
F8
F4
Fc6
T8
P8
O2
O1
P7
T7
Fc5
F3
F7
Af3

0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0
0

10

20

30
40
Frequency (Hz)

50

60

Fig. 1. Feature map for both hands.

To perform feature selection, we first need to have a feature
map which was generated using BCI2000 by using its built-in
stimulus functionality. The stimulus functionality gave us
detailed information regarding frequency and power of the
evoked signal with respect to movement performed. To carry
out stimulus presentation, it is necessary to have an isolated
environment to have as minimum artefacts as possible.
Separate view (screens) for both subject and examiner was
used in order to provide both of them space to be comfortable.

Fig. 2. Both hands normalized r-squared.

BCI2000 does not support Emotiv Epoc out of the box. We
had to use its drivers contributed by Dr. Griffin Milsap. Once
the driver was build any ready we launched the BCI2000 and

2469

set all the required parameters with zero filtering (as we need to
have all the signals at all frequencies). After Parameter setting
the stimulus session was started, and the acquired signal was
recorded. During the session, different instructions were shown
to the subject followed by rest intervals. The subject was asked
to perform or imagine movement related to those instructions.
After recording a sufficient amount of sessions, the recorded
data were analysed using Offline Analysis Tool. The tool gave
us the Feature maps for performed actions (Fig. 1).
The above figure illustrates the engagement of both hands
in the recorded sessions. On the x-axis we have Frequency and
on the y-axis we have a respective channel. By this map, we
can easily find the required signal at the required electrode. The
Offline analysis tool also generates graphs showing normalized
r2 values and scalp graphs for better understanding. Both types
of graphs for the above mention feature maps are given in
Fig. 2.

pads on two belts. The electrode pads used are self-stick Tyco
gel Carbon electrode pads of size 10 x 30 mm as it causes no
pain even at stimulation level of 33V. The J1 14 pin connector
connects to the micro-controller that controls the switching of
the AQV221 PhotoMOS-relays. The pulse generator section
consists of a 555 timer set at astable-mode to produce a square
pulse of 40Hz and of for 0.2ms. The pulse is then inverted
using the 74LS14 to produce the required pulse, which is on for
0.2ms. This pulse is then amplified to the required level using
the LM358 single supply op-amp. The output is then fed to the
switching section made of AQV221 PhotoMOS-relays. The
positive electrode pads are connected to the output of each
relay independently using the 14 pin connector J2. The ground
electrode pads are connected to another 14 pin connector which
is connected to the ground of the whole circuit. The solid-state
relays or semiconductor relays offer better solutions for high
precision applications than the electromechanical relays.

Fig. 4. Cursor movement.
Fig. 3. Scalp presentation for both hands.

After gathering this information, we used it to perform
cursor task, a built-in application to check that the steps
described above are done and working properly or not. We
launched the BCI2000 with appropriate parameters and filters
(CAR) to remove artefacts and to suppress all other incoming
signals except the required. The Cursor moves vertically up
and down with the movement of the subject’s hands and moves
downwards at rest. The subject is asked to make the ball hit the
target.
The main concept is calculating r2 values at each interval. If
the value of the selected electrode at the selected frequency is
greater than the threshold, represents movement and below
threshold represents rest.
IV. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
The device circuit constitutes of a variable, power supply,
pulse generator, switching series (AQV 221 PhotoMOS
Relays) and microcontroller Arduino mega 2560, 28 electrode

Fig. 5. Circuit diagram of the complete system.

2470

[7]

V. CONCLUSION
This paper presented a writing aid for dysgraphia affected
people using brain computer interface. All the subjects were
non-familiar to BCI and never used it before undergoing this
study. The BCI was easily adapted by all the subjects in the
limited number of trails and sessions. The most promising
thing in BCI is that subject does not have to actually perform
the movement instead he has to imagine it and the same
behaviour is observed in EEG which means the device can not
only be used to help dysgraphia affected people but people
having hand movement impurities can also be benefitted. The
subject acclimatised to use very rapidly and after some time
they reported that they are not concentrating on moving hand
but moving the cursor. The overall efficiency of the system is
calculated to be approx. 75%. The efficiency can be increased
by increasing number of electrodes over the motor cortex and
sensory brain. The overall results are very much satisfactory
and can pave a way to further research in this domain. This
research paper is limited to only fist extension and flexion due
to limited amount of time and resources. But in the future, it
can be extended to complete fingers movement and control.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank Engr. Shahid Latif for his help and
guidance in electronics parts. We would also like to thank Dr.
Griffin Milsap for his precious time in helping us in the need of
the hour. Lastly, we would like to thank Engr. Iftikhar Ahmed
and Engr. Riaz for their guidance and support.

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

REFERENCES
[1]

[8]

G. Acar, O. Ozturk, A.J. Golparvar, T.A. Elboshra, K. Bohringer, and
M.K. Yapici, “Wearable and flexible textile electrodes for biopotential
signal monitoring: A review,” Electronics, vol. 8, no. 5, article 479, May
2019.
R. Xiao, K. Liao, and L. Ding, “Discriminating multiple motor
imageries of human hands using EEG,” in Proc. IEEE Ann. Int. Conf. on
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), 28 Aug. - 1 Sept.
2012, San Diego, USA, pp. 1773-1776.
J. Lu, K. Xie, and D.J. McFarland, “Adaptive spatio-temporal filtering
for movement related potentials in EEG-based brain–computer
interfaces.” IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation
Engineering, vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 847-857, July 2014.
R. Xiao, and L. Ding, “Classification of finger pairs from one hand
based on spectral features in human EEG,” in Proc. IEEE Ann. Int. Conf.
on Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), 26-30 Aug.
2014, Chicago, USA, pp. 1263-1266.
Y. Liu, M. Sharma, C.M. Gaona, et al., “Decoding ipsilateral finger
movements from ECoG signals in humans,” in Proc. 23rd Int. Conf. on
Neural Information Processing Systems, 6-9 Dec. 2010, Vancouver,
Canada, pp. 1468-1476.
A. Shakeel, M.S. Navid, M.N. Anwar, S. Mazhar, M. Jochumsen, and
I.K. Niazi, “A review of techniques for detection of movement intention
using movement-related cortical potentials,” Computational and
Mathematical Methods in Medicine, vol. 2015, article 346217, 2015.

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

2471

N.D. Patel, “An EEG-based dual-channel Imaginary motion
classification for brain computer interface,” Dissertation, Lamar
University, Lamar, USA, 2011.
N. Liang, and L. Bougrain, “Decoding finger flexion from band-specific
ECoG signals in humans,” Frontiers in Neuroscience, vol. 6, article 91,
June 2012.
R. Xiao, and L. Ding, “EEG resolutions in detecting and decoding finger
movements from spectral analysis,” Frontiers in Neuroscience, vol. 9,
article 308, Sept. 2015.
A.S. Oliveira, B.R. Schlink, W.D. Hairston, P. Konig, and D.P. Ferris,
“A channel rejection method for attenuating motion-related artefacts in
EEG recordings during walking,” Frontiers in Neuroscience, vol. 11,
article 225, April 2017.
M. Jochumsen, I.K. Niazi, N. Mrachacz-Kersting, N. Jiang, D. Farina,
and K. Dremstrup, “Comparison of spatial filters and features for the
detection and classification of movement-related cortical potentials in
healthy individuals and stroke patients,” Journal of Neural Engineering,
vol. 12, no. 5, article 056003, Oct. 2015.
J.A. Wilson, G. Schalk, L.M.Walton, and J.C. Williams, “Using an
EEG-based brain-computer interface for virtual cursor movement with
BCI2000,” Journal of Visualized Experiments: JoVE, vol. 29, article
1319, 2009.
V. Morash, O. Bai, S. Furlani, P. Lin, and M. Hallett, “Classifying EEG
signals preceding right hand, left hand, tongue, and right foot
movements and motor imageries,” Clinical Neurophysiology, vol. 119,
no.11, pp. 2570-2578, Nov. 2008.
G. Pfurtscheller, C. Brunner, A. Schlogl, and F.H.L. da Silva, “Mu
rhythm (de) synchronization and EEG single-trial classification of
different motor imagery tasks,” NeuroImage, vol. 31, no.1, pp. 153-159,
May 2006.
A. Muralidharan, J. Chae, and D.M. Taylor, “Extracting attempted hand
movements from EEGs in people with complete hand paralysis
following stroke,” Frontiers in Neuroscience, vol. 5, article 39, 2011.
M.S. Fifer, G. Hotson, B.A. Wester, et al., “Simultaneous neural control
of simple reaching and grasping with the modular prosthetic limb using
intracranial EEG,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and
Rehabilitation Engineering, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 695-705, Oct. 2013.
E. Tamaki, T. Miyaki, and J. Rekimoto, “PossessedHand: A hand
gesture manipulation system using electrical stimuli,” in Proc. 1st
Augmented Human International Conf., 2-3 April 2010, Megeve,
France, article. 2.
G.R. Muller, C. Neuper, R. Rupp, C. Keinrath, H.J. Gerner, and G.
Pfurtscheller, “Event-related beta EEG changes during wrist movements
induced by functional electrical stimulation of forearm muscles in man,”
Neuroscience Letters, vol. 340, no. 2, pp. 143-147, April 2003.
D. Giordano, and F. Maiorana, “Addressing dysgraphia with a mobile,
web-based software with interactive feedback,” in Proc. IEEE-EMBS
Int. Conf. on Biomedical and Health Informatics (BHI), 1-4 June 2014,
Valencia, Spain, pp. 264-268.
C.A. Chestek, V. Gilja, C.H. Blabe, B.L. Foster, K.V. Shenoy, J. Parvizi,
and J.M. Henderson, “Hand posture classification using
electrocorticography signals in the gamma band over human
sensorimotor brain areas,” Journal of Neural Engineering, vol. 10, no. 2,
article 026002, April 2013.
S. Mangold, T. Keller, A. Curt, and V. Dietz, “Transcutaneous
functional electrical stimulation for grasping in subjects with cervical
spinal cord injury,” Spinal Cord, vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 1-13, Jan 2005.

