International Journal of Scientific Research in Information Systems and Engineering (IJSRISE)
Volume 2, Issue 1, April-2016. ISSN 2380-8128

GENDER DIFFERENCES WITH DIFFERENT EMOTIONS
FOR BRAIN FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY
ANALYSIS
Sushil Chandra, Institute of Nuclear Medicine and Allied Science, DRDO, India
Email: sushil.inmas@gmail.com
Greeshma Sharma, Institute of Nuclear Medicine and Allied Science, DRDO, India
Email: greeshmacct@gmail.com
Ahsan Z. Rizvi, Laboratoire des Symbioses Tropicales et Méditerranéennes, IRD, France
Email: ahsanrizvi@iiti.ac.in
Nidhi Gupta, Department of Computer Science, Banasthali University,Jaipur
Email: 18guptanidhi@gmail.com
Alok Prakash Mittal, Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering,
Email: mittalap@gmail.com
Netaji Subash, Institute of Technology, Delhi
Devendra Jha,Scientific Analysis Group DRDO, India
Email: sagdjha@gmail.com
Abstract - Visualization of gender differences under different emotional states is performed in this article.
Accomplished by Electroencephalographic (EEG) based functional connectivity patterns. Eighteen young participants
view advertisement film clips in series that evoked the following emotional states: neutral, positive, or negative. A wireless
EMOTIV EPOC EEG headset with 14 channels has used to collect EEG signals from subjects who shown a series of
advertisement clips. Coherence is used as a connectivity index to estimate the functional brain connectivity on EEG signals.
Brain connectivity is analyzed on alpha, beta, and theta frequency bands for all the three emotions. Results indicate that
while viewing the negative advertisements right hemispheric activation is greater in men while women have left
hemispheric activation. The right hemisphere is activated in men more than in women. So the left hemisphere finds more
active during the advertisement perceive by women, as positive and more right hemisphere activation is found during the
advertisement perceive as negative by men. Also, men show strong connectivity in the frontal region while women show
activation in all parts of the brain during different emotions. Emotion processing shows characteristics of small-world
networks. Having high clustering coefficients and short path length in brain networks which reveals that men positive and
neutral emotions are affected by small-world properties of functional connectivity networks. However, women rivalry
attributes are found in all the three categories of emotions.
Keyword: Emotions, Coherence, small-world, EEG, path length, clustering coefficient.

J.,2007) have indicated that the physiological
correlation of emotions is likely to be found in the
central nervous system (CNS) rather than simply in
peripheral physiological responses which include
motivation, feeling, behavior, and physiological
changes. The changes in electrodermal reactivity of
men and women report the most intense emotion while
relieving anger and happiness. There is a common
assumption that has transpired over the years about
women being more emotionally expressive than men.
Many studies are conducted (Kringet al., 1998),
examining emotional expressiveness in males and
females and there is a relatively substantial body of
research demonstrating that women are the more
emotionally expressive gender. In addition to this,
there are certain emotions those have stereotypically
link to each gender. Emotions of happiness, sadness,
and, fear are believed to be more expressive in women
while men are thought to be more expressive in

1. INTRODUCTION
Emotion is a mental state that does not arise
through free will and is often for accompanying by
physiological changes. According to some theories
(Gaulinet al., 2003), this is a state of feeling that
results in physical and psychological changes which
influence our behavior. The physiology of emotion is
closely linked to the nervous system with various
states and strengths and apparently to particular
emotions. Emotion is also related to the behavioral
tendency. (Schacteret al., 2011) Emotion is a positive
or negative experience which associates with a
particular pattern of physiological activity. (Turner et
al., 2005) Emotion can be seen as the ineffable
language of the body in contrast to the linguistic
language of the mind. Many other studies (Panksepp

IJSRISE © 2015.
http://www.ijsrise.com

pg. 1

International Journal of Scientific Research in Information Systems and Engineering (IJSRISE)
Volume 2, Issue 1, April-2016. ISSN 2380-8128
anger(Kellyet al.,1999). Since a long time researchers
trying to answer, Are women more emotional than
men? Do women have stronger physiological
responses than men in emotional situations? A
relatively substantial body of research has
demonstrated that women are more emotionally
expressive than men. However, it remains somewhat
unclear whether women also experience more emotion
than men, whether they show greater physiological
changes associate with emotion.
Researchers (Mausset al., 2009) have supported
this viewpoint using electroencephalographic (EEG)
or other neuroimaging approaches to investigate the
specificity of brain activity associated with different
emotional states. However, most of the available
studies on emotion-specific have focused on EEG
characteristics at the single-electrode level, rather than
at the level of EEG-based functional connectivity.
Correlation, coherence, and phase synchronization
indices between each pair of EEG electrodes are used
in emotional research. (Lee et al.,2014) examined the
different emotional states by using functional
connectivity patterns on EEG data which result in that
EEG-base functional connectivity proves to be a
useful tool for studying the relationship between brain
activity and emotional states.(Libraries al.,
2009)shows different functional connectivity
networks for emotions of EEG data.
This is a blind study in which subjects do not
know for what purpose the advertisement clips have
shown to them. No pre-assumption has been done for
this analysis. This blind study is done on the 18
subjects (9 women and nine men).For this 14 channels,
EEG data are collected by emotive poach. Coherence
is used which includes co-variations between two
signals as a function of frequencies. The functional
connectivity index is almost powerful in correctly
recognizing different emotional states. EEG base
Functional Connectivity Networks (FCNs) (Stam CJ.,
2002) will offer information on brain activity
regarding the connections establish in the brain. So far,
either linear or non-linear metrics are used for
calculating the similarity or the flow of information
among scalp electrodes (Tononiet al., 1994). The
graph is a mathematical representation of a network
reduced to nodes and connections between nodes,
functional connectivity networks can be analyzed with
metrics already established for treatment of graphs
(Fallaniet al., 2007).(Flor-Henryet al.,1979) Frequent
finding of studies investigating hemisphere
differences in the expression of emotions is that the
right hemisphere is more closely associated with the
expression of depressive, catastrophic feelings,
whereas the left hemisphere more closely associated
with the words of mildly active and euphoric
emotions(Killgoreet al.,2007). A recent compilation

of a recent compilation of neurological case reports
strongly supports the hypothesis of greater lefthemisphere activation or disinhibition in expressing
positive emotions and greater right-hemisphere
activation or disinhibition in expressing negative
emotions (Sackeim et al., 1982). The hypothesis is
strongly supported of greater left-hemisphere
activation or disinhibition in expressing positive
emotions and greater right-hemisphere activation or
disinhibition in expressing negative emotions
(Sackeim et al., 1982) which are asserted that each half
of the brain is specialized for processing particular
classes of emotion. The left cerebral hemisphere
specialize for processing positive emotions and the
right hemisphere specialize for processing negative
emotions(Bassett et al., 2006). FCNs create in men
and women during different emotional states are
characterize by small-world topology. They have high
clustering coefficient, small path length, and high
global efficiency. These characteristics favor both
specialize and integrate information processing. They
also offer minimization of wiring costs combine with
maximization of dynamical complexity as well.
The study aim is to differentiate
hemispherical activation in men and women during
different emotional states, generated while watching
the advertisements. For Emotions recognition, the
coherence is use which shows the functional
connectivity of brain during emotions. Emotions are
Happy, Pleasant, Sad, Fear, and Disgust. EEG
(Electroencephalographic) data have been collected
from 18 healthy subjects while viewing consecutive ad
films. After the experiment, feedback is taken from
each participant about the ad films. We first extracted
the time series separately from positive, neutral, and
negative ad films for each participant. We constructed
the weighted functional networks for positive, neutral
and negative emotions through the coherence
matrices. We calculate several network parameters for
example small-world, local efficiency, and
characterize the men and women emotions by
estimating graph-theoretic-based measures. Finally,
we performed statistical analysis of graph-theoretic
measures.
2.

METHODS

Participants
Eighteen young healthy subjects are taken of
which nine are men and nine women. The topics are in
21 to 26 age groups with free of any neurological
disorder. They have normal vision participate in the
experiment.

IJSRISE © 2015.
http://www.ijsrise.com

pg. 2

International Journal of Scientific Research in Information Systems and Engineering (IJSRISE)
Volume 2, Issue 1, April-2016. ISSN 2380-8128
(AF3, F7, F3, FC5, T7, P7, O1, O2, P8, T8, FC6, F4,
F8, and AF4). Each brain right and left hemisphere are
references by electrodes. The EEG signals are
recorded at128 Hz frequency rate. All EEG signals are
initially band- pass filter through the Independent
Component Analysis (ICA). ICA is applied to the filter
EEG data for removing biological artifacts such as
cardiac rhythm and eye blinks. A Notch Filter is also
us to remove 50 Hz power line noise that may have
arisen due to improper grounding while EEG data
acquisition. It is a requirement to sit comfortably in a
chair in a dimly illuminate Lightroom for measuring
EEG subjects. Subjects are instructed that EEG is
recorded while they are watching ad films with their
open eyes. The EEG protocol consists of the
participants who are watching the six consecutively ad
video with their relax position after watching videos
participants require to fill the feedback form. It
includes extracting specific frequency band. Each data
is, therefore, decomposing into the following
frequency bands; gamma (32-62Hz), beta (16-32 Hz),
alpha (8-16 Hz), theta (4-8 Hz), and delta (0.5-4 Hz).

Stimuli
A visual stimulus contains a series of sad,
inspirational, happy, and fearful advertisements. Six
emotion-eliciting ad film clips with visual and
auditory components are shown to the subjects which
induce different emotions positive while viewing
happy and inspirational film clips, neutral while
viewing two ‘‘neutral’’ movie clips, or negative while
displaying a fear and a disgust film clip. A visual
stimulus contains 1-minute blank screen at the
beginning of the ad clips sequence as a baseline in
resting state. There are five seconds blank screen
between the six consecutive advertisements to avoid
food carry over. Each ad clip is to create a coherent
segment and thus maximize the emotional meaning of
each clip. The auditory volume is kept constant for
each film clip. To avoid order effects on emotion
elicitation, the presentation of the six film clips is a
counterbalance. The advertisements are precisely
select so as to evoke significantly different emotions
of the men and women.

EEG Functional Connectivity Analysis
EEG-based functional connectivity is
estimated in the theta, alpha and beta bands for all
pairs of 14 electrodes, including AF3, F7, F3, FC5, T7,
P7, P8, T8, FC6, F4, F8, AF4, O1, and O2.
Coherence
For two different signals A and B, the
coherence at each frequency (f) is defined as:
Coh (f) = |SAB(f)|2 / (SAA(f)SBB(f))
Where |S AB(f)| is the cross-spectral density
between signals A and B. S AA is the auto-correlation
of signal A, and SBB is the autocorrelation of signal B.
Coherence is sensitive to amplitude and phase change,
and its value ranges from 0 to 1. Similar to correlation,
higher coherence indicates that two brain sites are
working more closely together, but at a specific
frequency.
Fig 1. Experimental Stimuli using Emotiv Epoch of
14-channels while watching an advertisement clips
After watching films, each subject is given a
feedback form to fill. This form contains several
questions. These questions assessed to report the
happiness, angriness and drowsiness level of topics.
EEG Recording
EEG is recorded using a 14 channel Emotiv
Epoch according to the International 10–20 system
IJSRISE © 2015.
http://www.ijsrise.com

pg. 3

International Journal of Scientific Research in Information Systems and Engineering (IJSRISE)
Volume 2, Issue 1, April-2016. ISSN 2380-8128
Degree Centrality
The simplest centrality measure is called
‘degree centrality’ (Lohmann et al., 2010).The degree
xi of a node i is defined as:
xi = ∑jaij
A node has a high degree it has strong
connections to many other nodes in the graph.
Global Efficiency (Eglobal)
The arithmetical mean of the inverse of the
distance (d) between each pair of nodes. Global
Efficiency represents how efficient is the
communication within a network. Global efficiency of
a fully connected and of an empty graph are equal to 1
and 0 accordingly.
1

Fig 2. Watts and Strogatz (Telesford et al., 2011)
small-world model. A simulated 14-node lattice with
average degree k is rewired at varying probabilities p,
ranging from 0 to 1. At small values p, network smallworldness is seen in a network with simultaneous high
clustering (squares) and low path length (circles).

1

Eglobal =N(N−1) ∑i,j∈N,i≠j d

I,j

Local Efficiency (Elocal)
The mean of the global efficiencies of all
subgraphs Gi of neighbors of each node of the graph
is defined as the local effectiveness of a graph and
average local efficiency local is given by

Small –world characteristics are as follow:
• Its average clustering coefficient C is significantly
greater than the average clustering coefficient of
a random graph. Crand constructs on the same
vertex set.
• The graph has approximately the same meanshortest path length L as its corresponding
random graph Lrand.
C and L are measured against those of their
equivalent derive random networks (Crandand Lrand,
respectively) to generate the ratios γ=C/Crand and
λ=L/Lrand. These ratios are then used to calculate the
small-world index as:

1

Elocal = N ∑i∈N E(Gi )
Clustering Coefficient(C)
Clustering coefficient C of a graph is
average over all vertices of the chart.
1

C = M ∑M
i=1 Ci
Path Length (L)
Path length did between two vertices I and j
are the minimal numbers of edges that have to be
travel to go from i to j. Shortest path length L of a
graph is the mean of the road lengths between all
possible pairs of vertices:
L=

1
M(M−1)

σ=

C/Crand
L/Lrand

Where ‘σ’ is a small-world index. The
conditions that must be met to be classified as smallworld are C~Crand and L≈Lrand, which results in
σ>1.The scale small-world index also exhibits a peak
profile, and for connection topologies.

∑i,j∈M,i≠j dij

Small-world
A computational model of small-world
networks proposed by Watts and Strogatz (1998) in
which the nodes have been connected with their
nearest neighbors, producing regular graph having a
high clustering coefficient with high average path
length. With a probability P, edges were then
randomly rewired.

IJSRISE © 2015.
http://www.ijsrise.com

pg. 4

International Journal of Scientific Research in Information Systems and Engineering (IJSRISE)
Volume 2, Issue 1, April-2016. ISSN 2380-8128
Table 1: Statistical Analysis

out that FCN of coherence is higher in negative
emotion than during positive and neutral emotion.
Women have higher local and global efficiencies
during positive emotion while men had these values
higher during negative emotion whereas in small
world women have rivalry differences in all the three
emotions. Men show right hemispheric activation
during negative emotion while female’s shows left
hemispheric activation. The parietal region is
activating during neutral emotion in both males and
females. Similar observations have been reported for
prefrontal–temporal
EEG
coherence
while
participants are watching fearful versus enjoyable ad
film sequences.
With these findings, our results show that
coherence is greater in women during positive emotion
than during negative emotion in the theta, alpha, and
beta bands. Most of these coherence differences are
locate in the right frontal, parietal and occipital sites.
Our results similarly indicate that positive emotion is
more synchronize than negative emotion at each
frequency band. Different functional connectivity
patterns are observed in the men and women
functional connectivity of small world with the 0.0816
rewiring probability through which the minor
difference had noticed in the men and women
emotions. According to that computation conclusion
of men and females is seen that negative emotion is
greater than positive emotion, and neutrally is equal to
males and women. So by coherence FCN, it is found
that women are much emotional than men. Although
the functional connectivity patterns might be different,
EEG-base functional connectivity reveals the similar
effect on classification for various emotional states in
either men or women groups. Better emotion is
observed in women than men group. Some studies
demonstrate that women tend to show hypersensitivity
to emotional stimuli. Whether the small world
functional connectivity shows, a different pattern
between men and women groups and the underlying
mechanism might be an interesting topic in the future.

Descriptive analysis and pair sample t-test are
used to assess the statistically significant differences
between the graph metrics of brain networks at
different scales. The tests are carried out separately for
all the values of positive, negative and neutral
emotions. The difference is to consider significant at
P<0.05. For Statistical analysis, we use SPSS toolbox
freely available. These tests are done to check the
relevant values of graph theoretical measures. For
which the computation is done on the weight averages
of local efficiency, global efficiency, path length,
clustering coefficients, small world index. Moreover,
the degree of men and women in all the three emotions
and then compare these measures between men and
females using the tests in which local and global
efficiencies show significant differences in negative
emotion of men.
3.

RESULTS
A one-way repeat measure ANOVA with
three levels of emotions positive, neutral, and negative
yield a significant main effect of all the three
(P<0.001). Post hoc tests indicate that negative and
positive ad clips are rate with higher activation
compared with neutral ad clips (P<0.01, M±SD:
Positive=5.67±0.42,
Neutral=4.78±0.51,
Negative=5.68±0.46). However, there is no significant
difference between neutral, negative and positive ad
clips (P=0.58). Pair sample t-test analysis reveals an
essential difference between men and women active
and negative emotions scores (t=0.06, P>0.05,
Positive=0.005±0.84,
Negative=0.0071±.0.092),
which is expected base on their construction as
independent dimensions.
Different EEG-based functional connectivity
patterns are observed among the various emotional
states. Moreover, it can be deducted that coherence
FCN is greater in women during positive emotion than
during negative and in men, neutral emotion is pointed

IJSRISE © 2015.
http://www.ijsrise.com

pg. 5

International Journal of Scientific Research in Information Systems and Engineering (IJSRISE)
Volume 2, Issue 1, April-2016. ISSN 2380-8128

Davidson, R.J., & Irwin, W. (1999). The functional
neuroanatomy of emotion and affective
style. Trends in cognitive sciences, 3(1), 11-21.C.

4.

CONCLUSION
Our results demonstrate different EEG-base
functional connectivity patterns of men and women in
various emotional states, in either single or combine
frequency bands; we use graph theory analysis to
determine the characteristics of weight functional
networks while watching the stimuli. Effective
functional networks become highly segregated and
exhibit weaker small-worldness. Positive and negative
emotional
networks
demonstrate
dissociable
functional connectivity that presents mainly in the
executive-control
network.
Particularly,
hemispherical differences are found in men and
women emotions. So the left hemisphere is more
active during the advertisement perceive by subjects
as positive and more right hemisphere activation is
observed during the advertisement perceive as
negative. In contrast, the local and global efficiencies
are greater in men having a negative emotion. These
observations increase our understanding of the taskstate base functional connectome of the human brain.
These findings provide evidence that
emotional states are characterized by their individual
patterns of central nervous system response. EEG
apparatus with more electrodes and other
neuroimaging techniques with portable apparatus i.e.
of FMRI and PET can be used to evaluate the emotions
of men and women. Further research can be carried out
by using electrodes more than 14 to conduct
microstate segmentation effectively. Considering both
the complex involve in processing emotion, and that
emotion involves several neural systems at different
brain sites, we can conclude that hopefully research
using small-world base functional connectivity among
brain sites might create new grounds for methodology
and identifies several promising and fruitful research
direction on emotions.

Fadlallah, B.H., Keil, A., & Principe, J.C. (2013, July).
Functional dependence in the human brain: A
graph theoretical analysis. In Engineering in
Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), 2013 35th
Annual International Conference of the IEEE (pp.
2948-2951). IEEE.
Fallani, F.D., Costa, L.F., Rodriguez, F.A., Astolfi, L.,
Vecchiato, G., Toppi, J., Borghini, G., Cincotti, F.,
Mattia, D., Salinari, S.,& Isabella, R. (2010). A
graph-theoretical approach in brain functional
networks. Possible implications in EEG
studies. Nonlinear biomedical physics, 4(Suppl 1),
S8.
Fallani, F.D.V., Astolfi, L., Cincotti, F., Mattia, D.,
Marciani, M.G., Salinari, S., Kurths, J., Gao, S.,
Cichocki, A., Colosimo, A.,&Babiloni, F. (2007).
Cortical functional connectivity networks in
normal and spinal cord injured patients: evaluation
by graph analysis. Human brain mapping, 28(12),
1334-1346.
Fallani, F.D.V., Richiardi, J., Chavez, M., &Achard,
S. (2014). Graph analysis of functional brain
networks: practical issues in translational
neuroscience. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B, 369(1653),
20130521.
Flor-Henry, P. (1979). On certain aspects of the
localization of the cerebral systems regulating and
determining emotion. Biological Psychiatry.

REFERENCE
Franks, D. D. (2006). The neuroscience of emotions.
In Handbook of the Sociology of Emotions (pp. 3862). Springer US.

Bassett, D.S., &Bullmore, E.D. (2006). Small-world
brain networks. The neuroscientist, 12(6), 512523.

Gaulin., Steven J.C. &Donald H. McBurney. (2003).
Evolutionary Psychology. Prentice Hall. ISBN
978-0-13-111529-3, Chapter 6, p 121-142.

Borod, J.C., Cicero, B.A., Obler, L.K., Welkowitz, J.,
Erhan, H.M., Santschi, C., Grunwald, I.S., Agosti,
R.M., & Whalen,J.R.(1998).Righthemisphere
emotional perception: evidence across multiple
channels. Neuropsychology, 12(3), 446.

Guevara, M.A., &Corsi-Cabrera, M. (1996).EEG
coherence or EEG correlation?. International
Journal of Psychophysiology, 23(3), 145-153.

Bos,
D.O.
(2006).
EEG-based
emotion
recognition. The Influence of Visual and Auditory
Stimuli, 1-17.

Izard, C. E. (2007). Basic emotions, natural kinds,

IJSRISE © 2015.
http://www.ijsrise.com

pg. 6

International Journal of Scientific Research in Information Systems and Engineering (IJSRISE)
Volume 2, Issue 1, April-2016. ISSN 2380-8128
emotion
schemas,
paradigm. Perspectives
science, 2(3), 260-280.

and
on

a
new
psychological

Applications in Biomedicine (ITAB), 2010 10th
IEEE International Conference on (pp. 1-4). IEEE.

Kaminski, M.J., &Blinowska, K.J. (1991). A new
method of the description of the information flow
in
the
brain
structures. Biological
cybernetics, 65(3), 203-210.

Lohmann, G., Margulies, D.S., Horstmann, A., Pleger,
B., Lepsien, J., Goldhahn, D., Lohmann, G.,
Margulies, D.S., Horstmann, A., Pleger, B.,
Lepsien, J., Goldhahn, D., Schloegl, H., Stumvoll,
M., Villringer, A. & Turner, R. (2010).
Eigenvector centrality mapping for analyzing
connectivity patterns in fMRI data of the human
brain. PloS one,5(4), e10232.

Kelly, J. R., & Hutson-Comeaux, S. L. (1999).
Gender-emotion
stereotypes
are
context
specific. Sex Roles, 40(1-2), 107-120.

Mauss, I.B., & Robinson, M.D. (2009). Measures of
emotion: A review.Cognition and emotion, 23(2),
209-237.

Killgore, W. D., &Yurgelun-Todd, D. A. (2007). The
right-hemisphere and valence hypotheses: could
they both be right (and sometimes left)?. Social
cognitive and affective neuroscience.

Nolte, G., Bai, O., Wheaton, L., Mari, Z., Vorbach, S.,
& Hallett, M. (2004). Identifying true brain
interaction from EEG data using the imaginary part
of coherency. Clinical neurophysiology, 115(10),
2292-2307.

James, W. (1884). II.—What is an emotion?. Mind,
(34), 188-205.

Kring, A. M., & Gordon, A. H. (1998). Sex differences
in emotion: expression, experience, and
physiology. Journal of personality and social
psychology, 74(3), 686.

Panksepp, J. (2007). Neurologizing the psychology of
affects: How appraisal-based constructivism and
basic emotion theory can coexist.Perspectives on
Psychological Science, 2(3), 281-296.

Lee, Y. Y., & Hsieh, S. (2014). Classifying different
emotional states by means of EEG-based
functional connectivity patterns. PloS one, 9(4),
e95415.

Sackeim, H.A., Greenberg, M.S., Weiman, A.L., Gur,
R.C., Hungerbuhler, J.P., &Geschwind, N. (1982).
Hemispheric asymmetry in the expression of
positive and negative emotions: neurologic
evidence. Archives of neurology,39(4), 210-218.

Lithari, C., Frantzidis, C.A., Papadelis, C., Vivas,
A.B., Klados, M.A., Kourtidou-Papadeli, C.,
Ioannides, A.A., &Bamidis, P.D. (2010). Are
females more responsive to emotional stimuli? A
neurophysiological study across arousal and
valence dimensions. Brain topography, 23(1), 2740.

Schacter, D.L. (2011). Psychology Second Edition, 41
Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10010.
Sporns, O. (2003). Graph theory methods for the
analysis of neural connectivity patterns.
In Neuroscience
databases (pp.
171-185).
Springer US.

Lithari, C., Klados, M.A., &Bamidis, P.D. (2010).
Graph Analysis on Functional Connectivity
Networks during an Emotional Paradigm. In XII
Mediterranean Conference on Medical and
Biological Engineering and Computing 2010 (pp.
115-118). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.

Stam, C.J., & Van Dijk, B.W. (2002). Synchronization
likelihood: an unbiased measure of generalized
synchronization in multivariate data sets.Physica
D: Nonlinear Phenomena, 163(3), 236-251.

Lithari, C., Frantzidis, C.A., Papadelis, C., Klados,
M.A., Pappas, C., &Bamidis, P.D. (2010,
November). Small-world properties of brain
Functional Connectivity Networks are affected by
emotional stimuli. In Information Technology and

Takehara, T., Ochiai, F., & Suzuki, N. (2015). A
small-world network model of facial emotion
recognition. The
Quarterly
Journal
of
Experimental Psychology, 1-22.

IJSRISE © 2015.
http://www.ijsrise.com

pg. 7

International Journal of Scientific Research in Information Systems and Engineering (IJSRISE)
Volume 2, Issue 1, April-2016. ISSN 2380-8128
Telesford, Q.K., Joyce, K.E., Hayasaka, S., Burdette,
J.H., &Laurienti, P.J. (2011). The ubiquity of
small-world networks. Brain connectivity, 1(5),
367-375.
Tononi, G., Sporns, O., &Edelman, G.M. (1994). A
measure for brain complexity: relating functional
segregation and integration in the nervous
system. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 91(11), 5033-5037.
Turner, J. H., & Stets, J. E. (2005). The sociology of
emotions. Cambridge University Press.
Wheeler, R.E., Davidson, R.J., &Tomarken, A.J.
(1993). Frontal brain asymmetry and emotional
reactivity: A biological substrate of affective
style.Psychophysiology, 30(1), 82-89.
Zalesky, A., Cocchi, L., Fornito, A., Murray, M.M.,
&Bullmore, E. (2012). Connectivity differences in
brain networks. Neuroimage, 60(2), 1055-1062.
Zhang, W., Li, H., & Pan, X. (2015). Positive and
negative affective processing exhibit dissociable
functional hubs during the viewing of affective
pictures. Human brain mapping, 36(2), 415-426.

IJSRISE © 2015.
http://www.ijsrise.com

pg. 8

