IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL VOL. ?, NO. ?, MONTH 2014

1

In-ear EEG from viscoelastic generic earpieces:
Robust and unobtrusive 24/7 monitoring
Valentin Goverdovsky, Member, IEEE, David Looney, Member, IEEE,
Preben Kidmose, Senior Member, IEEE, and Danilo Mandic, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—We introduce a novel in-ear sensor which satisfies
key design requirements for wearable electroencephalography
(EEG) – it is discreet, unobtrusive and capable of capturing highquality brain activity from the ear canal. Unlike initial designs
which utilised custom earpieces and require a costly and timeconsuming manufacturing process, we here extend the generic
earmould concept to make ear-EEG suitable for immediate and
widespread use. We propose a departure from silicone earmoulds,
and instead outline a sensor based on a viscoelastic substrate and
conductive cloth electrodes, both of which are shown to possess a
number of desirable mechanical and electrical properties. Owing
to its viscoelastic nature, the earpiece exhibits good conformance
to the shape of the ear canal, thus providing stable electrodeskin interface, while cloth electrodes require only saline solution
to establish low impedance contact. The analysis highlights the
distinguishing advantages compared to the current state-of-theart in ear-EEG. We demonstrate that such a device can be readily
used for the measurement of various EEG responses.
Keywords—electrophysiology, electroencephalography, biosensors, biomedical engineering, materials

I. I NTRODUCTION
EARABLE health is envisaged to become the transformative force in global healthcare, which promises
affordable, accessible and personalised diagnosis and treatment [1]. For this to become a reality, key advancements at
the level of sensor technology are a pre-requisite. An ideal
wearable sensor must be cheap, robust, unobtrusive, userfriendly and discreet for people to accept and wear it continuously. Inroads have been made in this direction by making
the sensors either invisible or part of the accepted apparel
and accessories. While it is relatively well-understood how
to incorporate the various body-sensors into e.g. the clothing
and watches, the requirement for discreet and unobtrusive
sensing has proven to be particularly challenging in the area
of electroencephalography (EEG) monitoring, where virtually
all the devices are placed along the scalp. This is not only
obtrusive, but also makes the recording process cumbersome
and stigmatising.
EEG refers to the process of recording electrical brain
activity. It is widely used in the fields of neuroscience, e.g.
for monitoring brain activity during episodes of breathing

W

Manuscript received Month ??, 2015; revised Month ??, 2015.
V. Goverdovsky, D. Looney and D. Mandic are with the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Imperial College
London, London, SW7 2AZ, UK (e-mail: goverdovsky@imperial.ac.uk;
david.looney06@imperial.ac.uk; d.mandic@imperial.ac.uk).
P. Kidmose is with the Department of Engineering, Aarhus University,
Aarhus DK-8000, Denmark (e-mail: pki@eng.au.dk).

cessation in patients suffering from sleep apnoea, and braincomputer interface (BCI), where brain waves are used to
control, among other things, a cursor on the screen. Modern,
state of the art sensors and systems are still very bulky, which is
acceptable for inpatients, but prohibitive for outpatient ambulatory monitoring. Systems do exist (Emotiv, Mindo, etc.), which
partially address the issues of portability and visual appeal,
however, their indiscreet placement on the scalp prevents wide
acceptance. To this end, we have recently introduced a novel
EEG recording concept termed ear-EEG, which allows for
electroencephalography signals to be acquired from inside the
ear canal, thus paving the way towards non-stigmatising brain
activity monitors [2].
The initial concept and prototypes were based on the
personalised earpieces [3] widely used in the hearing aids
industry. Their manufacturing process comprises a laborious
and costly procedure of obtaining wax impressions of the
subject’s outer ear and ear canal, 3D scanning of the impressions, creating models and finally manufacturing earpieces
with high resolution 3D printers. Although this yields tightfitting earpieces – critical for good quality signals – it was
found that this approach is not suitable for wide adoption due
to cost, occasional difficulties of fitting, and the requirement
for gelled electrodes to enable a low-impedance electrode-skin
contact.
To address the issues of cost and ease-of-use, we have
recently introduced generic earpieces made out of silicone,
with conductive silicone electrodes, which fit most adult ears
and can be used off-the-shelf. We also reported on the ability
of such electrodes to provide good quality signals in a standard
EEG paradigm of acoustic steady state response (ASSR) [4].
These silicone earpieces were able to record the ASSR even
in the challenging scenario when all the electrodes – sensing,
reference and ground – were placed on a single earpiece inside
the ear canal. Although a significant improvement over the
initial, custom-made, rigid prototype, the silicone earpieces
still inherit some of the drawbacks of hard-shell earpieces:
they require conductive gel for good electrode-skin contact
and their non-guaranteed conformance to the shape of the
ear canal leads to motion artefacts. Moreover, the conductive
silicone electrodes exhibited signs of degradation over a period
of several months which manifested itself in a significantly
increased impedance of the electrodes.
In addition to our work, in the area of ultra-wearable
EEG monitoring with generic earpieces, Hoon Lee et. al. [5]
recently reported in-ear headphones, in which buds where
made conductive by loading silicone substrate with carbon

2

IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL VOL. ?, NO. ?, MONTH 2014

nanotubes. The EEG was acquired by measuring the potential
difference between the two ears. The overall results were
promising, but there are also several drawbacks to this approach. First, the potential difference is measured between
two ears, thus requiring cumbersome cabling from both ears
to the acquisition unit. Second, such a setup limits spatial
resolution necessary to attribute measured activity to a particular brain hemisphere. Third, silicone buds provide suboptimal
conformance to the shape of the ear canal, thus restricting
the insertion depth and firmness of fit, leading to increased
susceptibility to motion artefacts. Fourth, based on our experiments, the signal measured between two ears frequently
contains strong cardiac component (ECG) [6], thus restricting
the ability of such setup to acquire low frequency EEG. Finally,
all of the earpieces described so far are too rigid to be used in
young children, particularly newborns, because inserting the
devices can damage the not yet fully formed bone around the
ear canal.
To resolve these issues, we here introduce a novel earpiece
which is comfortable to wear over extended periods of time,
is safe to use even in newborns, and provides good quality
EEG signals even in subjects, whose ear canals exhibit strong
pulsation artefacts – critical cases, where the EEG recorded
with custom-made plastic and previous generation silicone
earpieces is compromised.
II.

E ARPIECE S ENSOR

The two key components comprising the new device are
a memory foam substrate and conductive cloth electrodes.
The viscoelasticity of the substrate is a critical characteristic
which ensures that the earpiece can be effortlessly and safely
placed in the ear canal. Following insertion, the device expands
and redistributes pressure evenly along the entirety of its
contact surface, thus providing a stable interface with the
skin, robust to mechanical disturbances. The viscoelasticity
of the substrate also ensures that energy from abrupt motion
(e.g. pulsation) is absorbed, thus minimally disturbing the
electrode-skin contact. This approach is an alternative solution
to the motion-induced artefacts in ear-EEG compared to that
we introduced in [7]. Cloth electrodes are extremely flexible,
conductive, soft, comfortable to wear and conform to changes
in the substrate’s shape when the earpiece is compressed prior
to insertion. Only a small amount of saline solution is required
to provide good electrical contact between the cloth and the
skin.
A. Construction
All of the previous materials used for in-ear EEG sensors
(silicone and plastic) have proven to be too stiff and rigid.
Unsuitable for delicate ears of the newborns, these provide
unevenly distributed pressure along the outer surface of the
device, when put inside the ear canal, providing loose and
intermittent electrode-skin contact, susceptible to motion artefacts. To alleviate this problem, the earpiece material must
be soft, easy to fit, robust and suitable to self-administer.

Conductive thread
Cloth electrode

Viscoelastic
substrate

Heat-shrink tubing
(a) Earpiece construction diagram.

(b) Photo of the earpiece.
Fig. 1.

Proposed in-ear EEG sensor with a viscoelastic substrate.

Such a material is already widely available, e.g. in soundblocking earplugs, and is currently gaining popularity with inear headphones in the form of comfortable, sound-isolating
buds. Such materials are widely referred to as memory foams.
Memory foam is viscoelastic, characterised by the timedependent nature in the stress-strain relationship. It is capable
of undergoing significant relaxation under constant strain, akin
to viscous materials that flow when strained. On the other hand,
it does not permanently deform when squeezed, stretched or
twisted (in the limited range of strains) and given enough time
it returns to its original shape – characteristic of the elastic
(rubbery) response.
Not all polymers are viscoelastic to any significant practical
extent, but viscoelasticity can be engineered into a material by
adjusting its chemistry and microstructure1 [8]. For example
polyurethane can be mixed with additional chemicals, controlling its density and viscosity, and subsequently foamed to
produce memory foam widely used in mattresses and pillows,
well known for their pressure-relieving properties [9].
It is self-evident that memory foam has many of the key
characteristics required for a substrate of the in-ear EEG sensor. It can undergo significant compression without loosing the
original shape – required for comfortable and easy insertion.
The pressure on the outside surface of the foam earplug is
uniformly redistributed, creating excellent contact with the skin
at any point on the earpiece providing robust electrode-skin
interface and comfort during long term wearing. Foam can
1 Transparent polymer films in the car windshields are used in the viscoelastic regime, giving them significant energy dissipation capabilities during
impact.

GOVERDOVSKY et al.: IN-EAR EEG FROM VISCOELASTIC GENERIC EARPIECES: ROBUST AND UNOBTRUSIVE 24/7 MONITORING

be engineered to exhibit various degrees of firmness, thus
enabling earplugs suitable even for newborns. Finally, the
material is cheap and can be moulded into many different
shapes if needed.
To accommodate the high levels of compression that foam
earplugs undergo prior to insertion, the electrodes must be
made out of similarly flexible and sturdy material. We have
tested a number of different options, namely: polyurethanebased silver-loaded flexible adhesive, conductive copper paint,
silver-loaded silicone rubber and stretchable conductive fabric.
We have established that the adhesive and the paint do not
possess the required sturdiness when dry, and crack even under
minor compression levels of the underlying substrate. Silicone
rubber was found to be extremely hard to attach to the substrate
as well as to the wires, it also exhibited high impedance
after several straining cycles. Stretchable fabric performed
best, it easily accommodated all of the required deformations,
provided low impedance even after several months of use, and
was straightforward to attach to the substrate and wires.
The chosen conductive cloth is made out of silver-coated
nylon interwoven with elastic fibres. It can stretch in both
directions and has very low impedance of only 0.5 Ohm/sq.
To create electrodes, strips of fabric 4 mm wide and 1 cm
long were cut, into which stainless steel thread was sewn, thus
allowing standard wires to be soldered directly to the thread.
Since the thread is made out of stainless steel and the cloth is
silver-plated the whole electrode is resistant to corrosion. The
fabric strips were then placed on two sides of the memory
foam earplug opposite one another and were attached to the
substrate using 3M adhesive transfer tape. Stainless still thread
attached to the electrode was insulated with heat shrink tubing
and passed through the bulk of the earplug exiting through the
flat face of the earpiece. This arrangement created an in-ear
EEG sensor with two electrodes diametrically opposed to each
other as shown in Fig. 1.
Soft
Medium
Dense

Stress (kPa)

80
60
40
20
0

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

Strain (%)

(a) Stress-strain response of viscoelastic foam substrates.
Hard
Soft

Stress (MPa)

15

10

5

0

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

Strain (%)

(b) Stress-strain response of silicone substrates.
Fig. 2.

Stress-strain responses of various earpiece materials.

70

3

B. Mechanical characteristics
To evaluate the mechanical performance of the proposed
earpiece and establish the key difference in its behaviour
against the earlier prototypes, we have subjected the substrate
to a strain test to produce stress-strain curves for a number
of different variants of memory foam and silicone. Prior to
the evaluation, earpieces were cut to approximately 16 mm
tall cylinders with the opposing faces as flat as possible.
The measurements we performed on a dynamic mechanical
analyser where the cylinders were subjected to compressive
strain. The first testing phase comprised rapid compression
which squeezed the earpieces by 10 mm in 2.4 s. Then the
strain was held constant for 1 min and finally slowly released at
2 mm/min rate. Corresponding stress-strain curves for different
materials are shown on Fig. 2.
The plots in Fig. 2 reveal a significant relaxation exhibited
by each of the viscoelastic earpieces following rapid compression – a key desired aspect for long-term wearability. This
characteristic is critically important for both the comfort of the
user as well as the contact quality between the electrode and
skin. Additionally, all of the foam earpieces are significantly
softer than their silicone counterparts for a given compression
rate, e.g. they exhibit mere 5 kPa outward pressure at 40%
compression compared to 300 kPa of silicone. To achieve
secure placement within the ear no significant outward pressure
is needed, this is achieved through excellent conformance of
the viscoelastic material to the shape of the canal.
In general, there are two broad types of electrodes: nonpolarisable and polarisable [10]. The best known practical example
which closely resembles the characteristics of the former type
is the silver/silver chloride electrode. It has a thin layer of
a slightly-soluble ionic compound which is usually brought
in contact with an electrolyte containing anions of chloride,
such that there is almost no overpotentials and the current
passes freely across the electrode-electrolyte interface. The
latter type – polarisable electrodes – are frequently made with
noble metals and no charge crosses the electrode-electrolyte
barrier, hence they are also known as capacitive electrodes.
Nonpolarisable electrodes are relatively robust to mechanical motion artefacts, particularly in the events when the
electrode-skin distance changes without breaking the contact
with electrolyte [11]. On the other hand, the capacitive electrodes, such as the conductive cloth in the proposed sensor,
are very sensitive to such movements which change distance
between the ‘capacitor plates’, creating electrical noise in the
signals acquired. As mentioned earlier, viscoelastic materials
possess good energy absorption capabilities, which allows our
earpiece to mitigate the effects of motion artefacts, particularly
those induced by pulsatile movements of the ear canal wall.
To verify this property we have tested the viscoelastic
earpieces in people whose ear canals exhibited strong pulsation, against our earlier designs – the rigid plastic and
silicone earpieces. One representative case is shown on Fig. 3,
which compares the EEG signals obtained from the same
person, from the same ear canal, when using the siliconebased earpiece and the viscoelastic foam-based one. Observe
that the EEG from the proposed sensor does not have any

4

IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL VOL. ?, NO. ?, MONTH 2014

4.5

Impedance (kΩ)

EEG signal (µV)

20
10
0
-10
-20
125

126

127

128

129

130

131

132

133

134

Electrode 1
Electrode 2

4

3.5

3
12:00

135

13:00

Time (s)

14:00

15:00

16:00

17:00

Time of day

(a) In-ear EEG segment from memory foam earpiece.

Fig. 4.

Impedance variation of in-ear electrodes over time.

EEG signal (µV)

20
10
0
-10
-20
125

126

127

128

129

130

131

132

133

134

135

Time (s)

(b) In-ear EEG segment from silicone earpiece.
Silicone earpiece
Viscoelastic foam earpiece

10-10

PSD

approximately half-hour intervals using AVATAR – a portable
biosignal acquisition unit by Electrical Geodesics. Prior to
insertion, the ear was cleaned with cotton buds and water,
no abrasion was performed and saline solution was applied
to both electrodes in relatively small quantities. The outcome
of the experiments is demonstrated in Fig. 4, which shows
that the impedance of the in-ear electrodes remains essentially
constant over the full duration of the experiment.

III.

10-12

10-14
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Frequency (Hz)

(c) PSD of the EEG signals from silicone and memory foam earpieces.
Fig. 3. Comparison of signal quality between viscoelastic foam and silicone
earpieces.

pulsation artefacts, while that from the silicone-based one is
badly affected. Spectral analysis of these signals reveals that
the silicone earpiece is not suitable for recording low frequency
brain waves (<5 Hz) due to significant corruption of those
frequencies from artefacts induced by pulsation, as indicated
by ‘+’ in Fig. 3(b)
C. Electrical characteristics
The two key aspects of the electrical characteristic of the
proposed sensor are: (i) the ability to achieve low impedance
electrode-skin contact without abrasion or other means uncomfortable to the user and (ii) the stability of such contact
over time. Both of the requirements can be satisfied with the
appropriate choice of electrodes – conductive cloth has all
the mechanical characteristics to be used in conjunction with
viscoelastic foam substrates and it also performs well in the
context of EEG acquisition [12].
We have verified that the desired low impedance is achievable with just a saline solution and normal cleaning of the
ear canal to remove any excess ear wax. Long term stability
of such contact has been investigated through the following
experiment: the user has been asked to wear the earpiece for
a period of 5 hours and to record electrode impedances at

EEG ACQUISITION

After the mechanical and electrical characteristics of the proposed sensor have been tested and verified, we next consider
its use in the context of EEG acquisition. In our previous work,
we demonstrated the feasibility of recording EEG from within
the ear canal using personalised earpieces [2], [13]. Here we
validate the generic earpieces in a similar fashion via wellestablished auditory and visual evoked responses: the auditory
steady-state response (ASSR) and the steady-state visually
evoked potential (SSVEP), additionally we present transient
evoked potentials.
The ASSR [14] is one of the primary EEG responses
used to assess hearing threshold level [15]. When presented
with either a broadband or a narrow-band auditory signal
which is amplitude-modulated, typically with frequencies in
the range 40-80 Hz, the human brain ‘demodulates’ the signal
and produces a response at the modulation frequency. The
response is typically most pronounced in the temporal lobe
of the brain, which is located in close proximity of the ear
canal, thus making the ASSR appropriate for testing the in-ear
approach.
The SSVEP originates in the visual cortex [16], [17] in
response to visual stimuli, typically a light source flashing
at a fixed rate within the range 1 Hz to 100 Hz [17]. The
electrical activity that constitutes the brain electrical response
contains exactly the same or multiples of the stimulation
frequency. This paradigm is widely used in e.g. brain computer
interface due to its excellent signal-to-noise ratio. We also
examined the transient response to a visual stimulus – the
visual evoked potential (VEP) – by time-averaging epochs
following stimulus presentation. Over the past half century
transient evoked potentials have been used to study a wide
variety of physiological aspects of brain function such as
attention [18], and are frequently used in BCI applications [19].

GOVERDOVSKY et al.: IN-EAR EEG FROM VISCOELASTIC GENERIC EARPIECES: ROBUST AND UNOBTRUSIVE 24/7 MONITORING

Power/Freq.
(dB/Hz)

Power/Freq.
(dB/Hz)

ASSR
−120

Left ear

−130
−140

15

−110

20

40

45

A1

−120

Power/Freq.
(dB/Hz)

−130

15

20

25
30
35
Frequency (Hz)

40

45

25
30
35
Frequency (Hz)

40

45

−110
−120
C3

−130
15

20

headphones presenting an auditory stimulus comprising a
1 kHz sinusoid, amplitude-modulated with a 40 Hz sinusoidal
signal. The audio was generated in MATLAB and was presented at a sufficiently loud volume to accommodate the lack
of acoustic vents in the earpieces.
The VEP and SSVEP experiments were performed with a
red LED of 13 000 mcd brightness. For the VEP experiments
the LED was switched fully ON for 200 ms followed by a
fully OFF state for 1800 msm while for SSVEP the LED’s
light intensity was varied sinusoidally from fully OFF to fully
ON regimes at a rate of 15 Hz using pulse width modulation
(PWM). An Arduino Uno board generated the PWM waveform
with the aid of built-in counters, and the whole setup was
placed inside an opaque black box with only the frontal
region of the LED exposed, providing a viewing angle of
18◦ . The subject was seated approximately 70 cm away from
the stimulus which was positioned at head height. In all of
the experiments, the subject was instructed to observe the
stimulus while avoiding any head movements or eye activity.
The duration of the experiments was 250 s.

−110
−120
Cz

−130
15

20

25
30
35
Frequency (Hz)

40

45

Fig. 5. PSD analysis of responses from an ear-electrode and mastoid (A1)
and central regions (C3,Cz) scalp-electrodes, for an ASSR stimulus – a 40 Hz
amplitude-modulated auditory tone. Observe responses from all electrode sites
at 40 Hz.

A. Experimental setup
In all experiments, EEG was simultaneously obtained from
both the proposed in-ear generic earpiece as well as standard
on-scalp electrodes. The g.USBamp, a high quality 24-bit
biosignal amplifier from g.tec, was used to perform all data
acquisition; the unit facilitates simultaneous acquisition from
independent recording setups, through its recording configurations with different ground and reference electrode placements,
and thus enables a rigorous comparison between in-ear and onscalp recordings. On-scalp EEG was obtained from electrode
positions based on the international 10-20 system: the left
mastoid (A1), the left-central (C3) and the central regions (Cz).
All scalp electrodes were referenced to the right earlobe and
the ground electrode was placed on the forehead. In-ear EEG
was obtained from the left ear from two electrodes placed at
diametrically opposed locations along the ear canal wall (see
Fig. 1(b)), referenced to a gold-cap electrode placed behind
the left helix, with the ground gold-cap electrode placed on
the left earlobe. The data was acquired with a sampling rate
of 1.2 kS/s. All recordings were performed on a healthy male
subject aged 32.
The ASSR experiment was performed using over-the-ear

B. Experimental results
Fig. 5 shows the power spectral density (PSD) estimates
for the ear- and scalp- recordings for the ASSR experiment.
Prior to PSD analysis, the data was bandpass filtered using
a 4th order Butterworth filter with cutoff frequencies at 1
and 45 Hz. The PSD analysis was performed using Welch’s
averaged periodogram method, the window length was 10 s
and the degree of overlap was 50%. A clear peak at the 40 Hz
modulation frequency is visible from all electrode locations.
We define the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of the ASSR as the
height of the response peak above the background EEG [13].
As shown previously using the personalised earpieces [2], [13],
the results indicate that the SNR in ASSR obtained from the
in-ear approach is on a par with that obtained from the onscalp electrodes placed at the mastoid and temporal regions –
at approximately 10 dB.
The result of the VEP experiment is demonstrated on Fig. 6.
The raw signal was first bandpass filtered using a 4th order
Butterworth filter with cutoff frequencies at 1 and 13 Hz.
Subsequently the dataset was split into 110 two-second epochs,
whose start and stop times were determined by the stimulus
waveform. The samples where then averaged across all of
epochs to produce the VEP signal. A clear pick is evident,
approximately 180 ms after the stimulus start time.
2
1

Amp. (µV)

Power/Freq.
(dB/Hz)

25
30
35
Frequency (Hz)

5

stimulus start

0
-1
-2
-0.2

-0.1

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

Time (s)

Fig. 6. VEP response to visual stimulus obtained with the proposed generic
earpiece

6

IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL VOL. ?, NO. ?, MONTH 2014

Power/Freq.
(dB/Hz)

Power/Freq.
(dB/Hz)

Power/Freq.
(dB/Hz)

SSVEP
−120

Left ear

−130
−140

15

−110

30

35

20
25
Frequency (Hz)

30

35

20
25
Frequency (Hz)

30

35

20
25
Frequency (Hz)

30

35

A1

−120
−130

15

−110
−120
C3

−130
15

Power/Freq.
(dB/Hz)

20
25
Frequency (Hz)

−110
−120

intricately-shaped ear canals and to redistribute outward pressure along the entirety of its surface post insertion. These qualities lead to increased comfort for the wearer, provide secure
placement of the device inside the ear canal with minimal
pressure to the canal walls and thus allow the possibility to
acquire ear-EEG in general population.
The electrodes of the proposed earpiece are constructed
from conductive fabric and can accommodate all of the required deformations of the underlying viscoelastic substrate
without losing any of the desirable electrical properties. Such
electrodes have been shown to require only saline solution to
achieve low impedance electrode-skin contact which enables
stable electrical recordings, even over prolonged periods of
time.
We have shown that the proposed device is virtually immune
to motion artefacts generated by the pulsatile ear canal wall
movements and allows acquisition of EEG signals all the way
down to very low frequencies – crucial for monitoring brain
activity during e.g. sleep. It has also been demonstrated that
the proposed generic device can be readily used to acquire
all of the standard EEG responses, namely steady-state and
transient responses to visual and auditory stimuli, thus paving
the way for truly wearable EEG acquisition.

Cz

−130
15

Fig. 7. PSD analysis of responses from an ear-electrode and mastoid (A1)
and central regions (C3,Cz) scalp-electrodes, for an ASSR stimulus – an LED
flashing at 15 Hz. Observe responses from all electrode sites at 15 Hz and at
the first harmonic – 30 Hz.

R EFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

Fig. 7 shows the PSD estimates for the ear- and scalprecordings for the SSVEP experiment. Prior to PSD analysis,
the data was bandpass filtered using a 4th order Butterworth
filter with cutoff frequencies at 5 and 45 Hz. The PSD analysis
was performed using the same setup as for the ASSR experiment. Clear peaks at the stimulus frequency – 15 Hz, and at the
first harmonic – 30 Hz, are visible from all electrode locations.
Given the distribution of the response across multiple harmonics, it was not straightforward to assess the SSVEP SNR.
However the response obtained using the in-ear electrode is
clearly weaker compared with those obtained from the central
regions. This is as expected given the distance of the ear canal
from the response source – occipital region.

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

IV.

C ONCLUSION

A novel in-ear sensor has been developed for high-quality
long-term EEG monitoring. It is constructed with two key
components – a viscoelastic substrate and conductive cloth
electrodes. Both of these posses a number of desirable properties critical for unobtrusive and discreet in-ear sensing.
The substrate comprises a medium-density memory foam
which enables the earpiece to conform even to the most

[8]

[9]
[10]

A. Lymberis and A. Dittmar, “Advanced Wearable Health Systems
and Applications - Research and Development Efforts in the European
Union,” IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Magazine, vol. 26,
no. 3, pp. 29–33, 2007.
D. Looney, P. Kidmose, C. Park, M. Ungstrup, M. L. Rank,
K. Rosenkranz, and D. P. Mandic, “The in-the-ear recording concept:
User-centered and wearable brain monitoring,” IEEE Pulse, vol. 3, no. 6,
pp. 32–42, 2012.
D. Looney, C. Park, P. Kidmose, M. L. Rank, M. Ungstrup,
K. Rosenkranz, and D. P. Mandic, “An in-the-ear platform for recording
electroencephalogram,” in Proceedings of the Annual International
Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society,
vol. 2011, Jan. 2011, pp. 6882–5.
P. Kidmose, D. Looney, L. Jochumsen, and D. P. Mandic, “Ear-EEG
from generic earpieces: A feasibility study,” in Proceedings of the
Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine
and Biology Society (EMBS), 2013, pp. 543–546.
J. Hoon Lee, S. Min Lee, H. Jin Byeon, J. Sook Hong, K. Suk
Park, and S.-H. Lee, “CNT/PDMS-based canal-typed ear electrodes for
inconspicuous EEG recording.” Journal of Neural Engineering, vol. 11,
no. 4, p. 046014, Aug. 2014.
W. V. Rosenberg, T. Chanwimalueang, D. Looney, and D. P. Mandic,
“Vital signs from inside a helmet: A multichannel face-lead study,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech
and Signal Processing, 2015.
V. Goverdovsky, D. Looney, P. Kidmose, C. Papavassiliou, and D. P.
Mandic, “Co-located multimodal sensing: A next generation solution for
wearable health,” IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 138–145,
Jan. 2015.
X. Xu, B. Liu, and Y. Li, “Experimental studies on viscoelasticity of
film materials in laminated glass sheets,” SAE International Journal of
Materials and Manufacturing, vol. 8, no. 2015-01-0709, 2015.
J. Koreska and A. Albisser, “A new foam for support of the physically
handicapped,” Biomedical Engineering, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 56–8, 1975.
J. Webster, Medical Instrumentation: Application and Design. John
Wiley & Sons, 2009.

GOVERDOVSKY et al.: IN-EAR EEG FROM VISCOELASTIC GENERIC EARPIECES: ROBUST AND UNOBTRUSIVE 24/7 MONITORING

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

H. W. Tam and J. G. Webster, “Minimizing electrode motion artifact by
skin abrasion,” IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 24,
no. 2, pp. 134–139, Mar. 1977.
C. T. Lin, L. D. Liao, Y. H. Liu, I. J. Wang, B. S. Lin, and J. Y. Chang,
“Novel dry polymer foam electrodes for long-term EEG measurement,”
IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 58, no. 5, pp. 1200–
1207, 2011.
P. Kidmose, D. Looney, M. Ungstrup, M. Rank, and D. P. Mandic,
“A study of evoked potentials from Ear-EEG,” IEEE Transactions on
Biomedical Engineering, vol. 60, no. 10, pp. 2824–2830, 2013.
R. Galambos, S. Makeig, and P. J. Talmachoff, “A 40-Hz auditory
potential recorded from the human scalp,” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, vol. 78, no. 4,
pp. 2643–2647, 1981.
G. Rance and F. Rickards, “Prediction of hearing threshold in infants
using auditory steady-state evoked potentials,” Journal of the American
Academy of Audiology, vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 236–245, 2002.
L. H. van der Tweel and H. F. E. V. Lunel, “Human visual responses
to sinusoidally modulated light,” Electroencephalography and Clinical
Neurophysiology, vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 587–598, 1965.
C. S. Herrmann, “Human EEG responses to 1–100Hz flicker: Resonance
phenomena in visual cortex and their potential correlation to cognitive
phenomena,” Experimental Brain Research, vol. 137, no. 3-4, pp. 346–
353, 2001.
R. G. Eason, M. Harter, and C. White, “Effects of attention and
arousal on visually evoked cortical potentials and reaction time in man,”
Physiology & Behavior, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 283 – 289, 1969.
H. Serby, E. Yom-Tov, and G. Inbar, “An improved P300-based braincomputer interface,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 89–98, March 2005.

Valentin Goverdovsky Valentin Goverdovsky received the M.Eng. degree in electronic engineering
and obtained his Ph.D degree in communications
from Imperial College London, UK. He is currently
PLACE
a Rosetrees Fellow at the Department of Electrical
PHOTO
and Electronic Engineering of Imperial College LonHERE
don. His research interests are primarily in the areas of biomedical instrumentation, analog integrated
circuits, radio frequency communications, and he
received the Eric Laithwaithe Award for excellence
in research. His current work concentrates on the
development of wearable biosensing platforms, such as the novel in-the-ear
(ITE) sensing concept for 24/7 monitoring of brain and body functions in the
context of traumatic brain injury.

PLACE
PHOTO
HERE

David Looney David Looney (M’08) received the
B.Eng. degree in electronic engineering from University College Dublin, Ireland, and the Ph.D. degree
in signal processing from Imperial College London,
U.K., in 2011. He is currently a Research Associate
at the Dept. of Electronic and Electrical Engineering,
Imperial College London. His research interests are
in the areas of data fusion, time-frequency analysis,
linear algebra, complexity analysis and wearable
solutions for health monitoring.

7

Preben Kidmose Preben Kidmose (SM?12) received the B.Sc. degree in electrical engineering
from University of Southern Denmark (Engineering
College) in 1995, the M.Sc. degree in engineering
PLACE
from Technical University of Denmark in 1998, and
PHOTO
the Ph.D. degree in signal processing from TechniHERE
cal University of Denmark in 2001. From 2001 –
2011 he was employed by Widex A/S, Denmark, as
R&D engineering within hearing aids and medical
devices. He is currently Professor at Department
of Engineering at Aarhus University. His areas of
interest include signal processing and machine learning in medical devices
and for audio processing, medical instrumentation and sensors, and system
engineering/design of medical devices.

Danilo Mandic Danilo P. Mandic is a Professor
in signal processing with Imperial College London,
London, U.K., where he has been working in the
area of nonlinear adaptive signal processing and
PLACE
nonlinear dynamics. He has been a Guest ProfesPHOTO
sor with Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven,
HERE
Belgium and a Frontier Researcher with RIKEN,
Tokyo. His publication record includes two research
monographs titled Recurrent Neural Networks for
Prediction (West Sussex, U.K.: Wiley, August 2001)
and Complex-Valued Nonlinear Adaptive Filters:
Noncircularity, Widely Linear and Neural Models (West Sussex, U.K.: Wiley,
April 2009), an edited book titled Signal Processing for Information Fusion
(New York: Springer, 2008), and more than 200 publications on signal and
image processing. He has been a member of the IEEE Technical Committees on Signal Processing Theory and Methods and Machine Learning for
Signal Processing, an Associate Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS II, the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL
PROCESSING, the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS, and
IEEE Signal Processing Magazine. He has produced award winning papers and
products from his collaboration with the industry, and has received President’s
Award for excellence in postgraduate supervision at Imperial College. He is
a member of the London Mathematical Society.

