Enhancement of Human Computer Interaction with facial
Electromyographic sensors
Guillaume Gibert
MARCS Auditory
Laboratories
University of Western
Sydney
Locked Bag 1797
Penrith South DC
NSW 1797 Australia
g.gibert@uws.edu.au

Martin Pruzinec
Cognitive Systems Lab
University of
Karlsruhe (TH)
Adenauerring 4
76131 Karlsruhe
Germany

Tanja Schultz
Cognitive Systems Lab
University of
Karlsruhe (TH)
Adenauerring 4
76131 Karlsruhe
Germany

pruzinec@ira.uka.de

tanja@ira.uka.de

ABSTRACT

Catherine Stevens
MARCS Auditory
Laboratories
University of Western
Sydney
Locked Bag 1797
Penrith South DC
NSW 1797 Australia
kj.stevens@uws.edu.au

contribute to creating affective systems that can change
their status and react automatically according to the state
of the user. In the same way, human to human
communication through machines (such as in games) can
be improved by detecting and transferring additional
information to a display for example to a 3D avatar in
virtual environments.

In this paper we describe a way to enhance human
computer interaction using facial Electromyographic
(EMG) sensors. Indeed, to know the emotional state of
the user enables adaptable interaction specific to the
mood of the user. This way, Human Computer Interaction
(HCI) will gain in ergonomics and ecological validity.
While expressions recognition systems based on video
need exaggerated facial expressions to reach high
recognition rates, the technique we developed using
electrophysiological data enables faster detection of facial
expressions and even in the presence of subtle
movements. Features from 8 EMG sensors located around
the face were extracted. Gaussian models for six basic
facial expressions - anger, surprise, disgust, happiness,
sadness and neutral - were learnt from these features and
provide a mean recognition rate of 92%. Finally, a
prototype of one possible application of this system was
developed wherein the output of the recognizer was sent
to the expressions module of a 3D avatar that then
mimicked the expression.

(Ekman and Friesen 1971) described six primary
emotions that reflect distinguishable expressions: anger,
disgust, fear, happiness, sadness and surprise. These
emotional displays are often referred to as basic emotions.
They are recognized by humans independently of their
cultural background and their ancestry. A large amount of
work has been devoted to recognise these facial
expressions based on video inputs. Two main approaches
have been developed using appearance models (Bartlett,
Littlewort et al. 2006) or by determining the locations of
fiducial points (Tian, Kanade et al. 2001). These systems
are in general sensitive to the user location, the lighting
conditions and the viewing angle. Few studies have
provided insights in the recognition of facial expressions
using EMG signals. (Ang, Belen et al. 2004) proposed a
recognition system using 3 EMG electrodes able to
distinguish between 3 basic expressions: happiness, anger
and sadness. They reached an accuracy of 94.44% using 4
features (mean, standard deviation, Root Mean Square
(RMS) and the power density spectrum) and a minimumdistance classifier. (Chin, Ang et al. 2008) investigated
the classification of facial expressions from
electroencephalogram (EEG) and EMG signals using the
Filter Bank Common Spatial Pattern. They used 32
sensors recording EEG and EMG data and obtained an
accuracy of 86% in recognizing 6 types of facial
expressions. By reducing the number of sensors (6 frontal
electrodes for a headband implementation), the accuracy
decreased significantly to 78%.

Author Keywords

EMG, Facial expressions, Gaussian models
ACM Classification Keywords

H5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g.,
HCI): H.5.2 User Interfaces: Input devices and strategies.
INTRODUCTION

In the field of Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) there
is major interest in creating computer systems that are
able to understand all natural communication channels of
a human user. In Human-Human communication only a
small amount of the actual information is exchanged
through spoken language. Through channels like body
language and facial expressions, additional information is
transferred. Including this information into HCI will

In the present study, we describe a light expression
recognition system based on 8 facial EMG sensors placed
on specific muscles able to discriminate 6 expressions.
We first address the experimental description of the
recordings of one subject performing 6 facial expressions.
Then, we explain the method used to extract features
from the 8 EMG signals and to build a classifier. Results
of classification in terms of recognition rate and similarity

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this
work or2009,
personal
or classroom
useMelbourne,
is grantedAustralia.
without fee
OZCHI
November
23-27, 2009,
provided that
copies are
made or distributed for profit or
Copyright
the author(s)
andnot
CHISIG
commercialcopies
advantage
and thatat copies
bearDigital
this notice
and the
Additional
are available
the ACM
Library
full citation on the first page.orTo
copy from
otherwise,
to republish,
(http://portal.acm.org/dl.cfm)
ordered
the CHISIG
secretary
to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior
(secretary@chisig.org)
specific2009
permission
and/orISBN:
a fee.978-1-60558-854-4
OZCHI
Proceedings
2=&+, '09, 1RY -, 2009, 0HOERXUQH$XVWUDOLD
© ACM 2009 ISBN: 978-1-60558--4/09/1...$10.00

421

of the distributions of the expressions are provided.
Finally a prototype of an online scenario using this
system is described.

8.

Mentalis pushes skin above chin upwards and
curves lips upwards.

Procedure

The subject was seated in a sound insulated research
booth. The stimuli presentation was handled by a laptop
situated at 1.2 m from the subject. The electrodes were
attached according to the above mentioned positions.

METHODS
Subject

One healthy male volunteer took part to make the
recordings. The protocol of this experiment was approved
by the University of Western Sydney Human Ethics
Research Committee.

Each run started with the display of a black cross in the
middle of the screen during 1 second. Then, the
expression production was evoked by showing the name
of the expression during 3 seconds. Then, a grey bar was
displayed during 3 seconds. The subject was instructed to
relax during this phase. Following this procedure, the
subject performed the 6 following expressions: Surprise,
Happiness, Anger, Disgust, Sadness and Neutral. Each
expression was performed 3 times by the subject.

Data acquisition

EMG activity was recorded continuously from 8
Ag/AgCl bipolar electrodes grounded to the right wrist.
EMG signals were amplified and digitized at a rate of 600
Hz using a Varioport III amplifier (Becker 2003). The
EMG was collected and stored using UKA EMG/EEG
Studio (UKAv2) software from the ITI Waibel labs at the
University of Karlsruhe.

In addition to the EMG recordings, a frontal view video
was recording at 25 Hz. For synchronization reason, a
pure tone (400 Hz) of 500 ms duration was played at the
beginning and the end of the expression phase.

Sensors positions

According to the commonly used guidelines for human
electromyographic research (Fridlund and Cacioppo
1986) the electrodes were placed on height major mimic
muscles mainly on one side of the face (see Figure
1).

EMG Signal processing

Each facial expression was automatically epoched during
the recordings. A baseline correction was applied to each
epoch using the first 300 ms of signal. Note that the
literature suggests that a subject takes about 500 ms to
mimic the facial expression seen in static images
(Dimberg and Thunberg 1998). Moreover, visual
inspection of the signal confirmed this hypothesis for our
data and the reliability to use this period of signal to
compute the baseline. Then, the absolute value of the
signal was computed for every sensor. A low-pass filtered
(Butterworth, 6th order, 10 Hz) was applied to the
absolute values previously computed. This leads to a
pattern of activation of each sensor. These characteristic
parameters associated with each expression were
collected and simple Gaussian models were estimated for
each expression. The subject was instructed to maintain
the expression during 3 seconds but we only selected the
features values comprised between 0.5 s and 1.5 s after
the beginning of the performance to build the Gaussian
models. The a posteriori probability for each frame to
belong to each of the 6 expression models can then be
estimated at any time.

Figure 1: Sensors position used during the recordings

The muscles from which activity was recorded and their
functions are:
1.

Venter frontalis pulls the eyebrow up;

2.

Corrugator supercilii pulls the eyebrow to the
medial corner and down;

3.

Orbicularis oculi constricts skin around the eye;

4.

Levator labii wrinkles the nose, stretches nasal
wings and rises upper lip;

5.

Zygomaticus major
upwards and laterally;

6.

Masseter raises jaw and presses teeth together;

RESULTS

7.

Depressor anguli oris controls shape and size of
mouth opening;

The recognition rate calculated over all the expressions is
92.19%. This is quite high given the simplicity of the
model. We exhibit in Figure 2 an example of the time

pulls

mouth

Figure 2: Time course of the probability functions over the
execution of a series of expressions by the subject: anger,
disgust, happiness, sadness, and surprise

corners

422

course of these probability functions over the execution
of a series of expressions by the subject. The probability
of the target expression is stable during all the
performance as we can note for the expression “anger”.
Some errors are made by the classifier at the beginning
and the end of each performance and mainly mislabeled
as “neutral” expression.

driven by geometric or articulatory parameters and so rely
on a specific module to generate expressions.

Figure 4: A 3D avatar mimicking the expressions performed
by the subject (Left, “anger”; Right, “surprise”)
FUTURE DIRECTIONS

The system we developed reaches good recognition rate
but several improvements are possible. The next step in
the analysis will be to compare different kind of
classifiers such as Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) or
Support Vector Machine (SVM) used in video-based
recognizers and in the Brain-Computer Interface
community. We can expect improvements in the accuracy
with more complex classifiers. Another way to improve
the classification rate will be to test other features as
described in (Reaz, Hussain et al. 2006). Wavelets
coefficients and autoregressive models should provide
additional information useful for the classifiers. Of
course, these methods will be run on more subjects to test
their consistency. Similar results are expected with the
same electrode placements. The stability of the results
with fewer sensors is another issue as a real
implementation of the system would need a light system.

Figure 3: Hierarchical cluster tree computed for every
expression

We computed the Bhattacharyya distance between the
Gaussian models to measure the similarity of the
probability distributions of the 6 expressions. This
distance is normally used to measure the separability of
classes in classification. A dendrogram computed from
these distances can be seen in Figure 3. This dendrogram
is a hierarchical cluster tree showing the similarities
between the distributions of the expressions. It exhibits
that the classes “sadness” and “neutral” are the closest
one. Therefore, errors in classification between these 2
classes are expected. This is verified in the example of
time course in Figure 2: “sadness” is the expression which
probability is the less stable during the performance with
several mislabels as “neutral”. On the other side,
“sadness” and “anger” are the 2 more dissimilar
distributions and few errors are expected between theses
2 classes. This is consistent with the previous remark
about the stability of the “anger” expression.

Another interesting analysis will be to compare the
recognition rate and the speed in delivering it of videobased recognizers on our data. Indeed, we recorded
synchronously EMG signals and a front view of the
subject. We could expect difference in terms of accuracy
but also in terms of the size of the time window necessary
to reach these accuracies.

APPLICATION

Our work focused on the performance of expressions
only. We could expect for an HCI application that the
user would concurrently speak and use gestures to
express emotions. A future study will be focused on
detecting the affective states of the user using multimodal
data (EMG, Video and Acoustic) while users are
interacting with an application. (Busso, Deng et al. 2004)
proposed a system based on bimodal data: video and
acoustic to recognize the expression of the user. More
recently, facial surface EMG sensors have also been
successfully used to build continuous speech recognition
systems (Wand and Schultz 2009) and speech synthesis
systems from voiceless EMG signals (Toth, Wand et al.
2009).

This recognition system is very simple and light in terms
of computing. The only delay between the EMG
recordings and the response delivered by the recognition
system is due to the low-pass filter performed on the
absolute values. That means this system is able to deliver
a recognition response in real-time i.e. every 1.66 ms
whereas video-based systems could deliver it every 16.66
ms (frame rate at 60 Hz) in the best case. It may be
suitable to control the expressions module of a 3D avatar
in virtual environments for example.
We developed a prototype of one possible application of
this system for HCI. We built an online paradigm where
the expression recognized is sent to a 3D avatar which
mimics this expression. Examples of 2 expressions
recognized and mimicked by the avatar are displayed on
Figure 4. We integrated the responses from the recognizer
over time window of 500 ms and then sent it to the
expressions module of the avatar. This solution was used
to improve the accuracy and also to avoid too much
jittering faces if mislabelling occurred. Moreover, most of
3D avatars do not have a biomechanical model and are

In the proposed application, i.e. changing the expression
of an avatar to mimic the expression of the user, we could
imagine to make the face shape of the avatar vary directly
from the values of the features. In the robotics
community, (Tingfan, Butko et al. 2009) developed a
robot able to learn to perform expressions using a videobased recognizer as feedback. (Minoru, Chisaki et al.
2006) used EMG signals to control the robotic muscles to
423

make natural facial expressions. In the 3D animation
community, (Lucero and Munhall 1999) developed a face
model composed by soft tissue with multilayer
deformable mesh animated from EMG recorded activity.
Their aim was to produce speech. It would be interesting
to extend this kind of biomechanical models to generate
facial expressions directly from the EMG signals or
features extracted from it as initiated by (Morishima
2001).

movements
utilizing
electromyogram
sensors.
TENCON 2004. 2004 IEEE Region 10 Conference.
Bartlett, M., G. Littlewort, et al. (2006). Automatic
recognition of facial actions in spontaneous expressions.
Journal of Multimedia 1(6): 22-35.
Becker, K. (2003). VarioportTM. http://www.beckermeditec.de.
Burnham, D., R. Dale, et al. (2006-2011). From Talking
Heads to Thinking Heads: A Research Platform for
Human
Communication
Science.
from
http://thinkinghead.uws.edu.au/index.html.
Busso, C., Z. Deng, et al. (2004). Analysis of emotion
recognition using facial expressions, speech and
multimodal information. Sixth International Conference
on Multimodal Interfaces ICMI, State College, PA.
Chin, Z. Y., K. K. Ang, et al. (2008). Multiclass
voluntary facial expression classification based on Filter
Bank Common Spatial Pattern. Engineering in
Medicine and Biology Society, EMBS 2008. 30th
Annual International Conference of the IEEE.
Dimberg, U. and M. Thunberg (1998). Rapid facial
reactions to emotional facial expressions. Scandinavian
Journal of Psychology 39(1): 39-45.
Ekman, P. and W. V. Friesen (1971). Constants across
Cultures in the Face ans Emotion. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology 17(2): 124-129.
Fridlund, A. J. and J. T. Cacioppo (1986). Guidelines for
Human
Electromyographic
Research.
Psychophysiology 23(5): 567-589.
Krell, G., R. Niese, et al. (2009). Facial Expression
Recognition with Multi-channel Deconvolution.
Advances in Pattern Recognition, 2009. ICAPR '09.
Seventh International Conference on.
Lucero, J. C. and K. G. Munhall (1999). A model of
facial biomechanics for speech production. Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America 106(5): 2834-2842.
Minoru, H., Y. Chisaki, et al. (2006). Development and
Control of a Face Robot Imitating Human Muscular
Structures. Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2006
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on.
Morishima, S. (2001). Face analysis and synthesis. Signal
Processing Magazine, IEEE 18(3): 26-34.
Reaz, M. B. I., M. S. Hussain, et al. (2006). "Techniques
of EMG signal analysis: detection, processing,
classification and applications." Biological Procedures
Online: 11-35.
Tian, Y. I., T. Kanade, et al. (2001). Recognizing action
units for facial expression analysis. Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence, IEEE Transactions on 23(2):
97-115.
Tingfan, W., N. J. Butko, et al. (2009). Learning to Make
Facial Expressions. Development and Learning, 2009.
ICDL 2009. IEEE 8th International Conference on.
Toth, A., M. Wand, et al. (2009). Synthesizing Speech
from Electromyography using Voice Transformation
Techniques. Interspeech.
Wand, M. and T. Schultz (2009). Towards SpeakerAdaptive Speech Recognition Based on Surface
Electromyography. Biosignals.

DISCUSSION

In the research area of HCI, building affective
applications that can react on demand to the human user
is a very challenging issue. For example, an application
could use the expression of the subject to adapt the level
of difficulty to the emotional status. Another interesting
application could be the integration of expressions into 3
dimensional online virtual environments. These kinds of
application rely on the accuracy of the inputs processing.
To determine the emotional state of the user and adapt the
level of difficulty for example, the traditional input is a
video of the face of the user. Video-based expression
recognition systems are non-invasive and suitable in
certain application areas and certain conditions but are
quickly overpassed by human behaviour (moving too fast,
out of the camera field, etc.) (Krell, Niese et al. 2009).
EMG-based expression recognizers are an alternative for
certain kinds of HCI such as in games. They are more
invasive than the video-based as the user agrees to
wearing sensors on his face. On the other hand, the user
has complete freedom of movements and can really
interact in an ecologically valid way with the interface
without any constraint (in a virtual reality environment
for example). Currently, new devices have been
developed using wireless and small dry electrodes. The
electrodes are integrated into devices such as headphones
for MindSet from Neurosky (www.neurosky.com) or
helmets for Epoc from Emotiv (www.emotiv.com). The
use of such devices will reduce the duration of the
preparation of the user which is actually the main
limitation of EMG-based recognition systems.
CONCLUSIONS

The results presented in this research show that it is
feasible to recognize human expressions with high
accuracy by the use of facial EMG sensors. Therefore, the
next generation of HCI might be able to use this
information as a feedback of the user and adapt the
response to improve the performance and the engagement
of the user.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by the Thinking Head project a
Special Initiative scheme of the Australian Research
Council (ARC) and the National Health and Medical
Research Council (NH&MRC) (Burnham, Dale et al.
2006-2011).
REFERENCES

Ang, L. B. P., E. F. Belen, et al. (2004). Facial expression
recognition through pattern analysis of facial muscle

424

