Rev. Neurosci., Vol. 22(6), xxx–xxx, 2011 • Copyright © by Walter de Gruyter • Berlin • Boston. DOI 10.1515/RNS.2011.047

Cognition in action: imaging brain/body dynamics
in mobile humans

Klaus Gramann1,4,*, Joseph T. Gwin2,
Daniel P. Ferris2, Kelvin Oie3, Tzyy-Ping Jung1,4,
Chin-Teng Lin4,5, Lun-De Liao4,5 and Scott Makeig1
1

Swartz Center for Computational Neuroscience, Institute for
Neural Computation, University of California, San Diego,
CA, USA
2
Human Neuromechanics Laboratory, School of Kinesiology,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
3
Translational Neuroscience Branch, Human Research and
Engineering Directorate, US Army Research Laboratory,
Aberdeen Proving Ground, MD, USA
4
Brain Research Center, National Chiao Tung University,
Hsinchu, Taiwan
5
Department of Computer Science, National Chiao Tung
University, Hsinchu, Taiwan
*Corresponding author
e-mail: klaus@sccn.ucsd.edu

Abstract
We have recently developed a mobile brain imaging method
(MoBI), that allows for simultaneous recording of brain and
body dynamics of humans actively behaving in and interacting with their environment. A mobile imaging approach was
needed to study cognitive processes that are inherently based
on the use of human physical structure to obtain behavioral
goals. This review gives examples of the tight coupling between
human physical structure with cognitive processing and the
role of supraspinal activity during control of human stance
and locomotion. Existing brain imaging methods for actively
behaving participants are described and new sensor technology
allowing for mobile recordings of different behavioral states in
humans is introduced. Finally, we review recent work demonstrating the feasibility of a MoBI system that was developed
at the Swartz Center for Computational Neuroscience at the
University of California, San Diego, demonstrating the range
of behavior that can be investigated with this method.
Keywords: EEG; embodied cognition; independent
component analysis (ICA); mobile brain imaging; wireless
dry electrodes.

Introduction
Imaging the human brain under real world
task conditions

The development of new brain imaging methods over the last
century, starting with X-ray techniques in the first quarter

of the 19th century (Fox, 1984), allowed for significant new
insights into human brain function and pathology. With the
rapid development of new imaging methods and increasingly
powerful computer technology, additional brain imaging
approaches developed, including positron emission tomography (PET) and functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI). In the year 2010 alone, 811 scientific publications
using fMRI for cognition research were published (source:
ISI citation index; 3184 for fMRI alone; 811 for fMRI and
cognitive). All these studies investigated human brain activity of participants lying supine in noisy scanners to draw conclusions about the consequences of pathological states and
the functional architecture of the human brain. The human
brain, however, evolved to control and optimize behavior
in an ever-changing environment and is thus inextricably
linked to active exploration and human motor behavior in
our surroundings (Wilson, 2002; Anderson, 2003). We often
assume that brain activity measured in noisy scanners and
dimly lit experimental cubicles, reflects a general principle
of brain dynamics during cognitive processing. However,
until recently, no study explicitly investigated whether the
brain switches to a different modus operandi, while we
actively behave, move, walk and orient in small- and largescale environments.
Recent results from single cell recordings in different species of behaving animals demonstrate different brain dynamic
states dependent on the locomotor state of the animal. In
Drosophila melanogaster, responses of motion-processing
interneurons in the visual cortex double when the flies become
airborne, as compared to when they are in a resting position
(Maimon et al., 2010). This demonstrates that the gain of certain cell types changes with the locomotor state of the animal.
A similar change in brain dynamic state was demonstrated in
mice (Niell and Stryker, 2010), revealing that neurons in the
mouse visual cortex, more than double their visually evoked
firing rate, when the animal transitions from standing still to
running. At the same time, spontaneous firing or stimulus
selectivity of the cell does not change. These results support
the assumption that changes in behavioral state are accompanied by changes in brain dynamic state to adapt to differences
in incoming idiothetic and allothetic sensory information.
While invasive recordings can measure brain dynamic states
in stationary animals and recently also, in behaving animals,
this approach is limited for research on healthy humans for
ethical reasons. Electrocorticographic (ECoG) recordings in
patients with intractable epileptic seizures undergoing presurgery monitoring can reveal important insights into human
brain dynamics. However, this approach is restricted to a
clinical population and participants have to remain stationary
during the recordings.

2

K. Gramann et al.

As a consequence, research on human subjects generally
requires non-invasive methods, of which the most commonly
used are fMRI and positron emission tomography (18F-FDG
PET), which indirectly measure brain dynamics of human
participants through cortical blood flow. Changes in blood
flow are assumed to correlate with the metabolic needs of
neural populations that are active during cognitive processing (Logothetis et al., 2001). These traditional brain imaging
techniques provide excellent spatial resolution (ranging from
1 to 2 mm) but have poor temporal resolution due to the sluggish nature of the hemodynamic response (on the order of
seconds). More direct approaches to measure brain activity
like electroencephalography (EEG) or magnetoencephalography (MEG), directly measure electrical activity of neural
populations that are synchronously activated during cognitive processing. These methods provide excellent temporal
resolution (in the range of milliseconds) but are traditionally
not considered as imaging methods because of their relatively
coarse spatial resolution (in the range of centimeters) and their
historical focus on analysis of the signal in the time-domain.
Irrespective of their spatial or the temporal resolution, all
methods described thus far require participants to remain
motionless during signal acquisition. Due to the weight of
fMRI, PET, and MEG sensors, these imaging methods are
inherently stationary. While EEG sensors are light enough to
wear during movement, traditional signal analysis approaches
have not been able to handle the movement and muscle artifacts that contaminate these signals (Makeig et al., 2009).
However, cognition evolved to control human behavior and
is, therefore, based on our physical structure and uses the body
to achieve behavioral goals (Wilson, 2002; Anderson, 2003;
Makeig et al., 2009). Behavior is not only essential for humans
to adapt to an ever-changing environment, but contributes to
the neurogenesis of hippocampal neuropile (Kempermann
et al., 2010). Locomotion is necessary to increase proliferation of hippocampal neuropile, while subsequent learning
of newly acquired information is necessary to protect newly
born neural matter from apoptosis. This suggests that exploration of new environments helps the proliferation of neural
matter that then can be used to store new information that is
needed for adapting to new environments.
Non-invasive recording of human brain activity during
mobile behavior also has considerable potential to unlock
information about spatial reasoning in the human brain.
Human cognitive architecture have been successfully investigated for years using traditional imaging approaches, but
open questions remain with respect to brain dynamics, underlying more natural and complex behaviors. One example is
the investigation of cortical and sub-cortical activity associated with spatial orientation. More than a decade ago, several
investigations provided impressive new insights into the neural foundations of spatial navigation in humans (Aguirre et al.,
1998; Maguire et al., 1998; Gron et al., 2000). However, these
studies had to neglect the influence of rotations and translations of the body during spatial orientation due to mechanical
restrictions of the imaging method. Natural spatial orientation is accompanied by rich idiothetic information stemming
from the vestibular and kinesthetic system used with each

turn and each step, to automatically update egocentric spatial representations (Farrell and Robertson, 1998; Gramann,
in press). The absence of natural idiothetic information during the orienting process is often associated with differences
in individual strategies used to solve a spatial task (Gramann
et al., 2005, 2006, 2010b). Only a mobile brain imaging
method will allow for investigations of brain dynamics
accompanying body rotations and translations associated
with natural orienting behavior.
In addition to new insights into the complex interplay of
active behavior and brain dynamics, non-invasive recordings
of human brain dynamics during active behavior in humans
may also have potential clinical benefits. Altered cortical
activity accompanying physical impairments might be useful for diagnostics and training approaches to regain physical
functions. It would improve our understanding of how humans
coordinate complex motor plans and thus could improve
research and treatment of neurological disabilities by allowing brain neuroplasticity to be monitored during rehabilitation
(e.g., rehabilitation of gait function, Bakker et al., 2007; Boyd
et al., 2007; Jahn and Zwergal, 2010). It could enable an electromechanical brain computer interface (BCI) to supplement
impaired descending motor commands to increase treatment
efficacy (Daly and Wolpaw, 2008), or it could facilitate neural
control of prosthetic limbs or powered orthoses that provide
motor augmentation or restore functional mobility to amputees and patients with paralysis (Hatsopoulos and Donoghue,
2009; Kim et al., 2009; Leuthardt et al., 2009; Scherberger,
2009).
This review will give examples of the tight coupling of the
human physical structure with cognitive processing and the
role of supraspinal activity during control of human stance
and locomotion. Existing brain imaging methods for actively
behaving participants are described and new sensor technology allowing for mobile recordings of different behavioral
states in humans is introduced. Finally, we review recent work
demonstrating the feasibility of a MoBI system that was developed at the Swartz Center for Computational Neuroscience at
the University of California, San Diego, demonstrating the
range of behavior that can be investigated with this method.
Embodiment of cognitive processes

Investigations on embodied cognitive processing support the
assumption that the attributes, as well as the use of our physical structure, can significantly alter the dynamic brain processes underlying cognition. Modulation of brain dynamics
can happen on a very short time-scale, as Casasanto and colleagues demonstrated in their study on motor action and emotional memory (Casasanto and Dijkstra, 2010). The authors
showed that ostensibly meaningless actions were correlated
with the emotional content of memories that people retrieve.
By asking participants to place marbles in a bowl that was
either located above or below their hands, while retrieving
memories, the authors demonstrated that upward movements of the hand were correlated with increased retrieval
of positive memories. In general, neurocognitive representations of embodied cognitive processes differ for people with

Imaging brain/body dynamics in mobile humans

systematic differences in body-dependent behavior [e.g., for,
left- vs. right-handers whose understanding of action verbs
correlates with activity in the premotor cortex contralateral to
the dominant hand (Willems et al., 2010)].
Systematic differences in behaviors and underlying cognitive strategies will, over time, determine the accompanying
functional brain dynamics and/or lead to structural changes
based on cortical plasticity. Functional changes can be seen
as changes in the extent and direction of activation or the
functional reorganization of regional activations in different
brain areas contributing to, e.g., motor skill learning (Doyon
et al., 2002; Kelly and Garavan, 2005). Structural changes
can be found, e.g., in taxi drivers with increasing hippocampus proper correlating with their experience in using a maplike representation of London (Maguire et al., 1998) or in
expert string players demonstrating increased cortical representations of the fingers of the left hand (Elbert et al., 1995).
These examples show that behavior plays a pivotal role in
shaping the functional and structural basis of the human
brain, as well as the influence of the human brain on behavior
reflecting one of its most important functions: the optimization of behavior in an ever-changing environment. However,
the restrictions of traditional imaging approaches thus far
prohibited recordings of functional and structural dynamics while humans actively behaved. Over the last years, our
group tackled the question of how brain dynamics can be
measured in actively behaving participants using a mobile
brain/body imaging method.

Existing technologies for mobile brain imaging
in humans
Near infrared spectroscopy

Functional near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) can be used to
image the human brain during mobile activities. NIRS uses
transmission and reflectance of near infrared light to measure
changes in blood hemoglobin concentrations. Based on the
premise of neuro-vascular coupling, changes in blood hemoglobin concentrations are reflective of local metabolic neural activity. NIRS sensors are small and light enough to be
mounted on the head during mobile activities. Researchers
have used NIRS to demonstrate increases in oxygenated
hemoglobin in the frontal, premotor, and supplementary
motor cortex during walking (Miyai et al., 2001; Suzuki
et al., 2004, 2008; Harada et al., 2009).
However, a central limitation of this technique is that
hemoglobin concentration dynamics are slow, giving NIRS
a temporal resolution on the order of several seconds (Irani
et al., 2007). Thus, NIRS cannot be used to study the brain
dynamics of goal-directed movements and fast embodied
cognitive processes, which can be initiated and executed in
fractions of a second. A mobile brain imaging approach has
to have the temporal resolution allowing for investigating
sub-second cognitive processes based on direct measures of
brain activity. The only such method is the electroencephalogram (EEG) that uses sensors light enough to follow the

3

participants’ movements and directly measures electrical
activity of the brain in the range of milliseconds.
Electroencephalography

EEG is the sensing and graphical display of electrical activity
generated by the synchronous activity of millions of neurons
in the brain by means of electrodes placed along the scalp
(Nunez, 1981). EEG is a non-invasive tool that provides high
temporal resolution and directly measures electrical brain
activity as compared to more indirect measures of blood
flow reflecting metabolic changes as a consequence of neuronal activity. EEG predominantly measures electrical signals
originating in the neocortex. Because of the orthogonal orientation of pyramidal cells in the deeper layers of the neocortex with respect to the skull, electrical activity (excitatory
and inhibitory post-synaptic potentials) of large populations
of neurons produce far field potentials that can be recorded
using electrodes placed on the participant’s scalp. With appropriate amplification and sampling rate, the voltage differences
between electrodes can be recorded up to several kilohertz.
While the EEG signal allows very high temporal resolution, it provides only coarse spatial resolution. This drawback
of EEG is due to volume conduction and sensor locations outside the volume generating the signal. The human brain consists of biological tissue that allows transmission of electrical
currents and thus can be considered a volume conductor.
Electrical potentials spread from a current source, through the
brain volume, towards the sensors located outside the brain.
The capacitive component of the brain’s biological tissue
impedance and the electromagnetic propagation effect can
be neglected for frequencies below 1 KHz. This allows for
modeling the transmission of electrical currents in the brain
with quasi-static Maxwell equations (Plonsey and Heppner,
1967). At any given time several sources will transmit currents through the brain volume, therefore, the scalp-recorded
potential will be a linear mixture of all current sources. The
traditional analytical approach of interpreting systematic
changes of scalp-recorded potentials is thus confounded
with the problem of an unknown number of synchronously
active sources. In case of actively behaving participants, an
unknown number of electrical current sources associated
with eye movements, as well as activity from neck, cranial,
and facial muscles, will contribute to the linear mixture of an
unknown number of brain sources.

Requirements for a new mobile brain
imaging method
Requirements for mobile brain imaging
sensor technology

Traditional experimental setups use conventional wet
Ag/AgCl electrodes to measure EEG signals from the human
scalp (Nunez, 1981; Winter et al., 2007). Their characteristics have been widely studied and discussed in detail, demonstrating excellent signal quality with proper skin preparation

4

K. Gramann et al.

and the use of conductive gels (Thakor, 1999). However, the
preparation of participants and the use of conductive gels to
reduce skin-electrode interface impedance require time and
are often associated with decrease of signal quality for a subset of electrodes (Ferree et al., 2001). Their use inevitably
leaves residues on the scalp and preparation is generally time
consuming and often uncomfortable because it involves abrasion of the outer skin layers. Repeated skin preparations and
subsequent gel applications may also induce allergic reactions
or infections. The use of wet electrodes is often associated
with short circuits between two electrodes, in close proximity, when too much gel is applied (Roberto, 2010) and the
signal quality may degrade over extensive time periods as the
skin regenerates and/or the conductive gel dries (Ferree et al.,
2001). Additionally, the use of gel is usually problematic in
areas with dense hair volume, especially for long-term applications. Another important restriction of traditional wet electrodes is that they are hard-wired to the amplifier, via shielded
or non-shielded cables. This is not a problem in the case of
traditional laboratory experiments that require subjects to sit
still. However, if EEG is used to analyze the brain dynamics
of behaving subjects, cables will inevitably restrict participants’ movements and introduce mechanical artifacts (e.g.,
cable sway) (Gramann et al., 2010a; Gwin et al., 2010).
To
overcome these restrictions and to improve performance of
conventional wet electrodes, dry contact and non-contact
type EEG electrodes have been developed (Chi et al.,
2010). Dry contact electrodes can be separated into three
categories including: 1) dry micro-electro-mechanical
systems (MEMS) type electrodes, 2) dry fabric-based
electrodes and 3) hybrid dry electrodes. Dry MEMS type
electrodes include microneedles on their top surface used
to penetrate the outer skin layers allowing for high quality
signal acquisition on the forehead or other hairless sites (Griss
et al., 2001, 2002; Ko et al., 2006; Ruffini et al., 2006). Ruffini
et al. tested carbon nanotube (CNT)-based dry electrodes in
human trials for the first time, demonstrating that dry MEMSbased electrodes can potentially be used for acquiring EEG
signals without skin preparation or the use of conductive gels
(Ruffini et al., 2006, 2008). However, the use of MEMSbased electrodes can be considered invasive and sometimes
painful because parts of the electrodes penetrate the skin
surface. In addition, dry MEMS electrodes can only be
applied to the forehead or other nonhairy sites and have
relative high manufacturing expense compared to other types
of electrodes.
Recently, new fabric-based electrodes were developed
allowing for non-invasive recordings of biopotential signals
(Anna et al., 2007; Hoffmann and Ruff, 2007; Baek et al.,
2008; Xu et al., 2008; Beckmann et al., 2010). Dependent on
the specifications of the fabric, comparable performance of
fabric-based electrodes and commercial Ag/AgCl electrodes
can be achieved for ECG applications (Beckmann et al.,
2010). A recent study by Lin et al. successfully tested foambased electrodes covered with conductive fabric to record
EEG signals from the human forehead (Lin et al., 2011).

Dry wireless electrodes for mobile EEG acquisition

Importantly, foam-based electrodes revealed decrease motion
artifacts for actively behaving (e.g., walking) participants.
Compared with MEMS-based electrodes, fabric-based electrodes are relatively comfortable, non-invasive, and less
expensive. However, because of the reduction in the contact
area of the skin-electrode interface caused by hair, fabricbased electrodes are less suitable to acquire signals from sites
covered with hair.
In addition to MEMS-based and fabric-based electrode
types, Matthews et al. proposed a hybrid dry electrode for
EEG recordings (Matthews et al., 2007, 2008; Eric et al.,
2009). This type of electrode combines high-impedance resistive capacitive characteristics, contacts the scalp surface without any skin preparation and is dependent on the high contact
impedance between the scalp and electrode. However, these
electrodes are composed of hard, inflexible materials, which
can lead to discomfort or even pain when force is applied to
the electrode. The inflexible material is also associated with
significant signal distortions accompanying motion of the
sensors (Chi et al., 2010). Moreover, the fabrication costs for
high-contact impedance electrodes are higher than costs for
other types of dry EEG electrodes. To overcome those drawbacks, Liao et al. proposed a novel dry spring contact probe
EEG electrode for measuring EEG signals, especially over
hairy sites (Liao et al., 2011), which is flexible and fits the
scalp surface, even in case of movement or applied force from
outside. The spring contact probes and thin plate act as a buffer
to avoid pain and to support electrode-scalp fit; thus improving skin-electrode contact impedance during movement.
As an alternative to dry contact electrodes, non-contact
(capacitive) electrodes have the potential to acquire EEG
signals without direct contact to, or preparation of, the skin
(Matthews et al., 2005; Fonseca et al., 2007). A major drawback of dry capacitive electrodes, however, is their sensitivity
to motion artifacts and the necessity of designing new amplifiers to acquire signals from sensors with high source impedance (Chi et al., 2010).
The future of sensor technology for mobile brain/body
imaging Because of higher user comfort, as compared

to traditional EEG systems and higher mobility for actively
behaving participants, dry wireless sensors are essential
for future mobile brain recordings (Chi et al., 2010). Many
commercial EEG devices provide EEG technology for
entertainment [e.g., Neurosky (San Jose, CA, USA), Emotiv
(Hong Kong, ROC), StarLab (Barcelona, Spain), EmSense
(San Francisco, CA, USA) and nia Game Controller (OCZ
Technology, San Jose, CA, USA)] (Emotiv; Crowley et al.,
2010) or monitoring sleeping status (MyZeo, Newton, MA,
USA). The development of wireless portable EEG devices
for use with dry electrodes has been rapidly evolving. Lin
et al. developed a wearable EEG device (Mindo) for every
day mobile use including a 4-channel foam-based electrode
solution as well as a 16-channel spring contact probe solution
(Lin et al., 2008). Chi et al. designed a wireless device for
both EEG and ECG measuring with non-contact electrodes
(Chi et al., 2009; Chi and Cauwenberghs, 2010). With the
development of a proper readout circuit, devices with non-

Imaging brain/body dynamics in mobile humans

contact electrodes can be used to acquire signals through thin
t-shirts. There is little doubt that developing a real wearable
and wireless EEG device based on dry/non-contact electrodes
is an important trend that will influence future applications
in a wide field of technologies and will allow for recording
electrical brain activity in actively behaving participants. The
development of adequate sensors to improve signal quality
during active behavior and to reduce the time necessary to
prepare participants, is an important prerequisite for the
success of a new mobile brain/body imaging method.

Requirements for mobile brain imaging software

To develop a widely used brain imaging modality, it will also
be necessary to develop software for performing joint analysis of the EEG and behavioral data – not a trivial task. Current
efforts at the Swartz Center for Computational Neuroscience
(SCCN), UCSD, address two basic issues.
First, an experimental real-time interactive control and
analysis (ERICA) software framework, built on the DataRiver
platform by Andrey Vankov and colleagues at SCCN, allows
for collection and synchronization of concurrent data streams
with different sampling rates (Delorme et al., 2011) (http://
sccn.ucsd.edu/wiki/DataSuite). The ‘producer environment’,
developed by Dr. Vankov, allows for scripting of interactive
experiments, in which subject stimulation and feedback can be
interactively based on real-time analysis of the joint DataRiver
data. Allied MatRiver and Enactor environments, by Nima
Bigdeley-Shamlo and colleagues, allow real-time Matlab processing and visualization within the ERICA framework.
Second, the widely used EEGLAB environment for electrophysiological data analysis (Delorme and Makeig, 2004)
(http://sccn.ucsd.edu/eeglab) has been broadened to allow
analysis and visualization of multi-modal MoBI data via a
Matlab toolbox, MoBILAB, under development by Alejandro
Ojeda and colleagues at UCSD (http://sccn.ucsd.edu/wiki/
MoBILAB). An early target for MoBI analysis of EEG data
is to identify the timing and nature of motor decision events
via changes in body movement (e.g., movement starts and
stops, or course alterations). These can be identified as local
maxima in the jerk (third-derivative) magnitude time series
of a subject’s limb or motion capture marker trajectory. To
identify these motion events, one must properly low-pass
filter the motion capture data and then locate (and carefully
check) local maxima in the jerk time series. MoBILAB now
includes software for doing this. Once one or more classes of
motor decision events are identified in the behavioral data,
then standard analysis of EEG data epochs surrounding the
events of interest may be performed using EEGLAB, either
on the natural time-locked EEG epochs or after time warping
the epochs to normalize the duration of one or more movement phases across epochs.
The development of adequate software to process the
increasing amounts of synchronously recorded data and to
enable scientist to explore the relationship of active behavior
and brain dynamics is an important milestone for applying a
mobile brain/body imaging approach.

5

Requirements for analyzing mobile brain
imaging data
Traditional analysis of EEG and the problem of volume
conduction Traditional cognitive experiments record EEG

while subjects are seated in a dimly lit and sound attenuated
room, waiting for stimuli to be presented, without moving any
part of their body or even their eyes. Reactions to presented
stimuli are usually restricted to single button presses or
minimal movements of the feet or hands. The suppression of
eye movements, or any other movements of the body, avoids
the relatively strong electrical potentials that are associated
with movement of the eye [the human eye can be considered
a battery with a negatively charged retina (due to the negative
membrane potential of receptor cells) and a relatively more
positive cornea. Movement of the eyes to the sides or up and
down cause strong electrical potentials that can be measured
at electrodes far from the eyes] or contraction of neck or
superficial skull and facial muscles (Makeig et al., 2009).
Time periods with electromyographic or ocular activity are
typically removed offline by rejecting the contaminated signal
or by trying to regress out prototypic artifacts. The recorded
signals are then epoched relative to the onset of a stimulus
or class of stimuli and averaged over all epochs, assuming
that activity unrelated to stimulus processing will be averaged
out.
The restriction of participant movements in EEG investigations is thus primarily based on the fact that, due to volume
conduction, nonbrain related activity will contaminate the
signal of interest. However, movement of the eyes or contraction of muscles and the accompanying proprioceptive
feedback reflect active cognition and impact information processing (Biguer et al., 1988; Bove et al., 2002; Hayhoe and
Ballard, 2005).
Independent component analysis (ICA) for mobile
brain imaging Spatial filter algorithms can be used to

solve the problem of volume conduction and to dissociate
brain from nonbrain related electrical activity. One
example is independent component analysis (ICA), which
separates multichannel data into independent component
(IC) activities. Each IC activity is maximally statistically
independent from any other IC activity and differs with
respect to the strength of its volume-conducted activity
at each sensor. Like other spatial filters, ICA is based on
model assumptions including spatially stable mixtures of
the activities of temporarily independent sources (brain and
nonbrain), a linear summation of potentials arising from
different areas, and a maximum number of independent
sources being equal or less than the number of sensors.
ICA can separate out activities of dozens of maximally
independent information sources whose scalp maps nearperfectly fit the dipolar projections of cortical EEG sources
(Makeig et al., 2002, 2004; Gramann et al., 2010b). As a
consequence, equivalent current dipole models can be used
without further model assumptions to locate the origin of the
temporally-independent time source in the physical brain
space. With respect to actively behaving participants, it

6

K. Gramann et al.

should be pointed out that ICA separates out and dissociates
the contribution of brain and nonbrain sources including
mechanical artifacts (e.g., line noise), as well as biological
signals that are important for cognitive processing [i.e., eye
movements and muscle activities (Gramann et al., 2010a)].

Cognition in action-imaging brain and nonbrain
processes
Recordings of electrical brain activity of mobile human participants are necessary to gain new insights into the brain
dynamics accompanying natural embodied cognition. Only if
information from all of the sensory systems involved in active
behavior is available to the participant will natural cognitive
processing be possible. This includes proprioception and vestibular inputs, as well as visual and auditory information during head turns or full body rotations and translations in space.
However, MoBI recordings of human participants actively
looking around in space, walking, pointing and reaching
towards different objects will inevitably contain electromyographic (EMG) activity originating from superficial scalp
muscles, extraocular muscles, neck muscles, and muscles
contracting during mastication and swallowing.
The human neck comprises several ventral and dorsal muscles. The latter are used for rotation (looking to the side), flexion (looking down), hyperextension (looking up), and lateral
flexion (ear to shoulder) of the head. The dorsal neck muscles
consist of four layers with the outermost layer formed by the
trapezius muscle, which does not significantly contribute to
head motion (Bull et al., 1985; Vasavada et al., 2002). The
principal muscles of the second layer are the splenius capitis
(SPL) and levator scapulae (LS), while the principal muscles
of the third and fourth layers are the semispinalis capitis
(SSC) and the small muscles located between the occipital
bone the cervical vertebrae, respectively. Contractions of
all of these muscles, to move the head in space, show complex interactions with forces of gravity (MayouxBenhamou
et al., 1997) and differential contributions to head movements
along a combination of the cardinal axes. Most importantly,
the complex and redundant anatomy of the neck musculature
will result in cross talk of muscle activity recorded through
surface EEG electrodes.
There are two main functions of muscles, to move the body
and to stiffen the body. The purpose of most neck muscle
activity is the latter. Opposing muscles hold our head erect
at all times except during full supine relaxation. In addition,
the neck musculature plays a central role in providing stability of the head for successful integration of sensory information during motion. As a result, neck muscle activity interacts
with visual and auditory inputs, as well as proprioceptive and
vestibular information (Peterson et al., 1985). Subtle postural
position, shape, and tensional adjustments mold our readiness
to perceive and to act – for instance when we lean forward to
see more clearly, turn one ear forward to hear more clearly,
or retract our head in fright. The complex neck and face muscular adjustments entailed in maintaining and adapting our
erect posture to meet the challenge of events (including their

accompanying expected opportunities and/or threats), are a
key aspect of our emotional perception of and communication to others.
Human stance control and imaging approaches

Postural control has been studied in terms of two primary
functional goals: postural equilibrium, the coordination of
movement strategies to stabilize the body during both selfinitiated and externally-triggered movements that would
disturb postural stability, as discussed in the previous section; and postural orientation, the maintenance of the body’s
alignment with respect to gravity, support surfaces, the visual
environment, and internal reference frames, which largely
comprises the control of upright stance. Historically, the neural control of postural behavior, in general, and stance control,
in particular, has been thought to arise from brainstem and
spinal circuits, with little consideration of the role of cortical
mechanisms (Sherrington, 1910; Magnus, 1926). This view
has been established by observations of intact postural control
in animals with transections at the midbrain level (Magnus,
1926) and studies showing that early postural responses to
mechanical perturbations occur more quickly than the fastest voluntary movement (Horak and Nashner, 1986; Inglis
et al., 1994; Allum et al., 2001). For example, short forward
or backward translations of the support surface, elicit stereotyped patterns of muscular activations, beginning around the
ankle joint and proceeding temporally in a distal-to-proximal
order, with an onset latency of approximately 100 ms (Horak
and Nashner, 1986).
The view of postural control in terms of reflex control
processes is consistent with classical views of motor performance in terms of formal control systems that minimize
the role of cognitive processes in motor control (Cisek and
Kalaska, 2010). Indeed, the postural system for upright,
bipedal stance control has quite often been conceptualized
as a sensorimotor feedback process (Morasso et al., 1999;
Van der Kooij et al., 1999, 2001; Peterka, 2002; Mergner
et al., 2003; Kiemel et al., 2006), whose time-varying output
is reflected in trajectories of continuous deviations of body
position within a limited spatial range (i.e., ‘postural sway’).
Numerous experimental results demonstrate the importance
of sensory inputs for maintaining upright stance orientation relative to the physical environment, including vestibular (Johansson et al., 1995; Hlavacka et al., 1996), visual
(Berthoz et al., 1979; Bardy et al., 1996), somatosensory
(Aniss et al., 1992; Kavounoudias et al., 2001) and proprioceptive (Murphy et al., 2002) inputs. As such, the modeling
of stance control as a feedback control process, has served
as a useful model for examining processes of sensorimotor
integration (Dijkstra et al., 1994) and multisensory processing (Van der Kooij et al., 1999; Jeka et al., 2000; Oie et al.,
2002) in the nervous system.
Formal control theory models and system identification
approaches, such as those mentioned above, have provided
profound insights into the nature of the postural system itself
and potential mechanisms for neural control. Still, how such
control models are implemented in the nervous system is an

Imaging brain/body dynamics in mobile humans

open question. As we have discussed, the involvement of
spinal, brainstem, and cerebellar circuits in postural control
has been well demonstrated using decerebrate animal models (Sherrington, 1910; Magnus, 1926) and through clinical
studies in humans (Bronstein et al., 1990; Horak and Diener,
1994; Lewko, 1996). More recent findings in animal models have demonstrated long-loop postural pathways through
brainstem and motor cortex (Beloozerova et al., 2003, 2005)
that are modified by multisensory inputs, including vision and
vestibular. The output of these areas along descending pathways (i.e., reticulospinal, rubrospinal, corticospinal) is phasic, however, the relative contributions of these mechanisms
compared to cerebellar, brainstem, and spinal influences is
not yet clear.
While the potential role of long-loop postural responses
in humans remains controversial (Jacobs and Horak, 2007),
significant behavioral and clinical evidence indicates a role
for the cortex in the neural control of posture, if only indirectly. For example, changing task demands (Stoffregen
et al., 1999, 2000) and manipulations of cognitive load and
attention (Carpenter et al., 2001; Hunter and Hoffman, 2001;
Woollacott and Shumway-Cook, 2002; Quant et al., 2004)
lead to decreases in postural stability. As well, patients with
cortical lesions exhibit significant postural abnormalities
(Diener et al., 1985; Perennou et al., 2000), and those with
dementia or other cognitive deficits also increased postural
instability and risk for falls (Elble and Leffler, 2000; Hauer
et al., 2003) or reduced abilities to utilize sensory or mechanical aids (Sullivan et al., 2009).
Slobounov and colleagues
recently reported cortical responses related to voluntary
postural movements (Slobounov et al., 2005, 2008). Quant
et al. have shown early (approx. 100 ms) cortical responses that
were evoked by unpredictable, external postural perturbations,
and whose modulation by secondary task effects was associated
with differences in postural response amplitude (Quant et al.,
2004). However, the use of neuroimaging techniques in the
study of human postural orientation has thus far been fairly
limited. Recently, Slobounov et al. presented ICA-based source
localization results that suggest anterior cingulate modulation
of EEG in the ϑ, α, and γ bands associated with changes in the
virtual-time-to-contact of center-of-pressure position relative
to postural stability boundaries (Slobounov et al., 2009). Such
results, achieved through the joint analysis of the kinematic
and brain dynamics, describing observed behavior illustrate
the potential of MoBI-based brain imaging for elucidating the
cortical implementation of putative mechanisms of predictive
control, sensory estimation and/or sensory re-weighting that
have been identified in previous mechanistic models of the
postural control system.
Postural control and postural state may also serve as
critical contextual variables for the interpretation of brain
dynamics underlying human neurocognitive performance.
For example, Caldwell and colleagues presented results
showing that an upright standing vs. a seated posture significantly attenuated sleep-deprivation-induced increases
in slow-wave EEG activity (e.g., absolute theta power),
Imaging of postural control

7

and that such postural manipulations mitigated sleepdeprivation-related decrements in cognitive performance
(e.g., slower reaction time and increased attention lapses)
(Caldwell et al., 2000, 2003). Similar postural changes have
been interpreted in terms of homeostatic reflex mechanisms
(Cole, 1989), while Tachtsidis and colleagues observed
spontaneous, low frequency, cerebral hemodynamic oscillations whose amplitude is posture-dependent (supine vs.
sitting vs. standing) (Tachtsidis et al., 2004). Along with
previously discussed results indicating secondary task
effects on postural control, such results indicate that it may
be important to take into account postural dynamics and
changes in postural state in understanding observed MoBIbased brain dynamics data.
Applications for clinical sciences As discussed above,

the human control of stance has served as a useful model
system for the study of sensorimotor integration and
multisensory processing in the nervous system. The study
of stance control has also been pursued for its practical and
clinical implications; in the US, approximately 300 000 falls
result in hip fractures, with associated health care costs of
approximately $10 billion USD (Maki et al., 2003). The risk
of injury from falling increases with age. Jeka and colleagues
recently showed that both healthy and fall-prone older adults
have higher gains and slower down-weighting in the face
of high-amplitude visual environmental motion vs. young
adult controls (Jeka et al., 2010). Understanding the neural
underpinnings of sensory reweighting, including the potential
role of cortical mechanisms may be pivotal in the design
and enhancement of mitigation strategies based on sensory
training. Moreover, cortical signatures that can be associated
with predictive measures of postural instability (e.g., centerof-pressure time-to-contact with stability boundaries) may
hold promise as the basis for the development of neutrally
based assistive and/or training technologies for the prevention
of falls (Slobounov et al., 2009).
Human locomotor control and imaging approaches

It is generally accepted that humans use a multifaceted locomotion control strategy, including descending (from the
brain), peripheral (reflex pathways), and central neural networks (spinal) inputs (Dietz and Duysens, 2000; Dietz, 2003;
Nielsen, 2003; Drew et al., 2004; Rossignol et al., 2006; Yang
and Gorassini, 2006; Grillner et al., 2008). While spinal locomotor networks in humans and other vertebrates are capable
of generating rhythmic muscle activity, activating these networks in humans without functional descending motor pathways has proven to be difficult (Dietz et al., 1995; Wirz et al.,
2001; Ferris et al., 2004; Fong et al., 2009). Therefore, understanding how the brain, particularly the cortex, is involved in
human locomotion is critical from a basic science perspective
and for a variety of clinical applications.
In the absence of a method to image the human brain
during locomotion, researchers have used a variety of
creative approaches to study neural control of locomotion. One approach is transcranial magnetic stimulation

8

K. Gramann et al.

(TMS). TMS can excite or suppress target areas of human
cortex at precise phases of the gait cycle. Evaluating gait
kinematics in response to these cortical stimulations has
demonstrated substantial cortical involvement in locomotion (Schubert et al., 1997, 1999; Capaday et al., 1999;
Christensen et al., 2001; Hiraoka and Abe, 2007; Iglesias
et al., 2008). Another approach to study supraspinal contributions to human locomotion is to use stationary brain
imaging modalities (e.g., fMRI and PET) while subjects
perform rhythmic foot or leg movements (Luft et al., 2002;
Dobkin et al., 2004; Sahyoun et al., 2004; Heuninckx et al.,
2005; Heuninckx et al., 2008; Mehta et al., 2009) or mental imagery of locomotion (Jahn et al., 2004; Pfurtscheller
et al., 2006; Jahn et al., 2008a; Jahn et al., 2008b; Wagner
et al., 2008; Wang et al., 2008; Jahn et al., 2009; Ionta et al.,
2010). However, these stationary tasks are fundamentally
different than normal locomotion. Postural adjustments and
navigation are not required during rhythmic leg movements.
During mental imagery of walking, the sensory information

A

going to the brain is substantially different than during
actual walking (la Fougere et al., 2010). While recent studies using these methods have provided important insight into
supraspinal control of human walking (Yang and Gorassini,
2006; Jahn and Zwergal, 2010), there is a clear need for a
mobile technique to quantify brain activity. Early studies
using the MoBI approach have demonstrated the feasibility
of imaging electrocortical dynamics during human locomotion. Specifically, Gwin et al. (2011) recorded lower-limb
kinematics, ground reaction forces and 256-channel EEG,
while subjects walked on a treadmill.
Figure 1A shows the experimental set-up including infrared cameras and reflective markers on the lower limbs for
motion capture, an instrumented in-ground treadmill for
measuring ground reaction forces and a high-density EEG
system. In this study, ICA parsed electrocortical source signals from EEG. Electrocortical sources in or near the anterior cingulate, posterior parietal and sensorimotor cortex
exhibited significant intra-stride changes in spectral power

B

EEG amplifier
Infrared motion capture
light source and camera

EEG cap
(248 electrodes)

LCD
display

Frequency (Hz)

LOFF

Motion capture
reflective markers

Force measuring
dual-belt treadmill

LON ROFF RON LOFF

150
45
15
5
0

50

100

Percent gait cycle (%)

Power relative to
full gait cycle average (dB)

-0.5

0

0.5

Figure 1 (A) A subject standing on the dual-belt treadmill facing the LCD display. Components of the experimental set-up are highlighted
and described in the linked text boxes. (B) Gait event related spectral perturbation (ERSP) plots showing average changes in spectral power
during the stride cycle relative to the full gait cycle baseline for (top) the anterior cingulate cluster, (bottom) the posterior parietal cluster, (left)
the left sensorimotor cluster and (right) right sensorimotor cluster. The gait cycle begins and ends with left toe-off (LOFF). Vertical lines indicate the timing of left heel-strike (LON), right toe-off (ROFF), and right heel-strike (RON). Non-significant differences have been set to 0 dB
(green). (Center) clusters of electrocortical sources localized to the anterior cingulate (blue), posterior parietal cortex (green), and sensorimotor
cortex (red) are visualized in a horizontal view of the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) brain volume. Small spheres indicate the equivalent current dipole locations for single electrocortical sources for single subjects; larger spheres indicate geometric cluster centroids.

Imaging brain/body dynamics in mobile humans

9

(i.e., modulations in spectral power that were locked to distinct phases of the gait cycle) (Figure 1B). During the end
of stance, as the leading foot was contacting the ground
and the trailing foot was pushing off, α- and β-band spectral power increased in, or near, the left/right sensorimotor
and dorsal anterior cingulate cortex. Power increases in the
left/right sensorimotor cortex were more pronounced for
contralateral limb push-off (ipsilateral heel-strike) than for
ipsilateral limb push-off (contralateral heel-strike). Intrastride high-γ spectral power changes were evident in anterior cingulate, posterior parietal and sensorimotor cortex.

2009). More recently, Song and Giszter demonstrated that
rats can adapt to a hind limb coupled BMI and utilize the
BMI to overcome an imposed resistive load during locomotion (Song and Giszter, 2011). Future studies using noninvasive MoBI techniques and human subjects should
examine motor adaptation to lower limb coupled BMIs, in
particular BMIs designed to provide motor augmentation to
overcome chronic gait impediments.

Applications for clinical sciences There are many
potential clinical applications for mobile brain imaging
with EEG. Being able to non-invasively quantify how brain
activation during gait is different in neurologically impaired
patients compared to healthy individuals could help clinicians
identify subsets of patients with similar symptoms and target
interventions accordingly. These interventions may include
rehabilitation from acute nervous system damage, such as
stroke or spinal cord injury, as well as therapy for chronic
nervous system degeneration, such as fall prevention techniques
for older adults. To this end, we have begun to classify brain
activation patterns associated with perturbed walking and
walking under more demanding balance conditions. Freezing
gait in patients with Parkinson’s disease is another potential
target. Being able to identify the electrocortical dynamics that
cause individuals to become motionless without the ability to
take a step could lead to new brain stimulation devices that
prevent freezing gait from developing. Given the pervasiveness
of gait disabilities across a wide variety of patient populations,
the use of MoBI to understand the electrocortical dynamics
associated with impaired gait is surely an avenue of inquiry
worthy of pursuit.

In the first experiment investigating cognitive processes while
participants walked on a treadmill, Gramann et al. demonstrated the general feasibility of the MoBI concept and provided evidence that brain dynamics can be analyzed during
motion, despite massive electromyographic activity from
neck and cranial muscles, as well as electrooculographic
activity accompanying participants’ movements (Gramann
et al., 2010a). We analyzed the brain dynamics of participants
attending to a stream of visual stimuli during standing, slow
treadmill walking, and fast treadmill walking. The task was
to respond whenever a target was detected in a stream of
non-target stimuli. The onset of rare targets (‘oddballs’) was
associated with the so-called ‘oddball P3’ in the event-related
potential; a positive-going peak of the stimulus-locked and
averaged spontaneous EEG with a latency around 300 ms,
that accompanies infrequent and task-relevant stimuli (Sutton
et al., 1965; Picton, 1992). The P3 is thought to reflect stimulus updating and categorization processes being active when
stimulus detection engages memory operations (Polich,
2007).
However, this component of the event-related potential
was visible only after dissociating and filtering out activity related to horizontal and vertical eye movement and
activity arising from neck, supracranial, and facial muscles.
Analyses of sensor based data without spatially filtering
would have left the P300 buried under activity arising from
these nonbrain processes while participants were actively
moving (Kerick et al., 2009). Increasing non-brain activity
with increasing walking speed, however, revealed the ‘cognitive nature’ of eye movement and muscle activity. While
not measured in our study, prior studies have demonstrated
that increasing walking speed increases head deviations in
all three movement planes (up-down, front-back, left-right).
Therefore, to detect and discriminate target stimuli, which
appeared on a stationary monitor in front of the subjects,
participants had to compensate for displacements of the
head. This was done by activating the appropriate neck
muscles and moving the eyes so as to retain focus on the
center of the screen (Hirasaki et al., 1999; Mulavara et al.,
2002) (Figure 2A).
Back-projecting only the activity of IC processes with
equivalent dipole models located in the brain (i.e., by filtering
out any nonbrain related activity of the decomposed signal),
revealed significantly increased P3 amplitudes for target as
compared to nontarget stimuli (Figure 2B). More importantly,
P3 amplitudes for target stimuli did not differ irrespective of

Application for brain machine interfaces (BMI) The
application of MoBI during locomotion could enable
an electromechanical brain machine interface (BMI) to
supplement impaired descending motor commands during
gait rehabilitation, which might increase treatment efficacy
(Daly and Wolpaw, 2008). Specifically, using features of brain
activity to control electromechanical motor augmentation
devices that compensate for impaired neuromuscular control
during gait rehabilitation may increase the relearning rate by
encouraging active neurological participation from patients
and producing more normal sensory afferents that induce
central nervous system plasticity.
In addition, MoBI could facilitate non-invasive neural control of prosthetic limbs or powered orthoses that
provide motor augmentation or restore functional mobility to amputees and patients with paralysis (Millan et al.,
2008; Hatsopoulos and Donoghue, 2009; Kim et al., 2009;
Leuthardt et al., 2009; Scherberger, 2009). In vertebrate animals, intra-stride modulations of neuronal firing rates during
walking, measured using implanted intra-cortical electrode
arrays, have been accurately decoded to predict lower limb
muscle activations and kinematics (Fitzsimmons et al.,

Imaging cognitive processing during active
locomotion

10 K. Gramann et al.

Figure 2 Visual target stimulus responses in three movement conditions. (A) Centroids of IC clusters (colored spheres) visualized in the MNI
brain volume in horizontal, sagittal, and coronal views. Gray and yellow spheres represent eye and neck muscle activity clusters, respectively.
Other-colored spheres mark centroids of brain IC clusters. Grand-mean event related potential (ERP) envelopes (maximum and minimum
channel ERP values at each latency) time-lockedto target stimuli onset are shown below the IC cluster visualization for three different movement conditions. The light gray shaded area shows the summed back-projection of all IC clusters. The purple shaded area shows the backprojected contribution of the IC cluster with equivalent dipoles in or near anterior cingulate cortex (19). Yellow traces and dark gray traces
show the back-projected contribution of a representative neck muscle cluster (16) and a representative eye movement cluster (6), respectively.
(B) Centroid (bigger sphere) and individual ICs (smaller spheres) of the IC cluster contributing most strongly to the P3 peak (Cluster 19 in A).
This cluster contained 13 ICs from 11 subjects. The ICs were located in or near anterior cingulate cortex (BA32). Grand-mean ERP envelopes
(time-locked to target stimuli onset) are shown for the back-projected contribution of the IC cluster (purple shaded area, as in A but note the
change in vertical axis scale) and for the summed back-projection of IC clusters within the gray matter of the brain (gray shaded area, different
than A, excludes eye and muscle artifact ICs). The latency range of the P300 response is highlighted in light gray.

whether the participants were standing, walking slowly, or
walking more quickly. This study demonstrated the viability
of recording brain activity accompanying cognitive processes
during whole body movement.
Artifact pre-processing for extensive movements

Although ICA can remove many artifacts from EEG signals,
there are times when additional signal processing is necessary.
When the head undergoes particularly rapid movements,
such as during running, mechanical artifacts can dominate
the signal. Gwin and colleagues (Gwin et al., 2010) recently
applied an artifact template regression procedure to remove
running related movement activity from EEG signals. This
procedure was based on existing artifact removal techniques,
designed for time-invariant noise sources (Allen et al., 2000).
To address the time-varying nature of gait related movement

artifact, the authors used stride time-warping prior to applying
the artifact template regression.
The efficacy of this technique was tested on EEG collected
during treadmill running, a relatively rhythmic motor task.
However, such an artifact removal procedure is not inherently limited to removing quasi-rhythmic motor artifacts. It
may be possible to use a related procedure to remove movement artifact from signals recorded during more complex
movements, such as rapid directional changes, or from signals recorded in harsher environments, such as during automotive transport over rough terrain, provided enough trials
are available for the creation of an appropriate set of artifact
templates and movement related kinematic signals are available for performing appropriate time-warping. Successful
recording of EEG under these conditions remains to be
seen.

Imaging brain/body dynamics in mobile humans

Conclusion
Animal studies using mobile imaging approaches demonstrate
new insights into the brain dynamics of actively behaving animals. The modulation of brain dynamics by behavioral states
in these studies complements the existing view of human brain
function, as investigated using traditional imaging methods
like fMRI or MEG. Future studies, using a mobile imaging
approach, will have to overcome the restrictions associated
with immobile sensor arrays and immobile attitudes towards
analyzes of EEG signals. Making use of fast developing sensor technologies, growing computational power, and newly
available analyzes techniques more data streams can be
recorded and analyzed in naturally behaving humans including high density EEG, peripheral physiological activity, high
definition visual scene recordings (including eye movements),
and whole body kinematics. This approach to investigating the
human brain in action opens new avenues in systemic human
neuroscience.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a gift from the Swartz Foundation (Old
Field, NY) and by grants from the National Science Foundation,
USA (NSF IIS-0613595, TDLC-0542013), the Aiming for the Top
University Plan of National Chiao Tung University, the Ministry
of Education, Taiwan, the UST-UCSD International Center of
Excellence in Advanced Bio-engineering sponsored by the Taiwan
National Science Council I-RiCE Program under Grant Number
NSC-99-2911-I-009-101, and the Army Research Laboratory under
Cooperative Agreement Number W911NF-10-2-0022. The views
and the conclusions contained in this document are those of the
authors and should not be interpreted as representing the official policies, either expressed or implied, of the Army Research Laboratory
or the US Government. The US Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for government purposes notwithstanding any copyright notation herein.

References
Aguirre, G.K., Zarahn, E., and D’Esposito, M. (1998). Neural components of topographical representation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 95, 839–846.
Allen, P.J., Josephs, O., and Turner, R. (2000). A method for removing imaging artifact from continuous EEG recorded during functional MRI. NeuroImage 12, 230–239.
Allum, J.H.J., Carpenter, M.G., and Adkin, A.L. (2001). Balance
control analysis as a method for screening and identifying
balance deficits. Vestibular Labyrinth in Health and Disease
942, 413–427.
Anderson, M.L. (2003). Embodied cognition: a field guide. Artif.
Intell. 149, 91–130.
Aniss, A.M., Gandevia, S.C., and Burke, D. (1992). Reflex responses
in active muscles elicited by stimulation of low-threshold afferents from the human foot. J. Neurophysiol. 67, 1375–1384.
Gruetzmann, A., Hansen, S., and Mueller, J. (2007). Novel dry electrodes for ECG monitoring. Physiol. Meas. 28, 1375.
Baek, J.-Y., An, J.-H., Choi, J.-M., Park, K.-S., and Lee, S.-H. (2008).
Flexible polymeric dry electrodes for the long-term monitoring
of ECG. Sensor. Actuat A-Phys. 143, 423–429.

11

Bakker, M., Verstappen, C.C.P., Bloem, B.R., and Toni, I. (2007).
Recent advances in functional neuroimaging of gait. J. Neural.
Transm. 114, 1323–1331.
Bardy, B.G., Warren, W.H., and Kay, B.A. (1996). Motion parallax
is used to control postural sway during walking. Exp. Brain. Res.
111, 271–282.
Beckmann, L., Neuhaus, C., Medrano, G., Jungbecker, N., Walter,
M., Gries, T., and Leonhardt, S. (2010). Characterization of textile electrodes and conductors using standardized measurement
setups. Physiol. Meas. 31, 233.
Beloozerova, I.N., Zelenin, P.V., Popova, L.B., Orlovsky, G.N.,
Grillner, S., and Deliagina, T.G. (2003). Postural control
in the rabbit maintaining balance on the tilting platform.
J. Neurophysiol. 90, 3783–3793.
Beloozerova, I.N., Sirota, M.G., Orlovsky, G.N., and Deliagina, T.G.
(2005). Activity of pyramidal tract neurons in the cat during postural corrections. J. Neurophysiol. 93, 1831–1844.
Berthoz, A., Lacour, M., Soechting, J.F., and Vidal, P.P. (1979). The
role of vision in the control of posture during linear motion. Prog.
Brain Res. 50, 197–209.
Biguer, B., Donaldson, I.M., Hein, A., and Jeannerod, M. (1988).
Neck muscle vibration modifies the representation of visual
motion and direction in man. Brain 111, 1405–1424.
Bove, M., Courtine, G., and Schieppati, M. (2002). Neck muscle
vibration and spatial orientation during stepping in place in
humans. J. Neurophysiol. 88, 2232–2241.
Boyd, L.A., Vidoni, E.D., and Daly, J.J. (2007). Answering the call:
the influence of neuroimaging and electrophysiological evidence
on rehabilitation. Phys. Ther. 87, 684–703.
Bronstein, A.M., Hood, J.D., Gresty, M.A., and Panagi, C. (1990).
Visual control of balance in cerebellar and Parkinsonian syndromes. Brain 113, 767–779.
Bull, M.L., Vitti, M., and Defreitas, V. (1985). Electromyographic
study of the trapezius (upper portion) and levator scapulae muscles in some movements of the shoulders. Anat. Anzeiger. 159,
21–27.
Caldwell, J.A., Prazinko, B.F., and Hall, K.K. (2000). The effects
of body posture on resting electroencephalographic activity in sleep-deprived subjects. Clin. Neurophysiol. 111, 464–
470.
Caldwell, J.A., Prazinko, B., and Caldwell, J.L. (2003). Body posture affects electroencephalographic activity and psychomotor
vigilance task performance in sleep-deprived subjects. Clin.
Neurophysiol. 114, 23–31.
Capaday, C., Lavoie, B.A., Barbeau, H., Schneider, C., and Bonnard,
M. (1999). Studies on the corticospinal control of human walking. I. Responses to focal transcranial magnetic stimulation of the
motor cortex. J. Neurophysiol. 81, 129–139.
Carpenter, M.G., Frank, J.S., Silcher, C.P., and Peysar, G.W. (2001).
The influence of postural threat on the control of upright stance.
Exp. Brain. Res. 138, 210–218.
Casasanto, D. and Dijkstra, K. (2010). Motor action and emotional
memory. Cognition 115, 179–185.
Chi, Y.M. and Cauwenberghs, G. (2010). Wireless non-contact
EEG/ECG electrodes for body sensor networks. Proc. Int. Conf.
Body Sensor Networks (BSN), June 7–9, 2010, Singapore,
pp. 297–301.
Chi, Y.M., Deiss, S.R., and Cauwenberghs, G. (2009). Noncontact low power EEG/ECG electrode for high density wearable biopotential sensor networks. Wearable and Implantable
Body Sensor Networks (BSN), June 3–5, 2009, Berkeley, CA,
pp. 246–250.

12 K. Gramann et al.

Chi, Y.M., Jung, T.P., and Cauwenberghs, G. (2010). Dry-contact and
noncontact biopotential electrodes: methodological review. IEEE
Reviews-Biomed. Eng. 3, 106–119.
Christensen, L.O.D., Andersen, J.B., Sinkjaeer, T., and Nielsen, J.
(2001). Transcranial magnetic stimulation and stretch reflexes
in the tibialis anterior muscle during human walking. J. Physiol.
London 531, 545–557.
Cisek, P. and Kalaska, J.F. (2010). Neural mechanisms for interacting with a world full of action choices. Ann. Rev. Neurosci. 33,
269–298.
Cole, R.J. (1989). Postural baroreflex stimuli may affect EEG arousal
and sleep in humans. J. Appl. Physiol. 67, 2369–2375.
Crowley, K., Sliney, A., Pitt, I., and Murphy, D. (2010). Evaluating
a brain-computer interface to categorise human emotional
response. advanced learning technologies (ICALT), 2010 IEEE
10th International Conference, pp. 276–278.
Daly, J.J. and Wolpaw, J.R. (2008). Brain-computer interfaces in
neurological rehabilitation. Lancet Neurol. 7, 1032–1043.
Delorme, A. and Makeig, S. (2004). EEGLAB: an open source toolbox for analysis of single-trial EEG dynamics including independent component analysis. J. Neurosci. Methods 134, 9–21.
Delorme, A., Mullen, T., Kothe, C., Acar, Z.A., Bigdely-Shamlo,
N., Vankov, A., and Makeig, S. (2011). EEGLAB, SIFT, NFT,
BCILAB, and ERICA: new tools for advanced EEG processing.
Computat. Intelligence Neurosci. 130714, doi: 10.1155/2011/
130714.
Diener, H.C., Ackermann, H., Dichgans, J., and Guschlbauer, B.
(1985). Medium- and long-latency responses to displacements
of the ankle joint in patients with spinal and central lesions.
Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol. 60, 407–416.
Dietz, V. (2003). Spinal cord pattern generators for locomotion. Clin.
Neurophysiol. 114, 1379–1389.
Dietz, V., Colombo, G., Jensen, L., and Baumgartner, L. (1995).
Locomotor capacity of spinal cord in paraplegic patients. Ann.
Neurol. 37, 574–582.
Dietz, V. and Duysens, J. (2000). Significance of load receptor input
during locomotion: a review. Gait Posture 11, 102–110.
Dijkstra, T.M.H., Schoner, G., and Gielen, C.C.A.M. (1994). Temporal
stability of the action-perception cycle for postural control in a
moving visual environment. Exp. Brain Res. 97, 477–486.
Dobkin, B.H., Firestine, A., West, M., Saremi, K., and Woods, R.
(2004). Ankle dorsiflexion as an fMRI paradigm to assay motor
control for walking during rehabilitation. NeuroImage 23,
370–381.
Doyon, J., Song, A.W., Karni, A., Lalonde, F., Adams, M.M., and
Ungerleider, L.G. (2002). Experience-dependent changes in
cerebellar contributions to motor sequence learning. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 99, 1017–1022.
Drew, T., Prentice, S., and Schepens, B. (2004). Cortical and brainstem control of locomotion. Prog. Brain Res. 143, 251–261.
Elbert, T., Pantev, C., Wienbruch, C., Rockstroh, B., and Taub, E.
(1995). Increased cortical representation of the fingers of the left
hand in string players. Science 270, 305–307.
Elble, R.J. and Leffler, K. (2000). Pushing and pulling with the
upper extremities while standing: the effects of mild Alzheimer
dementia and Parkinson’s disease. Movement Disord. 15, 255–
268.
Eric, W.S., Peter, T., William, A.S., Tobin, M., Theresa, M.V., and
Robert, M. (2009). A Novel Dry Electrode for Brain-Computer
Interface. In: Proceedings of the 13th International Conference
on Human-Computer Interaction. Part II: Novel Interaction
Methods and Techniques. (San Diego, CA: Springer-Verlag), pp.
623–631.

Farrell, M.J. and Robertson, I.H. (1998). Mental rotation and the
automatic updating of body-centered spatial relationships.
J. Exp. Psychol. Learn 24, 227–233.
Ferree, T.C., Russell, G.S., and Tucker, D.M. (2001). Scalp electrode impedance, infection risk, and EEG data quality. Clinical
Neurophysiology 112, 536–544.
Ferris, D.P., Gordon, K.E., Beres-Jones, J.A., and Harkema, S.J.
(2004). Muscle activation during unilateral stepping occurs in
the nonstepping limb of humans with clinically complete spinal
cord injury. Spinal Cord 42, 14–23.
Fitzsimmons, N.A., Lebedev, M.A., Peikon, I.D., and Nicolelis, M.A.
(2009). Extracting kinematic parameters for monkey bipedal
walking from cortical neuronal ensemble activity. Front. Integr.
Neurosci. 3, 3.
Fong, A.J., Roy, R.R., Ichiyama, R.M., Lavrov, I., Courtine, G.,
Gerasimenko, Y., Tai, Y.C., Burdick, J., and Edgerton, V.R.
(2009). Recovery of control of posture and locomotion after a spinal cord injury: solutions staring us in the face. Prog. Brain Res.
175, 393–418.
Fonseca, C., Cunha, J.S., Martins, R., Ferreira, V., Sá, J.M.d.,
Barbosa, M., and Silva, A.M.d. (2007). A novel dry active electrode for EEG recording. IEEE T Bio-med. Eng. 54, 162–165.
Fox, W.L. (1984). Dandy of Johns Hopkins (Baltimore, MD:
Williams and Wilkins).
Gramann, K. (in press). Embodiment of spatial reference frames
and individual differences in reference frame proclivity. Spatial
Cognition and Computation. DOI: 10.1080/13875868.2011.
589038.
Gramann, K., Muller, H.J., Eick, E.M., and Schonebeck, B. (2005).
Evidence of separable spatial representations in a virtual navigation task. J. Exp. Psychol. Human 31, 1199–1223.
Gramann, K., Muller, H.J., Schonebeck, B., and Debus, G. (2006).
The neural basis of ego- and allocentric reference frames in spatial navigation: evidence from spatio-temporal coupled current
density reconstruction. Brain Res. 1118, 116–129.
Gramann, K., Gwin, J.T., Bigdely-Shamlo, N., Ferris, D.P., and
Makeig, S. (2010a). Visual evoked responses during standing
and walking. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 5, 12.
Gramann, K., Onton, J., Riccobon, D., Mueller, H.J., Bardins, S., and
Makeig, S. (2010b). Human brain dynamics accompanying use
of egocentric and allocentric reference frames during navigation.
J. Cognitive Neurosci. 22, 2836–2849.
Grillner, S., Wallen, P., Saitoh, K., Kozlov, A., and Robertson, B.
(2008). Neural bases of goal-directed locomotion in vertebrates
– an overview. Brain Res. Rev. 57, 2–12.
Griss, P., Enoksson, P., Tolvanen-Laakso, H.K., Meriläinen, P.,
Ollmar, S., and Stemme, G. (2001). Micromachined electrodes
for biopotential measurement. IEEE J. Microelectromechanical
Systems 10, 10–15.
Griss, P., Tolvanen-Laakso, H.K., Meriläinen, P., and Stemme, G.
(2002). Characterization of micromachined spiked biopotentials
electrodes. IEEE T Bio-med Eng. 49, 597–604.
Gron, G., Wunderlich, A.P., Spitzer, M., Tomczak, R., and Riepe,
M.W. (2000). Brain activation during human navigation: genderdifferent neural networks as substrate of performance. Nat.
Neurosci. 3, 404–408.
Gwin, J.T., Gramann, K., Makeig, S., and Ferris, D.P. (2010).
Removal of movement artifact from high-density EEG recorded
during walking and running. J. Neurophysiol. 103, 3526–3534.
Gwin, J.T., Gramann, K., Makeig, S., and Ferris, D.P. (2011).
Electrocortical activity is coupled to gait cycle phase during
treadmill walking. NeuroImage 54, 1289–1296.
Harada, T., Miyai, I., Suzuki, M., and Kubota, K. (2009). Gait capacity affects cortical activation patterns related to speed control

Imaging brain/body dynamics in mobile humans

in the elderly. Experimental brain research. Experimentelle
Hirnforschung. Experimentation Cerebrale 193, 445–454.
Hatsopoulos, N.G. and Donoghue, J.P. (2009). The science of neural
interface systems. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 32, 249–266.
Hauer, K., Pfisterer, M., Weber, C., Wezler, N., Kliegel, M., and
Oster, P. (2003). Cognitive impairment decreases postural control during dual tasks in geriatric patients with a history of severe
falls. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc. 51, 1638–1644.
Hayhoe, M. and Ballard, D. (2005). Eye movements in natural
behavior. Trend. Cogn. Sci. 9, 188–194.
Heuninckx, S., Wenderoth, N., Debaere, F., Peeters, R., and Swinnen,
S.P. (2005). Neural basis of aging: the penetration of cognition
into action control. J. Neurosci. 25, 6787–6796.
Heuninckx, S., Wenderoth, N., and Swinnen, S.P. (2008). Systems
neuroplasticity in the aging brain: recruiting additional neural
resources for successful motor performance in elderly persons.
J. Neurosci. 28, 91–99.
Hiraoka, K. and Abe, K. (2007). Cortical and spinal control of ankle
joint muscles before and during gait initiation. Somatosens. Mot.
Res., 24 127–133.
Hirasaki, E., Moore, S.T., Raphan, T., and Cohen, B. (1999). Effects
of walking velocity on vertical head and body movements during
locomotion. Exp. Brain Res. 127, 117–130.
Hlavacka, F., Mergner, T., and Krizkova, M. (1996). Control of the
body vertical by vestibular and proprioceptive inputs. Brain Res.
Bull. 40, 431–434.
Hoffmann, K.P. and Ruff, R. (2007). Flexible dry surface-electrodes
for ECG long-term monitoring. EMBS 2007. In: 29th Annual
International Conference of the IEEE, pp. 5739–5742.
Horak, F.B. and Diener, H.C. (1994). Cerebellar control of postural
scaling and central set in stance. J. Neurophysiol. 72, 479–493.
Horak, F.B. and Nashner, L.M. (1986). Central programming of postural movements-adaptation to altered support-surface configurations. J. Neurophysiol. 55, 1369–1381.
Hunter, M.C. and Hoffman, M.A. (2001). Postural control: visual
and cognitive manipulations. Gait Posture 13, 41–48.
Iglesias, C., Nielsen, J.B., and Marchand-Pauvert, V. (2008).
Corticospinal inhibition of transmission in propriospinal-like neurones during human walking. Eur. J. Neurosci. 28, 1351–1361.
Inglis, J.T., Horak, F.B., Shupert, C.L., and Jonesrycewicz, C. (1994).
The importance of somatosensory information in triggering and
scaling automatic postural responses in humans. Exp. Brain Res.
101, 159–164.
Ionta, S., Ferretti, A., Merla, A., Tartaro, A., and Romani, G.L.
(2010). Step-by-step: the effects of physical practice on the neural correlates of locomotion imagery revealed by fMRI. Hum.
Brain Mapp. 31, 694–702.
Irani, F., Platek, S.M., Bunce, S., Ruocco, A.C., and Chute, D. (2007).
Functional near infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS): an emerging neuroimaging technology with important applications for the study
of brain disorders. Clin. Neuropsychol. 21, 9–37.
Jacobs, J.V. and Horak, F.B. (2007). Cortical control of postural
responses. J. Neural. Transm. 114, 1339–1348.
Jahn, K., Deutschlander, A., Stephan, T., Strupp, M., Wiesmann, M.,
and Brandt, T. (2004). Brain activation patterns during imagined
stance and locomotion in functional magnetic resonance imaging. NeuroImage 22, 1722–1731.
Jahn, K., Deutschlader, A., Stephan, T., Kalla, R., Wiesmann, M.,
Strupp, M., and Brandt, T. (2008a). Imaging human supraspinal
locomotor centers in brainstem and cerebellum. NeuroImage 39,
786–792.
Jahn, K., Deutschlander, A., Stephan, T., Kalla, R., Hufner, K.,
Wagner, J., Strupp, M., and Brandt, T. (2008b). Supraspinal

13

locomotor control in quadrupeds and humans. Using eye movements as an experimental probe of brain function-a Symposium
in Honor of Jean Buttner-Ennever 171, 353–362.
Jahn, K., Wagner, J., Deutschlander, A., Kalla, R., Hufner, K.,
Stephan, T., Strupp, M., and Brandt, T. (2009). Human hippocampal activation during stance and locomotion fMRI study
on healthy, blind, and vestibular-loss subjects. Ann. Ny. Acad.
Sci. 1164, 229–235.
Jahn, K. and Zwergal, A. (2010). Imaging supraspinal locomotor control in balance disorders. Restor. Neurol. Neuros. 28, 105–114.
Jeka, J., Oie, K.S., and Kiemel, T. (2000). Multisensory information
for human postural control: integrating touch and vision. Exp.
Brain Res. 134, 107–125.
Jeka, J.J., Allison, L.K., and Kiemel, T. (2010). The dynamics of
visual reweighting in healthy and fall-prone older adults. J Motor
Behav 42, 197–208.
Johansson, R., Magnusson, M., and Fransson, P.A. (1995). Galvanic
vestibular stimulation for analysis of postural adaptation and stability. IEEE T Bio-med. Eng. 42, 282–292.
Kavounoudias, A., Roll, R., and Roll, J.P. (2001). Foot sole and ankle
muscle inputs contribute jointly to human erect posture regulation. J. Physiol-London 532, 869–878.
Kelly, A.M.C. and Garavan, H. (2005). Human functional neuroimaging of brain changes associated with practice. Cereb. Cortex.
15, 1089–1102.
Kempermann, G., Fabel, K., Ehninger, D., Babu, H., Leal-Galicia,
P., Garthe, A., and Wolf, S.A. (2010). Why and how physical
activity promotes experience-induced brain plasticity. Front.
Neurosci. 4, 189.
Kerick, S.E., Oie, S.E., and McDowell, K. (2009). Assessment of
EEG signal quality in motion environments. Aberdeen Proving
Ground, MD: US Army Research Laboratory. Report No.: ARLTN-355.
Kiemel, T., Oie, K.S., and Jeka, J.J. (2006). Slow dynamics of postural
sway are in the feedback loop. J. Neurophysiol. 95, 1410–1418.
Kim, H.K., Park, S., and Srinivasan, M.A. (2009). Developments in
brain-machine interfaces from the perspective of robotics. Hum.
Movement Sci. 28, 191–203.
Ko, L.-W., Chiou, J.-C., Lin, C.-T., Hong, C.-T., Jung, T.-P., Liang,
S.-F., and Jeng, J.-L. (2006). Using novel MEMS EEG sensors
in detecting drowsiness application. In: Proceeding of IEEE
Biomedical Circuits and Systems Conference (BioCAS 2006),
pp. 33–36.
la Fougere, C., Zwergal, A., Rominger, A., Forster, S., Fesl, G.,
Dieterich, M., Brandt, T., Strupp, M., Bartenstein, P., and Jahn,
K. (2010). Real versus imagined locomotion: a [18F]-FDG PETfMRI comparison. NeuroImage 50, 1589–1598.
Leuthardt, E.C., Schalk, G., Roland, J., Rouse, A., and Moran, D.W.
(2009). Evolution of brain-computer interfaces: going beyond
classic motor physiology. Neurosurg. Focus 27, E4.
Lewko, J.P. (1996). Assessment of muscle electrical activity in spinal cord injury subjects during quiet standing. Paraplegia 34,
158–163.
Liao, L.-D., Wang, I.-J., Chen, S.-F., Chang, J.-Y., and Lin, C.-T.
(2011). Design, fabrication and experimental validation of a
novel dry contact sensor for measuring electroencephalography
signals without skin preparation. Sensors 11, 5819–5834.
Lin, C.-T., Ko, L.-W., Chiou, J.-C., Duann, J.-R., Huang, R.-S.,
Chiu, T.-W., Liang, S.-F., and Jung, T.-P. (2008). Noninvasive
neural prostheses using mobile and wireless EEG. P. IEEE 96,
1167–1183.
Lin, C.T., Liao, L.D., Liu, Y.H., Wang, I.J., Lin, B.S., and Chang, J.Y.
(2011). Novel dry polymer foam electrodes for long-term EEG
Measurement. IEEE Bio-med. Eng. 58, 1200–1207.

14

K. Gramann et al.

Logothetis, N.K., Pauls, J., Augath, M., Trinath, T., and Oeltermann,
A. (2001). Neurophysiological investigation of the basis of the
fMRI signal. Nature 412, 150–157.
Luft, A.R., Smith, G.V., Forrester, L., Whitall, J., Macko, R.F., Hauser,
T.K., Goldberg, A.P., and Hanley, D.F. (2002). Comparing brain
activation associated with isolated upper and lower limb movement
across corresponding joints. Hum. Brain. Mapp. 17, 131–140.
Magnus, R. (1926). Some results of studies in the physiology of posture. Lancet ii, 531–536.
Maguire, E.A., Burgess, N., Donnett, J.G., Frackowiak, R.S., Frith,
C.D., and O’Keefe, J. (1998). Knowing where and getting there:
a human navigation network. Science 280, 921–924.
Maimon, G., Straw, A.D., and Dickinson, M.H. (2010). Active flight
increases the gain of visual motion processing in Drosophila.
Nat. Neurosci. 13, 393–399.
Makeig, S., Westerfield, M., Jung, T.P., Enghoff, S., Townsend, J.,
Courchesne, E., and Sejnowski, T.J. (2002). Dynamic brain
sources of visual evoked responses. Science 295, 690–694.
Makeig, S., Delorme, A., Westerfield, M., Jung, T.-P.,
Townsend, J., Courchesne, E., and Sejnowski, T.J. (2004).
Electroencephalographic brain dynamics following manually
responded visual targets. PLoS Biology 2, e176.
Makeig, S., Gramann, K., Jung, T.P., Sejnowski, T.J., and Poizner, H.
(2009). Linking brain, mind and behavior. Int. J. Psychophysiol.
73, 95–100.
Maki, B.E., McIlroy, W.E., and Fernie, G.R. (2003). Change-insupport reactions for balance recovery. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. 22,
20–26.
Matthews, R., McDonald, N.J., Fridman, I., Hervieux, P., and
Nielsen, T. (2005). The invisible electrode – zero prep time, ultra
low capacitive sensing. 11th International Conference on Human
Computer Interaction (HCII), Las Vegas, NV, pp. 22–27.
Matthews, R., McDonald, N.J., Anumula, H., Woodward, J., Turner,
P.J., Steindorf, M.A., Chang, K., and Pendleton, J.M. (2007).
Novel hybrid bioelectrodes for ambulatory zero-prep EEG measurements using multi-channel wireless EEG system. Lect. Notes
Comput Sc. 4565, 137–146.
Matthews, R., Turner, P.J., McDonald, N.J., Ermolaev, K., Manus,
T.M., Shelby, R.A., and Steindorf, M. (2008). Real time workload
classification from an ambulatory wireless EEG system using
hybrid EEG electrodes. EMBS 2008, 30th Annual International
Conference of the IEEE, pp. 5871–5875.
MayouxBenhamou, M.A., Revel, M., and Vallee, C. (1997). Selective
electromyography of dorsal neck muscles in humans. Exp. Brain.
Res. 113, 353–360.
Mehta, J.P., Verber, M.D., Wieser, J.A., Schmit, B.D., and SchindlerIvens, S.M. (2009). A novel technique for examining human
brain activity associated with pedaling using fMRI. J. Neurosci.
Meth. 179, 230–239.
Mergner, T., Maurer, C., and Peterka, R.J. (2003). A multisensory
posture control model of human upright stance. Neural Control
of Space Coding and Action Production 142, 189–199.
Millan, J.D., Ferrez, P.W., Galan, F., Lew, E., and Chavarriaga, R.
(2008). Non-invasive brain-machine interaction. Int. J. Pattern
Recogn. 22, 959–972.
Miyai, I., Tanabe, H.C., Sase, I., Eda, H., Oda, I., Konishi, I.,
Tsunazawa, Y., Suzuki, T., Yanagida, T., and Kubota, K. (2001).
Cortical mapping of gait in humans: a near-infrared spectroscopic
topography study. NeuroImage 14, 1186–1192.
Morasso, P.G., Baratto, L., Capra, R., and Spada, G. (1999). Internal
models in the control of posture. Neural Networks 12, 1173–1180.
Mulavara, A.P., Verstraete, M.C., and Bloomberg, J.J. (2002).
Modulation of head movement control in humans during treadmill walking. Gait Posture 16, 271–282.

Murphy, K.R., Parasuraman, B., Pethick, N., Miller, C.J., and
Fitzpatrick, S. (2002). Greater improvement in functional
health status with budesonide inhalation suspension (Pulmicort
Respules (TM) versus conventional therapy in children with persistent asthma. Pediatr. Res. 51, 177A.
Niell, C.M. and Stryker, M.P. (2010). Modulation of visual responses
by behavioral state in mouse visual cortex. Neuron 65, 472–479.
Nielsen, J.B. (2003). How we walk: central control of muscle activity
during human walking. Neuroscientist 9, 195–204.
Nunez, P.L. (1981). Electric fields of the brain: the neurophysics of
EEG. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press).
Oie, K.S., Kiemel, T., and Jeka, J.J. (2002). Multisensory fusion:
simultaneous re-weighting of vision and touch for the control of
human posture. Cognitive Brain Res. 14, 164–176.
Perennou, D.A., Leblond, C., Amblard, B., Micallef, J.P., Rouget, E.,
and Pelissier, J. (2000). The polymodal sensory cortex is crucial
for controlling lateral postural stability: evidence from stroke
patients. Brain Res. Bull. 53, 359–365.
Peterka, R.J. (2002). Sensorimotor integration in human postural
control. J. Neurophysiol. 88, 1097–1118.
Peterson, B.W., Goldberg, J., Bilotto, G., and Fuller, J.H. (1985).
Cervicocollic reflex-its dynamic properties and interaction with
vestibular reflexes. J. Neurophysiol. 54, 90–109.
Pfurtscheller, G., Leeb, R., Keinrath, C., Friedman, D., Neuper, C.,
Guger, C., and Slaterc, M. (2006). Walking from thought. Brain
Res. 1071, 145–152.
Picton, T.W. (1992). The P300 wave of the human event-related
potential. J. Clin. Neurophysiol. 9, 456–479.
Plonsey, R. and Heppner, D.B. (1967). Considerations of quasistationarity in electrophysiological systems. Bull. Math. Biophys.
29, 657–664.
Polich, J. (2007). Updating p300: an integrative theory of P3a and
P3b. Clin. Neurophysiol. 118, 2128–2148.
Quant, S., Adkin, A.L., Staines, W.R., Maki, B.E., and McIlroy,
W.E. (2004). The effect of a concurrent cognitive task on cortical
potentials evoked by unpredictable balance perturbations. BMC
Neurosci. 5, 18.
Roberto, M. (2010). The electrode – skin interface and optimal detection of bioelectric signals Physiol. Meas. 10, 31.
Rossignol, S., Dubuc, R.J., and Gossard, J.P. (2006). Dynamic sensorimotor interactions in locomotion. Physiol. Rev. 86, 89–154.
Ruffini, G., Dunne, S., Farrés, E., Marco-Pallarés, J., Ray, C., Mendoza,
E., Silva, R., and Grau, C. (2006). A dry electrophysiology electrode using CNT arrays. Sensor. Actuat. A-Phys. 132, 34–41.
Ruffini, G., Dunne, S., Fuentemilla, L., Grau, C., Farr, E., MarcoPallar, J., Watts, P.C.P., and Silva, S.R.P. (2008). First human trials of a dry electrophysiology sensor using a carbon nanotube
array interface. Sensor. Actuat. A-Phys. 144, 275–279.
Sahyoun, C., Floyer-Lea, A., Johansen-Berg, H., and Matthews, P.M.
(2004). Towards an understanding of gait control: brain activation during the anticipation, preparation and execution of foot
movements. NeuroImage 21, 568–575.
Scherberger, H. (2009). Neural control of motor prostheses. Curr.
Opin. Neurobiol. 19, 629–633.
Schubert, M., Curt, A., Jensen, L., and Dietz, V. (1997). Corticospinal
input in human gait: modulation of magnetically evoked motor
responses. Exp. Brain Res. 115, 234–246.
Schubert, M., Curt, A., Colombo, G., Berger, W., and Dietz, V.
(1999). Voluntary control of human gait: conditioning of magnetically evoked motor responses in a precision stepping task.
Exp. Brain Res. 126, 583–588.
Sherrington, C.S. (1910). Flexion-reflex of the limb, crossed
extension-reflex, and reflex stepping and standing. J. PhysiolLondon 40, 28–121.

Imaging brain/body dynamics in mobile humans

15

Slobounov, S., Hallett, M., Stanhope, S., and Shibasaki, H. (2005).
Role of cerebral cortex in human postural control: an EEG study.
Clin. Neurophysiol. 116, 315–323.
Slobounov, S., Hallett, M., Cao, C., and Newell, K. (2008).
Modulation of cortical activity as a result of voluntary postural
sway direction: an EEG study. Neurosci. Lett. 442, 309–313.
Slobounov, S., Cao, C., Jaiswal, N., and Newell, K.M. (2009). Neural
basis of postural instability identified by VTC and EEG. Exp.
Brain Res. 199, 1–16.
Song, W.G. and Giszter, S.F. (2011). Adaptation to a cortexcontrolled robot attached at the pelvis and engaged during locomotion in rats. J. Neurosci. 31, 3110–3128.
Stoffregen, T.A., Smart, L.J., Bardy, B.G., and Pagulayan, R.J.
(1999). Postural stabilization of looking. J. Exp. Psychol. Human
25, 1641–1658.
Stoffregen, T.A., Pagulayan, R.J., Bardy, B.G., and Hettinger, L.J.
(2000). Modulating postural control to facilitate visual performance. Hum. Movement Sci. 19, 203–220.
Sullivan, E.V., Rose, J., Rohlfing, T., and Pfefferbaum, A. (2009).
Postural sway reduction in aging men and women: relation
to brain structure, cognitive status, and stabilizing factors.
Neurobiol. Aging 30, 793–807.
Sutton, S., Braren, M., Zubin, J., and John, E.R. (1965). Evokedpotential correlates of stimulus uncertainty. Science 150,
1187–1188.
Suzuki, M., Miyai, I., Ono, T., Oda, I., Konishi, I., Kochiyama, T.,
and Kubota, K. (2004). Prefrontal and premotor cortices are
involved in adapting walking and running speed on the treadmill: an optical imaging study. NeuroImage 23, 1020–1026.
Suzuki, M., Miyai, I., Ono, T., and Kubota, K. (2008). Activities in
the frontal cortex and gait performance are modulated by preparation. An fNIRS study. NeuroImage 39, 600–607.
Tachtsidis, I., Elwell, C.E., Leung, T.S., Lee, C.W., Smith, M., and
Delpy, D.T. (2004). Investigation of cerebral haemodynamics by
near-infrared spectroscopy in young healthy volunteers reveals
posture-dependent spontaneous oscillations. Physiol. Meas. 25,
437–445.
Thakor, N.V. (1999). Biopotentials and electro-physiology measurement. In: The Measurement, Instrumentation, and Sensors
Handbook. (CRC Press: Boca Raton, FL).

Van der Kooij, H., Jacobs, R., Koopman, B., and Grootenboer, H.
(1999). A multisensory integration model of human stance control. Biol. Cybern. 80, 299–308.
Van der Kooij, H., Jacobs, R., Koopman, B., and Van der Helm, F.
(2001). An adaptive model of sensory integration in a dynamic
environment applied to human stance control. Biol. Cybern. 84,
103–115.
Vasavada, A.N., Peterson, B.W., and Delp, S.L. (2002). Threedimensional spatial tuning of neck muscle activation in humans.
Exp. Brain Res. 147, 437–448.
Wagner, J., Stephan, T., Kalla, R., Bruckmann, H., Strupp, M.,
Brandt, T., and Jahn, K. (2008). Mind the bend: cerebral activations associated with mental imagery of walking along a curved
path. Exp. Brain Res. 191, 247–255.
Wang, C.H., Wai, Y.Y., Kuo, B.C., Yeh, Y.Y., and Wang, J.J. (2008).
Cortical control of gait in healthy humans: an fMRI study.
J. Neural. Transm. 115, 1149–1158.
Willems, R.M., Hagoort, P., and Casasanto, D. (2010). Body-specific
representations of action verbs: neural evidence from right- and
left-handers. Psychological Science: a journal of the American
Psychological Society/APS 21, 67–74.
Wilson, M. (2002). Six views on embodied cognition. Psychon. Bull.
Rev. 9, 625–636.
Winter, W.R., Nunez, P.L., Ding, J., and Srinivasan, R. (2007).
Comparison of the effect of volume conduction on EEG coherence with the effect of field spread on MEG coherence. Stat.
Med. 26, 3946–3957.
Wirz, M., Colombo, G., and Dietz, V. (2001). Long term effects of
locomotor training in spinal humans. J. Neurol. Neurosur. Ps. 71,
93–96.
Woollacott, M. and Shumway-Cook, A. (2002). Attention and the
control of posture and gait: a review of an emerging area of
research. Gait Posture 16, 1–14.
Xu, P.J., Zhang, H., and Tao, X.M. (2008). Textile-structured electrodes for electrocardiogram. Text. Progress 40, 183–213.
Yang, J.F. and Gorassini, M. (2006). Spinal and brain control of human
walking: implications for retraining of walking. Neuroscientist
12, 379–389.

Klaus Gramann received
his
Pre-Diploma
in
Psychology from JustusLiebig-University Giessen,
his Diploma and PhD in
Psychology from RheinischWe s t f a e l i s c h - Te c h n i c a l
University Aachen in 1998
and 2002, respectively. He
worked as a post-doctoral
researcher in the Department
of Psychology, LudwigMaximilians-University
Munich from 2002 to 2007, and the Swartz Center for
Computational Neuroscience, University of California, San
Diego from 2007 to 2011. He is currently a visiting Professor
at the Brain Research Center of National Chiao Tung
University, Hsinchu, Taiwan. His research focuses on neural
dynamics of spatial orientation and visual attention and the
development of a mobile brain imaging method.

Joseph T. Gwin received his
BS and MS in Engineering
Sciences from Dartmouth
College, Hanover, in 2006
and 2008, respectively. In
2010 he received a MS
in Kinesiology from the
University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, where he is currently
a PhD candidate. He received
a National Defense Science
and Engineering Graduate
fellowship in 2009. His current work focuses on neuromuscular biomechanics and control with a particular focus on
human locomotion and novel approaches to locomotor rehabilitation in patients with neuromotor disabilities.

Received July 29, 2011; accepted August 10, 2011

16 K. Gramann et al.

Daniel P. Ferris received his BS
in Mathematics Education from
the University of Central Florida
in 1992, his MS in Exercise
Physiology from University
of Miami in 1994, and his
PhD in Human Biodynamics
from University of California,
Berkeley in 1998. He worked
as a post-doctoral researcher
in the UCLA Department of
Neurology from 1998 to 2000,
and in the Department of Electrical Engineering, University
of Washington 2000–2001. He is currently a Professor at
the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, in the School of
Kinesiology, Department of Biomedical Engineering, and
Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation. He is
also Associate Dean for Research in the School of Kinesiology.
He studies the neuromechanical control of human locomotion
in health and neurological disability. Two of his main research
areas are robotic lower limb exoskeletons and mobile brain
imaging during human locomotion.
Kelvin Oie received his BS in
Kinesiological Sciences in 1995,
his MA in Kinesiology in 1999,
and his PhD in Neuroscience and
Cognitive Sciences in 2006, all
from the University of Maryland
in College Park, MD where
he was a Graduate Research
Fellow. He joined the US Army
Research Laboratory in 2004
where he is currently a research
scientist and program manager
in the Translational Neuroscience Branch. His research has
examined adaptive processes in human multisensory integration for postural control, and is currently focused on advanced
approaches to measurement and understanding of human
behavioral and brain dynamics in complex environments.
Tzyy-Ping
Jung
received
a BS degree in Electronics
Engineering from the National
Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu,
Taiwan, in 1984, and MS and
PhD degrees in Electrical
Engineering from The Ohio
State University, Columbus, OH,
in 1989 and 1993, respectively.
He was a Research Associate of
the National Research Council,
National Academy of Sciences, USA in 1993–1996. He is
currently a Co-Director of the Center for Advanced
Neurological Engineering and an Associate Director of the
Swartz Center for Computational Neuroscience, University
of California, San Diego. He is also an adjunct Professor of
the Department of Bioengineering at UCSD and a Professor

in the Department of Computer Science, National Chiao Tung
University, Hsinchu, Taiwan. His research interests include
areas of biomedical signal processing, cognitive neuroscience, machine learning, time-frequency analysis of human
electroencephalogram, functional neuroimaging, and braincomputer interfaces and interactions.
Chin-Teng Lin received his PhD
degree in Electrical Engineering
from Purdue University, West
Lafayette, IN, USA in 1992. He
is currently the Provost and the
Chair Professor of the National
Chiao-Tung University. He was
elected an IEEE Fellow in 2005
for contributions to biologically
inspired information systems.
Dr. Lin has published over 140
journal papers, including over 80 IEEE transaction papers.
His research interests are in soft computing, brain-computer
interface, and cognitive neural engineering
Lun-De Liao received his BS and
MS degrees from the Department
of Mechanical Engineering,
Chung Yuan Christian University,
Taiwan, and the Deptartment of
Engineering Science from the
National Cheng Kung University,
Taiwan, in 2006 and 2008, respectively. He is currently studying in
the PhD program at the Institute
of Electrical Control Engineering
and the Brain Research Center, National Chiao Tung
University, Taiwan. His research interests include biophotonic functional imaging and advanced bio-sensing techniques.
Scott Makeig earned a bachelors
degree, ‘Self in Experience,’ at
the University of California
Berkeley and a PhD ‘Music
Psychobiology,’
from
the
University of California San
Diego. He returned to UCSD
in 2002 as founding Director
of the Swartz Center for
Computational Neuroscience,
as a Research Scientist, and is
currently an Adjunct Professor
of Neuroscience. His research is in the area of computational
cognitive neuroscience, particularly on analysis of highdensity EEG for which he has pioneered applications of time/
frequency analysis and independent component analysis
(ICA). He has defined and is now developing a novel imaging modality, Mobile Brain/Body Imaging (MoBI) combining
EEG, body motion capture, eye gaze and scene video, and
other information to understand the distributed EEG dynamics supporting motivated actions and interactions.

