Head movements based control of an intelligent wheelchair in an
indoor environment
Ericka Janet Rechy-Ramirez, Huosheng Hu and Klaus McDonald-Maier
School of Computer Science & Electronic Engineering, University of Essex, Colchester CO4 3SQ, U.K.
Email: ejrech@essex.ac.uk, hhu@essex.ac.uk, kdm@essex.ac.uk

Abstract—This paper presents a user-friendly human machine
interface (HMI) for hands-free control of an electric powered
wheelchair (EPW). Its two operation modes are based on head
movements: Mode 1 uses only one head movement to give the
commands, and Mode 2 employs four head movements. An EEG
device, namely Emotiv EPOC, has been deployed in this HMI to
obtain the head movement information of users. The proposed
HMI is compared with the joystick control of an EPW in an
indoor environment. The experimental results show that Control
Mode 2 can be implemented at a fast speed reliably, achieving
a mean time of 67.90 seconds for the two subjects. However,
Control Mode 1 has inferior performance, achieving a mean time
of 153.20 seconds for the two subjects although it needs only
one head movement. It is clear that the proposed HMI can be
effectively used to replace the traditional joystick control for
disabled and elderly people.

Keywords: Emotiv, human machine interface, electric powered wheelchair, hands-free control, head movement detection.
I. I NTRODUCTION
The current electric powered wheelchairs (EPWs) are
mostly joystick-driven, and cannot fully meet the need of the
disabled and elderly people whose autonomies are seriously
affected by decline in their motor function and cognitive
performance. Up to now, various hands-free HMIs have been
developed for the disabled and elderly people to control
EPWs by using shoulder, head and tongue motion, as well
as eye tracking. Jia et al. [7] developed a visual based HMI
for controlling a wheelchair by head gestures which were
recognized by detecting the position of the nose on user’s
face. Gajwani and Chhabria [2] used eye tracking and eye
blinking obtained by a camera mounted on a cap to control
a wheelchair. However, the performances of these HMIs are
likely affected by environmental noises such as illumination,
brightness, and the camera position. Additionally, eye tracking
may force and affect the vision of the user, causing tiredness
and dizziness.
On the other hand, some researchers have used electromyography signal (EMG) for controlling wheelchairs by performing
certain shoulder movements. Han et al. [4] used four EMG
electrodes on the Stenocleidomastoid muscle in order to detect
three shoulder movements (both shoulders up, right shoulder up and left shoulder up), achieving an average success
rate of 91.2%. While Moon et al. [8] only used two EMG
electrodes to detect shoulder movements in order to control
the wheelchair. Unfortunately some disabled people may not

1
.

be able to move their shoulders and bodies, alternative ways
are required. Huo and Ghovanloo [6] operated a wheelchair
by using tongue movements, in which the movement data
was obtained from a magnetic tracer on the tongue. This is
a little invasive for long-term usage since the user should
receive a tongue piercing embedded with the magnetic tracer.
Palankar et al. [9] controlled a wheelchair by using a mounted
robotic arm in a simulated environment. The robotic arm was
operated by means of a P300 brain computer interface (BCI),
in which the user was able to control the motion of the arm
and chair by focusing attention on a speciﬁc character on the
screen. Nevertheless, the response time of the BCI needs to
be improved for a real world.
Recently, a new EEG sensor, Emotiv EPOC, has been
available on the market to provide potential applications on
hands-free HMIs. It has three suites: ‘cognitiv suite’ to detect
thoughts, ‘expressiv suite’ to detect facial expressions and
‘affectiv suite’ to detect emotions, as well as a gyroscope to
detect head movements. In [3], it was used to recognize four
trained muscular events to steer a tractor: (i) eyes looking to
the right and jaw opened, (ii) eyes looking to the right and
jaw closed, (iii) eyes looking to the left and jaw opened, and
(iv) eyes looking to the left and jaw closed. Carrino et al. [1]
developed a system, namely “Virtual Move”, which allows
users to navigate through Google Street View (GSV) using
head movements, facial expressions, thoughts and emotional
states.
This paper proposes a novel HMI for hands-free control
of an electric powered wheelchair based on an EEG sensor
called Emotiv EPOC, which can detect head movements. It
has two modes: one uses only one head movement to control
the wheelchair and the other one uses four head movements.
Both control modes obtain the motion data from the gyroscope of the Emotiv EPOC headset. Two healthy subjects
have operated a wheelchair using both modes in an indoor
environment. It is important to say that once the proposed
HMI is running, the user does not need to keep the pose at
a speciﬁc position. Therefore, the fatigue of the user can be
greatly reduced. Both modes provide four control commands:
‘going forward’,‘turning right’,‘turning left’ and ‘stopping’.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section
II presents the research methodology, including a brief description of the Emotiv EPOC headset and the two control
modes, namely Mode 1 and Mode 2, used in our HMI.
Experimental results and analysis are given in Section III to

show the feasibility and performance of the two control modes
of the proposed HMI in the real-world setting. Finally, a brief
conclusion and potential future work are given in Section IV.
II. R ESEARCH M ETHODOLOGY
The proposed two control modes use the gyroscope of the
Emotiv EPOC headset in order to detect head movements.
As shown in Fig. 1, the Emotiv EPOC headset is a device
that measures EEG activity from 14 saline electrodes (plus
CMS/DRL references, P3/P4 locations) [5]. These electrodes
are arranged according to the 10/20 system, and their locations
are AF3, F7, F3, FC5, T7, P7, O1, O2, P8, T8, FC6, F4, F8 and
AF4. Besides the gyroscope, the Emotiv Software Development Kit for research includes an API to develop applications
using the three different emotiv suites: ‘cognitiv’, ‘expressiv’
and ‘affectiv’ suites. The ‘cognitiv suite’ recognizes conscious
thoughts of the user, the ‘expressiv suite’ recognizes facial
gestures and the ‘affectiv suite’ recognizes emotional states of
the user.

Fig. 2.

Gyroscope oscillations according to the head movements.

Fig. 1. Intelligent wheelchair setup for subject (Left) and the Emotiv EPOC
Headset (Right).

This research is focused on the use of the gyroscope of the
Emotiv. The gyroscope has two axes, X and Y, through which
the EmoEngine of the Emotiv sensor gives the position data
of the user’s head. As shown in the Fig. 2, the X axis reports
horizontal movements of the head, a negative value indicates
a left movement of the head and a positive value represents a
right movement of the head. On the other hand, the Y axis
identiﬁes vertical movements of the head, a positive value
corresponds to an up movement of the head and a negative
value indicates a down movement of the head.
A. Four head movements based control mode
In our proposed HMI, the four head movements based
control mode employs the motion data obtained by a twoaxis gyroscope inside the Emotiv sensor to recognize head
movements without the need of a camera. In this way, lighting
illumination effect is eliminated. As can be seen in the Fig. 3,
the user performs a speciﬁc head movement, e.g. Up, Down,
Right and Left, to issue a control command (‘going forward’,
‘stopping’, ‘turning right’ and ‘turning left’).
It should be noticed that after giving a control command,
the user unconsciously performs the opposite movement of
the head in order to return to the original position, which may
trigger by mistake the opposite control command. For this

Fig. 3.

Algorithm of the four head movements based control mode.

reason, a one-second delay was implemented for the user to
return his/her head to the neutral position. Moreover, the X
axis of the gyroscope is changing constantly when the user is
turning due to the movement of the wheelchair, therefore the
user cannot issue the ‘turning right’ command when ’turning
left’ has not completed and vice versa.
The turning angles of the head are determined by constants;
nevertheless, as shown in Fig. 4, the graphical user interface
of this control mode provides the facility of changing the
thresholds for left, right, up and down head movements at
execution time, as well as the wheelchair speed. In addition,

Fig. 4.
mode.

Graphical user interface of the four head movements based control
Fig. 5.

Algorithm of the one head movement based control mode.

this mode offers the options of adding new users, removing
users and saving the preferences of the user.
B. One head movement based control mode
The previous control mode offers four control commands,
each command is issued by a different head movement,
therefore four head movements are needed for controlling the
wheelchair. Nevertheless, some patients may only be able to
perform one head movement, for this reason this mode was
designed for controlling the wheelchair by using just one
head movement. This HMI only employs the ‘Y axis’ of the
gyroscope of Emotiv for the user to achieve ‘up’ or ‘down’
head movements. Since only one head movement is used
for triggering the four control commands (‘going forward’,
‘turning to the right’, ‘turning to the left’ and ‘stopping’), an
automation process for displaying the commands is provided
in this mode. As can be seen in the Fig. 5, this automation
process is based on a rotation technique in which each control
command is displayed one second, so the user is able to control
the wheelchair by employing just one head movement instead
of four.
To use this HMI, ﬁrstly the user has to select the desired
head movement to control the wheelchair, either ‘up head
movement’ or ‘down head movement’. Once that this head
movement has been selected, it cannot be changed during the
execution of the program and only this movement will be used
to control the wheelchair. As can be seen in the Fig. 6, the
HMI starts in the state of ‘stopping’ and below it, a ‘loading
symbol’ is displayed.
In order to display the control commands the user has to
perform the head movement selected previously in the HMI.
Once this has done, each control command will be displayed
for a second. This action was taken into account due to the
fact that if the control command symbols are displayed just
after the command was triggered, maybe by the time when the
desired control command symbol is displayed, the user does
not longer need it. So, if the user wants to give a certain control

Fig. 6.
mode.

Graphical user interface of the one head movement based control

command, ﬁrstly he needs to perform the head movement to
give the instruction of displaying the control commands and
then he has to wait for the desired control command until it
appears and performs the head movement in order to execute
it.
It is important to say that the electrodes of the Emotiv
headset are not deployed, as well as the user does not have to
maintain the head pose once the control command is issued, so
that the user fatigue in both control modes can be minimized.
III. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS
Both control modes of the proposed HMI, ‘one head movement’(Control Mode 1) and ‘four head movements’(Control
Mode 2), and the ‘joystick’ mode operated with the hand
have been tested by controlling a wheelchair in an indoor
environment. Two healthy subjects (a female and a male)
have operated the wheelchair using the three different control
modes. Five experiments were carried out by each control
mode. In each experiment, the subject has to follow the route

Fig. 7.

The route to follow in the indoor environment.

shown in Fig. 7 without hitting the obstacles.
Control Mode 1 was tested using ‘slow’ and ‘medium’
speeds, namely ‘Mode1-SL’ and ‘Mode1-MD’ for convenience, respectively. Since the response of Control Mode 2
is fast, a ‘fast’ speed (Mode2-FS) were also deployed in
experiments apart from ‘slow’ (Mode2-SL) and ‘medium’
(Mode2-MD) speeds. The slow and medium speeds of the
wheelchair correspond approximately to a motion of 14.28
and 22.22 centimeters per second, respectively. While the fast
speed is approximately equivalent to 27.27 centimeters per
second. Finally, the speed employed by the joystick mode
was approximately 60 centimeters per second. All speeds were
calculated only for the ‘going forward’ control command.
Traveling times and trajectories were recorded. Means and
standard deviations of the traveling times were calculated. The
position of the wheelchair was obtained by a Vicon system that
tracks the ﬁve markers attached to the wheelchair. To achieve
a good performance of both control modes, the Emotiv sensor
has to be attached properly to the user’s head, for this reason
a head band was used. In both control modes, the electrodes
were not deployed.
Fig. 8 shows the times used by Subject ’A’ to travel the
route ﬁve times per control mode. Subject ‘A’ had experience
on using all control modes at the moment of doing the
experiments. As can be seen, the fastest control mode was
the joystick, it took less than 30 seconds to ﬁnish the path.
The second fastest control mode was the ‘Mode2-FS’, which
took 71 seconds at the worst time and 64 seconds at the best
time. The 3rd fastest control mode was ‘Mode2-MD’, ﬁnishing
the path in all the experiments between 84 seconds and 96
seconds. On the other hand, although ‘Mode2-SL’ is slightly
faster than ‘Mode1-MD’, they had almost similar times (141
and 136 seconds) in two experiments (1 and 5). The biggest
difference between them was only about 24 seconds in the rest
of the experiments. Finally, it took more than 170 seconds to
ﬁnish the route in all the experiments at ‘Mode1-SL’.
Fig. 9 shows the times achieved by Subject ’B’ repeating the

Fig. 8. Time in seconds for Subject ’A’ following the route for ﬁve times
using three different control modes.

Fig. 9. Time in seconds for Subject ’B’ following the route for ﬁve times
using three different control modes.

route ﬁve times per each control mode. Before doing experiments, Subject ‘B’ did the route once with all control modes.
As in the case of Subject ’A’, the ‘joystick’, the ’Mode2-FS’
and the ‘Mode2-MD’ were the three fastest control modes,
being 29, 75 and 97 seconds for their worst times, and 25, 65
and 88 seconds for their best times, respectively. In spite of the
fact that ’Mode1-MD’ is supposed to be faster than ‘Mode2SL’, which only happened in two experiments of ﬁve. Even
though, in the experiment number three, the slowest control

Fig. 10. Means and standard deviations of the traveling times for Subjects
’A’ and ’B’ using three control modes.

mode for Subject ’B’ was ‘Mode1-MD’, ﬁnishing the route
in 210 seconds against 201 seconds for ‘Mode1-SL’. In four
experiments, the slowest control mode for Subject ’B’ was
‘Mode1-SL’, being its worst time 203 seconds and its best
time 176 seconds.
Fig. 10 shows the means and standard deviations of the
traveling times for Subjects ’A’ and ’B’ at each control mode.
It can be seen that ‘joystick’, ‘Mode2-FS’ and ‘Mode2-MD’
have similar means and standard deviations of the traveling
times between two users. The traveling times of both subjects
using these three control modes are clustered closely around
their means 23.60 and 27.80 for ‘joystick’, 66.40 and 69.40 for
‘Mode2-FS’, and 88.80 and 92 for ‘Mode2-MD’ with standard
deviations of 0.89 and 1.64 for ‘joystick’, 2.70 and 3.64 for
‘Mode2-FS’, and 4.86 and 3.67 for ‘Mode2-MD’. Note that
‘Mode1-SL’ has the largest means of traveling times for both
users (182.20 and 193.40 seconds), and ‘Mode1-MD’ has the
largest standard deviations between two users, i.e. 9.70 and
29.51 respectively.
Fig. 11 shows the boxplots of the traveling times of both
subjects in the three different control modes. Although the
medians of the traveling times for Subject ’A’ are smaller than
the medians of the traveling times for Subject ’B’ among three
control modes, their minimum traveling times are almost the
same. The maximum traveling times of three control modes are
almost similar between both subjects. However, the maximum
traveling times for Subject ’B’ in three control modes are
greater than the maximum traveling times for Subject ’A’
corresponding to these control modes.
As can be seen in the Figs. 12 and 13, both subjects were
capable of following the route shown in Fig. 7, without hitting
the obstacles using the three control modes at different speeds.
Nevertheless, the survey that was answered by both subjects
indicates that the favorite control mode after the joystick

Fig. 11.
modes

Traveling times of Subjects ’A’ and ’B’ at three different control

control mode was ‘Mode2-FS’. With respect of Control Mode
1, both users prefer ‘Mode1-SL’ over ‘Mode1-MD’ due to the
fact that they feel more conﬁdent at the slow speed to give
the control commands. For all these reasons, it is clear that
the ‘four head movements based control mode’ with a fast
speed is reliable for controlling a wheelchair, and the ‘one
head movement based control mode’ should be run at a slow
speed.
IV. C ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, a novel head gestures based HMI is proposed
for hands-free control of EPWs. It uses head movements
detected by the motion data obtained from the gyroscope
of an Emotiv sensor. It has two control modes, one mode
uses only one head movement (‘up’ or ‘down’) and the other
one employs four head movements (‘up’, ‘down’, ‘right’ and
‘left’). Four control commands were implemented, namely
‘going forward’, ‘turning right’, ‘turning left’ and ‘stopping’.
In both control modes, the user does not have to maintain the
head movement during the control command. Experimental
results show that the proposed HMI is reliable for controlling
a wheelchair.
The future work will be focused on the implementation of
a facial expressions based mode using the Emotiv sensor for
controlling a wheelchair, in which the user can choose his/her
most comfortable facial expressions to generate the control
commands.
Acknowledgements:
The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the UK
EPSRC Global Engagements grant EP/K004638/1 and the EU
Interreg IV A 2 Mers Seas Zeeën Cross-border Cooperation
Programme SYSIASS project: Autonomous and Intelligent
Healthcare System (http://www.sysiass.eu/). The 1st author has
been supported by the Conacyt studentship of the Mexican

Fig. 12.

Trajectories of Subject ’A’ employing the three control modes.

Fig. 13.

Trajectories of Subject ’B’ employing the three control modes.

Government. Our thanks also go to Robin Dowling for his
technical support during the research.
R EFERENCES
[1] F. Carrino, J. Tscherrig, E. Mugellini, O. Abou Khaled, and R. Ingold.
Head-computer interface: a multimodal approach to navigate through real
and virtual worlds. Human-Computer Interaction. Interaction techniques
and environments, pages 222–230, 2011.
[2] P.S. Gajwani and S.A. Chhabria. Eye motion tracking for wheelchair
control. International Journal of Information Technology, 2(2):185–187,
2010.
[3] J. Gomez-Gil, I. San-Jose-Gonzalez, L.F. Nicolas-Alonso, and S. AlonsoGarcia. Steering a tractor by means of an EMG-based human machine
interface. Sensors, 11(7):7110–7126, 2011.
[4] J.S. Han, Z. Zenn Bien, D.J. Kim, H.E. Lee, and J.S. Kim. Humanmachine interface for wheelchair control with EMG and its evaluation. In
Proc. of the 25th Annual Int. Conf. of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine
& Biology Society, volume 2, pages 1602–1605. IEEE, 2003.

[5] http://www.emotiv.com/researchers/. Emotiv software development kit
(sdk) for research.
[6] X. Huo and M. Ghovanloo. Using unconstrained tongue motion as an
alternative control mechanism for wheeled mobility. IEEE Transactions
on Biomedical Engineering, 56(6):1719–1726, 2009.
[7] P. Jia, H.H. Hu, T. Lu, and K. Yuan. Head gesture recognition for
hands-free control of an intelligent wheelchair. Industrial Robot: An
International Journal, 34(1):60–68, 2007.
[8] I. Moon, M. Lee, J. Chu, and M. Mun. Wearable EMG-based HCI for
electric-powered wheelchair users with motor disabilities. In Proceedings
of the 2005 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation,
pages 2649–2654. IEEE, 2005.
[9] M. Palankar, K.J. De Laurentis, R. Alqasemi, E. Veras, R. Dubey,
Y. Arbel, and E. Donchin. Control of a 9-DoF wheelchair-mounted robotic
arm system using a P300 brain computer interface: Initial experiments.
In Robotics and Biomimetics, 2008. ROBIO 2008. IEEE International
Conference on, pages 348–353. IEEE, 2008.

