SUBJECT-SPECIFIC CHANNEL SELECTION FOR CLASSIFICATION OF MOTOR
IMAGERY ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHIC DATA
Yuan Yang1,3 , Olexiy Kyrgyzov1,3 , Joe Wiart2,3 , Isabelle Bloch1,3
1

Institut Mines-Télécom, Télécom ParisTech/CNRS LTCI, Paris, France
2
Orange Labs R&D, Issy les Moulineaux, France
3
Whist Lab, France
ABSTRACT

Brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) are systems that record brain signals and then classify them to generate computer commands. Keeping a minimal number of channels (electrodes) is essential for developing portable BCIs. Unlike existing methods choosing channels
without optimization of time segment for classification, this work
proposes a novel subject-specific channel selection method based on
a criterion derived from Fisher’s discriminant analysis to realize the
parametrization of both time segment and channel positions. The
experimental results show that the method can efficiently reduce the
number of channels (from 118 channels to no more than 11), and
shorten the training time, without a significant decrease of classification accuracy on a standard dataset.
Index Terms— Brain computer interfaces, electroencephalography, biomedical signal processing, machine learning
1. INTRODUCTION
Brain-computer interface (BCI) systems capture subject’s intentions
by recording his brain signals and then translate them into commands to build a direct communication between brain and computer [1]. The most popular brain signal used in BCI is electroencephalogram (EEG) because of its low cost and high time resolution [2]. EEG studies show that imaginary movements of different
body parts can cause a power attenuation of sensorimotor rhythms,
i.e. µ and β rhythms, called event-related desynchronization (ERD),
at corresponding “active” cortex areas [3]; meanwhile, a power enhancement of sensorimotor rhythms called event-related synchronization (ERS) might be observed at other “idling” areas [3]. As
the left brain controls the right body, the right hand typically elicits ERD at hand representation area of the left brain, while a foot
movement may cause an ERS at hand representation areas of one
or both side(s) of the brain [3]. Thus, motor imagery of different
body parts can be identified by classifying ERD/ERS patterns, which
gives birth to motor imagery BCI [2]. However, ERD/ERS patterns
are typically short-lasting (half to few seconds) and occur in specific frequency bands [4]. The poor signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of
raw EEG signals and the mixture of different sources of brain activities (e.g. visual-related activities and motor imagery) make it
difficult to extract discriminative features for BCI classification [5].
Although multi-channel recording with a large number of channels
(e.g. 118) and spatial filtering algorithms (e.g. common spatial patterns (CSP) [5]) can improve the SNR and extract discriminative features from overlapping signals, this setting reduces the portability
This work was partially supported by grants from China Scholarship
Council and Orange Labs. The authors would like to thank Dr. Sylvain
Chevallier (Université de Versailles St-Quentin) for some useful discussions.

978-1-4799-0356-6/13/$31.00 ©2013 IEEE

and practicability of BCI so that it represents a main drawback for
final users [4]. Moreover, their effectiveness depends on the choice
of the frequency band and the time segment of the EEG data [5].
To develop an easy to use system, several algorithms were proposed to reduce the number of channels in BCI [6, 7, 8]. However,
they simply addressed the issue of channel selection by spatial information, disregarding the potential impact of time and frequency
information. As a result, the optimal combination of time, frequency
and channel position may not be achieved in a BCI design. Although a recent study showed that a broad frequency band (8-30Hz)
that covers both µ (8-12Hz) and β (18-25Hz) bands can generally
be used when employing a feature, called time domain parameters
(TDPs), the existing methods mainly work with the popular band
power (BP) feature, which is sensitive to frequency band and time
segment.
Here, we propose a channel selection method for TDP features.
In this method, a novel criterion based on Fisher’s dicriminant analysis is proposed to measure the discrimination power of TDP features
extracted from different channels and different time segments, so as
to find the optimal time segment and subset of channels for BCI design. The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the
experimental data. A brief introduction to TDP is given in Section 3.
A novel criterion for measuring the discrimination power of TDP
features is proposed in Section 4. The time segment optimization
and channel selection procedures are presented in Section 5. Experimental results are shown in Section 6.
2. DATA DESCRIPTION
The dataset IVa [9] from BCI competition III is used in this study. As
it consists of EEG signals recorded using 118 electrodes, this dataset
is very suitable for a fine selection of EEG channels. Five subjects,
denoted “aa”, “al”, “av”, “aw” and “ay”, have performed 280 trials
of cue-driven motor imagery (right hand: 140 trials, right foot: 140
trial) during the recording. The acquisition process was driven by visual cues, presented during 3.5s, and separated by randomly chosen
intervals, ranging from 1.75 to 2.25s. Subjects were required to perform the corresponding motor imagery task during the presentation
of a cue and to relax in the intermission. Ground truth is available for
all subjects in this dataset. The aim of the experiment is to perform
classification of the signal, for each subject, into two classes (right
hand, right foot), with as few electrodes as possible. As the training data are recorded before the testing data in real applications, the
first 70 trials for each class were used for training, and the remaining
ones for the independent testing in this study.
3. TIME DOMAIN PARAMETERS
The EEG signals are bandpass filtered between 8 and 30 Hz using
a 5th order Butterworth filter. For one channel (electrode) and one

1277

ICASSP 2013

trial, we denote by x(t) the filtered EEG signal in a time segment
[t0 , t0 + T − 1]. Time domain parameters (TDPs) are a set of broad
band (i.e. 8-30Hz) EEG features defined in the time domain [10]:
T DP (p) = log(

var

t∈[t0 ,t0 +T −1]

(

dp x(t)
)), p = 0, 1, 2, ...
dtp

(1)

The logarithm is applied here to make the distribution of TDPs approximately normal, since the linear classifier we use here typically
assumes that the input features follow Gaussian distributions [1].
Note that the TDP of order 0, A = T DP (0) , is the logarithmic
band power (BP) of the filtered signal. It characterizes the EEG pattern in terms of amplitude. As EEG signal can be considered as a
mixture of sinusoidal waves, the derivative provides the information
on frequency. The TDP of order 1, M = T DP (1) is a feature that
reflects the EEG pattern in terms of frequency, and the TDP of order
2, C = T DP (2) , reflects the change in frequency. We use these
three TDPs, [A, M, C], in this work, since they carry more information than the only BP feature, and have clearer physical meanings
than TDPs of higher orders in BCI research.
4. A CRITERION BASED ON FISHER’S DISCRIMINANT
Fisher’s discriminant analysis (Fisher’s LDA) is a very popular classification algorithm in BCI research [1], because it has a very low
computational cost and usually yields good results for motor imagery BCIs [11]. It projects high-dimensional data onto a direction
and performs a linear classification in this one-dimensional space.
The optimal projection is found by maximizing the separation between two classes. Let us assume that we have two classes of observations, h and f . In a one-dimensional feature space, the separation
between two classes is defined using the Fisher criterion [1]:
FC =

(µh − µf )2
(σ h )2 + (σ f )2

(2)

where µh and µf are the mean values of the feature over all trials for
classes h and f , respectively, (σ h )2 and (σ f )2 are the variances of
the feature.
In feature selection, F C can be used to evaluate the discrimination power of each single feature [1]. However, it is not suitable to
evaluate the discrimination power of a group of features. Thus, we
propose a novel and simplified criterion based on Fisher’s discriminant, called F score, F̂ , and we use it to estimate the discrimination
power of a group of features (here TDPs):

Fig. 1. General scheme of our method.
on-set (tn = 0, 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0s, T = 2s) for each single trial i at
channel e for class χ (χ ∈ {h, f }). Then, the discrimination power
of channel e during one time segment is estimated by the F score:
F̂e =
with

(3)

where k·k2 denotes the L2-norm (Euclidean norm), and tr(·) the
trace of a matrix. Compared to F C, F̂ is a derived version relying
on the Euclidean distance between class centers, µ
~h − µ
~ f 2 , to
estimate the difference between classes, and employing the trace of
the covariance matrix to evaluate the variance within a class. Note
that this simple expression avoids estimating a projection direction
as required by the general multi-dimensional expression of LDA.
5. TIME-SPATIAL OPTIMIZATION FOR CHANNEL
SELECTION
This method aims to find the optimal time segment and subset of
channels for classification. The general scheme of the method is
χ
χ
shown in Fig. 1. First, TDPs, [Aχ
e (i), Me (i), Ce (i)], are computed
from five overlapping time segments [tn , tn +T −1], n = 1, 2, ..., N
(N = 5) of 0-2.0s, 0.5-2.5s, 1.0-3.0s, 1.5-3.5s and 2.0-4.0s after cue

(4)

χ

χ
T DP e

K
1 X
= χ
T DPeχ (i)
K i=1

(5)

χ

χ
Tg
DP e =

2

µ
~h − µ
~f 2
F̂ =
tr(Σh ) + tr(Σf )

(Āhe − Āfe )2 + (M̄eh − M̄ef )2 + (C̄eh − C̄ef )2
Ãhe + Ãfe + M̃eh + M̃ef + C̃eh + C̃ef

K
X
1
χ
(T DPeχ (i) − T DP e )2
K χ − 1 i=1

(6)

where K χ is the number of training trials for class χ.
We first select the optimal subset of channels in each time segment [tn , tn + T − 1]. Existing methods typically determine the
number of selected channels based on user’s experience [8] or exhaustive searching strategy [6, 7], which is either arbitrary or timeconsuming. Here, we propose an automatic approach, by considering the properties of both features and classifier to determine the size
of the subset of selected channels.
Let F̂m be the largest F score among all channels in the time
segment [tn , tn + T − 1]:
n
o
(7)
F̂max = max F̂e | e ∈ {1, ..., 118}
The relative discrimination power of each channel e is defined as:

1278

ρF (e) =

F̂e
F̂max

(8)

The value of ρF (e) is between 0 and 1. A larger ρF (e) indicates a
larger relative discrimination power. Thus, a threshold ρ̂ can be set
to extract the channels with ρF (e) > ρ̂ to be used for classification.
A lower value of ρ̂ tends to pick out more channels. In practice, it
would be better to have training trials with five times as many as the
dimensionality of features to guarantee a good performance of the
classifier we are using [12]. As each channel yields three TDPs, the
range of ρ̂ can be shrunk to [P, 1.0] to feed the classifier, where P is
obtained by:
min N um(P ) s.t.
P

Table 1. Number of selected channels for each subject.
User
aa al av aw ay
Number of channels
8
6 11 10 11

(9)

P ∈ [0, 1.0], N um(P ) ≥ K/3R
where N um(P ) is the number of selected channels with ρF (e) >
P , K is the number of trials for training, and R is the ratio of the
number of trials to the number of features for a specific classifier
(here R = 5). Then, different subsets of channels according to different ρ̂ ∈ [P, 1.0] are used to train the classifier. The optimal ρ̂ is
obtained by seeking the subset with the lowest training error (ERR)
in the classifier training. The training error is defined as the observed
overall disagreement between classification outputs and true classes.
Let ρ̂∗ be the optimal ρ̂, so it is obtained by:
ERR(ρ̂∗ ) = min {ERR(ρ̂) | ρ̂ ∈ [P, 1.0]}

(10)

∗

If there are more than one ρ̂ obtained by Equation (10), we use the
largest ρ̂∗ as the optimal one.
For each time segment [tn , tn + T − 1], the optimal subsets
of channels S(tn ) is obtained by using ρ̂∗ (tn ), the optimal ρ̂ in the
time segment [tn , tn +T −1]. Denote by ERR(ρ̂∗ (tn )) the training
error achieved by S(tn ). The optimal time segment [t∗ , t∗ + T − 1]
is found by seeking the lowest training error ERR(ρ̂∗ (tn )) among
all time segments:
ERR(ρ̂∗ (t∗ )) = min {ERR(ρ̂∗ (tn ))}
tn

(11)

so as to obtain the optimal subset of channels S(t∗ ) in the optimal
time segment [t∗ , t∗ + T − 1].
6. RESULTS
The optimal time segment and subset of selected channels for each
subject are shown in Fig. 2. The numbers of selected channels are
listed in Table 1. The number of selected electrodes, which is no
more than 11 (see Table 1), is less than that of commercial BCI system Emotiv EPOC, which has 14 electrodes. Thus, the number of
electrodes selected by our method is still reasonable and acceptable
for general application (e.g. in a game environment). The computational time for finding the optimal combination of time segment
and subset of channels depends on the full number of channels and
the number of time segments. Here, for 118 channels and 5 time
segments, it only needs 11 seconds (Matlab 7.10.0, Window 7 Professional 64bits, CPU 2.66GHz, RAM 2.0Go).
For most subjects, the selected channels are mainly around the
hand representation area of the left brain (C3), because motor imagery of the right hand typically elicits strong ERD in this area (see
Fig. 3). However, the selected channels may also exist in the right
hand representation area for some subjects. Subject “aw” is an example, where the selected channels are mainly in the right brain. Further examination of the ERD/ERS maps for this subject shows that
motor imagery of the right foot elicits very strong ERS in the hand
representation area of the right brain (C4) (see Fig. 4), which explains why the channels with large discrimination power are mainly
in the right brain.

Fig. 2. Channel distribution of the F score and selected channels
(marked by bold points) for the subject-specific optimal segment for
each subject.

The TDPs are extracted from the optimal time segment and selected channels for the classifier training and the independent testing. In the testing, the classification results are evaluated by the classification accuracy (ACC), which is defined as the observed overall
agreement between classification outputs and true classes. The mean
classification accuracy for all subjects is denoted by ACC. The classification results are compared with those obtained by using both BP
and TDPs features extracted from all channels with CSP (3 pairs
of spatial filters [13]) and from just three commonly used channels
(C3, Cz, C4) at foot and hand representation areas (see Table 2). In
the comparison, the time segment is from the cue on-set to the cue
ending. The features are computed in this time segment. The pairedsample t-test was employed to reveal the statistical significance of
the difference between the results of different methods. From Table 2, we can see that the results obtained by using TDPs are better
than those using BP features for most subjects (even if the difference is not significant p > 0.05), indicating the interest of using
TDPs in motor imagery BCI. The results obtained using our method
(ACC = 0.78) are significantly better than using three commonly
used channels i.e. C3, Cz, C4 (ACC = 0.72 when using TDPs,
ACC = 0.71 when using BP, all p < 0.05). Compared to the results obtained using all channels with CSP, the mean classification
accuracy of our method is better than using full-cap CSP with BP
features (ACC = 0.76, not significant with p > 0.05) and equal
to using full-cap CSP with TDP features (ACC = 0.78 when using
TDPs). For some subjects (“aa” and “ay”), our method even yields
higher ACC than full-cap CSP. Thus, it meets the goal of largely reducing the number of electrodes (from 118 channels to no more than
11), without a major loss of classification performance. Moreover,
we use a relatively shorter time segment (2s length) than other methods (3.5s length). For most subjects (except “aw”), the classification
outputs were obtained before the ending of cue, which indicates that
less time (here, less than 3.5s) is required for recording training data
from those subjects.

1279

Table 2. Evaluation results for different methods.
CSP
C3+Cz+C4
Our method
User
BP
TDPs
BP
TDPs
TDPs
aa
0.46
0.47
0.64
0.59
0.67
al
0.94
0.94
0.79
0.81
0.88
av
0.68
0.69
0.58
0.59
0.61
aw
0.94
0.94
0.73
0.78
0.81
ay
0.75
0.84
0.81
0.82
0.92
mean 0.76
0.78
0.71
0.72
0.78
8. RELATION TO PRIOR WORK
Although earlier studies have presented the need for channel selection in reducing the electrodes required in a BCI system [6, 7, 8],
they simply addressed the issue based on spatial information, disregarding the potential impact of temporal information. This contribution, with the proposition of a novel algorithm, emphasizes the
potential effects of the chosen time segment on channel selection.
Meanwhile, a novel criterion derived from Fisher’s criterion is proposed to evaluate the discrimination power of a group of features,
and applied on time domain parameters (TDP), which overcomes
the disadvantage of Fisher’s criterion [1] on TDP feature selection.
Fig. 3. Time-frequency visualization of ERD/ERS for Subject “ay”,
using the time interval between -1s (i.e. 1s before cue on-set) and 0s
(i.e. cue on-set) as the baseline.

9. REFERENCES
[1] K.R. Müller, M. Krauledat, G. Dornhege, G. Curio, and B. Blankertz,
“Machine learning techniques for brain-computer interfaces,” Biomed
Tech (Berlin), vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 11–22, 2004.
[2] J.R. Wolpaw, N. Birbaumer, D.J. McFarland, G. Pfurtscheller, and T.M.
Vaughan, “Brain-computer interfaces for communication and control,”
Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 113, no. 6, pp. 767–791, 2002.
[3] G. Pfurtscheller, C. Brunner, A. Schlogl, and FH Lopes da Silva, “Mu
rhythm (de)synchronization and EEG single-trial classification of different motor imagery tasks,” NeuroImage, vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 153–159,
2006.
[4] Y. Yang, S. Chevallier, J. Wiart, and I. Bloch, “Time-frequency selection in two bipolar channels for improving the classification of motor
imagery EEG,” in Proc. IEEE EMBC, 2012, pp. 2744–2747.
[5] B. Blankertz, R. Tomioka, S. Lemm, M. Kawanabe, and K.R. Müller,
“Optimizing spatial filters for robust EEG single-trial analysis,” IEEE
Signal Process. Mag., vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 41–56, 2008.
[6] A. Barachant and S. Bonnet, “Channel selection procedure using Riemannian distance for BCI applications,” in Proc. IEEE/EMBS NER,
2011, pp. 348–351.

Fig. 4. Time-frequency visualization of ERD/ERS for Subject “aw”,
using the time interval between -1s (i.e. 1s before cue on-set) and 0s
(i.e. cue on-set) as the baseline.

[7] T.N. Lal, M. Schröder, T. Hinterberger, J. Weston, M. Bogdan, N. Birbaumer, and B. Schölkopf, “Support vector channel selection in BCI,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 1003–1010, 2004.

7. CONCLUSION

[8] Y. Wang, S. Gao, and X. Gao, “Common spatial pattern method for
channel selelction in motor imagery based brain-computer interface,”
in Proc. IEEE EMBS, 2006, pp. 5392–5395.

In this paper, we proposed a novel method and a new measure of discrimination power, relying on subject-specific time-spatial analysis
for channel selection. The results show that our method can largely
reduce the number of channels (from 118 channels to no more than
11), and shorten the training time, without a significant decrease of
classification performance on a standard dataset (BCI competition
III dataset IVa). The number of electrodes selected by our method is
less than the one of a commercial BCI system, Emotiv EPOC, so the
number is still reasonable and acceptable for general public applications, such as BCI games. This method can be used in designing
BCI systems using few channels (electrodes) for subject-specific applications. Our approach can also be used to let the user decide on
the best compromise between accuracy, easy use and portability, according to his needs. In the future, we will evaluate the robustness
of this method to data evolution by random selection of training and
testing data, and also perform experiments on more datasets.

[9] B. Blankertz, G. Dornhege, M. Krauledat, K.R. Muller, V. Kunzmann,
F. Losch, and G. Curio, “The Berlin brain-computer interface: EEGbased communication without subject training,” IEEE Trans. Neural
Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 147–152, 2006.
[10] C. Vidaurre, N. Kramer, B. Blankertz, and A. Schlogl, “Time domain parameters as a feature for EEG-based brain-computer interfaces,” Neural Netw., vol. 22, no. 9, pp. 1313–1319, 2009.
[11] F. Lotte, M. Congedo, A. Lécuyer, F. Lamarche, and B. Arnaldi, “A
review of classification algorithms for EEG-based brain–computer interfaces,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 4, pp. R1–R14, 2007.
[12] A. Jain and D. Zongker, “Feature selection: Evaluation, application,
and small sample performance,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 153–158, 1997.
[13] Y. Yang, S. Chevallier, J. Wiart, and I. Bloch, “Automatic selection of
the number of spatial filters for motor-imagery BCI,” in Proc. ESANN,
2012, pp. 109–114.

1280

