I.J. Education and Management Engineering, 2019, 2, 34-43
Published Online March 2019 in MECS (http://www.mecs-press.net)
DOI: 10.5815/ijeme.2019.02.04
Available online at http://www.mecs-press.net/ijeme

A Review based on Brain Computer Interaction using EEG Headset
for Physically Handicapped People
A F M Saifuddin Saif, MD. Ryhan Hossain, Redwan Ahmed, Tamanna Chowdhury
Department of Computer Science, Faculty of Science and Technology, American International University –
Bangladesh (AIUB)
Received: 21 October 2018; Accepted: 17 December 2018; Published: 08 March 2019

Abstract
The universes’ most complex structure is the human brain. To analyze its characteristics, many studies and
experiments have been carried out in a proper and systematic manner. From these researches and experiments,
scientists have learnt to communicate with computer using brain and hence, BCI has been developed. A BrainComputer Interface (BCI) provides a communication path between the human brain and the computer system.
With the advancement of information technology and neuroscience, there has been a flow of interest in turning
fiction into reality. This research investigated existing works of BCI with the purpose developing a system that
allows physically challenged people to communicate with other persons and helps to interact with the external
environments with the help of computers. Components like, comparison of invasive and non-invasive
technologies to measure brain activity, evaluation of control signals (i.e. patterns of brain activity or brain
waves that can be used for communication), development or improvement of algorithms for translation of brain
signals into computer commands, specific frequency components like electroencephalography (EEG), artificial
neural network (ANN) etc. are used to accomplish such a feat. With such, the developments of new BCI
applications are emerging every day.
Index Terms: Brain Computer Interface (BCI), Brain Wave, Electroencephalography (EEG), Artificial Neural
Network (ANN).
© 2019 Published by MECS Publisher. Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of the Research
Association of Modern Education and Computer Science.
1. Introduction
From the time when the computer was invented, people wanted to make it easier for everyone to control the
computer. With that thought, people started to research and invented new technologies day by day just to make
* Corresponding author. A F M Saifuddin Saif
E-mail address: saif@aiub.edu

A Review based on Brain Computer Interaction using EEG Headset for Physically Handicapped People

35

the use of the computer easier than before. And the time came when technology evolved and scientists were
able to develop a way using which physically handicapped people will be able to use computing devices. From
that aspect Human Computer-Interaction (HCI) came followed by Brain-Computer Interface is introduced as
improved phase.
With the advancement of technology, nowadays researchers have been able to make human brain interaction
with computer more efficiently than before. Human brain emits electron signals called brain waves.
Researchers have developed devices (EEG Headset) that can receive those brain waves and send it to the
computer for further research. The brain wave signals are known as Electroencephalography (EEG) signals.
The Electroencephalography (EEG) signals are generated in the brain through the voltage difference of ions
moving through the neurons. There are thousands of neurons in a human brain. Each specific neuron generates
some specific frequency for some specific command. The EEG signals are nothing but the brain activity in the
form of electro-voltaic waves. Mostly the signals are used to monitor the brain activity of people. But
nowadays EEG contains a fully developed sector which is known as BCI or Brain Computer Interaction.
Through BCI, people can control computer and other devices just by thinking phases. In the previous
researches, many researchers used EEG headset to collect the brain waves and then converted them to digital
signals, some of them also used additional amplifiers that increase frequencies of the wave to get improved
output. Then the signals went through an AI system which converts them into executable commands.
Currently, electrophysiological signals used in BCI can be described into three categories: specific frequency
components of EEG produced spontaneously during mechanism of brain thinking, such as alpha waves, beta
waves and so on; second category is brain evoked Event- Related Potentials (ERP), i.e. neural electrical activity
of cerebral cortex induced by specific sensory stimulus or event operation and third category is the electrical
activity signals of neurons in group directly acquired from electrode implanted into the specific region of the
brain cortex. Using these waves BCI applications have been made possible. EEG signals have mostly four
wave patterns, i.e. Alpha, Beta, Theta and Delta. Alpha waves are produced during a person is thinking about
anything consciously. Beta waves are generated when a person feels anxious, worried or angry, mostly when
the user’s state of mind changes and Delta waves are generated subconsciously by a person. And finally, theta
waves and some delta waves are generated when user is having a dream. During the recording of the signals,
sometimes Amplitude of the signal reaches an observable length. The observable peak is called Event Related
Potential (ERP). ERP defines that an event has occurred in the brain or a thought has been generated in the
brain. This research illustrates investigation that has been concluded on Brain Computer Interaction.
2. Related Work
With the help of BCI, the use of computer is becoming easier even for people with physical disabilities.
More and more researches are done based on BCI. Researchers have already developed systems that will help
the disabled people to control computers like home appliances, wheelchair, mobile phone, and more developed
systems are coming every day.
There are many ways using which researchers are developing BCI technology but the main equipment for a
BCI device is an EEG headset which is used by many researchers on many researches. The process is explained
in steps; at first, brain signals needs to be collected for processing purpose. Signal acquisition involves
collecting the electroencephalography signals generated in the human brain. EEG signals are generated due to
the electrical activity on the brain scalp. Under the scalp, there is a flow of ionic current which are collected
through the EEG head set as brain signals. There are two ways to collect the brain waves first one is inverse
and the second one is non-inverse. In the inverse method, the electrodes need to put inside one’s brain to collect
the brain waves. It is more accurate and gives some clear signals without any noise but it is more dangerous for
the users. For the second method, the user only needs to put the headset on his/her head to get the readings.
This method is not as accurate as the previous one but it is safer. For many researches, the second method has
been chosen.
Up until now, researchers have developed a number of systems to control computing activity using a number

36

A Review based on Brain Computer Interaction using EEG Headset for Physically Handicapped People

of ways. Shanmugapriya B. et al., 2014, Hundia ,2015, G. Ambica and B. Sujatha, 2015, U. Hoffmann et
al.,2008 have developed systems that allow users both able-bodied and physically challenged to control
computer using EEG technology [1, 2, 4, 15]. Ramesh C R and Prof. Lyla B Das, 2015 have developed an
interface that will help a speech impediment person to speak using BCI device [10]. Sneha Pushpa S and
Chandrashekar N S ,2007, B. SUJATHA and G. AMBICA ,2015, Nikhil R. Folane and R. M. Autee, 2016, P.
kumar et al., 2017 have developed interface using which home appliances can be controlled [6,8,12,18]. V.
Rajesh Kannan and K. O. Joseph, 2004, Jaromir Svejda et al., 2015, Kale Swapnil T. et al., 2014, T. Prasanth et
al., 2017 have developed robot controlling system using BCI technology [7, 13, 17, 20, 25]. Pradeep Kumar et
al have developed an interface that allows the user to control smart phone [11]. Using P300 Event-Related
Potential Kale Swapnil T. et al., 2014 have developed a system through which people will be able to control
internet browser [16]. R. Chandana Priya and K. Aparna, 2017, S. Naresh Babu and G. Nagarjuna Reddy, 2015
have developed mind-controlled wheelchair for disabled people using BCI [21, 24]. Even computer gaming has
been done using BCI technology. Srinath Vikramakumar and Dr. V. Dhanakoti, 2017 have developed a system
that allows users to play a computer game using their mind [22]. More and more technologies are being
developed with modern technology. This research intends to investigate previous methods, frameworks that
previous researchers have used and the results they achieved for validation.

3. Review based on Methods
Most of previous research used Electroencephalography (EEG) based biomedical signal processing system to
perform computer operations by manipulating the brain activity. The users have to explicitly manipulate the
brain activity to produce signals that can be used to operate the computer. The brain waves are obtained with
the help of scalp electrodes. EEG signals are collected and then processed to interpret the command and
execute the desired task.
To control computer with thinking is not a fiction. It is now possible by using BCI and researchers have

A Review based on Brain Computer Interaction using EEG Headset for Physically Handicapped People

37

proved that computer can be controlled using mind, let it be controlling a wheelchair, home appliances,
personal computer or even playing a game. Table 1 represents different methods used to make fiction into
reality.
Table 1. Qualitative Study of Different Methods based on Brain Computer Interaction.
Method
Artificial Neural Network (ANN)
[1,12,20]

Advantages
Reduces the fatigue of normal computer
users.

Fast Fourier Transformation (FFT) [2,4]

The system can be used by people to gain
thought process control over various
robotic systems.

Event-Related Potential (ERP) [10]

ERP provides measures of neural activity
with very high temporal resolution.

Non-invasive BCI [3,6,8,13,17,19]

Very fast

P-300 [15,16]

Requires no user training

Disadvantages
The system must undergo training to
understand user’s thoughts.
The system doesn’t chiefly work on the
basis of measuring the FFT and doesn’t
measure the amplitude and the frequency
response curve of the brain signals.
Only sufficiently strong potentials
generated synchronically by open fields
are recordable across the scalp
Least signal clarity
The P300 can be influenced by different
human factors such as attention,
motivation and fatigue.

With EEG signals and different methods, researchers have developed systems that can help physically
challenged people in a very adaptable manner. Using artificial neural network, a computer controlling system
has been developed. However, for the neural network to work properly, the system is needed to go through
training. If the training set is not good enough, the result may also not be good. While training is a problem,
P300 can be used which requires no training for the users who would use the devices. Using FFT, previous
researchers developed a system that can help physically disabled people to control robotic movements like
prosthetic arm and leg, wheelchair, and even some movements of a multipurpose robot. Even though FFT is
used in variety of researches, its response is slow. However, non-invasive BCI can be used here as it is very
fast but it has the least signal clarity. Event-related potential provides measures of neural activity with very
high temporal resolution but one of the main limitations of the ERP technique is that only sufficiently strong
potentials generated synchronically by open fields are recordable across the scalp.
4. Review based on Frameworks
When it comes to Brain Computer Interaction, brainwave is the power source of all research. In most of the
research framework, brainwave is collected from the user and after implementing different algorithms, the data
is sent to the computer or any other devices that are wished to be controlled. Shanmugapriya et al., 2014
collected brainwave of users and performed computer operations using neural network [1]. Shanmugapriya et
al.(2014), Nikhil R. Folane and R. M. Autee, Madhu Nakirekanti et al., 2016 also developed their system using
neural network [12,20]. But for their system to give the best result, training data set for the system has to be
rich, otherwise result will not be satisfactory. Hundia, 2015 did the same thing but he specifically used alpha
brainwave to accomplish his task [2]. Ramesh C R and Prof. Lyla B Das, 2015 used brainwave to accomplish
voice for speech impediments by sending the wave to a signal processing unit [10].
The brainwave signal has also been used to remotely control devices as well. Sneha Pushpa S and
Chandrashekar N S , 2007 used brainwave to control home appliances using Bluetooth system by transmitting
the wave to an ARM 7 processor [6]. V. Rajesh Kannan and K. O. Joseph, 2004 have also used the Bluetooth
technology to control mobile robot using brainwave [7]. But the response of the device is slow. To solve that
problem Kale Swapnil T et al., 2014 used non-invasive BCI technology which is very fast [17]. They extracted
the features of the neural signal collected from the user, decoded the signals and then send it to a navigation
system to control robot navigation using non-invasive BCI.
Just like Kale Swapnil T et al., 2014, Mr. Ramesh C R and Prof. Lyla B Das, 2015, Sneha Pushpa S and

38

A Review based on Brain Computer Interaction using EEG Headset for Physically Handicapped People

Chandrashekar N S, 2007, G. Ambica and B. Sujatha, 2015, Jaromir Svejda et al., 2015, Wei Tuck Lee et al.,
2013 have also used non-invasive BCI to get fast response [3, 6, 8, 13, 19]. Even though non-invasive BCI is
fast, using it gives the least signal clarity. This problem can be solved using ERP as it provides measures of
neural activity with very high temporal resolution.
Pradeep Kumar et al., 2017 used the brainwave to make an assistive framework using a smartphone by using
neurosky headset and sending the brainwave data to the phone using Bluetooth [11]. Nikhil R. Folane and R. M.
Autee, 2016 made a brainwave controlled wheelchair control system by sending the brainwave to a computer
system where the brainwave is analyzed using MATLAB, level analyzer and finally using decision maker, the
data is sent to the wheelchair through ARM processor [12]. Jaromir Svejda et al., 2015 also made a robot
movement controlling system using brainwave by using neuro headset, translation algorithm and sending the
data using Bluetooth device [13]. But as they used non-invasive BCI, the response is fast in comparison with
other frameworks.
Emily Mugler et al., 2008 used brainwave to control internet browser of a computer by amplifying the
brainwave collected from users and using their add-ons for Mozilla Firefox internet browser using P300 EventRelated Potential [16]. Usage of P300 gave them an extra advantage as they did not need to train the users to
use the system. But P300 can be influenced by different human factors such as attention, motivation and fatigue.
Hence, it might not give the best response all the time.
5. Review based on Experimental Results
Akshaya T. et al., 2014 proposed work is an Electroencephalography (EEG) based biomedical signal
processing system to perform computer operations by manipulating the brain activity [1]. The users have to
explicitly manipulate brain activity to produce signals that can be used to operate computer. The brain waves
are obtained with the help of scalp electrodes. EEG signals are collected and then processed to interpret the
command and execute the desired task. The real-time implementation requires training in the computer
according to one’s thoughts and actions through a neural network. The main advantage of their work is that it
reduces operation difficulty. Hundia (2015) developed a system that can be used by the differently abled people
to gain thought processed control over various prosthetics, wheelchairs and functioning robotics systems [2].
But the main weakness of their research was the lack of accurate data to compare the accuracy of their system.
Mr. Ramesh C R and Prof. Lyla B Das, 2015 achieved 81.17% accuracy and also when the device is active and
taking command, it goes to attention mode and for idle time, it goes for mediation mode. Also Computing et al.,
2015 went through a proper FFT algorithm analysis [4] that was not mentioned in [1, 2, 3].
The program described by J. Katona et al., 2014, enable users to investigate how brain wave signals are
measured by the EEG headset - alternate in time and how they depend on the changes of brain activity [5]. On
the basis of the results, the information obtained by the processed brain waves can be used in several research
areas, for instance, medical research, multimedia applications, games etc. But when it comes to using only
home appliance Sneha Pushpa S and Chandrashekar N S, 2007 presented the design and implementation of
non-invasive type of Brain-Computer Interface technique to control home appliances using EEG based brain
signals that works on controlling the physical devices, so the paralyzed and the physically disabled people can
independently do their work like switching on and off the lights and fans by their own [6]. This result mostly
depends on one person’s attention level which cannot be the same all the time. G. Ambica and B. Sujatha ,2015
used eSense Attention meter and showed intensity of a user's level of mental “focus” or “attention”, such as
that which occurs during intense concentration and directed (but stable) mental activity. Its value ranges from 0
to 100 [8]. Distractions, wandering thoughts, lack of focus, or anxiety may lower the attention meter level.
With trained system, accuracy can be increased significantly. Ramesh C R and Prof. Lyla B Das, 2015
experimented the results by showing that even without training, the average accuracy obtained is around 67%
[10]. Their research expected that if proper training is done before testing, the accuracy can be increased to
100% which shows that the idea implemented can be very useful in real life for the intended people.
The use of regular algorithm DFT which Pradeep Kumar et al., 2017 showed in DFT analysis of the captured

A Review based on Brain Computer Interaction using EEG Headset for Physically Handicapped People

39

signals has been performed to extract useful features [11]. Recognition of 9 mental commands from 8
participants has been performed using HMM classifier with an accuracy of 68.69% but in the other hand using
the alpha wave to recognize eye blinking Jaromir Svejda et al., 2015 found that the average reliability of
robotic device response on the signal of eye blinking was 65.45%. On the other hand, the response on the state
of open eyes was around 98% but Nikhil R. Folane and R. M. Autee, 2016 found out that with 70%
concentration user can control a wheelchair [12]. But the response of the wheelchair is slower than expected
which is less accurate. In case of disabled subjects, Ulrich Hoffmann et. (2008) was able to classify 100%
accuracy which was done for their subjects [15]. But in such case, they clearly showed an acceptable result but
some of the previous research resultant were not able to provide any perimeter data they had used and also
there was no evidence of how they used it while only the possible outcome had shown [16, 17, 18, 19].
For using the EEG headset for normal people, R. Chandana Priya, K. Aparna, 2017 used eye blinking giving
a close result of command execution. Besides, the proposed system demonstrated the possibility of forecasting
the disabled people’s vigilance in real time. The proposed work uses a hearing assistance from a single
electrode that makes the wheelchair to perform four operations (right, left, and front, back) without GUI unless
system requires any control device with high-level power [21]. But T. Prasanth et al., 2017 device allowed
paralyzed people to move around by using their mind. It transmits the auditory data to the mind of a deaf
person and allows them to hear. By using our mind, we may control video games also [25]. Both of their
devices have some issues, such as there is an occurrence of harmful effects on the environment by using these
technologies. They get very few electric signals by placing electrodes in Non - invasive manner. By placing
electrodes in an invasive manner creates a scar tissue in the brain.
In case of BCI based gamming Srinath Vikramakumar and Dr. V. Dhanakoti’s, 2017 described the
application of brain wave signal in gaming controller [22]. The controller system was completely hands-free
and made it usable for people with disability but the description only showed how the brain reacts when the
game starts. Table 2 shows performance summarization for different datasets.
Table 2. Performance Summarization of Different Methods for Different Datasets
Method
Fast Fourier Transform (FFT),
Neural Network[1]
Fast Fourier Transform (FFT)[2]

Event-Related Potential ERP[3]

Event-Related Potential ERP[10]

eSense[8]
Emotiv SDK[13]
Discrete Fourier Transform
(DFT)[11]
Artificial Neural Network
(ANN)[12]
P300[15,16]

Dataset
Electrooculography (EOG)
Electromyography (EMG)
Not Available
Datasheet of PCF8574AN
Datasheet of L293D
Datasheet of ISD 25120
Addressing modes of ISD 25120
Datasheet of LM386
Datasheet of PCF8574AN
Datasheet of L293D
Datasheet of ISD 25120
Addressing modes of ISD 25120
Datasheet of LM386
Data Level analyzer unit (LAU)
Not Available

Accuracy/Reliability
Triticale explanation
Response delay was 2.89 seconds

Average accuracy 81.17%

Average accuracy 67%

80% accuracy
98% when the user’s eye is open

Hidden Markov Model (HMM)

accuracy of 68.69%

Not Available

70% average concentration

http://bci.epfl.ch/p300

100% accuracy

6. Observation and Discussion
For BCI, most researchers used EEG headset. The gathered brainwave is then run through different

40

A Review based on Brain Computer Interaction using EEG Headset for Physically Handicapped People

algorithms and transformed to computer language to control computing activity. When it comes to a single
method or framework, all of them have advantages and disadvantages. When ANN can be used to make a
system easier to use for users, it also needs to train the system using the best possible dataset. When NonInvasive BCI is used for faster service, it has the drawback of not being able to get clear signal. ERP, with the
ability to get better signal data, it has the drawback of having the ability to get the data only across the scalp.
When it comes to the results, systems developed using FFT are suited for physically disabled persons but
lacks the communication speed [2]. Using ERP, the accuracy rate can be increased but it would need the users
to be trained [3, 10]. Even though ANN is better for users, researchers have found only 70% accuracy when
users are concentrating [12]. Such results found from previous research that a system using Emotiv SDK gave
98% accuracy but the user has to keep their eye open. Up until now, best result has been shown by the system
using P300 based BCI and accuracy rate is 100%.
Above all most of the previous research did not show the parameter and also any numerical values because
EEG headset basically does that task for them. Furthermore, almost all of them used either DFT or the IDEFT
algorithm for detecting brain waves and converting them. And as for noise reduction, backpropagation or other
algorithms can be used. Adding an amplifier can also prevent the relic frequencies from interfering. NeuroSky
EEG headset, mind wave headset by Neurosky and NeuroSky Brainwave sensor are basically the same but
different version of the EEG headset used in previous research. Also, the main difference exists among research
is mostly the different placement and number of scalps and the size. Many of the projects are based on only the
alpha wave but for several command executions there is also need for Beta waves which was negated in many
cases.
7. Conclusion
Above all, previous research contains one specific sequence regarding way of performing various tasks
related to brainwave. Almost all of the researchers have used Electroencephalography (EEG) headset to collect
brainwave data. The EEG headset collects brain signals and then converts them to digital signals. The
researchers may decide which type of brainwave they may accept (i.e. Alpha, Beta, Delta, Theta) and which
may discard and then it will be sent to a computer to process the signal with reference to the analysis of the data.
The subjects are quite possible to use the alpha or several types of brainwaves to gain control over electronic
devices. By recording the data over a few seconds, the subject can gain control over devices like robots,
wheelchair and other smaller devices. With this system, the user does not have to use much body muscle
movements. Hence, these types of systems or interface are best suited for physically disabled people. So this
research finally remarks based on previous research investigation that there is room for further improvement in
the BCI sector. The negligence of Beta waves, the command execution and the response time needs to
improved further more. The noise margin is also needed to be improved. With more research and advanced
investigation, physically disabled people who cannot even walk but only has brain activity may one day be able
to communicate with the world like any other normal person with the help of Brain-Computer Interface.

Acknowledgements
This research immensely supported through knowledge sharing from ABERT Research Team (AIUB Brain
Engineering Research Team) in the Department of Computer Science, American International University –
Bangladesh (AIUB).

A Review based on Brain Computer Interaction using EEG Headset for Physically Handicapped People

41

References
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]

[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]

[17]

[18]
[19]

S. B, Akshaya T, K. K, and Anbarasu V, “Controlling Computer Operations using Brain-Wave
Computing”, International Journal of Computational Engineering Research, vol. 4, pp. 76–81, 2014.
R. Hundia, “Brain Computer Interface-Controlling Devices Utilizing The Alpha Brain Waves”,
International Journal of Scientific & Technology Research, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 281–285, 2015.
Ramesh C R, L. B. Das, “Brain Computer Interface Based Assistive Device”, 2015 Int. Conf. Adv.
Comput. Commun. Informatics, pp. 330–334, 2015.
M. Computing, G. Ambica, and B. Sujatha, “STUDY AND APPLICATION OF BRAIN WAVES
(ALPHA , BETA ) FOR USER AMBIENT ENVIRONMENT CONTROL”, vol. 4, no. 10, pp. 197–200,
2015.
J. Katona, I. Farkas, T. Ujbanyi, P. Dukan, and A. Kovari, “Evaluation of the NeuroSky MindFlex EEG
headset brain waves data”, SAMI 2014 - IEEE 12th Int. Symp. Appl. Mach. Intell. Informatics, Proc.,
pp. 91–94, 2014.
S. Pushpa, C. N. S, and P. G. Student, “EEG based Brain-Computer Interface for Controlling Home
Appliances”, Int. J. Innov. Res. Sci. Eng. Technol. (An ISO Certif. Organ., vol. 3297, no. 6, pp. 9870–
9877, 2007.
V. Rajesh and K. O. Joseph, “Brain Controlled Mobile Robot Using Brain Wave Sensor”, pp. 77–
82,2004.
B. Sujatha and G. Ambica, “EEG Based Brain Computer Interface for Controlling Home Appliances”,
Int. Res. J. Eng. Technol., pp. 2395–56, 2015.
S. G. Mason and G. E. Birch, “A general framework for brain-computer interface design”, IEEE Trans.
Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 70–85, 2003.
Mr. Ramesh C R, Prof. L. B. Das, “Brain Computer Interface Device for Speech Impediments”, 19-21
November 2015, Int. Conf. on Controll, Communication & Computing India (ICCC).
P. Kumar, R. Saini, P. K. Sahu, P. P. Roy, D. P. Dogra, and R. Balasubramanian, “Neuro-phone: An
assistive framework to operate Smartphone using EEG signals”, 2017.
N. R. Folane, R. M. Autee “EEG Based Brain Controlled Wheelchair for Physically Challenged People”,
International Journal of Innovative Research in Computer and Communication Engineering, Vol. 4,
Issue 1, January 2016.
J. Svejda, R. Zak, R. Senkerik, and R. Jasek, “Using Brain - Computer Interface for Control Robot
Movement”, vol. 8, no. Cd, 2015.
A. L. S. Ferreira, L. C. de Miranda, E. E. C. de Miranda, and S. G. Sakamoto, “A Survey of Interactive
Systems based on Brain-Computer Interfaces”, SBC J. Interact. Syst., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 3–13, 2013.
U. Hoffmann, J. M. Vesin, T. Ebrahimi, and K. Diserens, “An efficient P300-based brain-computer
interface for disabled subjects”, J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 167, no. 1, pp. 115–125, 2008.
Emily Mugler, Michael Bensch, Sebastian Halder, Wolfgang Rosenstiel, Martin Bogdan, Niels
Birbaumer, Andrea Kübler, “Control of an Internet Browser Using the P300 Event-Related Potential”,
International Journal of Bioelectromagnetism, Vol. 10, No. 1, pp. 56 - 63, 2008.
Kale Swapnil T, Mahajan Sadanand P, Rakshe Balu G, Prof. N.K.Bhandari, “Robot Navigation control
through EEG Based Signals”, International Journal Of Engineering And Computer Science, ISSN:23197242, Volume 3, Issue 3, Page No. 5109-5113, March-2014.
Praveen kumar, M.Govindu, A.Rajaiah, “Automatic Home Control System Using Brain Wave Signal
Detection”, IJESC, ISSN-2321-3361, 2014.
Wei Tuck Lee, Humaira Nisar, Aamir S. Malik, Kim Ho Yeap, “A Brain Computer Interface for Smart
Home Control”, 2013 IEEE 17th International Symposium on Consumer Electronics (ISCE).

A Review based on Brain Computer Interaction using EEG Headset for Physically Handicapped People

42

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

Madhu Nakirekanti, Dr. Raja Murali Prasad, Eliyaz Mahammad, K. Narsimha Reddy, “BRAIN WAVE
CONTROLLED ROBOT USING MATLAB”, International Journal of Mechanical Engineering and
Technology (IJMET), Volume 8, Issue 12, pp. 750–759, Article ID: IJMET_08_12_081, December
2017.
R. ChandanaPriya, K. Aparna, “MIND WAVE SENSOR CONTROLLED WHEEL CHAIR”,
International Journal of Advance Engineering and Research Development, Volume 4, Issue 9,
September -2017.
Srinath Vikramakumar and Dr. V. Dhanakoti, “Mind wave Based Gaming Controller Using User
Friendly EEG Signal Acquisition”, International Journal of Innovations & Advancement in Computer
Science, ISSN 2347 – 8616, Volume 6, Issue 11, November 2017.
Dipti Pawar, Kapil Kamale, Ishaan Singh, Vishwajeet Kharote, Prajwal Goswami., “A Survey on
Thoughts to Text Using Brainwave Patterns”, International Journal of Innovative Research in Computer
And Communication Engineering, Vol. 5, Issue 5, May 2017.
S. Naresh Babu, G. Nagarjuna Reddy, “AN INTELLIGENT ROBOT CONTROL USING EEG
TECHNOLOGY”, International Journal of Application or Innovation in Engineering & Management
(IJAIEM), Volume 4, Issue 3, March 2015.
T. Prasanth, P. Dharma Teja, K. DasmanthaRao, M. N. Shyam Kumar, M. Rama Krishna,
“CONTROLLING OF ROBOT USING BRAIN SIGNALS WITH MATLAB”, SSRG International
Journal of Computer Trends and Technology (IJCTT), ISSN: 2231-2803, Special Issue, April 2017.
B. Sivakumar and K. Srilatha, “A novel method to segment blood vessels and optic disc in the fundus
retinal images”, Res. J. Pharm. Biol. Chem. Sci., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 365–373, 2016.

Authors’ Profiles
A.F.M. Saifuddin Saif received PhD from Faculty of Information Science and Technology,
University Kebangsaan Malaysia (UKM) in 2016. He received M.Sc. in Computer System
Engineering (Software System) from University of East London, UK and B.Sc. (Eng.) degree in
Computer Science and Engineering from Shahjalal University of Science and Technology,
Bangladesh in 2012 and 2008, respectively. Most of his contributions in Computer Vision and
Artificial Intelligence Research field were published in ISI Q1 journals. He has published many papers in ISI
indexed Journals, Scopus indexed Journals, Book Chapters, Conferences and Proceedings. He served as
Technical Committee Members, Reviewers, Guest Speakers, Session Chairs in many Conferences and
Workshops. Currently, Dr. A.F.M. Saifuddin Saif is an Assistant Professor at Faculty of Science and
Technology, American International University – Bangladesh. Before joining the university, he did Post
Doctorate at Faculty of Information Science & Technology, University Kebangsaan Malaysia. He spent more
than 6 years in IT industry such as Advanced Software Development, Web eMaze etc as IT researcher. His
research interests include Image Processing, Computer Vision, Artificial Intelligence, Augmented Reality, 3D
reconstruction and Medical Image Processing.

MD. Ryhan Hossain is an undergraduate student of Computer Science and Engineering (CSE)
program at the Faculty of Science and Information Technology of American International
University – Bangladesh (AIUB). He is currently also serving as Teaching Assistant in the
Department of Computer Science. His research interests and passion are mostly based on Brain
Computer Interaction, Artificial Neural Network, Computer Vision, Machine Learning, Data
mining.

A Review based on Brain Computer Interaction using EEG Headset for Physically Handicapped People

43

Redwan Ahmed Rahul is an undergraduate student of Computer Science and Engineering (CSE)
program at the Faculty of Science and Information Technology of American International
University-Bangladesh (AIUB). His research interests and passion are mostly based on
Convolutional Artificial Neural Networks, Brain Computer Interface, EEG signal processing
also included in the field of Computer Vision, Image Processing and Machine Learning.

Tamanna Chowdhury is an undergraduate student of Computer Science and Engineering (CSE)
program at the Faculty of Science and Information Technology of American International
University – Bangladesh (AIUB). She has received Dean's List Honors Award 2017 & 2016 for
her academic performance. Her research interests and passions are mostly based on Brain
Computer Interaction, Artificial Neural Network, Machine Learning, Data mining.

How to cite this paper: A F M Saifuddin Saif, MD. Ryhan Hossain, Redwan Ahmed, Tamanna
Chowdhury,"A Review based on Brain Computer Interaction using EEG Headset for Physically Handicapped
People", International Journal of Education and Management Engineering(IJEME), Vol.9, No.2, pp.34-43,
2019.DOI: 10.5815/ijeme.2019.02.04

