International Journal of Humanoid Robotics
c World Scientific Publishing Company

USING BRAIN-COMPUTER INTERFACES TO DETECT HUMAN
SATISFACTION IN HUMAN-ROBOT INTERACTION

EHSAN TARKESH ESFAHANI
Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of California Riverside
Riverside, California 92521, United State
etark001@ucr.edu
V. SUNDARARAJAN.
Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of California Riverside
Riverside, California 92521, United State
vsundar@engr.ucr.edu
Received 3 May 2010
Accepted 2 Augest 2010
This paper discusses the use of a brain computer interface (BCI) to obtain emotional
feedback from a human in response to the motion of humanoid robots in collaborative
environments. The purpose of this study is to detect the human satisfaction level and
use it as a feedback for correcting and improving the behavior of the robot to maximize
human satisfaction. This paper describes experiments and algorithms that use human
brains activity collected through BCI in order to estimate the level of satisfaction. Users
wear an electroencephalogram (EEG) headset and control the movement of the robot
by mental imagination. The robots responds to the mental imagination may not be
the same as human mental command and this will affect the emotional satisfaction
level. The headset records brain activity from 14 locations on the scalp. Power spectral
density of each EEG frequency band and four largest Lyapunov exponents of each EEG
signal form the feature vector. The Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon test is then used to rank
all the features. The highest rank features are then selected to train a linear discriminant
classifier (LDC) to determine the satisfaction level. Our experimental results show an
accuracy of 79.2% in detecting the human satisfaction level.
Keywords: Brain Computer Interfaces, Human Robot Interaction, EEG, Satisfaction
detection, Emotional Response

1. Introduction
Research in humanoid robotics, especially into developing robots with social behavior, has gained a lot of attentions in the last few decades. This research aims to
develop robots that can function as a co-worker in social places such as schools and
hospitals. 1–5 In addition to having anthropomorphic shape, such robots must act
well socially to be accepted by humans and to cooperate effectively. One aspect of
acting socially is the ability of the robot to recognize a humans emotional state and
to respond properly.
1

2

Ehsan Tarkesh Esfahani, Sundararajan V.

Verbal and non verbal cues have been widely used to detect human emotion. Vocal
tract formation, 6,7 the change in the tone of speech and behavioral speech production process (e.g duration, pause) are some of the features that have been used to
detect the humans emotion from auditory signals. 8,9
Facial expressions can also be used to detect emotional state. Position or displacement of specific points and regions of the face are used to find a correlation between
emotion and facial expression. 10,11 It should be noted that using facial expression
is limited to face-to-face interaction and may not always be detectable.
Most recent works interpret anxiety from physiological signals such as heart rate,
peripheral temperature, and skin conductivity for emotion detection. 12–14
However, the main challenge in emotion detection arises from the fact that emotion is an internal state that may not be reflected through behavior. Therefore,
facial expression and speech do not always coincide with internal mood. This brings
the idea of using electroencephalographic (EEG) signals for detecting the humans
emotion. Frontal lobe activity which is characterized in terms of decreased power
in certain frequency bands has been consistently found to be associated with emotional states. 15 The best known correlates of emotionality found with EEG involve
prefrontal asymmetry-that is, a positive affect is associated with greater activity
in the left prefrontal region than in the right side, and negative affect with the
reverse. 16
Brain activity signals have been also used to detect the level of emotion during seeing
emotionally-charged scenes. 17–19 Zhang and Lee used a combination of functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and EEG signals to analyze and classify the
emotional states stimulated by a natural scene. 17 Schaaff and Schults used single
EEG signals recording to classify the humans emotion induced by emotional pictures
into three categories of pleasant, natural and unpleasant and reported and average
recognition rate of 47%. 18 Frantzidis et al. 19 used multichannel EEG evoked by
pleasant and unpleasant stimulus to classify humans emotion. Using Mahalanobis
(MHV) distance-based classifier and support vector machines (SVMs), they could
achieve overall classification rates of 79.5% and 81.3% in the discrimination of pleasant and unpleasant emotions. However less attention have been made to the change
of emotional state stimulated by robots behavior.
In this paper, we focus on endowing a robot with the ability to recognize human
satisfaction. We investigate the feasibility of EEG based brain computer interfaces
for detecting the positive, negative or neutral states of mind of the human in response to the robots behavior. Section 2 reviews the characteristics of EEG based
brain-computer interfaces and describes the overall procedure of using brain activity for satisfaction detection. Section 3 discusses the experimental study that we
conducted to develop the algorithms. Section 4 describes the application of power
spectral density, largest Lyapunov exponent and Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon test to
obtain candidate features and Section 5 uses these features to devise classifiers to
distinguish between the emotions. Finally section 6 presents and discusses the results of the classification.

USING BRAIN COMPUTER INTERFACE TO DETECT HUMAN SATISFACTION...

Feature Generation

Preprocessing

3

EEG Acquisition

Emotion
Classification

Feature Selection
robot

Sim

ir on
n Env
ulatio

ment

Subject observing the robot's
response to his command

Fig. 1. Process of developing EEG based emotional detection.

2. EEG Characteristics
Mental tasks and emotional states activate certain parts of the brain. This activation
is a product of millions of neuronal firings within those regions of the brain. The goal
of an EEG based brain computer interfaces is to detect patterns in brain activities
and relate them to mental task (in this case, emotional states). This procedure is
composed of the steps shown in Figure.1.
The recorded brain signal includes several artifacts such as muscle movement,
eye movement, etc. The preprocessing block rejects the artifacts from the electrical
signal after it has been amplified. The feature generation and selection blocks transform the preprocessed signals into a feature vector. The generated feature vector is
a set of characteristics of EEG signals that discriminate between the various emotional states. The classification block uses the feature vector to classify an unknown
event based on a set of observed events (training data).
3. Data Acquisition
The simulation environment consists of a maze through which the human user tries
to make the robot navigate. The robots navigation is a combination of three movements: moving forward, turning left and turning right. The experiment involves a
human participant who monitors the robots navigation in the maze and tries to

4

Ehsan Tarkesh Esfahani, Sundararajan V.

correct robots movements.
Participants were asked to sit in a self-selected comfortable posture, 40 cm away
from a computer screen. They were then asked to mentally control the navigation
of the robot through the maze in the simulation environment.
The robot navigates in the maze through a sequence of movements. Each movement
consists of two parts. During the first part (mental command), the direction that
the robot should go is shown to the participant visually on the computer screen.
The participant is asked to mentally control the robots motion on the screen in that
given direction. For example, an image of a right arrow appears on the screen to
indicate that the user is to imagine the robot turning to the right. Mental command
lasts for about 2 seconds and the robot does not move during this time. During
mental command, the participant will be in a neutral state of emotional arousal.
The second part of the movement is the response of the robot to the mental command. In reality, the participant does not have control over the robots motion. The
sequence of turns has been predetermined and occurs regardless of the users control
input. Thus, sometimes the robot turns in the direction desired by the user and
sometimes it turns in the opposite direction. Correspondingly, the participant will
experience satisfaction in the former cases and dissatisfaction in the latter cases.
EEG data is recorded continuously during each part of the movement. EEG data
during mental command is labeled as Neutral. If the direction of mental command
and robots respond are the same, we label the EEG data recorded during the robot
response as Satisfied otherwise it would be labeled as Unsatisfied.
We conducted this experiment with four male subjects (aged between 21 and 35) in
two different sessions. Each session requires 74 movements (148 data point) for the
robot to complete the maze. It thus gives a total number of 1184 data points. 80%
of these are used for training the classifiers and the remainder is used for testing.
Before extracting the features, the first and the last 10% of the recorded trial for
each movement are chopped to eliminate the transitional effects.
EEG potentials were recorded with the Emotiv neuroheadset, 20 using the following
electrodes located at standard positions of the 10–20 International System: AF3,
AF4, F7, F3, F4, F8, FC5, FC6, T7, T8, P7, P8, O1, and O2 (see Figure.2).
The signals were recorded at a sampling rate of 2048 Hz through a C-R high-pass
hardware filter (0.16Hz cutoff), pre-amplified and low-pass filtered at 83Hz cutoff
and preprocessed using two notch filters at 50 Hz and 60 Hz to remove the main
artifacts. The signal is down-sampled further to 128 Hz.
Figure.3 shows the signal at channel F3 (Figure.2) for two movements. Each
movement has two data segments. In the first movement, the direction of robots
movement is the same as mental task and therefore the data segment associated
with 1st robot response is labeled as Satisfied. However in this second movement,
the two directions are not the same and data segment is labeled as Unsatisfied. All
data segments associated with mental command are labeled as neutral class.

USING BRAIN COMPUTER INTERFACE TO DETECT HUMAN SATISFACTION...

AF3

AF4
F3

F7

F4

FC5
T7

5

F8
FC6
T8

Reference
Electrodes
P7

P8
O1

O2

Fig. 2. Electrode placement for recording EEG data.

1st movement
1st mental
command

1st robot
response

2nd movement
2nd mental
command

2nd robot
response

EEG Data
Visual
Stimulus
Robot's
Movement
Emotional
Class

Moving Forward
Natural

Satisfied

Turning Left
Natural

Unsatisfied

Fig. 3. EEG signals recorded at channel F3 for the first two movements.

4. Feature Extraction
To analyze the EEG signals, five frequency bands are usually considered: delta (0-4
Hz), theta (4-8 Hz), alpha (8-13 Hz), beta (13-30 Hz) and gamma (30-100 Hz). It
has been shown that the power of these sub-bands carry useful information about
the emotional states. 21,22 Davidson et al. 21 have shown that disgust caused less
alpha power in the right frontal region than happiness while, happiness caused less
alpha power in the left frontal region. Moreover, Kostyunina and Kulikov 22 found
that that the peak in the alpha frequencies increases when the participant experiences joy or anger, and decreases when the participant feels fear or sorrow. Both
spatial and temporal features of EEG sub-bands have been used in BCI applications. Some of these features are: amplitude value of EEG signals, 21 power spectral

6

Ehsan Tarkesh Esfahani, Sundararajan V.

density (PSD) values, 23,24 higher order crossings (HOC), 25 autoregressive (AR) and
adaptive autoregressive (AAR) parameters, 26 time frequency features and inverse
model-based features. 27,28
It has been shown that EEG signals exhibits complex behavior with nonlinear dynamic properties. 29,30 This behavior takes the form of EEG patterns with different
complexities. Considering this, the nonlinear dynamics theory may be a better approach than traditional linear methods in characterizing the intrinsic nature of EEG.
Some researchers have used nonlinear based features of EEG signals such as largest
Lyapunov exponent and fractal dimension. 31,32
In this paper, we use a combination of power spectral density (PSD) of different
EEG sub-bands and the largest Lyapunov exponent (LLE) of EEG signals at each
electrode location as our set of features.
4.1. Power Spectral Density
To estimate the power spectrum of EEG signals, we implemented the Welch
periodogram algorithm 33 –one of the most commonly used techniques to compute
the power spectrum. EEG signals for each mental task were divided into segments
of one second, with a Hanning window of the same length applied to each segment,
and 50% overlapping between the segments. This provides us with a frequency
resolution of 1 Hz. Five frequency band powers from delta, theta, alpha, beta and
gamma band were extracted. For each data point normalized power spectral density
of subband ‘b’ at electrode location ‘l’ (P SDbl ) is calculated as Eq. (1).
P SDbl
P SDbl = P5
.
b=1 P SDbl

(1)

This produce 5 features at each electrode location which makes a total number
of 70 features for each data point.
4.2. Lyapunov Largest Exponent
The Lyapunov Exponent (λ) measures the sensitivity of a dynamical system to
initial conditions. For a dynamical system in a m–dimensional phase space, there
exist ‘m’ Lyapunov exponents (spectrum of Lyapunov exponents). Each Lyapunov
exponent (λi ) defines the exponential average rate of divergence of two neighboring
trajectories in one direction of the state space. A positive Lyapunov exponent corresponds to divergence of trajectories (existance of a chaotic attractor). A negative
exponent implies the convergence of trajectories to a common fixed point. Finally
a zero exponent means the trajectories maintain their relative positions; (they are
on a stable attractor).
To construct m–dimensional phase space from EEG time series signal, we used the
reconstruction technique developed by Packard et al. 34 and Taken. 35 For a given
EEG signal x(t) m–dimensional phase space is formed by using delay coordinate,‘τ ’

USING BRAIN COMPUTER INTERFACE TO DETECT HUMAN SATISFACTION...

7

as shown in Eq. (2).
Xi (t) = x(t), x(t + τ ), ..., x(t + (m − 1)τ .i = 1, 2, 3..., m

(2)

36

The algorithm proposed by Wolf et al. is used to compute the Largest Lyapunov Exmponent (LLE) from each EEG data. We locate nearest neighbor to initial
point as Eq. (3).
Xi (t0 ) = x(t0 ), x(t0 + τ ), ..., x(t0 + (m − 1)τ ) .

(3)

Then the Lyapunov exponent can be defined by Eq. (4).
λi =

m
X
L(tk )
1
ln
.
tm − t0
L(tk−1 )

(4)

k=1

Where ‘L(t0 )’ is the initial distance between these two nearby trajectories and
‘L(tk )’ is a distance between them at a later time ‘tk ’.
To implement this algorithm, OpenTSTOOL developed by Merkwirth et al. 37 is
used. In our analysis we use an embedding dimension of 8 and delay of 10 sampling
time as they show the best results. Therefor there are eight Lyapunov exponents
associated with each EEG data from which we select the four largest one as the
feature of each EEG signal. This will form a total number of 56 LLE features per
sampling data.
4.3. Feature Selection
In dealing with EEG classification, an important problem is the huge number of
features. This arises because (i) EEG signals are nonstationary, thus features must
be computed in a time-varying manner and (ii) the number of EEG channels is
large (14 channels which produce total number 126 features).
To evaluate which of the features provides the most useful information about the
emotion, we used Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon (MWW) test. The MWW test is a nonparametric test for determining whether two independent samples of observations
belong to the same distribution. 38 We rank all the features by Mann-WhitneyWilcoxon (MWW) test in three binary classifications (each class vs. the other two
classes). Therefore, we get three rankings for features which each represent the most
important features of its corresponding class. The features that have the highest
rank in all three tests are selected as the final feature set for the classification.
Selecting the optimum number of features is possible by comparing the classification
result of each binary classification versus the number of features (Figure.4). As
shown in Figure.4, increasing the number of features increases the classification
rate. However, there is no significant change in the classification accuracy when we
use more than 15 features. To select the final features for overall classification, we
select the top 40 features of each class and then select the top 25 features through
voting method.
To get more insight into the information carried by each features, we also ranked
all the features based on the electrode location. Figure.5 shows the classification

8

Ehsan Tarkesh Esfahani, Sundararajan V.

90
85
Casification Rate %

80
75
70
65
Unsatisfied vs. (Neutral and Satisfied)
Satisfied vs. (Neutral and Unsatisfied)
Neutral vs. (Satisfied and Unsatisfied

60
55
50

0

5

10

15
20
25
Number of Features

30

35

40

Fig. 4. Three binary classification rate versus the number of features used for feature selection.

Unsatisfied

Satisfied

Natural

Classification Rate %

90
80
7
0
60

50

40

AF3 F3

F7 FC5 T7

P7 O1 O2 P8
Channel Location

T8 FC6 F8

F4 AF4

Fig. 5. Comparison of three binary classification rate based on features of different channels.

rate of each of three classes just by using all features of single electrode. This
figure suggests that using feature of channels T7 and P8, almost the maximum
classification rate for all three channels is achievable.
5. Classification
The linear discriminator analysis (LDA) is used to evaluate the classification score
for any possible class using the following procedure.
Suppose that the number of classes is ‘C’ and that for each class, the number of
training samples is ‘E’. For each of these training samples, we extract ‘F’ features.
Let ‘c fie ’ be the ith feature of the eth example in the training set of class ‘c’. The

USING BRAIN COMPUTER INTERFACE TO DETECT HUMAN SATISFACTION...

9

sample estimate of the mean feature vector per class is given by Eq. (5).
c

E
1 Xc e
f .
f¯i =
E e=1 i

(5)

The sample estimate of the covariance matrix of class ‘c’ is calculated as Eq. (6).
c

covij =

E
X
(c fie −c f¯i )(c fje −c f¯j ) .

(6)

e=1

Then the ‘c covij ’ of all classes are averaged to calculate an estimate of the common
covariance matrix ‘covij ’. Finally the weight associated to each of the features is
calculated as:
c

wj =

F

F
X

−1 X c
−1 c ¯
wj c f¯i .
covij
fi ; 1 ≤ j ≤ F ; c w0 =
2
i=1
i=1

(7)

For each testing data, a score of classifying as class ‘c’ is calculated by using Eq. (8).
c

score =c w0 +

F
X

c

wi c fi ; 0 ≤ c ≤ C .

(8)

i=1

The output of the classification stage for a data set ‘x(t)’ is the class with the highest
score calculated through Eq. (8).
6. Results and discussion
We used 80 % of the recorded data for training the classifier with three classes of
“neutral”, “satisfied” and “unsatisfied”. To compare the effect of types of features
on the classification rate, we used three sets of features to train the classifier. Tables
1-3 show the results of classification for each of the classifier (when only the Largest
Lyapunov Exponents - LLE, only the power spectral density - PSD and finally, both
the LLE and the PSD are used).

Table 1. Classification result with just using LLE.
Class

Neutral (True)

Satisfied (True)

Unsatisfied (True)

Neutral (output)
Satisfied (output)
Unsatisfied(output)

71.6
16.9
11.5

15.3
78.3
6.4

13.1
4.8
82.1

The results show that the rate of detecting “unsatisfied emotion” is significantly
larger than neutral and satisfied emotions. There is no surprise to see that most of
misclassification involves “neutral emotion” which is a margin between the other
two classes.

10

Ehsan Tarkesh Esfahani, Sundararajan V.

Table 2. Classification result with just using PSD.
Class

Neutral (True)

Satisfied (True)

Unsatisfied (True)

Neutral (output)
Satisfied (output)
Unsatisfied(output)

68.1
18.1
13.8

20.6
77.4
2.0

11.3
4.5
84.2

Table 3. Classification result with both using LLE and PSD.
Class

Neutral (True)

Satisfied (True)

Unsatisfied (True)

Neutral (output)
Satisfied (output)
Unsatisfied(output)

63.1
14.4
22.5

22.1
73.1
4.8

14.8
12.5
72.7

We compared the classification rate of the three mentioned conditions with the
number of features. Furthermore, we used a fourth method where each EEG data
is classified three times (each time with one of the feature sets mentioned above).
In this case, if at least two of the classifiers determine that a data segment belongs
to the same class, classification result will be this mutual answer. Otherwise, when
none of the classifiers have the same outcome, the data will be classified as neutral.
The algorithm for this voting technique is shown in Figure.6. Figure.7 illustrates the
classification rate versus the number of feature when different types or combination
of features are used.
Figure.7 shows that combining both features does not significantly change the
classification result. However, using all the features according to the voting technique (described in Figure.6) will increase the accuracy of the classifier up to 80%.
Comparing the four different types of features in Figure.7, it appears that when
we want to obtain the highest accuracy with the minimum number of features, LLE
is the best candidate. The LLE can achieve a classification accuracy of 75% using
4 features. Just using PSD features, we need a larger size of feature vector, to get
to the same classification rate. However, increasing the size of feature vector in
LLE will result in a less accurate classifier. This suggests that there are only a few
electrodes or sub-bands carrying suitable information about the emotional state in
form of LLE. The information is more spread out for the PSD. Classification rate
based on channel information for both LLE and PSD features is shown in Figure.8
and it appears that PSD features of T8 and P8 channels are improving the accuracy
the most.
Subject based classification results for the four feature types are shown in
Figure.9 . As illustrated in Figure.9, using the voting method between three LDA
classifiers gives the highest accuracy level for the subject based classifier. These
classification rates vary between 80–95% for different subjects. The fact that the
accuracy of overall classification is less than the subject based may be because the
emotional response of different participants to the same event is not the same.

USING BRAIN COMPUTER INTERFACE TO DETECT HUMAN SATISFACTION...

EEG Data
Feature
Generation

Feature
Selection
Primary
Classification

PSD Features

LLE Features

MWW Test

MWW Test

MWW Test

LDA Classifier

LDA Classifier

LDA Classifier

Vote Counter
Classification
by votes

No

Classification
Results

Tie votes?

Yes

Neutral

The class with highest votes

Fig. 6. The algorithm for calculating the final classification result.

90

Classification Rate%

80
70
60
LLE Features
PSD Features
LLE and PSD
Voting Classifier

50
40
30

0

5

10

15
20
Number of Features

25

Fig. 7. Comparison of classification rate of type and number of features.

30

11

12

Ehsan Tarkesh Esfahani, Sundararajan V.

PSD

LLE

Classification Rate %

70

60

50
40
30

AF3 F3 F7 FC5 T7 P7 O1 O2 P8 T8 FC6 F8 F4 AF4
Channel Location

Fig. 8. Comparison of classification rate of type and number of features.

Classification Rate%

90

Subject 1

Subject 2

Subject 3

Subject 4

80
70
60
50

Classification Rate%

90
80
70

PSD Features
LLE Features

60
50

PSD and LLE
Voting Classifier

0

5

10
15
20
Number of Features

25

5

10
15
20
Number of Features

Fig. 9. Classification rate of subject based emotional detection.

7. Summary
In this paper we used an EEG-based brain computer interface to detect the satisfaction of human about a behavior of the robot. By conducting an experience with
a simulated robot that does not always follow the human desires, we collected a series of brain activity data using the electroencephalogram (EEG). We then used the
power spectral density and Lyapunov largest exponent to construct 112 features.

REFERENCES

13

Ranking the feature with Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon test, the top ranked members
of each feature set were selected for classification purposes. Comparing different
type and combination of features, the best classification rate (79.2%) is achievable
by considering the results of three single classifiers. Furthermore, the accuracy of
subject based emotional classification can be much higher than the overall accuracy
with using the same method (80.2%–94.7%). However using a subject based classifier for human robot interaction cannot be a good alternative for service robots as
the classifier needs new training data for each subject. For future work, an adaptive
classification method seems to be a wise choice as it can pre-trained based on emotional response of a large group of humans and then adapted as it interacts with a
new user.

References
1. P.J. Hinds, T.L. Roberts, and H. Jones, Whose job is it anyway? a study of
human-robot interaction in a collaborative task, Hum-Comput. Interact. 19(1)
(2004) 151–181.
2. K. Kawamura, R. Alan, R.A.P. II, D.M. Wilkes, W.A. Alford, and T.E. Rogers,
ISAC: Foundations in Human-Humanoid Interaction, IEEE Intell. Syst. 15(4)
(2000) 38–45
3. H. Ueno, A knowledge-based information modeling for autonomous humanoid
service robot, IEICE T. Inf. Syst. E85D(4) (2002) 657–665
4. P.F. Dominey, A. Mallet, and E. Yoshida, Real-time spoken language programming for coopetative interaction with a humanoid apprentice, Int. J. Hum.
Robot.6(2) (2009) 147–171.
5. J. Forlizzi, Robot products to assist the aging population, Interactions 12(2)
(2005) 16–18.
6. K.R. Scherer, Vocal communication of emotion: A review of research paradigms,
Speech Commun. 40(1) (2003) 227–256.
7. T. Waaramaa, A. Laukkanen, M. Airas, and P. Alku, Perception of Emotional
Valences and Activity Levels from Vowel Segments of Continuous Speech, J.
Voice 24(1) (2010) 30–38.
8. B. Yang and M. Lugger, Emotion recognition from speech signals using new
harmony features, Signal Process. 90(5) (2010) 1415–1423.
9. L. Devillers, L. Vidrascu, and L. Lamel, Challenges in real-life emotion annotation and machine learning based detection, Neural Networks 18(4) (2005)
407–422.
10. M. Pantic and L.J.M. Rothkrantz, Automatic Analysis of Facial Expressions:
The State of the Art, IEEE T. Pattern. Anal. 22(12) (2000) 1424–1445.
11. M. Pantic and L.J.M. Rothkrantz, Expert system for automatic analysis of
facial expressions, Image Vision Comput. 18(11) (2000) 881–905.
12. J. Anttonen, and V. Surakka, Emotions and Heart Rate while Sitting on a Chair,
in ACM SIGCHI Conf. on Human factors in comput. sys. (2005) 491–499.

14

REFERENCES

13. K. H. Kim, S. W. Bang, and S. R. Kim, Emotion recognition system using
short-term monitoring of physiological signals, Med. Biol. Eng. Comput. 42(3)
(2004) 419–427.
14. K. Takahashi, Remarks on svm-based emotion recognition from multi-modal
bio-potential signals, in IEEE Int Workshop on Robot and Human Interactive
Commun. (2004) 95–100.
15. J. A. Coan and J. J. B. Allen. Frontal EEG asymmetry as a moderator and
mediator of emotion. Biol Psychol. 67(1-2) (2004) 7–50.
16. S.K. Sutton and R.J. Davidson, R.J., Prefrontal brain asymmetry: a biological
substrate of the behavioral approach and inhibition systems. Psychol Sci. 8(3)
(1997) 204–210.
17. Q. Zhang and M. Lee, Analysis of positive and negative emotions in natural
scene using brain activity and GIST, Neurocomputing 72(4-6) (2009) 1302–1306.
18. K. Schaaff and T. Schultz, Toward an EEG-based emotion recognizer for humanoid robot, in IEEE Int. Sym. on Robot and Human Interactive Commun.
(2009)
19. C. Frantzidis, C. Bratsas, M. Klados, E. Konstantinidis, C. Lithari, A. Vivas,
C. Papadelis, E. Kaldoudi, C. Pappas, and P. Bamidis, On the classification
of emotional biosignals evoked while viewing affective pictures: an integrated
data mining based approach for healthcare applications, IEEE T. Inf. Technol.
Biomed. 14(2) (2010) 309–318.
20. http://www.emotiv.com
21. R. J. Davidson, P. Ekman, C. D. Sarona, J. A. Senulis, and W. V. Friesen.
Approach withdrawal and cerebral asymmetry: Emotional expression and brain
physiology. J. Pers. Soc Psychol. 58(2) (1990) 330–341.
22. M. Kostyunina and M. Kulikov. Frequency characteristics of EEG spectra in
the emotions. Neurosci. Behav. Physiol. 26(4) (1996) 340–343.
23. K. Ko, H. Yang, and K. Sim, Emotion recognition using EEG signals with
relative power values and Bayesian network, Int. J. Control Autom. Syst. 7(5)
(2009) 865–870.
24. L. Zhang, W. He, C. He, and P. Wang, Improving Mental Task Classification
by Adding High Frequency Band Information, J. Med. Sys. 34(1) (2010) 51–60.
25. P. Petrantonakis and L. Hadjileontiadis, Emotion Recognition from EEG Using
Higher-Order Crossings, IEEE T. Inf. Technol. Biomed. 14(2) (2010)186–197.
26. G. Pfurtscheller, C. Neuper, A. Schlogl, K. Lugger, Separability of EEG signals
recorded during right and left motor imagery using adaptive autoregressive
parameters, IEEE T. Rehabil. Eng. 6(3) (1998) 316–325.
27. T. Wang, J. Deng, B. He, Classifying EEG-based motor imagery tasks by means
of time-frequency synthesized spatial patterns, Clin. Neurophysiol. 115(12)
(2004) 2744–2753
28. F. Lotte, M. Congedo, A. Lecuyer,F. Lamarch, B. Arnaldi, A review of classification algorithms for EEG-based braincomputer interface, J. Neural Eng. 4(2)
(2007) R1–R13

REFERENCES

15

29. D. Garrett, D.A. Peterson, C.W. Anderson, and M.H. Thaut, Comparison of
linear, nonlinear, and feature selection methods for EEG signal classification,
IEEE T. Rehabil. Eng. 11(2) (2003) 141–144.
30. C.J. Stam, Nonlinear Brain Dynamics (Nova Biomedical Publication, 2004).
31. K. Natarajan, R. Acharya U, F. Alias, T. Tiboleng, and S. Puthusserypady,
Nonlinear analysis of EEG signals at different mental states, BioMed. Eng.
OnLine 3(7) (2004).
32. X. Li, Z. Deng, and J. Zhang, Function of EEG Temporal Complexity Analysis
in Neural Activities Measurement, Advances in Neural Network (Springer Berlin
2009) 209–218.
33. P. D. Welch, The use of fast Fourier transforms for the estimation of power
spectra: A method based on time averaging over short modified periodograms,
IEEE T. Audio Electroacoust. 15 (1967) 70–73.
34. N.H. Packard, J.P. Crutchfield ,J.D. Farmer ,R.S. Shaw, Geometry from a time
series. Phys Rev Lett 45 (1980) 712–716
35. F. Takens, Detection strange attractor in turbulence.In Lecture Notes in Mathematica. Edited by. D.A Rand, L.S Young. New York: Springer-verlag; (1981)
366–381
36. A. Wolf, J.B. Swift, L.H. Swinney and J.A. Vastano, Determining Lyapunov
exponent from a time series. Physica D 16(3) (1985) 285–317.
37. C. Merkwirth, U. Parlitz, I. Wedekind, D. Engster, W. Lauterborn
OpenTSTOOL (2009). URL:http://www.dpi.physik.uni-goettingen.de/tstool/
38. G.W. Corder and D.I. Foreman, Nonparametric Statistics for Non-Statisticians
(John Wiley and Sons, 2009).
Ehsan Tarkesh Esfahani received his M.S. degree in Mechanical Engineering from University of Toledo, Toledo, OH in 2007.
He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in the Department of Mechanical Engineering at University of California Riverside, Riverside, CA. His main research interests include
application of brain computer interfaces in control and design
inteligent systems.

V. Sundararajan received his M.S. and PhD degree in Mechanical Engineering from the University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, CA in 1997 and 2000 respectively. He is currently
an Assistant Professor in the Department of Mechanical Engineering, the University of California Riverside. His main research area is in intelligent design and manufacturing process.

