I.J. Image, Graphics and Signal Processing, 2018, 10, 46-53
Published Online October 2018 in MECS (http://www.mecs-press.org/)
DOI: 10.5815/ijigsp.2018.10.05

Efficient Mathematical Procedural Model for
Brain Signal Improvement from Human Brain
Sensor Activities
Rajib Chowdhury
Department of Computer Science, American International University Bangladesh, Dhaka, Bangladesh
Email: rajib.eee092@gmail.com

A.F.M. Saifuddin Saif
Department of Computer Science, American International University Bangladesh, Dhaka, Bangladesh
Email: saif@aiub.edu
Received: 23 June 2018; Accepted: 14 September 2018; Published: 08 October 2018

Abstract—Human brain signals obtained by the human
brain sensor electrodes measure the cerebral activities on
the human brain. The main aim of our research is to
improve the human brain activities based on the human
brain signal. The entire procedure contains three steps.
The first step is to acquire the brain signal, then develop
this brain signal with the proposed method and finally
improve the human brain activities with this modified
brain signal. The entire procedure will proceed in a
proposed Neuroheadset device embedded with necessary
sensors using the non-invasive technique. This device
will help to acquire the brain signal, modify this signal
and improve the brain activities with this modified brain
signal. In this research, we illustrated the first two steps
like signal acquisition and signal modification. In the
experiment, we used Electroencephalogram as an
efficient non-invasive signal acquisition technique for
acquiring the brain signal and also introduced a proposed
method to modify this signal. This method helped to
improve the human brain signal using the required times
of the iteration process. In the experiment level, several
iteration processes have been done to get above 90%
improvement rate of the brainwaves. In this research, the
improved signal has been considered based on the
generated brain signal in various aspects like human
intelligence, memory and also the capability of better
feelings.
Index Terms—Artificial intelligence, human brain sensor
activities, human brain signal, proposed method,
proposed neuroheadset device.
I.

INTRODUCTION

Human brain activities related research works are
contributing a most significant role in today’s research
world. Researchers are doing more research work based
on the human brain activities. The human brain activities
are mainly measured by the generated brain signal. In
Copyright © 2018 MECS

earlier, more research work like recognize of EEG-based
emotion, effects of physical exercise, improvement of
human brain signal classification, exploration of
prominent frequency wave, control of wheelchair, etc.
have done using the human brainwaves signal.
Human brain EEG sensors have facilitated to recognize
the emotion [1] using the optimal feature selection and
the deep learning ensembles method. Support vector
machine (SVM) has also been [2] considered for EEG
based emotion recognition. Deep Learning Network with
covariate shift adaptation based on a principal component
has been [3] used for the EEG-Based emotion recognition.
Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) has helped to [4]
improve the emotion recognition by combining the EEG
feature selection and kernel classifiers. The effects [5] of
a severe physical exercise based on the individual resting
state EEG alpha peak frequency (iAPF) have examined
using the EEG activity. Active Learning (AL) has been [6]
used for improving the classification of the neural signal
in a paradigm of rapid serial visual presentation (RSVP).
The EEG wave of prominent frequency has been [7]
explored from the network of brain sensors. EEG signal
has also been [8] used to control the wheelchair with the
help of design and the implementation of the braincomputer interface. It has also [9] investigated that the
physiological signal based on the neural and non-neural
basis has united to gather decision accuracy and selfassurance of visual and auditory subtasks performed
during an executed crew-station experiment.
At present, the major challenge is to improve the
human brain activities based on human brain signal
which has addressed as a core investigation by proposing
a new method in our research. Later aims will add to
establish a proposed neuroheadset device for acquiring
brain signal, controlling brain signal, developing the brain
signal, improving the brain activities based on modified
human brain signal by using a non-invasive technique. In
this research, we discussed the acquisition of brain signal
and the improvement of acquired brain signal. In the
future, we will discuss the methodology for improving
I.J. Image, Graphics and Signal Processing, 2018, 10, 46-53

Efficient Mathematical Procedural Model for Brain Signal Improvement from Human Brain Sensor Activities

the brain activity using the modified human brain signal
and about the proposed neuroheadset device. In this
research, we have acquired the EEG-based brain signal
using non-invasive signal acquisition technique and also
demonstrated the proposed method to improve the brain
signal with necessary iteration process. After the
acquisition of brain signal, we digitized, pre-processed,
and extracted features of the brain signal. In next, we
applied the proposed method for improving the brain
signal. In this research, analog to digital converter (ADC)
helped to increase the signal strength. We have
considered independent component analysis (ICA) in the
level of signal pre-processing. Fast Fourier transform
(FFT) was used to extract features from the pre-processed
signal. Then, we also represented the signal data into 256
data points. Our proposed method helped to improve the
brain signal by comparing with the data points of the
desired signal for every place with the necessary iteration
process. The details have been described in section III. In
the experiment level, we got more than ninety percent
improvement rate for all participated human subjects.

II.

RELATED WORKS

In [2] the year 2015 Raja Majid Mehmood and Hyo
Jong Lee recognized electroencephalogram (EEG) signal
based emotion using the Hjorth parameters and also the
SVM classifier. In their research, they used a 10/20
internationally recognized placement system for the brain
signal acquisition. Then, they used an easy cap on the
Brain Vision System with eighteen electrodes for
recording the acquired EEG signals. IAPS database has
been used to select the different types of emotional
stimuli. After recording the EEG signal, EEGLAB
toolbox has used for pre-processing the signals. Then
Hjorth parameters were computed in the time-frequency
domain using these pre-processed signals. For the feature
extraction, three Hjorth parameters have been used from
the brain lobe and the selected frequency wave. Finally,
the SVM classifier was used to classify the emotions.
In [10] the year 2015 Muhammad N. Fakhruzzaman,
Edwin Riksakomara and Hatma Suryotrisongko identified
the EEG based signal from the human brain activities
with the help of EMOTIV EPOC for the motor imagery.
In the data acquisition level, they used only one human
subject for avoiding the different types of brain signals.
In their research, right foot and left-hand moving have
been considered as the activities of training. Automatic
CSP filter generation has also been included in this step
through one of the circumstances inside the chain.
Classifier Trainer with the acquirer of input data has been
introduced by the executed of next scenario. The scenario
helped to read through the data when the feature vectors
were extracted and then wrote all of these into one
configuration file for further utilize. Support Vector
Machine (SVM) has been considered in their research for
the classification. In the Open Vibe, mi-csp-4-online.xml
has run for executing the step of testing with the help of
DSP filter. The entire testing step has been performed of

Copyright © 2018 MECS

47

10 epochs per activity within thirty seconds per session
with a five-second time-frame.
In [3] the year 2014 Suwicha Jirayucharoensak, Setha
Pan-Ngum and Pasin Israsena recognized the EEG signal
based emotion using the deep learning network with
principle component-based covariate shift adaption
(CSA). In their research, each layer has constituted with a
hundred nodes. All of the input features of these nodes
have calculated by using the process of feature extraction.
Two hundred thirty input features composing of the
power spectral density has learned by the system at each
time. The principal component analysis (PCA) was used
to decrease the problem of over-fitting of the DLN. The
most necessary fifty components have extracted by the
PCA from the first two hundred thirty input features. In
each layer, DLN with fifty concealed nodes fed these
extracted features. In the final step, the effectiveness of
the emotion recognition system has been developed with
the help of CSA to solve the problem of non-stationary in
EEG signals. Here, each of the individual input features
has normalized with the help of the average of preceding
feature significance within a rectangular window. A
leave-one-out cross-validation scheme helped to measure
the accuracy level of classification of both dimensional
states like valence and arousal states for the four
experimental steps. In their research, the leave-one-out
cross-validation has performed for the thirty-two subject
acquisitions. All input features based on other thirty-one
subjects helped to composite a training dataset. The
power spectral features have been consisted of each
dataset from the recording of the EEG signal when
subjects have watched the music videos. Here, based on
the gradient descent method, the DLN performed its
initial bias and weight optimization to get the
classification accuracy. The measurement of the accuracy
of classification has counted five times. Then the average
accuracy has been considered for the further analysis. At
next, the hidden nodes of each layer have decreased to
fifty nodes for avoiding the effects of performance
accuracy. The Nonlinear Principal Component Analysis
(NPCA) has performed by the auto-encoder when the
visible nodes have greater than hidden nodes. The PCA
has been used to help the stack of the auto-encoder for
learning the linear correlations between the features of
input. LIBSVM tools helped to measure the SVM
classifier performance. Naï
ve Bayes (NB) has also been
used in WEKA tool for performing the classification of
emotion.
In [11] November 2014 Norizam Sulaiman, Cheng
Chee Hau, Amran Abdul Hadi, Mahfuzah Mustafa, and
Shawal Jadin established the human thought
interpretation with the help of EEG waves and Lab VIEW.
In their research, they have used the EMOTIV EPOC
EEG amplifier and electrodes for acquiring the EEG
waves from the subjects. The location of the fourteen
measurement points of EEG covered entire brain lobes
like Temporal, Frontal, Occipital, and Parietal. The
protocol of the measurement has consisted of five
different steps including Move forward, Move backward,
Turn right, Turn left, and Stop. The Bluetooth device was
I.J. Image, Graphics and Signal Processing, 2018, 10, 46-53

48

Efficient Mathematical Procedural Model for Brain Signal Improvement from Human Brain Sensor Activities

used to send the EEG signals to the computer and then
stored in a file. At next, Lab View has been used to
analyze and find the features of EEG. To find out the
EEG features for the thinking types, the spectral analysis
of the EEG waves has performed in Lab View. The
features vector has also determined from the EEG power
spectrum ratio and the number of subjects.
In [16] October 2016 Jalal Karam, Salah Al Majeed,
Christofer N. Yalung and Lela Mirtskhulava established
the identification of brainwaves signal using the neural
network. In their research, they constructed a Radial
Basis Functions (RBF) Artificial Neural Network (ANN)
and implemented a BCI using a NeuroSkys EEG
biosensor for the recognition from the brain signals. The
two hundred fifty-six data points have been considered
for each thought. In here, Bluetooth helped to send the
data for the MATLAB documentation. The highest rate of
recognition has been considered for “stop” and
“backward” with seventy-seven percent and seventy-four
percent respectively. Generally, this contribution helped
to increase the machine operation performance by
primarily identifying the signal in advance of transferring
it as a control to the machine.

III.

C. Feature Extraction
After completing the signal pre-processing, necessary
features have been extracted from the pre-processed
signals. In this research, Fast Fourier transformation (FFT)
has [13] been considered as a significant method for the
analysis of frequency. FFT also [15] helps to extract the
values of poor signal quality.
D. Proposed Approach
The Proposed Approach is a two-phase model which
can use for improving the performance level of any
activities. The main aim of this research is to develop the
human brain signal with this proposed approach. The
system procedural model and the mathematical
procedural model have described in below:

PROPOSED RESEARCH METHODOLOGY

Figure 1 has demonstrated the overall framework
diagram for improving the human brain signal with the
proposed method. The methodology has described below
with the following necessary steps.
A. Signal Acquisition
For the signal acquisition, five male persons with the
age level of 25-30 years old have participated as subjects
in this experiment. In this research, Non-Invasive signal
acquisition method like [12] Electroencephalogram (EEG)
has been considered for acquiring the brain signal. EEG
has [13] a high temporal resolution. The EEG signal can
also be [18] able to investigate of human brain situation
and detect the overall performance ability of the human.
10/20 internally recognized placement system was [2]
used to collect the EEG signals. Then, an Easy Cap of
Brain Vision System with 18 electrodes was considered
to record the EEG signals. After that, analog to digital
converter (ADC) was used to digitize the low strength
signal. Acquired EEG based signals have been considered
for further pre-processing after completing the signal
digitization.
B. Signal Preprocessing
In the step of signal pre-processing, Independent
Component Analysis (ICA) has been chosen for reducing
the noise and artifacts from the signals because ICA [13]
performs better results than PCA and also considered as
computationally efficient. ICA also [14] contributes a
most vital role in decomposing mixed data and can [17]
able to find the components whose temporal patterns of
the activities are statistically independent of one another.

Copyright © 2018 MECS

Fig.1. Framework for improving the human brain signal

1) System Procedural Model
In this model, we have described the overall procedure
of the system for improving the EEG based human brain
signal with this proposed method. This proposed method
helped to improve the human brain signal from the
human brain activities. In this phase, at first, 256 data
points have been considered based on the feature
extracted human brain signal data. Our desired signal data
has also converted into 256 data points for the same
places as the acquired 256 data points of human brain
signal. Then the 256 data of acquired brain signal has
compared with the 256 data of desired improved signal in
every iteration process. If the input data points greater
than the output data points, then the input data will
decrease by one in every iteration process until the match

I.J. Image, Graphics and Signal Processing, 2018, 10, 46-53

Efficient Mathematical Procedural Model for Brain Signal Improvement from Human Brain Sensor Activities

49

with the desired output data. If the acquired signal data
for a particular place less than the desired improved
signal data for that place, then the data of the input signal
of that place will increase by one in every iteration
process. If the acquired signal data for a particular place
equal to the desired improved signal data for that place,
then the data of the input signal of that place will remain
unchanged. The iteration will stop while the acquired
signal data closely related to the desired signal data. The
improvement percentage will count after completing the
every iteration process.

The iteration process will continue until all the input
signal data meet with all the desired signal data. When
the input signal data match with the desired signal data,
then the iteration process will stop.

2) Mathematical Procedural Model

A. Experimental Setup

In this model, we have demonstrated the overall
mathematical procedural model for improving the human
brain signal. At first, we converted the feature extracted
acquired signal data into two hundred fifty-six data point
as input,

In the experimental setup, at first five male human
subjects with the age level of twenty-five to thirty years
old have attended for this experiment in our experimental
zone. Then an EEG-based cap has been placed in every
participant’s head one by one. After that, we have
acquired EEG-based signal data for all participants one
by one. In this experiment, the 10/20 internally
recognized placement system was used to collect the
EEG signal data. An Easy Cap of Brain Vision System
with eighteen electrodes was used to record the EEG
signal data. Analog to Digital Converter (ADC) was also
used to digitize the brain signal data. After completing
the step of digitization for developing the low strength
signals, EEG based signals have been considered for
further pre-processing steps. Independent Component
Analysis (ICA) was chosen to reduce the noise and
artifacts from the signals in the signal pre-processing
level. Fast Fourier transformation (FFT) was used to
extract the features of the pre-processed signal. Then we
applied the proposed method for improving the brain
signal data. After completing the feature extraction, the
brain signal data has converted into 256 data points. The
desired output signal data has also converted into two
hundred fifty-six data points as like as the same place of
input signal data points. Then the all 256 input data points
have been changed based on the comparison with all two
hundred fifty-six output signal data points in every
iteration process. The input signal data points have
remained the same value when the input signal data
points have the same as the output signal data points. The
input signal data point has decreased by one when the
input signal data point has greater than the output data
point. The input signal data point has also increased by
one while the input data point was less than the output
signal data point. The iteration process has stopped when
the input data points have matched with the desired
output data points. The proposed method has also
validated using the MATLAB software for the
experimental evaluation and analysis.

M i  [an ]  [a0 , a1 , a2 ,....., a255 ]

(1)

Then, we converted the desired output signal data into
256 data point, like the same places of input signal data,
as output,

M o  [bn ]  [b0 , b1 , b2 ,....., b255 ]

(2)

After that, we have applied below three equations for
every input signal data point with the required
I S iteration to get the desired improved signal data point.
If the input signals data point same as the output signals
data point then input signal data will remain at the same
value.

M oS  [an ] if [an ]  [bn ]

(3)

If the input signals data greater than output signals data
then the input signal data will decrease by 1 in the every
iteration process until the match with the desired output
signal data.

M oS  [an  1] if [an ]  [bn ]

(4)

If the input signals data less than the output signals
data then input signal data will increase by 1 in the every
iteration process until the match with desired output
signal data.

M oS  [an  1] if [an ]  [bn ]

(5)

IV.

EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS

In this section, we have discussed the three parts like
the experimental setup, experimental results, analysis and
discussion.

B. Experimental Results

Where,

S  [1, 2,3, 4,......]
n  [0,1, 2,3,....., 255]

Copyright © 2018 MECS

In the experimental result, the overall percentages of
the improvement rate for the acquired human brain signal
of the participated five male human subjects have
presented in Table 1. From this table, it has demonstrated

I.J. Image, Graphics and Signal Processing, 2018, 10, 46-53

50

Efficient Mathematical Procedural Model for Brain Signal Improvement from Human Brain Sensor Activities

that the improvement rates are 97.29%, 96.09%, 98.98%,
90.27%, and 95.33% for all the subjects respectively
using the proposed method. The required iteration
processes have also demonstrated in Table 1 for every
participant with the improvement rate. In here, 70, 84,
100, 139 and 80 times iterations have been required for
getting the improvement rate 97.29%, 96.09%, 98.98%,
90.27%, and 95.33% for all the subjects respectively
using the proposed method. Figure 2 has also illustrated
these improvement rates of that human brain signals for
required iteration process. Required iteration processes
for getting these overall improvement rates of
participated brain signal were seventy, eighty-four, one
hundred, one hundred thirty-nine and eighty times for all
the subjects respectively as shown in Table 1. The results
have demonstrated that our proposed method helped to
get this significant improvement rate of human brain
signal.
Table 1. Overall percentage of improvement of the human brain signal
with required iteration using proposed approach
Subject

Improvement Rate (%)
of the Brain Signal with
Proposed Approach

Required Iteration
Process (times)

Subject 1

97.29

70

Subject 2

96.09

84

Subject 3

98.98

100

Subject 4

90.27

139

Subject 5

95.33

80

achieving the eighty percent improvement rate with the
proposed approach are thirty-three, forty-two, thirtyseven, eighty-seven and forty times for all the subjects
respectively. The required iteration processes for also
achieving the ninety percent improvement rate with the
proposed approach are forty-eight, sixty-three, fifty-two,
one hundred thirty-nine and sixty-two times for all the
subjects respectively. In this experiment, we have got the
highest level performance of 98.98% improvement rate
for the human brain signal of the participated human
subject 3 with the required one hundred times iteration
process. In this research, we have got above ninety
percent improvement rate for the participated human
brain signal with the help of the proposed method. In this
experiment, the highest one hundred thirty-nine iteration
processes have been required to get the ninety percent
improvement rate on the signal data of the subject 3.
From the overall experimental results, we have observed
that the several iteration processes will need for getting
the improvement rate of the human brain signal data. The
iteration process will continue to reach the acquired brain
signal data into the desired improved signal data. The
necessary of the iteration process will also depend on the
generated human brain signal data. The iteration
processes will stop while the acquired human brain signal
data will closely relate to the desired improved brain
signal data.
Table 2. Necessary of iteration process for getting 50%, 80% and 90%
improvement rate of the human brain signals with proposed approach.
Subject

Required
Iteration Process
(times) for
achieving 50%
Improvement
Rate with
Proposed
Approach

Required
Iteration
Process (times)
for achieving
80%
Improvement
Rate with
Proposed
Approach

Required
Iteration
Process (times)
for achieving
90%
Improvement
Rate with
Proposed
Approach

Subject 1
Subject 2
Subject 3
Subject 4
Subject 5

12
17
15
30
15

33
42
37
87
40

48
63
52
139
62

C. Analysis and Discussion

Fig.2. Improvement percentage rate for five participated human brain
signals

The necessary of the iteration process for achieving
fifty percent, eighty percent and ninety percent
improvement rate as improving the human brain signal
based on desired output signal with the help of the
proposed approach has described in Table 2. From this
table, it has demonstrated that the required iteration
processes for achieving the fifty percent improvement
rate with the proposed method are twelve, seventeen,
fifteen, thirty and fifteen times for all the subjects
respectively. The required iteration processes for also
Copyright © 2018 MECS

After the result analysis, we have demonstrated that
our proposed method was highly performed to acquire
more than ninety percent performance of improvement
rate with required iteration process. The highest
percentage of improvement rate is 98.98% using our
proposed method for the brain signal of subject 3 with
one hundred iterations. The required maximum iteration
process was one hundred thirty-nine to get 90.27%
improvement rate shown in Table 1. In Table 2, we
described the required iteration process for getting 50%,
80% and 90% improvement rate with our proposed
method. Figure 3 has also explained the necessary
iteration process to get the 50%, 80% and 90%
improvement rate of participated brain signal. From the
experimental result, it has demonstrated that the
I.J. Image, Graphics and Signal Processing, 2018, 10, 46-53

Efficient Mathematical Procedural Model for Brain Signal Improvement from Human Brain Sensor Activities

necessary of the iteration process will depend on the
acquired human brain signal.
In earlier, more research works have been done based
on the acquired brain signal with the help of existing
methods. The highest percentages of existing research
and this research have described in Table 3. In this table,
it has demonstrated that the [16] highest recognition rate
for brainwaves with radial basis functions (RBF) artificial
neural network (ANN) is 77%. RBFs are generally [21]
embedded into a feed-forward neural network with two
layers that able to classify and model the artificial data.
The highest [10] performance of success rate for the
movement testing scenario using a support vector
machine (SVM) classifier is 91.67%. The maximum
emotion [2] recognition rate is 70% using brainwaves
with the SVM classifier. Support vector machine (SVM)
is a [19,20] powerful classifier and is also able to give the
better classification accuracy than others. The highest
improvement rate is 98.98% for brainwaves of the
participated human brain activities with our proposed
approach in this research as shown in Table 3. Figure 4
has also shown the highest level percentages of existing
research and this research based on the human
brainwaves. This graph has illustrated the highest
recognition rate of seventy-seven percent, the highest
success rate is 91.67%, and the highest emotion
recognition rate is 70% based on previous researches and
highest improvement rate is 98.98% based on this
research using human brain signal. Radial basis functions
(RBF) artificial neural network (ANN) used to get the
brain signal recognition rate. Support vector machine
(SVM) used to get the success rate and emotion
recognition rate. In this paper, the proposed method has
introduced for achieving improvement rate of human
brain signal. Table 3 has briefly illustrated the maximum
performance based on the previous researches and this
research.

Table 3. Chart of the highest percentage of this research with proposed
approach and the previous researches with existing methods based on
human brain waves.
Subject

Human

Based on Previous Researches
The
Highest
Recognition
Rate (%) of
Brain Wave
Signals
with Radial
Basis
Functions
(RBF)
Artificial
Neural
Network
(ANN)

The
Highest
Success
Rate (%)
for the
Movement
Testing
Scenario
using
SVM
Classifier

The
Highest
Emotion
Recognition
Rate (%)
using Brain
Wave
Signals
Using SVM
Classifier

77.00

91.67

70.00

Copyright © 2018 MECS

Based on
this Research
The Highest
Improvement
Rate (%) of
Brain Wave
Signals with
Proposed
Approach

98.98

Fig.4. Highest results of previous researches with existing methods and
this research with proposed method based on human brain signal

V.

Fig.3. Necessary of iteration processes for getting 50%, 80% and 90%
brain signal improvement rate

51

CONCLUSION

The most significant issue of our research is to improve
the human brain activities based on human brainwaves
using the proposed method. The overall process for
improving human brain activities has divided into
following three steps. The first step is to get the human
brain signal based on human brain activities, then
improve this brain signal by change with the proposed
method and finally use this modified brain signal for
improving human brain activities with the proposed
neuroheadset device. This proposed neuroheadset device
will help to get the brain signal, improve this acquired
signal and improve the human brain activity using this
modified signal of that human brain with the help of
necessary iteration process. In this paper, we have
explained the first two steps like acquiring the EEGbased human brain signal and improving the EEG-based

I.J. Image, Graphics and Signal Processing, 2018, 10, 46-53

52

Efficient Mathematical Procedural Model for Brain Signal Improvement from Human Brain Sensor Activities

human brain signal. We have also described a proposed
method to improve the EEG-based human brain signal. In
the experiment level, our proposed method helped to get
above ninety percent improvement rate for all the
participated humans. The highest 98.98% improvement
rate has got for the subject 3 with 100 iteration process.
In here, the required iteration processes were dependent
on generated brain signal. Our proposed method will also
help to improve the performance level of any kinds of
activities and will also be able to make the highest level
of performance of improvement. The proposed method
has expected to act as supreme innovation to improve
human brain signal in computer vision and artificial
research domain.
REFERENCES
[1]

Raja Majid Mehmood, Ruoyu Du and Hyo Jong Lee.
Optimal feature selection and deep learning ensembles
method for emotion recognition from human brain EEG
sensors. IEEE Access, 2017, 5 (99):1-1.
[2] Raja Majid Mehmood and Hyo Jong Lee. EEG based
emotion recognition from human brain using Hjorth
parameters and SVM. International Journal of BioScience and Bio-Technology, 2015, 7 (3):23-32.
[3] Suwicha Jirayucharoensak, Setha Pan-Ngum, and Pasin
Israsena. EEG-based emotion recognition using deep
learning network with principal component based
covariate shift adaptation. Hindawi Publishing
Corporation, The Scientific World Journal, 2014, Volume
2014, Article ID 627892.
[4] John Atkinsona and Daniel Campos. Improving BCIbased emotion recognition by combining EEG feature
selection and Kernel classifiers. Expert Systems with
Applications: An International Journal, 2016, Volume 47,
Issue C, 35-41.
[5] Boris Gutmann, Andreas Mierau, Thorben Hülsdünker,
Carolin Hildebrand, Axel Przyklenk, Wildor Hollmann,
and Heiko Klaus Strüder. Effects of physical exercise on
individual resting state EEG alpha peak frequency.
Hindawi Publishing Corporation, Neural Plasticity, 2015,
Volume 2015, Article ID 717312.
[6] Amar R. Marathe, Vernon J. Lawhern, Dongrui Wu,
David Slayback, and Brent J. Lance. Improved neural
signal classification in a rapid serial visual presentation
task using active learning. IEEE Trans. on Neural Systems
and Rehabilitation Engineering, 2016, 24 (3):333-343.
[7] Raja Majid Mehmood and Hyo Jong Lee. Exploration of
prominent frequency wave in EEG signals from brain
sensors network. International Journal of Distributed
Sensor Networks, 2015, Volume 2015, Article ID 386057.
[8] Rajeshree Mahendra Patil, D.M. Kate and A.P. Thakare.
Design and implementation of brain computer interface
for wheelchair control. International Research Journal of
Engineering and Technology (IRJET), 2016, Volume: 03,
Issue 02.
[9] Victor Shih, Ludan Zhang, Christian Kothe, Scott Makeig
and Paul Sajda. Predicting decision accuracy and certainty
in complex brain-machine interactions. IEEE International
Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC)
2016.
[10] Muhammad N. Fakhruzzaman, Edwin Riksakomara, and
Hatma Suryotrisongko. EEG wave identification in human
brain with EMOTIV EPOC for motor imagery. Science
Direct, Procedia Computer Science, 72 (2015):269 – 276.

Copyright © 2018 MECS

[11] Norizam Sulaiman, Cheng Chee Hau, Amran Abdul Hadi,
Mahfuzah Mustafa and Shawal Jadin. Interpretation of
human thought using EEG signals and Lab VIEW. IEEE
International Conference on Control System, Computing
and Engineering, 2014, 28 - 30, Penang, Malaysia.
[12] T. Kameswara Rao, M. Rajyalakshmi and T. V. Prasad.
An exploration on brain computer interface and its recent
trends. International Journal of Advanced Research in
Artificial Intelligence (IJARAI), 2012, 1 (8):17-22.
[13] M. Rajya Lakshmi, T. V. Prasad and V. Chandra Prakash.
Survey on EEG signal processing methods. International
Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Science and
Software Engineering, 2014, Volume 4, Issue 1, January
2014 ISSN: 2277 128X.
[14] Chuang Li, Han Yuan, Diamond Urbano, Yoon-Hee Cha
and Lei Ding. ICA on sensor or source data: A
comparison study in deriving resting state networks from
EEG. Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society
(EMBC), 2017, 39th Annual International Conference of
the IEEE, 14 September 2017.
[15] Munyaradzi C. Rushambwa and Asaithambi Mythili.
Impact assessment of mental subliminal activities on the
human brain through neuro feedback analysis. 3rd
International Conference on Biosignals, images and
instrumentation (ICBSII), 16-18 March 2017, Chennai.
[16] Jalal Karam, Salah Al Majeed, Christofer N. Yalung and
Lela Mirtskhulava. Neural network for recognition of
brain wave signals. International Journal of Enhanced
Research in Science, Technology & Engineering, 2016,
Vol. 5 Issue 10, ISSN: 2319-7463.
[17] David C Jangraw, Jun Wang, Brent J Lance, Shih-Fu
Chang, and Paul Sajda. Neurally and ocularly informed
graph-based models for searching 3D environments, J.
Neural Eng. 11 (2014) 046003 (12pp).
[18] Sabbir Ibn Arman, Arif Ahmed, and Anas Syed. Costeffective EEG signal acquisition and recording system.
International Journal of Bioscience, Biochemistry and
Bioinformatics, 2012, 2 (5):301-304.
[19] Durgesh K. Srivastava and Lekha Bhambhu. Data
classification using support vector machine. Journal of
Theoretical and Applied Information Technology, 2010,
12 (1): 1-7.
[20] Himani Bhavsar and Mahesh H. Panchal. A review on
support vector machine for data classification.
International Journal of Advance Research in Computer
Engineering & Technology (IJARCET), 2012, Volume 1,
Issue 10, ISSN: 2278-1323.
[21] Adrian G. Bors. Introduction of the radial basis function
(RBF) networks. Online Symposium for Electronics
Engineers, 2001, 1 (1):1-7.

Authors’ Profiles
Rajib Chowdhury received B.Sc. in
Electrical and Electronic Engineering from
Faculty
of
Engineering,
American
International
University
Bangladesh
(AIUB), Dhaka, Bangladesh in January
2013. Currently, he is a student of Master of
Science in Computer Science (Intelligent
Systems) at Faculty of Information Science
and Technology, American International University Bangladesh
(AIUB), Dhaka, Bangladesh. His research interests include
Image Processing, Computer Vision, Artificial Intelligence,

I.J. Image, Graphics and Signal Processing, 2018, 10, 46-53

Efficient Mathematical Procedural Model for Brain Signal Improvement from Human Brain Sensor Activities

Augmented Reality, 3D Reconstruction, and Medical Image
Processing.

A.F.M. Saifuddin Saif received Ph.D.
from Faculty of Information Science and
Technology,
University
Kebangsaan
Malaysia (UKM) in 2016. He received
M.Sc. in Computer System Engineering
(Software System) from University of East
London, UK, and B.Sc. (Eng.) degree in
Computer Science and Engineering from
Shahjalal University of Science and Technology, Bangladesh in
2012 and 2008, respectively. Most of his contributions in
Computer Vision and Artificial Intelligence Research field were

53

published in ISI Q1 journals. He has published many papers in
ISI indexed Journals; Scopus indexed Journals, Book Chapters,
Conferences, and Proceedings. He served as Technical
Committee Members, Reviewers, Guest Speakers, Session
Chairs in many Conferences and Workshops. Currently, he is an
Assistant Professor at Faculty of Information Science and
Technology, American International University Bangladesh
(AIUB). Before joining the university, he did Post Doctorate at
Faculty of Information Science and Technology, University
Kebangsaan Malaysia. He spent more than 6 years in IT
industry such as Advanced Software Development, Web eMaze
etc as IT researcher. His research interests include Image
Processing, Computer Vision, Artificial Intelligence,
Augmented Reality, 3D Reconstruction, and Medical Image
Processing.

How to cite this paper: Rajib Chowdhury, A.F.M. Saifuddin Saif, " Efficient Mathematical Procedural Model for
Brain Signal Improvement from Human Brain Sensor Activities ", International Journal of Image, Graphics and Signal
Processing(IJIGSP), Vol.10, No.10, pp. 46-53, 2018.DOI: 10.5815/ijigsp.2018.10.05

Copyright © 2018 MECS

I.J. Image, Graphics and Signal Processing, 2018, 10, 46-53

