International Conference on Smart Electronic Systems - 2016
KLE Society’s Dr M S Sheshgiri College of Engineering & Technology, Belagavi

International Journal of Technology and Science, ISSN (Online) 2350-1111, (Print) 2350-1103 Volume 3, Issue 4, 2016 pp. 50- 52

In-Vehicle Driver Health Monitoring
System
Savita Patil,
Bangalore
savitapatil.ec@gmail.com

Abstract—Automotive industry is moving towards
connected systems where many of the vehicles
parameters can be monitored and controlled remotely.
IoT (Internet of Things) is also making its way into
numerous aspects of human life. "In-Vehicle Driver
Health Monitoring System" will use multiple sensors
capable of capturing human activity parameters,
process the captured health data and feedback to avoid
loss. Benefits of bringing IoT power to In-vehicle health
monitoring system can be tremendous.
Index Terms—IoT (Internet of Things), Wearable Sensors,
Activity tracking, Cloud Computing, Health Care,
Automotive industry.

intervene and apply the brakes or stop the vehicle
and give indication lamps (blink the PBL).

II. SENSORS
To achieve our goal here, we can categorize the
sensors required into following three groups;
A. Wearable sensors
B. Device/Accessory connected sensors and
C. External sensors.
Now let us discuss the requirements for each
group of sensors and some sensors available in each
of these categories.
A. Wearable Sensors

I. INTRODUCTION
This concept is towards ensuring safe health
conditions of a person driving a vehicle. A person
driving a vehicle needs to be healthy and be able to
concentrate on driving. Any prolonged or sudden
health complications of the person driving the
vehicle can cause serious accidents/damages. Safety
can be ensured by continuous monitoring of some of
the health parameters of the driver and feedback fed
into the In-Vehicle control system to alert or take
possible measures to avoid unsafe driving causing
accidents and damages.
A driver's body parameters like body temperature,
heart rate, brain activity, muscle motion and other
critical data affecting health conditions can be
collected and monitored. Driver's facial expressions
can be kept under continuous observation for
example; blinking of eyes - If the number of times of
blinking of eyes is not within a normal range, then it
can be treated as sleep deprivation and his condition
as not safe for driving. If any of the parameter under
observation deviates from a normal value/range, an
alert system connected within the vehicle can
caution about it and even intrude and slowdown
vehicle, bring it to halt until the alert is
acknowledged and addressed. All the data from the
system can be saved in a cloud server.
Wearable Sensors for Activity Tracking, Camera
sensors and multiple other sensors can be used for
parameters monitoring. This data will be analyzed by
an IoT platform connected to cloud server.
Regular/critical outputs from the data processed can
be provided as feedback data to the in-Vehicle
monitoring system or to the user’s smart phone. So
that driver can park the vehicle nearby and take a
break or some safety feature in the vehicle can

www.i3cpublications.org

The simplistic form of a wearable sensor, a wrist
band or a watch, is already available abundantly in
the market. There are different vendors developing
and selling multiple varieties of wearable sensors [1].
These are capable of monitoring human activity
parameters including body temperature, brain
activity, blood pressure etc... The sensor(s) can also
be in the form of ring, chain or any accessory that
can be used on human body. Driver can have one or
multiple wearable sensors to collect the activity
parameters.
1. Hydration sensor: this can analyze various
electrolyte levels on the spot,that monitors
sweat to determine hydration status andyet
can fit in a palm or be worn on a wrist.The
sensing element or sensor can be calibrated
for a specific user or group of users.The patch
can then transmit all the information to the
smart phone.
2. BioStamp RC system: wearable sensor that
can be placed on various body locations to
capture targeted data. It can gather surface
electromyography (to detect driver drowsiness)
and electro cardiac activity. Easily accessible
on tablet and web applications allows cloud
basedstorage.
3. Emotiv EPOC is a 14-channel device that
requires the application of saline solution on
the user‘s head to increase the quality of the
EEG signal recorded.
B. Device/Accessory Connected Sensors
These are type of sensors which may not be
feasible to wear all the time by the user, but can be
part of the accessories that are in vehicle viz Drivers
seat, seat belt, steering wheel, gear liver, brake pedal

50

International Conference on Smart Electronic Systems - 2016
KLE Society’s Dr M S Sheshgiri College of Engineering & Technology, Belagavi

International Journal of Technology and Science, ISSN (Online) 2350-1111, (Print) 2350-1103 Volume 3, Issue 4, 2016 pp. 50- 52
etc... These can be fitted with sensors that could
collect data on certain body parameters and help
analyzing driver health condition. Heart rate,
breathing analyzers etc...
1.

2.

3.

Scanadu scout: A handheld sensor that when
placed against the forehead for 10 seconds
allows you to analyze, track, and trend your
vitals, including temperature, blood oxygen,
heart rate, respiratory rate and blood pressure
data to a smartphone with 99% accuracy. This
sensor could be fitted onto the steering control
application.
NeuroSky Mindset™ (2009), an audio 3
headset equipped with a single, dry EEG
sensor. It uses the Bluetooth® technology to
transfer signal samples wirelesslyto the host
computer.(
http://www.andrew.cmu.edu/user/btan/thes
is.pdf)
Ice: can be connected to the helmet or seat
belt to detect the impact of the collision or
accident and give warning signal. ICEdot
crash sensor is used in this.

Server

Sensor Data

Smart Phone / Wireless
device

Cloud Computing

IoT Platform

Figure1.Data flow

IV. SIMULATION
As shown in the Figure 1, data from sensors and
actuators will be sent by sensors to the smart phone
wirelessly. The sensors could be calibrated to single
user or multiple users depending on the application
of the sensors.

C. External Sensors
These are set of sensors that are placed nearby, to
monitor useful parameters that could help in
analyzing driver’s health. These include camera
sensors for facial expression detection including
closing or blinking of eyes, head posture, yawning
etc...
1. Cardiio : Calculates the person’s resting heart
rate.
2. AliveCor: Diagnoses Heart attacks.
3. Withing: Measure air quality and monitor
heart rate.

III. DATA PROCESSING AND ANALYSIS
Data from all the devices (heartbeat rate, body
temperature, brain activity data, camera images
etc..) connected in this health monitoring ecosystem
could be collected through a hand-held device like
smart phone or an in-vehicle device which is capable
of
collecting
data
wirelessly[Sensor
wireless
network][2]
Health parameters data collected is transmitted to
a cloud based system for data processing. Data could
be stored in the cloud server for stipulated time for
any further reference. Data analytics on these data
could help in analysis of different use cases
including these health parameters. Enabling cloud
computing for processing of these data can be done
through an IoT platform like Amazon Web Services
IoT or any other similar IoT platform [Internet of
Things][4]. Data is processed to derive vital
information about driver's health with all the
combinationsof data obtained.
Clinical methodologies to be adopted at the remote
system to provide information on the status based on
the obtained health parameters.

www.i3cpublications.org

Figure 2.Block Diagram
As shown in Figure 2, we can have all the sensors
connected to the microcontroller. Here we have taken
ARM7 LPC2168 for the simulation purpose. All the
sensor information could be collected in a
microcontroller. Over Wifi we can transmit the
sensor data to the mobile phone. We have a 16x2
LCD display connected to show the sensor readings,
Wifi connectivity etc… We have android phone at the
receiver end, which can get all the information sent
by the sensors.
We need to calibrate the Wifi device, ESP 8266 by
giving proper AT commands. At the receiver end you
can get all the sensor data with an android app. First
you need connect with ESP 8266 wifi connection.

51

International Conference on Smart Electronic Systems - 2016
KLE Society’s Dr M S Sheshgiri College of Engineering & Technology, Belagavi

International Journal of Technology and Science, ISSN (Online) 2350-1111, (Print) 2350-1103 Volume 3, Issue 4, 2016 pp. 50- 52
When we have successful connection LCD displays
the message: Wifi connected.
In this we check the patient’s health condition by
monitoring the heart beat. The heart beat is
monitored with the pulse rate of the body. The high
intensity light sensor senses the expansion and
contraction of the heart with the help of the nerves.
That beam will transmit the signal to the receiver
and the minuet change in the pulse is noticed as the
heart beat. If there is any change in the pulses then
it is noticed as the change in the heart and then the
controller will get a disturbed pulse count which
indicates the fault or malfunction of the heart. The
controller is fixed for a number of pulses initially. If
there is any change in any of the pulse counts, then
it is considered as a malfunction of the heart and
then it transmits the pulse count with the patient’s
ID to the doctor in the hospital and at the same to it
sends a SMS to a fixed number in the
microcontroller. After that we are adding another two
sensors for human. The precision in body heat
measure is +0.5degree centigrade.Measured the body
heat through lm35 temperature sensor. Another
sensor is ECG sensor.
A key product in this area is the SparqEE range of
products, including the original tiny CELLv[3]1.0
low-cost development board and a series of shield
connecting boards for use with the Raspberry Pi and
Arduino platforms.

Data on the cloud storage can be retrieved any time
for data analytics. The analysis of the stored data
can be obtained from IoT platform on any smart
phone or PC.
REFERENCES
[1] What is a Wearable Device? WearableDevices.com.
[2] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wireless_sensor_networ
k Wireless Sensor Network

[3] A Survey on Centralised and Distributed Clustering

Routing Algorithms for WSNs (PDF). IEEE 81st Vehicular
Technology Conference. Glasgow, Scotland: IEEE.
Spring 2015. doi:10.1109/VTCSpring.2015.7145650..
[4] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_of_ThingsInter
net of Things.
[5] "IoT Solutions & Services – IoT Cloud Platform, IoT
Modules, IoT Devices, IoT Apps"

[6] Wearable Photoplethysmographic Sensors—Past and
Present
https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/ca04/bcc2fdd9aed2b04e1f1
7c6bbb62f44dd3668.pdf
[7] A Survey on Human Activity Recognition using Wearable
Sensors
http://www.usf.edu/engineering/cse/documents/recentresearch-paper.pdf
[8] Parameter selection for health monitoring of electronic
products
https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/ddf9/008e72144d99eb46af
fce2bc82ec4016831a.pdf

There are bewildering connectivity options for
application engineers working on products and
systems for IoT.
Cellular is capable of sending large quantities of
data over GSM/2G/3G/4G, especially for 4G, while
this can be costlier and power consuming. But it can
be ideal for sensor-based low-bandwidth-data for
projects that will send very low amounts of data over
the Internet.
Many communication technologies well known
such as WiFi, Bluetooth, ZigBee and 2G/3G/4G
cellular can be used,but there are also several new
emerging networking options such as Thread.
It should give sufficient information in real time,
and make it available remotely. The intention is not
to achieve perfect clinical accuracy but the device is
able to detect anomalies in the measured data and it
also has alerting features. Authorized observers
(clinicians or family) can monitor at any moment the
state of the patient through the internet.

V. FEEDBACK AND ALERT SYSTEM
Report of the analysis can be categorized as
Normal, Deviated and Critical status. Status to be
displayed on display of the vehicle Infotainment
system. Any Critical data could override the current
data (some video-Audio running) on the display.
Deviated/Critical data can also be shared to people
who need to know the data, for example ,driver’s
immediate family and/or health care providers etc.

www.i3cpublications.org

52

