International Research Journal of Advanced Engineering and Science
ISSN (Online): 2455-9024

A Survey on Brainwaves and Its Analytics
Shankar Kantharaj, Saidutt Sharma
Information Science, BMSIT, Bangalore, Karnataka, India-560094
 Decrease in brain waves levels are also harmful as it
causes Inability to rejuvenate body and brain and poor
sleep
 Optimally levels brain wave levels are very useful
 Depressants and

Abstract— This paper describes the different types of brain waves,
what triggers them and the points of origin of the different types of
brain waves. It will be describing the various benefits of each type to
our physical and mental health and how we can enhance brainwave
activity. It will explain a few techniques to enhance the brainwave
activity in a particular frequency range. The detection by using EEG
and its working and some possible improvements which can be made
are covered. These can helpful in various fields and their
implementation to improve technology and also aid patients who are
physically handicapped.

B. Theta Waves
This range of frequency occurs during day dreaming and
sleep. Theta waves allow us to experience and feel deep
emotions however excess of theta waves can cause depression.
Theta waves can improve our intuition creativity and makes us
feel more natural. It’s also involved in restorative sleep and is
very beneficial as long as it is not produced in excess.
Theta rhythms are usually observed around the hippo-campus
in numerous species, including rodents, rabbits, dogs, cats,
bats and marsupials. Increased theta wave production can be
triggered through the consumption of depressants.
 Frequency range: 4Hz to 8Hz
 Excess
theta waves cause ADHD, depression,
hyperactivity and inattentiveness
 Lack of theta waves cause Anxiety, poor emotional
awareness and stress
 An optimal amount results in Creativity, emotional
connection, intuition and relaxation

Keywords— EEG, Brainwave entrainment, Neuro-feedback, Bionic
limbs, therapy, handicap, Machine learning.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Brainwaves are complex electronic patterns in our brains,
which are produced by synchronized electrical pulses from
masses of neurons communicating with each other. They are
detected using sensors placed on the scalp.
They are divided into bandwidths to describe their
functions and are best thought as a continuous spectrum of
consciousness. Brainwaves vary from very low frequency
waves like a very deep drumbeat to higher frequency waves
which are similar to a high pitch flute which can cohere with
each other through harmonics. Brain waves change according
to what we are doing when slower frequency brain waves are
dominant we feel tired and sleepy and slow but when higher
frequency waves are dominant we feel more active and
energetic. Brain waves speeds are measured in hertz and
according to their frequency are divided into various bands.
II.

C. Alpha Waves
Alpha waves bridge the gap between our conscious and
subconscious mind. It helps us calm down and can make us
feel deeply relaxed. In a state of excess stress, a phenomenon
called “alpha blocking” occurs which involves significant beta
activity, which will block out the alpha activity and result in
reduced alpha levels.

The frequency range of alpha waves are 8Hz to 12Hz

Excess alpha waves cause Daydreaming, loss of focus,
excess relaxation

Lack of alpha waves Anxiety, high stress, insomnia, OCD

In case of optimal levels of alpha is beneficial and helps
the body relax

Alcohol, Marijuana, relaxants, some antidepressant
increase levels of alpha waves in the brain

CLASSIFICATION OF BRAINWAVES

There are many types of brainwaves depending on their
own characteristics, each of which are listed and explained in
brief in this section.
A. Delta Waves
These are slowest brain waves, mostly found in young
children but as we grow older our delta levels tend to
decrease. They are associated with deep relaxation and
regenerative sleep. They also arise in unconscious body
function such as regulating heart beat and digestion. The
adequate production of delta waves helps us feel completely
rejuvenated after a good night’s sleep, an individual that
experiences abnormal delta activity may experience learning
disability and may have difficulty in maintaining conscious
awareness.
 Frequency range: 0Hz to 4Hz
 Excess Delta waves causes Brain injuries, learning
problems, inability to think, severe ADHD

D. Beta Waves
Beta waves are high frequency, low amplitude brain
waves, which usually occur when we are awake. They are
involved in conscious thought, logical thinking and tend to
have a stimulating affect. These are very fast brain waves that
most people exhibit throughout the day in order to complete
conscious tasks such as critical thinking, reading, writing and
socialization. Having an optimal amount allows us to complete
daily tasks efficiently, but excess can cause stress, anxiety and
unease. At still higher levels, it becomes difficult to think and
246

Shankar Kantharaj and Saidutt Sharma, “A survey on brainwaves and its analytics,” International Research Journal of Advanced
Engineering and Science, Volume 2, Issue 2, pp. 246-250, 2017.

International Research Journal of Advanced Engineering and Science
ISSN (Online): 2455-9024

focus clearly and we are likely to make bad decisions. This is
because at higher frequencies the brain cells and neurons
begin to fire wildly and chaotically, leading to a highly
disorganized and unfocussed state of mind.
A further increase could lead to the risk of a nervous
breakdown. The only way to relax is to lower down the
frequency of our brainwaves to alpha state.

Frequency range of beta waves 12Hz to 40Hz

Excess amount of beta waves cause Adrenaline, anxiety,
high arousal, inability to relax, stress

Lack of beta waves cause ADHD, daydreaming,
depression, poor cognition

Benefits of having optimal beat wave levels are Conscious
focus, memory, problem solving

electrical pulses. Here we try to achieve entrainment by
sending audio signals to the brain from outside.
There are three common modes of brainwave entrainment.
A. Binaural Beats
This is the most well-known form of brainwave
entrainment, where two slightly different frequencies are
presented to opposite ears. The brain perceives them as a
warbling sound at the difference frequency. These cyclic
pulsations are called binaural beats. The two input frequencies
should be lower than 1000 Hz and the frequency difference
below 30 Hz. Headphones are required for this technology to
work since the input to each ear is different.

E. Gamma Waves
These waves are involved in higher processing tasks and
higher cognitive functions. They are an essential part in
learning, memory and information processing and it is
believed that the gamma waves are important in the binding of
our senses in regard to perception and are involved in learning
new material. It has been shown that individuals who are
mentally challenged and have learning disabilities tend to have
lower gamma levels on average.

The frequency range of gamma is 40Hz to 100Hz

Excess gamma waves causes Anxiety, high arousal, stress

Lack of gamma results in ADHD, depression, learning
disabilities

Optimal level of gamma helps in binding senses,
cognition, information processing, learning perception,
REM sleep
III.

Fig. 1. Binaural beats in the brain after processing.

B. Monaural Beats
Monaural beats work similar to binaural beats and
combine two sound frequencies to form pulsating beats.
However, they are formed by combining the frequencies
digitally before the sound reaches the ears. They are
considerably more effective than binaural beats due to greater
amplitude variations compared to binaural beats.

BRAINWAVE ENTRAINMENT

People experience a soothing and relaxing feeling listening
to natural sounds such as a waterfall, beach, forest, river,
ocean waves etc. This occurs because all the sounds have a
relaxing effect on the brain. This is the basic idea behind
brainwave entrainment which has been taken a step further
that goes beyond the soothing effect of the normal music. The
relaxing natural sounds are embedded with special sub-audio
frequencies. These beats or tones are not directly perceived by
your ears by have a direct impact on your brainwaves. This is
the basis of brainwave entrainment.
While listening to entrainment music our brainwaves tend
to resonate at the frequency of the beats. If we change the
frequency of the beats, the brainwaves frequencies
synchronize with it. This allows us to control our brainwaves,
thus giving us control over our mental state.
For instance, a 10Hz beat will shift the brainwaves to the
alpha wave region (8-12 Hz).
Entrainment is when one vibrating object induces
vibrations of the same frequency into a nearby object which
may be vibrating at another frequency or not vibrating at all.
This is a very common phenomenon in nature. Whenever the
brain receives stimulus through eyes, ears or any other senses,
it responds by emitting an electrical charge. Entrainment can
be achieved by any form of rhythmic stimulus, such as
drumbeats, clicks, light flickers, physical vibrations or

Fig. 2. Monaural beats in the brain after processing.

C. Isochronic Tones
Isochronic tones are evenly spaced well-defined pulses of
sound waves. They are created manually by switching on and
off the sound source. This is by far most effective of the three
methods. The spacing between the pulses decides the
frequency of the tone. Here you have complete control over
the amplitude (intensity) as well as spacing of pulses.

Fig. 3. Isochronic beats in the brain after processing.

People following a healthy living style will find the use of
brainwave entrainment audios to be both practical and
beneficial. The brainwave audios can be used to offer a drug
free way to relax fast and effectively. Regular listening builds
up physical and emotional resilience and boosts the overall
sense of wellbeing.

247
Shankar Kantharaj and Saidutt Sharma, “A survey on brainwaves and its analytics,” International Research Journal of Advanced
Engineering and Science, Volume 2, Issue 2, pp. 246-250, 2017.

International Research Journal of Advanced Engineering and Science
ISSN (Online): 2455-9024

Stress and anxiety relief: The mental states of anxiety and
stress prompt high levels of beta activity. By entraining an
individual into an alpha frequency region, stress can be easily
relieved.
Relaxation: Alpha brainwaves are dominant during the periods
of relaxation and rest. Entraining brainwaves into the alpha
frequency puts the individual into states of relaxation. Lower
alpha frequencies give better relaxation.
Inducing sleep: The state of deep sleep is characterized by the
frequencies of delta brainwaves, 1-4 Hz. Feeding stimulating
frequencies in this range induces sleep when synchronization
is achieved.
Meditation: Theta and alpha waves contribute towards deep
meditative states. These are also the frequencies observed
during states of deep relaxation and sleep.
IV.

What Conditions Can It Help?
We are especially concerned with the more "intractable"
brain-based problems of childhood whose needs are not
currently being met. This includes, Seizures and sub-clinical
seizure activity, severely disruptive behaviour disorders such
as Conduct Disorder and Bipolar Disorder, Autistic spectrum
and pervasive developmental delay, Cerebral palsy, Acquired
brain injury, Birth trauma.
Many children have sleep problems that can be helped
such as Bed wetting, Sleep walking, sleep talking, Teeth
grinding, Nightmares, Night terrors. We can also be helpful
with many of the problems of adolescence including Drug
abuse, Suicidal behaviour, Anxiety and depression.
We can also help to maintain good brain function as
people get older. The good news is that almost any brain,
regardless of its level of function, can be trained to function
better.

NEUROFEEDBACK OF BRAINWAVES

Neurofeedback is direct training of brain function, by
which the brain learns to function more efficiently. We
observe the brain in action from moment to moment. We show
that information back to the person. And we reward the brain
for changing its own activity to more appropriate patterns.
This is a gradual learning process. It applies to any aspect of
brain function that we can measure. Neurofeedback is also
called EEG Biofeedback, because it is based on electrical
brain activity, the electroencephalogram, or EEG.
Neurofeedback is training in self-regulation. It is simply
biofeedback applied to the brain directly. Self-regulation is a
necessary part of good brain function. Self-regulation training
allows the system (the central nervous system) to function
better.
Neurofeedback addresses problems of brain dysregulation.
These happen to be numerous. They include the anxietydepression spectrum, attention deficits, behaviour disorders,
various sleep disorders, headaches and migraines, PMS and
emotional disturbances. It is also useful for organic brain
conditions such as seizures, the autism spectrum, and cerebral
palsy.
In this section we will discuss working of neurofeedback,
the conditions where it can be helped and its usage.

V.

DETECTION OF BRAINWAVES USING EEG

A device called Electroencephalograph (EEG), which is an
Electro physiological method used to monitor the brain state
of a person, can detect brain waves. This device is the most
common method of measuring brain waves and it involves no
invasive procedures for extracting brain signals of test patients
under study. Electrodes placed on the scalp can sense
fluctuations in the ionic currents produced by communication
of neurons or firing of signals between neurons.
Working: Billions of neurons maintain the brain’s electrical
charge. Neurons are electrically charged (or "polarized") by
membrane transport proteins that pump ions across their
membranes. Ions of similar charge repel each other, and when
many ions are pushed out of many neurons at the same time,
they can push their neighbours, who push their neighbours,
and so on, in a wave. This process is known as volume
conduction. When the wave of ions reaches the electrodes on
the scalp, they can push or pull electrons on the metal in the
electrodes. Since metal conducts the push and pull of electrons
easily, the difference in push or pull voltages between any two
electrodes can be measured by a voltmeter. Recording these
voltages over time gives us the EEG.
Research use: EEG are mainly use in neuroscience, cognitive
science, cognitive psychology, neurology and also
psychophysiological research. But treatment on mental
disabilities, such as Auditory Processing Disorder (ADP),
ADD, or ADHD can be diagnosed by using EEG
Advantages: Many other methods to study brain function exist
but there are various advantages of using EEG over them such
as:
 Hardware costs are significantly lower.
 EEG sensors can be used in more places than fMRI,
SPECT, PET, MRS, or MEG, as these techniques require
bulky and immobile equipment.
 EEG has very high temporal resolution, on the order of
milliseconds rather than seconds. EEG is commonly
recorded at sampling rates between 250 and 2000Hz in
clinical and research settings, but modern EEG data

How Does Neurofeedback Work?
We apply electrodes to the scalp to listen in on brainwave
activity. We process the signal by computer, and we extract
information about certain key brainwave frequencies. (All
brainwave frequencies are equal, but some are more equal
than others...) We show the ebb and flow of this activity back
to the person, who attempts to change the activity level. Some
frequencies we wish to promote. Others we wish to diminish.
We present this information to the person in the form of a
video game. The person is effectively playing the video game
with his or her brain. Eventually the brainwave activity is
"shaped" toward more desirable, more regulated performance.
The frequencies we target, and the specific locations on the
scalp where we listen in on the brain, are specific to the
conditions we are trying to address, and specific to the
individual.

248
Shankar Kantharaj and Saidutt Sharma, “A survey on brainwaves and its analytics,” International Research Journal of Advanced
Engineering and Science, Volume 2, Issue 2, pp. 246-250, 2017.

International Research Journal of Advanced Engineering and Science
ISSN (Online): 2455-9024

collection systems are capable of recording at sampling
rates above 20,000Hz if desired.
 EEG does not involve exposure to high-intensity (>1 tesla)
magnetic fields, as in some of the other techniques,
especially MRI and MRS. These can cause a variety of
undesirable issues with the data.
 Extremely un-invasive as it doesn’t require to put devices
physically inside our body, it is just a device we can put
like a cap.
Disadvantages: Many disadvantages are listed below.
 Low spatial resolution on the scalp. FMRI, for example,
can directly display areas of the brain that are active, while
EEG requires intense interpretation just to hypothesize
what areas are activated by a particular response.
 EEG poorly measures neural activity that occurs below the
upper layers of the brain (the cortex).

Signal-to-noise ratio is poor, so sophisticated data analysis
and relatively large numbers of subjects are needed to
extract useful information from EEG
VI.

response each change monitored by the headset. As the
software processes brain feedback, the well-received shapes
and changes are kept and expanded, while the disliked ones
fade away. This procedure goes on till we finally get an object
that is according to the user’s preferences. The company’s
Monster Dreamer project was applied on schoolkids to create
a monster they would imagine in minutes.
D. Drive A Wheelchair, Car
For many years, scientists have been working on a way to
allow people who have lost control of their bodies but still
have a sharp mind to have the ability to move around and this
problem can be solved by using a person’s brainwaves to
move a vehicle directly. In 2009, Japanese scientists at Toyota
and research lab RIKEN announced a thought-controlled
wheelchair that used an EEG sensor cap to capture brainwaves
and turn them into directional commands in just 125
thousandth of a second with a 95 percent accuracy.
At Lausanne, Switzerland's Federal Institute of Technology,
scientists have added "shared control" to the concept. Their
chair's software analyses the surrounding area's cluttered
environment and blends that information with the driver's
brain commands to avoid problems like collisions with
objects.
The system also eases the strain of command because users
needn't continually instruct the chair—the software processes
a single directional command and automatically repeats it as
often as needed to navigate the space.
German engineers at the Free University of Berlin have
attempted to take this concept on the open road with a car that
can be partially controlled by the driver's thoughts. The team
took an autonomous Volkswagen Passat, one of the emerging
breed of driverless vehicles, and outfitted it with a computer
system and software designed to work with Emotiv's
commercially available EEG brain-scanning headset.
Drivers were trained to produce recognizable thought
commands, like "turn left," by manipulating a virtual cube on
a screen. The on-board computer then analysed and converted
those thoughts to commands recognized by the car itself each
time they were thought by the driver.
The "BrainDriver" application is not roadworthy yet. But on
the long run, human machine interfaces like this could bear
huge potential in combination with autonomous driving--for
example, when it comes to decide which way you want to take
on a crossroad, while the autonomous cab drives you home.

APPLICATIONS OF BRAINWAVES

Brainwaves can be made use of in various technological
applications and also in studying and aiding patients suffering
from various physical disorders. Here are a few examples.
A. Compose and Play Music
The composition of music always takes place in the brain.
But through brainwaves musicians can now directly play
music from the brain without the need of using sheets of notes
or even using any instruments at all. Electroencephalography
(EEG) headwear devices can be used to send signals to the
computer in which their wearer would recognize the signals
they are sending by associating certain signals to a particular
task, wherein the computer would these tasks with the same
signals. Thus to create music, such thoughts would be
associated to musical notes and sounds to create musical
thought directly from the brain. This has been implemented by
the University of Michigan in the MIND ensemble (Music in
Neural Dimensions) program.
B. Screen Mobile Phone Calls
Brainwaves can be used in deciding which calls can be
allowed to pass through by monitoring to the state of the
brainwaves of the receiver. Thus if the receiver is in a tense or
busy state the call would get rerouted to voicemail, and if the
receiver is in a receptive state it lets the call go through.

E. Bionic Limbs
In some instances, human machine interfaces are
becoming part of the human body. One new prosthetic even
provides a sense of "touch" like that of a natural arm, because
it interfaces with the wearer's neural system by splicing to
residual nerves in the partial limb.
The prosthetic sends sensory signals to the wearer's brain
that produce a lifelike "feel", allowing users to operate it by
touch rather than by sight alone. This ability enables tasks
many take for granted, like removing something from inside a
grocery bag, and knowing how hard to grip items with the
prosthetic hand.

C. Create 3D Objects
A Chilean company has announced the first object to be
created by thought alone-paired with the growing power of the
latest 3d printing machines. They called the system the
Thinker Thing. The Thinker Thing system employs an Emotiv
EPOC EEG headset to map its wearer’s brainwaves. This
paired with the company’s own software the Emotional
Evolutionary Design, display “building block” shapes on the
computer screen.
It works by changing how to shapes change and evolve
according to the users positive and negative emotional
249

Shankar Kantharaj and Saidutt Sharma, “A survey on brainwaves and its analytics,” International Research Journal of Advanced
Engineering and Science, Volume 2, Issue 2, pp. 246-250, 2017.

International Research Journal of Advanced Engineering and Science
ISSN (Online): 2455-9024

Researchers at Case Western Reserve University, now
working with the Defence Advanced Research Projects
Agency (DARPA), developed the prosthetic DARPA is a
leader in the development of advanced prosthetics.

which this paper illustrates. The scope of brain waves is vast
and there is still a lot of work to be done in this field. With this
paper we hope to incite more people to do research in this
field and provide a better understanding of the importance of
brainwave studies.

VII. EEG APPLICATIONS

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

Few applications of EEG are listed below.

We would like to thank Dr. Ashwini Raj under whose
supervision we completed this paper and helped us with the
paper submission process.

A. Therapy
Real-time EEG has a role in the monitoring of the state of
mind of patients undergoing a variety of therapies.
EEG is a useful tool for practitioners in the treatment of
Addiction, Migraine, Depression, Sleep Disorders, Eating
Disorders, Anxiety, Learning Disabilities, Chronic Pain,
Epilepsy, Insomnia, Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD/ADD), Tourette's Syndrome, etc.

REFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]

B. Neuroscience Research
Many universities and institutions carry out research in the
field of neuroscience using EEG. The advantage of using EEG
is that the brain activity can be monitored even while the
person is engaging in his day to day activities. In the field of
neuro science research this device can be used to treat wide
range of neuro behavioural disorders including head injury,
epilepsy,
pain
syndromes,
movement
disorders,
cerebrovascular disorders, metabolic and neurodegenerative
disorders (including age-related), thought disorders, mood
disorders, anxiety disorders, personality and substance
dependence disorders, chronic stress, Alzheimer’s,
schizophrenia, and many other problems and illnesses.

[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]

news.nationalgeographic.com/.../130829-mind-brain-control-robotbrainwave-eeg-3d...: Applications of brainwaves
hubpages.com › Health › Mental Health › Anxiety Disorders:
Brainwave entrainment technology
mentalhealthdaily.com/.../5-types-of-brain-waves-frequencies-gammabeta-alpha-thet...: Types of brainwaves
http://www.scientificamerican.com/article/what-is-the-function-of-t1997-12-22/:Brainwave functions
www.science20.com › Life Sciences › Neuroscience › Florilegium:
How brainwaves and neurons create consciousness
http://www.brainworksneurotherapy.com/what-arebrainwaves:information on brainwaves
http://www.omharmonics.com/blog/gamma-brain-waves/:properties of
gamma waves
http://4mind4life.com/blog/2008/04/11/gamma-brainwaves/:information on gamma waves
http://www.md-health.com/Parts-Of-The-Brain-AndFunction.html:Various parts of the brain
http://www.brainworksneurotherapy.com/types-brainwaveentrainment:types of brainwave entrainment
https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Electroencephalography:eeg
information

VIII. CONCLUSION
There have been many prospects in the field of brainwaves
in recent years and there are many useful applications few of

250
Shankar Kantharaj and Saidutt Sharma, “A survey on brainwaves and its analytics,” International Research Journal of Advanced
Engineering and Science, Volume 2, Issue 2, pp. 246-250, 2017.

