International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology (IRJET)
Volume: 02 Issue: 09 | Dec-2015

www.irjet.net

e-ISSN: 2395 -0056
p-ISSN: 2395-0072

EEG BASED BRAIN COMPUTER INTERFACE FOR CONTROLLING HOME
APPLIANCES
B. SUJATHA1, G. AMBICA2
1 Associate

Professor, Department of ECE, LINGAYA’S INSTITUTE OF MANAGEMENT & TECHNOLOGY, INDIA

2M.Tech,

Department of ECE LINGAYA’S INSTITUTE OF MANAGEMENT & TECHNOLOGY/INDIA

-----------------------------------------------------------*****-----------------------------------------------------------ABSTRACT: This project discussed about a brain controlled
home appliances based on Brain–computer interfaces (BCI).
BCIs are systems that can bypass conventional channels of
communication (i.e., muscles and thoughts) to provide direct
communication and control between the human brain and
physical devices by translating different patterns of brain
activity into commands in real time. With these commands a
home appliances can be controlled. Here, we are analyzing
the brain wave signals. Human brain consists of millions of
interconnected neurons. The patterns of interaction between
these neurons are represented as thoughts and emotional
states. According to the human thoughts, this pattern will be
changing which in turn produce different electrical waves. A
muscle contraction will also generate a unique electrical
signal. All these electrical waves will be sensed by the brain
wave sensor and it will convert the data into packets and
transmit through Bluetooth medium. Level analyzer unit
(LAU) will receive the brain wave raw data and it will
extract and process the signal using Mat lab platform. Then
the instructions will be sending to the home section to
operate the modules (bulb, fan). The project operated with
human brain assumption and the on off condition of home
appliance is based on changing the muscle movement with
blinking.
KEY WORDS – BCI, Neurons, brain wave sensor, brain wave
raw, data Level analyzer unit (LAU).

I. INTRODUCTION
In this present world many people are coming across
many problems, one of those problems is physically
handicapped and aged people depending on others to
complete their tasks. Technology can be used to
reduce this problem to maximum extant using BCI
(Brain-computer
interface)[1].Brain-computer
interface is nothing but the interaction between the
human neural system and machines; it is a control
system which enables the people to communicate
and control a device by mere thinking.
© 2015, IRJET

Different brain states are the result of different
patterns of neural interaction. These patterns lead to
waves characterized by different amplitudes and
frequencies. This neural interaction is done with
multiple neurons. Every interaction between neurons
creates a minuscule electrical discharge. This project
dealing with the signals from brain. Different brain
states are the result of different patterns of neural
interaction. These patterns lead to waves
characterized by different amplitudes and
frequencies. The signals are recorded by
electroencephalogram (EEG) [2]. The signal
generated by brain was received by the brain sensor
and it will divide into packets and the packet data
transmitted to wireless medium (blue tooth)[3].the
wave measuring unit will receive the brain wave raw
data and it will convert into signal using MATLAB gui
platform. Then the instructions will be sending to the
home section to operate the modules (bulb, fan). The
project operated with human brain assumption and
the on off condition of home appliance is based on
changing the muscle movement with blinking. The
basic idea of BCI is to translate user produced
patterns of brain activity into corresponding
commands. A typical BCI is composed of signal
acquisition and signal processing (including
preprocessing, feature extraction and classification)
[4]. Although some BCI systems do not include all
components and others group two or three
components into one
Algorithm, most systems can be conceptually divided
into signal acquisition, preprocessing,
Feature extraction, and classification.

ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal

Page 580

International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology (IRJET)
Volume: 02 Issue: 09 | Dec-2015

www.irjet.net

II. DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION
This project work consists of a Processor using
ARM7core, brain wave sensor and alert unit obstacle
detection unit as hardware parts and an effective
brain signal system using Mat lab platform. In this
project initially the person’s attention level or else
the blinking level should be found out by the brain
wave sensor.

e-ISSN: 2395 -0056
p-ISSN: 2395-0072

which is called mindo3 initially we have to take the
data from the brain by using neurons position and
should store in the brain wave sensor. The
supportable sensor in the MATLAB is given in the
form of the following data function

Fig 1: Brainwave Headset provided by NeuroSky

The signals from our brain are taken by using the
brain sensor shown in fig;1. EEG Sensor to Sense the
Human brain, and it will be sensed by using the
Brainwave Headset which is provided by NeuroSky
i.e Dry electrode [5]. Technologies and those signals
will be transferred by using Bluetooth which is there
in the Brainwave headset, for this Brainwave headset
we need to give power using a AAA battery .The
Brainwave headset comes with Power switch, a
sensor tip, flexible ear arm and a ground connection
Ear clip. In this Headset we use Non-invasive sensor
that won’t cause any pain to the User who were the
headset. After inserting 3 AAA batteries switch on the
Brainwave headset automatically the LED indicator
will blink in GREEN colour which shows the sensor is
on.

Coding Platform:

In this project a brain computer interface system is
used which will do the key role in the entire
operation. For the BCI system, we are using the
MATLAB and for brain wave sensor and Processor
communication neurosky is used. The BCI will
process in the following way.
For calculating the blinking levels we need to use a
brain wave sensor support a neuro sky product
© 2015, IRJET

Fig 2: Brain Computer Interface Section

connectionId1
=calllib('Thinkgear','TG_GetNewConnectionId
');
Initially we need to check that sensor is connected or
not. The mind wave sensor software will provide the
information about the sensor connection. If the
sensor is connected we are enter into MATLAB
section for checking the blinking levels of person.

ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal

Page 581

International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology (IRJET)
Volume: 02 Issue: 09 | Dec-2015

www.irjet.net

e-ISSN: 2395 -0056
p-ISSN: 2395-0072

power, high performance and small size. Here in this
paper I’m using ARM7 processor and ARM processor
will receive the signals from the Bluetooth receiver
and it will process the signals and it will give the
signals to the Driver Circuit and according to that
signals received from the processor, according to the
signals received driver circuit controls the home
appliances. Here ARM processor will wait until the
signals received from the Brainwave headset and
after receiving the signals it will controls the
appliances. The driver circuit will connected to the
port 1 of the processor
Fig 3: DATA processing unit

Fig 4: Home section

The Data transmitted by the Brainwave headset will
be received by the Computer’s Bluetooth receiver.
And then all these data will be analyzed by the Level
Analysis platform. The Level Analysis platform will
extract the raw data using the MATLAB. After the
analysis of this data, this data will be sent to the
Home appliance controller using serial data
transmission i.e. RS232 According to the data
received by the RS232 the ARM processor will give
the directions to the GPIO to control the home
appliances.

III.SYSTEM HARDWARE
3.1 ARM Processor

The ARM processor is 32-bit embedded RISC
microprocessor. The ARM7 processor needs very low
© 2015, IRJET

3.2 EEG Signals
EEG signals can be collected with electrodes that are
placed on the surface of the scalp. The most widely
used electrodes are silver/silver chloride (Ag/AgCl)
because they have low cost, low contact impedance,
and relatively good stability. Furthermore, there are
rather mature commercialized acquisition systems
including the amplifier and EEG cap with integrated
Ag/AgCl electrodes, which have been successfully
applied in scientific research and clinical diagnosis.
However, using Ag/AgCl electrodes requires
removing outer skin layer and filling gel between
electrodes and scalp (and thus, this kind of electrodes
is also called “wet” electrodes). These operations take
long time and are uncomfortable to users. To address
these limitations of “wet” electrodes, some
researchers have been exploring “dry” electrodes,
which do not need to use gel and skin cleaning. The
main disadvantage of existing dry electrodes is that
the acquired EEG signals are worse than those
acquired with conventional electrodes due to the
increase of contact impedance. Some companies
(such as Quasar, Emotiv Systems Inc., and NeuroSky
Inc.) have been commercializing acquisition systems
based on dry electrodes. Here we are using NeuroSky
Brainwave headset. However, they are not yet
mature, and some researchers have doubts about
what physiological signals these systems actually
acquire.

3.3RS232communication
In telecommunications, RS-232 is a standard for
serial binary data transmission connection
between data terminal equipment and a DCE

ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal

Page 582

International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology (IRJET)
Volume: 02 Issue: 09 | Dec-2015

www.irjet.net

(information Circuit-terminating gear). It is more
often than not utilized in pc serial port through its

serial port, the module can communicate with any
logic and voltage compatible UART. The computer
will transform the data which is analyzed by using
the Level Analyzer unit using MAT lab. The data
which is transmitted by the RS232 module from the
computer will be received by the ARM processor.

3.4NeuroSky Technology
i. Brainwaves:
The last century of neuroscience research has
greatly increased our knowledge about the brain
and particularly, the electrical signals emitted by
neurons firing in the brain. The patterns and
frequencies of these electrical signals can be
measured by placing a sensor on the scalp. The Mind
Tools line of headset products contain Neurosky
Think Gear technology, which quantify the analog
electrical signals, commonly referred to as
brainwaves, and exercise them into digital signals.
The Think Gear technology then makes those
computations and signals available to games and
applications

ii. eSense

eSense is a NeuroSky's proprietary algorithm for
representing mental states. To calculate eSense, the
NeuroSky Think Gear technology intensifies the raw
brainwave signal and removes the ambient noise and
muscle movement. The eSense algorithm is then
applied to the remaining signal, resulting in
explicated eSense meter values. Please note that
eSense meter values do not interpret an exact
number, but instead describe ranges of activity. The
eSense meters are a way to show how effectively the
user is captivating Attention (similar to
concentration) or Meditation (similar to relaxation).

e-ISSN: 2395 -0056
p-ISSN: 2395-0072

The eSense Meditation meter shows the level of a
user's mental “calmness” or “relaxation”. Its value
ranges from 0 to 100. Note that Meditation is a
measure of a person's mental states, not physical
levels, so simply relaxing all the muscles of the body
may not instantly result in an intensified effect
meditation level. However, for most people in most
normal circumstances, relaxing the body often helps
the mind to relax as well. Meditation is related to
reduce activity by the active mental processes in the
brain. It has long been an observed that closing one's
eyes turns of the mental activities which process
images from the eyes. So closing the eyes is often an
effective method for increasing the
Meditation meter level. Distractions, wandering
thoughts, anxiety, agitation, and sensory stimuli may
lower the Meditation meter levels.

iv. eSense Meter - Technical Description

For each different type of eSense (i.e. Attention,
Meditation), the meter value is reported on a relative
eSense scale of 1 to 100. On this scale, a value
between 40 to 60 at any given moment in time is
considered “neutral” and is similar in notion to
“baselines” that are established in conventional
brainwave measurement techniques (though the
method for determining a Think Gear baseline is
proprietary and may differ from conventional
brainwaves).

IV.DESIGN FLOW
After Switching on the Brainwave headset and the
processor will initialize and the headset will starts
sensing the neurons signals and after sensing the
signals it will transfer them to through the Bluetooth
to the system it enter into the Matlab to check the
attention and eye Blinking Levels.

(a)Attention eSense:

The eSense Attention meter shows the intensity of a
user's level of mental “focus” or “attention”, such as
that which occurs during intense concentration and
directed (but stable) mental activity. Its value ranges
from 0 to 100. Distractions, wandering thoughts, lack
of focus, or anxiety may lower the attention meter
level.

(b)Meditation eSense:
© 2015, IRJET

ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal

Page 583

International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology (IRJET)
Volume: 02 Issue: 09 | Dec-2015

www.irjet.net

e-ISSN: 2395 -0056
p-ISSN: 2395-0072

Fig 5: Design Flow
Figure 6: Screenshot of Attention level and Blink level

V. RESULT AND DISCUSSION
The results are chected with NeuroSky headset, the
headset doesn’t give the 100% accuracy of
brainwaves but it is too good for its price and it can
give up to 80 % accuracy of brainwaves after
installing all the Neurosky software’s in PC, after
connecting the Headset with PC through PC using
Bluetooth, we need to wear the headset to the head
and then we needed to open the Mat lab Code and
run the program, after clicking run the program in
the command window of mat lab it will show the
brainwave is connected and blink is detected and
after that it will show the attention values and Blink
values which is shown in figure 6 After getting these
attention and blink values a graph will be generated
and In the graph there will be two signals, the Black
Signal is Blinking level and the red signal is Attention
signal shown in figure 7 . From here these signals will
be transferred to the processor, Processor decodes
the signals as per Brainwave signals and according to
the signals the Processor gives the commands to the
home section to control the appliances.

© 2015, IRJET

Figure 7: Screenshot of Graph (Black: Blink level, Red:
Attention Level)

VI.CONCLUSION
The signal generated by brain was received by the
brain sensor and it will divide into packets and the
packet data transmitted to wireless medium (blue
tooth).the wave measuring unit will receive the brain

ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal

Page 584

International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology (IRJET)
Volume: 02 Issue: 09 | Dec-2015

www.irjet.net

wave raw data and it will convert into signal using
MATLAB gui platform. Then the instructions will be
sending to the home section to operate the modules
(bulb, fan). The project operated with human brain
assumption and the on off condition of home
appliance is based on changing the muscle movement
with blinking. The Brain Computer Interface has
proved to be boon to the disabled persons by
providing them independent environment not by
manual control but by mere “thinking”.
REFERENCES
[1] sixto Ortiz jr.” Brain computer interfaces where
humanandmachinemeet”,computer
vol.40,no.1,pp.1721,jan.,2007
[2] Jie Liu and Ping Zhou, Senior Member, IEEE, “A Novel
Myoelectric Pattern Recognition Strategy for Hand
Function Restoration After Incomplete Cervical Spinal
Cord Injury” ieee transactions on neural systems and
rehabilitation engineering, vol. 21, no. 1, january 2013
[3] Luzheng Bi, Xin-An Fan, Yili Liu “EEG-Based Braincontrolled Mobile Robots: A survey”, Human-Machine
Systems, IEEE Transactions on(Volume:43, Issue:2), pp.
161-176, Mar 2013.
[4] Kale Swapnil T, Mahajan Sadanand P, Rakshe Balu G,
Prof. N.K.Bhandari “Robot Navigation control through EEG
Based Signals” International Journal Of Engineering And
Computer Science ISSN:2319-7242 Volume 3 Issue 3
March-2014 Page No. 5105-5108.
[5] J. C. Chiou, L. W. Ko, C. T. Lin, C. T. Hong, T. P. Jung, S. F.
Liang, and J. L. Jeng, “Using novel MEMS EEG sensors in
detecting drowsiness application,” presented at the 2006
IEEE Biomed. Circuits Syst. Conf.(BioCAS), London, U.K.

© 2015, IRJET

e-ISSN: 2395 -0056
p-ISSN: 2395-0072

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors would like to thank Ms.B.Sujatha for the
hardware and software development, useful discussion
and data acquisition.

BIBLIOGRAPHY:
GADE
AMBICA
pursuing
M.Tech in Lingayas Institute of
Management
&Technology,
Vijayawada in the Stream of
Electronics &Communication
Engineering was born on
23rdApril 1992.She received
graduation with a bachelor
degree in Electronics &
Communication
Engineering
Information from Amrita Sai Institute of Science &
Technology, Kanchikacherla in 2013.
Sujatha Bethapudi, M.Tech
working as an Assoc. Professor
in
ECE
Department
at
LINGAYAS
INSTITUTE
OF
MANAGEMENT
&
TECHNOLOGY,
Madalavarigudem, Vijayawada.
She was born on 10th June,
1979. Since her keen interest in
Embedded
systems,
Communications,
Processors
and strong support from LIMAT, the author is involved in
the development of monitoring, Communication Systems,
Processor based applications and other automation
applications for industries, Research & Development.

ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal

Page 585

