International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology (IRJET)

e-ISSN: 2395-0056

Volume: 05 Issue: 03 | Mar-2018

p-ISSN: 2395-0072

www.irjet.net

MINDGEAR - A gear change mechanism controlled by the mind
Nobel Philip 1, Karishma Lakhapate 2
1,2 Student,

Dept. of Mechanical Engineering, K.J. Somaiya College of Engineering, Maharashtra, India
---------------------------------------------------------------------***---------------------------------------------------------------------

BCI measures brain activity associated with the user’s intent
and translates this recorded activity into corresponding
signals for the respective BCI application. This signal is then
interpreted by a computer and carries out the function. BCIs
provide non-muscular interaction hence making it a
significant aid to those with disabilities.

Abstract - In this paper, we have researched about the idea

of introducing a gear change mechanism for automobiles
completely driven by the human brain by using braincomputer interface (BCI). The main aim of this technology is to
keep the driver completely focused on the road and not take
his hands off the wheel. This technology can be beneficial for
people who wish to drive but are restrained because of some
disabilities. This can mainly be achieved using motor imagery.
The process is carried out using Electroencephalography
(EEG).

Sensors present on the BCI device detect different types of
electrical and magnetic signals from the brain over different
areas. Electroencephalography (EEG) records electrical
activity from the scalp with the help of electrodes [2].

Keywords:
Brain-Computer
Interface
(BCI),
Electroencephalography
(EEG),
Semi-automatic
transmission, Motor Imagery.

There are two commonly used types of BCIs. The Partially
invasive BCIs are implanted on the inside of the skull but
outside the brain. This requires surgery to be done on the
user. Whereas the non-invasive BCIs are in the form of
headsets or wearable devices which have sensors that
measure brain activity from the outside. The non-invasive
ones are preferred since they don’t require a surgery, though
they have relatively poor strength due to the signals being
damped by the skull.

1. INTRODUCTION
Every moving vehicle requires a transmission system to
achieve change in speeds. Transmission is basically a
gearbox that comprises of gears and gear trains to provide
speed and torque conversions from a rotating input power
source or the driving gear to the output or the driven gear.
There are different types of transmission systems like the
Automatic, Manual and Semi-Automatic.

Moving something as big as a limb or as small as a muscle
causes brain activity. In fact, even the thought of movement
or imagination of movement causes change in the
sensorimotor rhythms. Sensorimotor rhythms refer to
oscillations in brain activity. These oscillations are
categorized according to frequency bands (delta: < 4 Hz,
theta: 4-7 Hz, alpha: 8-12 Hz, beta: 12-30 Hz, gamma: >30
Hz) [3]. ERD/ERS patterns can be produced by motor
imagery, which is the imagination of the movement without
actually performing the movement. Thus, even the thought
of moving a limb without even moving it causes signals to be
produced in the brain.

A semi-automatic transmission does not change gears
automatically, but rather has manual gear change without
the need of clutch engagement. The gear change can be
triggered by the information relayed by the computer or by
the driver using paddle shifts.
Many die-hard car enthusiasts love the manual transmission
over the automatic mainly because of how much fun they are
to drive. There is a level of control and involvement with
manuals that makes shifting so much more engaging than
automatic transmissions. For drivers who are comfortable
with driving a manual, many have a hard time going back to
an automatic. They trust their instincts more than the
sudden untimely shifts handled by the computer.

Therefore, BCIs can be controlled by imagining the
movement of the right hand, left hand, legs and other
distinctive features.
A little initial training is required to control the BCIs using
motor imagery as it may sound a little complicated. But as
technology advances, the easier it becomes to handle and
understand.

The manual transmission requires the driver to take their
hands off the wheel hence diverting their attention for a
couple of seconds. This can be avoided if the driver is able to
change gears without using his hands.

2. OBJECTIVE

What if we could execute gear change just by putting that
thought in our mind. This requires a concept that connects
the human brain and a computer. This concept is known as
the Brain- Computer Interface (BCIs) [1].

© 2018, IRJET

|

Impact Factor value: 6.171

The main aim of the paper is to design/construct a gear shift
mechanism that upshifts/downshifts and is completely
controlled by the brain, while still keeping both hands on the
wheel and eyes on the road, hence the driver has his/her
attention on the road all the time thus increasing safety.

|

ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal

|

Page 698

International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology (IRJET)

e-ISSN: 2395-0056

Volume: 05 Issue: 03 | Mar-2018

p-ISSN: 2395-0072

www.irjet.net

3. WORKING
We have the driver seated in the driver seat. He puts on a
headset that reads the signals from the brain. When it’s time
for the upshift of the gear, he just imagines movement of the
right arm. This produces signals in the brain that is picked
up by the BCI device and passed on to the computer. The
computer then relays this information to the vehicle and
causes the mechanical change to the next highest gear.
Same is the case for downshift, with the only change being,
the driver now imagines movement of his left arm.

Fig -2: Reusable EEG Electrodes [2]

4.2 Signal Amplifier

4. HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE

The signals received from the brain could be damped due to
interference by the skull.
Hence the voltage fluctuations measured at the electrodes
are very small, so the recorded data is digitized and sent to
an amplifier. These signals are amplified for further
processing.

4.3 Headset
Sample Since we are considering a non-invasive BCI, we
are looking at wearable headsets.

Fig -1: BCI Steps

4.1 Electroencephalography electrodes (EEG)

EMOTIV EPOC+ as shown in fig.3 is a wireless headset. It
has 14 saline sensors that offer optimal arrangement and
collection of signals with effective strength [4].

The Electroencephalography is the method used to record all
of the electrical activity generated by the brain from
electrodes placed on the scalp surface.
o

It measures electrical activity generated by the
synchronized activity of thousands of neurons.

o

It provides excellent time resolution, allowing
the analysis of which brain areas are active at a
particular time.

Recent EEG Non-Invasive BCI devices have better temporal
resolution due to the use of 256 electrodes occupying the
whole area of the human scalp. Reusable EEG electrodes as
shown in fig-2 are not as large as the disposable ones, and
this gives them an advantage of being able to be placed a lot
closer to the skin, even in areas with a lot of hair. These can
be made of gold, silver or tin since they are all good
conductors of electricity. They are used with headbands and
can also be fixed to headsets.

Fig -3: EMOTIV Headset [4]

4.4 Software
There are many commercial softwares available that are
designed for BCI applications. One among this is the
Neurobci. It allows the user to develop their own BrainComputer Interface based on biofeedback or neuro feedback
as created in HTML, Jscript, C++, MATLAB and Fieldtrip.

They need to be cleaned carefully after every use. Their
initial cost is higher than the disposable electrodes, however
this tends to even out over time as they are durable and have
an impressive lifetime.

4.5 Vehicle
A vehicle with semi-automatic transmission is used.
Semi-automatic transmission replaces the gear lever with a
set of actuators, and the clutch pedal with a hydraulic motor.

© 2018, IRJET

|

Impact Factor value: 6.171

|

ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal

|

Page 699

International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology (IRJET)

e-ISSN: 2395-0056

Volume: 05 Issue: 03 | Mar-2018

p-ISSN: 2395-0072

www.irjet.net

A computer (sometimes referred to as "TCM", or
"Transmission Control Unit") monitors various inputs, such
as the vehicle speed, engine torque, accelerator pedal
position, and more in order to determine when to change
gear and in which direction.
When it decides a gear change is necessary, it will engage the
clutch which in turn disengages the transmission from the
engine, then activate the shift actuators to affect a gear
change, then finally disengage the clutch so that engine is
once again driving the transmission.
This computer can be so programmed to take the input
coming in from the headset and trigger the gear change as
and when the driver has the thought in his mind.

5. CONCLUSIONS
The MindGear in short receives signals from the brain on the
required change of gear, which are transmitted through the
EEG wirelessly to the computer, hence performing the
action. This technology can prove to be effective for those
who are differently abled. This concept can be further
modified as per the user requirements/needs.
BCI is an interesting topic of research; it has the ability to
solve many seemingly impossible issues. Currently, BCI and
the use of EEGs are restricted mostly to gaming and
entertainment. This idea takes the concept of BCI one step
further.

REFERENCES
[1] Edited by Obermaier Bernhard, G.R. Muller and Gert
Pfurtscheller, “Brain Computer Interfaces: Revolutionizing
Human Computer Interaction”
[2] EEG Electrodes- http://www.greenteksensor.com/whatare-te-different-types-of-eeg-electrodes/
[3] Rabie A. Ramadan, S. Refat, Marwa A. Elshahed and
Rasha A. Ali, “Basics of Brain Computer Interface.”
[4] EMOTIV Headset - https://www.emotiv.com/

© 2018, IRJET

|

Impact Factor value: 6.171

|

ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal

|

Page 700

