Brain-Computer Interface Research at Katholieke
Universiteit Leuven
Nikolay V. Manyakov, Nikolay Chumerin, Adrien Combaz, Arne Robben,
Marijn van Vliet, Patrick A. De Mazière, and Marc M. Van Hulle
Laboratorium voor Neuro- en Psychofysiologie, K.U.Leuven, Campus Gasthuisberg,
O&N 2, Herestraat 49, 3000 Leuven, Belgium

{NikolayV.Manyakov, Nikolay.Chumerin, Adrien.Combaz, Arne.Robben,
Marijn.vanVliet, Patrick.DeMaziere, Marc.VanHulle}@med.kuleuven.be
ABSTRACT
We present an overview of our Brain-computer interface
(BCI) research, invasive as well as non-invasive, during the
past four years. The invasive BCIs are based on local fieldand action potentials recorded with microelectrode arrays
implanted in the visual cortex of the macaque monkey. The
non-invasive BCIs are based on electroencephalogram (EEG)
recorded from a human subject’s scalp. Several EEG paradigms were used to enable the subject to type text or to
select icons on a computer screen, without having to rely
on one’s fingers, gestures, or any other form of motor activity: the P300 event-related potential, the steady-state visual
evoked potential, and the error related potential. We report
on the status of our EEG BCI tests on healthy subjects as
well as patients with severe communication disabilities, and
our demonstrations to a broad audience to raise the public
awareness of BCI.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.4 [Information Systems Applications]: Miscellaneous

General Terms
Design, Experimentation

Keywords
Brain-computer interface, local field potentials, action potentials, electroencephalogram

1.

INTRODUCTION

Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) research has attracted
a lot of attention in recent years. It allows a subject to
communicate with the environment from brain signals directly, without speech or any other form of muscular activity. The results of BCI research, which is at the intersection
of different scientific disciplines, is expected to substantially

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
ISABEL ’2011 Barcelona, Spain
Copyright 20XX ACM X-XXXXX-XX-X/XX/XX ...$10.00.

contribute to rehabilitation and restoration of lost communication abilities of patients suffering from amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, stroke, brain/spinal cord injury, cerebral palsy,
muscular dystrophy, etc. The initial successes have attracted
attention not only in the scientific community, but also in
the popular media (see, for example, the movie ”Surrogates”
(2009), and episode 5.19 in the series “House MD“ (2009)).
Any BCI consists of the following components: equipment
for recording brain signals, a decoder, and an external device, usually a display on which visual feedback is given to
the subject, or an actuator, such as a wheelchair. In general,
BCIs are either invasive [1] or noninvasive [2]. The invasive
BCIs rely on recordings made with electrodes implanted in
the brain (e.g., local field potentials and action potentials)
or with electrodes placed on the cortical surface (electrocorticogram), whereas the noninvasive ones mostly rely on
electroencephalograms (EEGs) recorded from the subject’s
scalp.

2. INVASIVE BCI RESEARCH
Invasive BCIs are usually based on electrodes implanted
in the motor cortex, and use regressors and classifiers for
decoding the recorded signals, e.g., for tracking the arm
(or hand) position and for controlling prosthetic devices [3].
BCIs using implants in the visual cortex have received much
less attention. To bridge this gap, we targeted our invasive
research towards the decoding of recordings made in the
monkey’s visual cortex.
The visual perception of objects is assumed to start with
the detection of low-level features such as color, orientation,
curvature, and so on. Orientation plays a particularly important role since it is implicated in the extraction of the
contour and 2D shape of visual objects. There is a wealth
of evidence that the visual cortex consists of orientation selective nerve cells or neurons [4]. The evidence served as
the basis of population codes for the information representation in the brain [5]. The development of discriminative
brain signal features and the application of powerful machine learning techniques could lead to the construction of a
low-level visual decoder. Additionally to the decoding itself,
BCI systems also generate feedback to the subject, which in
turn, given the presence of perceptual learning, could lead
to better discriminative brain signals to which the decoder
should be adjusted.
In our research, we constructed invasive BCIs from local
field potentials (LFPs), reflecting the summation of numerous overlapping electrical fields generated by hundreds of

neurons [6]) or from action potential (spikes), reflecting the
activity of a single neuron or of a few neurons (multiunit
activity). Both were recorded chronically with a Utah array
consisting of 10 × 10 microelectrodes, implanted in visual
cortical area V4 of two rhesus monkeys. Contrary to LFPs,
the extracellularly recorded action potentials were lost after
several days/weeks of recording due to cell expiration, inflammation, reactive gliosis and scarring. Since LFPs tended
to be more stable, at least in our case, they were considered
for studying the decoding performance of long-term brain
implants.
For our LFP-based decoder, we used chronical recording
made over several months in two monkeys. During a recording session, the monkey was shown one of two oriented gratings, one of which led to a juice reward and the other not.
We focused on the LFP signal features, in the time interval
starting from the onset of the stimulus and ending well before the time instant when the reward could be given (conditional training). We analyzed how these signal features
depended on the presentation of a reward or a no-reward
stimulus (and the background), and how they varied as a
function of training time. One such signal feature was phase
synchrony and we showed that it is significantly higher for
the rewarded stimulus than for the unrewarded one [7]. After training the monkey, this difference is based on the reward, not the stimulus. The dependency of the synchrony
on the electrode distance suggests the possible presence of
propagating waves from one end of the array to the other.
We then developed a new strategy for the single trial decoding of our invasive recordings [8]. It is based on three
types of features applied to LFPs: wavelet-based features of
LFPs from individual electrodes, and two types of spatial
features: phase synchrony between electrode pairs and wave
propagation [9]. These features led to an improved separability of the brain responses, to the two types of stimuli,
during conditional training [10]. We were able to show that
the two types of spatial features mentioned yielded a significant improvement in the single-trial decoding accuracy and,
therefore, could be candidate LFP features also for other
decoding applications. From a neuroscience perspective, the
excellent single-trial performance we obtained in predicting
the presence of a rewarded versus an unrewarded stimulus
from LFP recordings shows that stimulus-reward association
has a profound effect in area V4.
We have also performed the spike-based decoding of the
orientation of a visual grating displayed to a monkey, irrespective of the grating’s spatial frequency [11]. Since the cell
responses are less strong in visual areas than in motor areas, the recordings contained spikes with smaller amplitudes
compared to the noise level. By consequence, rather than
attempting to extract and assign spikes to individual neurons, feature selection was applied to extract the required
information. Two types of feature selection procedures were
compared, filter and wrapper. The wrapper is combined
with a linear discriminant analysis (LDA) classifier, and the
filter is followed by a radial-basis kernel support vector machine (SVM) classifier. In addition, since we have a multiclass classification problem, different methods for combining
pairwise classifiers were compared. We showed that an LDA
together with a wrapper was shown to yield the best decoding performance [11].

As for noninvasive BCI work, our aim is to develop a wireless, portable BCI system operating in real-time. We use
the wireless EEG device developed by imec 1 , built around
their ultra-low power 8-channel EEG amplifier chip [12]. It
consists of two parts: an amplifier coupled with a wireless
transmitter and a USB stick receiver. Each EEG channel is
sampled at 12 bits per sample and 1000 Hz. We use an EEGcap with large filling holes and sockets for active Ag/AgCl
electrodes (ActiCap, Brain Products). The recordings are
made with eight electrodes. The reference and ground electrodes are placed on the left and right mastoids respectively.
A notch filter is always applied to remove the 50 Hz powerline interference.
Our BCI system is implemented in MATLAB as a clientserver application and can run either in parallel MATLAB
mode (as two labs) or on two MATLAB sessions started as
separate applications. The server part is responsible for the
EEG data acquisition, processing and classification. The
client part is responsible for the BCI logic, the user interface and the rendering. The client-server communication is
implemented using sockets and, due to a minimal data transfer rate (during recording only commands are sent from the
server to the client), it can work over a regular network, allowing one to run the BCI application on two different computers. For an accurate (in terms of timing) visualization of
the stimuli, we have used the Psychotoolbox2 .

3.1 BCI based on P300
The first type of noninvasive BCI we concentrated on is
based on the detection of the P300 component of EventRelated Potential (ERP: a stereotyped electrophysiological
response to an internal or external stimulus [13]). This brain
potential is elicited in the context of an oddball paradigm:
when a subject perceives two types of events, one of which
occurs only rarely, the rare event will elicit in the EEG an
ERP with an enhanced positive- going component at a latency of about 300 ms (the P300) primary above parietal
cortex.
A spelling system based on the detection of this ERP was
introduced in 1988 by Farwell and Donchin [14], and it is one
of the most studied BCIs. The work presented here deals
with a similar application. The P300 Speller allows subjects
to spell words by focusing on the desired characters shown
in a matrix while the rows and columns of the matrix are
consecutively and randomly intensified. The intensification
of a row or column containing the target symbol will elicit a
P300 potential and, by detecting this ERP component, the
BCI is able to identify the target row and column and, thus,
retrieves the symbol the subject has in mind.
Ideally, one sequence of intensifications of each row and
column would suffice to identify the target symbol. Unfortunately, the low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of the ERP makes
P300 almost undetectable in a single trial. It is, therefore,
common practice to repeat several times the sequence of intensifications, in order to average the EEG responses and
increase the SNR. Depending on the number of repetitions,
this approach can lead to a dramatic increase of the time
needed to communicate a symbol. It is thus important to
work on robust and efficient feature extraction/selection and
classification techniques to reduce required number of repetitions.
1

3.

NONINVASIVE BCI RESEARCH

2

http://www.imec.be
http://psychtoolbox.org

Our P300 Speller research was mostly concentrated on
the development and selection of powerful machine learning
algorithms to arrive at a robust, yet fast P300 detection.
We developed a feature extraction approach [15] based on
an algorithm proposed in [16] and a feature selection approach [17] based on the group methods of data handling
(GMDH) [18]. Our on-line comparison results on healthy
subjects suggested that, in general, feature extraction performs better for EEG signal amplitudes as features [19].
To boost the classification rate, we also considered timefrequency features and common spatial pattern features as
steps prior to classification [20], and we tried to optimize
the time- and frequency range of the P300 BCI speller [21].
Results obtained with healthy subjects suggested that not
only the P300 has its impact to the classification performance, but also the early ERP components, starting from
about 200 ms (the necessity of taking into account these
early components, in more occipital sites, was also confirmed
in a patient study in [23]). As to the frequency range, the
interval [0.1;10] Hz should be kept for further classification.
Different linear [22] together with nonlinear classifiers [23]
were also compared during an on-line testing of the P300
speller on (partially) disabled subjects. We found that the
Bayesian linear discriminant analysis (BLDA) [24] together
with the nonlinear SVM (nSVM) yielded the better classification accuracy. When taking into account the geometry of
the spelling matrix, we showed that the BLDA classifier, for
the case of the rows, and the BLDA together with nSVM,
for the case of the columns yielded, in general, the smallest
standard deviations between the actually typed and the intended characters (while mistyping mostly occurs either in
the same row or column), suggesting that those classifiers
lead to a more concentrated distribution of mistakes [23].
We also observed that the vertical standard deviation of mistakes is in general smaller than the horizontal one, particularly for the most accurate classifiers, especially when more
than 5-6 intensification sequences were taken for averaging.
Our results with (partially) disabled subjects suggested that
motor aphasia deteriorates the applicability of P300 leading
to what one might call a BCI illiteracy [23].

3.2 BCI based on SSVEP
The steady-state visual evoked potential (SSVEP) relies
on the psychophysiological properties of EEG brain responses
recorded from the occipital area during the periodic presentation of identical visual stimuli (flickering stimuli). When
the periodic presentation is at a sufficiently high rate (> 6
Hz), the individual transient visual responses overlap and
become a steady state signal: the signal resonates at the
stimulus rate and its multipliers [13]. This means that, when
the subject is looking at stimuli flickering at frequency f1 ,
we can detect f1 , 2f1 , 3f1 , ... in the Fourier transform of the
EEG signal recorded form the occipital pole. Since the amplitude of a typical EEG signal decreases as 1/f in the spectral domain, the higher harmonics become less prominent.
Furthermore, the fundamental harmonic f1 is embedded into
other on-going brain activity and (recording) noise. Thus,
when considering a small recording interval it is quite likely
to detect an (irrelevant) increase in the amplitude at frequency f1 . Finally, when building a BCI based on SSVEP,
not one but several frequencies need to be simultaneously
displayed, one for each command the subject wants to issue. Therefore, the detection problem becomes more com-

plex since now one of several possible flickering frequencies
fi need to be detected from the EEG recordings.
For our SSVEP BCI system, we used signals from above
occipital cortex. The recorded EEG signals underwent spatial filtering according to the minimum noise energy combination [25] and classified with the use of a (weighted) sum
of SNRs in signals after filtering [26]. As a primary application, a spelling device was developed, where the subject
could type symbols of his/her choice by directing the gaze
onto character (or group of characters) flickering at a particular frequency [27]. A comparison of the synchronous mode
(for a fixed duration of stimulation and a sequential signal
processing and decoding) and the asynchronous mode of operation (were all system components work in parallel: signal
recording, processing and decoding are performed during the
stimulation phase) revealed the superior performance of the
latter in terms of the information transfer rate (ITR) (number of bits conveyed per minute). As a second application,
“The Maze“ game was developed, in which case the subject
needs to navigate an avatar in a maze-like environment [28].
This game is targeted for a broad audience, to demonstrate
what BCI can do. It was tested by 53 persons during the
i-brain & senses event3 . In order to make the BCI game
more attractive, we did not use our conventional EEG system, but utilized a commercial EEG gaming headset EPOC
from Emotiv 4 . This enabled us to reduce the EEG preparation time, since the EPOC does not require conductive gel.
However, as we needed to access brain regions other than
the ones the EPOC was designed for, we had to reverse the
EPOC (rotate 180o axially). Feedback from the players was
collected anonymously. The results revealed that 66% of the
players reported a good control over the game, while only
3.8% reported no control at all. This shows the potential
applicability of EEG-based BCI in gaming, since also 85%
reported that they had fun with it (and no one reported to
dislike it). The ability to control the game was strongly correlated (0.7031) with the ability to concentrate during the
game, indicating the necessity to be involved and to keep
a proper level of attention going to flickering stimuli. As a
third application, we combined object detection with BCI
with the aim to develop a new way of subject-environment
interaction [29]. This application enables the subject to select an object from a restricted set of them with the use
of the SSVEP paradigm; the objects were captured with a
camera and presented on the screen. Such a system could
be used in hospitals to enhance the interaction of bedridden, temporarily immobilized patients with objects present
in their rooms.
Apart from frequency domain, we also developed time domain based decoders [30], since they have been conjectured
to yield a better performance for the SSVEP paradigm [31].
Rather than using FFT and frequency domain features, time
domain SSVEP classifier utilize a stimuli-locked averaging of
the EEG response (with lengths equal to integer multiples
of the periods of the stimulation frequencies used), and further classify the time-amplitude feature scores by means of
linear classifiers [30]. This method enables one to obtain
more precise SSVEP estimates when using computer based
displays. (Note that such displays do not have a refresh rate
that is exactly equal to, e.g., 60 Hz, but rather a slightly
3
4

Ghent, Belgium, 18–19 March, 2011
http://www.emotiv.com

smaller one.) Indeed, it allows for a more accurate detection using shorter recording intervals: frequencies that can
not be distinguished with FFT, because of the limited spectral resolution of a short recording interval, can now become
distinguishable.
While the previously discussed SSVEP BCI systems achieve
a reasonable ITR, since they rely on a computer screen
(monitor) for the visual stimulation, they have some limitations: the stimulation frequencies are related to the refresh
rate of the computer screen [32] (they could not be higher
than half the screen’s refresh rate), and restricted to specific
(subject-dependent) frequency bands, in order to obtain a
good SSVEP response, the harmonics of some stimulation
frequencies could interfere with one another (and their harmonics), leading to a deterioration of the decoding performance [32], and so on. These restrictions limit the number
of targets that can displayed simultaneously in a SSVEPbased BCI. In order to have more targets, the phase of the
SSVEP could be used as an alternative [33]: even a single
frequency could be used but with different phase lags, for
encoding different targets. Thus, by extracting phase information from the Fourier transform of the EEG signal, and
by comparing it to the phase of some reference signal(s), one
can detect the target the subject is looking at. We have developed classifiers for decoding phase information in SSVEP
using a multilayer feedforward neural network based on multivalued logic [34] and using a fuzzy logic controller [35].
Both of these classifiers incorporate circularity in the input
(phase shift) and output (classes), and are able to deal with
multichannel data. When comparing the results, the proposed decoding methods perform better for a larger amount
of target classes and for a sufficient length of the decoding
window.

single-trial decoding of the ErrP in the terms of the ErrP
detection accuracy, as well as the sensitivity (i.e., the proportion of ErrP segments that are correctly identified) and
the specificity (the proportion of non-ErrP segments that are
correctly identified) [38]. The latter measure is particularly
important for a BCI system, since we have to minimize the
occurrence of accidentally generated mistakes as a result of
the automatic ”correction“ of faithfully typed symbols, while
also keeping the correct detection of mistyped symbols high
(but having in mind that their correction potentially can
also be done with the use of the back space symbol). We
have found that the linear SVM has very high values for
the specificity and relatively lower values for the sensitivity,
while the LDA shows a more balanced performance for the
specificity and the sensitivity. But for the global accuracy,
the linear SVM seems to outperform the LDA.
To show the potential of an ErrP-based correction strategy for a P300 Speller, we evaluated the efficiency of correcting the mistyped symbols by replacing it with the second most probable symbols (in terms of the classifier ranking) [38]. We found that, for all tested subjects, the SVM
outperforms the LDA. But only for 2 out of our 3 subjects
the SVM-based ErrP detection is beneficial (the resulting
typing accuracy was higher than without ErrP correction),
after using around 100 and 250 typed symbols for training
the classifier.

4. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
NVM is supported by the research grant GOA 10/019, NC
is supported by IST-2007-217077, AC and AR are supported
by IWT doctoral grants, MvV is supported by IUAP P6/29,
MMVH is supported by PFV/10/008, CREA/07/027, IST2007-217077, G.0588.09, IUAP P6/29, GOA 10/019.

3.3 ErrPs in the Context of BCI
Like any communication system, a BCI is prone to mistakes. One could attempt to incorporate the correction of
those mistakes into the BCI system. This can be done,
for example, in the case of the speller, by including the
backspace character into the spelling matrix. But a more
elegant way to cope with mistakes is to detect the so-called
Error-related Potentials (ErrPs). They were suggested to
be generated in the anterior cingulate cortex with a spatial
distribution over the fronto-central regions of the scalp, and
related to the subject’s perception of an error [36]. Thus,
whenever the system detects an ErrP in the EEG recordings,
evoked in response to the subject realizing an error has occurred, the system is in a position to correct the error (using
some error correction algorithm), at least in principle.
We have investigated the ErrP when recording online with
the P300 BCI speller. We considered 6 healthy subjects [37]
and found that, on average, the difference between ErrPs
and potentials occurring when correctly typing characters
has a statistically significant negative peak at 320 ms followed by a positive one at 450 ms. This was most prominently the case for electrodes Fz and FCz. This suggests
that these time instances could be important for ErrP detection.
In order to evaluate the integration of ErrPs into a P300
BCI spelling system, we performed a study with several
longer recording sessions so as to collect a sufficient amount
of ErrPs. (Note that, in a properly working BCI systems,
errors should occur only infrequently.) We evaluated the

5. REFERENCES
[1] M. Velliste, S. Perel, M.C. Spalding et al. Cortical
control of a prosthetic arm for self-feeding, Nature 453:
1098–1101, 2008.
[2] N. Birbaumer, A. Kübler, N. Ghanayim et al., The
thought translation device (TTD) for completely
paralyzed patients, IEEE TRE 8(2): 190–193, 2000.
[3] G. Santhanam, S.I. Ryu, B.M. Yu et al. A
high-performance brain-computer interface, Nature 442:
195–198, 2006.
[4] W. Vanduffel, R.B. Tootell, A.A. Schoups, and
G.A. Orban, The organization of orientation selectivity
throughout macaque visual cortex, Cereb Cort 12:
647–662, 2002.
[5] A. Pouget, P. Dayan, and R. Zemel, Information
processing with population codes, Nat Rev Neurosci 1:
125–132, 2000.
[6] G. Buzsáki, Rhythms of the brain, Oxford, 2006.
[7] N.V. Manyakov and M.M. Van Hulle, Synchronization
in monkey visual cortex analyzed with an
information-theoretic measure, Chaos 18(3):037130,
2008.
[8] N.V. Manyakov and M.M. Van Hulle, Discriminating
visual stimuli from local field potentials recorded with a
multi-electrode array in the monkey’s visual cortex, in
IEEE MLSP, Cancún, Mexico, Oct 16–19, 2008,
pp.157–162.

[9] N.V. Manyakov, R. Vogels and M.M. Van Hulle,
Decoding stimulus-reward pairing from local field
potentials recorded from monkey visual cortex, IEEE
TNN 21(12): 1892–1902, 2010.
[10] N.V. Manyakov, J. Poelmans, R. Vogels and
M.M. Van Hulle, Combining ESOMs trained on
hierarchical feature sets for single-trial decoding of LFP
responses in monkey area V4, in ICAISC, LNAI 6114,
Part II, pp. 548–555, 2010.
[11] N.V. Manyakov and M.M. Van Hulle, Decoding
grating orientation from microelectrode array
recordings in monkey cortical area V4, Int J of Neur
Syst 20(2): 95–108, 2010.
[12] R.F. Yazicioglu, T. Torfs, P. Merken et al.
Ultra-low-power biopotential interfaces and their
applications in wearable and implantable systems,
Microel J 40(9):1313–1321, 2009.
[13] S.J. Luck. An introduction to event-related potentials
technique, The MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts,
2005.
[14] L.A. Farwell and E. Donchin, Talking off the top of
your head: toward a mental prosthesis utilizing
event-related brain potentials, Electroenc and Clin
Neurophys 70(6):510–523, 1988.
[15] N. Chumerin, N.V. Manyakov, A. Combaz et al. P300
detection based on Feature Extraction in on-line
Brain-Computer Interface, in KI’2009, LNAI 5803, pp.
339-346, 2009.
[16] J.M. Leiva-Murillo and A. Artes-Rodriguez,
Maximization of mutual information for supervised
linear feature extraction, IEEE TNN 18(5): 1433–1441,
2007.
[17] N. Chumerin, N.V. Manyakov, A. Combaz et al. An
Application of Feature Selection to On-Line P300
Detection in Brain-Computer Interface, in IEEE
MLSP, Grenoble, France, Sep. 2–4, 2009.
[18] A.G. Ivakhnenko and G.A. Ivakhnenko, The review of
problem solvable by algorithm of group methods of data
handling, Pat Recogn Image Anal. 5(4):527–535, 1995.
[19] N. Chumerin, N.V. Manyakov, A. Combaz, and
M.M. Van Hulle, Feature Selection and Feature
Extraction Approaches to P300 Detection in On-line
Brain-Computer Interface, in SfN meeting, Chicago,
Illinois, U.S.A, Oct 17–21, 2009, no. 687.5.
[20] A. Combaz, N.V. Manyakov, N. Chumerin et al.
Feature Extraction and Classification of EEG Signals
for Rapid P300 Mind Spelling, in ICMLA, Miami
Beach, Florida, USA, 13-15 Dec. 2009, pp. 386–391.
[21] N.V. Manyakov, N. Chumerin, A. Combaz, and M.M
Van Hulle, On the selection of time interval and
frequency range of EEG Signal Preprocessing for P300
Brain-Computer Interfacing, in MEDICON 2010,
IFMBE Proceedings 29, pp. 57–60, 2010.
[22] N.V. Manyakov, N. Chumerin, A. Combaz, and
M.M Van Hulle, Comparison of linear classification
methods for P300 Brain-Computer Interface on
disabled subjects, in BIOSIGNALS, Rome, Italy, 26-29
Jan 2011, pp. 328–334.
[23] N.V. Manyakov, N. Chumerin, A. Combaz, and
M.M. Van Hulle, Comparison of classification methods
for P300 Brain-Computer Interface on disabled
subjects, Comput Intel and Neurosc, Vol. 2011, Article

ID 519868, 2011.
[24] U. Hoffmann, J-M. Vesin, T. Ebrahimi, and K.
Diserens, An efficient P300-based brain-computer
interface for disabled subjects, J of Neurosc Meth 167:
115–125, 2008.
[25] O. Friman, I. Volosyak, and A. Gräser, Multiple
channel detection of steady-state visual evoked
potentials for brain-computer interfaces, IEEE TBE
54(4):742–750, 2007.
[26] N. Chumerin, N.V. Manyakov, A. Combaz et al.
Subject-Adaptive Steady-State Visual Evoked Potential
Detection for Brain-Computer Interface, in IDAACS,
Prague, Czech Republic, Sep 15-17, 2011.
[27] H. Segers, A. Combaz, N.V. Manyakov et al. Steady
State Visual Evoked Potentials (SSVEP) - based brain
spelling system with synchronous and asynchronous
typing modes, in NBC15, IFMBE Proceedings 34, pp.
164–167, 2011.
[28] N. Chumerin, N.V. Manyakov, A. Combaz et al.
Steady State Visual Evoked Potential based Computer
Gaming - The Maze, in INTETAIN, Genoa, Italy, May
25–27, 2011.
[29] A. Robben, N. Chumerin, N.V. Manyakov et al.
Combining Object Detection And Brain Computer
Interfacing: Towards A New Way Of
Subject-Environment Interaction, in IEEE MLSP,
Beijing, China, 18-21 Sep, 2011.
[30] N.V. Manyakov, N. Chumerin, A. Combaz et al.
Decoding SSVEP responses using time domain
classification, in IJCCI, Valencia, Spain, 24-26 Oct
2010.
[31] A. Luo and T.J. Sullivan, A user-friendly
SSVEP-based brain–computer interface using a
time-domain classifier, J of Neur Eng 7:026010, 2010.
[32] I. Volosyak, H. Cecotti, and A. Gräser, Impact of
Frequency Selection on LCD Screens for SSVEP Based
Brain-Computer Interface, in IWANN, Part I, LNCS
5517, 706–713, 2009.
[33] C. Jia, X. Gao, B. Hong, and S. Gao, Frequency and
Phase Mixed Coding in SSVEP-based Brain-Computer
Interface, IEEE TBE 58(1):200–206, 2011.
[34] N.V. Manyakov, N. Chumerin, A. Combaz et al.
Decoding Phase-based Information from SSVEP
Recordings with Use of Complex-Valued Neural
Network, in IDEAL, LNCS 6936, pp. 135–143, 2011.
[35] N.V. Manyakov, N. Chumerin, A. Combaz et al.
Decoding Phase-Based Information From Ssvep
Recordings: A Comparative Study, in IEEE MLSP,
Beijing, China, 18-21 Sep, 2011.
[36] C.B. Holroyd and M.G. Coles, The Neural Basis of
Human Error Processing: Reinforcement Learning,
Dopamine, and the Error-Related Negativity, Psych
Rev 109: 679–709, 2002.
[37] A. Combaz, N. Chumerin, N.V. Manyakov et al.
Error-related Potential recorded by EEG in the context
of a P300 Mind Speller Brain-Computer Interface, in
IEEE MLSP, Aug 29 - Sep 1, 2010, Kittilä, Finland,
pp. 65–70.
[38] A. Combaz, N. Chumerin, N.V. Manyakov et al.
Towards the detection of Error-Related Potentials and
its integration in the context of a P300 Speller
Brain-Computer Interface, Neurocomputing 2011.

