Submission No.:C000025
Affective Measurement

Improvement of BCI operation accuracy by the VR human bod...
Brain-computer Interface, Virtual Reality, Motor Imagery,...

ISASE 2020

Improvement of BCI operation accuracy by the VR human body
motion feedback
Yuki SHIMIZU*, Hisaya TANAKA*
* Kogakuin University, 2665-1 Nakano-cho, Hachioji-shi, Tokyo, 193-0015 Japan
em19007@ns.kogakuin.ac.jp hisaya@cc.kogakuinac.ac.jp
Abstract: This paper proposes a brain-computer interface virtual reality (BCI-VR) to improve brain-computer interface
(BCI) operation accuracy using hand animation feedback by virtual reality. At first, we thought event-related
desynchronization/synchronization (ERD/ERS) response is easier to detect in the case of imagining of hand than in the case
of imagining of arm since the corresponding area of the motor cortex of the hand is larger than that of the arm. As a result,
we assumed that BCI operation accuracy is improved. Thus, we compared the effect of imagining of making fists and of
imagining of conventional arm raising. Also, we conducted an experiment to operate the BCI to find BCI accuracy of
operation, and a sense of agency (SOA) was obtained using the seven-point Likert scale. The results demonstrated that the
imagine of making fists was higher than the conventional imagine of arm raising in both the average of operation accuracy
and the SOA. However, the Mann-Whitney's U test depicted no significant difference between the accuracy of the imagining
of making fists and of imagining of arm raising. Additionally, it was found that there was a positive correlation between
BCI operation accuracy and SOA. Therefore, motor imagery of making fists is considered to be good for improving the
accuracy of the BCI operation but it needs to be verified. It was also suggested that the accuracy of BCI operation could be
improved if the SOA could be obtained. In the future, we will continue to develop BCI-VR to improve the BCI.
Key words Brain-computer Interface，Virtual Reality，Motor Imagery，Sense of Agency，Feedback

1. INTRODUCTION
Generally, the brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) are
computer technologies that use brain wave response
similar
to
human
psychology.
The
electroencephalographic
(EEG)
event-related
desynchronization/synchronization (ERD/ERS) response
is observed directly above the motor area during an
intentional musculoskeletal movement motor imagery [1] ．
The interface performance of the BCI includes the
number of objects being operated (number of switches),
time from intention to operation (response speed), and
operation accuracy (correct answer rate). Wada et al. have
subjects trained to recognize hand movement images from
a first-person viewpoint and when the emerging ERD
exceeds a threshold, the exoskeleton robot attached to the
hand is synchronized with the images and multi-sensory
feedback. Their result demonstrated that ERD intensity
increased significantly before and after the training [2].
Further, our research group proposed a body movement
feedback that raises arms using virtual reality (VR) easily
obtains a sense of agency (SOA) and improves operation
accuracy than the bar graph animation or cube floating
movement [3]. However, the operation accuracy was 65%
in the best case and 40% even after 3 months of training,
so detecting the ERD/ERS response with high sensitivity
remained an unsolved problem.
However, homunculus showed by Penfield et al.,

knows that the area of the corresponding area of the motor
cortex is larger for the hands than for the arms [4]. We
thought ERD / ERS response is easier to detect in the case
of imagining of hand than in the case of imagining of arm
since the corresponding area of the motor cortex of the
hand is larger than that of the arm. As a result, we thought
BCI operation accuracy is improved
Therefore, in this paper, we trained the imagine of
making fists, created BCI, and verified the effect. We
obtained the number of correct operations per specified
number of times and calculated the ratio as the operation
accuracy. Furthermore, we measured the subjective
evaluation of whether the SOA was obtained using the
seven-point method.
2. METHOD
2.1 Brain-computer interface virtual reality
Brain-computer interface-virtual reality (BCI-VR) is a
computer system for controlling the VR using the EEG,
which was developed by our research group [3]. The
system was developed by combining Emotiv (EEG
headset) with Unity. The screen shown was a feedback to
the subject, and it was possible to give feedback as if they
were raising their arms by imagining raising arms without
raising their arms (Figure 1).
In the BCI-VR of this paper, the EEG measurement
device was replaced with g.USBamp biosignal amplifiers

1
Language:英語

ISASE 2020
ISASE

Submission No.:C000025
Affective Measurement

Figure 1: Arms animation feedback (Raising arms)

(Guger Technologies) and the analysis program was
composed of Simulink/MATLAB (Math Works). The
feedback part used Sixense Unity Plugin provided by
Unity Asset Store (Figure 2).

Figure 2: Hands animation feedback (Making fists)

Figure 3 shows when imagine of making a fist is
extending a bar to the right in screen, and when resting is
extending to the left . In this study, we used this to
construct feedback. In the BCI-VR, when the bar is
extending to the right, the hand animation is making fists,
and when the bar is extending to the left, the hand is
opened (rest). Since it is not yet revealed how to convert
the bar size to hand animation, the bar size was ignored,
and only the direction was reflected as feedback. Although
the hardware and software differ greatly from the
conventional system, the procedure up to the BCI
operation is the same.

Improvement of BCI operation accuracy by the VR human bod...
Brain-computer Interface, Virtual Reality, Motor Imagery,...

create the discriminant model. The discrimination model
can classify unknown EEG data online as imagine rest or
motor imagery by the BCI. The recorded brain activities
in this initial non-feedback run were used to set up a
subject-specific classifier for the classification in the
following feedback runs.
2.3 Online classification
In online classification, FB is performed using the
discrimination model created in the offline classification.
The feedback to the subject is shown on the screen as a
body animation (Figure 2). When the discrimination result
is to imagine rest, the hands’ animation moves from the
closed state to the open state (if it is fully opened, it does
not move anymore). When the discrimination result is
motor imagery, the hands animation moves from the open
state to the closed state (if it is completely closed, it does
not move anymore). The opening and closing speed of the
hands’ animation was locked.
2.4 EEG Recording
Brain signals were recorded by g.USBamp biosignal
amplifiers from four EEG electrodes that were placed over
the primary sensorimotor cortex according to the
international 10–20 system (F3, P3, F4, P4). A reference
electrode was mounted on the right ear and a ground
electrode on the forehead. A bipolar derivation method
was used, and the differences between the conventional
and the proposed BCI-VR, including the electrode
arrangement were summarized (Table1，Figure4).
Table 1: BCI-VR(previous study & current study)

Figure 3: Correspondence between Bar graph feedback and
Hands animation feedback

2.2 Offline classification
Offline classification is required for online feedback.
First, wear an EEG cap with electrodes on the head. After
practicing the gripping exercise, acquire the teacher data.
The teacher data is the two states of imagining of making
fists or imagining resting and the corresponding EEG.
According to the trigger signal of the EEG, run consisting
of 40 trials (i.e., 20 trials per class rest/motor imagery
presented in a randomized order) was conducted without
feedback.
Next, a discriminant model is calculated using linear
discriminant analysis (LDA) with the teacher data. The
g.BSanalyze (Guger Technologies software) was used to

Figure 4: EEG electrodes

2.5 Subjects
Five healthy subjects (5 males, age twenties)
participated in this experiment. The first experience BCI
operation for Sub.5 among Sub.1-5. Subjects were given

2
Language:英語

ISASE 2020
ISASE

Submission No.:C000025
Affective Measurement

Improvement of BCI operation accuracy by the VR human bod...
Brain-computer Interface, Virtual Reality, Motor Imagery,...

the details of the experiment in advance, and they
consented to join the experiment before experimenting.
Subjects reach under the display. They look like their arms
connected to the hand on the screen. Subjects cannot see
their own hands. Sub.6 and Sub.7 are the previous study
subjects [3]. They imagined of raising arms.
3. EXPERIMENT
Subjects sat in a chair and the experimenter mounted the
EEG electrodes to subjects. The experiment consists of
preliminary measurement, training, measurement, and
questionnaire (Figure 5).

Figure 5: Experimental paradigm

3.1 Preliminary Measurement
In the pre-measurement, a discriminant model for
discriminating the state imagine of rest and imagine
making fists shown in Section 2.2 (Offline classification)
making fists the according to hands’ animation displayed
on the screen. Instructions were letters on the screen
(Figure6) ．

3.4 Questionnaire
We asked subjects about the SOA when they operated
BCI by as a psychological index.
Q) Did you feel that you were moving the operation
target (hand model)?
Subjects scored Q based on the seven-point Likert
scale, where 1 denoted, “Didn't feel such thing at all” and
7 denoted, “Felt it strongly” And the opinions and
impressions about the experiment were freely described.
3.5 Evaluation
The BCI operation accuracy was determined by the
true operation, and defined as the correct rate (CR)
operation. The CR [%] is a correct rate in the confusion
matrix, which is derived from the average of each correct
response against intended imageries. It is calculated based
on the number of times when the subject response and the
instruction match (1). The I1:R1, I1:R2, I2:R1 and I2:R2
are numbering in the confusion matrix, which are numbers
of trials on the BCI experiment. I1:R1 is that subject rest
state when instructed to rest state, I1:R2 is that subject
make fists when instructed to rest state, I2:R1 is that
subject rest state when instructed to make fists and I2:R2
is that subject make fists when instructed to make fists.
(Table2) Motor Imagery is when the hand animation is
determined to be making fists, and Rest is when the hand
animation is determined not to making fists.
1

𝐶𝑅[%] = (

𝐼1:𝑅1

2 𝐼1:𝑅1+𝐼1:𝑅2

+

𝐼2:𝑅2
𝐼2:𝑅1+𝐼2:𝑅2

) × 100 … (1)

4. RESULTS

3.3 Measurement
In the measurement, feedback is performed only by
imagine the motion of the making fists. Except for this
point, it is the same as training.

Table 2: Total of imagery accuracy on making fists (N = 5)
Subjects responses

imagery

3.2 Training
In this training, motor imagine while making fist
according to the instructions. The instruction method and
instruction contents are the same as in the premeasurement. Using the discriminant model created in
advance measurement, feedback was performed by
discriminating EEG into two states imagine of rest or
imagine of movement. The experiment was performed to
give the subjects a concrete image of BCI's operating.

Intended

Figure 6: Trial flow

From the measurements, the number of rests for the
rest instruction and the number of motor imagery for
motor imagery instruction for total subjects is shown
(Table 2). The CRs are tabulated with bars graph. The
painted-out bar graph is CR to subjects (Sub.1-5)
imagined of making fists and the border of the bar is CR
to subjects (Sub.6-7) imagined raising arms (Figure 7).
The average of CR was 54 [%] for imaging of making fists
and 40 [%] for imaging of raising arms. The MannWhitney U test for the CRs of imaging of making fists or
raising arms showed a p-value of 0.31 and no significant
difference.

3
Language:英語

ISASE 2020
ISASE

Rest state

Rest state

Making fists

R1

R2

I1

40

60

Making fists l2

32

68

Submission No.:C000025
Affective Measurement

Figure 7: Each subject of the correct rate (N = 7)

The results of the questionnaire are shown for each
subject in the experiment (Table 3). The average of the
SOA was 5.8 for imaging of making fists and 3 for
imaging raising arms. The correlation between CR and
SOA were determined (Figure 8). The correlation is 0.53,
and the coefficient of determination was 0.27.
Table 2: Each subject’s sense of agency(N=7)

Figure 8: Correlation between
CR and SOA (Max = 7, Min = 0) (N=5)

5. DISCUSSION
The results demonstrate that the Mann-Whitney U test
for the CRs of imagining of making fists or raising arms
showed a p-value of 0.31 and no significant difference.
However, the average of CR was 54 [%] for imagining of
making fists and 40 [%] for imaging of raising arms. The
average value of CR shows that the imagining of raising
arms is higher than imaging of making fists. Thus, in the
BCI operation, it is considered that motor imagery using
hands can improve the CR, but further verification is
needed in the future.
The average of the SOA was 5.8 for imaging
of making fists and 3 for imaging raising arms.
Therefore, it can be said by the psychological index that
subjects could perform operating BCI as desired by the
imagining of making fists more than imagining of raising
arms. However, the subject’s SOA is high regardless of

Improvement of BCI operation accuracy by the VR human bod...
Brain-computer Interface, Virtual Reality, Motor Imagery,...

the subject CR. The criteria for recognizing that BCI
operation is possible to vary greatly between subjects.
Therefore, subjects with low CR may feel that they were
able to operate as intended if they moved a little as
instructed. The correlation between CR and SOA was 0.52,
which found to be positive. Therefore, it is assumed that
it is better to obtain SOA to improve CR.
From the free description of the questionnaire and the
comments from the subjects, it was found that the BCI
operation required considerable concentration. Therefore,
it is desirable to have an environment in which taking a lot
of breaks reduces the burden on the subjects and allows
them to concentrate. Furthermore, there was an opinion
that if a different instruction was given before and after,
the later instruction would be influenced by the previous
instruction, making it difficult to switch. Looking at the
subject's data, we confirmed that many people were
resting or imagining of the motor continuously. In the
future, we intend to improve the above problems while
developing feedback using hand animation and aim to
further improve the operation.
6. Conclusion
In this paper, to improve the BCI operation accuracy,
we created a BCI-VR using body motion feedback by VR
and verified the effect of the imagining of making fists.
The ratio was calculated as the operation accuracy, and the
SOA was obtained and measured subjectively by the
seven-item method. As a result, the imagine of making
fists was higher than the conventional imagine of raising
arms in both the operation accuracy and the SOA.
Therefore, it is considered that the hand-holding motion
of the hand is good for improving the operation accuracy
in the motion imagine during BCI operation.
References
[1] G.P. Furtscheller，F.H. Lopes da Silva; Event-related
EEG/MEG Synchronization and Desynchronization:
Basic Principles, Clinical Neurophysiology; 110 ，
pp.1842-1857，1999．
[2] K. Wada, Y. Ono, M. Kurata, M. ITO, M. Minakuchi,
M. Kono, T. Tominaga; Development of a Brainmachine Interface for Stroke Rehabilitation Using
Event-related Desynchronization and Proprioceptive
Feedback, Advanced Biomedical Engineering; 8, 5359, 2019.
[3] S. Kaneta, T. Nishigaki and H. Tanaka; Analysis of
Sense of Agency on BCI-VR System, The Institute Of
Electronics, Information And Communication
Engineers, IEICE Technical Report; 116(342), pp.4146, 2016.
[4] W. Penfield, T. Rasmussen, The Cerebral Cortex of
Man. in A Clinical Study of Localization of Function;
The Macmillan, New York, 1950.

4
Language:英語

ISASE 2020
ISASE

