2015 19th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Examining User Experiences Through A Multimodal BCI Puzzle Game
Fotis Liarokapis, Athanasios Vourvopoulos, Alina Ene
Masaryk University, Universidade da Madeira, Mezzo Movies Ltd
{liarokap@fi.muni.cz, athanasios.vourvopoulos@m-iti.org, alina.ene@mezzoglobal.com}
Abstract

gaming industry is constantly looking for new ways of
improving user experiences using new technologies.
Typical examples include the Nintendo Wii controller as
well as Microsoft’s Kinect. However, the majority of
games are still based on standard means of input such as
keyboard and mouse. Even if some new devices arose
(i.e. Wii, Kinect) they would still not totally fulfill player
satisfaction.
This paper focuses on determining the relationship
between user experience enhancement and cheap
commercial BCIs in games. In particular, the aim of the
study was (a) to examine whether a plug-and-play BCI
device as an additional component of the existing
interaction metaphor (i.e. keyboard and mouse) can be an
effective mechanism for games and (b) if the gaming
experience can be enhanced. For this purpose, a Tetris
game was designed featuring two modes (non-BCI and
BCI input) which require users to meditate in order to
change the game difficulty. Thirty participants were
asked to report on the two modes separately. Results
indicate that an affordable one-sensor BCI device that
requires no prior calibration in games positively
contributes to enjoyability however raises mental
demand. Also, there is no reported drop in performance
in a hybrid system where direct control is not handled by
a BCI input. Meditation cannot be self-regulated making
short-term direct control a bad design decision in future
BCI gaming scenarios for one-sensor headsets.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows.
Section 2 presents relevant work. Section 3 illustrates the
game that was implemented. Section 4 the architecture of
the system. Section 5 presents method used for the
evaluation whereas section 6 the comparative user study
with both qualitative and quantitative results. Finally, our
conclusions and future work are presented.

This paper presents a study of users’ experiences in
low cost multimodal brain-computer interface (BCI)
games. A 2D puzzle game (Tetris) was designed
featuring two modes (non-BCI and BCI input) which
require users to meditate in order to change the game
difficulty. Thirty participants were asked to report on the
two modes separately. Results indicate that a one-sensor
BCI device in games positively contributes to
enjoyability but raises mental demand. There was no
reported drop in performance in a hybrid system where
direct control is not handled by a BCI input. It was found
that meditation could not be self-regulated making shortterm direct control a bad design decision in future BCI
gaming scenarios for one-sensor headsets.
Keywords--- brain-computer interfaces, computer
games, human-machine interaction

1. Introduction
The first brain-computer interface (BCI) was
introduced back in 1964 [1] and since then there has
been a lot of progress, especially during the last decade.
A BCI provides an alternative way for natural
communication and control by bypassing the body’s
normal efferent pathways, which are the neuromuscular
output channels [2]. Most BCIs are based on
electroencephalography (EEG) signals which record
voltage fluctuations within the neurons of the brain using
electrodes [3]. It is a very well established method,
which has been used in clinical and research settings for
many years. The advantage of using EEG technology is
that it is inexpensive, lightweight, and easy to use
producing high temporal resolution. On the other hand,
the spatial resolution and the frequency range are limited.
Also, the EEG signals are prone to noise [4].
Virtual environments can be used as a safe, costeffective, and flexible training and testing ground for
prototypes of BCI applications [5]. The same applies for
video games which can be considered as a simple type of
virtual environments (VEs). There are various
possibilities in VEs (and video games) to provide users
with ways to control different scenarios using BCIs.
They can be combined with other input modalities in
order to modify them to control game situations [6]. The
1550-6037/15 $31.00 © 2015 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/iV.2015.87

2. Background
Games can be designed in such a way that control by
brain input is possible and that game environments know
how to adapt to cognitive and/or motor skills of the
gamer [6]. There have been many examples of BCI
games that are solely controlled by brain activity. A
typical example is the introduction of a BCI-based game
training paradigm which enables assessment of
continuous control performance [7]. A range of offline
results and online analysis of the game illustrate the
488

potential for the proposed BCI and the advantages of
using the game as a BCI training paradigm. The most
similar application to this research presented here is a
non-invasive BCI-Tetris game in three different versions
[8]. Two versions are based on the P300 event related
potential (ERP) and one combines the P300 ERP with
the control of sensorimotor rhythms. Results from the
user-study claimed that the BCI-Tetris can be effectively
controlled but only 2 subjects participated. Also the
interaction of the game was not multimodal.
Moreover, there are a lot of research prototypes that
have a multimodal meaning and combine BCIs with
other gaming controllers such as keyboard, mouse and
other controllers [9]. A typical example of a multimodal
BCI game is the Bacteria Hunt game with the main aim
of ‘eating’ as many bacteria as possible [10]. The
amoeba is controlled by using the keyboard whereas the
emoeba is modulated by the user’s alpha activity (higher
alpha results in more control). In the game FindingStar,
users control the entities of the game based on emotional
signals coming from the BCI as well as standard input
devices (i.e. the mouse and the keyboard) to defeat
monsters and solve puzzles [11]. NeuroWander game
uses the emotional and attentional states of the user to
perform various quests and the navigation is performed
using the mouse and the keyboard [12].
Furthermore, Affective Pacman was developed to
investigate the different levels of frustration in users
while playing the BCI game [13]. The game is controlled
by using two buttons that rotate the game. Results
showed that ‘no frustration’ seems to be more effective
than with ‘more frustration’. In another study, a steadystate visual evoked potential (SSVEP) based-BCI, was
used to control an avatar in the game World of Warcraft
[14]. Participants had to control four different icons.
Three were used to turn left, right, and forward the avatar
and another one to perform certain actions such as
grasping objects and attacking other objects. A
MindGame based on the original P300 row-column
speller paradigm using a checkerboard-styled game
board with 28/18 fields and 12 randomly positioned trees
was also proposed [15]. The fields with the trees are
potential targets in an oddball paradigm and thus the
player’s task is to move the character from tree to tree.
Another approach proposed a P300-based game, with
aim to control the movement of a virtual object along a
path specified by the examiner [16]. Four arrows were
randomly flashed in peripheral positions of the monitor
corresponding to the four possible directions that control
the ball.

NeuroSky headset extracts the Attention and Meditation
levels of the user, by raw EEG signals and the patterns of
the electrical activity are analyzed with the help of
specialized algorithms by converting the EEG signals
into control commands. Although NeuroSky is using
only one dry sensor placed in the frontal lobe, it remains
the cheapest interface with the least complex setup. It is
worth-mentioning that although there are other
commercial BCIs with more sensors (i.e. Emotiv EPOC),
thus better accuracy in translating the mental state, the
setup cost is significantly higher. In terms of operation,
data is transmitted from the user to the device through
electrodes/sensors placed at the appropriate places on the
user’s scalp. The raw EEG data are then converted into
attention and meditation values in the range of 0 to 100.
These ASCII values are then passed on to the game that
processes them according to the current context of the
game. A 2D Tetris game (see section 4), takes the user’s
input in the form of key strokes and meditation level by
the BCI device. With each level of difficulty, the speed
of the falling bricks increases taking into consideration
the number of achieved lines and the meditation level.

4. Tetris Game
The game is a Java based desktop application which
makes it available on most operating systems (see:
http://youtu.be/OEkWzy09Txg). The code had to be
modified to accommodate the headset’s EEG input
system and support the other previously mentioned
facilities (flexible speed, logs, username, meditation
use). The ThinkGear interface provided by NeuroSky
was used to connect the device to the application. The
Tetris game’s purpose was to teach the players how to
self-regulate their state of mind in a stressful demanding
situation to their own benefit as the more meditative they
manage to become the slower each shape will fall in the
context of the level’s speed. The difference this feature
will make becomes more prominent as the levels
increase. The game is multimodal, supporting a “BCI
input” and a “no BCI input” mode. In the latter,
meditation is defaulted at 50% of its maximum possible
value; the speed is only being affected by the number of
cleared lines. An instance of the game depends on three
factors: the name of the player, the log’s creation
timestamp and the use of meditation. Tutorial sessions
are recognised by the cancellation of the instance’s log
irrespectively of the selected mode.
The speed of the current falling brick is determined
by the number of milliseconds required for the shape to
traverse one line down (move on the Y axis from y0 to
y0-1). The bigger this step time value is, the slower the
brick will fall. In particular, for the BCI input mode, the
step time will be 150 milliseconds to which the double of
the current meditation level is added. As the game
progresses, the number of lines cleared multiplied by 5 is
subtracted from the step time, whereas for the “non BCI
input” mode, the current meditation value defaults to half
of its full potential (50%). A generated log’s name
format (CSV files) is constructed out of the current

3. System Overview
A laptop equipped with a 32-bit Intel Core 2 Duo
processor P7350 at 2.0 GHz and 3.00 GB of RAM were
utilized in conjunction with the inexpensive non-invasive
commercial BCI device. In particular, the NeuroSky
Mindset headset was used for this is the only device that
can be used for game interaction without prior
calibration since it is based on a single dry sensor. The

489

user’s name, game mode and timestamp at the time of
creation. For each second of gameplay, the
corresponding level, score, meditation and attention
levels and other EEG data (the Delta (0.5 - 2.75Hz),
Theta (3.5 - 6.75Hz), Low Alpha (7.5 - 9.25Hz), High
Alpha (10 - 11.75Hz), Low Beta (13 - 16.75Hz), High
Beta (18 - 29.75Hz), Low Gamma (31 - 39.75Hz), and
High Gamma (41 - 49.75Hz) rhythms) are gathered as
part of these logs (see section 6.3).

mental state are provided. According to [17], the
Meditation eSense meter is badly affected by
distractions, anxiety and other external stimuli and it is at
its best (close to 100%) when the user is relaxed, calm.
After going through the gaming scenario,
participants were asked to rate the two modes separately
on a scale from 1 (Low) to 5 (High) taking into
consideration mental demand, physical demand,
temporal demand, performance, effort, frustration,
learnability and satisfaction. These questions were
closely followed by open-ended questions that aimed in
collecting feedback on the overall experience and
possible future improvements. The subjects were
selected via random sampling to generate a non-biased
set of results from a section that is more representative of
the sample.

5. User Evaluation
This section presents the participants and procedure
followed for evaluating both modes. All participation
attempts started with each user being firstly instructed to
read the participant information leaflet and fill in the
consent form. The Tetris game was evaluated by a
number of 30 volunteers selected by random sampling.
The duration of the evaluation process was
approximately 30 minutes. This sample consisted of
73.33% males and 26.67% females. The dominant age
group is 18-25 with 80%, followed by 10% of people
aged 26-33. From the selected sample, 83.3%
participants reported using the computer to a very high
degree in their daily activities. However, in terms of
gaming experience the percentage drops to 23.33%.
The given task for the experiment was to play the
Tetris prototype three times for both playing modes (No
BCI and BCI, in this order) with the end goal of scoring
at least 5 lines each time. They were informed that the
speed of the falling shapes increases with each passing
level and that a level is marked by the collapse of a line.
An unlimited training period in which they get
accustomed with the setting and rules of the game is
allotted for each mode. For the “Non-BCI” mode,
participants were required to play the puzzle game as
normal, with keyboard input only. In the BCI mode,
participants were informed about the meditation versus
speed correlation. Instructions on how to control this

6. Results
This section presents the results from the qualitative,
the quantitative, as well as the comparative analysis from
the EEG rhythms logs.

6.1. Qualitative Feedback
The overall experience was described as interesting,
enjoyable and relaxing. The BCI mode was generally
seen as more challenging and entertaining compared to
the first mode (non-BCI mode). This was due to the fact
that some of the users noticed an increase in speed when
becoming annoyed and impatient. Also, the participants
found the meditation progress bar helpful and a key part
of the experience which they could use to their
advantage. Other participants preferred the second mode
as they discerned a lower speed which allowed more
time left for decision making and made the goal easier to
reach. It has also been reported that user focus shifts
from shape control accuracy to speed only halfway
through the game. However, there were still users not

Figure 1 Results from non-BCI Tetris mode. Significant correlations between the reported experiences

490

noticing much fluctuation in the speed of the shapes
during the second mode. Furthermore, the theme song
was labelled as monotone after a while. The BCI mode
was welcomed as a unique and fascinating concept even
though it could not be fully experienced by participants
who were tired. They expressed their confidence that this
type of novel gaming experience has a lot of potential for
becoming industry standard in the near future.
Even though for some it was somewhat difficult to
manage their meditation in a noisy environment, the
second mode was seen as an improvement to the usual
Tetris experience. Last but not least, the gathered
qualitative feedback revealed a surprising observation;
the ability to control the speed of the level in some
instances made the game easier to play for some. In
several cases, once participants managed to get used to
the pace of the game, because they had to be relaxed, the
BCI mode increased the enjoyability of the experience.
Participants were generally satisfied with the current
state of the game, but when asked to come with
enhancement suggestions the following improvements
were proposed. Several of them expressed their interest
in playing a version of Tetris fully integrated with the
BCI in which the shapes can be manipulated directly as
well, instead of relying on the keyboard. Some of them
also suggested the expansion of brain computer
interfaces in competitive multiplayer environments, with
a focus on studying how meditation is controlled in a
multitasking scenario. Additional recommendations
regard the audio component of the game, with some of
the testers finding it distracting. One suggested using
sound as an indicator of speed instead of a progress bar.
Just as with the first prototype, the device accuracy was
again raised as an issue along with the need of
introducing alternative input methods such as voice and
eye tracking.

6.2. Quantitative Feedback
Results from the “non BCI” mode are presented in
Figure 1. Overall, mental demand is rated as medium
with a mean of 2.63. Even though it has a big standard
deviation (0.999) which means that actual answers may
vary considerably (from 1.631 to 3.629), its
corresponding frequencies table shows that 40% of users
thought that mental demand for the prototype’s mode
was indeed moderate. Results suggest that on average,
the task was not physically demanding at all. The mean
indicates a low negative impact on the user’s comfort
while playing the game within the “non BCI” mode.
However, the standard’s deviation high value (std =
1.143) along with the associated frequencies table (40%
for Very Low) reveal that in fact, the physical demand of
the task was seen as very low. The degree to which the
users felt rushed was regarded as medium in spite of
frequencies for both low and medium temporal demand
being of the same value, 30%. The standard deviation
(std = 1.022) is high which makes the 2.70 mean values
not that significant. With a mean of 3.80 and a frequency
percentage of 40% for high performance, feedback
suggests that users generally saw themselves as
successful in accomplishing the given goal. 33.3% of
them considered that they had to put a fair amount of
effort into achieving the goal, which is also backed up by
the mean value of 2.77. In terms of frustration, the
majority (36.7%) agreed on the fact that they did not feel
discouraged or insecure during the evaluation of the “non
BCI” mode. Mean highlights the same result (2.17). The
participants reported a very high learnability score at
around 4.50, with 63.3% users managing to learn how to
play the game really fast. Lastly, the game mode was
described as being enjoyable (Mean of 3.67) with 40%
participants being moderately satisfied. Using
Spearman's Rank-Order Correlation [18], results indicate
that the highest significant correlation at the 0.01 level

Figure 2 Results from BCI Tetris mode. Significant correlations between the reported experiences

491

(2-tailed) is between effort and temporal demand. This is
closely followed by physical and mental demand,
learnability and performance, frustration and physical
demand, effort and performance, frustration and
temporal demand, performance and temporal demand,
temporal demand and physical demand.

For mode results comparison (Figure 3), the
Wilcoxon non-parametric test was used [19]. 13 out of
30 users thought that the mental demand quotient for
each mode (non-BCI and BCI) should be of the same
value, whereas other 13 users saw the BCI controlled
game version more mentally demanding. The statistics
shows that the difference is almost statistically
significant as the p value is just slightly over 0.05, 0.051.
Other statistically significant differences (p < 0.05) are
the ones referring to learnability (p < 0.005) and
satisfaction (p < 0.010). 11/30 (36.6%) users thought that
the meditation-controlled Tetris required more time in
order to learn how to play it than the generic mode, and
the satisfaction comparison reveals the fact that the same
percentage of participants considered the “BCI” Tetris
mode to be much more enjoyable than the “non BCI”
Tetris mode. The other factors’ Asymp. Sig. (2-tailed)
values are above 0.05 making them statistically
insignificant. It is worth mentioning that perceived user
performance remains unchanged from “non BCI” to
“BCI”.

6.3 EEG Rhythms Log
Results from EEG logs have been analysed for the
different EEG rhythms as given by the device (Figure 4).
Non BCI control contributes with highest means
compared to BCI control and has a larger deviation. This
can be an indication of user fatigue during BCI control,
reflected both on score and in EEG rhythms as given by
the device.

Figure 3 Comparative analysis through the
Wilcoxon non-parametric test
Results from the “BCI” Tetris mode are presented in
Figure 2. 46% of the sample population rated the
experience as being reasonably mentally demanding
which is also confirmed by the mean (Mean = 3.00). In
terms of physical demand, up to 70% of users did not
encounter any major comfort issues related to the given
task (Mean = 1.93). The mean of the temporal demand is
2.67 with a wide data spread (std = 1.061), the majority
rating it as Medium. The average success rate of the
participants for the current “BCI” Tetris mode was high
(Mean = 3.93, Frequency of High Performance =
46.7%). Half of the respondents thought they had put in a
medium amount of effort (Mean = 2.67, std = 0.959) and
a big percentage of them (63%) considered that the game
mode experience was not frustrating (Mean = 2.27, std =
0.907). In terms of the rate at which users managed to
learn how to play the meditation-influenced game, the
learnability factor was seen as high (high for 40%
participants, Mean = 3.97, std = 0.999). 40% of the
participants were highly satisfied with the current “BCI”
Tetris mode (Mean = 4.10, std = 0.845) indicating
significant correlations at the 0.01 level (2-tailed)
between learnability and frustration, effort and mental
demand.

Figure 4 Mean values and standard deviation for
Attention, Meditation and EEG rhythms values
Significant correlations were found for attention. In
particular, for increased attention we can see decreasing
Theta oscillations (r = -0.2885, p < 0.05). Theta is
usually linked to inefficiency and daydreaming. In fact,
the very lowest waves of theta represent the fine line
between being awake or in a sleep. In addition, high
Alpha (r = -0.1841, p < 0.05) and high gamma (r = 0.1589, p < 0.05) oscillations are observed with
increased attention. Alpha rhythms attenuate with
drowsiness, concentration, stimulation or visual fixation

492

[5]

[20]. High gamma oscillations have been observed in a
variety of different purpose neuroanatomical domains
including information processing. Finally, Delta band is
modulated the highest compared with the rest of the
rhythms showing an overall deep relaxation. For the
Non-BCI setup, Delta is almost three times higher,
indicating deeper relaxation when the BCI device was
not used as an input.

[6]

[7]

Conclusions
This paper investigated the degree to which low cost
commercial BCIs that require no prior calibration play an
important part in augmenting users’ experience in video
games. The participants were required to play a Tetrisbased game in two modes, normal gameplay and BCI
input. Throughout the whole process, meditation levels
were tracked and feedback was recorded. It was observed
that the more experienced gamers did not notice the
speed difference because they usually rushed the pace of
the game. For the participants who actually managed to
maintain high levels of meditation throughout the second
mode, they were more inclined to notice the speed
difference, achieve more and fully enjoy the experience.
It is also important to note that after long periods of use,
the device increased user fatigue, leading also to
connection problems. These indicate that there are still
some limitations with the EEG technology that needs to
be addressed. By statistically analysing the logs, it can be
concluded that even though participants were specifically
instructed to relax, focus and meditate, no significant
change in terms of meditation was observed from one
game mode to the other. In a gaming environment where
the ability to self-regulate a particular mind state
(attention, meditation) is crucial to goal achievement,
participants might get considerably frustrated. Finally,
significant correlations of EEG rhythms with attention
showed that users could possibly be more concentrated
during the session, achieving a high degree of relaxation
overall during non-BCI control.

[15]

References

[16]

[1]
[2]

[3]

[4]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

D.C. Dennett. Consciousness explained. In Back Bay
Books, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1992.
J.R. Wolpaw, N. Birbaumer, D.J. McFarland, G.
Pfurtscheller and T.M. Vaughan. Brain-computer
interfaces for communication and control. In Clinical
Neurophysiology, 113, 767-791, June 2002.
E.
Niedermeyer
and
F.L.
da
Silva.
Electroencephalography: Basic Principles, Clinical
Applications, and Related Fields, Edition 5. Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins. November 2004.
B. Graimann, B. Allison and G. Pfurtscheller. BrainComputer Interfaces: A Gentle Introduction. In Brain–
Computer Interfaces, The Frontiers Collection. Springer,
1-27. 2010.

[17]

[18]
[19]
[20]

493

R. Leeb, M. Lancelle, V. Kaiser, D.W. Fellner and G.
Pfurtscheller. Thinking Penguin: Multimodal BrainComputer Interface Control of a VR Game. In IEEE
Transactions on Computational Intelligence and AI in
Games. IEEE Computer Society, 5(2): 117-128, 2013.
A. Nijholt, D. Plass-Oude Bos and B. Reuderink.
Turning shortcomings into challenges: Brain–computer
interfaces for games. In Entertainment Computing.
Elsevier. 1(2): 85-94. 2009.
D. Coyle, J. Garcia, A. Satti and T.M. McGinnity. EEGbased continuous control of a game using a 3 channel
motor imagery BCI. In Proc. IEEE Symposium on
Computational Intelligence, Cognitive Algorithms, Mind,
and Brain (CCMB), 1-7. April 2011.
G. Pires, M. Torres, N. Casaleiro, U. Nunes and M.
Castelo-Branco. Playing Tetris with non-invasive BCI. In
Proc. IEEE 1st International Conference on Serious
Games and Applications for Health (SeGAH). IEEE
Computer Society. 1-6. November 2011.
D.P.O. Bos, B. Reuderink, et al. Human-Computer
Interaction for BCI Games: Usability and User
Experience, In Proc. of the 2010 Int'l Conference on
Cyberworlds, IEEE Computer Society. 277-281, 2010.
L. Bi, X.A. Fan and Y. Liu. EEG-Based BrainControlled Mobile Robots: A Survey. In IEEE
Transactions on Human-Machine Systems, IEEE
Computer Society. 43(2): 161-176. 2013.
M. Ko, K. Bae, G. Oh and T. Ryu. A Study on New
Gameplay Based on Brain Computer Interface. In Proc.
of DiGRA 2009, Brunel University, London, UK, 2009.
M.S. Yoh, J. Kwon and S. Kim. NeuroWander: A BCI
Game in the Form of Interactive Fairy Tale. In Proc. of
the 12th International Conference Adjunct Papers on
Ubiquitous Computing. ACM Press. 389-390. 2010.
B. Reuderink, A. Nijholt and M. Poel. Affective Pacman:
A frustrating Game for Brain-Computer Interface
Experiments. In Proc. of INTETAIN 2009, Springer, 221227, 2009.
C. Kapeller, C. Hintermüller and C. Guger. Augmented
control of an avatar using an SSVEP based BCI, In Proc.
of the 3rd Augmented Human International Conference,
Article No. 27, ACM Press, 2012.
A. Finke, A. Lenhardt and H. Ritter. The mindgame: A
p300-based brain-computer interface game,” In Neural
Networks. 22(9): 1329-1333, 2009.
F. Piccione, F. Giorgi, P. Tonin, K. Priftis, S. Giove, S.
Silvoni, G. Palmas and F. Beverina. P300-based brain
computer interface: Reliability and performance in
healthy and paralysed participants. In Clinical
Neurophysiology, 117(3): 531-537, 2006.
eSense(tm) Meters, NeuroSky Developer Doc.
http://developer.neurosky.com/docs/doku.php?id=esense
s_tm
G.W. Corder and D.I. Foreman Nonparametric Statistics:
A Step-by-Step Approach, Wiley, 2014.
S. Siegel. Non-parametric statistics for the behavioral
sciences. New York: McGraw-Hill, 75-83, 1956.
J.M. Stern. Atlas of EEG patterns. Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins, 2005.

