Data fusion and analysis techniques
of neuromarketing
B. Li1 , Y. Wang2 & K. Wang1,3
1 Shanghai

Key Laboratory of Intelligent Manufacturing and Robotics,
Shanghai University, China
2 School of Materials, University of Manchester, UK
3 Knowledge Discovery Laboratory, Department of Production and Quality
Engineering, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Norway

Abstract
The electroencephalogram (EEG) is one of the main technical means of
neuroscience research. It can read the level of physiologically activity in different areas of the brain by measuring the change in electric charge on the scalp.
Eye tracking instrument is one of the main equipment of cognitive psychology research; it can explore people’s cognitive process. Fusing EEG and eye tracking data
together integrates the consumer’s affective (emotional) and cognitive responses,
giving a comprehensive understanding of the consumer’s decision-making process.
At present the international research achievements of this aspect is still less. In this
paper, we combined with the international latest paper published in this aspect,
described the data collection, data analysis and processing, and data integration
framework, expected to provide some grounding for subsequent research.
Keywords: neuromarketing, EEG, eye tracking, data fusion.

1 Introduction
Neuromarketing applies the neuroimaging technology to study consumer’s behavior, explore the mechanism of consumer decision-making on neural activity
level, and find the real driving force behind the consumer’s behavior [1]. From the
point of the research field, neuromarketing mainly includes the neuron research
of consumer behavior, marketing strategies, advertising and customer relationship
management, etc. [2]. Neuromarketing is an emerging discipline that developed
based on the cognitive science and neuroscience [3].
WIT Transactions on Engineering Sciences, Vol 113, © 2016 WIT Press
www.witpress.com, ISSN 1743-3533 (on-line)
doi:10.2495/IWAMA150461

Advanced Manufacturing and Automation V

397

The development of neuroscience allow researchers to observe dynamically human brain activity from different aspects and angles, uncover the direct reasons
behind human behavior. Neuroscience studies of human brain structure and function of each structure is the physiological basis of neuromarketing research [4].
Generally the electroencephalogram (EEG) devices have the characteristics of
cheap, low requirement to the experimental environment and easy to popularize,
so it has become one of the main technical means of neuroscience research [5].
Eye movement instrument, as an important equipment of vision research, plays an
important role in cognitive science and psychology research [6]. The combination
of EEG signals with eye tracking signals to study the consumer’s decision-making
process has become one of the hot issues in present neural marketing research.

2 Data collection
2.1 EEG signal collection
The EEG signal is the weak electrical potential difference that measured on the
scalp [7] when a large number of neurons (Mainly the cone cells) discharge at
the same time in the brain neural system. The patterns of cortical activity were
obtained in the five principal frequency bands, Delta (0–4 Hz), Theta (3–7 Hz),
Alpha (8–12 Hz), Beta (13–30 Hz), and Gamma (30–40 Hz) [8, 9]. The EEG signals are very weak, usually determined by placing electrodes on the scalp to detect
the changes of brain waves. According to the type of the electrode, and the signal
acquisition method is divided into wet and dry electrode [10]. The wet electrode
is one of the traditional acquisition methods, Participants must daub conductive
paste when using. Dry electrode is a kind of emerging collection technology that
avoid the hassles of conductive paste daub. It can reduce the subjects’ discomfort
for a long time involved in the experiment and is more conducive to the practical
application of EEG equipment in the future.

Figure 1: EEG data collection processing.
Khushaba et al. [11] chose the Emotiv EPOC to collect the EEG signals when researched people’s decision-making process of select preferred crackers according
to their own preferences from the crackers described by different characteristics.
As shown in Fig. 1, the Emotiv EPOC is a high-resolution, neuro-signal acquisition
and processing wireless headset that monitors 14 channels of EEG data and has a
gyroscope measure for two-dimensional control. Neuromarketing can adopt the
WIT Transactions on Engineering Sciences, Vol 113, © 2016 WIT Press
www.witpress.com, ISSN 1743-3533 (on-line)

398 Advanced Manufacturing and Automation V
Emotiv EPOC to collect the EEG signals on the subjects’ scalp, and then Emotiv
EPOC sends the data to a computer via Bluetooth. The Emotiv Software Development Kit (SDK) provides a packet count functionality to ensure no data is lost, a
writable marker trace to ease single trial segmentation tasks, and real-time sensor
contact display to ensure quality of measurements [11].
2.2 Eye tracking data collection
The data collection process using eye tracking equipment mainly includes first
determining the fixation point, then distribution of the fixation point, fixation time,
and fixation order [12]. The pupil diameter and blink rate can be used as indicators
of cognitive processing. The data can be used to assess human psychology and
behavior, which could be further utilized to get more objective results [13].
At present large manufacturers of eye tracking instrument in the world include
Tobii, SMI (Sensomotic Instrument), SR Research, ASL (Applied Science Laboratory), etc. Most product types include head-mounted (head movements freely),
fixed head, and remote sensing. Sampling rate is up to 1,250 Hz (Type: iView X;
Hi-Speed). System accuracy degree can reach 0.5◦ and resolution can reach 0.2◦
in a certain scope angle (Type: Tobii TX300). The scale of tens of milliseconds
system error exists for all kinds of products [14]. Eye tracking instrument has a
very wide range of applications, mainly used for the psychological mechanism of
visual information processing, such as reading, visual search, advertising, psychology, etc. In addition, the eye tracking instrument can also be used in developmental
psychology, ergonomics, traffic psychology, and sports psychology research [15].
Wei-Long Zheng et al. adopted SMI eye tracking glasses to record pupil
size changes under different emotional stimuli in the aspects of research human
emotional cognitive [16].

3 Data analysis
3.1 The analysis of EEG signals
3.1.1 Cleaning and denoising EEG signals
EEG signals are measured by electrodes on the scalp surface, because the device
circuit interference or other physiological signals change will affect the voltage
field of the electrode nearby. It is inevitably mixed with other signals in the process
of measurement. As a result, the original EEG signals have low signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR) and contain a lot of noise and artifact. Detecting and removing artifacts in the EEG data due to muscle activity, eye blinks, electrical noise, etc. is an
important problem in EEG signal processing research [17].
The existing pretreatment method of denoising and removing artifact from EEG
signals mainly includes the following four:
(1) Directly delete the EEG signals fragments that contain artifact.
First observe the presence of artifact in the EEG signals when specific
processing, then use manual way to delete it [18]. Or set a threshold for
WIT Transactions on Engineering Sciences, Vol 113, © 2016 WIT Press
www.witpress.com, ISSN 1743-3533 (on-line)

Advanced Manufacturing and Automation V

399

the power or amplitude of EEG signals. Signal more than threshold would
be considered as artifact signal and be deleted automatically by software
program [19].
(2) Filter the artifact in EEG signals by using the linear filter.
For example, use of a high-pass filter can filter out some eye electric artifact and the low-pass filter can be used to filter out some muscle
artifacts [20].
(3) Adopt the method of linear regression to filter out artifact from the EEG
signals.
For example, under the two kinds of waveform that electrical interference
of eye presence and electrical interference of eye no presence, based on the
same kind of event-related potential. Combination of eye signals recorded
at the time and adopted the least squares method to calculate how much eye
electrical signals being contained in the event-related potential of objects
under interference. Record eye electrical signals at the same time in online
processing, then minus the corresponding proportion eye electrical signals
from EEG signals for correction of EEG signals [21].
(4) By using the method of signal decomposition.
Using the method of signal decomposition such as singular value decomposition or independent component analysis (ICA), the original EEG
signals are decomposed into multiple components, the artifact composition
are identified [22], the non-artifact components to reconstruct EEG signals
are reused.
3.1.2 The spectrum analysis method of EEG signals
The power spectrum analysis methods is the earliest and the most commonly used
in EEG spectrum analysis methods, originating from Fourier transform. In the
traditional EEG power spectrum analysis method, first a correlation function is
obtained, then according to Wiener–Khinchin theorem spectrum estimation [23]
is obtained. But the premise of the power spectrum analysis methods is for stationary random signals. There is a big difference in the spectral analysis results of
different time for non-stationary random signal. A common improvement method
is to put the signal divided into many small pieces in time domain, and viewed
as quasi-steady. Fetch the square of its amplitude frequency characteristics after
Fourier transform for each short signal, then multiply by the appropriate window
function as the signal power spectrum estimation [11]. The main drawback of this
method is that the frequency resolution is poor, and the side lobe leakage problems
exist.
EEG is non-stationary random signals, the correct expression and precision
of the frequency domain characteristics, phase information extraction, and the
transient waveform analysis is the current hot issues in the study of the EEG
signal processing. However, due to the common problems of spectrum analysis
method, the variance of the estimate features is bad, and the estimates values go
up and down along frequency axis severely; the longer the data, the more serious
is the phenomenon [24]. So the parameter model spectrum estimation method is
WIT Transactions on Engineering Sciences, Vol 113, © 2016 WIT Press
www.witpress.com, ISSN 1743-3533 (on-line)

400 Advanced Manufacturing and Automation V
proposed. This method of data processing can produce high-resolution spectrum
analysis results. Thus it provides a new effective method for the extraction of EEG
signal frequency domain characteristics. This method shows superiority, especially
in the analysis of dynamic characteristics [17].
3.2 Eye tracking data analysis
The data collected by eye tracking instrument include the first fixation point, the
fixation point distribution, fixation time, and fixation order and some simple derived data (the pupil diameter, blink rate). The corresponding software system
provided by general eye tracking instrument supplier can satisfy the needs of the
vast majority of customers of eye movement data analysis. For example, Tobii Studio 1.3 was employed as it offers an easy-to-use solution to extract and analyze eye
tracking data. The package facilitates efficient multi-person and multi-trial studies.
The software combines the collection and analysis of eye gaze data with numerous
other data sources, including keystrokes, external devices, video recordings, and
web browser activities [11].
The experimental conditions are complex. Eye tracking instrument’s own system
can’t provide all the required results. In order to achieve the desired purpose and
get the needed data, users need to find another data analysis method. Wei-long
Zheng et al. [16] researched the emotion recognition method, which combines EEG
and pupil diameter. According to this method, a person’s pupil diameter changes
under different emotional states, so a pupil diameter with the characteristics of the
emotion classification is chosen. However, the pupil diameter is highly dependent
on the luminance of the objects. So it couldn’t be used for emotion recognition
directly. Principal component analysis (PCA) is adopted to remove the influence
of luminance on pupil.

4 The framework of data fusion and analysis
An EEG machine reads the level of activity in different areas of the brain by measuring the change in electric charge at the scalp. Electrodes are strategically placed
all over the scalp so that measurement can be taken from different areas of the
brain. It has been found in many studies that there is a clear link between our eye
movements and our cognitive processes. Eye movement monitoring is a valuable
tool for capturing decision-makers’ information. Fusing EEG and eye tracking data
together integrates the consumer’s affective (emotional) and cognitive responses,
giving a comprehensive understanding of the consumer’s decision-making process.
At present, the international research achievements of this aspect is still less.
Khushaba et al. [11] investigated physiological decision processes while participants undertook a choice task designed to elicit preferences for a product. As
shown in Fig. 2, they used the commercial Emotiv EPOC wireless EEG headset with 14 channels to collect EEG signals from participants and a Tobii-Studio
eye tracker system to relate the EEG data to the specific choice options (crackers). First, the collected EEG signals are put into the signal preprocessing stage.
WIT Transactions on Engineering Sciences, Vol 113, © 2016 WIT Press
www.witpress.com, ISSN 1743-3533 (on-line)

Advanced Manufacturing and Automation V

401

In order to filter the noise and remove the artifacts, the EEG data was processed
with a bandpass filter after detrending analysis. In signal denoising stage, they
used a combination of independent component analysis (ICA) and discrete wavelet transform (DWT) based denoising [25] to clean the EEG signals. In the fast
Fourier transform (FFT) stage, they analyzed changes in spectral power and phase
to characterize perturbations in the oscillatory dynamics of ongoing EEG. At last
they provide a way to quantify the importance of different cracker features that
contribute to the product design based on mutual information.

Figure 2: Block diagram of the data analysis [11].
Wei-long Zheng and Bo-Nan Dong et al. [16] combined EEG and eye tracking
data to research emotion recognition method. The framework of their experiment
processing is shown in Fig. 3. For EEG data, they extracted different features from
five frequency bands. For eye tracking data, we extracted mean values, standard
deviations, and spectral powers of frequency bands from pupil responses. They
applied fusion methods of feature-level fusion and decision-level fusion combining
features from EEG signals and eye tracking data.

Figure 3: The framework of research processing [16].
WIT Transactions on Engineering Sciences, Vol 113, © 2016 WIT Press
www.witpress.com, ISSN 1743-3533 (on-line)

402 Advanced Manufacturing and Automation V
Throughout the process of decision–making, there is a constant cycle between
the cognitive processes (information gathering and reasoning) and the emotional
responses (to internal and external information). Fusing EEG and eye tracking data
together can help to truly understand the consumer decision-making process.

5 Conclusion
Neuromarketing has become the research focus today. It applies the neuroscience method to study consumer’s behavior, explore the mechanism of consumer
decision-making on neural activity level, and find the real driving force behind
the consumer’s behavior. Then the appropriate marketing strategies are produced.
Currently the international research achievements on this aspect are still less. How
to combine the EEG data and eye tracking data to study the marketing behavior
will become the research hot spot of neuromarketing. In existing research case, the
data from the fusion analysis method of the two kinds is very unitary, the depth
of integration analysis is enough, and does not form a complete system. In this
paper, we have analyzed the latest papers published on this respect and described
the data collection, data analysis and processing, and data integration framework.
We expect to see further research in this area in the future.

References
[1] Lee, N., A.J. Broderick, and L. Chamberlain, What is “neuromarketing”?
A discussion and agenda for future research. International Journal of
Psychophysiology, 63, pp. 199–204, 2007.
[2] Ma Qing-guo, and Wang Xiao-yi, From neuroeconomics and neuromarketing
to neuromanagement. Journal of Industrial Engineering Management, 20(3),
pp. 129–132, 2006.
[3] Du Jian-gang, and Wang Lin, Research on neuromarketing – Introduction of
fMRI. Economic Management Journal in China, 34(3), pp. 189–199, 2012.
[4] Plassmann, H., T.Z. Ramsøy, and M. Milosavljevi, Branding the brain: A
critical review and outlook. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 22, pp. 18–36,
2012.
[5] Kong Wan-Zeng, Xu Si-Jia, Dai Guo-Jun, and Hu San-Qing, The survey of
digital evaluation of advertising with neuromarketing. Chinese Journal of
Biomedical Engineering, 33(3), pp. 358–365, 2014.
[6] Meng-Lung Lai, Meng-Jung Tsai, Fang-Ying Yang, Chung-Yuan Hsu, et al.,
A review of using eye-tracking technology in exploring learning from 2000
to 2012. Educational Research Review, 10, pp. 90–115, 2013.
[7] Fu Jia-Wei, Shi Li-Chen, and Lu Bao-Liang, A survey on EEG-based vigilance analysis and estimation. Chinese Journal of Biomedical Engineering,
28(4), pp. 589–596, 2009.
[8] Mostafa, M.M., Brain processing of vocal sounds in advertising: A functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study. Expert Systems with Applications,
39(15), pp. 12114–12122, 2012.
WIT Transactions on Engineering Sciences, Vol 113, © 2016 WIT Press
www.witpress.com, ISSN 1743-3533 (on-line)

Advanced Manufacturing and Automation V

403

[9] Khushaba, R.N., L. Greenacreb, S. Kodagodaa, J. Louviereb, S. Burkeb,
and G. Dissanayake, Choice modeling and the brain: A study on the electroencephalogram (EEG) of preferences. Expert Systems with Applications,
39(16), pp. 12378–12388, 2012.
[10] Wang, X.W., L.C. Shi, and B.L. Lu, A survey on technology of dry electrodes for EEG recording. Chinese Journal of Biomedical Engineering, 29,
pp. 777–784, 2010.
[11] Khushaba, R.N., C. Wise, S. Kodagoda, et al., Consumer neuroscience:
Assessing the brain response to marketing stimuli using electroencephalogram (EEG) and eye tracking. Expert Systems with Applications, 40,
pp. 3803–3812, 2013.
[12] Zhao Xincan, Zuo Hongfu, and Ren Yongjun, A review of eye tracker
and eye tracking techniques. Computer Engineering and Application, 12,
pp. 118–120, 140, 2006.
[13] Tien, T., P.H. Pucher, and M.H. Sodergren, Eye tracking for skills assessment and training: Systematic review. Journal of Surgical Research, 191(9),
pp. 169–178, 2014.
[14] Zhang Chuang, Chi Jian-Nan, Zhang Zhao-Hui, et al., The research on
eye tracking for gaze tracking system. Acta Automatica Sinica, 36(8),
pp. 1051–1061, 2010.
[15] Dan Witzner Hansen, and Qiang Ji, In the eye of the beholder: A survey
of models for eyes and gaze. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence, 32(3), pp. 478–500, 2010.
[16] Wei-Long Zheng, Bo-Nan Dong, and Bao-Liang Lu, Multimodal emotion
recognition using EEG and eye tracking data. IEEE Engineering in Medicine
and Biology Society, pp. 5040–5043, 2014.
[17] Plöchl, M., J.P. Ossandón, and P. König, Combining EEG and eye tracking:
Identification, characterization, and correction of eye movement artifacts in
electroencephalographic data. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 6, 2012.
[18] Gratton, G., Dealing with artifacts: The EOG contamination of the eventrelated brai potential. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, (30), pp. 44–53, 1998.
[19] Millan, J., M. Franze, J. Mourino, et al., Relevant EEG features for the classification of spontaneous motor-related tasks. Biological Cybernetics, 86,
pp. 89–95, 2002.
[20] Fatourechi, M., A. Bashashati, R.K. Ward et al., EMG and EOG artifacts in
brain computer interface systems: A survey. Clinical Neurophysiology, 118,
pp. 480–494, 2007.
[21] Croft, R., J. Chandler, R. Barry et al., EOG correction: A comparison of four
methods. Psychophysiology, 42, pp. 16–24, 2005.
[22] Jung, T., S. Makeig, M. Westerfield, et al., Removal of eye activity artifacts
from visual event-related potentials in normal and clinical subjects. Clinical
Neurophysiology, 111, pp. 1745–1758, 2000.

WIT Transactions on Engineering Sciences, Vol 113, © 2016 WIT Press
www.witpress.com, ISSN 1743-3533 (on-line)

404 Advanced Manufacturing and Automation V
[23] Lin, C.T., L.W. Ko, I.F. Chung, et al., Adaptive EEG-based alertness estimation system by using ICA-based fuzzy neural networks. IEEE Transactions
on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, 53(11), pp. 2469–2476, 2006.
[24] Levy, W.J., Effect of epoch length on power spectrum analysis of the EEG.
Anesthesiology, 66, pp. 489–495, 1987.
[25] Akhtar, M.T., W. Mitsuhashi, and C.J. James, Employing spatially constrained ICA and wavelet denoising for automatic removal of artifacts from
multichannel EEG data. Signal Processing, 92(2), pp. 401–416, 2012.

WIT Transactions on Engineering Sciences, Vol 113, © 2016 WIT Press
www.witpress.com, ISSN 1743-3533 (on-line)

