Initial Result of Body Earthing on Student Stress
Performance
1

Mahfuzah Mustafa, 1Sia Kee Huong, 1Norizam Sulaiman, 1Rosdiyana Samad,
1
Nor Rul Hasma Abdullah, 1Nasrul Salim Pakheri, 2Mohd Nasir Taib
1

Faculty of Electrical & Electronics Engineering, UMP, Kuantan, Pahang, Malaysia
2
Faculty of Electrical Engineering, UiTM, Shah Alam, Selangor, Malaysia
1
mahfuzah@ump.edu.my, 2dr.nasir@ieee.org

Abstract—The body earthing technique is a kind of method
that can neutralize our positive charge and negative charge in
our body by connecting to the earth. It is believed that body
earthing gives a positive effect on human body. There is a
possibility that EEG signals can verify the positive effect of body
earthing. The experiment of body earthing is done by attaching
the patched kit to the hand of the subjects. Then, low voltage of
multimeter was used to measure the body voltage of the subjects
and EEG signals were collected. After that, the collected EEG
data were processed by Band-pass filter in MATLAB to filter out
the Alpha and Beta frequency bands separately. The threshold of
signal amplitude was set to -100 µV to 100 µV in order to remove
the noise of the signals. Next, the Power Spectral Density (PSD)
graphs of each EEG signals were plotted and the maximum
points of each signal were recorded. Then the peak points were
plotted in a histogram to see the changes of the Alpha and Beta
band signals. Lastly, the results of before the body earthed and
after body earthed were compared through the histogram
plotted. It is observed that, before the body earthed, the Alphaband is low, while the Beta-band is high. Then after body
earthed, the Alpha band increased, while the Beta band are
decreased.
Keywords—body earthing; stress; EEG signal; PSD

I. INTRODUCTION
The Earth has many negatively charged free electrons [1].
When humans are direct connected to the earth, the free
electron from the earth will be conducted in the body. This
process is called body earthing. The function of body earthing
is to balance the positive charge produced in our body cell in
order to maintain the neutral of the body. Throughout history,
humans were naturally absorbed the negatively charge by
direct connecting to the surface of the earth. However, the
modern lifestyles of humans have insulated themselves from
grounding to the earth by wearing of the insulated products
such as plastic shoes and mattress that is totally isolated the
body to the ground. Body earthing is claimed can help to
reduce stress [1].
A hectic lifestyles easily cause people to feel stress. Too
much workload and need to be resolved in the short term also
contributes stress to human. There is a positive stress and
negative stress [2], but in this paper will be discussed a

negative stress. Prolonged stress can affect human in mental,
physical and emotion [3]. The symptom of stress are
headaches, pain back of neck and sleep disturbance [4].
Stress is a state of mental tension and worry caused by the
problems in our life and work. Generally, the stress people
will have symptoms like anxious, moody, short temper and
others. Nowadays, the students are getting more stress due to
the tight schedule of their study and a lot of quiz, assignment,
project and examination. Subsequently, the student received
pressure from family and community to get the best grades.
Meanwhile, they also do not take care of their health. The
unbalanced charge inside the human body may be one of the
reasons that students getting stress easily throughout the day.
Direct contact between the human and the earth reduce the
induced voltage to human body [5]. This connection can be
done by using conductive adhesive that usually patch on feet,
conductive wire attached on body while sleeping or daily
activities and barefoot while walking [1, 2].
It has been reported that EEG signals can be used to
measure the stress levels [6]. The EEG signals are the signals
that are generated by our brain. These EEG signals can be
categorized into four bands of different frequency, such as
Delta, Theta, Alpha and Beta bands. The frequency of EEG
signals is different in each band such as Delta range from 0.5
Hz to 4 Hz, Theta range from 4 Hz to 8 Hz, Alpha range from
8 Hz to 13 Hz and Beta range from 13 Hz to 30 Hz. Usually,
the Beta band is detected in active, busy, active concentration
and alert people, while the Alpha band is detected from people
in relaxation condition. Other than that, the Theta band is
detected at drowsiness in older children and adult.
Furthermore, the Delta band is mostly found in adults slow
wave sleep.
The Patch kit is the body earthing product that can reduce
the charge of our body. One end of patch kit is attached to the
body part while one end is connected to a grounded wall outlet
or ground rod [7]. Emotiv EPOC is a high resolution, multichannel, wireless neuroheadset [8]. It consists of total 16
electrodes, while 2 electrodes are used as a reference. In
addition, it got a Bluetooth USB adapter and the saline
solution. The placement of the electrodes is based on the
method of 10/20 international placement system. In the 10/20
international placement system, the electrode sites are labelled

