J Surg Med. 2020;4(2):161-163.
DOI: 10.28982/josam.638667

Case report
Olgu sunumu

Neurofeedback improves EEG complexity and social interaction in a
boy with autism: A case report
Otizmli bir çocukta, nörogeribildirim EEG karmaşıklığı ve sosyal etkileşimi artırdı: Olgu raporu
Günet Eroğlu 1, Barış Ekici 2
Faculty of Engineering and Nat. Sci. Sabancı
University, Tuzla, Istanbul, Turkey
Pediatric Neurology Clinic, Vital Fulya Plaza,
Istanbul, Turkey

1

2

ORCID ID of the author(s)
GE: 0000-0001-8382-8417
BE: 0000-0002-0525-2018

Corresponding author / Sorumlu yazar:
Günet Eroğlu
Address / Adres: Soğuksu Park Sitesi Avcılar
Sok. No:11/1 A:2 D:6, Soğuksu Beykoz, İstanbul,
Türkiye
e-Mail: gunet.eroglu@healthmobilesoftware.com
⸺
Informed Consent: The authors stated that the
written consent was obtained from the parents’ of
the patient presented with images in the study.
Hasta Onamı: Yazar çalışmada görüntüleri
sunulan hastanın ebeveynlerinden yazılı onam
alındığını ifade etmiştir.
⸺
Conflict of Interest: No conflict of interest was
declared by the authors.
Çıkar Çatışması: Yazarlar çıkar çatışması
bildirmemişlerdir.
⸺
Financial Disclosure: This project is supported by
TUBITAK and Turkish Republic and EU funds
(Project number: 2170172).
Finansal Destek: Bu proje TÜBİTAK ve Türkiye
Cumhuriyeti ile AB fonları tarafından
desteklenmektedir (Proje no: 2170172).
⸺
Published: 2/26/2020
Yayın Tarihi: 26.02.2020
Copyright © 2020 The Author(s)
Published by JOSAM

Abstract

Autism is an interhemispheric connectivity disorder, and intracortical circuits are also likely to be disturbed. Autism is
characterized by impairments in communication with restricted interest and repetitive behaviors. Auto Train Brain is a
neurofeedback-enabled mobile phone software application designed in Sabancı University laboratory for improving the
cognitive functions of dyslexic children. Applying Auto Train Brain for 14 channels to an autistic boy created
complexity improvements at lower temporal scales. After neurofeedback therapy, the patient began to use eight
different single words, and his social responsiveness became significantly better. As a result of these, his CARS score
improved from 39 to 34. He demonstrated an increased ability to follow instructions, and his attention span increased.
Therefore, his FACT score increased from 21 to 30.
Keywords: Autism, Auto Train Brain, Neurofeedback
Öz
Otizm her iki hemisfer arasında oluşan bağlantısızlık sendromudur, aynı hemisferdeki kısa bağlantıların da etkilenmesi
muhtemeldir. Otizmde dar ilgi alanı ile iletişimde bozukluk ve tekrarlayıcı davranışlar bulunur. Auto Train Brain,
Sabancı Üniversitesi laboratuvarlarında tasarlanmış, nörogeribildirime dayalı ve disleksik çocukların bilişsel
performanslarını artıran bir cep telefonu uygulamasıdır. Otistik bir çocukta, AutoTrain Brain 14 kanaldan uygulanmış
ve düşük geçici ölçekte EEG karmaşıklığının arttığı gözlenmiştir. Nörogeribildirim terapisinden sonra çocuk, 8 farklı
kelime kullanmış, sosyal tepkileri önemli ölçüde düzelmiştir. CARS puanı 39’dan 34’e ilerleme kaydetmiştir.
Komutları yerine getirme becerisi artmış, dikkat süresi uzamıştır. FACT puanı 21’den 30’a yükselmiştir.
Anahtar kelimeler: Otizm, Auto Train Brain, Nörogeribildirim

Introduction
Impairments in communication with restricted interest and repetitive behaviors
characterize the autism spectrum disorders (ASDs), which may affect up to 1% of children.
Autism is a polygenetic developmental neurobiological disorder with multiorgan system
involvement (neocortical and cerebellar system, immune system, and gastrointestinal system),
though it predominantly involves central nervous system dysfunction. It is an interhemispheric
connectivity disorder, and intracortical circuits are also likely to be disturbed [1,2].
Auto Train Brain is a neurofeedback-enabled mobile phone software application
designed in Sabancı University laboratory for improving the cognitive functions of dyslexic
children. The software reads electroencephalography (EEG) signals from 14 channels of
eMotiv EPOC+ and processes these signals to provide neurofeedback to a person to improve
the brain signals with visual and auditory cues in real-time [3]. With its patented novel
approach, Auto Train Brain improves the intracortical circuits and improves functional
connectivity for people with dyslexia.
In this report, we have examined the positive outcomes of applying Auto Train Brain
to a boy with autism.

This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution-Non Commercial-NoDerivatives License 4.0 (CC
BY-NC-ND 4.0) where it is permissible to download, share, remix,
transform, and buildup the work provided it is properly cited. The work
cannot be used commercially without permission from the journal.

How to cite / Atıf için: Eroğlu G, Ekici B. Neurofeedback improves EEG complexity and social interaction in a boy with autism: A case report. J Surg Med. 2020;4(2):161-163.

P a g e / S a y f a | 161

J Surg Med. 2020;4(2):161-163.

Case presentation
The patient was thirty months old when he was
diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder according to DSM V
criteria. He was six years and ten months old at our initial
evaluation. He was non- verbal but could sustain brief eye
contact and could follow simple commands.
The childhood autism rating scale score (CARS) and
Frankfurt Adaptive Concentration Test (FACT) was used to
determine autism severity and attention performance,
respectively. His CARS score was 39 (The cutoff score for the
diagnosis of autism is 30), and FACT score was 21 (the average
score is 32). Visual analysis of sleep electroencephalography
(EEG) did not reveal any epileptic discharge. The quantitative
analysis of EEG data showed lower complexity in the lower
temporal scales and higher complexity in the higher temporal
scales.
The treatment plan was to apply Auto Train Brain at
home, 3 times a week, at least 100 times with the provision and
help of his parents. The main goal of the experiment was to
reduce the slow brain waves if the recorded ones were above the
TD norm age group's average slow waves, and improve the fast
brain waves if the recorded ones were below the TD norm
group's average fast waves. Visual and auditory feedback was
provided online in real-time via the Android Java program after
processing the EEG data gathered from the subject's head. For all
analyses in this report, Theta (4-8 Hz), Alpha (8-12 Hz), Beta-1
(12-16 Hz), Beta-2(16-25 Hz), and Gamma (25-45 Hz) band data
were recorded for 14 channels. Throughout the experiments, an
eMotiv EPOC+ headset was used. The internal sampling rate in
the headset is 2048 Hz per channel. The EEG data were filtered
to remove artifacts and alias frequencies, then downsampled to
128 Hz per channel. There were 14 EEG channels plus two
references. Electrodes were placed according to the 10-20
system. Before training with MyEmotiv mobile application, the
calibration of the eMotiv headset on the subject's scalp was
achieved, ensuring that each electrode transfers EEG data with
high quality.
To measure the success of this training, at the start and
end of the training, the "sleep" state raw EEG data was measured
with eMotiv PRO software and eMotiv EPOC+ headset, and
multiscale entropy was calculated [3]. The sampling rate of the
EEG data was 128 Hz. The raw data were filtered by using a
bandPass FIR filter (1-50Hz). The artifacts were removed
manually by using EEGLAB's data rejection options. The
independent component analysis was performed. MSE was
calculated for one continuous 60-s epoch for each experimental
and control EEG reading. The number of samples(N) is set to N=
128*60 (7680). Sample entropy parameters were set to (m=2,
r=0.25*standard deviation of EEG signal), which have proven to
be effective in other studies [4]. We have created 40 temporal
scales to analyze the complexity. The expected outcome of the
experiment was to increase in the EEG complexity and increase
in social responsiveness.
After neurofeedback therapy, the patient began to use
eight different single words, and his social responsiveness
became significantly better. As a result of these, his CARS score
improved to 34. He demonstrated an increased ability to follow

Neurofeedback improves social interaction in a boy with autism

instructions, and his attention span increased. Therefore, his
FACT score increased to 30.
Applying Auto Train Brain for 14 channels created
complexity improvements at lower temporal scales. The results
show that low complexity at lower temporal scales has improved
after 120 sessions of Auto Train Brain training (Figure 1) in all
channel locations. The power band values pre- and posttreatment were also included for the sake of completeness of
analysis (Figure 2 and Figure 3). These figures demonstrate that
the slow brain waves were reduced, and the left-brain dominance
was increased.

Figure 1: MSE

Figure 2: Frequency band values pre- treatment

Figure 3: Frequency band values post- treatment

Discussion
This report was the first attempt to apply Auto Train
Brain to ASD, as the neurofeedback protocols in Auto Train
Brain were initially designed to improve the cognitive abilities of
people with dyslexia. In dyslexia, the interhemispheric
connections are usually developed, whereas there is
“disconnection syndrome” in intracortical circuits (mainly
between Broca and Wernicke area). From this perspective,
autism and dyslexia seem to be reverse conditions [5,6].
However, they share similarities in gamma band abnormalities
(gamma bands are too low or too high in both conditions).
In the literature, neurofeedback has previously been
applied to autism with success (at C4 reward 10-13 Hz, at F7
reward 15-18 Hz, at T3-T4 reward 9-12 Hz, at F3-F4 reward 710 Hz and 14.5-17.5 Hz, inhibit 2-7 Hz, 22-30 Hz) [7]. Auto
Train Brain provides a novel neurofeedback method such that the
process is personalized according to each individual's needs, and
P a g e / S a y f a | 162

J Surg Med. 2020;4(2):161-163.

Neurofeedback improves social interaction in a boy with autism

the algorithm is bound by age-grouped norm data. These features
make it easy to apply at home without any side effects.
Auto Train Brain successfully improves the intracortical
circuits and improves the EEG complexity in people with
dyslexia with its particular neurofeedback protocols. Applying
the same protocols to a boy with autism indeed solved the
problems at short cortical connections, whereas the long-distance
temporal connections were not affected much. This remaining
problem creates the necessity to adapt the neurofeedback
protocols of Auto Train Brain for ASD to improve the long
temporal connections as well. The new protocol to improve
interhemispheric connections was added to Auto Train Brain, but
not tested on ASD yet.
The patient was able to wear the headset during the
training sessions. In most cases of ASD, the subjects cannot wear
the headset for 20 minutes because many ASD subjects find the
headset irritating. Although the neurofeedback protocol was
useful for solving the functional connectivity issues, a
specialized headband for ASD subjects to read EEG signals more
comfortably should be developed.
Conclusion
Auto Train Brain, which was initially developed to
improve the cognitive abilities of dyslexics, was applied to a boy
with autism successfully. According to the multiscale entropy
measures pre- and post-experiment, improvements in the
intracortical circuits have been determined. There is a need to
address the interhemispheric connections at Auto Train Brain
protocols which will be enhanced shortly.

References
1. Minshew NJ, Williams DL. The new neurobiology of autism: cortex, connectivity, and
neuronal organization. Archives of Neurology. 2007;64(7):945-50.
2. Baykan AH, Karabaş SA, Doğan Z, Solgun S, Özcan G, Şahin Ş, et al. Assessment of age-and
sex-dependent changes of cerebellum volume in healthy individuals using magnetic resonance
imaging. J Surg Med. 2019;3(7):481-4.
3. Eroğlu G, Aydın S, Çetin M, Balcisoy S. Improving cognitive functions of dyslexies using
multi-sensory learning and EEG neurofeedback. In2018 26th Signal Processing and
Communications Applications Conference (SIU) 2018;(pp. 1-4). IEEE.
4. Costa M, Goldberger AL, Peng CK. Multiscale entropy analysis of biological signals. Physical
review E. 2005;71(2):021906.
5. Takahashi T, Cho RY, Mizuno T, Kikuchi M, Murata T, Takahashi K, et al. Antipsychotics
reverse abnormal EEG complexity in drug-naive schizophrenia: a multiscale entropy analysis.
Neuroimage. 2010;51(1):173-82.
6. Casanova MF, El-Baz AS, Giedd J, Rumsey JM, Switala AE. Increased white matter gyral
depth in dyslexia: implications for corticocortical connectivity. Journal of Autism and
Developmental Disorders. 2010;40(1):21-9.
7. Coben R, Padolsky I. Assessment-guided neurofeedback for autistic spectrum disorder. Journal
of Neurotherapy. 2007;11(1):5-23.
This paper has been checked for language accuracy by JOSAM editors.
The National Library of Medicine (NLM) citation style guide has been used in this paper.
Suggested citation: Patrias K. Citing medicine: the NLM style guide for authors, editors, and publishers [Internet].
2nd ed. Wendling DL, technical editor. Bethesda (MD): National Library of Medicine (US); 2007-[updated 2015
Oct 2; cited Year Month Day]. Available from: http://www.nlm.nih.gov/citingmedicine

P a g e / S a y f a | 163

