H M
UMANA

ENTE

ISSUE 15 - JANUARY 2011

Agency:
FROM EMBODIED COGNITION TO FREE WILL
EDITED BY DUCCIO MANETTI AND SILVANO ZIPOLI CAIANI

EDITORIAL MANAGER: DUCCIO MANETTI - UNIVERSITY OF FLORENCE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR: SILVANO ZIPOLI CAIANI - UNIVERSITY OF MILAN
VICE DIRECTOR: MARCO FENICI - UNIVERSITY OF SIENA

Editorial
Board

INTERNATIONAL EDITORIAL BOARD
JOHN BELL - UNIVERSITY OF WESTERN ONTARIO
GIOVANNI BONIOLO - INSTITUTE OF MOLECULAR ONCOLOGY FOUNDATION
MARIA LUISA DALLA CHIARA - UNIVERSITY OF FLORENCE
DIMITRI D'ANDREA - UNIVERSITY OF FLORENCE
BERNARDINO FANTINI - UNIVERSITÉ DE GENÈVE
LUCIANO FLORIDI - UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD
MASSIMO INGUSCIO - EUROPEAN LABORATORY FOR NON-LINEAR SPECTROSCOPY
GEORGE LAKOFF - UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, BERKELEY
PAOLO PARRINI - UNIVERSITY OF FLORENCE
ALBERTO PERUZZI - UNIVERSITY OF FLORENCE
JEAN PETITOT - CREA, CENTRE DE RECHERCHE EN ÉPISTÉMOLOGIE APPLIQUÉE
PAOLO ROSSI MONTI - ACCADEMIA NAZIONALE DEI LINCEI
CORRADO SINIGAGLIA - UNIVERSITY OF MILAN
BAS C. VAN FRAASSEN - SAN FRANCISCO STATE UNIVERSITY
CONSULTING EDITORS
CARLO GABBANI - UNIVERSITY OF FLORENCE
ROBERTA LANFREDINI - UNIVERSITY OF FLORENCE
MARCO SALUCCI - UNIVERSITY OF FLORENCE
ELENA ACUTI - UNIVERSITY OF FLORENCE
MATTEO BORRI - UNIVERSITÉ DE GENÈVE
ROBERTO CIUNI - UNIVERSITY OF DELFT

SCILLA BELLUCCI, LAURA BERITELLI, RICCARDO FURI, ALICE GIULIANI,
STEFANO LICCIOLI, LIVIA LENTINI, UMBERTO MAIONCHI

HUMANA.MENTE - QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY

Editorial
Staff

TABLE OF CONTENTS

FOREWORD
Duccio Manetti and Silvano Zipoli Caiani
Agency: From Embodied Cognition to Free Will

p. V

PAPERS
Michael Silberstein, Anthony Chemero
Dynamics, Agency and Intentional Action

p. 1

Steve Torrance, Tom Froese
An Inter-Enactive Approach to Agency: Participatory Sense-Making,
Dynamics, and Sociality

p. 21

Shaun Gallagher
Strong Interaction and Self-Agency

p. 55

Terry Horgan
The Phenomenology of Agency and Freedom: Lessons from Introspection
and Lessons from Its Limits

p. 77

Mauro Maldonato
The Decisions of Consciousness and the Consciousness of Decisions

p. 99

Roberta De Monticelli
Epistemic Trust. Outline for a Phenomenology of Shared Intentionality

p. 121

Davide Rigoni, Luca Sammicheli, Marcel Brass
Perspectives on the Experience of Will

p. 139

Susan Pockett
Initiation of Intentional Actions and the Electromagnetic Field Theory of
Consciousness

p. 159

Mark H. Bickhard
The Dynamics of Acting

p. 177

Jing Zhu
Deliberative Libertarianism

p. 189

Liz Disley
The Non-Mysterious Flesh: Embodied Intersubjectivity at Work

p. 213

Susi Ferrarello
Practical Intentionality: a Balance Between Practical and Theoretical
Acts

p. 237

David Vender
Is Balancing Emblematic of Action? Two or Three Pointers from Reid
and Peirce

p. 251

BOOK REVIEWS
Alfred Mele - Effective Intentions
reviewed by Marco Fenici

p. 271

Sean Spence - The Actor's Brain
reviewed by Roberto Di Letizia

p. 277

Robert D. Rupert - Cognitive Systems and the Extended Mind
reviewed by Mirko Farina

p. 283

Laurence Shapiro - Embodied cognition
reviewed by Andrea Danielli

p. 291

Mario De Caro - Siamo davvero liberi?
reviewed by Giuseppe Vicari

p. 295

Alva Noe - Out of Our Heads
reviewed by Marco Spina

p. 303

Anthony Chemero - Radical Embodied Cognitive Science
reviewed by Silvano Zipoli Caiani

p. 307

COMMENTARIES
Maurice Merleau-Ponty - Phenomenology of Perception
commented by Roberta Lanfredini

p. 313

Henrik Walter - Neurophilosophy of Free Will
commented by Lorenzo Del Savio

p. 319

Daniel M. Wegner - The Illusion of Conscious Will
commented by Roberto Di Letizia

p. 327

Libet B., Freeman A. & Sutherland K. - The Volitional Brain
commented by Elisabetta Sirgiovanni

p. 341

Derk Pereboom - Living Without Free Will
commented by Giuliano Torrengo

p. 347

INTERVIEWS
Interview with Sean Spence
edited by Duccio Manetti

p. 359

Interview with Daniel Dennett
edited by Marco Fenici and Stefano Di Piazza

p. 369

REPORTS
IX SIFA (Società Italiana Filosofia Analitica) – NATIONAL CONGRESS
Truth, Knowledge and Reality
University of Padua, 23-25 September, 2010
reviewed by Claudio Calosi

p. 383

Introduction

Agency: From Embodied Cognition to Free Will
Duccio Manetti*

duccio.manetti@unifi.it

Silvano Zipoli Caiani**

silvano.zipoli@unimi.it
Traditional theories about experience have always represented the subject as a

passive recipient of sensory stimuli, which get processed through successive

layers of the brain cortex and culminate in a phenomenal experience, omitting
any mention of the role of the personal sense of agency. According to this
formulation, experience emerges as a combination of biological and
phenomenological descriptions, linking mechanical processes to subjective
qualitative reports. Conceptual frameworks provided by neuroscience and
phenomenological analysis are alternative descriptive systems originally
conceived for alternative explanatory purposes. Here is the origin of many of
the theoretical tensions in cognitive science. Today, after years in which
dualism and reductionism have been the only games in town, the idea of an
embodied dynamicism is emerging in the field of cognitive science with
support from substantial empirical evidence. As perceptual experience is
shaped by action execution, it seems necessary to assume a theoretical
framework within which the interconnection between the perceiving subject’s
conscious states, his body and the environment is adequately emphasized.
For the phenomenological debate, the notion of embodiment coincides
with the rebuttal of what is usually considered the Cartesian dualism, that is,
the segregation of any bodily influence from the subjective experiential
domain. Crossing the history of western thought, this problem acquires a
critical dimension in the twentieth century philosophical debate. The way to
understand the relationship between body and consciousness finds a new style
after the establishment of the phenomenological framework. Following the
path originally drawn by Husserl and successively developed by Merleau-Ponty,
* University of Florence
**
University of Milan

VI

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

it is possible to figure out how the phenomenological tradition, from its early
stages, has originally approached the mind-body problem underlying the
opportunity to develop an interactive conception based on the assumption of a
radical interweaving between the experiential and the bodily domains.
According to this view, perceptive experience can be conceived as a method
through which the subject travels in the environment following his motor
intentions and exploiting his skillful knowledge of the sensorimotor
constraints that link the execution of a goal oriented action to the variation of
the phenomenal features.
Working on the clarification of the notion of embodiment we have the
opportunity to cease to unreflectively privilege only one possible explanation
of our experience. The human mind, observed through the lenses of
embodiment, emerges at the interface of the brain, the body, the material and
social environment. This is an inextricable mash influencing all aspects of our
life. We are agents whose nature is fixed by a complex interaction involving our
personal experience, a particular kind of physical embodiment and a certain
embedding in the environment. This very combination of experience, flesh and
environment is the main character of our being in the world.
The assumption of agency as a critical aspect of our experience motivates
the introduction of another classical philosophical problem such as that
concerning the notion of free will. We usually consider human beings natural
organisms that are morally responsible for their own actions. Yet this
assumption represents one of the most intriguing puzzles that, from ancient
Greece to the contemporary era, has absorbed philosophers and scientists of
every kind. Are we really free agents? What does our subjective experience of
agency reveal to us? And how do these questions relate to the fact that we are
natural embodied beings?
Except in cases where we are physically constrained, we consider ourselves
free beings that think, believe and act autonomously, that is, according to the
states of consciousness that characterize our own mental life. We consider
ourselves responsible for our own acts because we perceive ourselves as being
able to freely project the actions that our body can perform. Accordingly, the
possibility of a free choice appears to be strictly related to the possibility of
assigning independence to a particular domain such as our subjective
consciousness.
The subjective sense of agency, that is, the feeling that we control our own
movements and actions, is certainly an essential, constant element of our

Introduction – Agency: From Embodied Cognition to Free Will

VII

everyday experience. It seems obvious to us that the casual chain leading to the
execution of an action critically derives from our conscious intention.
However, we can try for a moment to imagine we do not have any real power
over our actions. We can imagine that we are prisoners of an illusion that gives
us the impression that we are the causes of our actions, but that we are actually
nothing but automata governed by a sophisticated system of behavioral laws. If
we carried through with this imaginative effort, then the very meaning of the
word “freedom” would need to be modified according to the idea that those we
perceive as our voluntary actions are, in reality, independent of our will. But
does this make sense? Or is it only a philosophical trick?
The aim of the present issue of Humana.Mente is to frame the debate by
introducing original arguments in the fields of theory of agency and free will.
With this purpose in mind, we invited authors from different disciplines to
submit their contributions. We received enthusiastic replies from some of the
most prominent scholars working in these fields. This is certainly evidence that
the topic we proposed still arouses steady interest even after over two thousand
years of philosophical and scientific discussion. This volume is also evidence
that the debate is not frozen and that new conceptions and perspectives have
been developed over the last ten years. In order to make the composition of the
issue clear, we decided to divide the Papers Section into two parts. The former
devoted to introduce arguments concerning the theory of agency, the latter
devoted to introduce specific perspectives on the notion of free will. Now, let
us briefly illustrate the content of the volume.
The opening paper by Michael Silberstein and Antony Chemero is an
introduction to a dynamical account of intentional actions and agency.
Silberstein and Chemero contrast the idea that action is caused by
disembodied mental representations residing in the head and move from the
assumption that cognitive systems are genuinely extended structures, which
effectively connect the brain to the body and to the environment. Following
this line of thought, the body and the environment can be considered a
continuous dynamical system constituted by variables that change according to
mathematical laws. This makes it possible to account for cognitive processes
through differential equations that pair animal parameters with environmental
parameters. It is important to note that, in light of its radical antirepresentationalism and anti-computationalism, Silberstein and Chemero’s
dynamical theory constitutes a special approach to the extended mind

VIII

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

paradigm, different from other proposals in this field (e.g., Clark’s
conception). Indeed, the proposal advocated by the authors is in continuity
with Gibson’s ecological psychology, according to which cognition and
conscious experience are ongoing adaptive activities performed by animals in
their natural niche. According to this view, actions and environmental
conditions influence each other, such that the agent and the environment can
be viewed as two co-dependent sides of the same coin.
As a kind of enactive approach to agency, Torrance and Froese’s paper also
focuses on the dynamics of agents interacting with the environment. More
precisely, the environment is characterized as a system of conditions and
constraints imposed by a social situation where agents interact with each other.
Accordingly, the authors argue against what they call “methodological
solipsism” in cognitive science, emphasizing the role of historical and social
norms in shaping our subjective experience of agency. The authors discuss
many examples from common experience and artificial intelligence, showing
how the (relative) autonomy of an interaction process, which is separate from
the autonomy of individual participants, has the power to influence an agent’s
individual goals. Accordingly, the main challenge of the paper is to show how
social interactions actually co-constitute the individual’s sense of agency, as
well as how the individual’s actions are involved in the constitution of social
situations.
The role of social interaction in the formation of a sense of agency is also
emphasized by Shaun Gallagher. Gallagher’s paper criticizes the standard
debate in theory of mind, which is characterized by a dispute between theorytheory and simulation theory; Gallagher defends an alternative approach that
he calls interaction theory. According to Gallagher, interaction theory faces
many suppositions associated with the traditional approach in theory of mind,
arguing for three basic assumptions. First of all, other minds are not hidden,
inaccessible entities, but become manifest through other people’s behavior.
Second, Gallagher assumes that our everyday stance toward other people is not
merely a detached observation; rather, it is almost always the result of
embodied interactions and communicative actions. Finally, in Gallagher’s view,
understanding others doesn’t involve a process of mentalizing; it is a direct and
spontaneous activity that characterizes our life. In this paper, Gallagher
introduces a developmental model according to which adult communicative
and narrative practices – such as sensory-motor abilities (primary
intersubjectivity), joint attention and pragmatic engagement (secondary

Introduction – Agency: From Embodied Cognition to Free Will

IX

intersubjectivity) – develop from strong embodied interaction with other
people. According to Gallagher, autonomy is not an “internal and intraindividual negotiation”, but it is the expression of the way people arrange their
lives with others. Following this line, self agency emerges as a characteristic
defined by the network of human relationships, instead of a purely individual
attribute.
Next, Horgan’s paper argues about the phenomenology of agency and its
consequences on the freedom-determinism debate. In the first section of the
paper, the author introduces some features of agentive phenomenology as
made available by introspective attention. Horgan’s analysis is particularly
concerned with what he considers the erroneous presupposition that any
genuine phenomenal question can be reliably answered directly through
introspection, tempting one to think that introspection alone can solve every
dilemma concerning the nature of the subjective experience of agency. On the
contrary, Horgan argues, the self is inadequate as an ultimate source to find the
answers to questions about the nature of agency and freedom. Accordingly,
using an abductive argument, Horgan attempts to show why we cannot reliably
ascertain the nature of agency based solely on careful introspection, due to our
strong natural tendency to judge freedom as an essential and evident
component of our experience of acting.
Our subjective experience of agency, like various cognitive processes, is
shaped by specific bodily constraints. The way in which an organism is
embodied determines how a subject interacts with specific aspects of the
environment, thus influencing the rise of sensory-motor experiences which
serve as the basis for the formation of categories and concepts concerning our
phenomenology of action.
Accordingly, Mauro Maldonato highlights the unconscious role of the body
in agency dynamics. In the author’s opinion, even if we are normally led to
emphasize the role of perception and sensation, assuming that our voluntary
movements are essentially dependent on them, our phenomenology of action is
rooted in the motor system itself. Maldonato’s analysis focuses on the negative
consequences derived from the traditional separation of mental functions from
bodily dimension, drawing from many examples in the field of neurobiology to
show how the mind is profoundly influenced by the motor sphere. According to
Maldonato, motility has not only direct and overt consequences, but also
critical effects on other cognitive systems, such as those underlying perception
and language understanding. This conception shows that the boundary

X

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

between action and perception is not as sharp as it is usually supposed to be,
and that a great deal of cognition can be surprisingly related to the functioning
of the agent’s motor system.
Phenomenology of agency cannot be divorced from the critical question of
how we can actually control our voluntary behavior, or from the question
concerning the existence of a causal link between our feeling about performing
a specific action and the action itself. Accordingly, the second part of the
Papers Section includes contributions that introduce new aspects and
perspectives concerning the vexata quaestio of free will. Today, now that
refined techniques of enquiry in the field of neuroscience have been
developed, participants in the free will debate are particularly engaged in
interpreting the increasing amount of empirical data, which seems to threaten
the traditional dichotomy between determinists and libertarians. An example of
this tendency is visible in the interest that Libet’s experiments still arouse in
both the scientific and the philosophical communities. Over the years Libet’s
experimental paradigm has become a critical topic where the interests of
contrasting positions converge.
Given this trend, we decided to encourage contributions on free will
concerning the interpretation of empirical findings and the development of
theoretical frameworks. In keeping with this intention, for this section we
collected papers from prominent scholars in philosophy, psychology and
neuroscience. The overall result gives the reader a taste of how many different
approaches and styles characterize this fascinating debate. The first paper, by
Roberta De Monticelli, begins with an introduction to phenomenology as the
method based on “epistemic trust” in the world of experience, having the
power to characterize things as irreducible to their psychological, biological
and physical constitution. According to the author, the question of free will can
be considered as a genuine matter of epistemic trust, that is, of reliability
concerning ordinary experience. De Monticelli’s point is that, in order to
become a subject of acts and develop selfhood, one must entertain a
relationship of epistemic adequacy with the phenomenal world. Accordingly,
distinguishing between two orders of positionality, the author shows how the
persistence of the problem of free will depends on a sort of fallacy in the order
of explanation.
The paper by Davide Rigoni, Luca Sammicheli and Marcel Brass critically
discusses a series of influential experiments in the field of cognitive
neuroscience, concerning the relationship between the subjective sense of

Introduction – Agency: From Embodied Cognition to Free Will

XI

agency and the actual execution of intentional actions. The authors’ analysis
refers to a large amount of data according to which the execution of motor
actions is always preceded by unconscious brain processes; the individual’s
subjective experience of conscious intentions is purportedly inferred from the
event occurring after the action is executed. Results of this kind challenge the
intuitive view that we are responsible for the actions we execute, as our
conscious intention to act appears to be an unessential component.
Notwithstanding this empirical evidence, the authors’ point is that considering
free will as a mere epiphenomenal illusion would be an overstatement. To
support this claim, Rigoni, Sammicheli and Brass focus on our natural
tendency to perceive free will in others, emphasizing the underestimated
pragmatic value of believing in freedom rather than in determinism.
Susan Pockett’s paper frames the free will debate by introducing some
implications related to the assumption of what she calls electromagnetic field
theory of consciousness. This is an identity theory according to which
consciousness is identical to specific electromagnetic field patterns induced by
neural activity. Unlike other materialist identity theories, Susan Pockett’s
theory doesn’t assume a causal link between the electromagnetic fields and the
initiation of bodily movements. On the contrary, Pockett defends an
electromagnetic field theory of consciousness citing crucial reasons for
rejecting the belief that consciousness causes bodily movements and,
therefore, for rejecting the claim that electromagnetic patterns are involved in
our subjective experience of agency.
In the next paper, Bickhard proposes a radical critique of a computational
model of decision-making, where actions are the final elements of a causal
chain made of many point-like events through which the causal influence is
transmitted. According to this view, a decision to act is a computational
process that starts with a reason and ends with a motor execution. In contrast
to this view, Bickhard assumes that decision and action are two aspects of the
same underlying kind of process. Rejecting a pointillist picture, the author
defines a decision to act as a temporally extended and self-organizing process.
According to this view, Bickhard’s model of acting is determined by global
characteristics instead of reducible local causal attributes.
Jing Zhu’s paper supports a libertarian approach to the question of free will
according to which indeterminism takes place relatively early in the process of
deliberation, enabling the agent to perform genuine free actions. Zhu’s paper
faces the critical question that, even if determinism is false, the assumption that

XII

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

a radical indeterminacy characterizes a decision-making process cannot secure
a condition for rational, responsible free actions. After having introduced and
replied to some major objections to libertarianism, Zhu provides an interesting
account of how indeterminism can be considered a freedom-enhancing
condition, arguing for what he calls a deliberative libertarianism. According to
Zhu, indeterminacy, instead of being an obstacle to the libertarian’s purposes,
can be considered a crucial element of creativity that plays a critical role in
practical deliberations and problem solving.
Three contributions from our call for papers conclude the Papers Section of
the volume. They have been selected through a blind review process from
among many other contributions we received. The first of them, by Liz Disley,
emphasizes the role of social interactions in self-perception. The author
focuses on the phenomenological experience of collective work as a
paradigmatic example of intersubjectivity and human interaction. Following
suggestions from Hegel, Husserl and Merleau-Ponty, Disley argues that the
experience of physical work can improve one’s own capacity for
intersubjectivity, thus enhancing the role of the agent’s embodied nature.
The second paper, by Susi Ferrarello, focuses on the notion of practical
intentionality and investigates how it affects a decision-making process.
Relying on a phenomenological approach, combining Husserl’s theory of
knowledge with Husserl’s conception of will, the author defines a balance
between logical and practical acts, showing how logical reason is necessary to
give voice to our knowledge of reality, while practical reason is the starting
point for every logical act.
Finally, David Vender’s paper focuses on the role of acquired skills as
emblematic aspects of action. According to the author, we do not have to be
fully aware of our contribution to an action for it to count as a genuine act, nor
do we necessitate a rational justification of it, but we must be able to adapt
ourselves to the perceived situation. In view of that, Vender points out the
critical role of balancing underlying perceptual and bodily orientation in
executing complex actions.
As usual, we are also publishing a series of commentaries that provide new
takes on well-established texts. They offer new, challenging arguments on the
timeless questions concerning theory of agency and free will. Commentaries in
this issue include the works of Roberta Lanfredini on Merleau-Ponty, Lorenzo
Del Savio on Walter, Roberto Di Letizia on Wegner, Elisabetta Sirgiovanni on
Libet, Freeman and Sutherland and, finally, Torrengo on Pereboom.

Introduction – Agency: From Embodied Cognition to Free Will

XIII

The volume also includes reviews of more recently published books that we
are confident will provide arguments for discussion for many years to come.
Among the many volumes published in the fields of theory of agency and free
will, we selected the books by Laurence Shapiro, reviewed by Andrea Danielli,
Sean Spence, reviewed by Roberto Di Letizia, Robert Rupert, reviewed by
Mirko Farina, Alfred Mele, reviewed by Marco Fenici, Alva Noë, reviewed by
Marco Spina, De Caro, Lavazza and Sartori, reviewed by Giuseppe Vicari, and
Antony Chemero, reviewed by Silvano Zipoli Caiani.
Finally, the issue concludes with interviews of two prominent scholars:
Sean Spence (interviewed by Duccio Manetti) and Daniel Dennett
(interviewed by Marco Fenici and Stefano Di Piazza).
We would like to thank Livia Lentini and Alice Giuliani for their valuable
assistance in editing this issue.

XIV

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Dynamics, Agency and Intentional Action
Michael Silberstein*
silbermd@etown.edu
Anthony Chemero**
tony.chemero@fandm.edu
ABSTRACT

The complex systems approach to cognitive science invites a new
understanding of extended cognitive systems. According to this
understanding, extended cognitive systems are heterogenous, composed of
brain, body, and niche, non-linearly coupled to one another. In our previous
work, we have argued that this view of cognitive systems, as non-linearly
coupled brain-body-niche systems, promises conceptual and methodological
advances on a series of traditional philosophical problems concerning
cognition, reductionism, and consciousness. In this paper, we discuss agency
and intentional action in light of this view of cognition.

INTRODUCTION
Philosophical problems concerning intentional action, agency, volition and
free will form a tangled knot. Just as with the hard problem of consciousness,
most views on these problems tend to lead to dualism or eliminativism of one
sort or another. For example, these views typically end with the idea that free
will is either a force wielded by a homuncular agent or the idea that free will and
agency are illusions. As many have noted, both sides tend to share Cartesian
conception of self and action, more or less naturalized, and both sides tend to
agree that reification of agency or its elimination are the only options. This
conception includes the assumptions that action is caused by disembodied,
internal representations (intentions, beliefs, desires, and reasons) wielded by
* Elizabethtown College
** Franklin & Marshall College

2

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

agents, all residing in the head. Intentions are understood as prior to actions
and are detached from behavior. We reject all these assumptions in favor of a
dynamical account of intentional action and agency; an account that allows us
to avoid the extremes of dualism and eliminativism about intentional action and
agency. However, unlike many other extended accounts of agency and action,
we argue that extending agency and action makes them less susceptible to
reification or elimination, not more. We are certainly not alone in trying to tell
this story, see for example Juarrero 2009 and 2010, and a collection of articles
devoted to a more embodied, embedded and extended account of intentional
action and agency (Grammont et al. 2010).
We follow the strategy set out by Ryle in Thinking and Saying (1979).
There, Ryle wants to describe thinking in a way that is not reductionist, but still
avoids inflating thinking into something mysterious, because «Reductionist
and Duplicationist theories are the heads and tails of one and the same
mistake» (Ryle 1979, p. 80)
The specific notion of Thinking, which is our long term concern, has been duly
deflated by some philosophers into Nothing But such and such; and duly
reinflated into Something Else as Well. (Ryle 1979, p. 80)

We do not endorse Ryle‘s story about thinking, but we do agree with his
contention that the right story about it must be neither reductionist nor
duplicationist. We think the same is true of agency and intentional action.
In previous work, we laid out a story about cognition and conscious
experience that is neither reductionist nor duplicationist (Chemero 2009,
Silberstein and Chemero, forthcoming). Consciousness and cognition are not
Nothing But brain activity, but this does not mean they are to be reified as
Something Else as Well. In this paper, we extend that approach to intentional
action and agency. Our claims about action and agency are based on a
particular conception of conscious cognitive agents that we call extended
phenomenological-cognitive systems. The first part of the paper is devoted to
characterizing that account and the second part will unpack the implications
for intentional action and agency.
EXTENDED COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
We have argued that, at least in some cases, cognitive systems are extended
brain-body-environment systems (Chemero 2009; Silberstein and Chemero to

M. Silberstein & A. Chemero – Dynamics, Agency and Intentional Action

3

appear). We are not alone in defending what is now often called ‗extended
cognition‘. But, as we will make clear below, our understanding of extended
cognition is importantly different from most others. First, though, it is
important to be clear on just what it is for cognition to be extended. To do so,
consider a taxonomy offered by De Jaegher, Di Paolo and Gallagher (2010),
concerning three ways in which features of the extra-bodily environment might
be related to some cognitive phenomenon. First, the features might provide
the context in which the cognitive phenomenon occurs, such that variations in
the features produce variations in the cognitive phenomenon. Second, the
features might enable the cognitive phenomenon, in the absence of the
features, the cognitive phenomenon cannot occur. Third, the environmental
features might be constitutive parts of the cognitive phenomenon. Only in this
third case, when environmental features form constitutive parts of the cognitive
phenomenon, is the cognitive system genuinely extended. (Note that De
Jaegher et al. provide examples in which interpersonal social coordination
plays each of these roles in social cognition, thus demonstrating that social
cognition is at least sometimes extended.)
The empirical basis for our arguments that environmental features are
sometimes constitutive parts of cognitive systems is research in dynamical
modeling in cognitive science. Dynamical models have been used in
psychology for at least 30 years (since Kugler et al. 1980), and have since then
been employed with increasing frequency throughout neuroscience and the
cognitive sciences. In dynamical systems explanation, one adopts the
mathematical methods of non-linear dynamical systems theory, thus employing
differential equations rather than computation as the primary explanatory tool.
Dynamical systems theory is especially appropriate for explaining extended
cognition because single dynamical systems can have parameters on each side
of the skin. That is, we might explain the behavior of the agent in its
environment over time as coupled dynamical systems, using something like the
following coupled, non-linear toy equations, from Beer (1995, 1999):

dxA
 A(x A ;S(x E ))
dt
dxE
 E(x E ;M(x A ))
dt



4

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

where A and E are continuous-time dynamical systems, modeling the organism
and its environment, respectively, and S(xE) and M(xA) are coupling functions
from environmental variables to organismic parameters and from organismic
variables to environmental parameters, respectively. Although in everyday
conversation, we treat the organism and environment as separate, they are best
thought of as comprising just one system, U. Rather than describing the way
external (and internal) factors cause changes in the organism‘s behavior, such a
model would explain the way U, the system as a whole, unfolds over time.
In those cases in which cognitive systems are best characterized as nonlinearly coupled brain-body-environment systems that receive a dynamical
explanation, the cognitive system is extended. When the constituents of a
system are highly coherent, integrated, and correlated such that their behavior
is a nonlinear function of one another, the system cannot be treated as truly a
collection of uncoupled individual parts. Thus, if brain, body and environment
are non-linearly coupled, their activity cannot be ultimately or best explained
by decomposing them into sub-systems or system and background. Hence,
they are one extended system, with brain, body and environmental features all
serving as constitutive parts.
We can demonstrate this with an example. First, a little background: Work
this decade has shown that 1/f noise (a.k.a., pink noise or fractal timing) is
ubiquitous in smooth cognitive activity and indicates that the connections
among the cognitive system‘s components are highly nonlinear (Ding et al.
2002; Riley and Turvey 2002; Van Orden et al. 2003, 2005; Holden et al.
2009). Research on the role of 1/f noise in cognition has allowed a new (and
improved!) way to address some central issues in cognitive science, including
allowing experimental approaches to questions that were thought to be
―merely philosophical‖. 1 For example, Van Orden, Holden and Turvey
(2003) use 1/f noise to gather direct evidence showing that, in certain cases,
cognitive systems are not modular; rather these systems are fully embodied,
and include aspects that extend to the periphery of the organism. Van Orden,
Holden and Turvey (2003, 2005, 2009) argue that 1/f noise found in an
inventory of cognitive tasks is a signature of a ―softly assembled‖ system
sustained by interaction-dominant dynamics, and not component-dominant
dynamics. In component-dominant dynamics, behavior is the product of a
1

See Stephen et al. 2009; Stephen and Dixon 2009; Dixon et al. to appear for some recent
examples.

M. Silberstein & A. Chemero – Dynamics, Agency and Intentional Action

5

rigidly delineated architecture of components, each with pre-determined
functions; in interaction-dominant dynamics, on the other hand, coordinated
processes alter one another‘s dynamics, with complex interactions throughout
the system. For example, when, as part of an experiment, a participant is
repeating a word, a portion of her bodily and neural resources assemble
themselves into a «word-naming device» (Van Orden et al. 2003, p. 346). Soft
device assembly as the product of strongly nonlinear interactions within and
across the temporal and spatial scales of elemental activity can account for the
1/f character of behavioral data, while assembly by virtue of components with
predetermined roles and communication channels cannot. The key point for
current purposes is that only when dynamics are component dominant is it
possible to determine the contributions of the individual working parts to the
overall operation of the system; in a system whose dynamics are interaction
dominant, all of the system‘s parts are constitutive.
Finally, to the example: Dotov, Nie and Chemero (2010) describe
experiments designed to induce and then temporarily disrupt an extended
cognitive system, demonstrating that artifacts beyond the organism‘s
periphery, can participate in the interaction-dominant dynamics of a humantool system.
Participants in these experiments play a simple video game, controlling an
object on a monitor using a mouse. At some point during the one-minute trial,
the connection between the mouse and the object it controls is disrupted
temporarily before returning to normal. Dotov et al. found 1/f noise at the
hand-mouse interface while the mouse was operating normally, but not during
the disruption. As discussed above, this indicates that, during normal
operation, the computer mouse is part of the smoothly functioning interactiondominant system engaged in the task; during the mouse perturbation,
however, the 1/f noise at the hand-mouse interface disappears temporarily,
indicating that the mouse is no longer part of the extended interaction
dominant system. These experiments therefore were designed to detect, and
did in fact detect, the presence of an extended cognitive system, one in which
features of the environment are constitutive parts. The fact that such a
mundane experimental setup (using a computer mouse to control an object on
a monitor) generated an extended cognitive system suggests that extended
cognitive systems are quite common. And note that because the system
displayed interaction-dominant dynamics, it is not possible to separate any
component of the system as playing essentially cognitive roles, while other

6

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

components are mere tools. We will return to this example repeatedly in this
paper.
EXTENDED PHENOMENOLOGY-COGNITION
In Chemero 2009 and, especially, Silberstein and Chemero to appear, we have
argued that if features of the environment are sometimes constitutive parts of
cognitive systems, it is attractive to view consciousness as being also partly
constituted by features of the environment. 2 We claim that cognition and
conscious experience are inseparable and therefore extended, and thus we
often speak of ‗extended phenomenological-cognitive systems‘. In such
systems, conscious experience is neither Nothing But brain activity, nor
Something Else as Well (i.e., qualia). Because nothing in the claims we make
about agency and action depends on the extension of conscious experience, we
will not argue for extended consciousness in detail here. We will however use
the phrases ‗extended phenomenology-cognition‘ and ‗extended
phenomenological-cognitive systems‘. We do so to differentiate our view from
those of other proponents of extended cognition. One of the most important
ways in which our view differs from others is that we embrace
antirepresentationalism. In extended cognitive science, like the Dotov et al.
experiments described above, non-linearly coupled animal-environment
systems are shown to form just one unified, interaction-dominant system. The
unity of such a system removes the pressure to treat one portion of the system
as representing other portions of the system. Because the mouse and the object
it controls on the monitor are constituent parts of the interaction-dominant
cognitive system, there is no separation between the cognitive system and the
environment that must be bridged by representations. So extended cognition
invites antirepresentationalism. This antirepresentationalism is the key to the
understanding extended cognitive systems as extended phenomenologicalcognitive systems. As we will see below, it is also the key to the understanding
of agency and action.

2

See also Rockwell 2005.

M. Silberstein & A. Chemero – Dynamics, Agency and Intentional Action

7

CHARACTERIZING EXTENDED PHENOMENOLOGICAL-COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
We propose that extended phenomenology-cognition is to be understood as a
variety of niche construction, one in which the constructed niche is an animal‘s
cognitive and phenomenological niche. In biological niche construction, the
activity of some organism alters, sometimes dramatically, its own ecological
niche as well as those of other organisms (Olding-Smee et al. 2003). These
animal-caused alterations to niches have profound and wide-reaching effects
over evolutionary time. Phenomenological-cognitive niche construction has its
effects over shorter time scales — an animal‘s activities alter the world as the
animal experiences it, and these alterations to the phenomenological-cognitive
niche, in turn, affect the animal‘s behavior and development of its abilities to
perceive and act, which further alters the phenomenological-cognitive niche,
and on and on.
Following enactive cognitive scientists (e.g., Maturana and Varela 1980;
Thompson 2007; Di Paolo 2009) and ecological psychologists (e.g., Kelso et
al. 1980; Swenson and Turvey 1991; Kelso 1995; Chemero 2008), we take
animals and their nervous systems to be self-organizing systems. The animal‘s
nervous system has an endogenous dynamics, which generates the neural
assemblies that both compose the nervous system and constitute the animal‘s
sensorimotor abilities. These sensorimotor abilities are the means by which the
animal‘s niche couples with and modulates the dynamics of the animal‘s
nervous system. These sensorimotor abilities are coupled with the niche, i.e.,
the network of affordances available to the animal (Gibson 1979). See Figure
1. This yields three (approximately) nested self-organizing systems, coupled to
one another in different ways and at multiple time scales. Over behavioral time,
the sensorimotor abilities cause the animal to act, and this action alters the
layout of the affordances available, and the layout of affordances perturbs the
sensorimotor coupling with the environment (causing, of course, transient
changes to the dynamics of the nervous system, which changes the
sensorimotor coupling, and so on). Over developmental time, the
sensorimotor abilities, i.e., what the animal can do, determines what
constitutes the animal‘s niche. That is, from all of the information available in
the physical environment, the animal learns to attend to only that which
specifies affordances complementing the animal‘s abilities. At the same time,
the set of affordances available to the animal profoundly influence the
development of the animal‘s sensorimotor abilities. So we have a three-part,

8

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

coupled, nonlinear dynamical system in which the nervous system partly
determines and is partly determined by the sensorimotor abilities, which, in
turn, partly determine and are partly determined by the affordances available to
the animal. Also note that affordances and abilities are not just defined in terms
of one another, but causally interact in real time and are causally dependent on
one another in a nonlinear fashion.

Figure 1

Understanding extended phenomenological-cognitive systems as genuinely
phenomenological systems requires understanding affordances. Affordances
are not independent properties of an animal‘s physical environment. They are
irreducibly relational features of combined animal-environment systems,
features that the animal perceives and uses to guide its action (Chemero 2003,
Stoffregen 2003). The animal‘s behavioral niche, the set of affordances that it
has learned to perceive and act upon, just is the environment as the animal
experiences it. This underwrites a variety of phenomenological realism, or
realism about the environment animals act in, think about, and consciously
experience. Indeed, the entire system, including the environment as
experienced, is required to account for and explain cognition. On this view,
cognition and conscious experience are neither Nothing But brain activity, nor
are they a dualistic Something Else as Well — they are the ongoing adaptive
activity of the animal in its niche.

M. Silberstein & A. Chemero – Dynamics, Agency and Intentional Action

9

EXTENDED PHENOMENOLOGICAL-COGNITIVE SYSTEMS: PLASTICITY AND
ROBUSTNESS
In order to more fully develop the idea that extended phenomenologicalcognitive systems are multi-scale self-organizing systems, in this section we
connect extended phenomenology-cognition to another recent topic in
biology, the relationship between plasticity, robustness and autonomy in
development. 3 Let us begin with phenotypic plasticity, wherein genetically
identical individuals will frequently develop very different phenotypic traits
when exposed to different environments or environmental conditions (Kaplan
2008). In general, a single genotype or genome can produce many different
phenotypes depending on environmental and developmental contingencies.
Phenotypic plasticity is just one example of the epigenomic processes in which
various mechanisms create phenotypic variation without altering base-pair
nucleotide gene sequences. These processes alter the expression of genes but
not their sequence. In phenotypic plasticity, differential environmental
conditions can lead to different phenotypic characteristics, but there are also
cases where genetic or environmental changes have no phenotypic effect.
Robustness is the persistence of a particular organism‘s traits across
environmental or genetic changes. For example, in many knock-out
experiments, a particular gene (or group of genes) known to be involved in the
production of a protein or phenotypic trait is disabled, without disturbing the
production of the protein or the development of the trait in question (Jablonka
and Lamb 2005).
Together, plasticity and robustness imply that organismal processes have a
fair measure of autonomy, in that organismal processes are maintained despite
genetic and environmental disruptions. To account for the autonomy of the
organism from both genetic and environmental changes, developmental
biologists have called upon dynamical systems theory. The ongoing selfmaintenance and development of an organism acts as a high-order constraint,
which enslaves the components necessary to maintain its dynamics. Because of
this, a developing system will have highly flexible boundaries, and will be
composed of different enslaved components over time. This flexibility serves
the autonomy of the developing organism, making it more likely to be viable.
Autonomy is sometimes cashed out in terms of recursive self-maintenance.
3

See also Thompson 2007.

10

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

That is, some systems are autonomous in that they can maintain stability not
only within certain ranges of conditions, but also within certain ranges of
changes of conditions: they can switch to deploying different processes
depending on conditions in the environment.
The same is true, we believe, of extended phenomenological-cognitive
systems. The coupled, dynamical phenomenological-cognitive system is highly
opportunistic, encompassing different resources at different times. To use the
language of dynamical systems theory once again, the extended
phenomenological-cognitive system can be characterized as a set of order
parameters that enslave components of brain, body and niche as needed in
order to maintain itself. This means that the boundaries of the extended
phenomenological-cognitive system will change (sometimes very rapidly) over
time. And, as in the case of biological autonomy, the flexibility of the
boundaries of extended phenomenological-cognitive systems is crucial to their
self-maintenance. Autonomy as we are describing it here is the maintenance
appropriate relations among the nervous system, the body and the
environment, i.e., the maintenance of affordances and the cognitivephenomenological niche. Thompson and Stapleton (2008) call this ―sensemaking‖.
Organisms regulate their interactions with the world in such a way that they
transform the world into a place of salience, meaning, and value — into an
environment (Umwelt) in the proper biological sense of the term. This
transformation of the world into an environment happens through the
organism‘s sense-making activity. Sense-making is the interactional and
relational side of autonomy. (Thompson and Stapleton 2008, p. 3)

This sense-making is the activity through which extended phenomenologicalcognitive systems learn about, think about, and experience the world. Indeed,
it is the activity through which they have a world.
EXTENDED PHENOMENOLOGICAL-COGNITIVE SYSTEMS: ACTION AND AGENCY
Our view is that biological agents are best conceived as extended
phenomenological-cognitive systems, and that extended phenomenologicalcognitive systems engage in purposeful action. Indeed, it is better to say that
the dynamical activity of extended phenomenological-cognitive systems is
purposeful action. What are the consequences of this understanding of agency

M. Silberstein & A. Chemero – Dynamics, Agency and Intentional Action

11

and purposeful action? We begin by pointing out that there are significant
areas of agreement between our position and that of others who advocate
embodied, embedded and extended accounts of agency and action. We agree
that agents are not just a sequence of decision making conscious states. We
agree that one should endorse causal and explanatory pluralism (Chemero and
Silberstein 2008) when it comes to explaining action. We agree that actions
are processes extended in space and time, and that agents who engage in
actions are extended in space and time and include aspects of the surrounding
environment, social and physical, past and present, and perhaps even future
(Clark 2007, p. 107). These are the points of agreement; where we differ from
other proponents of extended agency is far more telling.
The first place we differ from Clark, and most other proponents of extended
cognition, is over the role of computation in explaining cognition. Indeed, the
debate about extended cognition is just an in house dispute over how wide
computational processes are.4 Extended phenomenological-cognitive systems
do not function by representing the environment; the system and the
environment are inseparable, so there is no need for intervening
representation. On the conceptions of computation that have been used by
cognitive scientists, computation requires representation (Fodor 1981). So
extended phenomenological-cognitive systems are not computational systems;
on our view, unlike many others who discuss extended cognition, cognition is
not computation.
Moreover, the view of extended cognition as wide computationalism
(Wilson 1995, 2004; Clark 1997, 2007) treats extended cognition as
synonymous with distributed cognition. For example, in the ur-example of
wide computation, the resources used to carry out long division are distributed
among multiple separate components: a human brain, visual system, and motor
system, along with the chalk and chalkboard on which the problem is written.
The computational processing is distributed among these separate
components, and the system like this would exhibit component-dominant
dynamics as a whole. In contrast, extended phenomenological-cognitive
systems are extended, but they are not distributed in the way Clark suggests.
As we saw with the Dotov et al. study described above, the non-linear nature of
extended phenomenological-cognitive systems, their robustness and their
plasticity all imply that the systems are softly assembled, exhibiting and
4

See the papers collected in Menary 2010.

12

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

sustained by interaction-dominant dynamics, and not component-dominant
dynamics. The soft assembly is the product of strongly nonlinear interactions
within and across the varying temporal and spatial scales of extended
phenomenological-cognitive systems. It is driven by order-parameters in a
higher-dimensional state space that both determine the expanding possibilities
for the system as a whole and constrain the degrees of freedom of the more
basic components in order to maintain the system as an autonomous, selforganizing unity. Because of (1) the time scale differences in the components‘
interactions and the dynamics of the whole system, and because (2) the same
dynamics of the whole is often realized by multiple components (i.e., the
system exhibits self-similarity at multiple spatial and temporal scales, which can
be detected as 1/f noise), the system as a whole has a significant degree of
autonomy from its components. The point is that extended phenomenologicalcognitive systems are autonomous systems that are made up of components,
but have dynamics that are not determined by the components (i.e., the
dynamics are interaction dominant). This is in contrast with wide
computational systems, which have component-dominant dynamics.
This difference between extended phenomenological-cognitive systems,
which are extended but not distributed, and wide computational systems,
which are distributed, is important to the discussions of agency and action.
Taking cognition to be distributed, as it is in wide computational systems,
makes agency ripe for elimination. Clark, for example, says
what we really need to reject, I suggest, is the seductive idea that all these
various neural and non-neural tools need a kind of stable, detached user.
Instead, it is just tools all the way down. (Clark 2007, p. 111)

Clark also frames the debate in terms of the following dilemma: agency and
action are just ―tools all the way down‖ or they require a neural, functional
center of consciousness, a central self relative to whom all neural,
technological resources are mere tools (Clark 2007, p. 113). Clark is not
alone in framing the state of play in this way. Ismael, for example, argues that
we are forced between either a self-representation playing a causal role or mere
input-driven self-organization; that is, real self-governance versus mere selforganization (Ismael 2010). The extended phenomenological-cognitive
systems conception of agency and action shows that this is a false dilemma. The
agency of extended phenomenological-cognitive systems is neither Nothing
But tools nor Something Else as Well (a reified self-representation). Moreover,

M. Silberstein & A. Chemero – Dynamics, Agency and Intentional Action

13

because agency in extended phenomenological-cognitive systems inheres in a
single (extended, but non-distributed) system with interaction-dominant
dynamics, it is natural to claim that this system, as opposed its tools, is
responsible for the action. The agency, like the system, might be extended, but
it is not distributed.
An important question, though, is whether this sort of agency, which does
without a Something Else as Well, is genuine agency. It is. Following
Barandiaran, Di Paolo, and Rohde (2009), we take it that agency has three
necessary components: the agent must be an identifiable individual; the agent
must do something; and there must be norms governing what the agent does.
We can see this by, once again, considering the Dotov et al. experiment. In the
experiment, an extended phenomenological-cognitive system composed of
(parts of) a person, a mouse, and computer display was brought into being and
then temporarily disrupted. This system does compose an identifiable
individual: the system as a whole behaved as an individual, as is indicated by its
having measurable 1/f noise at the interface between the person and the
mouse. This 1/f noise was a feature of the system as a whole, rather than a
feature of any of its components. The system did something: the video game
that was played had a goal state, and the extended phenomenological-cognitive
system‘s activity was aimed at bringing that goal state into being. Finally, it was
apparent whether the person-mouse-monitor system was successfully attaining
the goal state, and when the mouse disruption made attaining that goal state
difficult or impossible to achieve, the character of the system‘s activity changed
such that the 1/f noise disappeared. That is, the system‘s activity was governed
by norms, and the system‘s behavior changed when it was not achieving those
norms. This extended phenomenological-cognitive system displays the
necessary characteristics of genuine agency.
EXTENDED PHENOMENOLOGICAL-COGNITIVE SYSTEMS: INTENTIONAL
ACTION
We have explained how extended phenomenological-cognitive systems can be
agents, and can act purposefully. We have, so far, said nothing about how they
might have intentions or act intentionally. In intentional action, an agent‘s
intention is said to cause action. Given our goals, it is essential that intentional
action be neither Nothing But behavior, nor Something Else as Well. So

14

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

intention must not be merely causally prior to the action but must somehow
correspond to the intentional structuring of action, without being something
over and above the action. The question that arises is how can physical
processes instantiate intentional action of this sort? The outline of the correct
answer to this question can be found in Juarrero‘s pioneering application of
dynamical systems thinking to intentional action and agency (Juarrero 1999,
2009, 2010). Juarrero argues that beliefs, intentions, reasons, and the like are
not the efficient causes of action. Instead, they act as context-sensitive
constraints, and serve as final or formal causes of action. This is possible, she
says, because «mental phenomena should be describable mathematically as
neural attractors» (Juarrero 2010, p. 265). Intentions in particular are
described as «higher-dimensional, neurologically embodied long-range
attractors with emergent properties» (Juarrero 2010, p. 267). And more
specifically, intentions are «soft-assembled context-sensitive constraints
operating as control parameters» (Juarrero 2010, p. 268). These intentions
constrain the activity of the system, so that the action comes about. Although
Juarrero does not use the exact same language that we do, what she is
describing is the activity of softly assembled, self-organizing systems that
display interaction-dominant dynamics. Thus we agree with Juarrero that
intentions are best understood as control parameters, which are both
composed of the system‘s components and also act as constraints on the
activity of those components. This allows intentions to play a role in the
generation of action without being identical to the system components and
without being anything over and above the system.
There are, however, important differences between our view and
Juarrero‘s. First, while she does stress that the environment gets folded into
cognitive processes that are not just in the brain (Juarrero 2010, p. 265), we
think that she is too closely focused on the brain and ―self-organized neural
states‖. Second, Juarrero‘s view is representationalist:
A self-organized neural state is representational and symbolic if its central
features are given not by the configuration‘s intrinsic physical properties but by
the information it carries. (Juarrero 2010, p. 264)

Finally, and most importantly, we worry that Juarrero‘s view leans too much
toward the elimination of intentions. The second and third of these differences
in approach stem from the first. Because Juarrero takes intentions to be selforganizing neural processes, the parameters that govern their organization are

M. Silberstein & A. Chemero – Dynamics, Agency and Intentional Action

15

independent of the environment and the rest of the body. (That, after all, is
what it is to be self-organizing.) Because of their independence from the
environment and the rest of the body, there is pressure to treat them as
representing the body and environment. And, given Juarrero‘s laudable wish to
avoid reifying intentions and other mental entities, she ends up explaining the
connection between these context-sensitive neural constraints and action by a
body in an environment in a highly deflationary fashion, suggesting classical
probability theory as a good analogy for such constraints (Juarrero 2010, p.
260). On this analogy, your intention to get a cup of coffee right now impacts
your action the same way that the laws of probability influence the outcome of a
coin toss. This strikes us as going beyond Nothing But, all the way to Nothing.
The solution here, of course, is to reject Juarrero‘s neural focus by taking
intentions not to be self-organizing neural attractors that constrain the activity
of the body, but rather to be order parameters of self-organizing extended
phenomenological-cognitive systems that act as constraints on components of
extended phenomenological-cognitive systems. This is perfectly in line with
the way that constraints are discussed in physics, allowing them to be
kinematic, geometric, or topological constraints, including various kinds of
symmetries, or even boundary conditions. These constraints are features of a
system that can impact the behavior of the system, and whether one wishes to
call this impact formal cause or final cause, it is above all lawful and dynamical.
These non-reified intentions genuinely constrain the activity of system without
being something outside it.
CONCLUSION
We have been making the case that agents are extended phenomenologicalcognitive systems, composed of a changing collection of components of the
brain, body and niche. These systems exhibit interaction-dominant dynamics,
so it is impossible to separate out the contributions from individual system
components; this means they are extended, but not distributed. These systems
are genuinely agents and engage in intentional action. Their intentions are
order parameters that constrain the activity of system components, but do not
act as efficient causes. These agents do not pop into existence (emerge) from
complex brain dynamics, already armed with powers of intentionality and will.
Rather, agent and environment are co-dependent sides of the same coin. In

16

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

other words, sense-making and agency go hand in hand. It is built into this
conception of things that cognitive agents consciously experience the world in
terms of their abilities and goals. Given this, there is no special mystery of how
meaningful behavior could be possible. We are extended phenomenologicalcognitive systems, which is to say that we are not brains in vats in
representation-mediated contact with the environment we want to act in,
somehow; instead, we are meaningful action.

REFERENCES

Barandiaran, X., Di Paolo, E., & Rohde, M. (2009). Defining agency.
Adaptive Behavior, 17(5), 367-386.
Beer, R. (1999). Dynamical approaches to cognitive science. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 4(3), 91-99.
Beer, R. (1995). Computational and dynamical languages for autonomous
agents. In R. F. Port & T. Van Gelder (Eds.), Mind as Motion, (pp. 121147). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Chemero, A. (2003). An outline of a theory of affordances. Ecological
Psychology, 15(2), 181-195.
Chemero, A. (2008). Self-organization, writ large. Ecological Psychology,
20(3), 257-269.
Chemero, A. (2009). Radical Embodied Cognitive Science. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Chemero, A., &, Silberstein, M. (2008a). After the philosophy of mind.
Philosophy of Science, 75(1), 1-27.
Clark, A. (1997). Being There. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Clark, A. (2007). Soft selves and ecological control. In D. Ross, D. Spurrett,
H. Kincaid & G. Lynn Stephens (Eds.), Distributed Cognition and the
Will: Individual Volition and Social Context, (pp. 101-122).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

M. Silberstein & A. Chemero – Dynamics, Agency and Intentional Action

17

De Jaegher, H., Di Paolo, E., & Gallagher, S. (2010). Can social interaction
constitute social cognition? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 14(10),
441-447.
Ding, M., Chen, Y., & Kelso, J. A. S. (2002). Statistical analysis of timing
errors. Brain and Cognition, 48(1), 98-106.
Di Paolo, E. (2009). Extended life. Topoi, 28(1), 9-21.
Dixon, J., Holden, J., Mirman, D., & Stephen, D. (to appear). Multi-fractal
development of cognitive structure. Topics in Cognitive Science.
Dotov, D., Nie, L., & Chemero, A. (2010). A demostration of the transition
from readiness-to-hand to unreadiness-to-hand. PLoS ONE, 5(3),
e9433.
Fodor, J. (1981). Representations: Philosophical Essays on the Foundations of
Cognitive Science. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gibson, J. (1979). The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin.
Grammont, F., Legrand, D., & Livet, P. (Eds.) (2010). Naturalizing Intention
in Action. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Holden, J., Van Orden, G., & Turvey, M. T. (2009). Dispersion of response
times reveals cognitive dynamics. Psychological Review, 116(2), 318342.
Ismael, J. (2010). Self-organization and self-governance. Philosophy of the
Social Sciences. Published online, doi:10.1177/0048393110363435
Jablonka, E., & Lamb, M. (2005). Evolution in Four Dimensions Genetic,
Epigenetic, Behavioral, and Symbolic Variation in the History of Life.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Juarrero, A. (2009). Top-Down causation and autonomy in complex systems.
In N. Murphy, G. F. R. Ellis & T. O'Connor (Eds.), Downward
Causation and the Neurobiology of Free Will, (pp. 83-102). New York:
Springer-Verlag.
Juarrero, A. (2010). Intentions as complex dynamical attractors. In J. H.
Aguilar & A. A. Buckareff (Eds.), Causing Human Actions: New

18

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Perspectives on the Causal Theory of Action. Aguilar. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.

Kaplan, J. (2008). Review of Genes in Development: Rereading the Molecular
Paradigm edited by Eva M. Neumann-Held and Christoph RehmannSutter. Biological Theory, 2, 427-429.
Kelso, J. A. S. (1995). Dynamic Patterns. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kugler, P. N., Kelso, J. A. S., & Turvey, M. T. (1980). Coordinative structures
as dissipative structures I. Theoretical lines of convergence. In G. E.
Stelmach & J. Requin (Eds.), Tutorials in Motor Behavior. Amsterdam:
North Holland.
Maturana, H. R., & Varela, F. J. (1980). Autopoiesis and Cognition: The
Realization of the Living. (Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science,
vol. 42). Dordrecht: D. Reidel Publishing Company.
Menrary, R. (Ed.) (2010). The Extended Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Riley, M., & Turvey, M. (2002). Variability of determinism in motor behavior.
Journal of Motor Behavior, 34(2), 99-125.
Rockwell, T. (2005). Neither Brain nor Ghost. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Ryle, G., & Kolenda, K. (1979). On Thinking. Oxford: Blackwell.
Silberstein, M, & Chemero, A. (to appear). Complexity and Extended
Phenomenological-Cognitive Systems. Topics in Cognitive Science.
Stephen, D. G., & Dixon, J. A. (2009). The self-organization of insight:
Entropy and power laws in problem solving. Journal of Problem Solving,
2(1), 72-102.
Stephen, D., Dixon, J, & Isenhower, R. (2009). Dynamics of representational
change: Entropy, action, and cognition. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 35(6), 1811-1822.
Stoffregen, T. A. (2003). Affordances as properties of the animal-environment
system. Ecological Psychology, 15(2), 115-134.
Swenson, R., & Turvey, M. (1991). Thermodynamic reasons for perceptionaction cycles. Ecological Psychology, 3(4), 317-348.

M. Silberstein & A. Chemero – Dynamics, Agency and Intentional Action

19

Thompson, E. (2007). Mind in Life: Biology, Phenomenology, and the
Sciences of Mind. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Thompson, E., & Stapleton, M. (2008). Making sense of sense-making:
Reflections on enactive and extended mind theories. Topoi, 28(1), 2330. Published online, doi: 10.1007/s11245-008-9043-2.
Van Orden, G., Holden, J., & Turvey, M. T. (2003). Self-organization of
cognitive performance. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
132(3), 331-351.
Van Orden, G., Holden, J., & Turvey, M. (2005). Human cognition and 1/f
scaling. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 134(1), 117123.
Varela, F., Thompson, E., & Rosch, E. (1991). The Embodied Mind.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Wilson, R. (2004). Boundaries of the Mind. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge
University Press.

20

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

An Inter-Enactive Approach to Agency:
Participatory Sense-Making, Dynamics, and Sociality*
Steve Torrance**

stevet@sussex.ac.uk

Tom Froese***

t.froese@gmail.com

ABSTRACT

An inter-enactive approach to agency holds that the behaviour of agents in a
social situation unfolds not only according to their individual abilities and
goals, but also according to the conditions and constraints imposed by the
autonomous dynamics of the interaction process itself. We illustrate this
position with examples drawn from phenomenological observations and
dynamical systems models. On the basis of these examples we discuss some of
the implications of this inter-enactive approach to agency for our
understanding of social phenomena in a broader sense, and how the interenactive account provided here has to be taken alongside a theory of largerscale social processes.

1. INTRODUCTION
It is now two decades since the emergence of Enactivism as a distinctive
approach within Cognitive Science, with the publication of The Embodied
* The authors wish to express their gratitude to a number of people for conversations from which
they derived great benefit in the writing of this paper. These include Giovanna Colombetti, Stephen
Cowley, Hanne De Jaegher, Ezequiel Di Paolo, Madeline Drake, Shaun Gallagher, John Stewart;
colleagues at the Life and Mind seminars at the University of Sussex; and participants at a workshop on
Enaction and Social Cognition, Battle, Sussex, UK, in September 2008. They would also like to
acknowledge the support of the EUCognition network, which funded their participation at the above
workshop. Froese‟s research is funded by a postdoctoral fellowship of the Japanese Society for the
Promotion of Science (JSPS).
** Centre for Research in Cognitive Science, Department of Informatics – University of Sussex
*** Ikegami Laboratory, Department of General Systems Studies – University of Tokyo

22

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Mind (Varela et al. 1991). This volume was a broadside against traditional

conceptions of mind and agency – in particular the dominating notion that a
cognitive agent's interactions with the world are essentially mediated by an
internal information-processing device, epitomized by the digital computer,
linked to sensors and effectors. On this picture the agent‟s brain receives
sensory inputs which enables the brain‟s information-processing routines to
update its internal model of the world, modify its action-plans and generate
executive commands to effect physical changes in the world – what Rodney
Brooks (1991) described as the „sense-model-plan-act‟ view of cognition and
agency. At the time of The Embodied Mind the dominant question being asked
was: is the information processing device to be thought of primarily in terms of
symbolic AI models or in terms of some form of connectionist architecture.
Varela and colleagues were inspirational in offering „enactivism‟ as a new
departure from these „internalist‟ models, and many other novel approaches
appeared, calling themselves, variously, „embodied‟, „embedded‟, „dynamic‟,
and so on.
In fact a bewildering number of different proposals were made under the
„enactivist‟ banner1 – so that it is rather difficult to find a concise summary of
what enactivism, in essence, was proposing. However the enactive approach to
cognition and agency can be broadly summarized in terms of five interlocking
themes. See Thompson 2005, 2007; Torrance 2005, which address the
foundational question: What is it to be a (cognizing, conscious) agent? The
five-fold response is as follows: it is (a) to be a biologically autonomous
(autopoietic) organism – a precarious, far-from-equilibrium, self-maintaining
dynamic system; (b) with a nervous system that works as an organizationally
closed network, whose function is to generate significance or meaning, rather
than (as in the „sense-model-plan-act‟ model) to act via a set of continually
updated internal representations of the external world; (c) the agent‟s sensemaking arises in virtue of the its dynamic sensorimotor coupling with its
environment, such that (d) a world of significances is „enacted‟ or „brought
forth‟ by a process whereby the enacted world and the organism mutually codetermine each other; and (e) the experiential awareness of that organism
arises from its lived embodiment in the world.
These five themes draw upon a number of theoretical traditions, for
example, the autopoietic theory of Maturana and Varela (1987), the
1

See Torrance 2005 for a catalogue of some of these.

S. Torrance & T. Froese – An Inter-Enactive Approach to Agency

23

phenomenology of Merleau-Ponty (1945) and recent work on dynamical
systems (e.g., Port and Van Gelder 1995), as well as (in some interpretations
of enactivism) also leaning heavily on themes from Eastern mindfulness
meditation traditions (stressed in particular in Varela et al. 1991). Putting all
these various strands together we have a view of agency which stresses how an
agent and the world in which that agent acts can, in an important sense, be seen
as „co-constituting‟ or „co-enabling‟ one another. The enactive approach to
cognitive science has come a long way since it was first initiated by Varela and
colleagues, as demonstrated, for instance, by the subtle and extended
treatment in Thompson (2007). An initial focus on the embodied
phenomenology and sensorimotor dynamics of perception (O‟Regan and Noë
2001, Noë 2004)2 has come to be complemented by a renewed interest in
biological autonomy (putting more emphasis, for example, on autopoiesis)3,
and this resulted in a sharpened conception of sense-making in relation to
autopoiesis, a stress on the importance of adaptivity (Di Paolo 2005), and
more recently, an enactively-focused characterization of agency (Thompson
2005, Barandiaran et al. 2009). Other recent treatments of enactivist themes
include collected papers on intersubjectivity, empathy and sociality
(Thompson 2001, Di Paolo 2009); on enactive experience (Torrance 2005,
2007); on autonomy (Barandarian and Ruiz-Mirazo 2008); on enactivism in
relation to other post-cognitivist views of mind (Kiverstein and Clark 2009,
Menary 2010); and on enactivism as a new paradigm for the cognitive sciences
(Di Paolo et al. 2010).
During the progression of this extended discussion it has become evident
that it is not just the internalism and representationalist nature of classical
cognitivism that has to be challenged, but also a „methodological individualist‟
or „methodological solipsist‟ approach to cognition and agency. 4 This
individualistic picture has been challenged in many ways by enactivist and
other perspectives which stress embodied and embedded, features of agency
and cognition. Thus there has been a growing focus on the intersubjective, or
interactive, nature aspects of experience, knowledge and agency.5 De Jaegher
2

See also Torrance 2002.
See Varela 1997, Weber and Varela 2002.
4
See Fodor 1980 for a classical defence of an account of cognition which explicitly takes this
character, under the label „methodological solipsism‟.
5
This emphasis on interaction and intersubjectivity was given an important impetus by an
emphasis on second-person methods for investigating consciousness, and empathy as a central feature
3

24

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

and Di Paolo‟s (2007) enactive account of social interaction provided a new
departure by introducing the concept of participatory sense-making. Their
account, which drew inspiration from autopoietic accounts of biological
autonomy (e.g., Maturana and Varela 1987), and from research in artificial life
and evolutionary robotics, proposed that inter-individual interaction processes
can take on an autonomous organization of their own.
De Jaegher and Di Paolo‟s paper is a key study in a number of recent works
which mark a growing interest in the role of the interaction between agents for
understanding the nature of agency.6 For instance, it has been argued that the
inter-individual interaction process can constitutively shape forms of individual
agency (De Jaegher and Froese 2009), that inter-agent interaction is a
necessary condition for the shift from minimal to „higher-level‟ cognition
(Froese and Di Paolo 2009), and that historically based impersonal norms an
essential background in human social agency (Steiner and Stewart 2009; see
also below section 4). In addition, Di Paolo, Rohde and De Jaegher (2010)
have investigated the importance of an enactive account of social cognition to
understanding the nature of play. Moreover, the idea that interactive processes
are defined by a certain autonomy which both conditions and is conditioned by
the autonomy of the interacting individuals has profound repercussions for our
understanding of emotion, values and ethics (Colombetti and Torrance 2009).
In what follows we will further substantiate the idea that many kinds of
agency, in particular the agency of human beings, cannot be understood
separately from understanding the nature of the interaction that occurs
between agents. We begin with a discussion of some illustrative examples,
drawn from common experience, that show how the relative autonomy of the
interactive process itself can sometimes facilitate and sometimes hinder our
individual goals. However, the majority of cognitive scientists working on
interpersonal interaction and social cognition are likely to remain unconvinced
that these examples show that inter-individual interaction processes can indeed
play a constitutive role in determining the character of individual agency.
Accordingly, we discuss a series of simulation models which serve as concrete
proof of concepts, and which enable us to analyze the dynamics of the
interaction process in a precise mathematical manner. Effectively, the models
help us to demonstrate that it is possible to treat an inter-individual interaction
of this emphasis, as seen in the collection of papers which was published shortly after Varela‟s death
(Thompson 2001). See also, for example, Gallagher 2005.
6
See also Di Paolo 2009.

S. Torrance & T. Froese – An Inter-Enactive Approach to Agency

25

process as one whole dynamical system, and that this global system has
properties that modulate the flow of component activity and yet cannot be
reduced to the activity of any of the individual components. Having put the
enactive approach to social interaction on a more solid footing, we proceed to
discuss some of the implications this change in perspective has for our
understanding of social processes in a sense broader than that which is limited
to the inter-individual real-time interactions which are the major focus in the
earlier part of our discussions.
2. WHEN INTERACTING WITH OTHERS TAKES ON A LIFE OF ITS OWN
One of the key ideas to have emerged from the „participatory sense-making‟
literature is that the unfolding of an interaction between two or more people
has an autonomy of its own which is separate from the autonomy of the
individual participants. This idea will be given more theoretical weight later on,
but here it is illustrated intuitively. The relative autonomy of an inter-individual
interaction process may be encountered as an organizing (enabling and
constraining) influence on the unfolding events of the interaction from the
perspective of the interacting individual agents. Depending on the
circumstances, the autonomous organization of the interaction process itself
can facilitate or hinder the realization of the autonomous goals of the agents.
Here we illustrate these two types of situation by drawing on some concrete
examples from common experience, at first intuitively or pre-theoretically
described.
2.1 HOW THE INTERACTION PROCESS FACILITATES INDIVIDUAL ACTIONS
To begin with, it may be easiest to illustrate the constitutive role of the
interaction process for individual actions by recalling a social situation in which
we were engrossed in a conversation. It can happen that the flow of the
interaction carries us along quite effortlessly, with every one of our actions
prompting our interlocutor to respond with a complementary reaction, which
in turn evokes another response from us, and so forth, back and forth. In this
way we can describe the conversation as a stable social situation because of the
mutually reinforcing actions of the interlocutors.
At the same time we can also look at the role of the conversation itself. In
other words, the fact that we are situated in an engaging conversation means

26

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

that in response to what the other has said we are more likely to say or do
something appropriately engaging in turn, and the fact that we are more likely
to respond in this way also means that our actions are ensuring that we
continue to be situated in an engaging conversation. We are thus faced with a
self-perpetuating social interaction process, whereby the conversational nature
of the situation co-constitutes the individual‟s gestures, and the individual‟s
gestures co-constitute the conversational nature of the situation.
But does it really make sense to give a co-constitutive role to the structure
of the inter-individual interaction process itself? How do we know that we are
not simply dealing with the linear sum of the individual gestures? In the case of
a social situation in which the individual goals of the partners are mutually
reinforcing, it is indeed difficult to assess whether we need to appeal to any
additional interactional process at the inter-individual level in order to explain
what is going on. However, what about social situations in which the goals of
the individual interactors are not aligned with the self-perpetuating structure
of the interaction process?
2.2 HOW THE INTERACTION PROCESS HINDERS INDIVIDUAL ACTIONS
De Jaegher and Di Paolo (2007, 2008) nicely illustrate this possibility by
pointing out that verbal arguments are often self-perpetuating even despite the
best intentions of those involved. In such cases every attempt to end the
conflict by one or the other of the individuals may, in virtue of the interindividual situation, provoke a response from the partner and will therefore, in
spite of the individual‟s original goal, inadvertently give support to the
continuation of the overall argumentative situation. Anyone who has
experienced being entangled in such a self-perpetuating social conflict knows
the feeling of being helpless to stop what turns out to be an inevitable
continuation of the argument. On the personal level it can feel like what one is
saying is somehow twisted in the interaction so that it comes out wrong, is
misinterpreted, or simply remains ineffective.
The self-perpetuating verbal argument that no one wants to continue
having is a rather extreme example, but self-sustaining interactions in which
the structure of the social situation cannot be reduced to the sum of the
individual actions are actually quite common in our daily lives. As a
paradigmatic non-verbal example, De Jaegher and Di Paolo (2007) refer to the
situation in which we encounter someone while walking along a corridor and
we step aside to make way. It sometimes happens that we both step aside in the

S. Torrance & T. Froese – An Inter-Enactive Approach to Agency

27

same direction and are thus faced by the same impasse once again, which leads
us to make another synchronous sideways step together, and so forth, until one
of us finally makes a concerted effort to break the undesired interaction
process and lets the other pass.
A common verbal example that we can all relate to is trailing conversations
that we have difficulty in terminating. This can happen for instance when trying
to end a phone call in a polite manner, such that every „bye‟ and „thanks‟ and
„see you soon‟ uttered by one of the speakers is followed by a complementary
response by the other speaker, which then calls forth another response from
the first speaker, and so forth. In this way the „end‟ of the conversation
continues because the social situation as such facilitates the exchange of
mutually contingent responses, as well as because the cultural norms of our
society make it difficult to simply hang up on someone who is still speaking.
Accordingly, even though both callers may have the personal goal of
terminating the call, they can find themselves unable to easily do so because
additional responses are facilitated by the interactional nature of the social
situation and the cultural constraint of not hanging up prematurely.
We will return to a fuller discussion of the role of cultural norms in shaping
individual actions in a later section of this paper, but for now we simply want to
highlight the fact that even the most basic inter-individual interaction
processes can become self-perpetuating, autonomous structures in their own
right, and that these relational structures can play a constitutive role for the
enaction of individual actions (De Jaegher and Froese 2009).
2.3 HOW TO AVOID FALLING INTO SOCIAL MYSTERIANISM
However, as Boden (2006) has correctly pointed out, this kind of approach to
social interaction confronts us with a fundamental problem: how can we leave
methodological individualism, which is still prevalent in the cognitive sciences,
behind us without at the same time descending into some kind of social
mysterianism? How can we scientifically grasp the notion that an interindividual interaction process is not just constituted by the actions of several
interacting individuals, but that this whole interaction process itself is also
constitutive of the actions of those individuals as well?
Mainstream approaches to social cognition are ill equipped to address this
important challenge because they remain narrowly focused on the cognitive

28

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

abilities of the brains of isolated individuals (usually characterized in terms of
either theory theory or simulation theory). 7 Fortunately, however, these
cognitivist and individualist approaches to social interactions are no longer the
only game in town. In what follows we will show that it is possible to
systematically study the nature of social situations, including their coconstitutive impact, by making use of some minimalist technological tools. Not
only does this address the worry that an acceptance of the co-constitutive role
of interaction processes and a rejection of theory of mind approaches leads to a
non-scientific mysterianism about sociality; on the contrary, because our
framework is based on the mathematics of dynamical systems theory, we are
grounding the discussion in concrete models that are open to precise analysis.8
3. DYNAMICAL MODELS OF INTER-ENACTION
In the previous section we have described two distinct types of social situation
in which interactions between two or more individual agents can form a selfperpetuating dynamic structure at the level of the interactions themselves. In
these types of social situation the interaction process entrains the actions of the
individual interactors in such a way that they support the continuation of the
interaction process itself. And, depending on the organization of the
interaction process, it can either facilitate or hinder the realization of the
individual interactors‟ goals accordingly.
3.1 METHODOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
However, it is not enough to simply describe these social situations in a
7
For some recent critical accounts of conventional accounts of social cognition and „mindreading‟, see Gallagher 2001, 2005, 2008; Gallagher and Zahavi 2008, pp. 171-197. Dan Hutto‟s
Narrative Practice Hypothesis provides a particularly fertile source for criticisms of orthodox
approaches to social cognition (Hutto 2004, 2007; see also Gallagher and Hutto 2008).
8
Note that we are also avoiding the category mistake committed by Theory of Mind approaches,
which attempt to devise scientific explanations of social cognition by re-describing our personal-level
abilities as hypothetical brain-based mechanisms (e.g., our personal-level ability to imagine ourselves
in someone else‟s place makes a reappearance in the supposedly sub-personal simulation capacity of
so-called mirror neurons). The enactive approach, on the other hand, does not have to make use of
homuncular discourse when explaining sub-personal mechanisms underlying social interactions in
terms of dynamical systems.

S. Torrance & T. Froese – An Inter-Enactive Approach to Agency

29

narrative manner and to affirm in an intuitive way the personal sense of being
enabled or constrained in order to establish a science of social or interactive
situations. What is additionally required is a basic proof of concept, which
demonstrates that these narrative and phenomenological descriptions of the
efficacy of interaction processes in certain social situations are not merely
metaphorical embellishments of what is essentially a sum of individual actions.
To show that the social interaction process itself can play a constitutive role for
the actions of individual agents, we need to be able to show this process at work
in a concrete model that allows for systematic exploration of the essential
parameters.
One suitable way of satisfying this additional requirement is to take
advantage of recent work in Evolutionary Robotics modeling. Since its
beginnings in the early 1990s, the Evolutionary Robotics approach has
established itself as a viable methodology for optimizing dynamical controllers
for physical robots (Nolfi and Floreano 2000), as well as for synthesizing
simulation models of what has become known as „minimally cognitive behavior‟
(Beer 1996). The idea here is to set up an evolutionary algorithm that can
automatically shape the dynamical system of a model agent so that it performs a
given task in the simplest possible way, while still raising issues that are of
genuine interest to cognitive scientists (Beer 2003, Harvey et al. 2005, Froese
and Ziemke 2009). In the last decade there has been a growing interest in
using this kind of Evolutionary Robotics approach to investigate the dynamics
of social interactions (e.g., Iizuka and Di Paolo 2007a, Froese and Di Paolo
2008, Di Paolo et al. 2008), and the methodology has accordingly been
extended to include „minimally social behavior‟ as well (Froese and Di Paolo in
press).
We will draw on some of our own modeling work in this area (Froese and
Di Paolo 2010, in press), because the specific aim of these models is to serve
as proof of concepts which demonstrate that interaction processes themselves
can play a constitutive role in shaping individual actions over and above the
sum power of the individual agents. In fact, as we have already argued
extensively elsewhere (Froese and Gallagher 2010), the methodology of
Evolutionary Robotics is well suited to complement phenomenological
investigations in the cognitive sciences.
3.2 THE DYNAMICS OF PERCEPTUAL CROSSING
Froese and Di Paolo (2010) used an Evolutionary Robotics approach to

30

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

generate a series of agent-based simulation models whose minimalist taskdesign is directly based on a psychological experiment on perceptual crossing
by Auvray, Lenay and Stewart (2009). The term „perceptual crossing‟ denotes
social situations in which the perceptual activities of two agents interact with
each other (e.g., mutual touch or catching another‟s eye). Essentially, the study
by Auvray and colleagues is an exploration of the most basic conditions that are
necessary for participants to recognize each other by means of minimal
technologically mediated interaction in a shared virtual space. Since this study
is the original inspiration for the simulation models, we will describe it in a bit
more detail first.
A schematic illustration of the overall experimental setup is shown in
Figure 1. Two adult participants, acting under the same conditions, can
move a cursor left and right along a shared one-dimensional virtual „tape‟ that
wraps around itself. They are asked to indicate the presence of the other‟s
cursor-driven virtual „body‟ by clicking a mouse button. The participants are in
separate rooms and can only sense a tactile stimulation (on/off) on their finger,
depending on whether the location of their cursor coincides with another
object in the virtual space. Apart from each other‟s cursor object, participants
can encounter a static object on the tape, or a mobile „shadow‟ object that is
fixed at a distance to the partner‟s cursor. All objects are strictly identical in
size, and the two mobile objects (the other‟s cursor-driven „body‟ and its
attached „shadow‟) perform identical movements. Importantly, only the other‟s
cursor can be responsive to one‟s own movements since it provides tactile
feedback to the other participant.

Figure 1: Visual schematic of the experimental setup of Auvray, Lenay and

Stewart‟s (2009) study of perceptual crossing (adapted from Froese and Di
Paolo 2010). Two participants inhabit a virtual space consisting of a 600
unit long 1-D toroidal (wrap-around) environment. The space is divided
into two regions, „Up‟ and „Down‟. Each region contains three objects,

S. Torrance & T. Froese – An Inter-Enactive Approach to Agency

31

shown as grey oblongs. These are (a) the participant‟s mouse-driven „body‟
or „avatar‟ (labeled B1, B2) which the participant can move left or right at
will; (b) the body‟s „shadow‟ (S1, S2) which moves in lockstep with the
avatar; (c) a fixed object (F1, F2). In addition, each participant‟s has a
receptor field (R1, R2 – shown as white arrows pointing into the other
region), which move with the avatar‟s body, and which can overlap with
each of the three objects in the other region as it moves left and right. In the
actual experiment participants are blindfolded, and use a mouse to control
the movement of their avatar; the other hand is placed on a custom-built
tactile feedback device which issues an identical short vibration when the
receptor field encounters an object in the opposing space.

Since all virtual objects are of the same size and only generate an all-or-nothing
tactile response, the only way to differentiate between them is through the
interaction dynamics that they afford. And, indeed, an analysis of the results
revealed that, although they were often not aware of this fact, the participants
did manage to locate each other successfully. Essentially, the reason for this
success is that the ongoing mutual interaction afforded the most stable
situation under these circumstances. If one participant‟s receptor field
coincided with the other‟s body, thus activating the tactile feedback, the other
participant‟s receptor field would simultaneously also coincide with the first
participant‟s body, thus activating their tactile feedback, too. Accordingly,
both participants were mutually engaged in the same interaction and neither of
them had reason to disengage and to continue searching elsewhere. But if a
participant happened to interact with the other‟s mobile shadow object (whose
movements are an exact copy of the other‟s movements), the other would not
receive any tactile feedback from their engagement and would continue
searching, thus dragging their shadow object with them and terminating the
other‟s attempt at interaction. Interaction with the shadow object is therefore
inherently unstable, while mutual perceptual crossing is relatively stable. To be
sure, interacting with a static object is stable too, but the lack of social
contingency is given away when the interaction becomes too predictable, after
a few iterations at least.
A closer look at the results reveals a special role of the interaction process
in the overall outcome of the experiments. Interestingly, the participants
„failed‟ to achieve the task individually, because there was no significant
difference between the probability of a clicking response to the other‟s body
and the other‟s shadow object (Auvray et al. 2009, p. 39). In other words, on
an interaction to interaction basis, the participants were unable to distinguish

32

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

between those situations that were characterized by social contingency and
those that weren‟t. However, they still managed to solve the task collectively
because of the self-sustaining dynamics of the interaction process. That is, at

the end of a whole trial the most clicks in total occurred during situations of
actual perceptual crossing. The upshot of these experiments therefore is that,

even though it is impossible to distinguish the active partner from her
irresponsive copy on an individual basis, it turns out that most clicks are made
correctly because a mutual interaction is more likely to persist and participants
are therefore more prone to face each other once again.
The value of modeling this psychological experiment has already been
shown by Di Paolo, Rohde and Iizuka (2008), who used an Evolutionary
Robotics approach to generate an agent-based simulation model which
successfully replicated the main results of the study. At the same time it helped
them in gaining some additional insights into the dynamics of the interaction
process. For example, the problems that their model agents had with avoiding
interactions with their respective static objects led them to predict similar
difficulties for human participants. This prediction was already supported by
the empirical data presented by Auvray and colleagues, but it had previously
gone unnoticed.
Froese and Di Paolo (2010) continued this modeling research with the aim
of gaining a better appreciation of the further potential of this general
experimental setup and, at the same time, of improving our understanding of
the constitutive role of the interaction process for individual behavior and
agency. They began by using a similar modeling setup as that used by Di Paolo
and colleagues (2008), and provided a comprehensive analysis of the evolved
behavioral strategy by means of a set of simulated psycho-physical tests. The
results of the original study and its first model were successfully replicated.
The novel aspect of Froese and Di Paolo‟s re-implementation is the great
simplicity of the „neural‟ system of the evolved agents, which enables a detailed
dynamical understanding of their behavior. An example of the kind of analysis
that is made possible by this kind of model is shown in Figure 2.

S. Torrance & T. Froese – An Inter-Enactive Approach to Agency

(a)

(b)

33

34

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Figure 2: Illustration of the 3D state-space attractor landscape for the

three-node continuous-time recurrent neural network (CTRNN)
controlling the movements of one model agent (figure adapted from Froese
2009, p. 169). All nodes receive input from the agent's receptor field and
the output of the nodes labeled „motor-r‟ and „motor-l‟ determine the
agent's rightward and leftward velocity, respectively. Note that depending
on whether the agent‟s receptor field is turned off (a) or on (b), the position
of the point attractor, represented by a *, changes to a different region of
state-space. The lines converging on the attractors represent a sample of
possible state trajectories of the neural network (for 50 times the states of
the network‟s nodes were initialized to random values drawn from a
representative trial run and the network was allowed to settle for 8000 time
steps). See text and Froese and Di Paolo 2010 for details.

When the continuous-time recurrent neural network (CTRNN) that
controls movement of a model agent is decoupled from the 1-D environment, it
is characterized by two fixed point attractors, (labeled attractor0 and attractor1)
depending on whether the receptor field input is off or on. It turns out that the
velocity of the agents is strongly coupled to the value of this parameter. This is
indeed the basis for a tight sensorimotor coupling: the state of the receptor
field input parameter is largely determined by the current movement of the
agent in relation to its current environment (including potentially its relation to
the other agent), and at the same time its current movement is largely
determined by the state of the input parameter.
But this tight coupling should not be misunderstood as the mark of a purely
reactive system, since the sensorimotor loop is mediated by a dynamical system
with feedback connections. Moreover, because the contact sensor switches an
agent‟s neural system between the two different attractor landscapes (with
attractor0 and attractor1), the inter-individual interaction process is able to
organize the flow of internal dynamics into a transient that makes the individual
agents more responsive to the subtle changes of the interaction, thereby
making it more likely that the ongoing interaction process can be sustained.
Here we thus have a concrete example of how an interaction process can be
constitutive of individual behavior.
It is also worth emphasizing that the processes that drive the necessary
internal systemic changes via appropriate input-switching are largely external
to the agent. In fact, they are partly constituted by the mutually responsive
interaction with the other agent. An agent in an empty 1-D environment would
be doomed to linear movement in a single direction, since it is lacking the

S. Torrance & T. Froese – An Inter-Enactive Approach to Agency

35

ability to internally switch between the two attractor landscapes. Only during
an interaction with a responsive partner is the agent‟s internal organization
transformed so as to allow for an open-ended entrainment that can flexibly
proceed in either direction.9 In other words, here we also have a concrete
example of how an interaction process can be constitutive of individual agency.
3.3 FURTHER INVESTIGATIONS OF PERCEPTUAL CROSSING
To further illustrate the constitutive role of the interaction process on the
behavior of the individual agents, Froese and Di Paolo conducted a series of
additional experiments with the same computer model which we will briefly
describe here. The aim of these models is to give a better sense of how the
properties of the interaction process can shape individual behavior.
RECEPTOR FIELD SWITCHING EXPERIMENT

In a first variation of the experimental setup, the receptor fields are switched
between the agents such that each agent receives the other‟s sensory input.
This modification cripples the agents‟ ability to interact with their environment
on the basis of coherent sensorimotor correlations created by their own
exploratory behavior. Nevertheless, it is found that even under this impaired
condition stable perceptual crossing reliably emerges from the inter-agent
interactions. Thus, even without any consistent sensorimotor correlations as a
basis for individual behavior alone, the inter-individual interaction process
essentially negates this lack because of the self-perpetuation of mutually
responsive interactions. When the agents interact with each other, the
mutuality of the interaction means that they essentially serve as each other‟s
sensor interface, and this mutually and interactively re-established coherence
of the individuals‟ sensorimotor loops reinforces the interaction as a whole.
In this manner, even when most individual behavior is less stable than in the
original experimental setup, it is still possible for successful perceptual
crossing to self-organize in terms of the relative stabilities of the interaction
process. In sum, by modifying the original experimental setup Froese and Di
9
The crucial role of mutual responsiveness in the scaffolding of individual agency and behavior, as
it has been demonstrated by this model, may be able to teach us a lot about how to conduct our social
relations. This is true especially in the context of nursing and in other situations of dependency, in
particular those involving forms of impaired agency. See Colombetti and Torrance 2009 for a more
detailed discussion.

36

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Paolo (2010) thus demonstrated that the interaction process not only makes
interaction with the shadow object unstable, thereby removing it as a
possibility for further entrainment, but that it also plays a constitutive role in
making perceptual crossing a stable possibility.
INDIVIDUAL BEHAVIOR VERSUS INTERACTION PROCESS EXPERIMENT

In a second variation, Froese and Di Paolo changed the task so as to introduce
a conflict between individual behavior and global stability, namely by further
evolving the agents to locate the mobile object which is precisely not the other
agent, i.e., the other‟s mobile shadow object. The requirement of detecting
social contingency, nevertheless, remains the same as before. This is because
the individuals must still distinguish between those interactions that occur with
the other‟s receptor field and those that result from the mobile shadow object,
as well as avoid any interaction with the static object. However, in contrast to
the original psychological study, here the agents are required to stay with their
partner‟s shadow object, rather than staying with the receptor field of their
actual partner. The task is therefore to detect a certain kind of mobile object
that gives rise to non-contingent interactions, a task that can only be achieved
by detecting, and then avoiding, interactions with contingently responsive
mobile objects.
It should be noted that, due to the asymmetry inherent in this setup (i.e.,
agents face in opposite directions, but their shadows are displaced in the same
direction), it is impossible for both participants to be interacting with each
other‟s shadow at the same time. Therefore, in order to complete the task it is
now necessary for the participants to avoid engaging in inter-individual
interaction with each other, so that they can find the shadow object. This will
not be easy because (i) engaging in perceptual crossing is still a relatively stable
behavior, at least for as long as both interactors remain convinced that they are
interacting with the other‟s shadow, and (ii) crossing with the other‟s shadow
remains inherently unstable, since that other participant receives no
stimulation from this interaction and will therefore keep on looking for the
shadow of its partner. In this manner we have created an experimental setup in
which the „intentions‟ of the individuals and the dynamics of the whole interindividual interaction process are in direct conflict, and which therefore allows
us to further investigate what happens when individuals try to break out of
interactions.

S. Torrance & T. Froese – An Inter-Enactive Approach to Agency

37

Figure 3: Illustration of the behavior of the agents and their attached
shadow objects during a representative trial showing the change in
positions over time (figure taken from Froese 2009, p. 164). They first
encounter their respective static objects (seen as dotted lines), then
continue searching, and finally locate each other and establish perceptual
crossing until the end of the run (16000 time steps).

Froese and Di Paolo found that agents can temporarily succeed at this task, but
only by regularly falling back into stable patterns of perceptual crossing. The
beginning of a representative trial run is depicted in Figure 3. At time t = 0 the
agents begin to move and are briefly distracted by encountering their
respective static objects, until they first cross each other‟s receptor field after t
= 4000. There then begins an extended period of mutual perceptual crossing
until, after t = 8000, agent („down‟) tries to break out of the interaction with
the other agent, and to interact with the other‟s non-contingent shadow object.
This is relatively successful until the agents fall back into mutual perceptual
crossing at around t = 12000 and again at around t = 15000. The modeling
results of this experimental variation therefore provide us with a simplified
illustrative example of how it can be difficult for individuals to counteract the
stability of mutual entrainment in an inter-individual interaction process, even
if the disengagement from each other is in fact necessary or beneficial for the
completion of their individual tasks.
3.4 DISCUSSION OF RESULTS
In earlier sections we suggested that a central claim of the enactive approach to
inter-individual interaction is that the dynamics of the interaction process as a
whole can play a constitutive role for individual behavior (including sensemaking) and for agency. The modeling results presented in the current section
of the paper show that this central claim can be systematically approached in a
scientific manner without recourse to some social mysterianism. By

38

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

constructing minimalist models with very simple artificial „agents‟ we have
been able to demonstrate how the inter-individual interaction process, taken as
a whole system, can have important properties that in principle can neither be
separated from the being and doing of the interacting individuals, nor be
reduced to the being and doing of those individuals alone.
It may be argued that these modeling results are based on artificial „agents‟
that are so minimalist that they have limited value when it comes to a scientific
understanding of interactions between human subjects. And, of course, we do
not want to claim that these kinds of model agents are actual agents or that the
models include all that is essential for proper agency.10 On the contrary, it
further strengthens our arguments if we in fact choose to treat these agents
merely as simple dynamical systems, since it shows that we are must be kept in
mind that these models are directly based on actual psychological studies, that
they replicate the main results of those studies, and that they give additional
insight into these results that were not directly evident before (Di Paolo et al.
2008). They allow us to distill the essential features of an experimental setup
and to explore the space of possible solutions in a mutually informing manner
(Froese and Di Paolo in press). For instance, some initial exploratory
psychological experiments of perceptual crossing conducted by De Jaegher
and Di Paolo at the University of Sussex in 2009 have indicated that human
subjects are indeed capable of overcoming the limitations of switched receptor
fields because of the stabilizing influence of mutual interaction (Di Paolo,
personal communication).
3.5 FUTURE WORK: SITUATING INTERACTION PROCESSES IN A SOCIOCULTURAL CONTEXT

We have described and analyzed two types of inter-individual interaction
processes in some detail, namely those in which the goals of the interacting
individuals are complementary, and those that are in conflict, with the
organization of the interaction process itself. But there is another important
type of inter-individual interaction which we have not mentioned yet. It can
happen that the way in which an interaction process unfolds ends up modifying
the goals of the interacting individuals such that there is suddenly a new
purpose to their actions. De Jaegher and Di Paolo (2008) discuss an
illustrative example where an infant holds up a toy object and in response the
10

See Froese and Ziemke 2009 for an extended discussion on this topic.

S. Torrance & T. Froese – An Inter-Enactive Approach to Agency

39

mother also grasps it, and then continues to hold the object when the infant
releases its grip. In this situation the infant‟s action may have started out as a
simple stretching of the arm or display and, through the interaction with the
mother, the action was in the end invested with a novel social meaning, namely
that of giving something to someone else. The behavioral repertoire of the
infant has thus been transformed in the interaction, and the act of giving can
from now on be initiated intentionally to modulate the flow of social
interactions.
Note that this example also nicely illustrates the important distinction
between participatory sense-making and social cognition (Gallagher 2009) 11,
and a possible transition between the two forms of interaction. As Gallagher
points out, while the notion of participatory sense-making denotes the process
of sense-making with another (although this other is not necessarily the object
of this sense-making), social cognition is a term used to characterize the
process of cognition about another (although this process does not necessarily
happen with another). In the case of the mother who spontaneously completes
the infant‟s act of reaching with an object by receiving the object, such that the
interaction invests the infant‟s original act with the new meaning of „giving‟, we
have an example of how participatory sense-making (the infant-mother
interaction provides the infant with new meaning) enables an instance of social
cognition (the intentional act of giving involves reference to someone else).
This kind of inter-individual interaction considerably complicates the
picture of the constitutive role of the interaction process, because it is no
longer just a matter of how an individual‟s goals are hindered or facilitated by
that interaction process. We are now moving toward a more dynamic view of
social interaction according to which the interaction process itself can modify
the normative structure of the interacting agents while they are interacting.
Moreover, this example illustrates how closely the real-time dynamics of an
inter-individual interaction process and the historical normative order that
defines the socio-cultural background are related. It is on this basis that an
individual‟s enculturation into a social network whose interactions are
explicitly and implicitly regulated by an arbitrary (symbolic and traditional) set
of preexisting norms becomes a possibility.
We find this kind of inter-enaction of meaning and purpose in an exemplary
11
Gallagher‟s use of the term „social cognition‟ is in line with the current conventions in the
cognitive sciences. But in this context it may be a misleading term for a number of reasons (see next
section for details).

40

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

form in the case of artistic group activities, such as collective jazz
improvisation. In relatively simple versions of joint improvised playing, two or
more musicians may agree a basic framework (e.g., chord sequence, tempo)
but such a framework is by no means inevitable. One or other player may take
the „lead‟ while others „follow‟ but roles may be swapped rapidly – or perhaps
there is no clear lead-follower differentiation. What typically results is a set of
unrehearsed and unplanned developments in the musical production which
may take off in risky directions that are completely unanticipated by all
participants, often radically departing from the set melodic and chordal
structure, tempo, and so on. In such explorations there will be a continual and
subtle cross-play between what occurs intentionally and what occurs by
happenstance, between what is the result of individual agency and what
emerges as a group product, and between what is spontaneously co-created in
the moment and what is derived from a longstanding heritage of musical
tradition. The example of jazz improvisation therefore provides a very useful
phenomenon for clarifying how different individual, interactional and sociocultural factors can shape individual and group behavior.
We currently do not know of any agent-based models which specifically
investigate the relationship between the autonomous dynamics of the interindividual interaction process and the pre-existing normative order that is
determined by socio-cultural context in which the interaction process is
situated, although there are some promising leads. It may be useful for future
Evolutionary Robotics work in this area to take a closer look at some of the
models inspired by duet interactions (e.g., Di Paolo 2000, Ikegami and Iizuka
2007) and models of spontaneous goal switching (e.g., Iizuka and Di Paolo
2007b). It is possible that an integration of these two approaches could
provide a first step toward a better dynamical understanding of how individual
behavior, an ongoing interaction process, and a pre-existing history of
interactions together can lead to changes of an agent‟s goals. At least one thing
is clear already: since the enactive approach to agency is going to draw on
cognitive science, interaction science, and social science in one unified
framework, it is essential to be clear about the term „social‟, which perhaps has
different connotations in each of these areas of research.

S. Torrance & T. Froese – An Inter-Enactive Approach to Agency

4.

41

INTER-ENACTION AND „SOCIALITY‟

In the preceding discussion we have sometimes referred to „interaction‟ (or
„inter-enaction‟, our preferred term for a certain enactive view of the latter),
and sometimes to „social interaction‟. We act and cognize with others and
about others in our world in a variety of ways – are all of those ways to be
included in a blanket way within the terms of the account of „participatory
sense-making‟ (PSM) sketched here and in other works cited? In what follows
we will consider a view which is, in many ways, critical of the PSM or interenactive account. This discussion will enable us to clarify what we see as a
correct evaluation of the scope of PSM theory, and also to put right certain
possible mistaken assumptions about the PSM approach.
In a recent paper, Pierre Steiner and John Stewart (2009) claim that the
PSM account put forward by De Jaegher and Di Paolo, and endorsed by others
(including ourselves) is, at worst, radically flawed, and at best, much more
limited in the extent of its application than its proponents are claiming.12 This
is for two interconnected reasons. First, the PSM view fails to take account of
the fundamental role played by social norms, or (as they put it) „normative
order‟, in setting the context for our inter-individual interactions. These social
norms include communicative, moral, legal, economic, religious, etc. rules,
expectations, forms of life, and so on. As they see it, these normative structures
constitute the very fabric of the social environment in which humans live and
interact on a day-to-day basis.
Second, far from being a field of autonomy, the realm of social normativity
imposes important constraints (they claim) on how the fine-grained
interactions of our day-to-day life unfold: the existence and ubiquity of such
constraints make it appropriate to talk of this field of inter-individual
interactions as one of heteronomy, rather than – as the PSM account suggests –
one of autonomy.
The authors argue that the notion of „sociality‟ – and related terms such as
„social cognition‟, „social interaction‟ – can be understood in at least two
importantly different ways. On their own view, which makes strong appeals to a
tradition of social theory stemming from Émile Durkheim, Talcott Parsons and
many others, sociality is largely constituted by this pre-existing, culturally
inherited, normative order that each social agent (human) finds him/herself
12

Their account is couched in terms of a discussion of „social cognition‟ but it equally applies to
„social interaction‟, and indeed to the nature of the „social‟ in general.

42

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

embedded in throughout daily life. The norms in this pre-existing structure
actually constitute the possibility of enacting worlds that would just not exist
without them. Interactions between two or more agents are never properly
social unless they take place in the context of an environment of social
structures or norms which give meaning to the interactions. (Steiner and
Stewart 2009, p. 528)

Let us call Steiner and Stewart‟s account the „social normative order‟ approach
(SNO for short).
On the contrasting view of sociality, which they identify with the PSM
account, sociality emerges from the dynamics of the inter-individual
interactions as they unfold in the here-and-now. The relatively small-scale
interactions that are the major focus of the PSM account are actually
„heteronomous‟ with respect to these large-scale pre-existing structures,
rather than autonomous processes that are constitutive of sociality.
We believe that the SNO account makes some crucially important points,
and does indeed highlight gaps or inadequacies in the original PSM account.
Nevertheless we will argue that it is possible to resolve the apparent disparities
between the PSM and SNO accounts, by making some conceptual
clarifications, and by delineating different terms of reference or scopes of
application for the different accounts. The result will be a fuller picture of
interactive agency and of sociality than is presented in either account as they
stand.
Consider again the situation where two people are walking towards each
other along a confined passageway. The PSM account will refer to this situation
as involving an independent dynamic of interaction, which has its own
autonomy, which in turn constrains the activities of the individual participants
in the situation. Yet clearly, to the extent to which the individual participants in
such a corridor scene are „subject to‟ this dynamic, they are „heteronomous‟
with respect to the dynamic itself. So heteronomy could be seen as being
equally a feature of the PSM account as provided by De Jaegher and Di Paolo
(although their account happens not to employ that term). Of course any actual
corridor scene will include a host of other features which are not specified in
the bare description ‟two people rapidly walking towards each other and
attempting to adjust their position within the narrow space of the passageway„
– where it is more or less treated as a physical interaction. There will be rules of
etiquette, for example, that prescribe ways of dealing with the situation that are
and aren‟t „socially acceptable‟ (one person shouting at or shoving past, the

S. Torrance & T. Froese – An Inter-Enactive Approach to Agency

43

other will be considered rude or even an assault; laying on the ground and
inviting the other to walk over you would be considered impossibly
obsequious; and so on). 13 These will be part of a vast array of culturally
prescribed social norms – sometimes explicitly codified, and sometimes
implicitly understood and even unconscious to participants – that govern the
way that people are expected or allowed to behave in public spaces. These do
indeed shape the situation that often unfolds in the way described in the
canonical „corridor scene‟. And indeed, in relation to these pre-existing
normative structures, the dynamic of the interaction of the two passing figures,
as they alternately move to one side, then to the other, of the passageway, will
indeed, qua interactive dynamics, be describable as heteronomous rather than
autonomous. But at the same time, in relation to the individual participants
themselves, this interactive process does occupy a degree of autonomy, as
described in the PSM account.
For a similar reason, the pre-existing normative orders that are referred to
in the SNO account can perhaps equally be described as „autonomous‟
(independent; transcendent) with respect to the participants. Steiner and
Stewart choose not to use the word „autonomous‟ in this connection (2009, p.
530) because they want to stress the idea of heteronomy (when focusing on the
participants). But of course „autonomy‟ and „heteronomy‟ are (certainly in this
context) point-of-view-relative terms. In the case of both PSM and SNO there
are individual agents and a supra-individual structure. In each case the supraindividual structure (interaction-dynamic in the PSM account; historicallygiven normative order in the SNO account) has „autonomy‟ in the broad sense
of being „independent‟, having its own „life‟. Also, in both accounts this
structure constrains and enables actions by the individuals. Conversely, in the
case of both accounts, the individual agents are heteronomous with respect to
the over-arching structure, because of the constitutive, enabling role each
structure has on their activity.
Once pointed out, this should seem obvious, but perhaps it needs to be
clarified, so as to forestall any further confusion. Thus Steiner and Stewart are
perhaps wrong in saying that heteronomy plays no role in the PSM account
(because it is there, even though not named as such). Nevertheless they are
correct in saying that the kind of heteronomy imposed on (or better, implied
13

See Colombetti and Torrance 2009, for an elaboration of this point, and for a discussion of the
richly ethical nature of such apparently simple interactions.

44

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

for) individual agents by the normative order which provides the medium for
their interactions (and makes them „fully human agents‟) has complex, wideranging and subtle characteristics, which are not recognized (or not stressed
fully enough) in the PSM account, and which are elaborated at length within
Steiner and Stewart‟s paper. Conversely, the PSM account in turn involves
subtle features – for example those to do with the dynamics of interaction
which we have sought to stress in the descriptions of experimental
investigations earlier in the paper – which are not taken up in Steiner and
Stewart‟s SNO account. Thus each paper contains important elements that
have to be brought together in order to have a properly filled-out picture of
social inter-(en)action.
Another, related, point that needs to be made concerns the „sense-making‟
aspect of the PSM account. In the above discussion we have mostly
concentrated on the autonomy of the interaction between participants, relative
to those individual agents themselves. But of course, as the term „participatory
sense-making‟ is intended to convey, the interaction between two or more
agents (in the face-to-face, real-time situations which were of primary interest
to the authors of the PSM account) typically involves a continual exploratory
unfolding of the situation.
Consider, as an example, the interaction that might typically occur between
two motorists who find themselves in a collision: as they encounter one another
each may have a pre-planned culturally determined „script‟ which they may
aspire to follow in a way that will (they hope) remain relatively impervious to
the way the other may seek to influence the interaction. Yet what often happens
is that the actual development of the interaction involves a path which is
mutually influenced by the two actors, and which often follows a trajectory that
conforms to the prior expectations of neither of them.
Talking of the „autonomy‟ of the interaction process helps to evoke the way
that this trajectory seems to take on a „life‟ of its own, to a greater or lesser
degree independent of the individual participants. But equally, one can talk of
this unfolding as a mutual exploration of the relation-space, where
significances are jointly created (indeed, „enacted‟) by the participants. For
example there will be a negotiation over the affective tone that this encounter
will take – will the course it follows be on the whole friendly or hostile?
Sometimes such joint meaning-making will be primarily cooperative or
collaborative, sometimes it will have a primarily combatitive or aggressive
character; more often than not it will have elements of both.

S. Torrance & T. Froese – An Inter-Enactive Approach to Agency

45

There are many other examples of encounters that facilitate an ongoing
exploration that has an exploratory, creative character on the part of the actors,
where meanings are constantly „enacted‟, „challenged‟, „reinforced‟, and so on
but where this exploratory, enactive process may also be seen as having its own
independent dynamic. The example of jazz improvisation was mentioned
earlier. (Even in this sphere of artistic collaboration there may be both
cooperative and confrontational elements). To get a feel for other kinds of
example think of the kinds of interactions that commonly take place between
people, whether in buses or underground trains or lifts, etc., people playing
sports like football and squash; or again people in various kinds of sexual
encounters, whether they be courtship scenes, blocked or reluctantly-borne
come-ons, full-blooded passion, or any of the other myriad variants of sexual
interaction.
How, then, should we relate these two accounts or these two levels of
description? How does the exploratory, enactive, and immediate character of
the meaning-making dynamic in real-time interactions, as characterized within
the PSM story, cohere with the vast edifice of inherited, culturally-accreted
norms which is the dominant motif of the SNO account? There may seem to be
a conflict: surely, it might be said, both cannot be true. Yet that is just what, on
a more reflective examination, can be agreed to be indeed the case. We
construct the shared meanings in our ongoing, real-time interactions, within
the context of a vast array of social „givens‟, which have a solidity for individual
participants – a social solidity, one might say. These social „givens‟ (both
informal and codified) will both facilitate and constrain the individual
interactive encounters that occur at the face-to-face level. Thus, for the
disputants in the automobile collision these norms include legal regulations,
financial constraints, bounds of moral acceptability in word and action,
instructions or recommendations in documents on how to conduct oneself at
an accident scene, as well, of course, as the physical and technological
conditions of the situation itself and the perceptions and memories of the
sequence of relevant events.14 But while these social givens set prescriptive
14
Of course there are many other features of social encounters besides the interactional dynamics
highlighted by PSM and the historic normative structures highlighted by SNO. It should be obvious
that physical, biological, psychological conditions of different sorts play important roles, of both a
primary or supportive kind. The roles of different kinds of artefacts, including texts and other
symbolic media, and technological devices of many kinds, should also be stressed (e.g., Clark 2003).
PSM and SNO mark out important necessary features of social action: they are in no way to be
considered as jointly sufficient.

46

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

and/or permissive conditions for the interactions that occur on a given
occasion, the interactions themselves will involve creative reinterpretation and
modification of the very norms which are the framework within which the
interaction takes place. As often as not these reinterpretations are trivial.
Sometimes they can be of major cultural or political significance – as, for
example, was the occasion on December 1st 1955 in Montgomery Alabama
when Mrs. Rosa Parks, a black passenger on a bus, refused to move from a her
seat to enable a white person entering the bus to sit in a whites-only row, in
accordance with racial segregation practices in operation at the time.
Moreover, it is worth asking how these apparently impersonal social norms
that are emphasized by Steiner and Stewart actually maintain their continued
existence. They don‟t just exist in a special normative realm independently of
the actual lives of people: they are embedded in the ways people conduct those
lives – their continued existence requires that they be continually (inter-)
enacted, in either word or deed. As pointed out above, more often than not
norms are written down in various forms (or are repeated in various kinds of
confirmatory speech-act). But this is true only of some kinds of norms, and
even those will actively maintain their force in the social order only as a result
of compliant patterns of action and interaction, and through acts of positive
and negative sanction. Thus what made the whites-only norm a norm that was
in force in buses in the Alabama of 1955 was the fact that it was regularly
adhered to in action by both white and black travelers, and that noncompliance was met with fines or other punishments. So, while Steiner and
Stewart are right that interactions of the face-to-face sort take on the character
that they do because of constitutive role played by the background of historic
social norms, those historic norms themselves are perpetuated through
continuing compliant interactions by the members of the population for whom
those norms have force.15
What these considerations strongly suggest is that the PSM account and the
15
Indeed it is important to see that the term „participatory sense-making‟ should be interpreted to
cover, not just the kind of case where new interpretative directions are taken for a given rule or set of
rules, but also the kind of case where an existing way of doing things is reaffirmed by faithful
repetition. Thus taking a moment to say Grace before starting a family meal will be as much a case of
participatory sense-making, as breaking with tradition by missing out on Grace. In the latter case the
participants are creating a new „sense‟ to their joint meal-taking activity; in the former case the
participants are re-affirming their recognition of an old „sense‟ – that of their traditional way of starting
a meal-time. In each case the participants are enacting a continuation into the future of what they
perceive as the way the past demands or permits them to act in the here and now.

S. Torrance & T. Froese – An Inter-Enactive Approach to Agency

47

SNO accounts are both necessary to a full understanding of inter-individual
relationships and larger scale social relationships as well, of course, of
individual agency. Not merely are they both necessary, but they are
complementary processes, in that each process is partially constitutive of the
other process. As Steiner and Stewart have emphasized in their account, the
interactions that take place in real time, at a face-to-face level are constitutively
governed by countless historically accreted social norms that exist as an
impersonal background to the real-time interactions. However, as we have
argued, the PSM account of face-to-face interactions16 gives an account of the
social reality of those social norms, by explaining that the existence of the
historic force of those social norms is itself constituted by countless
interactions, sayings and collaborations in the past; and that their continued
existence is constituted by further interactions, sayings and collaborations into
the future.
5.

CONCLUSIONS

In this paper we have discussed three kinds of view: individualism; PSM; SNO.
These three views suggest three different levels of analysis: one focusing on
individual „in-the-head‟ cognitive processes; one on the dynamics of interindividual interactions; and on the historical structures of large- (and small-)
scale social norms. Individualism interprets the inter-individual and the social
in terms of individual acts and internal processes, more often than not couched
in terms of some variant of the cognitivist (sense-model-plan-act) story, whose
odd solipsist character only becomes evident when critics of the story, such as
enactivists and others, bring it to attention. The enactive approach to agency,
with its emphasis on the relational nature of life and mind, provides a different
kind of departure point for a consideration of the role of sociality.
We have considered two variants here. PSM concentrates on the interindividual level, the level at which people participate with each other in a
shared moving present, and a shared presence, in which the dynamic of the
interaction can be seen as having its own relative autonomy, both arising out of
the agents‟ moves and as continually restructuring them. We have shown how
16
The term „face-to-face‟ should be used with some caution. Some interactions, for example via
Facebook or Twitter, are hardly face-to-face in any literal sense. Nor are they necessary small-scale or
intimate: a given announcement on a social networking site may have an audience of millions!

48

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

theoretical claims about the dynamics of these interactions can be grounded in
experimental models based on minimalist scenarios using artificial agents.
SNO sees action primarily in terms of the historic social norms which have
created the background of expectations and rules that act as the fundamental
enabling and constraining factors of the unfolding shared present. PSM and
SNO can be seen as offering two contrasting responses to classical
individualism, each of which stresses a crucial aspect of the supra-individual
nature of human action.
However these two views are not in competition. Clearly they offer
necessary complements to each other. PSM needs SNO to explain the sense in
which present-tense interactions are truly social, rather than just „interagential‟. But SNO needs PSM to explain how the vast edifice of historical
normativity left by dead people and dead time, retains its liveness in the present
and into the future by countless collaborative acts of reinterpretation, revision
and reaffirmation. A considered version of inter-enactivism has to stress both
these levels as offering important constitutive conditions for human action.
Thus it is important, as social normative order theory insists, to see every
action as taking place within a historical context – which includes the highlevel accreted norms at various scales of globality and locality – broadly
universal rules to do with economy, morality, prevailing technical conditions,
etc., as well as community-specific and family-specific normative
environments; but, it must be stressed, much else besides social norms: the
physical and biological conditions, the phylogenetic and ontogenetic
inheritances, and so on. However, at the moment of action or interaction itself
there is also the dynamic of how the actors in a situation both are shaped by
these normative conditions and reshape them in their interaction, and how the
actions of each individual agent in the situation both shape and are shaped by
the actions of the others present in that situation. This is the domain of
participatory sense-making, but for a more complete enactivist picture we need
to combine this domain of inter-individual dynamic presence with the past
social conditions which have brought those individuals to this presence.

S. Torrance & T. Froese – An Inter-Enactive Approach to Agency

49

REFERENCES

Auvray, M., Lenay, C., & Stewart, J. (2009). Perceptual interactions in a
minimalist virtual environment. New Ideas in Psychology, 27(1), 3247.
Barandiaran, X., Di Paolo, E. A., & Rohde, M. (2009). Defining agency:
Individuality, normativity, asymmetry, and spatio-temporality in action.
Adaptive Behavior, 17(5), 367-386.
Barandiaran, X., & Ruiz-Mirazo, K. (Eds.) (2008). Special Issue on “Modeling
Autonomy”. BioSystems Journal, 91(2).
Beer, R. D. (1996). Toward the evolution of dynamical neural networks for
minimally cognitive behavior. In P. Maes, M. J. Mataric, J.-A. Arcady, J.
Pollack & S. W. Wilson (Eds.), From Animals to Animats 4: Proc. of the
4th Int. Conf. on Simulation of Adaptive Behavior, (pp. 421-429).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Beer, R. D. (2003). The dynamics of active categorical perception in an
evolved model agent. Adaptive Behavior, 11(4), 209-243.
Boden, M. A. (2006). Of islands and interactions. Journal of Consciousness
Studies, 13(5), 53-63.
Brooks, R. A. (1991). Intelligence without reason. In J. Myopoulos & R.
Reiter (Eds.), Proc. of the 12th Int. Joint Conf. on Artificial Intelligence,
(pp. 569-595). San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
Clark, A. (2003). Natural-Born Cyborgs: Minds, Technologies, and the
Future of Human Intelligence. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Colombetti, G., & Torrance, S. (2009). Emotion and ethics: An inter(en)active approach. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 8(4),
505-526.
De Jaegher, H., & Di Paolo, E. A. (2007). Participatory sense-making: An
enactive approach to social cognition. Phenomenology and the
Cognitive Sciences, 6(4), 485-507.
De Jaegher, H., & Di Paolo, E. A. (2008). Making sense in participation: An
enactive approach to social cognition. In F. Morganti, A. Carassa & G.
Riva (Eds.), Enacting Intersubjectivity: A Cognitive and Social

50

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Perspective on the Study of Interactions, (pp. 33-47). Amsterdam: IOS
Press.

De Jaegher, H., & Froese, T. (2009). On the role of social interaction in
individual agency. Adaptive Behavior, 17(5), 444-460.
Di Paolo, E. A. (2000). Behavioral coordination, structural congruence and
entrainment in a simulation of acoustically coupled agents. Adaptive
Behavior, 8(1), 25-46.
Di Paolo, E.A. (2005). Autopoiesis, adaptivity, teleology, agency.
Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 4(4), 429-452.
Di Paolo, E.A. (Ed.) (2009). Special issue on “The Social and Enactive Mind”.
Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 8(4).
Di Paolo, E. A., Rohde, M., & De Jaegher, H. (2010). Horizons for the
enactive mind: Values, social interaction, and play. In J. Stewart, O.
Gapenne & E. A. Di Paolo (Eds.), Enaction: Towards a New Paradigm
for Cognitive Science, (pp. 33-87). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Di Paolo, E. A., Rohde, M., & Iizuka, H. (2008). Sensitivity to social
contingency or stability of interaction? Modelling the dynamics of
perceptual crossing. New Ideas in Psychology, 26(2), 278-294.
Fodor, J. A. (1980). Methodological solipsism considered as a research
strategy in cognitive psychology. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 3(1),
63-73.
Froese, T. (2009). Sociality and the Life-Mind Continuity Thesis: A Study in
Evolutionary Robotics. D.Phil. thesis, Brighton, UK: University of
Sussex.
Froese, T., & Di Paolo, E. A. (2008). Stability of coordination requires
mutuality of interaction in a model of embodied agents. In M. Asada, J.
C. T. Hallam, J.-A. Meyer & J. Tani (Eds.), From Animals to Animats
10: Proc. of the 10th Int. Conf. on Simulation of Adaptive Behavior, (pp.
52-61). Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag.
Froese, T., & Di Paolo, E. A. (2009). Sociality and the life-mind continuity
thesis. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 8(4), 439-463.
Froese, T., & Di Paolo, E. A. (2010). Modeling social interaction as

S. Torrance & T. Froese – An Inter-Enactive Approach to Agency

51

perceptual crossing: An investigation into the dynamics of the
interaction process. Connection Science, 22(1), 43-68.
Froese, T., & Di Paolo, E. A. (in press). Toward minimally social behavior:
Social psychology meets evolutionary robotics. Advances in Artificial
Life: Proc. of the 10th Euro. Conf. on Artificial Life. Berlin: SpringerVerlag.
Froese, T., & Gallagher, S. (2010). Phenomenology and artificial life: Toward
a technological supplementation of phenomenological methodology.
Husserl Studies, 26(2), 83-106.
Froese, T., & Ziemke, T. (2009). Enactive artificial intelligence: Investigating
the systemic organization of life and mind. Artificial Intelligence,
173(3-4), 366-500.
Gallagher, S. (2001). The practice of mind: Theory, simulation or primary
interaction? Journal of Consciousness Studies, 8(5-7), 83-108.
Gallagher, S. (2005). How the Body Shapes the Mind. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Gallagher, S. (2008). Direct perception in the intersubjective context.
Consciousness and Cognition, 17(2), 535-543.
Gallagher, S. (2009). Two problems of intersubjectivity. Journal of
Consciousness Studies, 16(6-8), 289-308.
Gallagher, S., & Hutto, D. (2008). Understanding others through primary
interaction and narrative practice. In J. Zlatev, T. P. Racine, C. Sinha &
E. Itkonen (Eds), The Shared Mind: Perspectives on Intersubjectivity,
(pp. 17-38). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Gallagher, S., & Zahavi, D. (2008). The Phenomenological Mind: An
Introduction to Philosophy of Mind and Cognitive Science. London:
Routledge.
Harvey, I., Di Paolo, E. A., Wood, R., Quinn, M., & Tuci, E. A. (2005).
Evolutionary robotics: A new scientific tool for studying cognition.
Artificial Life, 11(1-2), 79-98.
Hutto, D. D. (2004). The limits of spectatorial folk psychology. Mind and
Language, 19(5), 548-573.

52

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Hutto, D. D. (2007). The narrative practice hypothesis: Origins and
applications of folk psychology. In D. Hutto (Ed.), Narrative and
Understanding Persons, (pp. 43-68). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Iizuka, H., & Di Paolo, E. A. (2007a). Minimal Agency Detection of
Embodied Agents. In F. Almeida e Costa, L. M. Rocha, E. Costa, I.
Harvey & A. Coutinho (Eds.), Advances in Artificial Life: Proc. of the
9th Euro. Conf. on Artificial Life, (pp. 485-494). Berlin, Germany:
Springer-Verlag.
Iizuka, H., & Di Paolo, E. A. (2007b). Toward Spinozist robotics: Exploring
the minimal dynamics of behavioral preference. Adaptive Behavior,
15(4), 359-376.
Ikegami, T., & Iizuka, H. (2007). Turn-taking interaction as a cooperative and
co-creative process. Infant Behavior & Development, 30(2), 278-288.
Kiverstein, J., & Clark, A. (2009). Introduction. Mind embodied, embedded,
enacted: One Church or Many? Topoi, 28(1), 1-7.
Maturana, H. R., & Varela, F. J. (1987). The Tree of Knowledge: The
Biological Roots of Human Understanding. Boston: Shambhala
Publications.
Menary, R. (Ed.) (2010). Special issue on „4E Cognition: Embodied,
Embedded, Enacted, Extended‟. Phenomenology and the Cognitive
Sciences, 9(4).
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1962). Phenomenology of perception. (Tr. by C. Smith).
New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul. [1945]
Noë, A. (2004). Action in Perception. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Nolfi, S., & Floreano, D. (2000). Evolutionary Robotics: The Biology,
Intelligence, and Technology of Self-Organizing Machines. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
O‟Regan, J. K., & Noë, A. (2001). A sensorimotor account of vision and visual
consciousness. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 24, 939-1031.
Port, R. F., & van Gelder, T. (Eds.) (1995). Mind as Motion: Explorations in
the Dynamics of Cognition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

S. Torrance & T. Froese – An Inter-Enactive Approach to Agency

53

Steiner, P., & Stewart, J. (2009). From autonomy to heteronomy (and back):
The enaction of social life. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences,
8(4), 527-550.
Stewart, J., Gapenne, O., & Di Paolo, E.A. (Eds.) (2010). Enaction: Towards a
New Paradigm for Cognitive Science. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Thompson, E. (Ed.) (2001). Between Ourselves: Second-Person Issues in the
Study of Consciousness. Thorverton, UK: Imprint Academic. Also
published as a special issue of the Journal of Consciousness Studies,
8(5-7), 1-309.
Thompson, E. (2005). Sensorimotor subjectivity and the enactive approach to
experience. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 4(4), 407427.
Thompson, E. (2007). Mind in Life: Biology, Phenomenology, and the
Sciences of Mind. Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press of Harvard
University Press.
Torrance, S. (2002). The skill of seeing: Beyond the sensorimotor account.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 6(12), 495-496.
Torrance, S. (2005). In search of the enactive: Introduction to special issue on
enactive experience. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 4(4),
357-368.
Torrance, S. (Ed.) (2005). Special issue on Enactive Experience, 1.
Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 4(4).
Torrance, S. (Ed.) (2007). Special issue on Enactive Experience, 2.
Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 6(4).
Varela, F. J. (1997). Patterns of life: Intertwining identity and cognition. Brain
and Cognition, 34(1), 72-87.
Varela, F. J, Thompson, E., & Rosch, E. (1991). The Embodied Mind:
Cognitive Science and Human Experience. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Weber, A., & Varela, F. J. (2002). Life after Kant: Natural purposes and the
autopoietic foundations of biological individuality. Phenomenology and
the Cognitive Sciences, 1(2), 97-125.

54

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Strong Interaction and Self-Agency
Shaun Gallagher*
gallaghr@mail.ucf.edu
ABSTRACT

The interaction theory of social cognition contends that intersubjective
interaction is characterized by both immersion and irreducibility. This
motivates a question about autonomy and self-agency: If I am always caught up
in processes of interaction, and interaction always goes beyond me and my
ultimate control, is there any room for self-agency? I outline an answer to this
question that points to the importance of communicative and narrative
practices.

In regard to social cognition, there has been growing opposition to the
standard theory-of-mind (ToM) views, usually referred to as theory theory (TT)
and simulation theory (ST). I have defended an alternative approach:
―interaction theory‖ (IT). IT is based on evidence from both phenomenology
and developmental psychology, and it offers an alternative to the simulation
interpretation of the neuroscience of mirror neurons. An important part of IT
is its emphasis on ‗strong interaction‘ (Gallagher in press; also see De Jaeger et
al. 2010) – a concept of interaction that is a seemingly pervasive feature of
intersubjectivity. In this paper I take a closer look at this concept and raise
questions about what appears to be a threat to the notion of self-agency. The
question is: If we are so interactively interdependent on others in our everyday
practical and communicative behaviors, is there any room for autonomy?
INTERACTION THEORY (IT) AS AN ALTERNATIVE TO TT AND ST
In psychology, philosophy of mind, and more recently, in the neurosciences,
studies of how one person understands and interrelates with another person
* Department of Philosophy, University of Central Florida – Institute of Simulation and Training
– University of Hertfordshire – University of Copenhagen

56

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

have been dominated by two main approaches: theory theory and simulation
theory. The major tenets of TT are based on scientific experiments that show
that children develop an understanding of other minds around the age of four.
One version of TT claims that this understanding is based on an innately
specified, domain specific mechanism designed for ‗reading‘ other minds (e.g.,
Baron-Cohen 1995, Leslie 1991). An alternative version claims that the child
attains this ability through a course of development in which the child tests and
learns from the social environment (e.g., Gopnik and Meltzoff 1997).
Common to both versions is the idea that children attain their understanding of
other minds through the use of folk or commonsense psychology which they
use to make theoretical inferences about certain entities to which they have no
access, namely, the mental states of other people. When we make such
inferences and attribute specific mental states to others, we are said to be
mentalizing or mindreading.
ST, in contrast, argues that rather than theorizing or making inferences
about the other person‘s mind, we use our own mental experience as an
internal model for the other mind (e.g., Gordon 1986, 1995; Heal 1986,
1998a, 1998b). To understand the other person, I simulate the thoughts or
feelings that I would experience if I were in the situation of the other,
exploiting my own motivational and emotional resources. I imagine what must
be going on in the other person‘s mind; or I create in my own mind pretend
beliefs, desires or strategies that I use to understand the other‘s behavior. My
source for these simulations is not a theory that I have. Rather, I have a real
model of the mind at my immediate disposal, that is, I have my own mind, and I
can use it to generate and run simulations. I simply run through the sequence
or pattern of behavior or the decision-making process that I would engage in if
I were faced with the situation in question. I do it ‗off line‘, however. That is,
my imaginary rehearsal does not lead to actualizing the behavior on my part.
Finally, I attribute this pattern to the other person who is actually in that
situation.
Despite extensive debates between proponents of TT and ST, respectively,
TT and ST share three basic suppositions. The three suppositions are these.
(1) The problem of social cognition is due to the lack of access that we
have to the other person‘s mental states. Since we cannot directly
perceive the other‘s thoughts, feelings, or intentions, we need some
extra-perceptual cognitive process (mindreading or mentalizing) that
will allow us to infer or simulate what they are.

Shaun Gallagher – Strong Interaction and Self Agency

57

(2) Our normal everyday stance toward the other person is a third-person,
observational stance. Based on what we observe we use mindreading
to explain or predict their behaviors.
(3) These mentalizing processes constitute our primary and pervasive way
of understanding others.
There are also a number of unsolved problems associated with these ToM
approaches. I won‘t go into detail here, but I‘ll give a brief indication of some
of these problems.1 First, some (but not all) theorists claim the process of
theoretical inference or simulation is conscious or introspective (e.g.,
Goldman 1995; Goldman 2006, p. 147); but there is no phenomenological
evidence that this is so, and there should be if the process is both consciously
explicit and pervasive. That is, we should be able to catch ourselves in the act,
but we don‘t. The second problem is what I refer to as the starting problem, a
version of the frame problem. For TT, the question is how do I know what
piece of folk psychology (what rule, or what platitude) actually applies to the
case at hand. For ST, one can see the problem clearly in the following
description of a simulation routine provided by Nichols and Stich:
The basic idea of what we call the ‗off-line simulation theory‘ is that in
predicting and explaining people‘s behavior we take our own decision making
system ‗off-line‘, supply it with ‗pretend‘ inputs that have the same content as
the beliefs and desires of the person whose behavior we‘re concerned with, and
let it make a decision on what to do. (Nichols and Stich 2003, pp. 39-40)

Simulation as a form of mindreading is supposed to provide insight into the
beliefs and desires of the other person, but it seems that we need to know the
content of those mental states in order to do the simulation. Neither TT nor ST
provide a good answer to the starting problem.
A third problem concerns diversity and applies specifically to ST. Keysers
and Gazzola describe simulation in the following way:
In [simulation] cases, observing what other people do or feel is therefore
transformed into an inner representation of what we would do or feel in a
similar situation — as if we would be in the skin of the person we observe.
(Keysers and Gazzola 2006, p. 390)

But how does knowing what we would do help us know what someone else
1

See Gallagher 2005 and 2007 for more detail.

58

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

would do? Indeed, many times we are in a situation where we see what
someone is doing, and know that we would do it differently, or perhaps, not do
it at all. A fourth problem concerns development. The kind of inferential or
simulation processes found in explicit versions of TT and ST are too
cognitively complex to account for the infant‘s ability to understand the
intentions of others. Yet, as we‘ll see below, there is a large amount of evidence
to support the idea that young infants are able to grasp the intentions of others.
The developmental problem is addressed by a recent version of ST that
relies on an interpretation of mirror neuron (MN) activation as a form of
simulation. In this case, simulation is said to be fast and automatic. If MNs are
active in young infants, then the developmental problem does not apply to this
version of ST. Since activation of MNs are non-conscious, the issue of
phenomenological evidence is irrelevant, and there is no starting problem. Socalled neuronal ST, then solves all of the above problems except perhaps the
diversity problem. But there are other problems involved in neural ST. One
concerns the fact that simulation is originally defined as involving pretense. As
Nichols and Stich make clear in the above quote, simulation involves the use of
pretend beliefs and desires. We pretend to be in the other person‘s shoes in
order to run the routine. But the notion of pretense does not apply in the case
of MNs. Indeed, most theorists claim that MNs are neutral with respect to who
the agent is, and agent-neutrality is not consistent with the notion of pretense.
MNs can‘t account for me pretending to be you if in fact there is no distinction
between me and you at that level. As a result, there have been attempts to shift
the definition of simulation to involve a simple matching (e.g., Goldman 2006,
Rizzolatti et al. 2001). My motor system is said to go into a state matching
yours when I see you perform an action. But the neurological details do not
bear this out2, and it seems counter-intuitive if we think of how we interact with
others. In the majority of cases we are not imitating or mimicking others;
rather, our motor systems are busy supporting responses or complementary
actions.
This is not an exhaustive list of problems with TT and ST, but it should be
sufficient to see why we might want to find a better account of social cognition.
Interaction theory is proposed as that better account. IT challenges the three
suppositions associated with ToM approaches. In their place IT argues for the
following propositions.
2

See, e.g., Catmur et al. 2007, Dinstein et al. 2008.

Shaun Gallagher – Strong Interaction and Self Agency

59

(1) Other minds are not hidden away and inaccessible. The other person‘s
intentions, emotions, and dispositions are expressed in their
embodied behavior. In most cases of everyday interaction no inference
or projection to mental states beyond those expressions and behaviors
is necessary.
(2) Our normal everyday stance toward the other person is not thirdperson, detached observation; it is second-person interaction. We are
not primarily spectators or observers of other people‘s actions; for the
most part we are interacting with them in some communicative action,
on some project, in some pre-defined relation; or we are treating them
as potential interactors.
(3) Our primary and pervasive way of understanding others does not
involve mentalizing or mindreading; in fact, these are rare and
specialized abilities that we develop only on the basis of a more
embodied engagement with others.
IT emphasizes the role of communicative and narrative practices, and it appeals
to evidence from developmental studies, starting with primary and secondary
intersubjectivity (Trevarthen 1979; Trevarthen and Hubley 1978).


Primary intersubjectivity (starting from birth) – Sensory-motor
abilities – enactive perceptual capacities in processes of interaction



Secondary intersubjectivity (starting around 1 year of age) – joint
attention, shared contexts, pragmatic engagements, acting with others



Communicative and narrative competencies (starting from 2-4 years)
– communicative and narrative practices that represent intersubjective
interactions, motives, and reasons and provide a more nuanced and
sophisticated social understanding.

In this paper I will begin with a focus on primary and secondary
intersubjectivity, but I‘ll return the issue of narrative competence. I take this
strategy because I first want to focus on the nature of interaction itself, and
most of the essential aspects can be grasped in primary and secondary
intersubjectivity. When it comes to the question of self-agency, however,
narrative will be shown to play an important role.

60

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

THE DEVELOPMENT OF INTERACTION
Primary intersubjectivity consists of the innate or early-developing sensorymotor capacities that bring us into relation with others and allow us to interact
with them. These capacities are manifested at the level of perceptual
experience -- we see or more generally perceive in the other person‘s bodily
movements, gestures, facial expressions, eye direction, etc. what they intend
and what they feel, and we respond with our own bodily movements, gestures,
facial expressions, gaze, etc. From birth the infant is pulled into these
interactive processes. This can be seen in the very early behavior of the
newborn. Infants from birth are capable of perceiving and imitating facial
gestures presented by another (Meltzoff and Moore 1977, 1994). Importantly,
this kind of imitation is not an automatic or mechanical procedure; Csibra and
Gergely (2009) have shown, for example, that the infant is more likely to
imitate only if the other person is attending to it.
Primary intersubjectivity can be specified in more detail as the infant
develops. At 2 months, for example, infants are able to follow the gaze of the
other person, to see that the other person is looking in a certain direction, and
to sense what the other person sees (which is sometimes the infant herself), in a
way that throws the intention of the other person into relief (Baron-Cohen
1995; Maurer and Barrera 1981). In addition, second-person interaction is
evidenced by the timing and emotional response of infants‘ behavior. Infants
«vocalize and gesture in a way that seems [affectively and temporally] ‗tuned‘ to
the vocalizations and gestures of the other person» (Gopnik and Meltzoff
1997, p. 131). At 5-7 months, infants are able to detect correspondences
between visual and auditory information that specify the expression of
emotions (Walker 1982; Hobson 1993, 2002). At 6 months infants start to
perceive grasping as goal directed, and at 10-11 months infants are able to
parse some kinds of continuous action according to intentional boundaries
(Baldwin and Baird 2001; Baird and Baldwin 2001; Woodward and
Sommerville 2000). They start to perceive various movements of the head, the
mouth, the hands, and more general body movements as meaningful, goaldirected movements (Senju et al. 2006).
Developmental studies show the very early appearance of, and the
importance of, interactive attunement in the form of timing and coordination in
the intersubjective context. In still face experiments, for example, infants are
engaged in a normal face-to-face interaction with an adult for 1 to 2 minutes,

Shaun Gallagher – Strong Interaction and Self Agency

61

followed by the adult assuming a neutral facial expression. This is followed by
another normal face-to-face interaction. Infants between 3 and 6 months
become visibly discouraged and upset during the still face period (Tronick
2007, Tronick et al. 1978). The importance of interactive touch has also been
demonstrated in the still-person effect (Muir 2002).
Murray and Trevarthen (1985) have also shown the importance of the
mother‘s live interaction with 2-month old infants in their double TV monitor
experiment where mother and infant interact by means of a live television link.
The infants engage in lively interaction in this situation. When presented with
a recorded replay of their mother‘s previous actions, however, they quickly
disengage and become distracted and upset. These results have been
replicated, eliminating alternative explanations such as infants‘ fatigue or
memory problems (Nadel et al. 1999, Stormark and Braarud 2004).
Primary intersubjectivity is not something that disappears after the first year
of life. It is not a stage that we leave behind, and it is not, as Greg Currie
suggests, a set of precursor states «that underpin early intersubjective
understanding, and make way for the development of later theorizing or
simulation» (Currie 2008, p. 212, my emphasis).3 Rather, citing both
behavioral and phenomenological evidence, IT argues that we don‘t leave
primary intersubjectivity behind; the processes involved here don‘t ―make
way‖ for the purportedly more sophisticated mindreading processes – these
embodied interactive processes continue to characterize our everyday
encounters even as adults. That is, we continue to understand others in strong
interactional terms, facilitated by our recognition of facial expressions,
gestures, postures, and actions as meaningful.
Scientific experiments bear this out. Point-light experiments (actors in the
dark wearing point lights on their joints, presenting abstract outlines of
emotional and action postures), for example, show that not only children
(although not autistic children) but also adults perceive emotion even in
movement that offers minimal information (Hobson and Lee 1999, Dittrich et
al. 1996). Close analysis of facial expression, gesture and action in everyday
contexts shows that as adults we continue to rely on embodied interactive
abilities to understand the intentions and actions of others and to accomplish
interactive tasks (Lindblom 2007, Lindblom and Ziemke 2007).

3

Cf. Baron-Cohen 1991 and 1995.

62

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

By the end of the first year of life, infants have a non-mentalizing,
perceptually-based, embodied and pragmatic understanding of the intentions
and dispositions of other persons. With the advent of joint attention (at around
9 months) and secondary intersubjectivity (at around 1 year) infants start to use
context and enter into situations of participatory sense-making (De Jaegher
and Di Paolo 2007). That is, infants begin to co-constitute the meaning of the
world in their interactions with others. We start to understand the world
through our interactions with others, and we gain a more nuanced
understanding of others by situating their actions in contexts that are defined
by both pragmatic tasks and cultural practices.
Meaning and emotional significance is co-constituted in the interaction –
not in the private confines of one or the other‘s head. The analyses of social
interactions in shared activities, in working together, in communicative
practices, and so on, show that agents unconsciously coordinate their
movements, gestures, and speech acts (Issartel et al. 2007, Kendon 1990,
Lindblom 2007). In the contextualized practices of secondary intersubjectivity
timing and emotional attunement continue to be important as we coordinate
our perception-action sequences; our movements are coupled with changes in
velocity, direction and intonation of the movements and utterances of the
speaker.
The kind of embodied and contextualized interaction that we find in
primary and secondary intersubjectivity is what I am calling ‗strong
interaction‘. In strong interaction, our movements are often synchronized in
resonance with others, following either in-phase or phase-delayed behaviour,
and in rhythmic co-variation of gestures, facial or vocal expressions (Fuchs and
De Jaegher 2009). This kind of intersubjective interaction involves
coordination but does not imply perfect synchronization. Non-autistic infants
from 3-months of age prefer slight modulations (time-delays) and imperfect
contingency in responses (Gergely 2001). As De Jaegher (2008) suggests,
continuous movements between synchronised, desynchronised and the states
in-between, drive the process. Attunement, loss of attunement, and reestablished attunement maintain both differentiation and connection.

Shaun Gallagher – Strong Interaction and Self Agency

63

A CLOSER LOOK AT INTERACTION
I want to focus on two aspects of strong interaction: immersion and
irreducibility. The first involves the idea that interaction is not something that
we decide to enter into. Rather, it is, as the existentialists might say, something
that we are thrown into, before anything like a decision is even possible. This is
closely tied to the fact that interaction is primarily, that is, from the very
beginning, embodied – a fact (or the facticity) of our physical nature, and
specifically, of the kind of body that we have and the contingencies of our
earliest existence. There is, in effect, no scientific mystery to this
phenomenon, even if in everyday experience it seems a mystery in terms of why
for the most part we cannot help but engage in it. The second aspect involves
the idea that strong interaction is irreducible to the individuals involved.
I start with a question related to the first aspect, namely the question of the
origin of interaction. Merleau-Ponty points to the bodily nature of interaction
with his concept of intercorporeity (Merleau-Ponty 1962, p. 352). What I
want to suggest is that intersubjective interaction ultimately derives from a
more primary intercorporeal interaction.
We know the principle from neuroscience, movement influences
morphology (Edelman 1992, Sheets-Johnstone 1998): brain development
results from the system as a whole adapting to new levels of organization at
more peripheral levels, rather than the neurological developments unfolding to
‗allow‘ increasing proprioceptive capacities (Van der Meer and Van der Weel
1995). Consider the variety of developmental processes that follow this
principle. For example, there is good evidence that both (1) a primitive
proprioceptive registration of one‘s bodily movement, and (2) a differentiation
between self and non-self develop prenatally (see Gallagher 1996). For
example, proprioceptors in the muscles (muscle spindles) first appear at 9
weeks gestational age (Humphrey 1964); parts of the vestibular system
develop as early as the fourth month of gestation (Jouen and Gapenne 1995);
and cortical connections necessary for body-schematic proprioceptive
processes are in place by 26 weeks gestational age. In addition, the
differentiation between self and non-self in the later-term fetus is evidenced
across a number of studies of fetal behavioral reaction to various stimuli. In
response to auditory stimuli, as early as 24 weeks gestational age, fetal heart
rate changes; and after 25 weeks, the fetus responds by blinking its eyes or
moving its limbs. Cortical response to such stimuli has been demonstrated in

64

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

premature infants between 24-29 weeks gestational age (Fifer and Moon
1988). Differential responsiveness in the late-term fetus, signals a preference
for some sounds (such as the mother‘s voice) rather than others (DeCasper and
Spence 1986). Bright light directed on the lower abdomen of the mother in the
third trimester can elicit fetal eye blinks (Emory and Toomey 1988), and fetal
facial movements prompted by music or voice may be indicative of a similar
differential awareness (Birnholz 1988). And we know that what Aristotle called
the most basic sense, the tactile sense, develops early in the fetus, with cortical
pathways intact by 20-24 weeks gestational age, with a differential registration
between self-touching and being touched even earlier (Glass 2005).
Even before the development of full-fledged proprioceptive and tactile
senses, however, the fetus is already moving. At twelve weeks gestational age,
there is evidence of spontaneous and repetitious movements – e.g., movement
of the hand to the mouth occurs multiple times an hour from this time (De
Vries et al. 1982; Tajani and Ianniruberto 1990). At ten weeks gestational age
fetuses display structured bodily movements which they develop through
habituation (Krasnegor et al. 1998); for example, regular mouth opening and
closing, swallowing, and movement in response to stimuli such as the mother‘s
laugh or cough.
The first movements to occur are sideward bendings of the head. […] At 9-10
weeks [gestational] age complex and generalized movements occur. These are
the so-called general movements […] and the startles. Both include the whole
body, but the general movements are slower and have a complex sequence of
involved body parts, while the startle is a quick, phasic movement of all limbs
and trunk and neck. (Prechtl 2001)

Two kinds of movement are involved here: early fetal movement, which is
spontaneous and repetitive and starts out as a reflex that unfolds genetically
(De Vries et al. 1982); and early fetal movement that appears regulated and
practiced – i.e., non-reflex (Krasnegor et al. 1998) – and that starts out as a
response to stimuli. Setting aside the question of which of these come first, we
can say that at some point in early fetal motility responsive movement comes
along.4 The question is: To what is this movement a response? What is the
4
I note here a recent study by Zoia et al. (2007) on intentional or directed movement in the fetus.
Zoia et al. examined kinematic patterns of foetal movements showing that at 22 weeks hand to mouth
and hand to head movement involved straighter and more accurately aimed trajectories with
acceleration and deceleration phases consistent with target size and sensitivity. Thus, «by 22 weeks of
gestation the movements seem to show the recognizable form of intentional actions, with kinematic

Shaun Gallagher – Strong Interaction and Self Agency

65

origination of this movement that helps to set the train of development in
motion? The answer is that this kind of movement is a reaction to the mother‘s
bodily movement – a kind of intercorporeal interaction.
It is likely that these earliest regulated movements, which are prior to
proprioceptive capacity, are a response within and to, the maternal body in her
regulated and habituated, body schematic movement. […] Add to physical
movement the regular maternal heart beat, digestion, and breathing and we can
see that the intrauterine world is not only a moving but quite rhythmic or
regulated animate world. (Lymer 2010, p. 230)

This is not yet intersubjective interaction (the mother may not even know she‘s
pregnant this early; and there is no claim that the fetus is an experiencing
subject), but it is an intercorporeal interaction – a non-conscious motor
coupling between mother and fetus driven toward and then driven by
proprioception and touch. The point I want to make here is that whatever the
moment of the awakening of consciousness – whether that is prenatal (at
around 26 weeks gestational age) or later than that – and wherever we might
locate the earliest aspect of self-awareness, this kind of intercorporeal
interaction predates that, so that we find ourselves already immersed in
interactive processes that prefigure the intersubjective ones found in primary
intersubjectivity.
To this immersion I want to add that the primary and secondary
intersubjective interactions that we find in infancy are more than capacities or
mechanisms that belong to the individuals involved in interaction. They are not
based simply on ―first-order mechanisms‖ (Buckner et al. 2009) that we find in
each individual, because they are not reducible to the sum of individual
capacities (De Jaegher and Di Paolo 2007, De Jaegher et al. 2010). In the case
of intersubjective interaction, 1 + 1 > 2. This is what De Jaegher and Di Paolo
(2007) mean by saying that interaction has some degree of autonomy. The
interaction in intersubjective contexts goes beyond each participant; it results
in something (the creation of meaning) that goes beyond what each individual
qua individual can bring to the process – just as when two people dance the
tango, something dynamic is created that neither one could create on their
patterns that depend on the goal of the action, suggesting a surprisingly advanced level of motor
planning» (Zoia et al. 2007, p, 217). Also see Becher 2004 : «Purposive movement depends on brain
maturation. This begins at about 18 weeks‘ gestation and progressively replaces reflex movements,
which disappear by about 8 months after birth […]»

66

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

own. Moreover, as we have just seen in regard to the origins of interaction, we
are in the tango before we even know it.
So, not just in its origins, but as an ongoing process, interaction has a
certain kind of irreducibility; it goes beyond the individual participants. In
cases were one person is totally in control of the other person (if total control is
ever possible), there is no interaction in this specific sense. The characteristics
of immersion and irreducibility motivate the question about individual
autonomy – self-agency. Merleau-Ponty talks about the infant getting caught
up in the ―whirlwind of language‖ – but prior to that the infant is caught up in
the whirlwind of interaction – and even as adults we remain in that whirlwind.
And within that whirlwind, does the irreducibility of interaction leave any room
for self-agency or individual autonomy? If I, always already, even before birth,
am caught up in a whirlwind of interaction, and that interaction always goes
beyond me and my ultimate control, is there really any room for self-agency?
SELF-AGENCY AND THE NARRATIVE SELF
There are current lively debates about self-agency and related concepts of
freedom, free will, intention formation, and the sense of agency, with a variety
of positions being staked out. From materialist and reductionist perspectives
numerous theorists argue that self-agency is an illusion. They point to
neuroscientific data (e.g., the Libet experiments that seem to show that the
brain knows what we are going to do before we, as conscious individuals, do)
or to the results of psychological experiments (e.g., Wegner 2002, Pockett
2006); or they suggest that if we do have free will, we need a subpersonal
explanation of it that shows how it is generated in the individual brain (Spence
1996). Those who defend free will also often appeal to processes that are in the
head (intention formation, reflective decision-making, or the
phenomenological sense of agency, e.g., Pacherie 2008, Stephens and
Graham 2000), or to mental causation, (Searle 1983, Lowe 1999). These
approaches – whether they dismiss or defend the notion of free will – follow a
traditional view that conceives of self-agency (or the lack of it) as a matter of
individual subjectivity. Free will is either in the individual system or it is not.
Even those theories that take social phenomena into account often use the
individual as a measure of whether free will exists. For example, social

Shaun Gallagher – Strong Interaction and Self Agency

67

determinists argue that individual free will doesn‘t exist precisely because the
individual is fully determined by our social interactions, cultural forces, etc.
In general, then, discussions of freedom/free will/self-agency focus on the
individual – the question is framed that way, for example, if we ask about
individual autonomy. I want to suggest, however, that in response to the
question about self-agency, motivated by the account of strong interaction, we
can conceive of self-agency in different terms by conceiving of the agent as
something other than an individual who either has or does not have free will. If
we view the agent as someone who emerges from intercorporeal interactions,
and develops in social interactions with others, then we have a good model for
speaking about self-agency in a system that is not reducible to a simple
individual. On this model, self-agency – and a proper sense of freedom (which
comes along with a proper sense of responsibility) – can be found only in the
context of social interaction, where our intentions are formed in or out of our
interactions with others.
Clearly, we learn to act from watching and interacting with others as they
act in the world. We learn our own action-possibilities from others. Through
our interactions with others we generate shared intentions and form our own
intentions out of the same fabric. In this context, how can we explain selfagency?
It is at this point that I want to point out the importance of that aspect of
interaction theory that involves communicative and narrative competencies
(Gallagher and Hutto 2008). Beyond the processes of primary and secondary
intersubjectivity, communicative and narrative practices allow for a certain
volitional space to open up – the possibility of taking a critical perspective on
ourselves. Narrative allows us to reflectively locate our interactions in what
Bruner calls the ‗landscape of action‘ and ‗the landscape of consciousness‘
(Bruner 1986). That is, through narrative, we can reflect on our actions and
interactions, and on what our motives for such actions might be.
In this process, and specifically in autobiographical (or self-) narrative,
narrative distance, a concept that goes back to Aristotle‘s Poetics, is
established between the self who narrates and the self who is narrated. This
distance allows for the possibility of what Harry Frankfurt (1971) calls secondorder volitions – that is, volitions in which we consider or evaluate our own
first-order action volitions. On Frankfurt‘s view, this capacity for second-order
volitions, or what Charles Taylor (1989) calls the possibility for a strong
evaluation of our own desires, is essential for moral personhood. From an

68

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

interactionist perspective, this is possible only as a result of social interaction
processes, in social settings where we act and interact, and where we exercise
our communicative and narrative practices.
What we call autonomy, then, is not constituted in just an internal intraindividual negotiation made by an agent with respect to herself, but is
inextricably interwoven into and out of our relationships with others. In this
regard, self-agency becomes a matter of degree rather than an all or nothing
issue. Some people arrange their lives with others, or find themselves in such
arrangements, so that they have a high degree of freedom – a greater range of
possibilities than others who find themselves in social relationships, or
cultures, or institutions where they are prevented from acting freely.
There is nothing new in this thought: our social interactions and
arrangements are such that they either promote freedom or prevent it.
Whatever self-agency is, it‘s weaved out of this fabric of interaction; not a
characteristic of the individual; but a characteristic of a set of relationships. In
some of my interactions I am freer than in others. Some arrangements support
self-agency, and some do not. I could say, without contradiction, that I am free
and I am not free – but only in the sense that my self-agency is constituted in
my different relations differently.
It‘s also the case that certain interactions can make one participant free and
the other a slave. So the question that derives directly from conceiving of
intersubjective interaction as a primary force in shaping our cognitive,
emotional, and social life is not the metaphysical question: Do I as an individual
have free will? It is rather the political question: who is free (or more free) and
who is not, and why? The political question is a pragmatic and critical one,
because we can ask why, and motivate change.
CONCLUSION
With regard to discussions of social cognition, shifting away from theory-ofmind approaches, such as theory theory and simulation theory, and taking up
the interaction theory and the emphasis on intersubjective interaction also
involves shifting away from conceptions of self-agency that are reducible to
neural or mental or strictly individual processes framed in terms of mental
causation. I‘ve suggested that self-agency is a matter of degree and that it can
be won or lost in the varying contexts of interaction – contexts from which I can

Shaun Gallagher – Strong Interaction and Self Agency

69

distance myself through a narrative process that allows for strong evaluation.
Accordingly, self-agency and related phenomena such as free will and intention
formation – these are not things that pertain strictly to an individual; rather,
they are constituted in interaction and in communicative and narrative
practices.

REFERENCES

Baird, J. A., & Baldwin, D. A. (2001). Making sense of human behavior:
Action parsing and intentional inference. In B. F. Malle, L. J. Moses &
D. A. Baldwin (Eds.), Intentions and Intentionality: Foundations of
Social Cognition, (pp. 193-206). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Baldwin, D. A., & Baird, J. A. (2001). Discerning intentions in dynamic
human action. Trends in Cognitive Science, 5(4), 171-178.
Banks, W., Pockett, S., & Gallagher, S. (2006). Does Consciousness Cause
Behavior? An Investigation of the Nature of Volition, (pp. 109-124).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Baron-Cohen, S. (1991). Precursors to a theory of mind: Understanding
attention in others. In A. Whiten (Ed.), Natural Theories of Mind:
Evolution, Development and Simulation of Everyday Mindreading, (pp.
233-251). Cambridge, MA: Basil Blackwell.
Baron-Cohen, S. (1995). Mindblindness: An Essay on Autism and Theory of
Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Becher, J.-C. (2004). Insights into early fetal development. Behind the
Medical Headlines. (Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh and
Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Glasgow October 2004).
Birnholz, J. C. (1988). On observing the human fetus. In W. P. Smotherman
& S. R. Robinson (Eds.), Behavior of the Fetus, (pp. 47-60). Caldwell,
NJ: Telford Press.
Bruner, J. (1986). Actual Minds, Possible Worlds. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.

70

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Buckner, C., Shriver, A., Crowley, S., & Allen, C. (2009). How ‗weak‘
mindreaders inherited the earth. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 32(2),
140-141.
Catmur, C., Walsh, V., & Heyes, C. (2007). Sensorimotor learning
configures the human mirror system. Current Biology, 17(17), 15271531.
Csibra, G., & Gergely, G. (2009). Natural pedagogy. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 13(4), 148-153.
Currie, G. (2008). Some ways of understanding people. Philosophical
Explorations, 11(3), 211-218.
De Casper, A. J., & Spence, M. J. (1986). Prenatal maternal speech influences
newborns‘ perception of speech sounds. Infant Behavior and
Development, 9, 133-150.
De Jaegher, H. (2008). Social understanding through direct perception? Yes,
by interacting. Consciousness and Cognition, 18(2), 535-542.
De Jaegher, H., & Di Paolo, E. (2007). Participatory sense-making: An
enactive approach to social cognition. Phenomenology and the
Cognitive Sciences, 6(4), 485-507.
De Jaegher, H., Di Paolo, E., & Gallagher, S. (2010). Does social interaction
constitute social cognition? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 14(10):
441-447.
De Vries, J. I. P., Visser, G. H. A., & Prechtl, H. F. R. (1982). The emergence
of fetal behaviour: I. Qualitative aspects. Early Human Development, 7,
301-322.
Dinstein, I., Thomas, C., Behrmann, M., & Heeger, D. J. (2008). A mirror up
to nature. Current Biology, 18(1), R13-R18.
Dittrich, W. H., Troscianko, T., Lea, S. E. G., & Morgan, D. (1996).
Perception of emotion from dynamic point-light displays represented in
dance. Perception, 25, 727-738.
Edelman, G. (1992). Bright Air, Brilliant Fire. New York: Basic Books.
Emory, E. K., & Toomey, K. A. (1988). Environmental stimulation and
human fetal responsivity in late pregnancy. In W. P. Smotherman & S.

Shaun Gallagher – Strong Interaction and Self Agency

71

R. Robinson (Eds.), Behavior of the Fetus, (pp. 141-161). Caldwell,
NJ: Telford Press.
Fifer, W. P., & Moon, C. (1988). Auditory experience in the fetus. In W. P.
Smotherman & S. R. Robinson (Eds.), Behavior of the Fetus, (pp. 175188). Caldwell, NJ: Telford Press.
Frankfurt, H. (1971). Freedom of the will and the concept of a person. Journal
of Philosophy, 68(1), 5-20.
Fuchs, T., & De Jaegher, H. (2009). Enactive intersubjectivity: Participatory
sense-making and mutual incorporation. Phenomenology and the
Cognitive Sciences, 8(4), 465-486.
Gallagher, S. (1996). The moral significance of primitive self-consciousness.
Ethics, 107(1), 129-140
Gallagher, S. (2005). How the Body Shapes the Mind. Oxford: Oxford
University Press/Clarendon Press
Gallagher, S. (2007). Simulation trouble. Social Neuroscience, 2(3-4), 353365.
Gallagher, S. (in press). Narrative competency and the massive hermeneutical
background. In P. Fairfield (Ed.), Hermeneutics in Education. New
York: Continuum.
Gallagher, S., & Hutto, D. (2008). Understanding others through primary
interaction and narrative practice. In J. Zlatev, T. Racine, C. Sinha & E.
Itkonen (Eds.), The Shared Mind: Perspectives on Intersubjectivity,
(pp. 17-38). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Gergely, G. (2001). The obscure object of desire: ‗Nearly, but clearly not, like
me‘: Contingency preference in normal children versus children with
autism. Bulletin of the Menninger Clinic, 65(3), 411-426.
Glass, P. (2005). The vulnerable neonate and the neonatal intensive care
environment. In G. B. Avery, M. G. MacDonald, M. M. K. Seshia & M.
D. Mullett (Eds.), Avery‘s Neonatology: Pathophysiology &
Management of the Newborn, (pp. 111-129). Philadelphia: Lippencott,
Williams and Wilkins.

72

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Goldman, A. I. (1995). Desire, intention and the simulation theory. In B. F.
Malle, L. J. Moses & D. A. Baldwin (Eds.), Intentions and
Intentionality: Foundations of Social Cognition, (pp. 207-224).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Goldman, A. I. (2006). Simulating Minds: The Philosophy, Psychology, and
Neuroscience of Mindreading. New York: Oxford University Press.
Gopnik, A., & Meltzoff, A. N. (1997). Words, Thoughts, and Theories.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gordon, R. M. (1986). Folk psychology as simulation. Mind and Language,
1(2), 158-171.
Gordon, R. M. (1995). Developing commonsense psychology: Experimental
data and philosophical data. Paper presented at the APA Eastern
Division Symposium on Children‘s Theory of Mind, 12/27/95.
(http://www.umsl.edu/~philo/Mind_Seminar/New%20Pages/paper
s/Gordon/apakids9.htm)
Heal, J. (1986). Replication and functionalism. In J. Butterfield (Ed.),
Language, Mind, and Logic, (pp. 45-59). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Heal, J. (1998a). Co-cognition and off-line simulation: Two ways of
understanding the simulation approach. Mind and Language, 13, 477498.
Heal, J. (1998b). Understanding other minds from the inside. In A. O‘Hear
(Ed.), Current Issues in Philosophy of Mind. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Hobson, P. (1993). The emotional origins of social understanding.
Philosophical Psychology, 6(3), 227-249.
Hobson, P. (2002). The Cradle of Thought. London: Macmillan.
Hobson, P., & Lee, A. (1999). Imitation and identification in autism. Journal
of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 40(4), 649-659.
Humphrey, T. (1964). Some correlations between the appearance of human
fetal reflexes and the development of the nervous system. Progress in
Brain Research, 4, 93-135.

Shaun Gallagher – Strong Interaction and Self Agency

73

Issartel, J., Marin, L., & Cadopi, M. (2007). Unintended interpersonal
coordination: ‗Can we march to the beat of our own drum‘?
Neuroscience Letters, 411(3), 174-179.
Jouen, F., & Gapenne, O. (1995). Interactions between the vestibular and
visual systems in the neonate. In P. Rochat (Ed.), The Self in Infancy:
Theory and Research, (pp. 277-301). Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.
Kendon, A. (1990). Conducting Interaction: Patterns of Behavior in Focused
Encounters. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Keysers, C., & Gazzola, V.( 2006). Towards a unifying neural theory of social
cognition. In S. Anders, G. Ende, M. Junghofer & J. Kissler (Eds.),
Understanding Emotions, (pp. 379-402). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Krasnegor, N. A., Fifer, W., Maulik, D., McNellis, D., Romero, R., &
Smotherman, W. (1998). Fetal behavioral development: Measurement
of habituation, state transitions, and movement to assess fetal well being
and to predict outcome. The Journal Maternal-Foetal Investigation, 8,
51–57.
Leslie, A. (1991). The theory of mind impairment in autism: Evidence for a
modular mechanism of development? In A. Whiten (Ed.), Natural

Theories of Mind: Evolution, Development and Simulation of Everyday
Mindreading, (pp. 63-78). Oxford: Blackwell.

Lindblom, J. (2007). Minding the body: Interacting socially through embodied
action. Linköping Studies in Science and Technology. Dissertation No.
1112.
Lindblom, J., & Ziemke, T. (2007). Embodiment and social interaction:
Implications for cognitive science. In T. Ziemke, J. Zlatev & R. Frank
(Eds.), Body, Language, and Mind: Embodiment, (pp.129-162).
Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Lowe, E. J. (1999). Self, agency and mental causation. Journal of
Consciousness Studies, 6(8-9), 225-239.
Lymer, J. (2010). The phenomenology of the maternal-foetal bond. Ph.D.
Dissertation. Wollongong University, Australia.

74

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Maurer, D., & Barrera, M. E. (1981). Infants‘ perception of natural and
distorted arrangements of a schematic face. Child Development, 52(1),
196-202.
Meltzoff, A., & Moore, M. K. (1977). Imitation of facial and manual gestures
by human neonates. Science, 198, 75-78.
Meltzoff, A., & Moore, M. K. (1994). Imitation, memory, and the
representation of persons. Infant Behavior and Development, 17, 8399.
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1962). Phenomenology of Perception. (Tr. by C. Smith).
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Muir, D., & Lee, K. (2003). The still-face effect: Methodological issues and
new applications. Infancy, 4(4), 483-491.
Murray, L., & Trevarthen, C. (1985). Emotional regulation of interactions
between 2-month-olds and their mothers. In T.M. Field & N. A. Fox
(Eds.), Social Perception in Infants, (pp. 177-197). Norwood, NJ:
Ablex.
Nadel, J., Croué, S., Mattlinger, M.-J, Canet, P., Hudelot, C., Lécuyer, C, &
Martini, M. (1999). Expectancies for social contingency in 2-montholds. Developmental Science, 2, 164-173.
Nichols, S., & Stich, S. P. (2003). Mindreading: An Integrated Account of
Pretence, Self-Awareness, and Understanding Other Minds. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Pacherie, E. (2008). The phenomenology of action: A conceptual framework.
Cognition, 107(1), 179–217.
Prechtl, H. (2001). Prenatal and early postnatal development of human motor
behavior. In A. F. Kalverboer & A. Gramsbergen (Eds.), Handbook of
brain and behaviour in human development, (pp. 415-418). Dordrecht:
Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Rizzolatti, G., Fogassi, L., & Gallese, V. (2001). Neurophysiological
mechanisms underlying the understanding and imitation of action.
Nature Review Neuroscience, 2, 661-670.

Shaun Gallagher – Strong Interaction and Self Agency

75

Searle, J. (1983). Intentionality: An Essay in the Philosophy of Mind.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Senju, A., Johnson, M. H., & Csibra, G. (2006). The development and neural
basis of referential gaze perception. Social Neuroscience, 1(3-4), 220234.
Sheets-Johnston, M. (1998). Consciousness: A Natural History. Journal of
Consciousness Studies, 5(3), 260-294.
Spence, S. A. (1996). Free will in the light of neuropsychiatry. Philosophy,
Psychiatry, and Psychology, 3(2), 75-90.
Stephens, G. L., & Graham, G. (2000). When Self-Consciousness Breaks:
Alien Voices and Inserted Thoughts. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Stormark, K. M., & Braarud, H. C. (2004). Infants‘ sensitivity to social
contingency: A ―double video‖ study of face-to-face communication
between 2- and 4-month-olds and their mothers. Infant Behavior and
Development, 27, 195-203.
Tajani, E., & Ianniruberto, A. (1990). The uncovering of fetal competence. In
M. Papini, A. Pasquinelli & E. A. Gidoni (Eds.), Development Handicap
and Rehabilitation: Practice and Theory. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science
Publishers.
Taylor, C. (1989). Sources of the Self. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Trevarthen, C. B. (1979). Communication and cooperation in early infancy: A
description of primary intersubjectivity. In M. Bullowa (Ed.), Before
Speech, (pp. 321-348). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Trevarthen, C., & Hubley, P. (1978). Secondary intersubjectivity:
Confidence, confiding and acts of meaning in the first year. In A. Lock
(Ed.), Action, Gesture and Symbol: The Emergence of Language, (pp.
183-229). London: Academic Press.
Tronick, E. Z. (2007). The Neurobehavioral and Social Emotional
Development of Infants and Children. New York: Norton.
Tronick, E., Als, H., Adamson, L.,Wise, S., & Brazelton, T. B. (1978). The
infants‘ response to entrapment between contradictory messages in

76

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

face-to-face interactions. Journal of the American Academy of Child
Psychiatry, 17, 1-13.
Van der Meer, A. L., Van der Weel, F. R., & Lee, D. N. (1995). The
functional significance of arm movements in neonates. Science, 267,
693-695.
Walker, A. S. (1982). Intermodal perception of expressive behaviors by
human infants. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 33, 514535.
Wegner, D. (2002). The Illusion of Conscious Will. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Woodward, A. L., & Sommerville, J. A. (2000). Twelve-month-old infants
interpret action in context. Psychological Science, 11, 73–77.
Zoia, S., Blason, L., D‘Ottavio, G., Bulgheroni, M., Pezzetta, E., Scabar, A.,
Castiello, U. (2007). Evidence of early development of action planning
in the human foetus: A kinematic study. Experimental Brain Research,
176(2), 217-226.

The Phenomenology of Agency and Freedom:
Lessons from Introspection and Lessons from Its
Limits*
Terry Horgan**

thorgan@email.arizona.edu

ABSTRACT

The paper will focus on three interrelated matters. First is the phenomenology
of agency, the ―what it is like‖ of experiencing oneself as an agent — and more
specifically, the experiential aspect of freedom that is an integral part of the
phenomenology of agency. Second is the extent to which introspection is, or is
not, a reliable way to answer questions about the phenomenology of agency
and freedom. Third is the import of these first two matters for philosophical
debates about agency and free will.
Briefly, my overall position goes as follows. The phenomenology of free
agency has features that are well and aptly described by language of the kind
that is traditionally employed by advocates of metaphysical libertarianism
concerning the free will issue — language like ―self as ultimate source,‖ and
―agent as cause‖. This is something that is reliably detectable by introspection.
However, introspection by itself cannot reliably ascertain whether or not the
satisfaction conditions for free-agency phenomenology require, for example,
the falsity of state-causal determinism or the presence of the metaphysically
heavyweight attribute that metaphysical libertarians call ―agent-causal
freedom‖.
Moreover, the best overall theoretical position about the nature of free
agency — the one that emerges by abductive ―inference to the best
explanation‖ of all pertinent, evidentially relevant, factors — is compatibilist.
Among the considerations that underwrite this abductive conclusion is the fact
that a suitable version of compatibilism can provide a full accommodation of
the phenomenology of free agency; i.e., the right kind of compatibilism entails

* My thanks to Michael McKenna and Mark Timmons for helpful comments and discussion.
** University of Arizona

78

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

that normal humans do indeed exercise free agency, and also entails that their
agentive experience does not misrepresent the nature of free agency itself.

1. SOME RELIABLY INTROSPECTIBLE ASPECTS OF AGENTIVE
PHENOMENOLOGY2
I begin by describing some features of agentive phenomenology which, I
submit, are readily ascertainable just on the basis of introspective attention to
such phenomenology.
What is behaving like phenomenologically, in cases where you experience
your own behavior as action? Suppose that you deliberately do something —
say, holding up your right hand and closing your fingers into a fist. What can
you ascertain about the phenomenology of this item of behavior, on the basis of
introspective attention to this phenomenology? To begin with, there are of
course the purely bodily-motion aspects of the phenomenology — the what-it‘slike of being visually and kinesthetically presented with your own right hand
rising and its fingers moving into clenched position. But there is more to it
than that, of course, because you are experiencing this bodily motion as your
own action.
In order to help bring into focus this specifically actional phenomenological
dimension of the experience, it will be helpful to approach it a
negative/contrastive way, via some observations about what the experience is
not like. For example, it is certainly not like this: first experiencing an
occurrent wish for your right hand to rise and your fingers to move into
clenched position, and then passively experiencing your hand and fingers
moving in just that way. Such phenomenal character might be called the
phenomenology of fortuitously appropriate bodily motion. It would be very
strange indeed, and very alien.
Nor is the actional phenomenological character of the experience like this:
first experiencing an occurrent wish for your right hand to rise and your fingers
to move into clenched position, and then passively experiencing a causal
process consisting of this wish‘s causing your hand to rise and your fingers to
move into clenched position. Such phenomenal character might be called the
2

This section is adapted, with some modifications, deletions, and additions, from similar sections
in Horgan 2007b and in Horgan et al. 2003.

Terry Horgan – The Phenomenology of Agency and Freedom

79

passive phenomenology of psychological state-causation of bodily motion.3
People often do passively experience causal processes as causal processes, of

course: the experience of seeing the collision of a moving billiard ball with a
motionless billiard ball is an experience as-of the collision causing the latter
ball‘s subsequent motion; the experience of observing the impact of the
leading edge of an avalanche with a tree in its path is an experience as-of the
impact causing the tree to become uprooted; and so on. Sometimes people
even experience their own bodily motions as state-caused by their own mental
states — e.g., when one feels oneself shuddering and experiences this
shuddering as caused by of a state of fear. But it seems patently clear that one
does not normally experience one‘s own actions in that way — as passively
noticed, or passively introspected, causal processes consisting in the causal
generation of bodily motion by occurrent mental states. That too would be a
strange and alienating sort of experience.4
How, then, should one characterize the actional phenomenal dimension of
the act of raising one‘s hand and clenching one‘s fingers, given that it is not the
phenomenology of fortuitously appropriate bodily motion and it also is not the
passive phenomenology of psychological state-causation of bodily motion?
Well, it is the what-it‘s-like of self as source of the motion. You experience
your arm, hand, and fingers as being moved by you yourself—rather than
experiencing their motion either as fortuitously moving just as you want them
to move, or passively experiencing them as being caused by your own mental
states. You experience the bodily motion as generated by yourself.
The language of causation seems apt here too, but differently deployed: you
experience your behavior as caused by you yourself, rather than experiencing it
as caused by states of yourself. Metaphysical libertarians about human freedom
sometimes speak of ―agent causation‖ (or ―immanent causation‖), and such
terminology seems phenomenologically apt regardless of what one thinks
about the intelligibility and credibility of metaphysical libertarianism.
Chisholm (1964) famously argued that immanent causation (as he called it) is a
distinct species of causation from event causation (or ―transeunt‖ causation, as
he called it). But he later changed his mind (Chisholm 1995), arguing instead
3
Here and throughout I speak of ‗state-causation‘ rather than ‗event-causation‘. More below on
my reasons for this choice of terminology. States can be short-lived, and often when they do they also
fall naturally under the rubric ‗event.‘
4
For discussion of a range of psychopathological disorders involving similar sorts of dissociative
experience, see Stephens and Graham (2000).

80

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

that agent-causal ―undertakings‖ (as he called them) are actually a species of
event-causation themselves — albeit a very different species from ordinary,
nomically governed, event causation. Phenomenologically speaking, there is
indeed something episodic — something temporally located, and thus ―eventish‖ — about experiences of self-as-source. Thus, the expression ‗state
causation‘ works better than ‗event causation‘ as a way of expressing the way
behaviors are not presented to oneself in agentive experience. Although
agentive experience is indeed ―event-ish‖ in the sense that one experiences
oneself as undertaking to perform actions at specific moments in time, one‘s
behavior is not experienced as caused by states of oneself.
The phenomenology of doing typically includes another aspect which will
be especially important in the context of the present paper: what I will call core
optionality. (More presently on the reason for the modifier ‗core‘). Normally
when you do something, you experience yourself as freely performing the
action, in the sense that it is up to you whether or not to perform it. You
experience yourself not only as generating the action, and not only as
generating it purposively, but also as generating it in such a manner that you
could have done otherwise. This palpable phenomenology of optionality has
not gone unrecognized in the philosophical literature on freedom and
determinism, although often in that literature it does not receive as much
attention as it deserves. (Sometimes the most explicit attention is given to
effort of will, although it takes only a moment‘s introspection to realize that the
phenomenology of effortfully exerting one‘s will is really only one, quite
special, case of the much more pervasive phenomenology of optionality5).
The core-optionality aspect of agentive phenomenology is intimately bound
up with the aspect of self-as-source, in such a way that the former is an essential
component of normal agentive self-source experience.6 In experiencing one‘s
5
This is not to deny, of course, that there is indeed a distinctive phenomenology of effort of will
that sometimes is present in the phenomenology of doing. The point is just that this aspect is not
always present. A related phenomenological feature, often but not always present, is the
phenomenology of trying — which itself is virtually always a dimension of the phenomenology of effort
of will, and which often (but not always) includes a phenomenologically discernible element of
uncertainty about success. (Sometimes the phenomenological aspect of core optionality attaches
mainly to the trying dimension of the phenomenology of doing. When you happen to succeed at what
you were trying to do but were not at all confident you could accomplish — e.g., sinking the 10 ball
into the corner pocket of the pool table — the success aspect is not experienced as something directly
under voluntary control).
6
I say that the aspect of core optionality is an essential component of normal self-source
experience because I mean to leave open the possibility of unusual self-source experiences that lack

Terry Horgan – The Phenomenology of Agency and Freedom

81

behavior as emanating from oneself as its source, one experiences oneself as
being able to refrain from so behaving — or at any rate, as being able to refrain
from willfully producing such behavior. This is so even when acts under
extreme coercion or duress — e.g., handing over one‘s wallet or purse to a thief
who is pointing a gun in one‘s face. It also is so even when one acts with an
extreme phenomenological ―imperativeness‖— e.g., a mother‘s unhesistatingly
leaping into the river to save her drowning child, Luther‘s acting out a sense of
moral requirement (as expressed by his declaring ―Here I stand, I can do no
other‖), the compulsive hand-washer‘s act of washing hands for the third time
in ten minutes. The core phenomenology of optionality that is essential to
ordinary agentive experience remains present in all such cases, even though
there are further, superimposed, phenomenological aspects (duress, moralobligation experience, intensely strong irrational desires, or the like) whose
presence can render appropriate, in context, a judgment that the agent ―could
not have done otherwise,‖ or ―had no other option,‖ or ―did not act freely‖.
Because the phenomenology of core optionality remains present even in such
cases, it also can be contextually appropriate to use ‗could‘ and ‗option‘ and
‗free‘ in a way that reflects this fact (rather than in a way that reflects the
presence of one or another kind of superimposed non-optionality
phenomenology). For instance, one might say this:―I could have refrained from
giving the thief my wallet, and thus I gave it to him freely and with the option of
refraining — even though refraining would have been quite stupidly irrational‖.
Hereafter I will use the expression ‗free-agency phenomenology‘, in order to
refer to the experience of self-as-source in a way a way that underscores the
aspect of core optionality that is an essential component of normal self-assource experience.
A few words are in order at this point about thought-experimental
―Frankfurt scenarios‖ inspired by Frankfurt (1969). One such scenario is this:
one‘s body would have moved the same way even if one had not willed it to
move that way, because a device implanted in one‘s motor cortex would have
triggered that same motion had one not willfully produced it; but in that case
the motion would not have been experienced as willfully generated, and indeed
this aspect — for instance, self-source experiences in which one firmly believes that one is in a
―Frankfurt scenario‖ in which one‘s circumstances are such that were one about to will to refrain from
performing the act one is about to perform, an evil scientist would cause the pertinent bodily motions
to occur anyway and would also cause these motions to be accompanied by (epiphenomenal)
experience-as-of willfully performing that action. More momentarily on Frankfurt scenarios.

82

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

would not have been experienced as one‘s own action. A different Frankfurt
scenario is this: one‘s body would have moved the same way even if one had not
willed it to move that way, because a device implanted in one‘s motor cortex
would have triggered that same motion had one not willfully produced it; in
addition, that device would have triggered the phenomenology of willing to
move one‘s body in just that way — with the dual triggering operating in a
manner that renders the phenomenology itself completely epiphenomenal visà-vis the bodily motion. As far as free-agency phenomenology is concerned
(and that is the present topic), the main thing to stress is the following: in both
of these scenarios (and in most Frankfurt-style scenarios), one‘s free-agency
phenomenology is at least partially non-veridical, because the phenomenology
includes not only the self-as-source aspect but also the could-do-otherwise
aspect that is an essential component of normal self-as-source experience. The
agent‘s phenomenology is as-of being a full-fledged self-source of the
behavior, where full-fledgedness includes being such that one could have acted
otherwise instead; but in Frankfurt scenarios, the agent is not a full-fledged
self-source of the kind that the agent experiences himself/herself to be.7 These
remarks about agentive phenomenology leave various moral and metaphysical
questions still open — e.g., (i) whether the agent in a Frankfurt scenario is
morally responsible for the action, (ii) whether the agent is a genuine selfsource of the behavior even though the agent could not have done otherwise,
and (iii) whether the agent acts freely even though the agent could not have
done otherwise. Whatever one might say about those questions, the key point
is that the self-as-source aspect of normal agentive experience includes the
core optionality (core ―could-do-otherwise‖) aspect as an essential element.
Agentive phenomenology is more closely akin to perceptual/kinesthetic
experience than it is to discursive thought. (Many higher non-human animals, I
take it, have some agentive phenomenology, even if they engage in little or no
discursive thought). Of course, we humans also wield concepts like agency,
voluntariness, and the like (whereas it is questionable whether non-human
7

What about the Frankfurt scenario envisioned in note 6, in which one firmly believes that one is
in a scenario in which core optionality is absent? Perhaps here one‘s agentive phenomenology would
be as-of non-full-fledged self-as-source-hood in which the core-optionality aspect is lacking. But that
would be extremely unlike ordinary agentive phenomenology. (Alternatively — as I myself suspect
would be the case — perhaps even here the core-optionality aspect still would be present in one‘s
agentive phenomenology despite one‘s belief that core optionality itself is absent. Compare
experiences of the Muller-Lyer illusion, in which one horizontal line still looks longer than the other
even when one firmly believes the two lines are the same length).

Terry Horgan – The Phenomenology of Agency and Freedom

83

animals do); but thoughts employing these concepts are not to be conflated
with agentive phenomenology itself.
2. SOME LIMITATIONS OF INTROSPECTION VIS-À-VIS AGENTIVE
PHENOMENOLOGY8
The phenomenal character of one‘s current experience is self-presenting to the
experiencing subject. Self-presentingness is an especially intimate form of
direct acquaintance between the experiencing subject on one hand, and the
phenomenal character of some aspect of the subject‘s current state of
phenomenal consciousness; the state‘s appearing a certain way, acquaintancewise, is constitutive of the state‘s actually being that way.
Let a purely phenomenological question be a question that (i) is about some
aspect of the intrinsic phenomenal character of one‘s present experience, and
(ii) is such that the answer is entirely determined just by the intrinsic
phenomenal character of one‘s present experience. (The point of clause (ii) is
to exclude questions that bring in some extrinsic aspect while still being in
some sense ―about‖ intrinsic phenomenal character — e.g., ―Am I now
undergoing an experience with the phenomenal character that I was writing
about last Tuesday?‖).
In light of the fact that phenomenal character is self-presenting, one might
be tempted to think that any purely phenomenal question can be reliably
answered directly on the basis of introspection. More specifically, one might be
tempted to think that introspection alone can reliably determine whether or
not free-agency phenomenology has metaphysical-libertarian satisfaction
conditions. (Having metaphysical-libertarian satisfaction conditions means
this: the intentional content of one‘s free-agency experience is veridical only if
one is an ―agent-cause‖ in the metaphysically heavyweight sense of this notion
that is invoked by metaphysical libertarians — which entails, inter alia, that
state-causal determinism is false).
I maintain, however, that this claim about the powers of introspection vis-àvis free-agency phenomenology is false. (Hence the more general thesis — that

8
This section is adapted, with some modifications and deletions, from section 3 of Horgan (in
press-b). Other pertinent discussions of mine, sometimes collaborative, are Horgan (2007a, in pressa) and Horgan and Timmons (in press).

84

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

any purely phenomenal question can be reliably answered directly on the basis
of introspection — is also false). In this section I will briefly say why.9
Let me begin by introducing some terminology. First, I distinguish two
kinds of introspection concerning one‘s current experience. On one hand is
attentive introspection: paying attention to certain aspects of one‘s current
experience. On the other hand is judgmental introspection: the process of
forming a judgment about the nature of one‘s current experience, and doing so
spontaneously just on the basis of attending to the aspects(s) of one‘s current
experience about which one is judging — without any reliance on collateral
information or evidence. (Judgmental introspection thus deploys attentive
introspection, while also generating a judgment about what is being attended
to).
Second, I call a purely phenomenal question conceptual-competence
amenable (for short, CC amenable) just in case it can be correctly answered by
simply introspectively attending to one‘s current experience and then
spontaneously exercising one‘s conceptual competence with the pertinent
concepts. By contrast, a purely phenomenal question is conceptualcompetence transcendent (for short, CC transcendent) just in case it cannot be
correctly answered this way.
With these distinctions at hand, consider now the following three pairwiseincompatible claims about the satisfaction conditions of free-agency
phenomenology.
(1) Free-agency phenomenology has satisfaction conditions that (i) are
fully fixed by intrinsic phenomenal character alone, and (ii) are
metaphysical libertarian.
(2) Free-agency phenomenology has satisfaction conditions that (i) are
fully fixed by intrinsic phenomenal character alone, and (ii) are
compatible with state-causal determinism (and hence are not
metaphysical-libertarian).
(3) Free-agency phenomenology has satisfaction conditions that (i) are
not fully fixed by phenomenal character alone, (ii) instead are fixed by
phenomenology in combination with extra-phenomenological facts
about the experiencing agent‘s cognitive architecture, and (iii) are
9

For more extended elaboration and defense of the view, see Horgan (in press-b).

Terry Horgan – The Phenomenology of Agency and Freedom

85

such that their being metaphysical-libertarian or not, and their being
compatible with state-causal determinism or not, depends upon those
cognitive-architecture facts.
Claims (1) and (2) both construe free-agency phenomenology as having
―purely narrow‖ referential purport that lacks any constitutive externalistic
elements, whereas claim (3) construes it as having ―wide‖ referential purport
that incorporates certain constitutive externalistic elements. For the
phenomenology to have wide referential purport is for its reference-relation to
its referent-property (if it has a referent-property) to depend constitutively not
merely on the intrinsic character of the phenomenology itself, but also upon
certain phenomenology-external facts about the nature of the experiencing
agent — according to claim (3), facts about the agent‘s cognitive architecture.
On one potential view that comports with claim (3), the pertinent facts would
concern the nature of the cognitive-architectural choice-generating and
behavior-generating mechanisms that are normally operative in situations
where the experiencing agent undergoes free-agency phenomenology, and
meeting the satisfaction conditions would be a matter of exercising those
cognitive mechanisms in the normal way.
Claims (1) and (2), on the other hand, construe free-agency
phenomenology as referring, in the experience of all actual and possible
creatures who are phenomenal duplicates of one another, to one and the same
property — regardless of any differences in the cognitive architectures of
different phenomenal duplicates.10 The essence of the property that
constitutes free agency is entirely fixed by the intrinsic phenomenal character
of free-agency experience alone. Claim (1) says that this phenomenologically
fixed property has metaphysical-libertarian satisfaction conditions, whereas
claim (2) says that it has satisfaction conditions that are compatible with statecausal determinism (and hence are not metaphysical-libertarian).
Consider now the following question, which pertains entirely to the
intrinsic phenomenal character of agentive experience and whose answer
depends only on that phenomenal character — and which is therefore a purely
phenomenological question:
10
This property need not actually be instantiated by the creature in order to be the referentproperty of the creature‘s free-agency experience. Indeed, it need not even be a property whose
instantiation is metaphysically possible. (Maybe it is a metaphysical-libertarian property, and maybe —
as some hard incompatibilists maintain — the instantiation of such a property is outright impossible
regardless of whether or not state-causal determinism is true).

86

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

(Q) Which (if any) of the pairwise incompatible claims (1)-(3) is correct?
At the moment, the issue I am focusing upon is not what the answer is to
question (Q), but rather this: whether or not one can reliably ascertain, just via
judgmental introspection, what the answer is. I claim that one cannot do so,
and that the reason why not is that (Q) is a CC transcendent question.
Elsewhere (Horgan, in press-b) I defend these claims, and I also offer a
proposed multi-component debunking explanation of the common
judgmental-introspective beliefs that (a) one can reliably answer question (Q)
just on the basis of introspection, and (b) that the answer is that claim (1) is
true.
An explanatory task arises at this point that needs addressing — viz., the
task of explaining credibly why it should be that (Q) is a CC-transcendent
question. Since claims (1)-(3) all concern only the phenomenal character of
free-agency experience, and since phenomenal character is self-presenting to
the experiencing agent, something needs saying about why human agents are
nonetheless unable to ―read off‖ the answer to question (Q) just by directing
their attentive introspection upon their own free-agency experience and then
exercising their conceptual competence with concepts like the concept of
state-causal determinism and the concept of free-agency phenomenal
character.
I have addressed this explanatory task most extensively in in Horgan (in
press-b); there is also pertinent discussion in Horgan (2007a, 2007b) and in
Horgan and Timmons (in press). Although I lack the space here to rehearse my
proposed account, let me just mention 3 key elements of the account. First,
normal conceptual competence is mainly a matter of being able to correctly
apply a given concept to a concrete case — or more precisely, to do so modulo
one‘s available evidence; consequently, conceptual competence alone is apt to
be fairly limited as a basis for answering abstract general questions about the
nature of satisfaction conditions. Second, these same facts about conceptual
competence are in play when one introspectively attends to one‘s agentive
phenomenology with the goal in mind of forming an introspective judgment
about question (Q): it is unreasonable and unwarranted to expect one‘s
capacity for concept-wielding to be that splendid when it is directed at general
hypotheses concerning the intentional content of agentive phenomenology,
just as it is unreasonable to expect it to be that splendid when it is directed at
general hypotheses concerning the satisfaction conditions for concepts
themselves. Hence third, general hypotheses about satisfaction conditions are

Terry Horgan – The Phenomenology of Agency and Freedom

87

a matter for abductive inference — even when these hypotheses concern facts
about the intentional content of self-presenting phenomenal character, facts
that are fully fixed by that phenomenal character itself.
3. LESSONS
Let me draw out some lessons of the above discussion, with respect to
philosophical debates about free agency. To begin with, participants in these
debates need to explicitly acknowledge the existence of free-agency
phenomenology — including its self-as-source dimension, and including the
core optionality (core can/could do otherwise) aspect that is itself an essential
component of normal self-as-source experience.11
Second, it needs to be appreciated that there are intimate interconnections
among these three matters: (1) the satisfaction conditions of free-agency
phenomenology, (2) the satisfaction conditions of everyday statements and
judgments that ascribe free agency or classify specific acts and decisions as the
products of free agency, and (3) the metaphysics of free agency. Item (1) is apt
to constrain item (2), in the following way: if free-agency phenomenology has
metaphysical-libertarian satisfaction conditions, then thereby so do everyday
ascriptions of free agency, whereas if free-agency phenomenology has
compatibilist satisfaction conditions, then thereby so do everyday ascriptions
of free agency. In addition, item (1) is apt to constrain item (3), as follows: if
genuine free agency exists at all, then it fully conforms to the satisfaction
conditions imposed on it by agentive phenomenology. (I will express these
modes of constraint by saying that free-agency phenomenology strongly
constrains, respectively, the concept of free agency and the metaphysics of free
agency. And I will say that an overall position that treats the concept of free

11
Some philosophers, notably Eddy Nahmias and has collaborators, do pay attention to freeagency phenomenology and yet deny that it really has an aspect of self-as-source. (See, e.g., Nahmias
et al. 2004). But they appear to assume that if there were such an aspect, then (a) this aspect would
have metaphysical-libertarian satisfaction conditions, and (b) its having metaphysical-libertarian
satisfaction conditions would be reliably ascertainable introspectively. They thereby conflate two
claims: (1) the claim that agentive phenomenology has a self-as-source aspect, and (2) the claim that
agentive phenomenology has a self-as-source aspect with features (a) and (b). In my view they would be
right to deny claim (2), but they are wrong to deny claim (1) — and they unfortunately muddy up the
dialectical waters by conflating the two claims.

88

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

agency and the metaphysics of free agency as strongly constrained by freeagency phenomenology is a strongly internally coherent position).
Third, it is important to articulate various package-deal positions that
simultaneously address items (1), (2), and (3), and it is important to subject
such positions to comparative cost-benefit assessments as package deals.
Concerning item (1), a package-deal position will embrace just one of these
two (incompatible) claims: (1a) phenomenological libertarianism, asserting
that free-agency phenomenology has metaphysical-libertarian satisfaction
conditions, or (1b) phenomenological compatibilism, asserting that such
phenomenology has compatibilist satisfaction conditions. Likewise,
concerning item (2) there are two options: (2a) conceptual libertarianism,
asserting that everyday free-agency ascriptions have metaphysical-libertarian
satisfaction conditions, or (2b) conceptual compatibilism, asserting that such
ascriptions have compatibilist satisfaction conditions. Concerning item (3)
there are three options: (3a) metaphysical libertarianism, (3b) metaphysical
compatibilism, or (3c) hard incompatibilism.
Fourth, barring powerful countervailing theoretical considerations,
theoretical package-deal positions that are strongly internally coherent will be
much more likely to be correct than those that are not. (The default theoretical
presumptions are that free agency has the features it is experienced as having,
and that the concept of free agency has satisfaction conditions that conform
well to the satisfaction conditions of free-agency experience. People implicitly
adopt these presumptions routinely, and people routinely implicitly take the
presumptions to be epistemically well warranted. In principle, one could
challenge these default presuppositions, but doing so in a credible way would
require some heavy-duty, hard-to-envision, form of argumentation). A strongly
internally coherent package-deal position have will have these two features:
first, it embraces (1a) if and only if it embraces (2a), and it embraces (1b) if and
only if it embraces (2b); second, it asserts that if there is such a genuine
phenomenon as free agency at all, then that phenomenon conforms to the
satisfaction conditions laid down by free-agency phenomenology.
The fifth moral is conditional: if one can reliably ascertain, just on the basis
of introspection, that free-agency phenomenology has metaphysical-libertarian
satisfaction conditions, then there are only two package-deal positions that are
strongly internally coherent, viz., (1a) + (2a) + (3a), and (1a) + (2a) + (3c). The
first of these embraces phenomenological libertarianism, plus conceptual
libertarianism, plus metaphysical libertarianism. This package deal is

Terry Horgan – The Phenomenology of Agency and Freedom

89

libertarian through and through. The second view embraces phenomenological
libertarianism, plus conceptual libertarianism, plus hard incompatibilism. This
package deal asserts that there is no such phenomenon as free agency, on the
grounds that (i) genuine free agency would have to conform to metaphysicallibertarian satisfaction conditions, and (ii) no real phenomenon conforms to
such conditions.
The sixth moral is also conditional, and is a corollary of the fifth one: if one
can reliably ascertain, just on the basis of introspection, that free-agency
phenomenology has metaphysical-libertarian satisfaction conditions, then
there is no viable compatibilist package-deal position that is strongly internally
coherent. Thus the best one could do, by way of formulating a package-deal
position that honors the introspectively manifest fact that free-agency
phenomenology has metaphysical-libertarian satisfaction conditions, would be
to adopt a partial-error theory asserting that although there really is a
phenomenon of free agency, the nature of this phenomenon is very
significantly misrepresented by free-agency experience. That kind of view is a
very unattractive theoretical option for those who are inclined to reject
metaphysical libertarianism. One reason to think so, inter alia, is that whatever
phenomenon the account ends up treating as the one picked out by freeagency experience will be so different in reality from how it is experienced to
be that there will be very little credible basis for claiming that it is an eligible
referent of free-agency phenomenology (or of the concept of free agency).12
The six morals lately mentioned all draw upon the discussion in section 1
above, concerning reliably introspectible aspects of free-agency
phenomenology. Let us now factor in the discussion in section 2, concerning
the limitations of introspection with respect to free-agency phenomenology.
That discussion yields this seventh moral: it is not the case that one can reliably
ascertain, just on the basis of introspection, what the answer is to question (Q).
This in turn brings an eighth moral in its wake, as a corollary: viz., it is not the
12
For taxonomic completeness, the following additional moral is worth mentioning, also
conditional in form: if one can reliably ascertain, just on the basis of introspection, that free-agency
phenomenology has compatibilist satisfaction conditions, then the only strongly internally coherent
package-deal position that conforms with the introspectively ascertainable nature of free-agency
phenomenology is package-deal compatibilism, i.e., (1b) + (2b) + (3b). But it is extremely implausible
to claim that it is introspectively obvious that self-as-source phenomenology has compatibilist
satisfaction conditions, and I know of no compatibilist who does claim this. Rather, compatibilists tend
either to ignore free-agency phenomenology altogether (the more typical tendency), or else to deny
that agentive phenomenology has a self-as-source aspect at all (as do Nahmias and his collaborators).

90

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

case that one can reliably ascertain, just on the basis of introspection, that freeagency phenomenology has metaphysical-libertarian satisfaction conditions.
This leads to a ninth moral: there is another package-deal position that is
consistent with what is reliably introspectively ascertainable about agentive
phenomenology — viz., the position (1b) + 2(b) + 3b). This view is thoroughly
compatibilist — phenomenologically, conceptually, and metaphysically — and is
therefore strongly internally coherent. It begins with the contention that freeagency phenomenology has compatibilist satisfaction conditions. It then claims
that free-agency phenomenology constrains both the concept of free agency
and the metaphysics of free agency — in such a way that the concept has
compatibilist satisfaction conditions too, and in such a way that genuine free
agency is a phenomenon that is compatible with state-causal determinism (and
hence is not correctly characterized by metaphysical libertarianism).
A tenth moral, also grounded in my discussion in section 2 of the
limitations of introspection, is that there is an important role for abduction
when one inquires about the satisfaction conditions of free-agency
phenomenology — a role that is complementary to the roles of attentive and
judgmental introspection, and that potentially can take up the slack left by
introspection. That is good news for compatibilists, myself included.
4. SKETCH OF A VERSION OF PACKAGE-DEAL COMPATIBILISM
Let me now briefly sketch the version of package-deal compatibilism that I
favor.13 I have defended various aspects of this overall approach in a number of
prior writings, some collaborative (Horgan 1979, 2007a, 2007b, in press-a,
in press-b, Graham and Horgan 1994, Henderson and Horgan 2000, Horgan
and Timmons in press). The argumentation in those writings is largely
abductive, and incorporates the contention that one cannot reliably ascertain
the satisfaction conditions of free-agency phenomenology just on the basis of
careful introspection.14
13
This section is adapted, with some modifications and deletions, from section 4 of Horgan
(2007b).
14
I believe that there is significant work yet to be done by way of further elaborating my
recommended approach — in particular, there is a need to say more about the satisfaction conditions of
free-agency phenomenology, and about why and how these conditions can be met even if state-causal
determinism is true. I am unhappy with possible-worlds satisfaction conditions according to which the
possible worlds that are ―accessible‖ to a freely choosing/acting agent include worlds in which a

Terry Horgan – The Phenomenology of Agency and Freedom

91

As a prelude, let me distinguish two kinds of mental intentionality, which I
call presentational content and judgmental content, respectively.
Presentational intentional content is the kind that accrues to phenomenology
directly — apart from whether or not one has the capacity to articulate this
content linguistically and understand what one is thus articulating, and apart
from whether or not one has the kind of sophisticated conceptual repertoire
that would be required to understand such an articulation. Judgmental
intentional content, by contrast, is the kind of content possessed by such
linguistic articulations, and by the judgments they articulate. (Here I use
‗judgment‘ broadly enough to encompass various non-endorsing propositional
attitudes, such as wondering whether, entertaining that, and the like). Dogs,
cheetahs, and numerous other non-human animals presumably have agentive
phenomenology with presentational intentional content, although it is
plausible that they have little or no sophisticated conceptual capacities of the
kind required to undergo states with full-fledged judgmental content involving
concepts like freedom or agency.
I do not mean to suggest that this distinction is a sharp one. It wouldn‘t
surprise me if the two kinds of content blur into one another, via a spectrum of
intervening types of psychological state and/or a spectrum of increasing forms
of conceptual sophistication in different kinds of creatures. Also, it may well be
that the two kinds of content can interpenetrate to a substantial extent, at least
in creatures as sophisticated as humans. It is plausible, for instance, that
humans can have presentational contents the possession of which require (at
least causally) a fairly rich repertoire of background concepts that can figure in
judgmental states. One can have presentational experiences, for instance, as-of
computers, automobiles, airplanes, train stations — all of which presumably
require a level of conceptual sophistication that far outstrips what dogs
possess.
―divergence miracle‖ occurs shortly before the agent chooses/acts otherwise than how the agent
chooses/acts in the actual world. I am even more unhappy with satisfaction conditions according to
which some ―accessible‖ possible worlds are allowed to differ somewhat from the actual world at all
moments in time prior to the agent‘s non-actual choice/act. An idea that currently appeals to me is
this: do the semantics of modals in terms of ―scenario-specifications‖ that (a) are epistemically
possible (relative to some contextually pertinent body of background information), and (b) need not
be metaphysically possible. As regards modals about human agency, some such scenariospecifications will hold fixed the portion of the actual world that precedes a given agent‘s choice/act,
will specify some way the agent chooses/acts that differs from the agent‘s actual-world choice/act, and
will also specify that there are no violations of any actual-world laws of nature.

92

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Briefly, the version of package-deal compatibilism that I favor comprises
the following eleven theses. First, the presentational content of agentive
phenomenology includes the aspect of self-as-source, which itself normally
includes the aspect of core optionality (core ―can/could do otherwise‖) as an
essential component.15 Second, the presentational intentional content of
agentive phenomenology has satisfaction conditions that are compatible with
state-causal determinism. Third, this compatibility is a non-manifest feature of
agentive phenomenology; i.e., one cannot reliably tell, just on the basis of
careful introspective attention to one‘s own agentive experience and the
exercise of one‘s conceptual competence in judgment-formation, whether or
not the compatibility hypothesis is true. Fourth, despite the compatibility of
agentive phenomenology with state-causal determinism, a bodily event that is
experienced as one‘s action cannot also be experienced as state-caused, either
by non-mental states or by mental states. Fifth, the presentational aspect of
core optionality remains present as an essential component of normal agentive
phenomenology even when one experiences oneself as acting under coercion
or duress. Sixth, an essential aspect of experiences of state-causation,
including experiences of one‘s own bodily motions as state-caused, is the
presentational aspect of inevitability — i.e., the aspect of inevitability given the
circumstances and the causing events. Seventh, the two theses lately
mentioned jointly explain the phenomenological mutual exclusion described in
the fourth thesis: this exclusion results from the core optionality aspect of
agentive phenomenology on one hand, and from the inevitability aspect of the
15

Many recent versions of metaphysical compatibilism about free agency not only ignore freeagency phenomenology altogether (including the phenomenological aspect of core optionality), but
also presuppose both (a) that the capacity to choose otherwise and do otherwise is incompatible with
state-causal determinism, and (b) that the ―can/could do otherwise‖ feature is simply never required
for genuine free agency. Compatibilists who affirm claim (b) typically do so because of the
conceivability of Frankfurt-style scenarios — and they then go on to affirm (a) by conceding to the
incompatibilists the latter‘s own favored construal of ‗can/could do otherwise‘. All this seems to me to
be seriously mistaken. Even if there are possible scenarios in which one exercises free agency even
though it is not the case (because of a preempted potential cause waiting in the wings) that one
can/could do otherwise, it doesn‘t begin to follow that the capacity to do otherwise is never required
for genuine free agency. On the contrary, that capacity remains a defeasibly necessary condition for
free agency, Frankfurt-style cases notwithstanding. My three biggest complaints about dominant
versions of metaphysical compatibilism in the recent philosophical literature are (1) that they ignore
free-agency phenomenology, (2) that they grossly overestimate the (quite limited) significance of
Frankfurt-style scenarios, and (3) that they concede to incompatibilists the contention that if
determinism is true then people can never choose or act differently than they actually do choose and
act.

Terry Horgan – The Phenomenology of Agency and Freedom

93

phenomenology of state-causation on the other hand. One cannot experience
an item of one‘s own behavior both as inevitable and as something that one
could have refrained from doing.
Eighth, at the level of judgmental intentional content, the concept of free
agency involves a feature that is probably not exhibited by the free-agency
aspect of presentational intentional content — viz., implicit contextual
parameters that determine, in context-specific ways, contextually operative
standards of satisfaction. For instance, in many contexts the standards operate
in such a way that an action performed under extreme coercion — e.g., with a
gun in one‘s face — do not count as free. I.e., under the contextually operative
standards, the judgment that such an action is not free is correct. 16 (In other
contexts, however, the concept of freedom is correctly used in such a way that
its satisfaction conditions coincide with those for the core optionality aspect of
sensory-experiential intentional content — for instance, when one says ―I could
have refused to give the gunman my wallet, although that would have been a
foolhardy thing to do; thus, I exercised freedom of choice in giving it to him‖).
Ninth, the implicit contextual parameters governing the judgmental
concept of free agency can take on a limit-case setting in certain contexts of
judgment or conversation — i.e., a parameter-setting under which an item of
behavior counts as a free action only if (i) it is not state-causally determined,
and (ii) it comes about as a result of metaphysical-libertarian ―agent causation‖
involving the self as a godlike unmoved mover.
Tenth, the satisfaction conditions for presentational free-agency
intentional content — i.e., for free-agency phenomenology — coincide with
certain non-limit-case, compatibilist, satisfaction conditions for judgmental
free-agency intentional content. The satisfaction conditions for agentive
phenomenology do not coincide with the incompatibilist satisfaction
conditions that accrue to judgmental free-agency intentional content when the
implicit parameters at work in the judgmental concept of free agency have
extremal, limit-case, settings.
Eleventh, the metaphysics of free agency is constrained by the intentional
content of free-agency phenomenology, and thus is also constrained by the
(matching) intentional content of everyday, non-limit-case, ascriptions of free
agency. So, since the phenomenological content and the conceptual content
16
Such judgments will normally be keyed to certain aspects of phenomenology too, aspects that
are superimposed upon the underlying phenomenology of core optionality — e.g., the phenomenology
of duress under threat, the phenomenology of moral imperativeness, and the like.

94

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

are compatibilist, free agency itself is a phenomenon that is compatible with
state-causal determinism.
Elsewhere, sometimes collaboratively, I have set forth arguments in support
of the various theses constituting this version of package-deal compatibilism.
Contextualist compatibilism about the judgmental concept of freedom, in a
form that acknowledges limit-case parameter-settings that are incompatibilist,
is defended in Horgan (1979), Graham and Horgan (1994), Henderson and
Horgan (2000), and Horgan (forthcoming). Other aspects of the full packagedeal are defended in Horgan (2007a, 2007b, in press-a, in press-b), and in
Horgan and Timmons (in press). I will not argue for the position here, because
of space limitations.
I do recognize that when one attends introspectively to one‘s free-agency
phenomenology, with its presentational aspect of self-as-source which itself
includes the aspect of freedom as an essential component, and when one
simultaneously asks reflectively whether the veridicality of this phenomenology
requires one to be an ―agent cause‖ in the sense espoused by metaphysical
libertarianism, one feels some tendency to judge that the answer to this
question is Yes. If the position I have sketched is correct, then this tendency
embodies a mistake: the satisfaction conditions of free-agency agentive
phenomenology do not require heavyweight, metaphysical libertarian, ―agentcausal freedom,‖ and do not require the falsity of state-causal determinism. I
certainly acknowledge that a theoretically adequate version of package-deal
compatibilism should provide a plausible explanation of this mistaken
judgment-tendency — an explanation of why the tendency arises so strongly
and so naturally, once the compatibility issue is explicitly raised. I have
addressed this challenge elsewhere, e.g., Horgan (2007a, 2007b, in press-a,
in press-b). Although I lack the space here to summarize the ―respectful
debunking‖ explanation I have offered for incompatibilist judgment
tendencies, let me just say that my proposed explanation draws on two
principal resources: first, that fact, already stressed, that agentive
phenomenology and the phenomenology of state-causation are mutually
exclusionary, and second, the contextualist element that I claim is operative in
judgmental attributions of free agency.
So the version of package deal compatibilism I favor, which is contextualist
about the concept of free agency, allows for a fairly plausible explanation of the
incompatibilist-leaning judgment-tendencies that naturally tend to arise when
one asks whether free-agency phenomenology is compatible with state-causal

Terry Horgan – The Phenomenology of Agency and Freedom

95

determinism. When one factors this into the mix, alongside the various
convergent forms of largely abductive evidence (not set forth here) that favor
both phenomenological compatibilism and conceptual compatibilism, I think a
strong case can be made in support of an overall position that is
phenomenologically compatibilist, conceptually compatibilist about everyday
free-agency ascriptions, and metaphysically compatibilist.
5. CONCLUSION
Although the rich and distinctive phenomenology of agency went largely
ignored in mainstream philosophy of mind in the twentieth century, it is now
receiving renewed attention in that branch of philosophy. Agentive
phenomenology also received far too little attention in twentieth-century
philosophical discussions of freedom and determinism — with advocates of
compatibilism probably being the worst offenders. It is time to bring the
phenomenology of free agency explicitly into the freedom/determinism
debate, and to accord it significant weight. A complete treatment of the
freedom/determinism issue should address three topics together: the
phenomenology of free agency, the concept of free agency, and the
metaphysics of free agency. All else equal, a package-deal treatment of these
topics should be strongly internally coherent — i.e., it should treat the
phenomenology of free agency as strongly constraining both the concept of
free agency and the metaphysics of freedom. This theoretical desideratum
would spell big trouble for compatibilism if one could reliably ascertain,
directly on the basis of introspection, that free-agency phenomenology has
metaphysical-libertarian satisfaction conditions. But there are strong reasons
to think that introspection is simply not that powerful — a fact that opens up
room for abductive considerations to enter the dialectical mix. Once such
considerations are properly brought to bear and given their due epistemic
weight, I maintain, the overall package-deal position that will look best in terms
of theoretical cost-benefit evaluation will be phenomenologically compatibilist,
conceptually compatibilist (yet also conceptually contextualist), and
metaphysically compatibilist.

96

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011
REFERENCES

Chisholm, R. (1964). Human freedom and the self. The Langley lecture
(University of Kansas). Reprinted in J. Feinberg & R. Shafer-Landau
(Eds.) (2002), Reason and responsibility: Readings in some basic
problems of philosophy, 11th Edition, (pp. 492-499). New York:
Wadsworth.
Chisholm, R. (1995). Agents, causes, and events: The problem of free will. In
T. O‘Connor (Ed.), Agents, Causes, and Events: Essays on
Indeterminism and Free Will, (pp. 95-100). New York: Oxford
University Press.
Frankfurt, H. (1969). Alternate possibilities and moral responsibility. Journal
of Philosophy, 66(3), 829-839.
Graham, G., & Horgan, T. (1994). Southern fundamentalism and the end of
philosophy. Philosophical Issues, 5, 219-247.
Henderson, D., & Horgan, T. (2000). What is a priori and what is it good for?
Southern Journal of Philosophy, Spindel Conference Supplement, 38,
51-86.
Horgan, T. (2007a). Agentive phenomenology and the limits of introspection.
Psyche, 13(2).
Horgan, T. (2007b). Mental causation and the agent-exclusion problem.
Erkenntnis, 67(2), 183-200.
Horgan, T. (in press-a). Causal compatibilism about agentive phenomenology.
In T. Horgan, M. Sabates & D. Sosa (Eds.), Supervenience and Mind:
Essays in Honor of Jaegwon Kim. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Horgan, T. (in press-b). Introspection about phenomenal consciousness:
Running the gamut from infallibility to impotence. In D. Smithies & D.
Stoljar (Eds.), Introspection and consciousness. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Horgan, T., Tienson, J., & Graham, G. (2003). The phenomenology of firstperson agency. In S. Walter and H. D. Heckmann (Eds.), Physicalism
and Mental Causation: The Metaphysics of Mind and Action, (pp. 323340). Exeter: Imprint Academic.

Terry Horgan – The Phenomenology of Agency and Freedom

97

Horgan, T., & Timmons, M. (in press). Introspection and the phenomenology
of free will: Problems and prospects. Journal of Consciousness Studies.
Nahmias, E., Morris, S., Nadelhoffer, T., & Turner, J. (2004). The
phenomenology of free will. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 11(7-8),
162-179.
Stephens, G. L., & Graham, G. (2000). When Self-Consciousness Breaks:
Alien Voices and Inserted Thoughts. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

98

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

The Decisions of Consciousness
and the Consciousness of Decisions
Mauro Maldonato*

mauro.maldonato@unibas.it
ABSTRACT

For a long time the study of motor decision making has essentially been based
on the mechanical neurophysiology of the connections between nervous
structures. Empirical research and theoretical reflection have in this way been
dominated by reflexological and cybernetic models without plausible
alternatives. The tendency to separate the mental functions from the body,
almost as though they were independent systems, has at times had negative
consequences. Indeed, whether dealing with language or other cognitive and
perceptive functions, the mind is profoundly influenced by the motor sphere,
the oldest from an evolutionary point of view, which depends on the cortex, the
basal ganglia and the cerebellum that contain motor, motivational and
cognitive components. The ever-growing debate in the cognitive
neurosciences, the philosophy of the mind and phenomenology shows that the
time for a conceptual and epistemological change is growing nearer, a change
which puts the idea of embodied consciousness and cognition back at the
centre of the research being conducted.

1. THE MATRIX CONTROVERSIES OF THE MOTOR ACTION MODELS
In the most famous of his Croonian Lectures, the English neurologist John
Hughlings Jackson, father of modern neurology, noted:
That activities of the highest, least organised, nervous arrangement, during
which consciousness, or most vivid consciousness arises, are determined by
activities of lower, more organised, nervous arrangements, I firmly believed. As
I have said, in effect, states of consciousness attend survival of the fittest states
* University of Basilicata

100

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

of centres representing all parts of the organism as one whole. Roughly
speaking, the highest nervous states are determined from below, and not by
autocratic faculties acting upon the highest part of the highest centre. (Jackson
1884, p. 706)

Despite the many, and often incorrect, interpretations of his philosophy,
Jackson can be given the undeniable credit for having moved the
neurophysiological debate of the 1800‟s from a relational life model founded
on reflection (the automatic response that causes the simultaneity of forms and
movements), to another model in which motor functions descend mechanically
from cortical structures, which are the biological basis of rationality,
imagination, logical thought and still more. For more than two centuries, reflex
had been the dominant paradigm not only for philosophers such as Descartes,
but also for the majority of neuroanatomists, neurophysiologists and
neuropathologists. Jackson considered identifying the site of a lesion, a
functional centre and anatomic location, to be erroneous, because ontogenesis
realizes but above all directs the organism, integrating at a higher level that
which is integrated at a lower level. At the centre of his research are the
functional metamorphoses, whose temporality impresses rhythm and
movement, guiding the relational life of every living being. Time, in fact, does
not influence only the development of forms and movements, but also assigns a
functional hierarchy to them.
The Jacksonian idea, according to which the evolution of the nervous
system is characterized by ascending dynamics – from the more organized
lower levels towards the less organized higher centres of the highest level (from
the most automatic to the most voluntary) – introduced a new dimension into
the debate of that age on the organization of the nervous system (1884). A
concept that is so conditioned by the idea of evolution joins the notion of
overlap to that of hierarchy, the notion of mechanisms to that of integration. In
his vision the spatial (nervous) structures are subordinate to the flow of time: in
this way, that which is lower (that is, more fixed) is subordinate to that which is
higher (more mobile). The natural finalism in the hierarchy of nervous
functions confers upon the concept of integration logical-sequential
characteristics, according to which the lower or instrumental functions
controlled by the highest level become subordinate like words to syntax, or
means to an end (Ey 1947).
In spite of its apparent mechanism, the Jacksonian idea of an
autonomous ontogenesis of relational life makes the principle of hierarchy

M. Maldonato – The Decisions of Consciousness and the Consciousness of Decisions 101

dynamic and, therefore, functional to that same process of integration: which is
then nothing other than a sensorimotor coordination, a link between the
present and the past, between imagined and perceived. In this sense, that
which defines the highest level is its contingency (its freedom), and the same
concepts of “automatic” and “voluntary” represent the levels of the functional
hierarchy, whose morphology and nervous structures represent the free
movement of relational life (Jackson 1932). The very notion of a “centre of
consciousness” – the most controversial Jacksonian theme, considered by
some to be the stumbling block of his hierarchical theory of functions –
remains the most important issue in the current neuroscientific debate.
Consciousness, the highest level of the evolution of the nervous system is, for
Jackson, the structural-functional basis for the unfurling of the mind‟s
activities: its very organization (Evans 1972). The order of consciousness is, in
fact, sustained by multiple horizontal levels, every one of which is in a
structural and functional continuum with various phenomenological
occurrences (Maldonato 2009). It is such characteristic that allows for the
integration processes of the activities of thought and of the programming of
motor activities (even when only representational). Planning an action, in fact,
always requires predicting its consequences, and this type of prediction is the
result of model action activity. In this sense, thought and motility are tightly
linked on both a phylogenetic level as well as an ontogenetic one. This link has
over time produced an enormous archive of extraordinarily fluid motor
repertories. The progressive refinement of the relation between the motor and
the pre-motor cortex is at the origin not only of motor behaviours (such as the
ability to construct and manipulate objects), but also of the acquisition of
competences from structures such as Broca‟s area and the basal ganglia, which
control the motor aspects of language. It must be said, however, that language
is not an individual and autonomous system, but rather the product of a
sophisticated coordination between systems and cerebral areas that are tied to
the representation of objects, to perception and to the very motility of the
body.
2.

THE SENSE OF MOVEMENT AND EMBODIED ACTION

On a phylogenetic level sensory and motor activities – the basis of the
development of various cognitive functions – have the longest history. The

102

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

wide range of structures in the human nervous system show, on the one hand,
how complex the evolution of motor control has been and, on the other hand,
its impact on other functions: from language to motility and so forth
(Jeannerod1994). The motor and muscular systems are high-priority systems
and their activation triggers the inhibition of the perceptive, sensory, attention,
and other systems. This fact is even more readily apparent if one considers that,
in animals, movements are linked to the carrying out of actions essential to
survival, such as escape, attack, searching for food and the selection of a sexual
partner. The activation of some muscles (even when only activated potentially,
such as in the case of muscle tensing) involves the activation of other muscles,
the reduction of sensations, the limitation of the flow of ideas and still more.
This means that motility has not only direct motor consequences but also
general effects on other systems. While it is true that movements depend
largely on cerebral motor areas, it is in fact the whole nervous system that
presides over the control of motility (MacKay 1987). The same cortical areas
that decode sensations – through which we perceive muscle tension or the
position of a limb – inform us retroactively about the execution of a particular
movement. Without this function the movement would be imprecise, rough or
completely blocked.
As it is known, muscles are controlled by the pyramidal neurons of the
motor cortex, which are connected through the spinal marrow to motor
neurons situated therein in order to reach, from there, the peripheral muscular
fibres. Every muscular movement – such as moving a finger, shaking hands,
crying and so on – involves the activation of the nervous-muscular neuron-fibre
sequence. However, motor action is extraordinarily more complicated. In fact,
if it is true that the composition and harmony of movements is guaranteed by
the base ganglions and by the cerebellum – it is in these structures that the
memory of the sequence of muscular actions are conserved, actions that allow
us, for example, to centre in on a target with an arrow, pick a small flower, or
dial a number – they constitute only the infrastructures of the movement: the
planning and the execution of the movement depend, instead, on other cortical
and subcortical structures (Adams et al. 2005).
Today, the relationship between the complexity of a motor action and the
number and type of nervous structures involved is clearer. It has been
observed, for example, that even simple and localized movements like the
flexing or the stretching of the index finger of the right hand involve the
activation of the primary motor area and of the somatosensory area of the

M. Maldonato – The Decisions of Consciousness and the Consciousness of Decisions 103

contralateral hemisphere. These are areas that are activated when a more
complex movement is in action: for example, when subjects are asked to touch
the tip of their right thumb to, in the following order, the tip of their index
finger, middle finger, ring finger and pinkie finger of the same hand; although
it must be said that in this case even the supplementary motor cortex and the
prefrontal cortex are activated, the latter being activated even when the
movement is simply imagined. In the case of the imagination and execution of a
complex movement, the prefrontal area and the supplementary cortex are
bilaterally activated, that is to say that there is activation even in the hemisphere
not involved in the execution or imagination of the motor act (Brown and
Marsden, 2001). This bilateral stimulus could correspond to the activation of
an abstract plan of the movement or reflect a variety of motor plans oriented
towards the same goal.
There are studies that indicate that it is first the prefrontal cortex (the
decision to act) that is activated, then the supplementary cortex (involved in the
plan of action) and, finally, the motor cortex, which implements and modulates
the action based on the proprioceptive information that reaches the
somatosensory cortex (Brown and Marsden 2001). Ultimately, the sequence of
movements is due to two different circuits: an internal one, which involves the
supplementary area, the basal ganglia and the temporal lobe, and takes over
when a motor ability becomes habitual because it is guided by an internal
representation of the action; and an external one, which includes the parietal
lobe, the premotor area and the cerebellum, involved in direct movements or
movements guided by spatial representations.
3. THE PREDICTIVE BRAIN
The execution of remarkably complex actions, such as those of a musician at a
piano, is much more articulated than what experiments on the planning and
execution of simpler movements reveal, contextualized and guided as they are
by the judgement of the performer. All of this was already clear to Lotze who, in
the mid 1800‟s, wrote:
We see in writing or piano-playing a great number of very complicated
movements following quickly one upon the other, the instigative
representations of which remained scarcely a second in consciousness,
certainly not long enough to awaken any other volition than the general one of

104

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

resigning one‟s self without reserve to the passing over of representation into
action. All the acts of our daily life happen in this wise: Our standing up,
walking, talking, all this never demands a distinct impulse of the will, but is
adequately brought about by the pure flux of thought. ( quoted in: James 1952,
p. 791)

Beyond the musical interpretation and the talent of the single performer, all of
the components of that musical ability derive from the complex interaction
between motor learning, temporal processing and sequencing, in which a
crucial role is played by the relations between the cortex and the basal ganglia.
In reality, the line between perception and action is not well-drawn as one
might believe when basing oneself on the description of the execution of a
motor task (Berthoz 1993). If the cerebral structures‟ capacity for processing
is considered, rather than their specific function in the execution of a task, not
only does the crucial role played by the parietal lobe in the perception and
execution of an action become clear, but also that of the basal ganglia in the
sequencing of movements, language or ideation. Despite being parts of
different systems, perception and action constitute integrated functions. In
light of these considerations, subordinating motor functions to higher
cognitive activities and classifying the body as an inferior entity to that of the
mind appears implausible. The body and its movements are at the origin of the
abstract behaviours of which we are proud, beginning with language which
gives form to our mind. For example, the evolution of some motor behaviour,
such as the ability to construct and manipulate objects, selected an order of
movements based on a sequence of cause-effect links. This led the motor and
premotor cortex to develop a growing ability to generate interlinking
movements, inducing even Broca‟s area to produce the verbal gestures and the
sequences of syllables that are at the basis of communication. In this sense,
pronouncing a sequence of syllables is like sculpting bronze or sharpening a
blade: this control of motility preceded language, but also contributed to
structuring it as an internal motor logic (Oliverio 2009).
It is rather probable that the logic of the body and of its movements
constituted the foundation on which, over time, the operational logic of
language structured itself. In terms of physical experiences many motor
operations have been so important that they have progressively supplied the
infrastructures for the development of symbols and metaphors used in
language, translating themselves over time into classes of perceptions,
behaviours and universal linguistic conventions (Lakoff and Johnson 1980).

M. Maldonato – The Decisions of Consciousness and the Consciousness of Decisions 105

4. EMBODIED MEMORIES, GOALS AND PLANS OF ACTION
Perception is, by its very nature, multisensory. It uses multiple reference
systems adapted to the actions in progress. In fact, while receptors measure
derivatives, the brain mobilizes a repertory of prototypes of forms, faces,
objects, and even synergies of movements. During its progress, evolution
selected simplifying laws in the geometric, kinematic and dynamic properties
of natural movements. But perception is also predictive, thanks above all to
memory, which uses the consequences of past actions in order to predict those
of future actions (Berthoz 1998). Whether shaking hands, writing a letter or
performing another action, every executive act requires a behaviour directed
towards a goal, a behaviour made possible thanks to the control of a series of
nervous structures and mental processes that process information.
Because of its complex relations with the other cortical areas and
subcortical nuclei, the frontal cortex is at the centre of the executive functions:
from the memory of work (which allows one to remember the beginning of a
sentence once completed) to the behaviour directed towards a goal (which
implies a continuous re-modulation of information with the passage from one
plan of action to another and the continuous verification of the consequences
of our actions). Such functions depend on the prefrontal cortex (in human
beings it accounts for approximately half of the frontal lobe), which being
linked to all of the other cortical areas and to a large part of the subcortical
structures is directly or indirectly involved in all of the executive functions
(Miller et al. 2002).
But how do we succeed in formulating plans of action corresponding to
specific goals? A plan of action involves a hierarchy of relevant actions and
irrelevant actions. In addition, it can be part of a vast plan consisting of
immediate objectives or of sub-plans matching the principal objective. These
complex functions involve the planning and the choice of an action, the
monitoring of its execution, and the reinforcement tied to the reaching of the
desired goal.
Since the by now classic studies of Leonardo Bianchi (1889) on the effects
of bilateral ablation of the prefrontal cortex of primates, the executive
functions of the motor system have been attributed to the prefrontal lobes. In
order to fully grasp the subtle and complex relations of the prefrontal cortex
with behaviour it is useful to understand the distinction between the lateral
prefrontal cortex and the medial prefrontal cortex. The lateral prefrontal cortex

106

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

can be further subdivided into the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (which selects
the information) and the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (which stores the
information). The medial prefrontal cortex can also be subdivided into two
important areas: the anterior cingulate cortex (which identifies the errors of
specific behaviour) and the superior frontal gyrus which seems to be involved
in the selection and the execution of a task (Rushworth et al. 2004). In reality,
these anatomic-functional subdivisions and their implications on behaviour are
not always so clear-cut. In fact, between anatomic areas and functions it is not
infrequent that overlapping levels are observed, a fact that encourages
researchers to be very careful when defining the role of different frontal and
prefrontal areas.
This intricate neuronal geography propels us to reconsider the integration
processes between frontal and prefrontal areas, whose collaboration creates
that complex phenomenon called motor control, the dynamics of which are in
some ways the opposite of those of perception. Indeed, if perceiving means
putting the external world into an image, acting means representing to oneself
the desired consequences of a movement which is being carried out while it is
being carried out. In this sense, the execution of a movement has to do with a
representation of the environment, beginning with the information made
available by the parietal cortex and by the hippocampus which, as is known, is a
structure involved in numerous aspects of spatial memory (Oliverio
2008).This information passes to the premotor cortex which, so to say,
„projects‟ the movement and, finally, to the motor cortex which carries out the
action.
As we have seen, motor control and its execution depend on cortical and
subcortical structures, among which we find the basal ganglia that play a
fundamental role in the control of spatial memories, of motor actions in a
specific context and of the motivational components of learning. In this
schema, the cortex and the basal ganglia plan the action, the execution of the
movement and the control over its state of execution, in close collaboration
with the cerebellum, the red nucleus, the striated muscle and other subcortical
structures. For almost a century and a half, motor functions were instead
considered to be directly dependent on superordinate structures, such as
cortical ones, considered to be the basis of higher cognitive activities:
rationality, creativity, and thought. In reality, thought activities and motor
activities (even when only representational) are always closely correlated.
Whether imagining, planning or acting, it is always the same area of the brain

M. Maldonato – The Decisions of Consciousness and the Consciousness of Decisions 107

that is activated. The planning of an action always, in fact, requires the
prediction of its consequences, and this type of prediction is the result of
model action activity (Oliverio 2008).
The tendency to separate mental functions from the body has negative
consequences. Whether dealing with language or other cognitive and
perceptive functions, the mind is profoundly influenced by the motor sphere,
which in turn depends on older structures such as the cortex, the basal ganglia
and the cerebellum. The prevalence of a hierarchically superordinate vision of
the mind (to the detriment of the motor sphere) has depended on true and
proper philosophical misunderstandings, which are worth examining briefly. In
contrast with the arguments that identify him as the greatest driving force
behind modern philosophical dualism, Descartes shed light on the intimate
and immediate relationship between mind and body. In the sixth of the
Meditations on First Philosophy, the French philosopher argues that nature
teaches him
[…] through these very feelings of pain, hunger, thirst, and so forth, that I am
not present in my body only as a pilot is present in a ship, but that I am very
closely conjoined to it and, so to speak, fused with it, so as to form a single
entity with it. For otherwise, when the body is injured, I, who am nothing other
than a thinking thing, would not feel pain as a result, but would perceive the
injury purely intellectually, as the pilot perceives by sight any damage occurring
to his ship; and when the body lacks food or drink, I would understand this
explicitly, instead of having confused feelings of hunger and thirst. (Descartes
2008, p. 57)

Descartes affirms that we are joined to our body, that the mind is mixed with
the body as though it were one entity and that we are conscious of what
happens in our body, although in a different way from how we are conscious of
objects external to the body. In short, we do not look at our body as we look at
other things. We do not have to check, for example, the position of our legs or
whether we have our hands in our pockets. We know this information without
having to verify it. Unlike those patients who, because of a vascular accident or
another cerebral lesion, have lost the sense of the body‟s movement and of their
own position in the space around them. As is known, in order to be aware of
movement and of their own position these patients have to check the position
of their own body, just as the Cartesian “pilot” looks at his own ship.
Beyond the necessary rereading of Cartesian philosophy, in evolutionary
terms the human nervous system developed mainly in order to coordinate

108

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

perception and body movements and to increase efficiency in activities
essential for survival such as hunting, coupling and raising offspring. As
paradoxical as it may seem, evolution has favoured the development of
knowledge for efficient action, not so much for reflection. James asks himself
whether the simple idea of the effects of a movement is a sufficient motor
stimulus or whether there is an additional mental antecedent, such as a
decision or some other analogous phenomenon, in order to which there may be
movement (James 1952). He advances the idea that a movement is always
associated with a representation of its consequences and that every
representation of a movement reawakens with the maximum level of intensity
the real movement, every time it is not impeded by an antagonistic idea
simultaneously present in the mind (James 1952). Following along the lines of
Lotze, who believed that the imagination of a movement activated the same
structures involved in its execution, James suggests that consciousness is
always the consciousness of an action.
5.

DECISIONS OF CONSCIOUSNESS

During its different evolutionary stages biological life on our planet produced
two main adaptations: to begin with it imprinted elements into the genetic code
that would facilitate the periodic variability to environmental changes such as
light, temperature, precipitation and still others; and secondly it equipped the
animal nervous system with structures that would guarantee the sensory and
motor activities developed through time (Maldonato and Dell‟Orco 2010).
Compared with higher animals human beings also have an internal
representation of time, and this originates in the birth of conscious experience.
It is through the conscious perception of time that, over the course of
evolution, human beings have been able to achieve enormous adaptive and
reproductive advantages.
As a neurobiological phenomenon distinct from awareness, consciousness
originates in the cortical-subcortical space, even if it is only in the cerebral
cortex that the experience of time is realized, that is, the unmistakable
individual impression of continuous past experiences that is bound together
with future expectations. And it is always in the cortex that the unification of
time takes place, realized through the combination between nervous circuits
and our conscious experience, to which we can add through introspection and

M. Maldonato – The Decisions of Consciousness and the Consciousness of Decisions 109

accounts in the „third person‟. Although it is an essential characteristic of
consciousness, we know little about time. These notions revolve around the
categories of succession and duration (Fraisse 1987). Succession implies the
eminently cognitive distinction between the simultaneity and the sequence of a
number of events – although not in an absolute sense, because when temporal
scales of tens of milliseconds are used the reliability of our judgement becomes
more uncertain. Duration instead implies the ability to understand sequential
perceptive events as though they were simultaneous, that is to „feel‟ the interval
of time without discontinuity. In Time and Free Will: An Essay on the
Immediate Data of Consciousness (1910), Bergson problematizes the
spatialized vision of duration of the positive sciences by identifying two
dimensions of conscious life: a superficial I, which is built on cognitive issues;
and a fundamental I, which is built through the synthesis of consciousness.
Before Bergson, it was the Eleatic philosophers and later Saint Augustine (The
Confessions) who shed light on the problematic nature of the concept of the
Present and who questioned time as the succession of present moments. How
short can a moment be, that changing interval that flows from the past to the
future and vice versa? According to James (1952) our consciousness of time
originates in different speeds, which depend on the number of events or
changes that we experience in a certain interval (neuroscientists would speak
of a minimum necessary time for the emergence of neural events correlated to a
cognitive event). This immaterial structure has been interpreted as the
phenomenon of surfaces of a neural integration at wide range, tied to a diffuse
synchrony: this being an interpretation that could clarify, through a dynamic
reconstruction, both the invariant nature of events and the synchronization
process of tangible experience (Petitot et al. 1999).
In reality, there is no agreement on the nature of the processes at the basis
of succession and duration. In general, the most accredited hypothesis is that
the perception of time takes place around the following orders of magnitude:
below one hundred milliseconds it is possible to distinguish the beginning and
the end of an event, its instantaneity; past five seconds the perception of the
duration seems to be cut in half by memory (Fraisse 1987). The „moments‟ of
this deceptive present are believed to oscillate between 100 milliseconds and 5
seconds. Other hypotheses indicate that at the foundation of consciousness is a
mechanism of temporal unification of neuronal activities that synchronizes
impulses in medium oscillations of 40 Hz (Crick 1994). These oscillations are
not believed to codify additional information, but they are thought to unify part

110

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

of the existing information in a coherent perception. Our consciousness,
therefore, would not be generated by the action of a specific zone of the brain,
but by the concomitant activation of a series of neurons distributed in the
brain. Such oscillations are a necessary but insufficient condition for the
production of conscious experience.
The phenomena of general neuronal activity as seen by EEG originate in
the activation, parallel inhibition and synchronization of multiple neuronal
circuits. This is a dynamic balance, in which every event, lasting from 100 to
200 milliseconds, reflects the activation of a distributed and parallel neural
network that is translated into the contents of consciousness, such as an
abstract thought or a visual image (Le Van Quyen et al. 1997). In certain
conditions, there are areas in which neuronal oscillations play a crucial role. In
addition, certain states of consciousness (alertness, falling asleep, waking, etc.)
and pathologies such as depression, epilepsy, and Parkinson‟s disease cause
different registrations of thalamic-cortical rhythms (Charney et al. 1996),
whose duration varies with the variation of clinical populations. For example,
in paranoid schizophrenics they are shorter (Torrey et al. 1994), whereas in
manic patients the rhythms show continuous changes (Goodwin and Jamison
1990) and so on. It is not implausible to maintain that these neuronal
harmonies and discords give way to the emerging phenomena that make
subjective experience possible. A thus-constructed model would allow us to do
without metaphysical entities such as the central theatre of Baars (1997), the
homunculus of Dennett (2005) or any other metaphysical entity, letting the I
of neuronal organization emerge and, therefore, the subjectivity of the physical
brain. Careful reflection on the concept of temporality encourages the
reconsideration of some aspects of consciousness that seem obvious. The first
aspect to be reconsidered is the unity of conscious experience, which
disappears as soon as it is considered on the basis of time scales of milliseconds
(Roeckelein 2000); the second is immediacy, a phenomenon sometimes too
quickly attributed to consciousness. We have already seen previously how
continuous visual information is connected to different processes that require
certain intervals of time. Furthermore, the milliseconds relating to the duration
of these processes are irrelevant (Richelle et al. 1985) and no piece of
information can reach consciousness until at least half a second has passed
after its arrival in the cerebral cortex.
In reality, experimental research has yet to propose convincing solutions
for the problem of the experience of time. This is perhaps because this

M. Maldonato – The Decisions of Consciousness and the Consciousness of Decisions 111

disconcerting enigma is different from the one relating to the cerebral areas
and structures that are at the origin of phenomena and experiences, which can
be studied today through brain imaging methods (Posner and Raichle 1994,
Zeman 2001). As the origin and structure of consciousness, temporality joins
together the different levels of neurophysiological and phenomenological
reflection. An efficient research method is composed of cerebral activation
studies (PET, fMRI, MEG, event-related potentials) which allow for the
exploration of the central nervous system before and after an adequate
stimulus: the presentation of ambiguous visual stimuli, the transition from
general anaesthesia to reawakening, the passage from a vegetative state to a
minimally conscious one and still others. For example, the rekindling of the
activity of the re-entering thalamic-cortical circuits, in a patient who was first
„vegetative‟ and then „minimally conscious‟, shows the importance of the role
of the connections between the intralaminar nuclei of the thalamus and the
frontal and parietal associative cortices in the maintaining of consciousness.
Here, a fundamental task is performed by the Ascending Reticular Activating
System (ARAS) – a system composed of the reticular formation, the thalamus
and the thalamic-cortical projection system – which presides over the diffuse
activation of the cerebral cortex in states of wakefulness and alertness, states
necessary for the formulation of the contents of consciousness (Moruzzi and
Magoun 1949). This is a distributed system, not circumscribable to the
reticular nuclei of the encephalic trunk (Plum and Posner 2000) that projects
itself in a descending direction towards the spinal cord and, in an ascending
direction, towards the cerebral hemispheres. Each one of its constituent nuclei
has particular anatomic, physiological and biochemical characteristics: those
that modulate the functioning of the cortex reside in the upper two thirds of the
pontine tegmentum, others in the lower third of the pons and in the bulb – that
is why, in stroke patients, isolated lesions of the pons can cause a coma even in
the absence of mesencephalic damages (Wilkinson and Lennox 2007). It is not
without significance, moreover, that some nuclei of the cerebral trunk surpass
the thalamus in order to connect directly with the frontal-basal cortex, from
which the bilateral projections diffused to the cerebral cortex originate; or that
other nuclei go beyond both the thalamus and the frontal-basal cortex to reach
wide areas of the cerebral cortex; or that, finally, other nuclei are connected
with the reticular nucleus of the thalamus and not with the intralaminar nuclei.
This unique neuronal geography allows us to consider the functions of the
ARAS as being much more wide-ranging and complex than those linked to the

112

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

simple „desynchronization‟ of the cerebral cortex (Mancia 1994), also essential
to the state of wakefulness and attention. Then there are the non-specific
thalamic-cortical projections, such as the activation of the thalamic-cortical
circuit at a high oscillatory frequency, projections fundamental to the essential
functions of consciousness. Studies on cerebral activation (Laureys et al.
2004) have demonstrated that, in patients in a vegetative state (a state of
wakefulness without content), the connectivity between cerebral areas that are
normally connected is lost: in particular, between the primary cortical areas
and the associative multimodal ones (the prefrontal, premotor, and parietaltemporal areas, the cortex of the posterior and precuneous gyrus cingulate) or
between these cortical areas and the thalami. This leads one to wonder whether
the exclusive role of ARAS in determining consciousness should not be
reconsidered, rethinking consciousness as the effect of the interaction of an
enormous variety of qualia and of distinct perceptions implied in the
distributed and dynamic activity of the thalamic-cortical nucleus.
In general, consciousness is a stable and at the same time variable temporal
event generated by an interaction of different levels – neural infrastructures,
qualitative-subjective experiences and functional units – that are logically
interrelated. This is a structure-function that is radically different from the
other phenomena of the natural world (Maldonato 2007), one that emerges
through an order in which the schema produced by the system‟s elements
cannot be explained by the individual action of the system‟s single
constituents, but rather by the synergy between its elements: this being a
phenomenon that can be found both in elementary environments and in
extremely complex ones.
There now seems to be a general consensus that at the basis of
consciousness there is synchronization between different cerebral regions, and
that this form of temporalization constitutes a deciding factor in the integration
processes of neuronal information. However, the question remains open as to
the nature of the passage from the neuronal level to that of perception and,
finally, consciousness. It is not enough, in fact, to postulate an explanatory
principle (chronological time or any other synchronizing function) without
taking the mechanisms for accomplishment into account. Varela (1996) has
long insisted on the necessity of considering consciousness as an emerging
phenomenon, in which local events can give rise to properties or global objects
in a reciprocal causal co-involvement. These are structural invariants
incompatible with the continuous representation of linear time inherited from

M. Maldonato – The Decisions of Consciousness and the Consciousness of Decisions 113

classical physics (Prigogine 1986, 1997). More recent theories on
consciousness hypothesize a minimum necessary amount of time for the
emergence of neural events that connect themselves to a cognitive event
(Dennett and Kinsbourne 1992). This temporality can plausibly be attributed
to long-range cerebral integration linked to diffuse synchrony: an event that
would shed light on phenomenological invariants, restoring tangible
experiential content to the synchronization process.
For a long time scholars focused on the concept of the unitarity and the
permanence of consciousness in time. Today, instead, numerous studies show
that consciousness is a plural process that encompasses different contents in
itself simultaneously, each element of which has its own intentionality (Zeki
2003, O‟Brien and Opie 2000).
But what are the biophysical mechanisms of the unified experience of
consciousness? And how does this internal plurality unify the different
contents? There seem to be two possible models. The first model hypothesizes
that consciousness is generated by a central neural system, in which duly
integrated information is first represented and then brought to consciousness.
In this schema consciousness appears to be the result of the work of the central
neural system that generates different contents and representations, a
phenomenon taking place exclusively in the brain. In the second model the
simultaneous co-activation of the contents generated by distributed structures
in the brain are believed to give rise, ultimately, to the phenomenon of
consciousness. Consciousness would in this way be generated by distributed
cerebral mechanisms – both cortical and subcortical – the contents of which,
each element being independent one from the other, are exposed to
intrasensory and intersensory (environmental) influences. The contents of the
distributed cerebral mechanisms and the intrasensory and intersensory
influences affect each other reciprocally and thus co-determine conscious
experience. It is in this fine line that the distinction between a unitary model
and a plural model of consciousness lies.
Ramachandran (2004) has a number of times discussed the plausibility of a
model that integrates visual, auditory, tactile and proprioceptive experiences as
well as other experiences. These individual spheres, in a relatively independent
way, can be altered or neutralized without influencing the other spheres.
Experimental evidence relating to the consequences of lesions and ablation of
cerebral areas show that if, on the one hand, it is possible to lose the capacity to
visually grasp movement, conserving however the other aspects of visual

114

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

experience (Zeki and Bartels 1998), on the other hand, it is possible to lose
the sensation of colour, without losing visual experience and the experience of
movement. Studies on the deficits caused by lesions on the level and kind of
functional specialization and cerebral localization have shown that the brain
works on a large scale, between procedures and domains that are reflected in
specific anatomical districts (primary visual processing in the occipital cortex,
auditory processing in the temporal cortex, planning and memory processing
in the frontal cortex), while specific functions are realized in well-demarcated
anatomical districts and locations (for example, the visual motor function takes
place in area V5 and that of colour in V4). The zones of the brain that program
particular informational content are those in which the contents come into
consciousness. For example, different events from a visual scene, presented
simultaneously, are not perceived with the same duration. This multiple
asynchrony seems to prove that consciousness is the integrated result of
countless micro events more than a unitary faculty (Zeki 2003).
But how can these multiple neural events restore to us the impression of a
unitary subjectivity? And which paths lead to the composition of the Self and of
consciousness? Concepts such as „unitary subjectivity‟ and the „Self‟ remain
problematic. Here, we will limit ourselves to affirming that the Self emerges
when the individual events produced by the brain are sufficiently
representational, coherent and close-knit. In the absence of neurological and
psychiatric disorders, we experience a structured world of distinct objects
ordered in space, organized according to regularities and contents within
meaningful spatial-temporal schemas: extramodal contents (colours, forms,
etc.) and intramodal contents (proprioceptive, auditory and visual). In reality
representational cohesion is not an invariant characteristic of conscious
experience, but the result of a selection through which the brain searches for
the path of its own integration. Ultimately, the Self has to do with a regulatory
activity of consciousness that processes and maintains such plurality in an
interweaving of local contents in contact with each other. In such a model,
consciousness appears not as a hierarchical entity, but as a multiple horizontal
entity, whose representational cohesion is carried out by thalamic-cortical and
cortico-cortical distributed circuits. All conscious experiences, beginning with
those that are qualitative (qualia), become unified within the field of
consciousness. In this sense, unity is implicit in qualitative subjectivity. But if
our consciousness is determined by the play between these innumerable
dynamics, then there are not only different conscious states unified in

M. Maldonato – The Decisions of Consciousness and the Consciousness of Decisions 115

subjectivity, but also aggregate underlying fields of consciousness. In other
words, the unitarity of consciousness follows subjectivity and quality because
there is no way to have subjectivity and quality without unity.
The issue of conscious subjectivity goes beyond the search for its neuronal
correlates and even beyond the conceptual contraposition between
consciousness and the unconscious. For example, in the phenomenon of vision
the methodologically relevant question certainly concerns the neural
coordinates of consciousness, but above all it regards the way in which visual
experiences enter and become part of the conscious sphere. If the
infrastructure behind the field of consciousness is the thalamic-cortical system
– which reprocesses the information originating from the different districts in
various sensory forms (visual, tactile, auditory and so on) – from its operational
neural levels one could remount to the structure of visual consciousness, of
qualia, of temporal experience and still more. Nevertheless, the brain cannot
generate conscious experience on its own: it is, in fact, only a necessary
condition so that countless neuronal micro events may generate conscious
perceptions of the world‟s objects (Varela et al. 1992). In this sense, an indepth study of consciousness requires multi-level explanatory criteria: a
quantitative-categorial criterion (attention, alertness, sleep, and coma); a
qualitative-dimensional criterion (subjective experiences such as sensations,
thoughts, and emotions); and a final criterion for the analysis of the different
synchronic (the field of consciousness) and diachronic (the I and personality)
types and levels of consciousness. At the present day, almost no one among
scholars maintains that consciousness is characterized by a strict alternation
between states of wakefulness and sleep. The constant variability of
consciousness is demonstrated by numerous situations: from the clear and
ready alertness of an airplane pilot to the attention levels of a student immersed
in speculation; from the concentration of a monk in contemplation to the labile
alertness of a drowsy or distracted individual. Something analogous can be said
of sleep, which through the study of EEG correlates can be analyzed according
to different qualitative and quantitative criteria (Mancia 1994). It must be
noted, furthermore, that levels of consciousness are conditioned not only by
physiological variations of the sleep-wakefulness rhythm, but also by the
ingestion of anaesthetic drugs (which reduce the level of consciousness) or
psychoactive substances (which increase attention levels).
Studies conducted on experimental animal models have shown that among
the cerebral structures involved in the modulation of alertness are the locus

116

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

coeruleus (with adrenergic projection), the posterior portion of the

hypothalamus (with histaminergic projection), other brainstem nuclei (with
serotonergic and dopaminergic projection) and, above all, the intralaminar
nuclei of the thalamus. The latter, in particular, play the essential role of
synaptic relay for the diffuse cortical paths that regulate the synchronization of
the cortical electrical activity registered by EEG. A lesion of these centres can
cause a coma and vegetative states measurable using criteria such as those of
the Glasgow Coma Scale (Teasdale and Jennett 1974). Expressions such as a
loss of consciousness, a reduction of the level of consciousness, regaining
consciousness, and others refer to this meaning of the term, essentially
overlapping with the concept of awareness.
6.

CONCLUSIONS

In this essay, it has been shown how numerous aspects of motor planning and
of the intentional perception of an agent do not appear on the conscious level.
The integration between these levels has a concrete meaning, which has effects
on those conceptions of the mind that have been at the centre of the
philosophical debates on the philosophy of action. Varela (1996) highlighted
the role played by the body on the dynamics of perception; however, his
reflection is still “disembodied”, that is without empirical support. According
to Berthoz (1998), the body is not only a thing, a potential scientific object of
study, but also the necessary condition of experience. It constitutes the
perceptive opening to the world: the primacy of perception is a primacy of
experience, when perception reassumes an active and constitutive role and can
be at the basis of action.
In the embryonic, fetal and infancy stages, action precedes sensation and
not the opposite: first reflex movements are carried out and after they are
perceived. We are normally led to emphasize sensations and perception, and
particularly to retain that movement is essentially dependent on them. On the
contrary, we could represent this sequence inversely through a schema in
which one begins with movement in order to then consider the consequences
that this has on the surrounding environment, namely the perception of the
consequences and the modifications that this has on subsequent movements.

M. Maldonato – The Decisions of Consciousness and the Consciousness of Decisions 117
REFERENCES

Adams, R. D., Victor, M., & Ropper, A. H. (2005). Principles of Neurology.
New York: Mc Graw-Hill.
Baars, B. J. (1997). In the Theater of Consciousness: The Workspace of the
Mind. New York: Oxford University Press.
Bergson, H. (1910). Time and Free Will: An Essay on the Immediate Data of
Consciousness. London: George Allen and Unwin.
Berthoz, A. (1993). Multisensory Control of Movement. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Berthoz, A. (1998). Il senso del movimento. Milano: McGraw-Hill Companies.
Bianchi, L. (1889). Semiotica delle malattie del Sistema Nervoso. Milano:
Vallardi.
Brown, P., & Marsden, J. F. (2001). Cortical network resonance and motor
activity in humans. Neuroscientist, 7(6), 518-527.
Charney, D. S., Woods, S. W., Krystal, H. H., & Heninger, G. R. (1996).
Neurobiological mechanism of human anxiety. In B. S. Fogel, R. B.
Shiffer & S. M. Rao (Eds), Neuropsychiatry, (pp. 257-286). Baltimore:
Williams & Wilkins.
Crick, F. (1994). The Astonishing Hypothesis: The Scientific Search for the
Soul. New York: Scribner.
Dennett, D. (2005). Sweet Dreams. Philosophical Obstacles to a Science of
Consciousness. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dennett, D., & Kinsbourne, M. (1992). Time and the observer: The where
and the when of the consciousness in the brain. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 15, 183-247.
Descartes, R. (2008). Meditations on First Philosophy with Selections from
the Objections and Replies. New York: Oxford University Press.
Evans, P. (1972). Henry Ey‟s concepts of the organization of consciousness
and its disorganization. An extension of Jacksonian theory. Brain,
95(2), 413-440.

118

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Ey, H. (1947). Système Nerveux et Troubles Nerveux. Evol. Psych., XII(1),
71-104.
Fraisse, P. (1987). Temporal structuration of cognitive processes: Discussion.
In M. Olivetti Belardinelli (Ed.), Comunicazioni scientifiche di
psicologia generale, 15, (pp. 26-33). Roma: Bulzoni.
Goodwin, F. K., & Jamison, K. R. (1990). Maniac Depressive Disorder.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Jackson, J. H. (1884). The Croonian lectures on evolution and dissolution of
the nervous system. The British Medical Journal, 1(1214), 660-663.
Jackson, J. H. (1932). Selected Writings, 2 Vols. London: Hodder Stoughton.
James, W. (1952). The Principles of Psychology. Chicago: Encyclopedia
Britannica Inc.
Jeannerod, M. (1994). The representing brains: Neural correlates of motor
intention and imagery. Behavioural Brain Sciences, 17, 187-202.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors We Live By. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Laureys, S., Owen A. M., & Schiff N. D. (2004). Brain function in coma,
vegetative state, and related disorders. Lancet Neurology, 3(9), 537546.
Le Van Quyen, M., Adam, C., Lachaux, J. P., Martinerie, J., Baulac, M.,
Renault, B., & Varela, F. J. (1997). Temporal patterns in human
epileptic activity are modulated by perceptual discriminations.
NeuroReport, 8(7), 1703-1710.
MacKay, D. G. (1987). The Organition of Perception and Action. New York:
Springer Verlag.
Maldonato, M. (2007). La coscienza prismatica. Un mosaico di forme
incostanti. In M. Maldonato (Ed.), La coscienza. Come la biologia
inventa la cultura, (pp. 13-60). Napoli: Guida.
Maldonato, M. (2009). Il meraviglioso algoritmo. Sulla struttura immateriale
della coscienza. In M. Maldonato & R. Pietrobon (Eds.), Pensare la
scienza, (pp. 41-68). Milano: Bruno Mondadori.

M. Maldonato – The Decisions of Consciousness and the Consciousness of Decisions 119

Maldonato, M., & Dell‟Orco, S. (2010). Psicologia della decisione. Milano:
Bruno Mondadori.
Mancia, M. (1994). Neurofisiologia. Milano: Cortina.
Miller, E. K., Freedman, D. J., & Wallis, J. D. (2002). The prefrontal cortex:
Categories, concepts and cognition. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond., B,
Biol. Sci., 357(1424), 1123-1136.
Moruzzi, G., & Magoun, H. W. (1949). Brain stem reticular formation and
activation of the EEG. Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neuro., 1, 455-473.
O‟Brien, G., & Opie, J. (2000). Disunity defended: A reply to Bayne.
Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 78(2), 255-263.
Oliverio, A. (2008). Geografia della mente. Milano: Raffaele Cortina.
Oliverio, A. (2009). La vita nascosta del cervello. Milano: Giunti Editore.
Petitot, J., Varela, F., Pachoud, B., & Roy, J.-M. (Eds.) (1999). Naturalizing

Phenomenology: Issues in Contemporary Phenomenology and
Cognitive Science. Standford, CA: Stanford University Press.

Plum, F., & Posner, J. B., (2000). Stupor e coma. Roma: SEU.
Posner, M. I., & Raichle, M. E. (1994). Images of Mind. New York: Scientific
American Library.
Prigogine, I. (1986). Dall‟essere al divenire: tempo e complessità nelle scienze
fisiche. Torino: Einaudi.
Prigogine, I. (1997). La fine delle certezze: il tempo, il caos e le leggi di
natura. Torino: Boringhieri.
Ramachandran, V. (2004). The Emerging Mind. London: Profile Books.
Richelle, H., Lejeune, J. J., Perikel, & Fery, P. (1985). From biotemporality to
nootemporality: Toward an integrative and comparative view of time in
behavior. In J. A. Michon & J. L. Jackson (Eds.), Time, Mind and
Behavior, (pp. 75-99). Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Roeckelein, J. E. (2000). The Concept of Time in Psychology. Westport:
Greenwood Press.

120

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Rushworth, M. F. S., Walton, M. E., Kennerley, S. W., & Bannerman, D. M.
(2004). Action sets and decisions in the medial frontal cortex. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 8(9), 410-417.
Teasdale, G., & Jennett, B. (1974). Assessment of coma and impaired
consciousness. A practical scale. Lancet, 2(7872), 81-84.
Fuller Torrey, E., Bowler, A. E., Taylor, E.H., Gottesman, I. I. (1994).

Schizophrenia and Manic-Depressive Disorder: The Biological Roots of
Mental Illness as Revealed by the Landmark Study of Identical Twins.
New York: Basic Books.

Varela, F. J. (1996). Neurophenomenology: A methodological remedy for the
hard problem. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 3(4), 330-350.
Varela, F., Thompson, E., & Rosch, E. (1992). La via di mezzo della
conoscenza. Le scienze cognitive alla prova dell‟esperienza. Milano:
Feltrinelli.
Wilkinson, I., & Lennox, G. (2007). Manuale di neurologia. Torino: Minerva
Medica.
Zeki, S. (2003). La visione dall‟interno. Arte e cervello. Torino: Bollati
Boringhieri.
Zeki, S., & Bartels, A. (1998). Toward a theory of visuale consciousness.
Consciousness and Cognition, 8(2), 225-259.
Zeman, A. (2001). Consciousness. Brain, 124, 1263-1289.

Epistemic Trust.
Outline for a Phenomenology of Shared Intentionality
Roberta De Monticelli*

demonticelli.roberta@hsr.it

ABSTRACT

Phenomenology is a method for thinking the (ontological) novelty of things, as
irreducible to their (physical, biological, psychological) foundations. In this
paper I shall exemplify this claim by addressing a question debated in
contemporary philosophy of mind, analytical ontology, moral and natural
philosophy, namely: what makes a human person out of a member of the
biological species homo sapiens? A set of socially transmitted rules, a second
cultural nature, seems to be a necessary condition for what we called primary
self-constitution, the emergence of a “normally” behaving human subject.
Epistemic trust is the basic condition for this transmission. The arguments for
my claim are part of a general theory of acts, including voluntary actions,
mental acts, speech acts and social acts, providing the foundation for a theory
of personal identity and research in the field of social cognition.

Trust is a very intriguing subject for a phenomenologist. For phenomenology
itself can be defined as a way of thinking based on the exercise of trust – albeit a
peculiar kind of trust, that I’ll term epistemic trust.
1. EPISTEMIC TRUST AND THE CULTURE OF SUSPICION
Phenomenology has been here for a century, and yet very few people do really
understand its novelty. Too many thinkers or just scholars have usurped its
beautiful name, without sharing in the least its spirit, without applying or

* Vita-Salute San Raffaele University

122

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

developing the methods for philosophical research on vital topics in our
contemporary world, for which it had been devised.
What is, in fact, the spirit of phenomenology? I’ll try to summarize it by this
very notion of epistemic trust. I’ll define epistemic trust as the systematic
adoption of following key-principle: (ET) Nothing appears in vain (without a
foundation in reality) – of course the reverse is not true: There is much more to
discover in reality than what appears (otherwise no research would be needed,
and we would be omniscient).
Epistemic trust is a style of thinking, which might be clarified through some
more definite methodological principles. In this presentation I do not want to
get into methodological details, though. The first thing I want to convey by this
formula is that phenomenology has been so widely misunderstood, because we
have not yet – not in the least – understood the whole depth of Plato’s
summons: sozein ta fainomena, to “save” phenomena. That is, things which are
seen, things which appear, fainomena indeed.
Phenomenology so characterized seems to radically escape what the French
philosopher Paul Ricoeur termed the “culture of suspicion”. Under such a
phrase I understand the mental attitude quite opposed to epistemic trust: a
complete lack of confidence in the world of phenomena, that is in the ordinary
world of our daily experience. This is both faithful and unfaithful to Ricoeur’s
own understanding of his phrase.
Faithful, on one hand. In his highly influential work, Freud and Philosophy,
Ricoeur (1970) draws attention to three key intellectual figures of the
twentieth century who, in their different ways, sought to unmask, demystify,
and expose the real from the apparent; «Three masters, seemingly mutually
exclusive, dominate the school of suspicion: Marx, Nietszche, and Freud»
(Ricoeur 1970, p. 32).
On the other hand, Ricoeur’s analysis focuses on a supposed false
consciousness haunting – according to the three masters – a particular kind of
experience – namely, religious experience. Religion is not about what it seems
to be about. According to Marx, while religion appeared to be concerned with
the lofty issues of transcendence and personal salvation, in reality its true
function was to provide a “flight from the reality of inhuman working
conditions” and to make “the misery of life more endurable”. Religion in this
way served as “the opium of the people”. Similarly, Nietzsche unmasks religion
to reveal it as the refuge of the weak. Likewise with Freud, the same pattern of
“unmasking” to reveal and distinguish “the real” from the “apparent” is

Roberta De Monticelli – Epistemic Trust

123

evident in his analysis of religion. So, while religion was perceived to be a
legitimate source of comfort and hope when one is faced with the difficulties of
life, in reality religion was an illusion that merely expressed one’s wish for a
father-God.
In this respect, my understanding of Ricoeur’s dictum is slightly unfaithful
to his own. For a false consciousness is no actual experience. Ricoeur himself
insisted that it would be a mistake to view the three as masters of scepticism.
They are involved with destroying established ideas, not with criticising
authentic experience. Quoting Ricoeur himself:
All three clear the horizon for a more authentic word, for a new reign of Truth,
not only by means of a 'destructive' critique, but by the invention of an art of
interpreting. (Ricoeur 1970, p. 33)

All three, for Ricoeur, «represent three convergent procedures of
demystification» (Ricoeur 1970, p. 34).
Once a false consciousness is demystified, authentic experience can take
place again, and reality revealed, within the limits of an age’s conceptual and
cultural means. In this respect, the masters of suspicions are no masters of
scepticism.
Now, independently of Ricoeur’s purpose, I do believe that our age is an
age of scepticism, thereby interpreting the school of suspicion in a much more
radical way, namely as a school of complete lack of confidence in the
truthfulness of experience itself.
1. SCEPTICISM AND PHENOMENOLOGY
Philosophy of nature as well as philosophy of culture has proposed many
reasons to doubt that things are as they appear, over the last century. The
“culture of suspicion” – in my radical interpretation – that is a majority of
continental philosophers of the twentieth century, on the one side, and the
mainstream naturalism striving toward an image of the world compatible with
contemporary science on the other side, suggests that our experience (and our
moral experience quite particularly) is a pervasive, systematic illusion. They
could be right.
Why has this happened? The story would be too long to tell: we shall limit
ourselves to pointing to the two mentioned contemporary forms of scepticism

124

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

concerning visible things – or the visible and sensible life-world: which we may
term as Post-modern Relativism and Reductive Materialism.
The first one has been the dominant philosophy of culture, whereas the
second one has been the dominant natural philosophy of man and his mind.
Both represent a form of scepticism relative to the immediately given things of
our life-world, including ourselves, human persons.
According to post-modernism no real epistemic credit can be given to
immediate cognition or consciousness – no form of intuition, acquaintance,
perception, feeling is a mode of veridical experience, the world being as it were
wrapped up in language, culture, interpretations.
But according to reductive materialism, phenomena are epi-phenomena,
just shadows or dreams caused by a completely different reality. Take for
example Daniel Dennett’s (1991), “the phenomenological garden”: we do not
find a description of a real scene like this one, or of a fictional one, similar
enough to a human life-world of the Twentieth century on earth, but just a list
of qualia, or sense data, in three classes:
1. “Experiences” of the outer world, such as views, sounds, smells,
sensations of slippery or rough, of warm and cold, and of our body’s
position;
2. “Experiences” of the inner world, such as imaged views and sounds,
memories, ideas and insights;
3. “Experiences” of emotions and feelings.
All that is purely “subjective”, that is belonging to what contemporary
philosophers of mind call “phenomenal consciousness”, the “hard problem” of
consciousness, i.e., phenomenal consciousness.
Actually, questioning the reliability of sensory and sensible experience has
been a main trend in the history of modern philosophy, starting indeed from
Descartes doubt, going on with Galileo and Locke’s expulsion of secondary
qualities from the furniture of the real world… Yet the “age of suspicion”
induced by modern science on the world of everyday experience was at its
beginnings in Descartes’ days. Nowadays we can perfectly conceive of a world
such as that of Matrix, where no experienced object is really as it appears:
steaks are nothing but tasty qualia and people themselves are nothing but the
characters of a (shared) dream, while their true life is lived somewhere else…

Roberta De Monticelli – Epistemic Trust

125

In fact, the “phenomenological garden” of Dennett, or the world of Matrix,
is just a set of beautifully arranged qualia, which would support the universal
negation of our Principle of epistemic trust:
(N) All appears in vain
(N) supports a version of (epi)phenomenalism. And phenomenalism is
surely no phenomenology, but the very opposite way of thinking: a
radical form of scepticism about phenomena.
Take any issue in contemporary philosophy of mind: the “hard problem” of
consciousness, that is the nature of any form of direct cognition, such as
perception, emotion, empathy, self-perception; or the nature of the self; or –
most important for meta-ethics and legal philosophy – the issue of free will. All
of them can be reduced to the general problem of epistemic trust, that is, of
reliability of ordinary experience. This is particularly clear with free will.
There is no doubt that we experience free will as the power to determine
ourselves to an action, usually in the presence of alternative possible actions;
moreover, such an experience seems to be constitutive of our personal and
moral identity. Through the decisions I make I assert my identity, stating who I
am and projecting the one I shall be – on the background of what I have been.
And this is not only true from a first person point of view. I learn to know other
people from their actions, through the emotions, the sentiments that their
voluntary actions arouse in me: gratitude, grudge, admiration, disdain – and
the corresponding value judgments. All the realm of moral experience
supposes that we do in fact enjoy free will.
2. CAN WE TAKE EXPERIENCE SERIOUSLY?
The question is whether this kind of experience is valid – even though its
fallibility, as any other experience of reality – or whether it is systematically
deceptive: whether it can be veridical or not, whether it does correspond to
something beyond the experience itself, in reality. This is the general meaning
of most philosophical questions today, and free will is just a privileged issue to
focus on it.
Now, moral experience is just a part of value-experience (morally good or
bad, and all of the virtues and vices, are, respectively, positive or negative
values of voluntary actions, or habits). In order to take moral experience
seriously, I first have to take value-experience seriously. Morality presupposes

126

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

that there are things of value, negative and positive; that there are things and
states of affair which are valuable in some respect (pleasant or unpleasant,
beautiful or ugly, precious or cheap, holy or unholy etc.), and even more or less
valuable.
Moral goodness, in fact, can be defined as the property of a voluntary action
(or behaviour, or habits, or intention) aiming at realizing the higher possible
value in the given situation.
More specifically, the human world is full of wrongs, for example of killings,
frauds, act of violence etc.; moreover, there are lots of things which seem unfair
even when there is nobody acting unjustly (e.g., depending on economy or
social relations), there are vulgar attitudes and ugly pictures etc.
Am I justified in taking all this experience seriously? That is, in considering
experience, including moral and value experience, either as reliable or as at
least correctible, in any case as such, that we can learn from it, use it as
evidence for our judgements and inferences, etc.? Has our experience
generally a cognitive value? And if perception does, why emotion should not?
Let’s consider my indignation at a base act, like cheating a defenceless
child. In order to take this experience seriously, I must believe: (1) that the
agent acted freely, and that free will is no illusion; (2) that the action is actually
base, a moral wrong, hence that there are negative or inferior values that the
action realizes instead of positive or higher ones.
Hence in order to take my indignation seriously I must entertain a) an
ontological b) an axiological belief.
Am I justified in having this kind of beliefs? The question is: can beliefs of
this kind be true and justifiable, even if they were not justified in this particular
case?
3. EPISTEMIC TRUST AND PERSONHOOD
The answer is yes, only in case (ET) is true. In fact, phenomenology is born to
oppose scepticism concerning the phenomenal world, be it of a post-modern
relativist, or of a reductive materialist kind.
Why should we adopt epistemic trust instead of scepticism, or
phenomenology instead of phenomenalism?
I’ll argue that epistemic trust is a necessary condition for human animals to
become persons, that is, reasonable or responsible agents. The point of the

Roberta De Monticelli – Epistemic Trust

127

argument is that, if I am right, no human animal can become a subject of acts,
or develop a selfhood, without entertaining a relation to reality which is a
relation of epistemic adequacy – as opposed to simple biological adaptation. In
other words, one does not become a normal, autonomous individual of the
human kind without entertaining a relation with truth and falsity: a relation
which is fundamental even before being voluntary, or conscious.
Let us begin by quoting a passage from a social phenomenologist, Peter L.
Berger:
To become a parent is to take on the role of world-builder and world protector.
The role that a parent takes on represents not only the order of this or that
society, but order as such, the underlying order of the universe that it makes
sense to trust. (Berger 1995, p. 55)

«Everything is in order, everything is all right» (p. 55) – that is the kind of
sentence by which any parent reassures her children. This phrase, Berger says,
can be expanded into an assertion of cosmic scope: “Be confident. Trust what
there is”. He goes on:
This is precisely what the formula intrinsically implies. And if we are to believe
the child psychology […] this is an experience that is absolutely essential to the
process of becoming a human person. Put differently, at the very centre of the
process of becoming fully human at the core of humanities, we find an
experience of trust in the order of reality. (Berger 1995, p. 55, 56)

We must be more analytic to understand the deep issue which is at stake in this
passage. What is being “built” in the relation between a parent and a newborn
child is what phenomenologists call the self-evidence of the life world, or, as
Erwin Straus has it, the axiomatic of the everyday world: to sum up, the
fundamentals of that shared tacit knowledge, mostly practical knowledge, know
how or “sich bekennen”, being familiar with, that is common sense. Husserl
introduces the concept of transcendental trust: i.e., the confident expectation
that experience keeps going on in the same constitutive style, or according to
the same constitutive rules (Formal and transcendental logic). The real world,
Husserl underlines, «exists only on the assumption, constantly prescribed, that
experience keeps going on in this same constitutive style» (Husserl 1929).1 L.
Binswanger quotes this passage from Husserl in order to emphasize the tragic
loss of “natural evidence” (natürliche Selbstverständlichkeit) which can take
1

Quoted by L. Binswanger (1960, p. 24 ; the translation is mine).

128

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

place in schizophrenia or major depression, when the patient experiences “the
end of the world”. Actually this lost of transcendental trust is the loss of
“normality” – the loss of reason and even personal identity, the very basis of
severe psychopathologies.
John Searle calls “background” this largely shared set of tacit cognitions
and abilities which are, according to him, no intentional states (beliefs or
intentions), but allow intentional states to refer or to have conditions of
satisfaction. This background contains the enormous number of implicit
norms, or patterns of “normal” behaviour, that we follow when dressing up
(order of suits, socks, shoes) or cutting a cake (one does not cut it like one cuts
the grass), even if any explicit direction about how to act correctly is missing.
But, as we learn how to behave more or less adequately by “doing with”, or
taking part in common activities, sharing ordinary life, so we learn how to
respond in appropriate ways to events in the environment by sharing
experiences, “right” ways of perceiving and feeling.
As flourishing researches in social ontology and social cognition have
shown, we – the “neotenic” animals, the ones whose training to autonomous
life is the longest one – learn by shared intentionality the right ways to be and
act in the world. How do we achieve this apprenticeship of reality?
The key-notion of this account is a concept playing a very basic role in
Husserl’s phenomenology, namely that of Position (Stellungnahme). What
follows can also be read as a commentary of a very deep dictum by Husserl,
describing the very nature of personal life: “Alles Leben ist Stellungnahme”.
Mental life is usually described as a sequence of mental states. This
description, current in contemporary philosophy of mind, is unfaithful to
mental life of a person. Personal life is no sheer sequence of mental states (such
is a dream) but rather a motivational connection of acts. Let me quote two
passages by Husserl, where he points out the relation between positionality
and normativity – or, as I would say, “normality” of our mental life:
Alles Leben ist Stellungnehmen, alles Stellungnehmen steht unter einem
Sollen, einer Rechtssprechung über Gültigkeit oder Ungültigkeit, nach
prätendierten Normen von absoluter Geltung. Solange diese Normen
unangefochten, durch keine Skepsis bedroht und verspottet waren, gab es nur
eine Lebensfrage, wie ihnen praktisch am besten zu genügen sei. Wie aber
jetzt, wo alle und jede Normen bestritten oder empirisch verfälscht und ihrer
idealen Geltung beraubt werden? (Husserl 1987)

Roberta De Monticelli – Epistemic Trust

129

In order to understand this passage better, we must recall that central
achievement of Husserl’s which is his unified theory of reason (theoretic,
axiological, practical), as the realm of acts subject to normativity, or the
distinction right/wrong. Here is a passage nicely summarizing that
achievement:
Der Deutlichkeit halber bemerke ich, dass das Wort Vernunft hier nicht im
Sinne eines menschlichen Seelenvermögens, sondern einen Titel für die
wesensmässig geschlossene Klasse von Akten und ihre zugehörigen
Aktkorrelaten befasst, die unter Ideen der Rechtmässigkeit und
Unrechtmässigkeit, korrelativ der Wahrheit und Falschheit, des Bestehens und
Nichtbestehens usw. stehen. Soviel Grundarten von Akten wir scheiden
können, für welche dies gilt, soviel Grundarten der Vernunft. (Husserl 1988)

This way, the whole set of “intentionalen Erlebnisse” – that is “Akte”,
partitioned into the three classes of cognitive or “doxic”, axiologic or
“wertende”, practical or conative “Erlebnisse” are described as subject to
normativity. The life of reason starts with the life of a person, permeates all her
experiences, perceptions, feelings, intentions, desires, decisions… A very
“aristotelian” picture indeed, very far from Cartesian and post-Cartesian
dualism of mind and body, reasons and passions etc.
Normativity is an essential feature of intentionality, though a very neglected
one both in continental and analytic philosophy of mind: yet it pervades the
whole extent of our mental life. This is a deep insight phenomenology offers,
suggesting that we should look at personhood as the condition of what we may
call “the normative animal”. A description of what we mean by “normative
animal” can be found in this remarkable passage by Edmund Husserl:
Das Tier lebt unter bloßen Instinkten, der Mensch auch unter Normen. Durch
alle Arten «von» Bewußtseinsakten geht ein damit verflochtenes normatives
Bewußtsein von richtig und unrichtig (schicklich, unschicklich, schön, häßlich,
zweckmäßig, unzweckmäßig usw.) und motiviert ein entsprechendes
erkennendes, wertendes, dinglich und gesellschaftlich wirkendes Handeln.
(Husserl 1989)

Consciousness and normativity are essentially bound in our life. Now, how is
this possible, from its very beginning? For, according to this description, we
do not first perceive, feel or act and only later learn to perceive, feel or act
adequately; we are subject to normativity from the very beginning. We
experience the world in such a way as to be at least able to learn from our

130

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

errors, to correct them. We are bound to be reasonable from the very outset of
our life. How is that possible?
Husserl’s answer to this question sheds light on many peculiarities which
distinguish our very early dispositions to social cognition from those of other
primates, as described in the pioneering work of Michael Tomasello (1999,
2008 and 2009).
We won’t go into details here, but shall only point out to the essential
insight Husserl allows us to work out, by linking, as he does, normativity to
positionality, this other pervasive and largely neglected feature of
intentionality. The upshot of this move is realizing that the exercise of reason is
impossible without that of freedom – a pretty radical and yet non-arbitrary kind
of freedom, largely unknown in the other animal species on earth. This nonarbitrary kind of freedom is the very basis of personhood, in the sense that it is
constitutive of it. Hence, there is no exercise of reason without that of
personhood. Personhood is no sheer biological condition, neither is it a sheer
social status, conferred to us as that of belonging to a community, as being
acknowledged as a member in other primates’ communities. Personhood is the
more or less adequate exercise of positionality. It is a biologically grounded
disposition which actualizes itself in the progress of adequate position-taking
in response to the environment. It is the work of the subjective side of
intentionality. Yet this adequacy (right or wrong) cannot be there before we
ourselves are there. And “we” are quite apparently not yet there at the very
beginning. At the very beginning, our positionality is random, our
Stellungnehmen is largely arbitrary. There is a “freedom” which precedes us,
so to speak. If this “freedom”, or rather arbitrary positionality, is not
adequately “guided”, we won’t develop a “normal” personal life, a life of
“reason”.
Teaching to take position adequately is the task of the original lifecommunity which welcomes us at our birth, or one fundamental task of
parental care – so obvious, that it often goes unnoticed. Only on the basis of a
“correct” or truthful relation to factual and axiological reality of the
environment can we develop the motivational coherence making up a self or a
subject of further experience and action. But what is adequacy or correctness
for a baby or a very young child?
Right and wrong – this is the law and ethos of the life community, most
originally of the parental care-takers. This is what Berger meant by saying that
parents “bring order into the world”:

Roberta De Monticelli – Epistemic Trust

131

A child wakes up in the night, perhaps from a bad dream, and finds himself
surrounded by darkness, alone, beset by nameless threats. At such a moment
the contours of trusted reality are blurred or invisible, and in the terror of
incipient chaos the child cries out for his mother. It is hardly an exaggeration to
say that, at this moment, the mother has been invoked as a high priestess of a
protective order. It is she (and in many cases she alone) who has the power to
banish the chaos and to restore the benign shape of the world. (Berger 1970, p.
54)

Mother is right in all she does to assert that there is no danger, that “all is in
order”. But how can the infant know she is right? Well, this is epistemic trust,
the more fundamental and necessary kind of trust. The necessary condition,
not only to grow adult, and to verify whether that trust was just or not (maybe
nobody of us mortal beings can really verify the absolute truth of that assertion
– we only learn to know its relative truth). Epistemic trust is a necessary
condition to become a “normal animal”, a human person.
4. SOME DETAILS
The basis of our entire personal life is given by what we may call basic acts,
involving first level positions.
4.1. FIRST LEVEL POSITIONALITY
There are two classes of such basic acts: cognitive or emotional, perceptions
and emotions. Cognitive basic acts, perceptions are characterized by first level
“doxic” positionality; emotional basic acts by “axiologic” positionality.
What we call doxic positionality is realizing, taking note of the perceived
thing’s existence. It is a kind of assent or denial, not a reflexive but an
immediate one: yes, the thing is there. A perception can turn out to be a
delusion. It could not, if there were no doxic position, like in an act of
imagination or day-dreaming. A doxic position corresponds to the pretense of
veridicality which distinguishes perceptions.
What we call axiologic positionality – is realizing the positive or negative
salience, or value, of the given thing or situation. Each emotion includes such a
position. In fact, emotions can be appropriate, or not. But they could not turn
out to be non appropriate – such as panic in front of a very peaceful little cat –
if they lacked any axiological position.

132

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

First level positions are not free. I cannot avoid endorsing the existence of
what I see or touch; I cannot take up an opposite position on the negative value
of an object of fear, or horror. Even in case the thing turns out to be a delusion
as experience goes on, or the fearful beast not to be that bad after all.
What is the role of positionality in basic experience? It should be clear by
now. Only positionality is responsible for adequacy of perceptions and
emotions. Perceptions are veridical or not ; emotions are appropriate or not, in
virtue of their positions. Hence, if by “experience” we don’t mean just causal
impact of external reality on an organism, but something we can learn from,
something which is or is not veridical, something which can provide evidence
for our judgments, then we must take positionality into account.
To sum up: (basic) acts are adequate or inadequate responses to reality. By
adequacy, I mean rational adequacy, in a broad sense: cognitive and practical.
Personal life as a life of reason starts with the basic acts. Or, we can also say:
basic acts constitute a first level of emergence of a person on her states: the
level of evidential objectivation.
4.2. THE ROLE OF EPISTEMIC TRUST
Now, let’s observe a child or a newborn. Consider her basic experiences,
emotions and perceptions. In every perception there is something like a yes or
a no, an existential proto-judgement. Mother is there – or she isn’t. In every
emotion there is something like an axiological yes or no. Good and evil, wellbeing, tummy-ache. Way before being able to voluntary or reflexively position
taking, we spontaneously respond to the data of the environment – factual data
and/or data of value – that are conveyed by perceptions and emotions. We
respond with a sort of cognitive and emotive yes and no.
Initially, though, these positions are largely chaotic: clear in the limiting
cases of crying and satisfaction, easy to turn into their opposites, they seem to
follow each other as simple states, without a punctual “correspondence” with
reality, and without an internal “coherence”. The care-giver brings order in the
baby’s world by reinforcing all (and only) the adequate positions, and the same
does the community within which the baby grows up. “Nasty table, it hurts
you”, says mother while beating the edge of the table, “yeees so good!” – by
feeding her child.
Indeed, a child learns to take a position – to take a position correctly, at the
level of basic positions. They are not “free” (for one cannot choose whether or
not approving of well-being or crying with tummy-ache) but can be so

Roberta De Monticelli – Epistemic Trust

133

inadequate, random and chaotic, that they would prevent the configuration of a
unitary subject, with a motivational coherence, memories, and expectations. In
order to constitute (truthful) experience, and hence the ground of our life, the
pulsation of positional yes and no should not be totally dependent on
emotional states, drives and desires. But how do we teach our children right
and wrong? We take the right positions with them, we share positionality. Only
in this way an ordered world, more or less objective and filled with positive and
negative qualities, emerges from a flux of sensory, emotional, enactive
experience.
We can verify it every day, even observing young humans far beyond the age
of what we may call primary self-constitution, or the apprenticeship of the basic
skills of personhood, within the customs and language of the concerned lifecommunity. Without a discipline of consents and prohibitions, of positive and
negative endorsements on the part of the concerned life-community, no new
member of it ever becomes a “normal” subject, a person finally capable of
responsibility and reason. A person only grows up on the basis of the right and
wrong responses that we learn to give in our infancy – and far beyond. For we
humans never stop growing up: “ripeness is all”, but it is seldom reached.
A set of socially transmitted rules, a second cultural nature, seems to be a
necessary condition for what we called primary self-constitution, the
emergence of a “normally” behaving human subject. Epistemic trust is the
basic condition for this transmission, and this would conclude the argument.
4.3. FREE ACTS
It would not end the phenomenology of our growing up, though. Personhood
involves individual personality. We have so long examined the role of
positionality in making up the solid ground of a life capable to learn from
experience, indefinitely, and to save acquired knowledge for future
generations (as other primates don’t do, or very little). Is this its only role?
Of course not, if primary self-constitution is not human or personal
ripeness. Personhood is a highly individuated “normal” behaviour. Within the
range of normality, there is no function (perception, cognition, memory,
emotional life, language) whose exercise would not appear, in our species,
highly “personalized”. How do individual personalities emerge? Here is a
further job for positionality within our intentional life (in the broad sense of
“intentional”).

134

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Basic positions are not free – it is not in our power to see something that
isn’t there or to feel as good something that hurts us. But we can switch
attention from the factual datum, as we can “neutralize” the negative emotional
datum, instead of “taking them over” and let us be “motivated” by them to
further exploration, further emotions or actions, even in the passive sense of
agreeing to an incitement to further experience.
These “removals” and “acceptances” are second order positions. Second
order positions generally are in our power: they are free acts – in a broad sense
of “free”, which does not necessarily involve reflective consciousness, let alone
deliberation. They are responsible for those spontaneous and largely
unreflective (in a sense, “unconscious”) strategies of avoidance and pursuit
through which everyone track his life in the world, thereby manifesting
personal motivational patterns, a “character” or a “personality”. Some of us,
still in a cradle, pay more attention to colours, other to sounds. This
spontaneous and unconscious management of our passivity, so to speak, or of
our exposure to the experience, manifests a kind of “freedom” – or
individualization of behaviour – largely unknown among other primates. The
exercise of it is what makes us different from each other. If positionality of the
first order, or adequate positionality, constitutes us as reasonable
(“normative”) animals, positionality of the second order, or free positionality,
constitutes us as individual persons. In a sense, this “freedom” precedes and
shapes us, as our actions and activities do all over our life.
The object of these second order positions is nothing well defined and
structured as a project, not even a meaningful voluntary action like that of
comforting a friend or preparing a coffee. They define what we can describe as
the grey zone of spontaneity. And this grey zone where the human behaviour
has a limited responsibility is surprisingly vast. It not only covers early infancy
behaviours, it is not only typical for collective behaviours with their sometimes
inhuman consequences (the “big animal”, said Plato), but it is also the basso
continuo of our conscious life, the ensemble of its routines, the ground of our
“familiarity” with the world and with the others.
It is surprising how much of ourselves, of our individual selves, is “built” in
this grey zone of spontaneity, which harbours a part of the enigma
characterizing human personality, for better and for worse. Indeed, by
exposing and not exposing myself to a certain path of further experience,
emotions, actions, I determine “myself”, emerging from the states I happen to
live in (while other primates just keep living in them) and I orient my life

Roberta De Monticelli – Epistemic Trust

135

instead of just living through it. In a certain measure, I make myself responsible
for what I become.
4.4. A CONCLUSION ON WILL AND FREE WILL
Positions of this order are in broad sense free acts, but they lack of a conscious
intention – of a purpose. Free will – the conscious exercise of a power to
endorse or not any given motif of action – desires, drives, aspirations,
emotions, interests, engagements, duties – is not yet involved here. Free will,
or rather decisions and choices actualizing it – represent a positionality of a
further level, by which a possible reason for action is transformed in an actual,
causally efficacious one. In fact, what else is “the will” if not positionality or

power of endorsement at this level of cognitive, axiological and practical acts,
or “reason”? It could definitely not exist without the interplay of “normality”

and “spontaneity” at the inferior levels, without non-free and free positionality.
But once the inferior levels are granted, why should free will not be as real as it
seems to be?
Why then does the problem of free will seem so insoluble? Our analysis
shows that this depends on a sort of fallacy in the order of explanation of the
relevant phenomena. Most philosophers presuppose our existence as human
persons (without saying in what it is characteristic), and wonder whether our
“will” (without explaining what they mean by this word) is “free” (sometimes
without really defining this predicate). They don’t observe, instead, the two
described features of our being:
1.

A truthful or at any rate correctible relation to factual and value data of
experience, a “normality” of responses

2.

A surprising discretionary power through which any human being lets
himself get motivated by those data, thereby manifesting what we call
her “character”.

These features seem to be constitutive conditions of personhood, required for
“reason” and “will” to be there too. Only on their basis will decisions and
choices become possible, as soon as feasible and meaningful actions can be
represented as projects and turned into effective actions by decisions. As selfobligations, decisions and choices are self-constitutive acts at a higher level, in
which identity through time is constituted and modified: since any such project
involves taking over responsibility for one’s future self and recognizing oneself

136

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

responsible for past actions. Any decision involves a conscious endorsement or
reject of what we are already. A decision involves a first person reflective
attitude, something far beyond the spontaneous management of one’s passive
states. Much more basically than in the exercise of free will, phenomenology
opens up the interplay of chance, norms, freedom and truthfulness through
which we build ourselves as the persons we shall be, by trial and error.

REFERENCES

Berger, P. L. (1970). A Rumor of Angels: Modern Society and the Rediscovery
of the Supernatural. New York: Anchor Book.
Binswanger, L. (1960). Melancholie und Manie – Phaenomenologische
Studien. Pfullinger: Gunther Neske.
Dennett, D. (1991). Cosciousness Explained. Boston: Little, Brown and
Company.
Husserl, E. (1929). Formale und transzendentale Logik. Versuch einer Kritik
der logischen Vernunft. In E. Husserl, Jahrbuch für Philosophie und
phänomenologische Forschung, vol. X. Tübingen: Max Niemeyer
Verlag.
Husserl, E. (1987). Philosophie als Strenge Wissenschaft. In E. Husserl,
Aufsätze und Vorträge (1911-1921), Hua XXV. Dordrecht: Kluwer
Academic Publisher.
Husserl, E. (1988). Vorlesungen über Ethik und Wertlehre 1908-1914, Hua
XXVIII. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publisher.
Husserl, E. (1989). Fünf Aufsätze über Erneuerung, Formale Typen der
Kultur in der Menschheitsentwicklung. In E. Husserl, Aufsätze und
Vorträge (1922-1937), Hua XXVII. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic
Publisher.
Ricoeur, P. (1970). Freud and Philosophy: An Essay on Interpretation. New
Haven: Yale University Press.
Tomasello, M. (1999). The Cultural Origins of Human Cognition.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Roberta De Monticelli – Epistemic Trust

137

Tomasello, M. (2008). Origins of Human Communication. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Tomasello, M. (2009). Why We Cooperate. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

138

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Perspectives on the Experience of Will
Davide Rigoni*

davide.rigoni@unipd.it

Luca Sammicheli**

luca.sammicheli@unibo.it

Marcel Brass***

marcel.brass@ugent.be

ABSTRACT

In the last decades, psychologists and neuroscientists brought the concept of
human will out of the philosophical debate. Here we critically examine the
different attempts within the field of cognitive neuroscience to study neural
processes underpinning human will. Volition has been investigated under
different perspectives: while some threads of research focused on the
subjective experience of free will (i.e., will under a self perspective), others
explored how the brain is able to identify free will in other individuals (i.e., will
under a other perspective). In addition, we comment that perceiving free will in
others is tightly connected to the ethical and juridical concept of personal
responsibility. Finally, we present a promising theoretical framework that
stresses the pragmatic value of believing in free will. Rather than focusing on
the subjective experience of volition itself, this approach studies whether
believing in free will or not has an impact on brain processes underlying willed
behaviour.

1.

INTRODUCTION

The subjective feeling of controlling our own actions is an intuitive and
pervasive component of human experience. When switching on the TV to
* Department of Developmental Psychology and Socialization – University of Padua
** Faculty of Psychology – University of Bologna
*** Department of Experimental Psychology – University of Ghent

140

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

watch the news or when entering a pub to order a cappuccino, we have the
clear feeling of voluntarily and freely determining our choice. The question of
how we can voluntarily control our behavior has always fascinated researchers
from different disciplines such as philosophy and psychology. This question is
fundamental to what it means to be a human being and is tightly related to
socially relevant issues, such as personal responsibility and self-control.
The fascination for willed behavior is to some degree fuelled by the vexata
quaestio of free will. In the last decades, cognitive neuroscientists and
experimental psychologists focused on intentional actions, sometimes
assuming – more or less explicitly – that understanding brain processes
involved in conscious and voluntary actions (i.e., those actions that we
perceived as free) would provide an answer to the question whether free will
exists or not, or at least would modify our notion of volition. However, it is
highly questionable whether the fields of neuroscience and experimental
psychology have tools for answering the question whether free will, in
philosophical terms, exists. 1 As Roskies concluded in her recent review,
«neuroscience has not much affected our conception of volition […]» but «[…]
it has typically challenged traditional views of the relationship between
consciousness and action» (Roskies 2010, p. 123).
Therefore, the present paper will focus on the neural mechanisms
underlying the subjective experience of free will or volition without trying to
relate these findings to the philosophical problem of free will.
In the first part, we will critically discuss a series of empirical findings
within the field of cognitive neuroscience that explored what brain mechanisms
precede the experience of free will. These findings have strongly influenced the
notion of the relationship between consciousness and intentional actions. In
the second part, we will examine the reconstructive approach of the experience
of will. According to this perspective, our experience of volition is strongly
influenced by events occurring after the action is executed and sometimes is
retrospectively reconstructed. Then we will briefly discuss how we perceive
free will in others. This part of the paper will outline the processes that
underpin our ability to identify intentionality in other individuals. In addition,
we will describe how tightly these processes are related to ethical and juridical
issues. Finally, we conclude by presenting a recent theoretical framework that
stresses the pragmatic value of believing in free will. Rather than focusing on
1

For a recent review, see Roskies 2010.

D. Rigoni, L.Sammicheli & M. Brass – Perspectives on the Experience of Will 141

the subjective experience of volition itself, this approach studies whether it has
any implication whether we believe in free will or not.
2. THE SUBJECTIVE EXPERIENCE OF VOLITION: CAUSE OR CONSEQUENCE
From a phenomenological point of view, we may define as free those actions
that are performed intentionally and with a minimum of external constrictions.
When we have the intention to perform a specific action, we feel that our
intention is, somehow, causing the action itself; in other words we feel that our
action is determined by our intention to perform that action. We refer to this
feeling of willing as conscious intention (Haggard 2005).
A first line of research within the field of cognitive neuroscience has
focused on whether the subjective experience of free will plays a causal role in
the initiation of behaviour. In a pioneering experiment, Benjamin Libet and
colleagues (Libet et al. 1983) applied neurophysiological methods to study the
relationship between the electrophysiological brain activity associated with
voluntary movements and conscious intentions. The main interest was on the
temporal relationship between motor-related brain potentials, as recorded with
the electroencephalogram (EEG), and the „conscious feeling of intending to
act‟. Thus, the question was: when do people become aware of their own
decision to do a certain movement? And what happens in the brain in the
meantime?
An implicit problem in investigating internal representations such as the
conscious intention to perform a movement, is that it is impossible – at
present, at least – to obtain a direct and objective measure of when a person
becomes aware of his or her conscious intention. It is not possible to have a
direct access to the „internal world‟ of others and therefore, to obtain an
estimation of when people had the conscious intention to execute a movement,
experimenters must rely on introspection (i.e., subjective reports of inner
states). Libet and colleagues (Libet et al. 1983) developed a method that
allowed to compare subjective self-reports with brain activity. In the
experiment, participants were seated in front of a screen displaying a clock
with a rapidly moving spot and they were asked to execute a rapid movement
(i.e., a wrist flexion), at will. Afterwards, they were asked to report what time it
was (i.e., the position of the spot in the clock) when they had the first subjective
experience of intending to act (see Figure 1). Libet referred to this reported

142

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

time as the will judgment (W). At the same time, movement-related cortical
potentials were recorded by means of a surface electrode placed on
participants‟ scalp.

Figure 1: A typical Libet‟s clock paradigm is represented. (a) Participants

make a voluntary and spontaneous finger movement while watching a
cursor moving clockwise around a clock face. (b) At a variable time after
finger movement, the cursor stops. (c) Then, participants are asked to
report the position it was when they had the first intention to make the
movement.

Libet was mainly interested in a well known cortical potential, the
Bereitschaftspotential or readiness potential (RP) (Kornhuber and Deecke
1965). The RP is a slowly increasing negative potential which starts up to 2
seconds before voluntary and spontaneous movements and is bilaterally
symmetrical over the pre- and post-central region, with a maximum at the
vertex (Shibasaki et al. 1980, Shibasaki and Hallett 2006). The RP is
generated by the supplementary motor area (SMA) – including pre-SMA and
SMA proper –, a brain region involved in the late stages of motor preparation
(Shibasaki and Hallett 2006). It is associated with spontaneous and voluntary
movements and it is absent or greatly reduced before involuntary movements
or movements made in an automatic manner (Shibasaki and Hallett 2006).
In the original experiment (Libet et al., 1983), participants‟ voluntary
movements were preceded by a RP beginning 500 ms to about 1000 ms before
movement onset. The W-judgment, indicating the time when people had their
first intention to move, was approximately 200 ms before the motor response.
Therefore, the brain potentials reflecting motor preparation began about 300
to 800 ms before the person consciously intended to act. Conscious intentions
would thus seem, the authors concluded, to be a latecomer in the process of

D. Rigoni, L.Sammicheli & M. Brass – Perspectives on the Experience of Will 143

decision, rather than the generator of the action.
Several theoretical and methodological aspects of the Libet‟s clock
paradigm have been extensively questioned (Hallett 2007, Pockett and Miller
2007, Roskies 2010). However, despite the numerous theoretical and
methodological critiques2, the Libet‟s clock has been widely used to investigate
conscious intentions and it still offers «one of the few viable methods for
experimental studies of awareness of action» (Haggard 2005, p. 291).
Furthermore, the main result of Libet‟s experiment has been repeatedly
confirmed by other empirical studies that clarified the temporal relationship
between conscious intentions and brain processes underlying motor
preparation. For instance, Haggard and Eimer (1999), replicated the original
findings and found that the reported W correlates only with the late part of the
RP – i.e., the lateralized RP – that represents the stage at which the
representation of an abstract action is translated into representation of a
specific movement (i.e., “Do that!”). This finding suggests that we become
aware of our own intention to perform a voluntary movement only when
information about which specific movement has to be made is represented in
pre-motor areas (Haggard and Eimer 1999).
These data show that our motor actions are preceded by preconscious brain
activity, which enters our awareness only at a later stage, just before the action
is executed. Therefore, a plausible conclusion is that conscious intentions are
not the first source of our behavior as voluntary actions would be primarily
determined by brain activity that enters consciousness only at the later stages
(Hallett 2007).
However, these conclusions are far from being uncontroversial. For
instance, Trevena and Miller recently questioned the assumption that the RP is
specifically associated with voluntary movements (Trevena and Miller 2010).
They thought to show that the RP is not necessarily followed by an overt
movement and therefore it cannot be considered a specific marker of voluntary
movement preparation. However, their experimental setup has also been
criticized (Gomes 2010). Therefore, further research is needed to better
clarify the relationship between brain processes underlying voluntary
movements preparation and the subjective experience of intention.
It is noteworthy to mention that more recent studies extended the
hypothesis that our behavior is determined by unconscious brain activity using
2

See Haggard 2008; Hallett 2007; Pockett and Miller 2007.

144

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

functional MRI. For instance, Soon and colleagues (Soon et al. 2008) used a
modified version of the Libet‟s clock in which participants had to freely decide
between a left and a right button press that they should execute at a freely
chosen time. Then, participants reported the time at which the conscious
motor decision was actually made. They found that the outcome of the decision
– i.e., whether the left or the right button – was encoded in the brain activity of
prefrontal and parietal cortex up to 10 seconds before it entered awareness.
The decoding accuracy was about 60%. Thus, these data show that brain
activity preceding awareness can predict our conscious decisions3. It is crucial
to note here, however, that the prediction even though reliable was far from
being perfect. With an accuracy of 60%, that is, 10% above chance, it is
difficult to argue that these information determine our decision. This finding
does not tell us that our conscious decisions are fully determined by such
unconscious processes; rather it indicates that our conscious decisions are
biased by brain activity reflecting unconscious processes. One crucial question
is whether the low accuracy is due to methodological shortcomings or to
principle reasons, namely that the bias is simply not stronger than, for example
10 %. It would be interesting to further investigate whether it is possible to
influence the accuracy of the prediction.
3. RECONSTRUCTION OF INTENTIONS AND APPARENT MENTAL CAUSATION
In voluntary actions we experience that the conscious intention to perform an
action precedes the action itself. Subjectively, the intention to press a key
determines or causes the key press. A series of empirical studies in
experimental psychology and neuroscience attempted to challenge this
intuitive experience by focusing on cognitive and brain mechanisms
underlying the evaluation of the consequences of our actions, as these
processes seem to influence the subjective experience of conscious
intentions. 4 Empirical data suggest that the subjective experience of the
conscious intention is strongly influenced by events occurring after the action

3

Indeed, what is unconscious is not the brain activity itself, but the mental state associated with
that brain activity.
4
See Banks and Isham 2009; Kühn and Brass 2009; Lau et al. 2007; Rigoni et al. 2010;
Wegner and Wheatley 1999.

D. Rigoni, L.Sammicheli & M. Brass – Perspectives on the Experience of Will 145

is executed. Conscious intentions would then be, at least partially,
retrospectively inferred from events occurring after an action is executed.
A study by Lau and colleagues (Lau et al. 2007) provided evidence in
favour of this reconstruction hypothesis. They applied a Transcranial Magnetic
Stimulation (TMS) over the pre-supplementary motor area (pre-SMA) after the
execution of a simple spontaneous movement while participants were
performing a Libet‟s task. They found that when the TMS pulse was applied
200 ms after movement execution, the perceived onset of the conscious
intention shifted backward in time, indicating that the experience of conscious
intentions involves activity of the pre-SMA taking place after the execution of
action.
Banks and Isham (2009) used a modified version of the Libet‟s procedure
in which participants were asked to press a button at will and to report the W
judgment – i.e., the time they had the intention to press the button.
Immediately after each button press, an auditory feedback was delivered at
variable delays of 5, 20, 40, or 60 ms, in order to signal a response later than
the actual one. Although participants were not aware of the delay, their W
judgment moved forward in time linearly with the delay of the auditory
feedback, indicating that people estimate the timing of their conscious
intentions on the basis of the apparent time of response, rather than the actual
response. In other words, people estimate the timing of their conscious
intentions on the basis of the consequences of the actions, rather than the
intention itself.
Rigoni and colleagues (Rigoni et al. 2010) extended these findings by
applying electrophysiological recordings to the procedure used by Banks and
Isham (2009) in order to investigate the psychophysiological mechanisms
involved in the inferential processes of the conscious intentions. The authors
demonstrated that the inferential processes by which the intention is
reconstructed involve brain processes related to action-monitoring.
Taken together, these empirical findings show that the effects of intentional
actions have an impact on the subjective experience of free will – at least on the
subjective estimation of when participants had the intention to act. In addition,
they challenge the intuitive view that voluntary actions are caused by the
conscious intention to perform that specific action.
Other studies moved a step further and provided evidence that people may
retrospectively reconstruct the experience of volition for actions that are
executed unintentionally. For instance, Kühn and Brass (2009) combined a

146

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

stop-signal paradigm and an intentional action paradigm: participants were
asked to press a button as fast as possible when a stimulus, say a letter, was
displayed on a computer screen (primary response trials). Sometimes, right
after the stimulus, either a stop-signal or a decision-signal was presented: with
the stop-signal, participants had to inhibit the pending response, with the
decision-signal they could decide whether responding to the stimulus or
aborting the pending response (decide trials). In the decision trials in which
participants provided a response, participants were also asked whether it was a
voluntary response or a failed inhibition – i.e., participants were not able to
stop the response. The aim of the study was to compare the reaction times
(RTs) in the decide trials in which the subjects decided voluntarily to press the
button with RTs in primary response trials in order to explore whether subjects
were able to discriminate between acting without being able to stop (i.e., failed
inhibition) and deciding voluntarily to resume the prepared action. If
participants were able of distinguishing those states, there should be no decide
trials in which subjects stated to have chosen voluntarily to resume the
prepared action in the range of primary response RTs. That was because the
process of stopping an ongoing action and reinitiating it voluntarily should
take time. On the basis of this RT analysis, the authors showed that participants
judged as voluntary responses that were in the time range of primary response
RTs and were thus given unintentionally (i.e., failed inhibitions). Therefore, in
some cases, participants had the experience of a conscious decision for
unintentional responses.
A more radical view, proposes the so-called theory of apparent mental
causation (Wegner and Wheatley 1999). According to this hypothesis, people
feel that their conscious intentions are the source of their actions because they
think about that action in advance of its occurrence, and because alternative
sources of the action are not available. The human mind would assume a causal
path from the intention to act to the action itself in order to explain the
correlation between them (Haggard 2008). This correlation occurs because
both the subjective experience of intention and the action are generated by a
common process, that is the neural preparation of the movement. Several
studies support the idea that sometimes conscious will is fabricated from the
perception of a causal link between the thought and the action. For instance,
Wegner and Weathley (1999) demonstrated empirically that people have the
subjective experience that they performed intentional actions that were actually
performed by another person. As Wegner commented, «conscious will is not

D. Rigoni, L.Sammicheli & M. Brass – Perspectives on the Experience of Will 147

inherent in action» (Wegner and Weathley 1999, p. 11): conscious intention
is not an intrinsic part of the process by which somebody acts, but it is an
extrinsic accompaniments to that process.
Taken together, all these studies provide evidence that the experience of
volition is biased by factors concerning the consequences of our behaviour.
According to some authors, volition is a perception, rather than the generator
of behavior. According to this model of free will, our brain motor‟s system
would produce a movement as a product of its different inputs and would
inform consciousness of the movement, that would be perceived as being freely
chosen (Hallett 2007).
However, one has to be careful with drawing to far reaching conclusions
from studies showing that our experience of will is sometimes illusionary.
Arguing that free will is always an illusion on the basis of experimental
observations that it is possible to generate an illusionary will, is, in our opinion,
an overstatement. Indeed, it is like claiming that our visual system is delusional
on the basis of demonstrations of visual illusions such as the Kanizsa triangle or
the Müller-Lyer illusion.
4.

EXPERIENCING FREE WILL IN OTHERS

Imagine yourself sitting in a crowded bus. Suddenly the bus driver hits the
brakes and the bus comes to an immediate stop. The person standing in front
of you looses balance and falls on top of you. You feel pain and you are quite
annoyed. However, despite a first impulse to react, you feel that a much more
appropriate response is to say: “Don‟t worry, it happens!”.
As indicated by the example above, we do not only feel that we are free; we
also have a clear feeling that other people are free to act. In other words, as we
have an immediate subjective experience of free will, we also have an
immediate subjective experience of others‟ free will (Gallagher and Zahavi
2008). This ability to immediately and effortlessly discriminate between
actions performed intentionally and actions performed unintentionally has
been referred to as intentional stance (Dennett 1987).
The subjective experience of other people‟s free will is so instinctive and
pervasive that virtually all human societies have formalized it into the juridical
category of personal responsibility. Personal responsibility is an almost
universal concept that is grounded on the ability to identify others‟ intentions:

148

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

the question of „guilty‟ vs. „innocent‟ actions is meaningful only if we consider
the possibility to distinguish between free or intentional actions and
unintentional actions.
Among the few studies that focused on the psychological mechanisms
supporting juridical categories – in a perspective that in philosophy of law may
be called jus naturalism – Hamilton tried to describe the parallelism between
the juridical categories of personal responsibility and the Heider‟s levels of
causal attribution (Heider 1958). According to Hamilton (1978), legal
responsibility rules are approximately analogs to the Heider‟s responsibility
attribution levels. For instance, the association attribution, in which a person is
«held responsible for each effect that is in any way connected with him or that
seems in any way to belong to him» (Heider 1958, p. 113), is equivalent to the
Vicarious responsibility rule (e.g., regulations that tavern owners are
responsible if liquor is served to minors, with or without the owner‟s
knowledge or consent). Similarly, intention attribution – i.e., «only what a
person intended is perceived as having its source in him» (Heider 1958, p.
113) – is typical criminal responsibility for an intended act (Hamilton 1978).
In law, the use of the different categories of personal responsibility requires
the decoding of social behaviour (e.g., a crime) through mind constructs (e.g.,
the intention). That is, the implicit principle of personal responsibility is made
explicit by the law in order to distinguish between a signifier (e.g., a punch)
from a non-signifier action (e.g., an automatic reflex in the Tourette‟s
syndrome).
What are the mechanisms by which our brain can distinguish free from
determined actions? Whereas Libet focused on the problem of free will under a
self perspective (i.e., the experience that „I‟ have free will), here the problem is
framed under an others perspective (i.e., the experience that „others‟ have free
will). As outlined in the previous paragraph, attribution of intentionality is
crucial for social interactions and for the regulation of human societies, as
demonstrated by the existence of the categories of personal responsibility in
the law. The study of social cognition – i.e., the processing of information
related to the other human beings – is the mean by which the problem of free
will – in the others perspective – can be investigated. The question moves from
the description of the factors influencing the experience of free will to the
investigation of cognitive and the neural processes underlying the attribution
of free will to others.

D. Rigoni, L.Sammicheli & M. Brass – Perspectives on the Experience of Will 149

Within the field of cognitive neuroscience, different hypotheses have
emerged to describe brain mechanisms underlying our ability to attribute free
will to others. However, all the different hypotheses rest on the assumption that
the first step in the attribution of intention is the ability to distinguish
biological from non-biological agents. That is, people must first classify
interactions between objects as mechanical or intentional and discern the
resence of agents, starting from perceptual information (Frith 1999). The
brain network underlying the processing of biological motion involves the
superior temporal sulcus and the premotor cortex (Beauchamp et al. 2002,
Grossman and Blake 2002).
The ability to detect agency from biological motion (i.e., psychological
causation or intentional movement) is considered a precursor of intentionality
attribution. When we observe a biological motion, we attribute mental states to
the observed movement, such as goals, intentions, desires. However, we would
not attribute intentions to all biological agents but limit it, with a few
exceptions, to human agents. Thus, perceiving free will in others requires the
ability to understand also other people‟s goals and intentions. There are two
competing hypotheses explaining how we are able to attribute intentionality to
others (Gallese and Goldman 1998). The simulation theory suggests that
people use their own mental mechanisms to predict the mental processes of
others. According to the simulation theory, people simulate others‟ cognitive
processes by deploying the same cognitive mechanisms. Conversely, the theory
suggests that people understand others‟ intentions by acquiring a
commonsense theory of mind, something similar to a scientific theory. In other
words, people use inferential and deductive processes that do not involve
simulation. The two processes involve distinct brain circuits: simulating
involve premotor and parietal areas, the insula, and the secondary
somatosensory cortex, while theorizing involve midline structures and the
temporal-parietal junction (Keysers and Gazzola 2007).
It has been proposed that the two views describe different types of social
interactions that are at the two extremes of a intuitive/reflective continuum
(Keysers and Gazzola 2007, Uddin et al. 2007): simulationists focus on more
intuitive examples in which intentionality is easily and effortlessly identifiable
(e.g., when we observe a hand grasping a mug); investigators of the theory
theory would be concerned with more reflective examples of intention
attribution, in which the attribution of intention follows a conscious browsing

150

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

through what we know about the observed person and the context (e.g., when
someone steps on our toes in a crowded bus) (Brass et al. 2007).
The discovery of the mirror neurons (Rizzolatti et al. 1996) provided an
important insight into the brain mechanisms that might be involved in the
attribution of others‟ intentionality. Mirror neurons are a special class of
neurons in premotor areas that fire when we perform object-directed actions
such as grasping, tearing, manipulating, holding, but also when we observe
somebody else performing the same class of actions. Recent empirical findings
indicate that the mirror neuron system may be involved also in goal and
intention understanding (Hamilton and Grafton 2006, Iacoboni et al. 2005),
but the involvement of the mirror system might be limited to intuitive
situations, as outlined above.
An interesting approach is to link the mirror neuron system with the
concept of semantic nature of human behaviour (Hauser 2006 and Rawls
1971), in which the freeness of a certain action is a semantic attribution that
leads to an immediate and unavoidable perception of intentionality – “You are
free!”. Gallagher and Zahavi (2008) propose a theory of social cognition that
emphasize the immediacy of the attribution of intentionality. This perspective
is distinct from the two other main theories of social cognition – the simulation
theory and the theory theory. According to the authors,
Mirror activation, on this interpretation, is not the initiation of simulation; it‟s
part of a direct intersubjective perception of what the other is doing. At the
phenomenological level, when I see the other‟s action or gesture, I see (I
directly perceive) the meaning in the action or gesture. (Gallagher and Zahavi
2008, p. 179)

This approach seems to be well supported from empirical findings on the
mirror neurons in social contexts.5
Further research within neuroscience is needed to clarify how our brain
perceive free will in others. For instance, Liepelt and colleagues (Liepelt et al.
2008) found that reasoning about the action and the context in which the
action is performed have a strong impact on the brain processes underlying the
attribution of intentionality to others. This suggests that the attribution of free
will to others might be a prerequisite for the activity of the mirror-neuron
system, rather than its consequence (Liepelt et al. 2008).

5

See Gallagher and Zahavi 2008 for a review.

D. Rigoni, L.Sammicheli & M. Brass – Perspectives on the Experience of Will 151

However, the attribution of mental states – such as intentionality – to
others include other mechanisms as well, namely mechanisms that allow to
distinguish one‟s own intentions from others‟ intentions. 6 This mechanism
involves the right inferior parietal cortex in conjunction with prefrontal cortex.
5.

THE PRAGMATIC VALUE OF BELIEVING IN FREE WILL

A totally different perspective on free will comes from social psychology in
which human will is viewed as a kind of organ that is fuelled by willpower
(Baumeister 2008). This perspective defines human will as a unitary concept
that is characterized by specific properties. One central assumption of the
willpower metaphor is that it draws on a common limited resource (Baumeister
et al. 1998; Vohs and Schooler 2008). Tasks that require willpower include
self-control, decision making, complex problem solving and conflict
resolution. From this perspective there is not one task that measures the free
will but rather a number of tasks that draw more or less on this resource. In a
series of studies, Baumeister and colleagues could show that different tasks
requiring willpower indeed interfere with each other (e.g., Baumeister et al.
1998; Muraven and Baumeister 2000). More specifically, they could show that
carrying out a task that strongly relies on willpower leads to a depletion of this
resource – this process is called ego-depletion and results in impaired
performance in other tasks that rely on willpower. For instance, carrying out a
self-control task leads to less persistence in a difficult problem solving task.
Furthermore, making free choices to perform attitude relevant behavior also
leads to reduced persistence in the problem solving task.
A second basic assumption of the willpower metaphor is that willed
behavior is very effortful and requires more energy than behaviour that does
not rely on willpower (Gailliot and Baumeister 2007; Gailliot et al. 2007).
Support for the idea of higher energy requirements for processes involving
willpower stems from the observation that such processes are very sensitive to
the glucose level (Gailliot and Baumeister 2007).
Given that willed behaviour is so demanding, why do people put so much
effort into their behaviour? Why do they spend so much energy to control
themselves? Why do they behave responsibly instead of letting their automatic
6

See Decety and Sommerville 2003 for a review.

152

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

and selfish impulses drive their actions? It has been demonstrated that
increasing people‟s sense of responsibility can shift their behaviour toward a
more desirable performance (Harmon-Jones and Mills 1999, Mueller and
Dweck 1998). Under this perspective, one might expect that reducing
people‟s sense of responsibility may promote undesirable behavior. What
would happen if people start to believe that they have no control over their own
actions? In other words, what would happen if people would be induced to
believe the subjective experience of free will is completely illusional? To
address this question, Vohs and Schooler (2008) carried out a study in which
they examined whether inducing participants to believe that human behavior is
predetermined would encourage cheating. Two groups of participants were
exposed either to a deterministic (i.e., statements claiming that high-minded
people now agree in that free will is an illusion) or to a neutral message (i.e.,
statements about consciousness which did not discuss free will). Afterwards,
participants were given a series of mental-arithmetic problems. They were told
that due to a computer glitch, the correct answer would appear on the screen
while they were attempting to solve the problem and that they could stop the
answer from being displayed by pressing the space bar after the arithmetical
problem appeared. Furthermore, they were told that although the
experimenter would not know whether they pressed the space bar, they should
try to solve the problem honestly. Unbeknownst to the participants, the
dependent measure was indeed the number of times they pressed the space bar
to prevent the answer from appearing. Results showed that the participants
who were exposed to a determinist message cheated more frequently than
those who were exposed to a neutral message. In the same study, the authors
showed that also when the task requires a more active behavior in order to
cheat (i.e., stealing money from the researchers), participants exposed to a
deterministic message behave more immorally than others.
Baumeister and colleagues (Baumeister et al. 2009) extended these
findings into a broader context. More precisely, they showed that a disbelief in
free will increases antisocial attitudes such as aggression and at the same time
reduces pro-social behavior such as helpfulness.
These studies show that inducing a deterministic perspective that denies
free will strongly influences human behaviour in social contexts. A simple
exposure to a deterministic worldview increases the probability that people
behave immorally and antisocially. What are the mechanisms underlying this

D. Rigoni, L.Sammicheli & M. Brass – Perspectives on the Experience of Will 153

antisocial shift? Why do people behave antisocial if they are induced to believe
that they are not free? According to Baumeister,
Feelings of responsibility and accountability may make people feel that they
ought to behave in socially desirable ways, such as performing prosocial acts of
helping and restraining antisocial impulses to aggress against others. The
deterministic belief essentially says that the person could not act otherwise,
which resembles a standard form of excuse (“I couldn‟t help it”) and thus might
encourage people to act in short-sighted, impulsive, selfish ways. (Baumeister
et al. 2009, p. 261)

Therefore a deterministic message acts as an implicit cue that let people behave
in a selfish, impulsive, less altruistic, and aggressive fashion.
One alternative perspective of how beliefs about free will might affect social
behaviour is to assume that disbelief in free will changes basic motor cognitive
processes which in turn influence how we experience the consequences of our
behaviour. Recently, the research group of Marcel Brass attempted to
investigate the impact of disbelieving in free will on the preparation of
intentional motor action. In particular, they applied the free will manipulation
to study brain processes related to the preparation of voluntary movements.
They could show that brain potentials that precede voluntary movements and
that reflect the intentional involvement in action preparation, are strongly
modulated by the level of disbelief in free will (Rigoni et al., submitted). A
potential explanation for this result is that the free will manipulation affects
intentional involvement in the task via a reduction of self-efficacy beliefs. Less
intentional involvement in an action might on the other hand reduce the feeling
of agency for the consequences of the behaviour which in turn might alter our
experience of responsibility for such actions. Although the specific
mechanisms underlying this effect are not clear, these results suggest that
abstract belief systems might have a an impact on very fundamental brain
processes.
Whereas the studies in social psychology and cognitive neuroscience are
crucial in showing the benefits of believing in free will at a societal level
another question is how disbelieving in free will can influence individual well
being. Promoting the idea that one has few control over his or her own
behaviour has a strong impact on how individuals perceive themselves, for
instance by lowering individual well-being and by increasing feelings of
powerlessness and dissatisfaction.

154

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Believing that we have free will or in other words that we have control over
our own actions and over the environment thus seems to be a psychological and
biological necessity.7
6. CONCLUSIVE THOUGHTS
The subjective feeling of free will is a pervasive component of human
experience. We have a clear and unavoidable experience of voluntarily control
a great part of our actions and we feel to be the agent of our behaviour. We
therefore feel we are responsible for those actions that are performed with a
conscious intention, that is, those actions that are associated with the
subjective experience that “I” decided to do so. However, the neuroscience of
will (Haggard 2008) has challenged this intuitive experience by questioning
the role of free will as the generator of our actions. Here, we critically analyze
the most important contributions that have threatened the existence of free will
from a neuroscientific perspective. We commented that these studies will
hardly provide an answer to the philosophical question of whether free will
exists.
Furthermore, we outlined two additional perspectives on free will, namely,
how people perceive free will in others and the pragmatic value of believing in
free will. Both these frameworks are of great social relevance: human societies
are ruled on the concept of personal responsibility and therefore it is assumed
that people can freely decide their own actions. Understanding the
mechanisms underlying the ability to perceive others‟ intentionality and how
disbelief in free will alters basic brain processes, would shed light on several
essential aspects of all human societies.

REFERENCES

Banks, W. P., & Isham, E. A. (2009). We infer rather than perceive the
moment we decided to act. Psychological Science, 20(1), 17-21.

7

See Leotti et al. 2010 for a review.

D. Rigoni, L.Sammicheli & M. Brass – Perspectives on the Experience of Will 155

Baumeister, R. F., Bratslavsky, E., Muraven, M., & Tice, D. M. (1998). Ego
depletion: Is the active self a limited resource? Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 74(5), 1252-1265.
Baumeister, R. F. (2008). Free will in scientific psychology. Psychological
Science, 3(1), 14-19.
Beauchamp, M. S., Lee, K. E., Haxby, J. V., & Martin, A. (2002). Parallel
visual motion processing streams for manipulable objects and human
movements. Neuron, 34(1), 149-159.
Brass, M., Schmitt, R. M., Spengler, S., & Gergely, G. (2007). Investigating
action understanding: Inferential processes versus action simulation.
Current Biology, 17(24), 2117-2121.
Decety, J., & Sommerville, J. A. (2003). Shared representations between self
and other: A social cognitive neuroscience view. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 7(12), 527-533.
Dennett, D. (1987). The Intentional Stance. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Frith, C. D. (1999). Interacting minds-A biological basis. Science,
286(5445), 1692-1695.
Gailliot, M. T., & Baumeister, R. F. (2007). The physiology of willpower:
Linking blood glucose to self-control. Personality and Social
Psychology Review, 11(4), 303-327.
Gailliot, M. T., Baumeister, R. F., DeWall, C. N., Maner, J. K., Plant, E. A.,
Tice, D. M., & Brewer, E. L. (2007). Self-control relies on glucose as a
limited energy source: Willpower is more than a metaphor. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 92(2), 325-336.
Gallagher, S., & Zahavi, D. (2008). The Phenomenological Mind: An
Introduction to Philosophy of Mind and Cognitive Science. London:
Routledge.
Gallese, V., & Goldman, A. (1998). Mirror neurons and the mind-reading.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2(12), 493-501.
Gomes, G. (2010). Preparing to move and deciding not to move.
Consciousness and Cognition, 19(1), 457-459.

156

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Grossman, E. D., & Blake, R. (2002). Brain areas active during visual
perception of biological motion. Neuron, 35(6), 1167-1175.
Haggard, P, & Eimer, M. (1999). On the relation between brain potentials and
the awareness of voluntary movements. Experimental Brain Research,
126(1), 128-133.
Haggard, P. (2005). Conscious intention and motor cognition. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 9(6), 290-295.
Haggard, P. (2008). Human volition: Towards a neuroscience of will. Nature
Reviews Neuroscience, 9(12), 934-946.
Hallett, M. (2007). Volitional control of movement: The physiology of free
will. Clinical Neurophysiology, 118(6), 1179-1192.
Hamilton, A. F. de C., & Grafton, S. T. (2006). Goal representation in human
anterior intraparietal sulcus. The Journal of Neuroscience, 26(4),
1133-1137.
Hamilton, V. L. (1978). Who is responsible? Toward a social psychology of
responsibility attribution. Social Psychology, 41(4), 316-328.
Harmon-Jones, E., & Mills, J. (1999). Cognitive Dissonance: Progress on a
pivotal theory in social psychology. Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.
Hauser, M. (2006). Moral Minds: How Nature Designed Our Universal Sense
of Right and Wrong. New York: Ecco Press.
Heider, F. (1958). The Psychology of Interpersonal Relations. New York:
Wiley.
Keysers, C., & Gazzola, V. (2007). Integrating simulation and theory of mind:
From self to social cognition. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 11(5),
194-196.
Kornhuber, H. H., & Deecke, L. (1965). Hirnpotentialänderungen bei
Willkürbewegungen und passiven Bewegungen des Menschen:
Bereitschaftspotential und reafferente Potentiale. Pflügers Archiv
European Journal of Physiology, 284(1), 1-17.
Kühn, S., & Brass, M. (2009). Retrospective construction of the judgement of
free choice. Consciousness and Cognition, 18(1), 12-21.

D. Rigoni, L.Sammicheli & M. Brass – Perspectives on the Experience of Will 157

Lau, H. C., Rogers, R. D., & Passingham, R. E. (2007). Manipulating the
experienced onset of intention after action execution. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 19(1), 81-90.
Leotti, L. A, Iyengar, S. S., & Ochsner, K. N. (2010). Born to choose: The
origins and value of the need for control. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
14(10), 457-463.
Libet, B., Gleason, C. A, Wright, E. W., & Pearl, D. K. (1983). Time of
conscious intention to act in relation to onset of cerebral activity
(readiness-potential). The unconscious initiation of a freely voluntary
act. Brain, 106, 623-642.
Liepelt, R., Cramon, D. Y. V., & Brass, M. (2008). What is matched in direct
matching? Intention attribution modulates motor priming. Journal of
Experimental Psychology. Human Perception and Performance, 34(3),
578-591.
Mueller, C. M., & Dweck, C. S. (1998). Praise for intelligence can undermine
children‟s motivation and performance. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 75(1), 33-52.
Muraven, M., & Baumeister, R. F. (2000). Self-regulation and depletion of
limited resources: Does self-control resemble a muscle? Psychological
Bulletin, 126(2), 247-259.
Pockett, S., & Miller, A. (2007). The rotating spot method of timing subjective
events. Consciousness and Cognition, 16(2), 241-254.
Rawls, J. (1971). A Theory of Justice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Rigoni, D., Brass, M., & Sartori, G. (2010). Post-action determinants of the
reported time of conscious intentions. Frontiers in Human
Neuroscience, 4, 38.
Rigoni, D., Kuhn, S., Sartori, G., & Brass, M. (submitted). Inducing disbelief
in free will alters brain correlates of preconscious motor preparation.
Rizzolatti, G., Fadiga, L., Gallese, V, & Fogassi, L. (1996). Premotor cortex
and the recognition of motor actions. Brain Research. Cognitive Brain
Research, 3(2), 131-141.

158

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Roskies, A. L. (2010). How does neuroscience affect our conception of
volition? Annual Reviews of Neuroscience, 33, 109-130.
Shibasaki, H, Barrett, G., Halliday, E., & Halliday, A. M. (1980). Components
of the movement-related cortical potential and their scalp topography.
Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, 49(3-4), 213226.
Shibasaki, H., & Hallett, M. (2006). What is the Bereitschaftspotential?
Clinical Neurophysiology, 117(11), 2341-2356.
Soon, C. S., Brass, M., Heinze, H.-J., & Haynes, J.-D. (2008). Unconscious
determinants of free decisions in the human brain. Nature
neuroscience, 11(5), 543-545.
Trevena, J., & Miller, J. (2010). Brain preparation before a voluntary action:
Evidence against unconscious movement initiation. Consciousness and
Cognition, 19(1), 447-456.
Uddin, L. Q., Iacoboni, M., Lange, C., & Keenan, J. P. (2007). The self and
social cognition: The role of cortical midline structures and mirror
neurons. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 11(4), 153-157.
Vohs, K. D., & Schooler, J. W. (2008). The value of believing in free will:
Encouraging a belief in determinism increases cheating. Psychological
Science, 19(1), 49-54.
Wegner, D. M., & Wheatley, T. (1999). Apparent mental causation. Sources
of the experience of will. The American Psychologist, 54(7), 480-492.

Initiation of Intentional Actions and the
Electromagnetic Field Theory of Consciousness
Susan Pockett*

s.pockett@auckland.ac.nz

ABSTRACT

The electromagnetic (EM) field theory of consciousness proposes that
consciousness is identical with certain brain-generated EM field patterns. It
initially seemed to be a point in favour of this theory that EM fields are known
to affect neurons, which in principle provides a mechanism whereby
consciousness could affect its brain. However, it is shown here that the sorts of
EM fields proposed by the theory as being conscious can act only on neurons
that are either identical with, or spatially close to, the neurons that generated
those fields in the first place. This makes it difficult to see how putatively
conscious EM fields could initiate bodily movements. It does not harm the EM
field theory of consciousness however, because an accumulation of
independent psychological and physiological evidence shows that
consciousness itself is not the proximal cause of voluntary movements. The fact
that humans are not directly conscious of the initiation of their own bodily
movements is now used to reveal a basic structural feature that may distinguish
conscious EM fields from the superficially similar fields produced by those
parts of the brain that do not generate conscious experiences.

The electromagnetic (EM) field theory of consciousness (Pockett 1999, 2000,
2002; McFadden 2002a, 2000b) is an identity theory which proposes that
consciousness is identical not with particular spatial patterns of neuronal
activity per se, but with the extracellular EM field patterns that are induced by
those spatial patterns of neuronal activity. The major difference between the
EM field theory of consciousness and what might now be called the classical

* Departments of Physics and Psychology – University of Auckland (New Zealand)

160

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

neural identity theory of Place (1956), Feigel (1958) and Smart (1959) is that
the EM field theory allows for the possibility of generating consciousness in the
complete absence of neurons, using hardware instead of wetware to generate
the relevant EM fields.
This proposed identity between consciousness and EM field patterns in
principle provides a mechanism by which consciousness could initiate bodily
movements. It well known that EM fields can influence and even cause neural
activity.1 Thus, at first sight it appears reasonable to suppose that conscious
EM fields could act on the brain to cause bodily movements. This was initially
seen (Pockett 2000; McFadden 2002a, 2000b) as a point in favour of the EM
field theory of consciousness. However, doubts soon appeared (Pockett 2002)
and have since hardened in the present author‟s mind to frank disbelief that
conscious electromagnetic patterns do, in the normal course of events, cause
bodily movements. The main reasons for this disbelief are as follows.
REASONS FOR NOT BELIEVING THAT CONSCIOUS ELECTROMAGNETIC
PATTERNS CAUSE BODILY MOVEMENTS
1.SPATIAL EM PATTERNS CAN ONLY ACT ON THE NEURONS THAT GENERATED THEM
The first reason for doubting that conscious EM patterns cause bodily
movements concerns the physical characteristics of putatively conscious EM
patterns. In order to understand the argument here, it is first necessary to
understand the mechanism by which neurons generate the EM patterns in
question.
The EM field patterns proposed by this theory as being conscious are
spatial patterns of those transient, extracellular, electrical events known (quite
independently of the present theory) as „field potentials‟. Field potentials are
produced by the synchronous activation of chemical synapses on large
numbers of anatomically aligned pyramidal cells in the cerebral cortex of the
brain. The larger the number synapses on one pyramidal cell and/or the larger
the number of spatially aligned post-synaptic pyramidal cells activated
synchronously, the larger the field potential. The cellular mechanism by which
1
See Adey 1981, Richardson et al. 1984, Taylor et al. 1984, Turner et al. 1984, Dalkara et al.
1986, Dudek et al. 1986, Snow and Dudek 1986, Yim et al. 1986, Faber and Korn 1989, Jeffereys
1995, Francis et al. 2003, Deans et al. 2007, Frölich and McCormick 2010.

S. Pockett – Initiation of Intentional Actions and the EM Theory of Consciousness 161

field potentials are generated is well understood and is shown diagrammatically
in Figure 1.

Figure 1: Diagram showing how the field potentials associated with a single

pyramidal cell are generated. Activation of chemical synapses on the distal
dendrites of pyramidal cells (top) causes a burst of positive ions to flow
from the extracellular fluid into the apical dendrite. This leaves a shortlasting local negativity in the extracellular fluid around the synapse (top
voltage trace). The product is a negative-going field potential known as a
population epsp (excitatory post-synaptic potential). The intracellular
positivity caused by this entry of ions to the dendrite essentially has to go
somewhere, so to complete the circuit, positive ions flow out of the
pyramidal cell at the cell body (bottom). This outflow produces a positivegoing population epsp in the extracellular fluid near the cell body (bottom
voltage trace). If the voltage transient in the cell body is large enough to
cause an action potential to fire at the initial segment of the axon, a
relatively small and brief “population spike” also appears in the middle of
the population epsps.

Figure 1 illustrates two important points about the EM field theory of
consciousness:

(a) The field potentials that make up putatively conscious fields are
dominated by synaptic potentials, due to the activation of chemical
synapses. The external fields produced by acton potentials per se have

162

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

relatively little influence on the shape of field potentials. The activation
of electrical (as opposed to chemical) synapses has no influence on the
shape of field potentials.
(b) The field potentials that contribute to conscious field patterns always
come in positive-negative pairs: one positive-going field potential at
the level of the pyramidal cell body and one negative-going field
potential around the distal part of the apical dendrite. These positivenegative pairs are conveniently modelled as dipoles (right hand side of
Figure 1). The EM field theory of consciousness proposes that
conscious fields are distinguished from non-conscious fields – and
from different conscious fields – by the spatio-temporal pattern in
which these dipoles are arranged.
With this background, we may now return to the question of why it is doubtful
that conscious EM fields can cause bodily movements. The exact features of the
spatio-temporal dipole patterns that covary with particular sorts of
consciousness are not yet clear (although some progress on that question is
made by the arguments later in the present paper). However, one thing which
is very clear is that such spatio-temporal patterns propagate very badly through
space. Pockett et al. (2007) show mathematically that, assuming the patterns
covarying with sensation to be produced by cortical dipoles spaced 3 mm apart,
with an inter-pole distance of 2 mm (the approximate thickness of the cerebral
cortex), the point spread function of EM fields through a medium with the
conductivity of brain tissue is such that the patterns in question can not be
recognised more than 2.5 mm above their source. In fact (i) some of the
relevant dipoles may not extend the full width of the cortex, and (ii) the interdipole spacing is probably closer to 1 mm (the width of a human ocular
dominance column) than 3 mm, which makes the situation even worse with
respect to the distance over which a putatively conscious pattern could
propagate – in any direction – and still be recognisable. In short, the physics of
electromagnetism dictates that by the time one of these field patterns has
travelled a mere mm or so from its source, it is so smeared or blurred as to be
indistinguishable from a completely unpatterned (and therefore nonconscious) field.
This means that on any physically realistic version of the EM field theory of
consciousness, individual conscious experiences remain very localized around
the neurons that generate them. The only neurons a conscious field can

S. Pockett – Initiation of Intentional Actions and the EM Theory of Consciousness 163

activate or influence in a way that depends on the spatial pattern of (and
therefore the experience encoded by) the field are the very neurons that
generated the field in the first place. In this regard, it is notable that all the
empirical demonstrations cited earlier about the effect of brain-generated EM
fields on the brain do involve the back-action of fields on the neurons that
generated them.
How does this relate to the possibility of conscious fields‟ initiating bodily
actions? It is true that the EM field theory of consciousness proposes that an
individual‟s consciousness as a whole is the sum total of all the conscious fields
generated by the brain. So in one sense, consciousness as a whole has access to
the whole brain. But any particular conscious field pattern – for example, the
conscious thought “I should check my mail-box within the next few minutes” –
is able to affect the neuronal activity only of neurons in the immediate vicinity
of those that generated the thought. A conscious thought such as “I should
check the mail-box” would probably be generated somewhere in the prefrontal
and/or parietal cortices (Pockett 2006). The main point of this argument is
that it is physically impossible for a patterned EM field generated in the
prefrontal and/or parietal cortex to have any direct effect on motor neurons, as
suggested by McFadden (2002a, 2000b). Quite apart from the patternblurring effect of the point spread function, as mentioned above, the
propagation of dipole electric fields obeys an inverse cube law. Motor neurons
live in the spinal cord, several hundreds of mm away from either the parietal or
prefrontal cortex. By the time it gets to the spinal cord, the EM field due to a
parietal or prefrontal dipole has been reduced by the inverse cube law to less
than 1/100,000 of its source strength. So never mind the fact that its spatial
pattern would be unrecognisable – the EM field due to even the strongest
parietal or prefrontal dipole essentially does not exist at all in the spinal cord.
Of course, a patterned EM field generated in the parietal and/or prefrontal
cortex could have a direct effect on the neurons that generated it, and these
neurons could then activate all the standard action potential and synaptic
mechanisms by which the motor system is usually understood to work to
produce an eventual effect on motor neurons. But the parietal and/or
prefrontal neurons in question could just as easily do that job all by themselves,
without the need for any intervention from a conscious EM field – or indeed
without the need for any conscious thought at all. And oddly enough, the next
section of the present paper cites considerable evidence that usually, this is
exactly what happens.

164

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

2. PSYCHOLOGICAL EVIDENCE THAT CONSCIOUSNESS DOES NOT CAUSE BEHAVIOUR
The second major reason for disbelieving that conscious EM patterns cause
bodily movements concerns the psychologically measured properties of
consciousness itself, independently of any theory as to its nature. The issue
here is that there is now a large body of evidence that consciousness is not the
direct cause of intentional aka voluntary movements.
Some of this evidence is summarised by Wegner (2002), Pockett (2004)
and the various contributors to Pockett et al. (2006). The topic is too large
allow its discussion in very great detail here, but in brief, consciousness is
certainly not directly involved in the control of intentional movements.
Jeannerod (2006) summarises a number of experiments showing that people
are generally not even aware of having made the fine adjustments that serve to
control their own intentional movements. The question of whether or not
consciousness is involved in the initiation of voluntary movements is more
complex, although ultimately the answer is just as clearcut.
The first and still most often quoted evidence against the idea that voluntary
movements are initiated by consciousness is that generated by Libet et al.
(1983). Libet and colleagues showed that the Bereitschaftspotential or
readiness potential associated with a spontaneous voluntary movement begins
some 350 ms before the subject reports having initiated the movement. This
has been widely taken as demonstrating that voluntary movements are initiated
un- or pre-consciously. Pockett and Purdy (2010) repudiate that conclusion by
showing that:
(a) Readiness potentials are neither necessary nor sufficient (in anything
other than a definitional sense) for voluntary movements. Rather, they
simply indicate readiness to make a spontaneous movement.
(b) When subjects in Libet-style experiments are asked to make not
spontaneous movements, but movements based on a definite decision
about which of two acts to perform, the readiness potential is usually
so much shorter than that associated with spontaneous movements
that it starts at approximately the same time as the subject reports
having initiated the movement.
These findings initially seem to reopen the possibility that voluntary
movements might be initiated consciously. But the validity of that conclusion is
immediately thrown into doubt by the subjective observation of one of Pockett

S. Pockett – Initiation of Intentional Actions and the EM Theory of Consciousness 165

and Purdy‟s participants that for him, it was actually impossible to distinguish
between deciding to move and moving. On closer inspection, this single
observation turns out to be supported not only by the huge variability in the
movement initiation times reported by the deliberately untrained participants
in question (some of whom often reported that they had decided to initiate a
particular movement after they had objectively moved), but also by a large body
of experimental evidence from a whole series of other workers.2 For example,
Banks and Isham (2009) show that tricking a subject into thinking their own
movements occurred progressively later than they actually did results in linear
delays in the reported time of movement initiation.
The overwhelming conclusion from this body of experimental work is that
humans do not consciously experience their decisions to initiate bodily
movements in the same way as they experience sensory or even other cognitive
events. Pockett and Miller (2007) show that subjects can report very accurately
on the time at which they actually make a movement – perhaps because an
actual movement is accompanied by a good deal of proprioceptive and other
somatosensory feedback. But the psychological experiments of a number of
labs now combine to suggest that when asked to report the time at which they
initiated a movement, all a subject can do is infer that they must have initiated it
sometime shortly before it took place.
The coup de grace in favour of this conclusion comes from the work of
Desmurget et al. (2009), who describe a series of Penfield-esque experiments
in which they directly stimulate various parts of the cerebral cortex in awake
patients undergoing brain surgery and then ask the patients to report on their
conscious experiences. When Desmurget and colleagues stimulate parietal
regions, which are thought to generate conscious intentions to move at some
time in the near future (Pockett 2006) the subject reports a subjective
intention or desire to move the relevant part of the body, which escalates with
stronger stimuli to a belief that they actually have moved, even though no EMG
(electromyographic) activity can be detected. However, when the
experimenters stimulate premotor cortex, which is thought to underpin the
initiation of movements, the patient reports no subjective consciousness of
movement and in fact firmly denies that any bodily movement has taken place,

2

Aarts et al. 2005, Lau et al. 2007, Banks and Isham 2009, Kühn and Brass 2009, Rigoni et al.
2010.

166

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

even when the stimulation is turned up so much that the experimenters can see
the relevant part of the body moving.
The addition of this neurophysiological evidence to the accumulated
psychological results now makes it reasonable to conclude definitively that
subjective reports about movement initiation are not reports of on-the-spot
conscious perceptions at all. They are post-hoc cognitive constructions. We
are not directly conscious of the initiation of our voluntary movements. Thus
consciousness can not be considered to be the proximal cause of voluntary
movements. The fact that experimental subjects usually fail to realise this is
probably due to the general inability of humans to perceive cause and effect
accurately (Choi and Scholl 2006).
WHY IS THE INITIATION OF MOVEMENTS NOT ACCESSIBLE TO
CONSCIOUSNESS?
From the point of view of the EM field theory of consciousness, one beneficial
effect of the fact that we do not consciously experience the initiation of bodily
movements is that it renders harmless the parallel fact (see (1) above) that the
sorts of EM fields the theory says are conscious can have direct physical effects
only on the neurons that generated them. If consciousness itself does not
initiate movements, there is no reason to suppose that putatively conscious EM
fields should be able to initiate movements.
However, there is also another important consequence for the EM field
theory of consciousness of the fact that we do not consciously experience the
initiation of bodily movements. This is that it potentially provides a valuable
clue as to the characteristics of dipole patterns that do underpin conscious
experiences.
As explained earlier, the EM field theory of consciousness proposes that
different putatively conscious EM fields are characterised by different spatial
dispositions of the standard „field potentials‟ generated by activation of
chemical synapses on the distal apical dendrites of cortical pyramidal cells
(Figure 1). The spatial disposition of field potentials clearly depends on the
anatomical disposition of pyramidal cells. This means that for the EM field
theory of consciousness to work:

S. Pockett – Initiation of Intentional Actions and the EM Theory of Consciousness 167

(a) parts of cortex that produce different types of conscious experience
should probably have different types of intracortical disposition of
pyramidal cells
(b) parts of the cortex that do not produce conscious experiences at all
should definitely have a fundamentally different intracortical
disposition of pyramidal cells from parts of the cortex that do produce
conscious experiences.
Fortunately for the theory, it turns out that requirement (a) was shown to be
broadly fulfilled a little over a hundred years ago. Figure 2 reproduces the map
of spatial variations in the cytoarchitecture of the cerebral cortex published by
Brodmann (1909).3 This map is based on microscopically observed differences
in the layering of pyramidal and other neurons from the outside to the inside of
the cortex. Despite a mid-century flurry of complaints from Lashley (who,
unable to find his „engram‟, became convinced that the cortex must be
pluripotential in function and therefore uniform in structure), the
cytoarchitectonic areas delineated by Brodmann have since been shown to
correspond so well with the functional areas delineated by modern
electrophysiological and imaging techniques that particular regions of cortex
are still routinely identified using their Brodmann Area (BA) numbers. For our
present purposes the most relevant of these numbers are those of the motor
and pre-motor cortices (BA4 and BA6).

3
Although Brodman‟s map is almost identical to an earlier map by Campbell (1905), the
Brodmann version has become much more well-known, to the extent that its numbering system is still
widely used.

168

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Figure 2: Brodmann‟s cytoarchitectural map of the human cerebral cortex.

Brodmann Areas 4 & 6 are motor & premotor cortex. Brodmann Areas 1,2
& 3 (somatosensory), 17 & 18 (visual) and 41 & 42 (auditory) are primary
and sccondary sensory cortex. Cerebellum not shown.

So requirement (a) above has been known for a century to be largely fulfilled.
One very useful effect of the new information that movement initiation is
inaccessible to consciousness is that it allows us now to test requirement (b).
While the longer term planning of movements (which is accessible to
consciousness) probably occurs in the prefrontal and/or parietal cortices (BA
10, 11, 39 & 40), the initiation of movements is generally thought to occur
somewhere in BA6, the area now known as pre-motor cortex (see Pockett
2006 for review). It is therefore deeply fortunate for the EM field theory of
consciousness that the anatomical work of Brodmann‟s successor von
Economo (1925 and 1927) does indeed show a fundamental difference
between the cytoarchitectonics of premotor and motor cortices (BA6 & BA4)
and that of all other regions of the neocortex.
Figure 3 shows in diagrammatic form the cortical locations and cell body
architectures of the five general types of cortex identified by von Economo.
Figure 3(A) shows that the area encompassed by BA6 and BA4 is classified as
„agranular‟ cortex. Figure 3(B) shows that the major difference between
agranular cortex and the other four cortical types in Economo‟s classification

S. Pockett – Initiation of Intentional Actions and the EM Theory of Consciousness 169

system is that agranular cortex lacks the „granular‟ layer which in most
cytoarchitectonic classification systems is called lamina IV.

Figure 3: Cortical locations (A) and cellular structure (B) of the

cytoarchitectonic types classified by von Economo (1925 and 1927).
Roman numerals in B indicate cytoarchitectonic layers: surface of brain at
top. Lamina I consists entirely of apical dendrites from the pyramidal cells
of lower layers (see Fig 4) and incoming axons from other parts of the
cortex, which synapse on the dendrites. Apart from lamina I,
cytoarchitectonic type 1 (found mainly in areas BA 4 & 6) lacks welldemarcated layers. The five architectonic types named by von Economo are
1- agranular cortex; 2 - frontal cortex; 3 – parietal cortex; 4-polar cortex; 5
(solid black areas in A) – granular or koniocortex.

In all regions of the neocortex except the motor and premotor cortices,
lamina IV is a largely pyramid-free layer of stellate neurons, which in Nissl
stained sections4 somewhat resemble dust (leading to von Economo‟s
identification of the three major primary sensory areas, where lamina IV is
particularly obvious, as „koniocortex‟). The stellate neurons in Lamina IV
4
Nissl staining shows all cell bodies, but none of their axons or dendrites. Golgi staining selects a
few neurons (in a completely uncontrollable way) and stains the whole cell, including the axon and all
dendrites.

170

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

receive major synaptic input from the subcortical thalamus. However the
contribution of these thalamo-cortical synapses to the field potential landscape
would be negligible, because the dendrites of stellate cells extend at all angles
from the cell body and thus the positive and negative voltage transients
illustrated in Figure 1 tend to cancel each other out. In contrast, the apical
dendrites of most of the pyramidal cells in laminae III and IV – including those
in motor and pre-motor cortices (Porter and Lemon 1993) – extend all the way
up to lamina I, at the surface of the cortex (see Figure 4).

Figure 4: Semi-diagrammatic view of Golgi stained neurons in adult mouse
parietal cortex (after Lorente de No, 1951). Axons are not drawn in the
original “to avoid complication”. Nissl-stained cells at left illustrate cortical
layers. Dotted lines added by present author. Differences in detail
doubtless exist between mouse & human and between different cortical
areas within a given species: this figure is intended simply to illustrate
general structural features of non-motor cortex.

In terms of the overall disposition of dipoles, this tendency for the apical
dendrites of most pyramidal cells to extend right up to the surface of the cortex
means that those parts of the neocortex which do generate conscious
experiences are likely to produce a field potential landscape characterised by
one layer of negative poles at the surface of the brain and two deeper layers of
positive poles, separated by an electrically neutral field in the position of

S. Pockett – Initiation of Intentional Actions and the EM Theory of Consciousness 171

lamina IV (Figure 5). In contrast, any area of brain that does not produce
conscious experiences is likely to produce something more like a simple
surface-negative, depth-positive dipole, without the complex double-layering
of the deeper positive field. This latter class of brain areas would definitely
include the cerebellum, which (a) does not generate conscious experiences
(Jeannerod 2006) and (b) does not exhibit anything like the 6-layered
anatomical structure characteristic of neocortex (Eccles et al. 1967).

Figure 5: Schematic diagram of the proposed EM field shapes

characterising conscious (A) and unconscious (B) fields. Roman numerals
on left of diagram indicate cortical layers: Lamina I is at the surface of the
cortex. The sprinkling of larger positive charges in B is intended to
represent the giant Betz cells found in motor cortex.

For logistical reasons it would not be particularly easy (although not
impossible) to perform experimental tests in human subjects of these
predictions about the dipole landscapes produced by parts of the cortex that do
and do not generate conscious experiences. But the predictions made here
could relatively easily be tested in animals. Pending such testing, these
speculations may point the way with regard to further elaboration of the EM
field theory of consciousness. However, considerably more work on the
relationship between cytoarchitecture and neurophysiological activity is
necessary before any more detailed predictions can be made about the EM field
shapes underpinning the various different modalities of conscious experience.

172

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011
REFERENCES

Aarts, H., Custers, R., & Wegner, D. M. (2005). On the inference of personal
authorship: Enhancing experienced agency by priming effect
information. Consciousness and Cognition, 14(3), 439-458.
Adey, W. R. (1981). Tissue interactions with nonionizing electromagnetic
fields. Physiological Reviews, 61(2), 435-514.
Banks, W. P., & Isham, E. A. (2009). We infer rather than perceive the
moment we decided to act. Psychological Science, 20(1), 17-21.
Brodmann, K. (1909). Vergleichende Lokalisationslehre der Grosshirnrinde:
in ihren Prinzipien dargestellt auf Grund des Zellenbaues. Leipzig:
Verlag von Johannes Barth. [Brodmann‟s localisation in the cerebral

cortex: the principles of comparative localisation in the cerebral cortex
based on cytoarchitectonics. Tr. by J. L. Garey. Springer, 1994]

Campbell, A. W. (1905). Histological Studies on the Localization of Cerebral
Function. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Choi, H., & Scholl, B. J. (2006). Perceiving causality after the fact: Postdiction
in the temporal dynamics of causal perception. Perception, 35, 385399.
Dalkara, T., Krnjevic, K., Ropert, N., & Yim, C. Y. (1986). Chemical
modulation of ephaptic interaction of CA3 hippocampal pyramids.
Neuroscience, 17(2), 361-370.
Deans, J. K., Powell, A. D., & Jefferys, J. G. (2007). Sensitivity of coherent
oscillations in rat hippocampus to AC electric fields. J. Physiol., 583,
555-565.
Desmurget, M., Reilly, K. T., Richard, N., Szathmari, A., Mottolese, C., &
Sirigu, A. (2009). Movement intention after parietal cortex stimulation
in humans. Science, 324, 811-813.
Dudek, F. E., Snow, R. W., & Taylor, C. P. (1986). Role of electrical
interactions in synchronization of epileptiform bursts. Advances in
Neurology, 44, 593-617.

S. Pockett – Initiation of Intentional Actions and the EM Theory of Consciousness 173

Eccles, J. C., Ito, M., & Szentagothai, J. (1967). The cerebellum as a neuronal
machine. New York: Springer.
Economo, C. von (1925). Die fünf Bautypen der Grosshirnrinde. Schweiz
Arch Neurol Psychiatri (Zürich), 16, 266-269.
Economo, C. von (1927). Zellaufbau der Grosshirnrinde des Menschen. Aehn
Vorlesungen. Verlag von Julius Springer.
Faber, D. S., & Korn, H. (1989). Electrical field effects: Their relevance in
central neural networks. Physiological Reviews, 69(3), 821-863.
Feigl, H. (1958). The „mental‟ and the „physical‟. In H. Feigl, G. Maxwell & M.
Scriven (Eds.), Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, Vol 2.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Francis, J. T., Gluckman, B. J., & Schiff, S. J. (2003). Sensitivity of neurons to
weak electric fields. Journal of Neuroscience, 23(19), 7255-7261.
Frölich, F., & McCormick, D. (2010). Endogenous electric fields may guide
neocortical activity. Neuron, 67(1), 129-143.
Jeannerod, M. (2006). Consciousness of action as an embodied
consciousness. In S. Pockett, W. Banks & S. Gallagher (Eds.), Does
Consciousness Cause Behavior? (pp. 25-38). Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Jefferys, J. G. (1995). Nonsynaptic modulation of neuronal activity in the
brain: Electric currents and extracellular ions. Physiological Reviews,
75(4), 689-723.
Kühn, S., & Brass, M. (2009). Retrospective construction of the judgment of
free choice. Consciousness and Cognition, 18, 12-21.
Lau, H. C., Rogers, R. D., & Passingham, R. E. (2007). Manipulating the
experienced onset of intention after action execution. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 19(1), 81-90.
Libet, B., Gleason C. A., Wright, E. W., & Pearl, D. K. (1983). Time of
conscious intention to act in relation to onset of cerebral activity
(readiness potential): The unconscious initiation of a freely voluntary
act. Brain, 106(3), 623-642.

174

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Lorente de No, R. (1951). Cerebral cortex: Architecture, intracortical
connections, motor projections. In J. F. Fulton (Ed.), Physiology of the
Nervous System, (pp. 288-330). New York: Oxford University Press.
McFadden, J. (2002a). Synchronous firing and its influence on the brain‟s
electromagnetic field: Evidence for an electromagnetic field theory of
consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 9(4), 23-50.
McFadden, J. (2002b). The conscious electromagnetic information (cemi)
field theory: The hard problem made easy? Journal of Consciousness
Studies, 9(8), 45-60.
Place, U. T. (1956). Is consciousness a brain process? British Journal of
Psychology, 47(1): 44-50.
Pockett, S. (1999). Anesthesia and the electrophysiology of auditory
consciousness. Consciousness and Cognition, 8(1), 45-61.
Pockett, S. (2000). The Nature of Consciousness: A Hypothesis. Lincoln, NE:
iUniverse.
Pockett, S. (2002). Difficulties with the electromagnetic field theory of
consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 9(4), 51-56.
Pockett, S. (2004). Does consciousness cause behaviour? Journal of
Consciousness Studies, 11(2), 23-40.
Pockett, S. (2006). The neuroscience of movement. In S. Pockett, W. Banks
& S. Gallagher (Eds.), Does Consciousness Cause Behavior? (pp. 924). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Pockett, S., Banks, W., & Gallagher, S. (Eds.) (2009). Does Consciousness
Cause Behavior? Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. [2006]
Pockett, S., & Miller, A. (2007). The rotating spot method of timing subjective
events. Consciousness and Cognition, 16(2), 241-254.
Pockett, S., & Purdy, S. (2010). Are voluntary movements initiated
preconsciously? The relationships between readiness potentials, urges
and decisions. In W. Sinnot-Armstrong & L. Nadel (Eds.), Conscious
Will and Responsibility: A Tribute to Benjamin Libet. New York:
Oxford University Press.

S. Pockett – Initiation of Intentional Actions and the EM Theory of Consciousness 175

Pockett, S., Zhou, Z. Z., Brennan, B. J., & Bold, G. E. J. (2007). Spatial
resolution and the neural correlates of sensory experience. Brain
Topography, 20(1), 1-6.
Porter, R., & Lemon, R. (1993). Corticospinal function and voluntary
movement. Monographs of the Physiological Society, 45. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Richardson, T. L., Turner, R. W., & Miller, J. J. (1984). Extracellular fields
influence transmembrane potentials and synchronization of
hippocampal neuronal activity. Brain Research, 294(2), 255-262.
Rigoni, D., Brass, M., & Sartori, G. (2010). Post-action determinants of the
reported time of conscious intentions. Frontiers in Human
Neuroscience, 4(38).
Published Online, doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2010.00038.
Smart, J. J. C. (1959). Sensations and brain processes. Philosophical Review,
68(2), 141-156.
Snow, R. W., & Dudek, F. E. (1986). Evidence for neuronal interactions by
electrical field effects in the CA3 and dentate regions of rat
hippocampal slices. Brain Research, 367(1-2), 292-295.
Taylor, C. P., Krnjevic, K., & Ropert, N. (1984). Facilitation of hippocampal
CA3 pyramidal cell firing by electrical fields generated antidromically.
Neuroscience, 11(1), 101-109.
Turner, R. W., Richardson, T. L., & Miller, J. J. (1984). Ephaptic interactions
contribute to paired pulse and frequency potentiation of hippocampal
field potentials. Experimental Brain Research, 54(3), 567-570.
Wegner, D. M. (2002). The Illusion of Conscious Will. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Yim, C. C., Krnjevic, K., & Dalkara, T. (1986). Ephaptically generated
potentials in CA1 neurons of rat's hippocampus in situ. Journal of
Neurophysiology, 56(1), 99-122.

176

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

The Dynamics of Acting
Mark H. Bickhard*
mhb0@lehigh.edu

ABSTRACT

A model of decision and action processes is outlined, and several
consequences of this model are developed. The simple plausibility of this
model demonstrates that common discussions of decision making and action
are constrained within metaphysical frameworks that are at best questionable.
The model, in turn, enables a model of free will that is consistent with
contemporary physics and likely, from an evolutionary perspective, to have
emerged. The model is an alternative to decision making as computation and
action as the initiation of a causal chain, and entails that decision and action
processes are self-organizing, global, and intrinsically intertwined with each
other. In turn, the model broadens attention with regard to ethical
considerations to persons and their character, and to the development and
developing processes of those persons and characters. This is much closer to
an Aristotelian virtue ethics than to a primarily action focused ethics, such as
Kant’s. Finally, the overall model of persons that emerges in the discussion is
one of ongoingly active and ongoingly developing processes, not one of some
kind of classical substance or entity.

1. GLOBAL RELATIONALISM
Action and acting are commonly investigated within a framework assumption
that action is a special kind of, or a special initiation of, causal chains. Causal
chains, in turn, are chains of particular event-points through which some kind
of causal influence proceeds. In concert, decision making is commonly
investigated as a special kind, or a special result, of computational reasoning. A
decision, thus, would typically be a computation that terminates with the
initiation of a causal chain.
* Department of Philosophy and Department of Psychology – Lehigh University (Bethlehem, PA
- USA)

178

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

I contend that both assumptions are in error, and that they yield serious
aporia concerning the nature of decision making and acting, with resultant
distortions in related investigations, such as of free will and responsibility. I
outline an alternative model that avoids these errors and distortions.
Arguments against causal chain models of action and computationalist
models of decision making have been elaborated elsewhere (e.g., Bickhard
1996, 2009a, in press-a, in preparation), so I will just outline some of the
central points here. Regarding causal chain models: there is an underlying
metaphysical assumption in causal chain models that causality can somehow
travel from particular point-event to particular point-event, which, in turn,
presupposes that our world consists of such point-events. But there are
reasons to reject this (Bickhard, in press-a, in press-b; Butterfield 2006). One
is that a continuum, such as that of space-time, cannot be constructed out of
particular points. A related reason is that process models, such as those of
quantum field theory, force a relationalism, and are not consistent with
particularisms. But, if particular point-events cannot constitute the underlying
furniture of our world, then real processes cannot be constituted out of (causal
chains of) such point-events. Real processes in the world are extended in both
space and time, and can have global properties that cannot be captured with
causal chains. This is of particular importance for later discussion in this article
with regard to self-organizing processes.
Regarding computational models: such models assume that representation
is constituted as some form of encoding of what is represented, but such
encodingism assumptions are, at root, incoherent (Bickhard 1996, 2009a,
2009b, in preparation; Bickhard and Terveen 1995). But, if computationalist
style representations cannot be the fundamental form of representation, then
computation on such ―symbolic‖ representations cannot be the fundamental
form of thought or decision making. Connectionist models might at first seem
to be immune to such ―encodingist‖ critiques, but presumed connectionist
representations are still ―just‖ trained encoding correspondences, and do not
avoid the basic problems involved.
If so, then alternatives must be found. I turn now to the general form of
such an alternative, one that integrates issues of decision making and issues of
acting.

Mark H. Bickhard – The Dynamics of Acting

179

2. DECISIONING AND ACTING
The general model framework that I will be making use of here is that of selforganizing processes. In general, decision processes are constraint-satisfying
self-organizing processes, and acting is temporally extended constraint
satisfying self-organizing processes. In this paper, I will not be arguing directly
for these models, though I will give some indications of their plausibility (see
Bickhard, in press-a, in preparation; Juarrero 1999). The central point here is
that such models are plausible, and that they are inconsistent with the
presuppositions of standard models, and that they therefore yield (plausible)
alternatives to common forms of argument and conclusions concerning such
issues as free will. Arguments that such models are correct, as well as plausible,
require much more extensive development (Bickhard, in preparation).
A first shift in perspective that is required to understand these kinds of
models is to recognize that the central nervous system, from single neurons to
the entire system (and, in fact, including the entire organism) is always active.
It is always doing something; to do nothing is to be dead. Thus, neurons are
not passive threshold switches and the CNS is not a passive information
processor. Functional relationships with the world, thus, as well as
relationships within the CNS, are not those of transduction, triggering, or
equivalent activities on a passive system, but, instead, are those of the
modulations of intrinsically already ongoing activity, of the organism, of the
CNS, of domains of CNS activity, of single neurons, of astrocytes, etc.
(Bickhard 2008a).
Such ongoing activity in the nervous system is not totally free: it is
functional. Such activity functions to modulate (control is a strong version of
modulation) other activity, including that of acting in the world. The crucial
point here is that this is a normative functionality: such activities and the
modulations that they induce can be inappropriate to the environment (for
example). They can be dysfunctional.
But that entails that the ongoing activity at a given time constitutes a
preparation, a set-up, for the functional activity, e.g., action and interaction,
that will ensue. Just as that activity can be inappropriate or wrong, so can the
preparations for that activity: there is an anticipatory character to how the
system is prepared and preparing to function, and such anticipation can be
false.

180

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

This is the core of an action and interaction based model of representation.
Truth value is the central problem of representation, and anticipation yields
emergent truth value.1 More familiar kinds of representation, such as of
objects, can be constructed out of such ―representations as anticipations‖ in a
roughly Piagetian manner (Bickhard 2009a, in preparation; Piaget 1954).
2.1. CONSTRAINT SATISFYING SELF-ORGANIZING PROCESSES
Consider now the possibility that some CNS activities can serve as (soft)
constraints on other CNS activities. The constraining activities could effect
such constraints via a form of modulation of other self-organizing processes,
such that the self-organizing processes would be modulated to honor those
constraints. If the constraining processes were to constitute representational
conditions, then this would constitute a model of internal constraint
satisfaction problem solving, with the constraining processes constituting the
problem ―definitions‖.
In turn, this would constitute a model of an internalization of a variation and
selection process — an evolutionary epistemology (Campbell 1974). The
constraints serve as selection principles and the self-organizing processes
generate potential satisfiers of those selection principles.2
Crucially, such self-organizational processes constituting evolutionary
epistemological processes would be intrinsically global in nature, and not
capturable with point to point causal event chains.
2.2. DECISION PROCESSES
A self-organizing evolutionary epistemological model can also serve as a model
of decision processes. A decision involves determining what to do, given some
constraints on what is desirable and permitted. In general, these constraints
will involve both environmental conditions, and internal criteria such as
preferences, goals, and values. Taking those external and internal conditions as
constraints on a problem solving variation and selection process yields a
candidate for satisfying those constraints— yields a (candidate) decision
―outcome‖. Note that this is not at all a computational model of decision
making.
1
2

For a model of ontological emergence, see Bickhard 2009a.
See Bickhard 2002, 2009a for a model of rational thought based on these notions.

Mark H. Bickhard – The Dynamics of Acting

181

2.3. (INTER)ACTION PROCESSES
CNS processes may or may not modulate activity that controls muscles. If so,
we call the overall process a process of (inter)action. There is no constraint in
the model of constraint satisfying self-organization outlined above on whether
or not the activities do, in fact, generate action; they may or they may not, but
the general self-organizing nature of the processes will be the same in either
case. That is, the general model can serve also as a model of interaction, with
the emergent constraint satisfying processes modulating downstream muscle
activity.
2.4. GLOBAL AND INTERTWINED
Such a model of acting is not consistent with action as initiated at some eventpoint, which then pursues a causal-chain trajectory through further such eventpoints. Such a self-organizing model of acting is both global, in the sense that
the processes are determined (if at all) by global characteristics, not reducible
to local causal chains, and extended, in the sense that acting is an ongoing
process of modulation and control, extended in both space and time, with
feedback, monitoring, and adjustments. Acting does of course have
(modulatory) consequences beyond the range of such feedback, etc., — e.g.,
the thrown rock hits something, makes a sound, etc. — but 1) those too will not
in general be reducible to causal chains, and 2) such further consequences can
be descriptively part of an ―action‖, perhaps even in the sense that they are
represented in the goals, etc. that constrain the internal processes, but the fact
that some consequences of acting are beyond the range of feedback and other
internal forms of self-organization and its modulation does not entail that
acting in general is of that form.
In fact, it is clear that acting in general cannot be in that form. Acting is in
accordance with preferences, goals, and values in terms of (heuristic)
strategies, sub-strategies, alternative strategies, subsidiary further problem
solving, etc. that constitute a potential ―fit‖ to those constraints. Plans are
never detailed down to the most minute sub-action; they are always at more
general levels, which have to be ―filled-in‖ progressively in ongoing
interacting. Acting is globally organized (and organizing); it is extended and
organized(ing) in space and time.
Notice that some of these aspects of acting are themselves constitutive of
decision processes — e.g., a decision about a sub-goal or strategy. Thus, both

182

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

decision processes and acting processes are global and extended, and they are
inherently intertwined. The ―picture‖ of computational decision processes that
end with the initiation of an action in the form of a causal chain is incorrect
even at a general descriptive level: the processes involved are not point-events,
and the two kinds of processes are not dynamically distinct. Decision-acting
processes are global and extended and are distinguishable aspects of a single
underlying kind of process. They are not pointillistic.
3. FREE WILL
Free will has to do with the unpredictability and indeterminancy of decision
and action processes. I will argue here that free will in those senses is possible,
and perhaps even likely, but, in the next section, that it doesn’t make much
difference for issues of moral responsibility and evaluation.
3.1. UNPREDICTABILITY
There are circumstances in which it can be adaptive to be unpredictable in
one’s actions. This is particularly clear in conditions of conflict: if an opponent
can predict what you will do, then the opponent may have an advantage. There
are reasons to think that social phenomena such as this were strongly involved
in the evolution of the human brain (Humphrey 1976; Byrne and Whiten
1988), and, thus, that the adaptiveness of unpredictability was similarly a
strong selection constraint. The general point, however, is much broader than
that: it holds, for example, in most predator-prey relationships.
Selection for the possibility of unpredictability can be ―easily‖ satisfied:
chaotic processes are intrinsically unpredictable. Chaotic processes are highly
sensitive to initial conditions, so much so that those initial conditions cannot
be determined with sufficient accuracy to permit prediction. Chaotic processes
are, nevertheless, deterministic processes. So, chaos generates a
differentiation between predictability and determinancy (Bickhard, in press-b).
If the processes that generate candidate satisfiers of internal problem defining
constraints are themselves chaotic, then we have a model of unpredictable,
even though determinate, decision-acting processes.

Mark H. Bickhard – The Dynamics of Acting

183

3.2. INDETERMINISM
Selection for unpredictability may, then, constitute selection for chaotic
processes, which are chaotic in virtue of high sensitivity to initial conditions. If
such sensitivity to initial conditions were of sufficiently fine scale, then it could
include sensitivity to conditions at a quantum level. Quantum level conditions
involve an inherent indeterminancy, and, thus, such a process would be not
only unpredictable, but also indeterministic. There may be a major
metaphysical distinction between a process being unpredictable but
deterministic and a process being intrinsically indeterminate, but that
distinction is likely not ―visible‖ to selection constraints for chaotic processes.
So evolutionary selection for unpredictability may well have generated
indeterministic sensitivity to quantum level conditions.
Such recruitment of inherently indeterministic quantum level phenomena
into global decision and action processes, therefore, will constitute a model of
decision and acting processes that are both unpredictable and indeterministic.
This would be an ―amplification‖ of quantum level indeterminancy to the level
of decision and action (Bishop 2002).
Inherent unpredictability and indeterminancy of decision and action
processes constitutes a good candidate model for free will. It at least captures
the primary characteristics commonly taken to constitute free will. So, given
the possibility of high quantum level sensitivity of ―chaotic‖ processes, free will
is at least possible. The evolutionary considerations suggest that it might even
be likely.
4. ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS
Free will is of relevance most centrally to issues of ethics and morality. So a
clear next question is what relevance this model of free will has for ethical and
moral issues.
4.1. RESPONSIBILITY
A model of pure random action is not a model of free will (Dennett 1984). One
aspect of this point is that, in such a model, there is no person who is engaged

184

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

in and modulatory of such action.3 Free will, if it exists at all, must be a
property of a person’s activities: ―simple‖ randomness does not suffice.
In the model outlined, the randomness, thus unpredictability and
indeterminism, is within the constraints of preferences, goals, values,
environmental considerations, and so on. The ongoing decision-action
processes will, in general, honor these constraints, and, thus, indirectly
manifest them. These normative constraints constitute core aspects of persons;
they constitute core aspects and parts of character. Activity, then, will tend to
honor and be manifestations of the (character of the) person engaged in that
activity.
At this point, the globality of self-organization has an important
consequence: self-organizing processes cannot be reduced to causal chains,
and, especially if they are at least chaotic, cannot be canceled out in favor of
prior causal chains leading into self-organization. External constraints and
conditions can certainly influence decision and action process, and can
certainly influence the construction of preferences, goals, values, and other
normative aspects of character, but they cannot determine them. Similarly, the
quantum randomness of constructions that occur within such constraints can
influence later aspects of character, but they cannot determine them.
The general point here is that it is not possible to cancel out the character of
a person in favor of prior ―luck‖ in the form of prior causal chains. A person
and their character is ineliminable in accounting for decision and action
processes. Whatever the influences may be of incoming ―causality‖, it cannot
be exhaustive. Consequently, a person and their character is ineliminable in
considerations of responsibility for decision and action. Ethical evaluations,
then, will necessarily involve evaluations of persons.
Note that this point does not depend on in-principle indeterminate free
will. The character of persons constitutes the primary locus of ethical ontology,
no matter the determinancy or indeterminancy of the self-organizing processes
of decisions and actions. So, free will may be possible and even likely, but, I
contend, it doesn’t make much difference with regard to ethical issues.
4.2. ETHICS
I have outlined a model of ethical ontology that focuses on persons and their
character. This is much closer to an Aristotelian framework than to a Kantian
3

For a model of persons consistent with the above discussion, see Bickhard 2008 , in press-c.

Mark H. Bickhard – The Dynamics of Acting

185

framework, and it is worth pointing out some of the differences that follow
from this primary distinction.
One of the most important is that such a model of acting as honoring
character shifts the focus of ethical ontology form that of action to that of
character — toward a virtue ethics. But the difference is even stronger than this.
Action honors character, but character is itself developed, and, furthermore,
character is in ongoing development throughout a person’s life time (Bickhard
2006, 2008b, in press-c).
There are, thus, at least three levels of person-level ethical ontological
consideration: ―selecting actions, selecting kinds of person to become,
selecting kinds of becoming to engage in‖ (Bickhard, in press-a). A strong, or
exclusive, focus on action as the locus of ethics obscures considerations of
learning and development, and of the ethical issues involved in processes of
learning and development. An action focus obscures the possibilities of ethical
error in a person’s being, and in a person’s becoming.
5. CONCLUSIONS
I have limned a model of decision and action processes that constitutes an
alternative to models that are embedded in assumptions of point-event causal
chains. By taking into account the anticipatory inherent activity of the
organism and nervous system, non-computational models of mental process
can be developed, and non-causal chain models of decision and action
processes. I have not argued in detail for these models: their very existence, so
long as they are at all plausible, suffices to show that much of the current
literature proceeds within questionable presupposed frameworks.
Some further consequences of such models are: 1) a model of free will that
is consistent with contemporary physics, and at least likely from an
evolutionary perspective, and 2) an ontology for ethics that emphasizes
persons and their character, not just actions, and, furthermore, illuminates the
ethical relevance of the development of persons, not just the actions that they
engage in. Persons are not things or entities or substances: persons are open,
ongoingly self-organizing, at multiple temporal scales, processes.

186

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011
REFERENCES

Bickhard, M. H. (1996). Troubles with computationalism. In W. O’Donohue
& R. F. Kitchener (Eds.), The Philosophy of Psychology, (pp. 173183). London: Sage.
Bickhard, M. H. (2002). Critical principles: On the negative side of rationality.
New Ideas in Psychology, 20(1), 1-34.
Bickhard, M. H. (2006). Developmental normativity and normative
development. In L. Smith & J. Voneche (Eds.), Norms in Human
Development, (pp. 57-76). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bickhard, M. H. (2008a). The Microgenetic Dynamics of Cortical Attractor
Landscapes. May 22-23, 2008. Workshop on ―Dynamics in and of
Attractor Landscapes‖. Isola d’Elba, Italy: Parmenides Foundation.
Bickhard, M. H. (2008b). Are you social? The ontological and developmental
emergence of the person. In U. Müller, J. I. M. Carpendale, N. Budwig
& B. Sokol (Eds.), Social Life and Social Knowledge, (pp. 17-42). New
York: Taylor & Francis.
Bickhard, M. H. (2009a). The interactivist model. Synthese, 166(3), 547591.
Bickhard, M. H. (2009b). Interactivism. In J. Symons & P. Calvo (Eds.), The
Routledge Companion to Philosophy of Psychology, (pp. 346-359).
London: Routledge.
Bickhard, M. H. (in press-a). Some consequences (and enablings) of process
metaphysics. Axiomathes.
Bickhard, M. H. (in press-b). Systems and process metaphysics. In C. Hooker
(Ed.), Handbook of Philosophy of Science. Philosophy of Complex
Systems, (Vol. 10). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Bickhard, M. H. (in press-c). A process ontology for persons and their
development. New Ideas in Psychology.
Bickhard, M. H. (in preparation). The Whole Person: Toward a Naturalism of
Persons — Contributions to an Ontological Psychology.

Mark H. Bickhard – The Dynamics of Acting

187

Bickhard, M. H., & Terveen, L. (1995). Foundational Issues in Artificial
Intelligence and Cognitive Science: Impasse and Solution. Amsterdam:
Elsevier Scientific.
Bishop, R. C. (2002). Chaos, indeterminism, and free will. In R. Kane (Ed.),
The Oxford Handbook of Free Will, (pp. 111-124). Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Butterfield, J. (2006). Against Pointillisme about mechanics. British Journal
for the Philosophy of Science, 57(4), 709-753.
Byrne, R. W., & Whiten, A. (1988). Machiavellian Intelligence. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Campbell, D. T. (1974). Evolutionary Epistemology. In P. A. Schilpp (Ed.),
The Philosophy of Karl Popper, (pp.413-463). LaSalle, IL: Open
Court.
Dennett, D. C. (1984). Elbow Room. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Humphrey, N. K. (1976). The social function of intellect. In P. P. G. Bateson
& R. A. Hinde (Eds.), Growing Points in Ethology, (pp. 303-317).
London: Cambridge University Press.
Juarrero, A. (1999). Dynamics in Action: Intentional Behavior as a Complex
System. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Piaget, J. (1954). The Construction of Reality in the Child. New York: Basic
Books.

188

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Deliberative Libertarianism*
Jing Zhu**

zhujing6@mail.sysu.edu.cn

ABSTRACT

Libertarian theories of free will maintain that the freedom of will is
incompatible with determinism, and that the involvement of indeterminacy can
somehow lead to genuine free actions, in the sense that an agent has a choice
about what to do, is able to do other than what she actually does, and is the
ultimate source of her responsible actions.1 Philosophers disagree on where
the indeterminism required for libertarian free agency is located in the
processes leading to an agent‟s practical decision and rational action.
Deliberative indeterminism or libertarianism holds that the required
indeterminism should take place relatively early in the process of deliberation2,
prior to the momentary mental act of decision-making that terminates a
deliberation. 3 Ironically, the idea of deliberative libertarianism has been
proposed and developed mainly by some non-libertarians, most notably by
Daniel Dennett and Alfred Mele4, and is opposed by some libertarians.5 The
* The author is grateful to Alfred Mele and Robert Kane for valuable comments on a draft of this
article. This research was support by a grant (06BZX024) from National Social Sciences Foundation
of China.
** Institute of Logic and Cognition – Department of Philosophy – Sun Yat-sen University
(Guangzhou, China); Institute of Philosophy of Mind and Cognition – National Yang-Ming University
(Taipei, Taiwan)
1
See Kane 1996 and Clarke 2003 for recent reviews of libertarian accounts of free will.
2
The terms “deliberative indeterminism” and “deliberative libertarianism” are adopted from
Clarke 2002 and 2003 respectively.
3
See Mele 2003, ch. 9 for an articulation and defense of the idea that to decide to do something
is to perform a momentary mental action of forming an intention to do it, which terminates the agent‟s
practical deliberation.
4
Dennett is a well-known compatibilist, and Mele is a self-claimed agnostic about the truth of
compatibilism.
5
Robert Kane, a leading contemporary libertarian, once proposed a richer account of
deliberative libertarianism than Dennett‟s in his Free Will and Values (1985), which contains many
valuable germinal ideas to be developed in this paper. However, it seems that Kane tries to distance
himself from this position lately by declaring that he believes that the idea of deliberative libertarianism
is only a part but «not adequate in itself even for an account of free practical choice» (Kane 1996, pp.
162 and 236) and that he has never unqualifiedly endorsed it (2002, p. 25). In his recent A

190

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

aim of this paper is to develop and defend deliberative libertarianism. Section 1
describes the basic idea of deliberative libertarianism. Section 2 surveys some
major objections directed against it. I defend deliberative libertarianism in
Section 3 after refining the psychological model of deliberation and decisionmaking proposed by this brand of indeterminism, and conclude with some
suggestions for libertarianism in general in Section 4.

1. DELIBERATIVE LIBERTARIAN ACCOUNTS
A persistent charge against libertarianism is that, even if determinism is false,
the involvement of indeterminacy, which implicates randomness, chanciness
and arbitrariness, can still hardly secure a condition for rational, responsible
free action. Any positive libertarian theory of free will is faced with the
challenge to provide an intelligible, coherent and plausible account on how a
certain kind of indeterminism can be freedom-enhancing, rather than freedomdiminishing, in the production of an agent‟s rational and responsible action.
The idea of deliberative libertarianism has hence been proposed and
recommended to libertarians to cope with this challenge.
1.1. DENNETT
In “On Giving Libertarians What They Say They Want” (Dennett 1978),
Dennett suggests that it may be possible to install indeterminism at the
microscopic level in the internal causal chains that affect human behavior at the
macroscopic level while preserving the intelligibility of practical deliberation
that libertarians require (Dennett 1978, pp. 290-292), and that the required
indeterminism should be placed «at some earlier point, prior to the ultimate
decision or formation of intention» (Dennett 1978, pp. 292-293). Dennett
goes on to propose the following “realistic model of decision-making”:
When someone is faced with an important decision, something in him
generates a variety of more or less relevant considerations bearing on the
decision. Some of these considerations, we may suppose, are determined to be
generated, but others may be non-deterministically generated. For instance,
Contemporary Introduction to Free Will (2005), while surveying Dennett‟s and Mele‟s views under
the section title “Deliberation and Causal Indeterminism” (pp. 64-65), Kane does not mention his
own early work on this topic.

Jing Zhu – Deliberative Libertarianism

191

Jones, who is finishing her dissertation on Aristotle and the practical syllogism,
must decide within a week whether to accept the assistant professorship at the
University of Chicago, or the assistant professorship at Swarthmore. She
considers the difference in salaries, the probable quality of the students, the
quality of her colleagues, the teaching load, the location of the schools, and so
forth. Let us suppose that considerations A, B, C, D, E, and F occur to her and
that those are the only considerations that occur to her, and that on the basis of
those, she decides to accept the job at Swarthmore. […] Let us suppose though,
that after sealing her fate with a phone call, consideration G occurs to her, and
she says to herself: “If only G had occurred to me before, I would certainly have
chosen the University of Chicago instead, but G didn‟t occur to me”. Now it
just might be the case that exactly which considerations occur to one in such
circumstances is to some degree strictly undetermined. (Dennett 1978, pp.
293-294, emphasis in original)

The major feature of this model, according to Dennett, is this:
When we are faced with an important decision, a consideration-generator
whose output is to some degree undetermined produces a series of
considerations, some of which may of course be immediately rejected as
irrelevant by the agent (consciously or unconsciously). Those considerations
that are selected by the agent as having a more than negligible bearing on the
decision then figure in a reasoning process, and if the agent is in the main
reasonable, those considerations ultimately serve as predictors and explicators
of the agent‟s final decision. (Dennett 1978, p. 295)

Dennett‟s model of deliberative decision-making, accordingly, consists of two
essential units: one is the consideration-generator whose functioning is
sometimes undetermined; the other is the evaluating/selecting unit whose
output is a decision or intention. The required indeterminism is embodied in
the former, rather than in the latter. To appreciate the significance of the latter
unit for our rational free agency, Dennett invites us to consider an analogy
drawn on the following remarks of the poet, Paul Valéry:
«It takes two to invent anything. The one makes up combinations; the other
one chooses, recognizes what he wishes and what is important to him in the
mass of the things which the former has imparted to him. What we call genius is
much less the work of the first one than the readiness of the second one to
grasp the value of what has been laid before him and to choose it». (quoted in
Dennett 1978, p. 293)

192

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Consequently, the brand of libertarianism Dennett has recommended is also
called “Valerian libertarianism” in the literature of free will (e.g., Bernstein
1989 and Double 1991).
1.2. MELE
In order to meet what libertarians want from indeterminism and to resolve
some of the important problems they face, Mele suggests that
it might be worth exploring the possibility of combining a compatibilist
conception of the later parts of a process issuing in full-blown, deliberative,
intentional action with an incompatibilist conception of the earlier parts. (Mele
1995, p. 212)

Mele proposes what he labels “modest indeterminism”, according to which
only some doxastic states or events are causally undetermined in deliberation:
Some of [an agent‟s] beliefs will “come to mind”, as we might say, and play a
role in deliberation; other will not. But it is not causally determined which of
these beliefs will come to mind and which will stay on the sidelines. Once a
belief enters into the deliberative process, that “entering” event can play a role
in the causal determination of subsequent mental events. Causally
undetermined events can play a role in causally determining later events. (Mele
1995, p. 214)

What an agent judges best, we may suppose, is contingent upon which beliefs
in a particular subset of his nonoccurrent beliefs “come to mind”. And if the
agent is an ideally self-controlled agent, then if he does make a decisive best
judgment, he will consequently intend to act in accordance with the judgment.
The most notable feature of the model of deliberation based on doxastic
indeterminism of the kind sketched, according to Mele, is that it does not
diminish an agent‟s proximal control over her thoughts and actions, which is by
stipulation compatible with the truth of determinism, and her responsibility as
well, to any significant extent in comparison with attractive compatibilist
accounts of free agency and moral responsibility based on determinism:
[N]otice that we are not always in (proximal) control of which of our beliefs
come to mind anyway, even if determinism is true. Assuming determinism,
everything that happens on this front is causally determined, but the causal
story often does not place the agent in the driver‟s seat. So, other things being
equal, if responsibility for one‟s judgments is compatible with determinism, it
is compatible, as well, with a modest indeterminism of the sort at issue. Plainly,

Jing Zhu – Deliberative Libertarianism

193

which of our nonoccurrent beliefs come to mind can influence the outcome of
our deliberation. An internal indeterminism that, as it happens, does not
render us any less in proximal control of what occurs in this sphere than we are
if determinism is true does not bring with it any direct impediment to
responsibility for one‟s judgments that is not to be found on the assumption
that our world is deterministic.
This last point merits emphasis. One way to emphasize its significance is to
make it a defining condition on the subset of one‟s beliefs that are subject at a
time to indeterminism of the sort at issue that they are beliefs whose coming or
not coming to mind is not something that one would control even if
determinism were true. The agent who is subject to indeterminism in this
sphere is not – simply on that account – worse off with respect to actual
proximal control over his psychological and overt behavior than he would be at
a deterministic world. (Mele 1995, pp. 215-216)

Moreover, this sort of internal indeterminism has the potential to supply what
libertarians most want for free agency and moral responsibility. First, in being
indeterministic, it seems to be sufficient to block the worry voiced in the
consequence argument – the strongest argument for incompatibilism.6
It allows for an agent‟s having more than one physically possible future and for
its being true, on some incompatibilist readings of “could have done
otherwise”, that an agent could have judged, intended, and acted otherwise
than as he did. (Mele 1995, p. 216)

Second, Mele suggests that
the doxastic indeterminism at issue is an agent-internal indeterminism: it
provides for an agent‟s having more than one physically possible future in a way
that turns, essentially, on what goes on in him. (Mele, 1995, pp. 216-217,
emphasis in original)

Mele goes on to argue that this sort of indeterminism can provide the grounds
to secure the conditions for an agent‟s ultimate control over her choices and
actions, which should not be fully subject to the causal determination of
something external to the agent (e.g., the state of the world prior to the agent‟s
birth together with the laws of nature). The notion of ultimate control, which is
incompatible with determinism, preserves the crucial understanding that the
origin or source of our free choices and actions is in us and not in anyone or
anything else over which we have no control.
6

See Van Inwagen 1983.

194

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Both Dennett and Mele refuse to install indeterminism at other points of
deliberation or at the exact moment of decision-making or even later. Dennett
writes: «If there is to be a crucial undetermined nexus, it had better be prior to
the final assessment of the considerations on the stage» (Dennett 1978, p.
295). For Mele, it is essential that except for certain doxastic mental states or
events coming to mind indeterministically (which may emerge at any moment
during deliberation), the rest of deliberation (the assessment of various courses
of action and the formation of the best judgment), the formation or acquisition
of the corresponding intention to act, and the agent‟s intentional acting
accordingly, all proceed deterministically. And this is why the involvement of
indeterminacy will not diminish an agent‟s
proximal control over how he deliberates in light of the beliefs that do enter his
deliberation. He may have considerable proximal control over how carefully he
deliberates in light of these beliefs, over whether he deliberates in ways that
violates his deliberative principles, and so on. (Mele 1995, p. 215).

According to the austere deliberative libertarian accounts advocated by
Dennett and by Mele, the indeterminism required for an intelligible, plausible
and coherent libertarianism works only in supplying input to an agent‟s
deliberation.
2. OBJECTIONS TO DELIBERATIVE LIBERTARIANISM
This section surveys some major objections to deliberative libertarianism
raised by a number of philosophers, including Randolph Clarke, Richard
Double, Laura Waddell Ekstrom7 and John Martin Fischer.8
2.1. THE ARGUMENT FROM LUCK
The problem of luck has become a main focus in recent debates about free will
and moral responsibility, concerning both libertarian and compatibilist
7
Ekstrom‟s view (2000) has been taken as a version of deliberative libertarianism (Clarke 2003,
ch. 4). But as Mark Balaguer points out (2004, pp. 403-404), this interpretation is a mistake, which is
partly due to Ekstrom‟s confusing and misleading terminology such as „preference‟. Balaguer reports
that in private correspondence, Ekstrom has endorsed the non-Valerian libertarian interpretation of
her view.
8
Fischer (1995) presents and recommends a version of deliberative libertarianism as one that
may satisfy libertarians in some respects.

Jing Zhu – Deliberative Libertarianism

195

accounts.9 Ekstrom argues that deliberative libertarianism is not immune to
this problem:
[I]n my view, [Dennett and Mele] locate the indeterminism in the wrong place.
Specifically, the views are too weak, in virtue of the indeterminism location, to
secure agential freedom. On these views, free agents are subject to luck in what
thoughts come into their minds as they are deliberating about what to do. But
once the thoughts occur and the last of them has occurred during deliberation,
there is a deterministic causal connection between the particular pattern of
beliefs that has happened to occur and the subsequent decision outcome. But
this is problematic. For I might be a free agent, on Dennett‟s or Mele‟s account,
while being a victim, with regard to that I judge best and that I consequently
intend and do, of what thoughts happen to occur to me at the time. Granted,
there are “forks in the road” of some sort on this picture of free agency
(alternate physically possible futures). But it is not up to me, the free agent,
which one I take. Which one I take is decided by which considerations happen
to come to mind, where this is indeterministically caused by some previous
events. On both Dennett‟s and Mele‟s views, once a certain pattern of
considerations has happened to occur to the agent, a particular action may
follow of physical necessity and yet count as free. Since neither of the views
includes an account of the nature of the self, they leave unanswered the
question of why an act that is the causally necessary outcome of whatever
considerations have happened to occur is plausibly claimed to be originated by
the agent. (Ekstrom 2000, p. 137)

The objection from luck will be answered in section 3. Here I want to point
out that Ekstrom‟s charge that both Dennett‟s and Mele‟s views lack “an
account of the nature of the self” seems unfair. Even if the coming of certain
considerations or beliefs to mind is a matter of mere happenings, over which an
agent has no control, how the agent assesses, evaluates these considerations
and reaches to the best judgment can nevertheless reflect the values, principles,
preferences, capacities and habits that the agent possesses. Given the same
pattern of considerations, different agents may well make different judgments
and decisions, and the difference can hardly be accounted for without
appealing to certain aspects of an agent‟s self. As Mele remarks,
an agent‟s psychological condition (a combination of states and events) can be a
central part of what causes his judging that it would be best to A, in a scenario
in which the occurrence of a certain causally undetermined „coming-to-mind‟
9

See Mele 2006 and Pereboom 2001.

196

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

event just prior to the judging would have resulted in a different deliberative
outcome. (Mele 1995, p. 217).

2.2. THE ARGUMENT FROM ACTIVE DIFFERENCE-MAKING
Clarke observes that a common belief about the freedom of will – one held by
compatibilists and incompatibilists alike – is that in acting freely, agents make a
difference to how things go by exercises of active control:
The difference is made, on this common conception, in the performance of a
directly free action itself, not in the occurrence of some event prior to the
action, even if that prior event is an agent-involving occurrence causation of the
action by which importantly connects the agent, as a person, to her action. On a
libertarian understanding of this difference-making, some things that happen
had a chance of not happening, and some things that do not happen had a
chance of happening, and in performing directly free actions, agents make the
difference. If an agent is, in the very performance of a free action , to make a
difference in this libertarian way, then that action itself must not be causally
determined by its immediate antecedents. In order to secure this libertarian
variety of difference-making, an account must locate openness and freedomlevel active control in the same event – the free action itself – rather than
separate these two as do deliberative libertarian views. (Clarke 2003, p. 64,
emphasis in original)

Deliberative libertarian accounts, Clarke argues, fail to supply this sort of
difference-making. Dennett and Mele require that the coming to mind of
certain beliefs, «which are not themselves actions», be undetermined, and
allow «that these undetermined events, together with a nonactive reasoning
process and its nonactive output (the making of an evaluative judgment),
causally determine the decision» (Clarke 2003, p. 62).10 On these views,
[A]gent might be said to make a difference between what happens but might
not have and what does not happen but might have, but such a difference is
made in the occurrence of something nonactive or unfree prior to the action
that is said to be free, not in the performance of the allegedly free action itself.
Failure to secure for directly free actions this libertarian variety of differencemaking constitutes a fundamental inadequacy of deliberative libertarian
accounts of free action. (Clarke 2003, p. 64, emphasis in original)

10

It seems better to use „nonactional‟ to replace the term „nonactive‟ in this quotation, for the
latter may (wrongly) imply that the agent is passive in regard to her deliberation and decision-making.

Jing Zhu – Deliberative Libertarianism

197

2.3. THE ARGUMENT FROM DUAL RATIONALITY AND CONTROL
According to a general libertarian understanding of the condition of “could
have done otherwise” or “alternative possibilities for action”, when an agent
acts freely, she must possess the capacity or power to act more than one way
deliberately and rationally, rather than arbitrarily, capriciously, or irrationally,
given exactly the same prior circumstances. This requirement is crucially
different from and much stronger than what compatibilists usually demand –
that the agent could have done otherwise if she had made another decision or
choice. Whereas compatibilists interpret the power to do otherwise as a “oneway” hypothetical ability to choose otherwise than what the agent actually does,
libertarians must impute to free agents a “two-way” or dual ability to choose
otherwise, in a categorical sense. And for libertarians, this dual, categorical
ability to choose or act otherwise must be exercised in a noncapricious and
rational way (see Kane 1985 and 1996, ch. 7; Double 1991, ch. 1).
Libertarians seem to
be committed to the idea that free agents not only control which choices they
actually make, but counterfactually would control alternative choices had they
manifested their categorical ability to choose otherwise. (Double 1991, p. 15,
emphasis in original)

In addition, as with dual control, when an agent makes a free choice, it should
have been rational for her to have chosen another option under precisely the
conditions that actually obtain.11
Double argues that deliberative libertarian accounts fail to “capture the
spirit of the conditions of categorical ability to choose otherwise, dual control,
or dual rationality, since it does not locate the indeterminacy where the
libertarians want it, viz., at the final choice”:
To see this, compare Dennett‟s and standard compatibilist accounts. The latter
hold that agents are free to decide otherwise, provided they would decide
otherwise if they are so inclined. As we have already seen, the libertarians think
that this hypothetical freedom is a sham. Now, Dennett‟s Valerian view holds
that we do enjoy a categorical freedom to decide otherwise, since the
appearance of some considerations on which we base our choices is literally
indeterministic – that is, there are other physically possible worlds in which our
11
Kane lately prefers the expression “plural rationality” to “dual rationality,” and comes to see
plural rationality as but one aspect of a more general “problem of plurality” for all libertarian accounts
of freedom (Kane 1996, ch. 7).

198

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

decisions would have been different. But this sort of categorical freedom, no
less than the hypothetical freedom provided by the compatibilist‟s account, is
too weak to satisfy the libertarian. […] Libertarians want the freedom to decide
either way, given the conditions that in fact obtain. So, although Dennett‟s view
does an admirable job at producing one-way rationality – an unsurprising fact
given that Dennett is a compatibilist – it fails to provide dual rationality, and it
fails to produce the sort of indeterminacy that libertarians want. (Double 1991,
pp. 200-201)

2.4. INDETERMINACY AND THE PROBLEM OF GENUINE CONTROL
A motivation for deliberative libertarianism is to solve the problem of agential
control under the condition of indeterminism. Mele argues that the modest
indeterminism he posits – internal, doxastic indeterminacy – is no worse than
compatibilism in respect to proximal control, even if determinism is true. In
addition, Mele suggests that installing indeterminacy in this way can preserve
the crucial libertarian belief in alternative possibilities or freedom to choose
and do otherwise. Fischer, in his insightful assessment of Mele‟s libertarian
account, finds these claims puzzling:
How can adding arbitrariness of the sort envisaged – the lack of determination
of the beliefs that come to mind during deliberation – to a causally
deterministic process yield genuine control? A libertarian of course will
contend that an entirely deterministic process does not contain genuine
control by the relevant agent. How, then, can installing the sort of
indeterminacy envisaged – indeterminacy as to which belief states will come to
the agent‟s mind – transform the sequence from one of lack of control to one
containing control? This smacks of alchemy. […] If an agent has genuine
control in the sense of possessing alternative possibilities, he can make it the
case that one path is followed, or another path is followed, in accordance with
that he judges best and chooses. He can deliberately purse one course of action,
or deliberately pursue another; what path the world takes (at least in certain
respects) is “up to him”. In contrast, when it is merely possible that something
different have occurred, the path the world takes need not depend in the
relevant way on the agent. In a genuinely random event, presumably there are
various metaphysically open possibilities; but by definition no agent has control
over what happens. (Fischer 1999, pp. 140-141, emphasis in original)

Fischer contends that, «whereas it may well be possible that Mele‟s libertarian
agent do something different from what he actually does, it is not clear that he
has genuine control over what he does». Given that the sequence of doxastic

Jing Zhu – Deliberative Libertarianism

199

states is not entirely determined by prior states of the agent, it is not clear that
what the agent judges best and then does is genuinely up to him (Fischer 1999,
p. 141).
Furthermore, Fischer argues that the deliberative libertarian account Mele
advocates appears even worse than compatibilism in certain respects:
[T]he compatibilist will point out that, even though the agent does not directly
control what belief-states come to mind (in the sense of choosing them or
willing them), they are envisaged as strongly connected to the agent‟s prior
states to the extent that they are a deterministic product of those past states.
Under determinism, one‟s prior states – desires, beliefs, values, general
dispositions – determine the precise content and ordering of the subsequent
doxastic states (that constitute deliberation), even if the agent does not directly
control what doxastic states he will be in (and thus is not in the “driver‟s seat”,
in this sense). (Fischer 1999, p. 141, emphasis in original)

A similar objection is also raised by Clarke:
It could be that, whenever one of us set out to make up her mind about which of
several alternatives to pursue, all and only the most important and relevant
considerations, or all and only those of this type that she had time to consider,
would come promptly to mind, and these considerations would then figure
rationally and efficiently in producing an evaluative judgment. In a
deterministic world in which our deliberations always ran in this ideal fashion,
we would exercise a valuable type of nonactive proximal control in deliberating.
If chance at a later stage of deliberation would diminish proximal control, then
chance of the sort required by Mele‟s view would seem to diminish this
nonactive proximal control[…], anything that was found desirable in the
independence secured by an account requiring chance here would have to be
weighed against the loss of control in comparison with this deterministic ideal.
(Clark 2003, pp. 68-69)

So far I have collected four major objections found in recent literature
directed against deliberative libertarianism. 12 I shall reply to all these
objections in the next section.
12
There are some other worries against deliberative libertarianism. For instance, Kane suggests
that selection from among chance-generated considerations «could not provide an account of moral or
prudential choice», for «if responsibility is to be captured, then choosing morally or prudentially
rather than from weakness of will could not merely be a matter of chance-generated alternatives»
(Kane 1996, p. 162). Ishtiyaque Haji points out that whereas Mele‟s deliberative libertarian account
«does make room for agent‟s having more than one physically possible future and for its being true
that the agent could have judged, intended, and acted otherwise than she did», «such indeterminacy

200

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

3. DEFENDING DELIBERATIVE LIBERTARIANISM
Before replying to the objections to deliberative libertarianism presented in
section 2, I need to develop and refine the psychological model of deliberation
and decision-making employed by this sort of indeterminism in several
important aspects. The essence of the developments and refinements is to give
agents a more active role in practical deliberation by way of efforts of will
through which the agents might exercise greater control over the deliberative
process – without eliminating the creative role of chance-selected
considerations. (Kane 1996, p. 164).

3.1. TOWARD A REALISTIC MODEL OF DELIBERATION AND DECISION-MAKING
First, I suggest that the over-simplified, over-idealized indeterministic model
of deliberation that has been implicitly assumed by most opponents of
deliberative libertarianism should be abandoned. According to this simplistic
model, the process of deliberation is in essence a linear, “one-shot” procedure:
after all the considerations or beliefs, some of them are indeterministically
caused, have come to mind as input to deliberation, all available alternatives are
assessed and compared, and then a decisive best judgment falls out as the
outcome of deliberation; period. Though this abstract model may be ideal for
logical analysis of rational decision-making, it is a far cry from the reality of
human psychology, leaving out many essential elements of an agent‟s efforts
and control in deliberation. To see this, let us consider how a person is
typically engaged in the process of deliberation. In the first round of
deliberation, a set of considerations C1 may come to the mind of the agent as
input to deliberation; after all relevant options have been assessed and
compared, a (tentative) best judgment B1 falls out as a result. But the agent may
deem that B1 is unacceptable or unsatisfactory, or he may want to find an even
better solution to the practical problem he is faced. He can readily embark on
another round of the deliberative procedure: has another set of beliefs and
considerations C2 come to mind, and reach to another best judgment B2 as a

does little to persuade us that the agent ensures that she has more than one physically possible future,
etc.» (Haji 2001, p. 186). Since these worries have not been fully articulated, and I do not think they
can amount to serious challenges to deliberative libertarianism, especially with regard to the refined
psychological model of deliberation to be developed here, I will not attempt to silence them in this
paper.

Jing Zhu – Deliberative Libertarianism

201

result. And the operation of this procedure can continue until a final decisive
best judgment B is selected from among {B1, B2, …, Bn}. As Mele remarks:
The relevant indeterminism also applies, of course, to which nonoccurrent
beliefs, in a certain subset of such beliefs, do or do not come to mind while
deliberation is in progress. And even when an agent is on the verge of reaching
a decisive better judgment, the (undetermined) coming to mind of a belief
might prompt reservations that lead to reconsideration. So, in a scenario of the
imagined kind, what an agent decisively judges best can be causally open as
long as deliberation continues. Further, as long as deliberation is in progress it
can be causally open when that deliberation will end, for it can be causally open
whether a belief will come to mind and prolong deliberation. (Mele 1995, p.
217)

Or, as Robert Kane points out:
Viewed in this way, ordinary practical reasoning or deliberation […] is more
like the trial-and-error processes of „thought experimentation‟ that are
characteristic of scientific discovery and creative problem-solving. The
reasoner must consider various presuppositions and consequences of proposed
lines of action, which usually involves the use of imagination to construct
probable scenarios exemplifying those presuppositions and consequences. […]
As with instances of creative problem-solving, there are no fixed rules about
what to consider, when one has considered enough consequences, and so on.
(Kane 1996, p. 159)

A realistic human psychological model of deliberation is certainly much
more dynamic, sophisticated and subtle than the abstract reasoning from
C=(C1∪C2∪…∪Cn) to B.13
Second, I think that the passivity of the coming to mind of certain
considerations or beliefs in one‟s deliberation has been over-stated in the
discussions of deliberative libertarianism. An agent is not always a helpless
victim in regard to which subset of her nonoccurrent beliefs coming to her
mind in deliberation. Consider Jones, the young philosopher in Dennett‟s
example, who needs to make a choice between the positions offered by the
University of Chicago and Swarthmore College. In her deliberation, it may
occur to her that it is worthwhile to consult someone who has had first-hand
13
Mele 1995, pp. 230-235 provides a nice case about the course of deliberation in which
“intellectually sophisticated, self-reflective, self-assessing agents who seriously and responsibly tackle
their decision problem”.

202

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

personal experience with these institutions. Then she may perform a search in
her memory in order to find out whom she may want to consult. Her recalling
and searching for the particular items from her memory seem more like her
(mental) actions, something that she actively, intentionally performs or brings
about, rather than things that she merely undergoes or just happen to her.
In a recent article, Galen Strawson argues that in a fundamental respect,
reason, thought and judgment neither are nor can be a matter of intentional
action. «[M]ost of our thoughts – our thought-contents – just happen»
(Strawson 2003, p. 228). But Strawson still allows an agent‟s mental acts to
play a prefatory, catalytic role in thought:
For what actually happens, when one wants to think about some issue or work
something out? If the issue is a difficult one, then there may well be a distinct,
and distinctive, phenomenon of setting one‟s mind at the problem, and this
phenomenon, I think, may well be a matter of action. It may involve rapidly and
silently imaging key words or sentences to oneself, rehearsing inferential
transitions, refreshing images of a scene, and these acts of priming, which may
be regularly repeated once things are under way, are likely to be fully fledged
actions.
What else is there, in the way of action? Well, sometimes one has to shepherd
or dragoon one‟s wandering mind back to the previous thought-content in
order for the train of thought to be restarted or continued, and this too may be a
matter of action. We talk of concerted thought, and this concertion, which is
again a catalytic matter, may be (but need not be) a matter of action: it may
involve tremendous effort and focused concentration of will. Sometimes
thoughts about the answer to a question come so fast that they have to be as it
were stopped and piled and then taken up and gone through one by one; and
this, again, can be a matter of action. Sometimes one has a clear sense that
there is a relevant consideration that is not in play, although one doesn‟t know
what it is. One initiates a kind of actively receptive blanking of the mind in
order to give any missing elements a chance to arise. This too can be a matter of
action, a curious weighted intentional holding open of the field of thought.
(Strawson 2003, pp. 231-232)

Strawson‟s account of the prefatory, catalytic role of some mental acts in
bringing certain thought-contents into mind makes good sense for deliberative
indeterminism. An agent‟s performing of such mental acts of priming,
attending, imaging and so on, which may well embody the agent‟s skills, habits
and capacities of thinking and problem-solving, can make certain beliefs more
or less likely to come to mind or consciousness in deliberation, though this

Jing Zhu – Deliberative Libertarianism

203

event is not entirely causally determined. This is quite in harmony with the
spirit of Leibniz‟s familiar dictum “reasons may incline without necessitating”:
a person‟s skills and efforts in deliberation can positively, though not
deterministically, influence the coming to mind of certain considerations.
Third, it is important to notice that once an agent is engaged in deliberation,
it is up to the agent to decide when to terminate his deliberation, unless the
process is interrupted from within or without. The purpose of deliberation is to
find the best or a satisfactory solution to the practical problem that the agent is
faced. But any deliberation is resource-consuming in terms of time, memory
and cognitive capacity. In deliberation, a rational, resource-limited agent must
consider whether to continue the deliberative process, that is, to have more
beliefs and considerations come to mind and to make relevant assessments, in
order to make more accurate assessments and find a better solution, or to
terminate the process with the best available solution that has already found, in
order to save the cost of deliberation. An experienced decision-maker would
know that the temporal duration and mental effort devoted to deliberation do
not guarantee the quality of decision-making. On the other hand, from the
point of view of the deliberating agent, it seems sometimes quite uncertain
whether or not that he has already selected the best solution for the practical
problem at issue: perhaps just a little more effort, an all-round best solution
will fall out. So an agent in deliberation may need to make hard choice under
uncertain condition more often than usually conceived. It is thus up to him to
decide when to terminate the deliberation, and thereby to make a practical
decision on what to do. This mental event can be aptly viewed as a secondorder decision: decide whether to terminate a deliberation. And this is
something that a responsible agent must actively perform, rather than passively
let happen to him.
I have attempted to improve and refine the psychological model of
deliberation and decision-making in several aspects14, which allows an agent to
be engaged in the iterative processing of deliberation before making final
decisions, to play an active role in bringing nonoccurrent beliefs into
deliberative consideration, and to actively decide when to terminate a
deliberation. We shall see below how these improvements enable us to
response to the major objections directed to deliberative libertarianism.
14

See Kane 1996, ch. 9 for suggestions and accounts of indeterminate efforts of will at other
points in the deliberative process, which give agents a more active role in practical deliberation.

204

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

3.2. REPLIES TO THE OBJECTIONS
THE ARGUMENT FROM LUCK

I shall not attempt to tackle the vexed problem of moral luck15, but only to
show that the sort of indeterminacy introduced by deliberative libertarianism
will not diminish an agent‟s control over his thoughts and decisions in
comparison to that any qualified compatibilist account can offer. As noted
earlier, deliberative libertarianism does not leave out “an account of the nature
of the self” in an agent‟s practical deliberation and decision-making. First, the
beliefs or considerations that come to an agent‟s mind in deliberation,
including those caused indeterministically, are not generated from nowhere.
They are what the agent has already collected and processed and still possesses.
Second, the agent can make efforts, positively but not deterministically, to
bring certain beliefs or considerations to come into deliberation. Third, the
agent‟s assessments and evaluations of these considerations reflect the values,
principles, preferences, and habits of the agent. Fourth, it is up to the agent to
make the decision whether to terminate a deliberation with the best judgment
already reached or to continue to search for a better option.
Nevertheless, despite his efforts, an agent may be still under the mercy of
luck in regard to which beliefs coming to his mind. For instance, after the
crucial beliefs and considerations coming to mind (indeterministically), Paul
readily makes the best practical judgment and hence the best decision D; but
Paul*, who is under the same prior conditions and shares with Paul the same
set of values, preferences, and mental capacities, fails to reach the best decision
D simply because the crucial beliefs and knowledge needed to reach the
judgment have not come to his mind, in spite of his efforts. The difference
between Paul‟s and Paul*‟s decisions is solely due to their different luck. So
indeed deliberative libertarianism is not entirely immune to the problem of
luck. But as Mele has noted, «we are not always in (proximal) control of which
of our beliefs come to mind anyway, even if determinism is true» (Mele 1995, p.
215). A psychologically plausible and realistic compatibilist account of human
deliberation should not assume that in a deterministic world all relevant and
important beliefs will consequently come to the agent‟s mind because
everything entering into the agent‟s deliberation is deterministically caused.
We can be forgetful about certain important information we already acquired,
15

See Nelkin 2004 for a helpful review.

Jing Zhu – Deliberative Libertarianism

205

and we may even suffer from the frustrating phenomenon of tip-of-the-tongue,
the feeling of knowing something that cannot be immediately recalled (see
Brown 1991; Brown 2000 for reviews). Both deterministic and
indeterministic account of human deliberation should leave room for such
lucky events (for better or for worse) to occur. And there seems not point to
assume that the sort of indeterminism introduced by deliberative libertarianism
will render an agent worse off in terms of luck and control in this regard. So the
problem of luck poses no special threat to deliberative libertarian accounts of
free agency.
THE ARGUMENT FROM ACTIVE DIFFERENCE-MAKING

Clarke argues that in acting freely, agents can make a difference to how things
go by exercising active control, «in the performance of a directly free action
itself, not in the occurrence of some event prior to the action» (Clarke 2003, p.
64), and that deliberative libertarian accounts fail to supply this sort of
difference-making. But as we have seen in the refined model of deliberation
and decision-making developed above, an agent must decide when to terminate
a deliberation, and this decision may well make a difference to how the agent
will act consequently: if the agent decides to have more beliefs and
considerations come to mind, in order to find a better alternative, she can
readily do so, and this possibility is open to her. So the agent might be said to
make a difference between what happens but might not have and what does not
happen but might have, by directly exercising a mental act of deciding on
whether to terminate her ongoing deliberation. Deciding is a mental act by
nature, something that an agent actively performs rather than passively
happens to her.16 Therefore it follows that Clarke‟s attack against deliberative
libertarianism in this regard is untenable.
Both Dennett and Mele insist that, in the model of deliberation adopted by
deliberative libertarians, except for some considerations‟ coming-to-mind
being caused indeterministically, all other stages of deliberation must be
causally determined. So it seems obvious that, in accordance with their views,
the very mental event of deciding to terminate a deliberation should also be
deterministic. I would rather leave this question open, for it seems that a variety
of libertarian views, including non-causal, agent-causal, and event-causal
16

See McCall 1987; McCann 1998, ch. 8; Mele 2003, ch. 9 for arguments for the thesis that
deciding is a mental action.

206

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

accounts other than deliberative libertarianism, can also make sense of this
special second-order decision as a free mental act which terminates a
deliberation.
THE ARGUMENT FROM DUAL-RATIONALITY AND CONTROL

Richard Double argues that deliberative libertarianism does not qualify as an
attractive libertarian account of free agency because it fails to «capture the
spirit of the conditions of categorical ability to choose otherwise, dual control,
or dual rationality» (Double 1991, p. 200), by which an agent can act more
than one way deliberately and rationally, given exactly the same prior
circumstances. And this is what a qualified libertarian account can offer
whereas compatibilism cannot.
Double‟s charge, however, is largely misplaced. The alleged categorical
ability to choose otherwise need not be exercised in every free action.
According to one of the most compelling, intelligible and plausible libertarian
accounts of free will which honor this sort of ability, namely, Kane‟s eventcausal account, the exercise of this categorical ability usually implicates dual or
plural conditions in terms of competing, conflicting or incommensurable
motives, practical reasons, or values:
Exercise of free will […] typically involve incommensurable alternatives and
incommensurable reason sets in one manner or another. In moral cases, the
incommensurable reason sets are motives of duty versus self-interest; in
prudential cases, desires for long-term goals versus present satisfactions; in
cases of efforts sustaining purposes, desires to perform tasks or fulfill goals
versus fears, inhibitions, aversions, and other countervailing inclinations. … in
practical deliberation also, agents are torn between competing and not easily
comparable reasons for choosing between alternatives […] The sets of reasons
favoring each of the alternatives […], the “incommensurable reason sets”,
comprise different and competing visions of what the agent wants to do or
become. (Kane 1996, p. 167)

Notice that deliberative libertarian accounts have not incorporated plurality
conditions into the psychological model of deliberation and decision-making:
it has been presumed that all alternatives under deliberation can be accurately
compared with each other and ranked accordingly. Whether this is a necessary
simplification or unrealistic idealization, it would be question-begging to
criticize deliberative libertarian accounts not being able to offer the categorical
ability to choose otherwise typically exercised under the conditions of plurality.

Jing Zhu – Deliberative Libertarianism

207

Notwithstanding its failure to «capture the spirit of the conditions of
categorical ability to choose otherwise, dual control, or dual rationality»
(Double 1991, p. 200), deliberative libertarianism can still offer something
that compatibilism cannot, and stand as an intelligible and plausible variant of
libertarianism well worth wanting for its own right.
INDETERMINACY AND THE PROBLEM OF GENUINE CONTROL

Libertarians typically argue that in a deterministic world agents lack genuine
control over their choices and actions. Fischer asks:
How can adding arbitrariness of the sort envisaged [by deliberative
libertarianism] – the lack of determination of the beliefs that come to mind
during deliberation – to a causally deterministic process yield genuine control?
[…] How, then, can installing the sort of indeterminacy envisaged –
indeterminacy as to which belief states will come to the agent‟s mind –
transform the sequence from one of lack of control to one containing control?
(Fischer 1999, p. 140)

The reasoning that motivates Fischer‟s worry is this: since the envisaged agent
lacks control over the events of (some) beliefs‟ indeterministic coming-to-mind
during deliberation given that indeterminacy implies arbitrariness, deliberative
libertarianism cannot do any better in securing genuine agential control than
compatibilism. Indeed, according to the psychological model of deliberation
and decision-making posited by deliberative libertarian accounts, the agent
does not have the capacity to directly control which of her beliefs to be
indeterministically prompted to come to her mind, but, as the refined model
developed in this article has suggested, she can always decide and control
whether to have more beliefs, some of them to be prompted indeterministically,
come to her mind for deliberation. And this may have bearing on her final
practical decision. Since it is up to the agent to decide when to terminate an
ongoing deliberation, it is thus up to her and under her control whether to have
more beliefs and considerations come to mind in order to envisage more
alternatives and to make better assessments of the options. As some of the
beliefs and considerations are indeterministically prompted, this sort of
indeterminacy can thus constitute in the agent‟s certain kind of genuine
control over her choices and actions which is precluded in a deterministic
world.

208

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Moreover, deliberative libertarianism helps to secure a sense of ultimacy
that libertarians concern, namely the crucial understanding that the origin or
source of our free, responsible choices and actions is in us and not in anyone or
anything else over which we have no control. As noted earlier, Mele‟s notion of
“ultimate control”, by which an agent‟s performing a free action in the sense of
ultimacy is not sufficiently caused solely by conditions external to the agent, is
incompatible with determinism.
Transformation of a deterministic actional process from one of lack of ultimate
control to one containing such control by installation of the sort of internal
indeterminacy that Mele recommends, should, consequently, not smack of
alchemy. (Haji 2001, p. 183)

Fischer and Clarke both argue that the indeterminacy introduced by
deliberative libertarianism seems to diminish an agent‟s control over her
thought and deliberation in a certain way:
Under determinism, one‟s prior states – desires, beliefs, values, general
dispositions – determine the precise content and ordering of the subsequent
doxastic states (that constitute deliberation), even if the agent does not directly
control what doxastic states he will be in. (Fischer 1999, p. 141)

This helps to build a strong connection between one‟s prior psychological
states and the deliberating process. And,
in a deterministic world in which our deliberations always ran in this ideal
fashion, we would exercise a valuable type of nonactive proximal control in
deliberating. If chance at a later stage of deliberation would diminish proximal
control, then chance of the sort required by Mele‟s view would seem to
diminish this nonactive proximal control. (Clarke 2003, p. 69)

However, it is questionable whether it is always desirable and valuable for an
agent to enjoy a strong, deterministic connection between her prior
psychological states and “the precise content and ordering of the subsequent
doxastic states” in deliberating. The purpose of deliberation is to figure out an
optimal solution to the practical problem an agent is faced. This is sometimes a
creative problem-solving task. The invoking of indeterminacy at certain points
in this process may help to envisage new, novel ideas and alternatives that are
not directly and strongly connected with one‟s prior psychological states.
Furthermore, the whole process of deliberation is nevertheless under the
agent‟s control: the agent can decide whether to allow more beliefs and

Jing Zhu – Deliberative Libertarianism

209

considerations come to mind and when to terminate a deliberation. So the
working of indeterminacy is directed by the agent‟s purposeful executive
guidance. And its effect can amount to practical decisions and actions only in
accordance with the agent‟s overall psychological constitution.
Human creativity typically involves the generation of new ideas or concepts,
or new associations between existing ideas or concepts, and results in
producing or bringing about something novel, in imagining new possibilities
not conceived before, and in seeing and doing things in a manner different
from what was thought possible or normal previously. Creativity is not merely
associated with the inspirations of geniuses in arts and sciences. It is also
manifested in our ordinary daily lives, though in much less degrees of
originality, ingenuity and significance. Thomas Edison once remarked that “to
have a great idea, have a lot of them”. The eminent chemist Linus Pauling
echoed that “the way to get good ideas is to get lots of ideas and throw the bad
ones away”. It has been suggested that divergent thinking, which involves
breaking away from what has been thought possible and normal, and flexible,
novel generation of alternative solutions to a set problem, is a crucial element
of creativity (Guilford 1967 and McCrae 1987). It is thus tempting to
speculate that indeterminism may play a positive role in human creativity in
general, and deliberative problem-solving in particular.17
Kane helpfully introduces the term “Taoist efforts” to characterize how
agents “can willfully put themselves in a frame of mind that is receptive to new
chance-selected considerations”:
Practical deliberators, like creative problem-solvers, do not have to wait for
chance-selected considerations to occur in a manner that is completely
uncontrolled and unbidden. When engaging in reflection about what to do,
they can make efforts to relax their minds, freely associating and opening
themselves to new thoughts and images that may well up from the unconscious.
I call efforts of these kinds “Taoist efforts” because they are efforts to
temporarily relinquish conscious control over thought process in order to be
receptive to new considerations that may come to mind – that is, efforts-not-tomake-an-effort to control one‟s thoughts. Doors are thereby opened in
deliberation that can free the mind from present commitments and ways of
thinking. (Kane 1996, p. 165)

17

Kane (1996, pp. 159-160) has offered some interesting and inspiring discussions on the
relation between indeterminism, practical deliberation and creative problem-solving.

210

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

At the price of sometimes relinquishing total rational control of the
conscious mind, as Kane suggests, there is room for indeterminism in the
process of practical reasoning to enhance freedom and creativity: «This
indeterminism make possible „new beginnings‟ in practical deliberation that
cannot be determined by reason, but can be used by it» (Kane 1996, p. 165).
4. CONCLUSION
In this paper, after developing and refining the psychological model of
deliberation and decision-making employed by deliberative indeterminism in
several crucial aspects, which allows an agent to be engaged in the iterative
processing of deliberation before making a final decision, to exert some
positive influence in bringing her nonoccurrent beliefs into deliberative
consideration, and to actively decide when to terminate a deliberation, I have
shown that the four major arguments directed against deliberative
libertarianism are all untenable. Deliberative libertarianism survives these
attacks as an intelligible, coherent and plausible libertarian account of free will
that is worth being taken seriously.
Libertarians need to appeal to indeterminism to account for free agency. A
principal challenge to this is that indeterminism, which implicates randomness,
chanciness and arbitrariness, seems to undermine, rather than enhance,
conditions for rational, responsible free actions. Deliberative libertarianism
suggests a way to cope with this challenge: whereas an agent generally lacks
control over how an indeterministic event happens, she can nevertheless
control when to let a certain kind of indeterministic event to occur, whether to
invoke more events of the sort, and whether to take into account the effects of
these events. Moreover, as deliberative libertarianism has illustrated,
indeterminism need not necessarily be “a hindrance or obstacle to our
purposes that must be overcome by effort”, as some libertarians grant (e.g.,
Kane 1999, p. 237, emphasis in original). Indeterminacy can nevertheless
work as a positive and constructive ingredient that consists in human freedom,
creativity and dignity.

Jing Zhu – Deliberative Libertarianism

211

REFERENCES

Balaguer, M. (2004). A Coherent, Naturalistic, and Plausible Formulation of
Libertarian Free Will. Noûs, 38(3), 379-406.
Bernstein, M. (1989). Review of Robert Kane, Free Will and Values. Noûs,
23(4), 557-559.
Brown, A. (1991). A review of the tip of the tongue phenomenon.
Psychological Bulletin, 109(2), 204-223.
Brown, S. R. (2000). Tip-of-the-tongue phenomena: An introductory
phenomenological analysis. Consciousness and Cognition, 9(4), 516537.
Buckareff, A. (2005). How (not) to think about mental action. Philosophical
Explorations, 8(1), 83-89.
Clarke, R. (2002). Libertarian views: Critical survey of noncausal and eventcausal accounts of free agency. In R. Kane (Ed.), The Oxford Handbook
of Free Will, (pp. 356-385). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Clarke, R. (2003). Libertarian Accounts of Free Will. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Dennett, D. (1978). On giving libertarians what they say they want. In D.
Dennett, Brainstorms: Philosophical Essays on Mind and Psychology,
(pp. 286-299). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Double, R. (1991). The Non-Reality of Free Will. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Ekstrom, L. W. (2000). Free Will: A Philosophical Study. Boulder, CO:
Westview Press.
Fischer, J. M. (1995). Libertarianism and avoidability: A reply to Widerker.
Faith and Philosophy, 12(1), 119-125.
Fischer, J. M. (1999). Critical Notice of Alfred R. Mele‟s Autonomous Agents.
Noûs, 33(1), 133-143.
Guilford, J. P. (1967). The Nature of Human Intelligence. New York:
McGraw-Hill.

212

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Haji, I. (2001). Control conundrums: Modest libertarianism, responsibility,
and explanation. Pacific Philosophical Quarterly, 82(2), 178-200.
Kane, R. (1985). Free Will and Values. Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
Kane, R. (1996). The Significance of Free Will. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Kane, R. (1999). Responsibility, luck, and chance: Reflections on free will and
indeterminism. Journal of Philosophy, 96(5), 217-240.
Kane, R. (2002). Introduction: The contours of contemporary free will
debates. In R. Kane (Ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Free Will, (pp. 341). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kane, R. (2005). A Contemporary Introduction to Free Will. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
McCall, S. (1987). Decision. Canadian Journal of Philosophy, 17, 261-288.
McCann, H. (1998). The Work of Agency. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
Press.
McCrae, R. R. (1987). Creativity, divergent thinking, and openness to
experience. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52(6), 12581265.
Mele, A. (1995). Autonomous Agents. New York: Oxford University Press.
Mele, A. (2003). Motivation and Agency. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Mele, A. (2006). Free Will and Luck. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Nelkin, D. K. (2004). Moral luck. In Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
<http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/moral-luck/>
Pereboom, D. (2001). Living without Free Will. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Strawson, G. (2003). Mental ballistic or the involuntariness of spontaneity.
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 76, 227-256.
Van Inwagen, P. (1983). An Essay on Free Will. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

The Non-Mysterious Flesh:
Embodied Intersubjectivity at Work
Liz Disley*

esd23@cam.ac.uk

ABSTRACT

Working one‘s fingers to the bone, having one‘s nose to the grindstone,
Knochenarbeit… the metaphors we use for hard physical work are often
applied equally to serious intellectual feats or exhaustive non-physical
investigation or processing. In the phenomenological experience of work, what
is the qualitative difference between physical and non-physical work? Hegel
was the first to suggest a strong connection between work and sense of self-assubject as among other selves, and his account in the master/slave dialectic and
subsequent influential interpretations such as that of Kojève are focused on the
physical process of ‗negating‘ objects. Recent work on joint interests and joint
attention focuses on goal-directed action that is paradigmatically non-physical,
or where the physical aspect is incidental. In this paper, I investigate the role
played by physical work in self-perception and in intersubjective relationships,
specifically in a model of empathetic relationships. I also investigate the
question of whether embodiment or shared goals and intentions are more
important to a full account of intersubjectivity and empathy. As well as
contributing to current debates about models of empathy, this discussion is
also relevant to conceptions of solidarity and theories of the self in general,
particularly as regards self-world relations.
INTRODUCTION – THE PERSONAL AND THE PROFESSIONAL
In this paper, I begin by examining briefly two accounts of more or less
successful intersubjectivity and empathy in the work of Hegel and Husserl. The
role played by the phenomenon of personal love between partners in these
accounts has, in recent examinations, been seen as central to the extent to
which they can be regarded as paradigms of successful and meaningful human
* University of Cambridge

214

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

interaction.1 At the same time, the Hegelian and Husserlian accounts of human
interaction which form the starting-point of my paper also have as an important
element a framework of work as involving suppression of some type of desire
and of community on the micro-level. My paper shifts the focus of the debate
onto this phenomenon of work, asking whether group work, which I define
more specifically in the next section, could in fact function as the arena wherein
intersubjectivity and empathy can function ideally. My reasons for choosing to
focus on work rather than love in this paper are threefold. Firstly, work is more
easily examined on an everyday level as something which figures in the lives of
all of us, certainly when the term ―work‖ is broadly defined, as in my paper.
Personal love is regarded, perhaps accurately, as a kind of mystical
phenomenon which in many ways defies sober phenomenological analysis and
is far distinct from typical concepts of reason. Secondly, personal love typically
involves a very small community in each instance: paradigmatically, it involves a
community of two.2 Communities of workers, however, can be of any size.
Focusing on work rather than love allows one to explore how intersubjectivity
and empathy can and do function in wider communities. Thirdly, in work, it is
much easier to isolate the physical aspect from the non-physical aspect and
examine what role the nature of embodiment, and our understanding and
experience of others‘ embodiment, can play in intersubjectivity and empathy.
By ―embodiment‖, I refer not only to the simple fact of a self being associated
with a physical object, but the way the self experiences that body and other
bodies.
1

For examples of such examinations – not all of whom agree that Hegel or Husserl succeed in
providing an account of successful human interaction – see e.g., Ormiston 2004, Williams 2000 and
Hadreas 2007.
2
I specifically use the term ―personal love‖, rather than love in general, to exclude a variety of
other phenomena we describe as ―love‖ – love for art, cooking or a particular geographical landscape,
love for my country or compatriots, and other types of love that cannot be described as having a
particular object with which the one who loves has a direct and potentially reciprocal relationship. My
love for the paintings produced by the Dutch Masters or Verdi‘s operas is not personal love in this
sense because, as inanimate objects, they cannot respond to me. Equally, my love of an abstract
concept such as a country – for it is surely some set of values, atmosphere or something else intangible
that is the object of my love, not a tract of land between borders – can never be a relationship of
personal love, since there exists no candidate for reciprocal action, leaving aside even the theoretical
possibility of such action were such a candidate to be present. Love for compatriots is a case closer to
the borderline, since I do at least want to leave open the possibility of altruistic love for one‘s fellow
human being as a category of personal love. Nevertheless, love for compatriots in general is likely to
have the same kind of very abstract character as love for one‘s country, and is not likely to focus on one
specific individual who might reciprocate in a relationship of personal love.

Liz Disley – The Non-Mysterious Flesh

215

After the discussion of Hegel and Husserl, I proceed with some definitions
about the nature of work, and a more detailed discussion of how work might be
the ideal arena for successful intersubjectivity and empathy. For reasons of
space and scope, it is not possible to provide here a full examination and
justification of a particular definition and understanding of what might count as
―successful‖ empathy and intersubjectivity, so I will offer just some brief
thoughts. First of all, to define the terms themselves, I define intersubjectivity
in the following way; as that quality of the external world and/or human minds
that allows us to see other minds and their attendant bodies and subjects and
objects in the fact of our own subjectivity and objectivity, as willing, perceiving
and acting subjects like ourselves inhabiting the same world.3 Empathy is, as
the original German term ―Einfühlung‖ (feeling-in or -into) suggests, more
closely connected with our ability to access and understand the motivational,
emotional and affective states of those who also inhabit our world. Degrees of
―success‖, in the first instance, are therefore concerned with the degree and
complexity of understanding of these types that is achieved. On this analysis,
neither intersubjectivity nor empathy is a binary quality in the sense of either
being achieved or not being achieved, but allows for a wide range of degrees.
There is certainly also an ethical dimension concerned with what obligations
there might be on us to achieve successful intersubjectivity and empathy, or
whether, to argue from a different angle, the fact that intersubjectivity and
empathy are possible entails certain ethical demands. These extremely useful
and pertinent questions are not my concern here, but would certainly form an
interesting basis for a discussion.
1. WORK, DESIRE AND PURPOSE – SOME DEFINITIONS
What is the central and essential phenomenological quality of work? Certainly,
we use the same kinds of metaphors involving physicality (working one‘s
fingers to the bone, Knochenarbeit in German) or even animals (working like a
dog, donkey-work) to describe this experience or the observation of someone
else‘s work. However, the terms we use to describe our own work or, generally
approvingly, the effort of other people, do not mean that the experience we
have of our own or of others‘ work does not vary greatly depending on whether
3

Note that this general analysis is agnostic about whether intersubjectivity and empathy are made
possible by some biological or even ontological feature of the world or human subjects.

216

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

this work entails physical effort. Equally, whilst the colloquial terms above
paradigmatically conjure up the image of lone, heroic toil, this does not
necessarily contribute anything to the question of whether there is a
phenomenological difference in undertaking work alone or in a group and, if
so, how this difference can be characterised. The first part of this paper will
suggest some differences in terms of phenomenological experience of physical
and non-physical work, both undertaken alone and as part of a group. In this
analysis, my aim is to discover what, if any, part is played in the
phenomenological experience of sole or group work by embodiment.
Any analysis of the phenomenon of work needs to volunteer at least a
provisional definition of the boundaries of that phenomenon. Certainly, it
would be unwarranted to assume from the outset that the definition of ―work‖
which will be important for this particular analysis is co-extensive with the
definition of ―work‖ from a socio-economic point of view. Indeed, the
provisional definition with which I am working is broader than that. The
economic definition of work as a sustained task undertaken in order to earn
money will not be sufficient for this analysis, or at the very least the financial
benefits of work will not be seen as the most phenomenologically pertinent
feature of the phenomenon.
Many critics of, and commentators on, Hegel and the subsequent idea of
work, alienation and freedom have emphasized one particular feature, that is,
the extent to which work is a suppression of one‘s natural desires. A fairly neat
analysis can be made with the help of Harry Frankfurt‘s first- and second-order
desires, where ―natural desire‖ is understood to be roughly equivalent to firstorder desires.4 A first-order or natural desire is a straightforward, immediate
desire, formed with minimal, if any, cognitive involvement – the desire for rest,
shelter, food or drink. A second-order desire, on the other hand, is a desire for
a desire and thus not a simple natural desire. For example, one might desire
fame or fortune, but this is likely to require the suppression of natural desires
such as that for rest. One might desire, then, that one does not desire rest. That
is to say, the first-order desire is held in check in order that the second-order
desire can take precedence. Work involves, but is of course not limited to,
holding one‘s natural desires in check in favor of some purpose that extends
beyond these natural desires.

4

Cf. Frankfurt 1988.

Liz Disley – The Non-Mysterious Flesh

217

1.1. BASIC AND HIGHER PURPOSES
This desire criterion concerns partly what work is not, in terms of purpose. It is
at the same time important to point out that work is for some purpose, and
must be understood by the worker as being for some purpose. This can be
understood as a two-fold requirement. First of all, a particular task of work
should be understood as purposive by the worker – that is, if I am standing at
the front of a room making some comment about Kant, I should understand
that the purpose of this task is to teach my students about Kant, perhaps so that
they can pass their exams. Equally, in the case of physical work, I should
understand that my polishing of a window is for the purpose of cleaning that
window, perhaps to improve the appearance of a building. The work should
have what I will call basic purposiveness (the basic purposiveness criterion). I
will examine whether, for joint or collaborative work, it is important for work
that is relevant from the point of view of my analysis of empathy and
intersubjectivity that each participant has the same broad idea of the basic
purposiveness of the work. As well as basic purposivenss, there is the question
of higher purposiveness (the higher purposiveness criterion). This is rather
more difficult to define, and it will be a major task of my paper to examine what
this consists in and to what extent it is important to the phenomenon of work as
key to an understanding of empathy and intersubjectivity. Higher
purposiveness as I am defining it concerns the perceived overall purpose of the
task as it contributes to the person‘s job or profession, or wider significance of
a task that does not fit into the framework of employment, for example, a small
task that is part of the wider purpose e.g., of renovating one‘s home.
In the simplest possible terms, I understand a ―worker‖ as being someone
engaging in a task which involves action other than as a function of one‘s
natural desires (the desire criterion) which also involves some kind of basic
purpose (the basic purposiveness criterion). For individual work, I initially
leave open the possibility or necessity of a higher purpose to the task at hand.
This is a fairly minimal description of work, which would certainly extend to
running errands or performing basic household tasks, as well as, importantly,
caring for another person or performing fairly simple acts of kindness (holding
open a door, for example). For group work, I initially work with the following
definition – the definition of individual work, but with another individual
worker that assists one in fulfilling either a basic purpose (e.g., preparing a
meal for one‘s family) or a higher one (providing the family with a nutritious
and pleasant-tasting diet). Additionally, for the purposes of the

218

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

phenomenological analysis of joint experience, I will stipulate for joint or
group work that there must be some kind of sustained communication between
workers in a group work situation, leaving aside for the moment the question
of whether the workers have to have physically met at some point.5
2. HEGEL AND HUSSERL – WORK AND LOVE
Before I begin the analysis of physical and non-physical work using the
phenomenological method, I will briefly sketch out the historical background
to this question. Perhaps the most famous example of a phenomenological
analysis of physical work is provided by Kojève‘s reading of Hegel‘s
master/slave dialectic in paragraphs 178-196 of the Phenomenology of Spirit
in his Introduction to the Reading of Hegel (Kojève 1969) Kojève offers us an
analysis of work as a process that limits the slave‘s freedom still further by
holding him in fear of death, but in fact proves his salvation as the interaction
with the external world distinguishes him from animals and humanizes him.
For this type of work, as I will explain, the physical aspect of work is central to
Kojève‘s narrative of liberation which can in turn be casts as a comment on the
objectivity and subjectivity of the human self. At the same time, if we are to take
the core of Kojève‘s analysis seriously, what he says about the liberating and
humanizing power of work is even more convincing if we are considering
physical work in a group rather than lone work. The other central historical
figure important for the purposes of this paper is Edmund Husserl. Husserl, in
his On the Phenomenology of Intersubjectivity (Husserl 1973), develops an
account of communal striving (streben) that forms the basis of personal love,
but which can potentially be widened out to form a kind of ideal model of
positive ethical intersubjectivity. However, although embodiment is certainly a
concern for Husserl in the Cartesian Meditations (Husserl 1950), the Ideen II
(Husserl 1991), the Krisis writings (Husserl 1976) and Husserl 1973, his
account of intersubjectivity and empathy does not fully account for the special
role played by one‘s own experience of one‘s own body as an object in the
lifeworld as well as a subject that is the geographical centre (the ―absolute
5

A full examination of the phenomenological experience of modern workplaces with electronic
communication, video-conferencing and the like as opposed to traditional workplaces where
colleagues are physically together for the majority of the time is unfortunately beyond the scope of this
paper, but this would certainly be a worthwhile candidate for a fuller study.

Liz Disley – The Non-Mysterious Flesh

219

here‖ of e.g., Husserl 1950, p. 146) of self-government.6 To explain what role
embodiment needs to play in the analysis of work, I refer later to the work of
Maurice Merleau-Ponty.
Hegel and Husserl provide us with two accounts of working together,
understood in the broadest possible terms. Their two accounts will therefore
form the starting-point of my enquiry. Choosing these two accounts in
particular requires an engagement with the general question of
intersubjectivity and monistic ontology to which I shall return at various points
in the paper. Both Hegel and, less directly, Husserl, are accused of subsuming
true intersubjectivity into the monistic unity of subject and object. The
criticism of the former is lead by Michael Theunissen, and of the latter, Max
Scheler.7 Both Hegel and Husserl‘s accounts of intersubjectivity appear to
treat the unity of marriage partners or lovers as a kind of paradigmatic example
of effective realisation of that phenomenon. Despite the lack of obvious
similarity between work and love, in fact these examples both depict a unity
with some kind of shared intentions that is grounded on a deeper unity of
consciousness, which may or may not imply or require a deeper ontological
union.
For Hegel, married couples form the smallest unit in a civil society shaped
by an intersubjectivity of reason and action. Some recent scholars have
suggested that it is in a loving relationship that Hegelian intersubjectivity has
its most positive and well-functioning expression as perfect mutual recognition
(in the technical sense of Anerkennung) of the other partner‘s ontological
status. Briefly stated, recognition in Hegelian terms is specifically the
recognition of the Other as having a particular ontological status that is the
same as one‘s own, and, crucially for Hegel‘s account, it must be mutual. One
cannot recognize without being recognized, and vice versa. Recognition, for
Hegel, is a necessary part of the development of self-consciousness.8 Whilst

6
The prolific nature of Husserl as a writer as well as the specific historical challenges of tracing
his shifting views render many accounts of a particular concept or view of his open to challenge from
an earlier or later work. Whilst I do not claim that Husserl has one constant view of intersubjectivity, I
do assert that the elements of his concept that are particularly relevant to the concerns of this paper
remain sufficiently constant for this not to constitute a serious objection from other works.
7
See Theunissen 1991 in general and Scheler 1970, p. 75.
8
This is not an uncontroversial account of Hegelian recognition or the development of selfconsciousness. John McDowell has recently followed Joseph Flay (Flay 1984, p. 86) and George
Armstrong Kelly (Kelly 1984) in advancing a view of the master/slave dialectic as an internal process

220

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

the master/slave dialectic describes a failure of mutuality and therefore a
failure of recognition, the loving relationship describes a relationship where
the two partners live in recognition and harmony. Others have suggested that
the ascription of a unity of consciousness to the loving couple, as well
as Hegel‘s monistic ontology in general, involves a subsuming of genuine
intersubjectivity into one monistic substance, thereby rendering the idea of a
social construction of reality incoherent or impossible. Indeed, the famous
quotation from the Philosophy of Right initially seems to lend some weight to
the assertion that individual consciousness is subsumed:
Love means in general terms the consciousness of my unity with another, so
that I am not in selfish isolation but win my self-consciousness only as the
renunciation of my independence and through knowing myself as the unity of
myself with another and of the other with me.9
Both in German Idealism and in the work of Husserl, intersubjectivity is not
simply, as Allen Wood describes it, «our conception of the mentality of others
and our awareness of it», but accords much more closely to the definition given
in the first part of this paper (Wood 2006, p. 66). Hegel‘s and Husserl‘s
accounts of recognition and empathy both clearly require that the subject is in
some way an actor in a community, and it is precisely in this sense that it can be
useful to use close relationships between two people as a model for human
interaction in general. What does seem clear from the Philosophy of Right is
that recognition is a process with three clear steps, and not a case of simple
desire for mastery or subjectivity as in, for example, a Sartrean account. In fact,
the first desire is that for objectivity, to disappear into the other person, which
is then replaced by a desire for subjectivity and then an achievement of both
objectivity and subjectivity in the eyes of oneself and the other. The lover is not
subsumed, but recognized, and the simple desire becomes a complex one. The
simple desires for objectivity and then subjectivity must be held in check and
suppressed in order for the more complex desire for recognition to emerge.
This notion of desire held in check is one that can be observed on the simple
empirical level of any close relationship between two individuals where each
individual wants something for the other individual as well as for herself.
The main difficulty with Hegel‘s account of recognition and
intersubjectivity is the centrality of the master/slave dialectic which is open to
involving not a distinct other, but rather the finding of oneself in one‘s formative activity and the move
from theoretical cognition of life to a practical immersion in it. See McDowell 2009.
9
Hegel 1991, addition to paragraph 158.

Liz Disley – The Non-Mysterious Flesh

221

such a wide range of empirical elucidations. Husserl‘s account of an
intersubjectivity of action is far more empirically comprehensible. I will turn
now to the issue of the role played by love in Husserl‘s account of
intersubjectivity. Husserl‘s account of personal love proceeds from his general
analysis of the concept of communal striving.10 Whilst love is more than
communal striving, this working together forms the basis of close interpersonal
relationships. His general concept of empathy forms the basis for his
discussions of communal striving and personal love. The key concept is
Nachverstehen or, as Peter Hadreas translates it, understanding-followingafter-another (Hadreas 2007, p. 20). Nachverstehen is a kind of empathetic
understanding of one person following after another which makes the other
person impossible to objectify. Part of the refusal to objectify the beloved is
due to the appreciation of her particular subjectivity – an object could simply
be replaced.
There are two particular features of this phenomenon that demonstrate the
clear connection to Husserl‘s broader intersubjectivity and an account of
ethical love in the community. Firstly, there is this impossibility of objectifying
the beloved; as Peter Hadreas puts it, «The beloved person remains more than
can be collated into an object» (Hadreas 2007, p. 20). This has clear parallels
with the irreducible nature of the community. Secondly, there is the emphasis
on communal striving and activity in the couple as well as in the wider
community, as the person of the beloved is disclosed to the other part of the
couple through sharing in his acts and following in his footsteps, either
cognitively or literally. Working together for common goals is crucial:
As one who loves I know that, whatever I think, feel, strive for, or do, all are
necessarily ‗in the interests‘ of my beloved, is right for the beloved, and is right
for the beloved not only in the sense of my not being scolded by the beloved,
but rather as something I strove for in the interests of my beloved‘s striving.
(Husserl 1973, p. 173)11

The higher purposes of the beloved and the lover are completely at one with
each other – all goals, whether or not they are basic or higher purposes, are at
one, because the lover is in love with the unique beloved. The question remains
whether this complete meshing of goals of action could persist with a weaker
bond, for example, that of the workers. Leaving aside the question of whether
10
11

See e.g., Husserl 1973, p. 171.
Adapted from a translation in Hadreas 2007, p. 37.

222

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Husserl‘s account is simply too demanding, I will move on to examine an
account that goes beyond Husserl‘s concept of the self and the body and places
embodied self at the very centre of intersubjectivity and empathy.
3.

THE WORKER AS EMBODIED – MERLEAU-PONTY AND SKILL

What is the special relevance of embodiment to work? How does the fact that
we are, as Merleau-Ponty puts it, ―psycho-physical subjects‖ affect us as
workers, and how does this relate in particular to work undertaken in a group?
The following comment is key:
In so far as I have hands, feet, a body, I sustain around me intentions which are

not dependent upon my decisions and which affect my surroundings in a way
which I do not choose. These intentions are general […] they originate from

other than myself, and I am not surprised to find them in all psycho-physical
subjects organized as I am. (Merleau-Ponty 1962, p. 440, my emphasis)

Not only does the simple fact of my embodiment mean that I am not able to
predict with certainty how my goal-directed action will translate into the
desired result on even the most basic level, but due to my physicality, my
intentions do not depend on my decisions because even those intentions have
to be developed with regard to the physical environment of which I, qua
physical being, am part. Merleau-Ponty‘s comment also touches on the concept
of intersubjectivity of embodied objects, albeit in a fairly minimalistic sense –
there is a simple reasoning that because I am limited in translating my
decisions into concrete intentions (and therefore am not radically free in the
sense that Sartre would insist I am), then others whom I identify, for whatever
reason, as being crucially similar to myself, must also be limited by such
circumstances.
Seen in the light of the current discussions of models of empathy, MerleauPonty‘s comments about intentions, decisions and the understanding that
other psycho-physical objects are similarly limited in their goal-directed
activities are particularly interesting, especially given his concept of skilful
action. According to Merleau-Ponty in the Phenomenology of Perception,
there is a strong connection between the physical self and the world (the
intentional arc) which means that when the active body acquires new skills,
these are stored not as mental representations but as dispositions which allow
one to respond to one‘s physical environment – what we would, in the common

Liz Disley – The Non-Mysterious Flesh

223

vernacular, call ―skills‖. Moreover, the ―maximal grip‖ is the process which
allows the active body to refine its skills and bring the physical situation closer
to what it regards as the optimum – Merleau-Ponty uses the example of a
painting which has an optimal distance from which it should be seen. The vital
point about skill in the intentional arc and maximum grip is that the capacities
developed there are not propositional knowledge. Can we equally have skills
with regard to other psycho-physical objects, and, if so, do these capacities
treat such psycho-physical objects simply as part of the external furniture, or
do they respond at the same time to the non-physical aspects of the Other?12
The significance of this question becomes clear when one considers the
modern debate in the theory of empathy between theory-theorists and
simulation theorists. Broadly speaking, the two views can be summarized in the
following manner. The theory-theorist sees empathy as involving a theory of
mind that is held by the empathiser which allows them to attribute intentional
states to the person with whom they are empathising. In other words, for the
theory-theorist, empathy involves propositional knowledge, unlike MerleauPonty‘s account of the intentional arc and of maximum grip. The simulation
theorist, on the other hand, believes that by using our cognitive capacities, we
put ourselves in the position of the other and simulate their mental states in
ourselves. As one of the early proponents of this theory, Jane Heal, puts it, «we
take the subject matter of that thought, whether we believe the same or not,
and think directly about it» (Heal 1995, p. 35). In this sense, simulation theory
does not involve propositional knowledge – in fact, the factual contents of our
beliefs are, as she points out, irrelevant from the point of view of our
empathising. Certainly at first glance, it seems that empathy, for the simulation
theorist, is a kind of skill, even if it does not follow the precise path of skilldevelopment traced out by Merleau-Ponty in the Phenomenology of
Perception.
If it is the case that empathizing in general is a simulation process not
involving propositional knowledge or a theory of mind, then one could argue
that the skill of working with another person, two workers both limited by the
fact of their being physical objects amongst physical objects, is rather like the
example of a chess player developed by Hubert Dreyfus in a 2002 paper.
Dreyfus describes the stages that a chess player learning to play to a very high
12

I follow a general convention used by a large number of writers on intersubjectivity of
capitalising the word Other when it refers specifically to a candidate for intersubjective relationships.

224

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

standard goes through – first the simple memorisation of playing rules and
possible move permutations, moving on to a stage where those rules work
together with each other in a kind of interplay with a developing skill that does
not require conscious reference to propositional knowledge, finally ending up
at the following stage where expertise is used all the time and the body of
knowledge is referred to only occasionally. This allows the immediate intuitive
situational response that is characteristic of expertise (Dreyfus 2002, p. 372).
If this analysis is applied to work in a framework influenced by Merleau-Ponty,
we begin to get a general picture of skilled working with others that does not
primarily require reference to a body of propositional knowledge. Whatever
the degree to which the chess analysis, to which I return in the fourth section of
this paper, can be applied to the world of work, the account of skill in general
draws us closer to the conclusion, as Wringe 2003 puts it in the context of a
simulation account of empathy, that «[o]ur beliefs do not constitute the sum or
even, necessarily the most important part of our mental lives» (Wringe 2003,
p. 354). Empathy is rather more than the attribution to others of mental states.
3.1. WORK AND INTERCORPOREITY
In the previous subsection, I suggested that Merleau-Ponty‘s account of skill
presents a picture of the phenomenological experience of individual and group
work that fits well with the simulation-theory view of empathetic relations. In
this subsection, I will briefly examine Merleau-Ponty‘s own view of work and
recognition in the master/slave dialectic in the Phenomenology. David Storey
argues that, in terms of arguing for more fundamental structures of
consciousness as an explanation of human experience, Merleau-Ponty is to
Husserl what Hegel is to Kant (Storey 2009, p. 62). According to Storey, both
Merleau-Ponty and Hegel are fundamentally concerned with restoring the
great chain of being by re-imbuing what are often seen as non-philosophical
objects with ontological significance and making clear the fundamental unity of
self and object in a pre-conscious sense. In Hegel‘s case, of course, that is
motivated by a commitment to monistic ontology in general. This of course
brings forward the well-established question of whether Hegel‘s objections to
Kant (and, by analogy, Merleau-Ponty‘s objections to Husserl) take as their
primary ground the fact that Kant/Husserl‘s general framework provides an
empirically or phenomenologically insufficient account of human experience,
or the fact that the ontological presuppositions are faulty to begin with. Storey
suggests that the difference between the two pairs of philosophers relates to

Liz Disley – The Non-Mysterious Flesh

225

their general attitudes towards monistic and dualistic ontologies. One
proposition, which I can explore only briefly in this paper, is whether effective
intersubjectivity (or a fully descriptive account of intersubjectivity) in fact
requires some kind of monistic ontology. In other words, it could be that the
overcoming of the dualism which Storey characterizes as that of Spirit and
Flesh will in fact require an overcoming of other dualisms, most fundamentally
of all that of subject and object. I will put this question aside for the moment
and return to it later.
The key concepts which differentiate Merleau-Ponty from Husserl are those
of intercorporeity and skill. Whilst Husserl pre-figures Merleau-Ponty in terms
of his concern with lived, bodily experience, his account of embodiment,
certainly in the Cartesian Meditations, focuses on the Other‘s governing of
one‘s own body as similar to my governing by own body rather than the body as
a limitation on freedom which must constantly adapt to obstacles to performing
a particular desired action as in Merleau-Ponty‘s account of skill.13 Husserl‘s
account of spatial subjectivity in Husserl 1973 in particular is full and detailed,
but it demonstrates an important limitation which is crucial for the account of
intersubjectivity and work, namely the inability to fully ―objectivate‖, as Peter
Reynaert puts it, my body as a whole (Reynaert 2001, e.g., p. 211). In order to
experience my body as an object, I would have to step outside that body and
assume different perspectives from the one I occupy.14 This has important
consequences for the self at work and for access to experience of the Other,
which in Husserl‘s account of embodiment and Paarung seems rather
theoretical in terms of comparing data.15 Not only is it impossible for Husserl
to develop an account of something like Merleau-Ponty‘s skill, he also cannot
develop even a basic account of something like the later philosopher‘s concept
of crisscrossing described below, as, for Husserl, we can objectivate parts of
our bodies but not our bodies as a whole. Therefore, the methodological
explanation breaks down.
Merleau-Ponty‘s concept of crisscrossing, where we experience embodied
others and ourselves as both objects and subjects by shifting focus between our
left hand touching our right hand and our right hand being touched by our left
hand, is a prior stage of embodied intersubjectivity before that of full

13

See e.g., Husserl 1950, p. 128.
Cf. Husserl 1973, p. 413.
15
Cf. Husserl 1950, p. 147.
14

226

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

intercorporeity.16 As mentioned, it is always going to be a further question why
this should be the case. What is special about the other person‘s right hand that
I should be able to apprehend it in a similar way to my own hand? Why don‘t I
encounter it in the same way as a door handle or a hockey stick? If it is simply a
matter of physical similarity, then intersubjectivity on many definitions has not
been achieved at all, and certainly I am thinking about and empathizing with
the Other very much on the level of the theory-theorist, basing my conclusions
on a theory of mind and the ascription on the basis of physical similarity to the
Other of propositional knowledge about her cognitive faculties. For a number
of reasons mentioned above, this is deficient in terms of empathy, if not also in
terms of intersubjectivity, and therefore deficient on both the
phenomenological and the ontological levels.
Merleau-Ponty‘s concept of intercorporeity provides us with an account of
intersubjective embodiment that attempts to explain without the use of
theories of mind or propositional knowledge why it is that, as succintly puts it,
«the flesh of another person is not an absolute mystery» (Brubaker 2000, p.
96). Merleau-Ponty‘s account of incorporeity is one which has experience, and
not propositional knowledge, at its heart. He gives the example of the left and
right hands as compared with the hand of another, and poses the following
question: why «when touching the hand of another, would I not touch in it the
same power to espouse the things that I have touched in my own?» (MerleauPonty 1964, p. 141). Merleau-Ponty links this to color perception or
apprehension. When I think of my own experience of the color green, I
recognise that this is somehow a private experience not transparent to the
Other. At the same time, however, I recognise it on reflection as a precognitive apprehension and not a judgement in the Kantian sense. As Brubaker
puts it,
by witnessing the sensuous flesh constitutive of our own idios cosmos, each of
us may posit, by analogy, ―another presumptive domain of the visible and the
tangible‖ that cannot be expressed in the languages of physical bodies and
intentional consciousness. (Brubaker, 2000, p. 96)

We come to this conclusion, or, to put it more accurately, we experience the
Other in this way, because of the way we experience our own body as a
perceiving body and because we can ascribe to another experience we
recognise as being private.
16

See e.g., Merleau-Ponty 1964, p. 135.

Liz Disley – The Non-Mysterious Flesh

227

If we accept Merleau-Ponty‘s account of intercorporeity, what kind of
consequences does this have for the intersubjective experience of work? Does
it demonstrate that intersubjectivity and empathy will somehow work better in
physical group work than in non-physical group work? One thing to notice in
particular about Merleau-Ponty‘s account of intersubjective embodiedness is
that it does not primarily involve goal-directed action, but rather simple
encounters with the physical Other. At the same time, however, if we also take
into account Merleau-Ponty‘s comment that a crucial part of embodied is the
experience of being frustrated in some way by one‘s physical environment
purely in the sense that one is not, pace Sartre, radically free to realise one‘s
intentions, we can begin to see how intercorporeity might be transferred to the
work realm. What is crucial for incorporeity is some kind of realm, a cosmos in
which one acts. A work environment is a specific example of such a cosmos. I
witness that my physical experience of the workplace is private and opaque in
some important way for the Other, but that they have a similar cosmos which
they experience in some broadly similar way. Their physicality is not a
complete mystery for me. How can I make it even less of a mystery? Presumably
by physically standing in their cosmos and sharing physical experiences. Two
workers performing similar physical tasks side-by-side will get as close as
anyone can to each other‘s physical experience, but the importance of shared
goals, crucial for Husserl, pales into insignificance on the Merleau-Pontian
account. Indeed, the experience of incorporeity would be equally strong in the
case of two exact competitors, for example, two runners competing would have
a stronger bond of this nature than competitors in a relay team. This is not
necessarily a deficiency in Merleau-Ponty‘s account – indeed, a strong moral
dimension has been observed in his account which I shall discuss later in this
paper. In many ways, it is Merleau-Ponty‘s account which might be seen as the
one that would most easily account for the phenomenon of solidarity.
It is a further question, of course, whether this incorporeity points towards
or even requires some kind of general ontological framework which enables us
to extrapolate from our experience of our own physicality to that of others, and
I will return once more to this question later in the paper. I will note here that
the notion of intercorporeity seems to strongly support the simulation theory
of empathy as expounded by Heal et al. whilst seeing only a minor role for goals
and intentions. It is to the notion of shared intentions that I will now turn.

228

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

4. SHARED INTENTIONS
One good candidate for a view which opposes that of Merleau-Ponty in almost
every respect is John Searle in his account of shared or collective intentionality.
Searle‘s central claim relevant to this paper in his The Construction of Social
Reality is that collective intentionality is not at all dependent on even the
existence of a world outside the mind.17 His argument goes broadly like this:
collective intentions exist only in individual brains, but it is nevertheless
possible for individuals to have a so-called we-intention because of a kind of
―shared Background‖, capitalized because it is being used in a technical sense
to mean conditions necessary for certain cognitive activities and, crucially,
language. Whilst Searle‘s account might seem radically individualistic, in fact
he argues that the having of a Background sense of relevantly similar others is,
in fact, inborn and something we have in common with biologically similar
species (Searle 1995, p. 414). This provides an interesting counterpart to the
idea of some form of ontological unity, namely a kind of biological unity, or at
the very least some kind of biologically-determined access to the Other at least
in terms of their cognitive faculties. Whilst this would be likely to fall short in
terms of empathy in as far as empathy involves some kind of shared emotion, it
seems to be a good candidate for practical intersubjectivity. Certainly, to put it
in Heideggerian or Sartrean terms, it is a form of pre-reflexive consciousness –
there can be no reflection when recognizing the kind of cognitive capacities the
Other has based on some biological consciousness. When making this
particular point in a paper about the intersubjectivity of meaning, Carlos
Cornejo makes the following point:
In natural circumstances I am not in front of others as they were objects
being-present-at-hand. Instead, we usually are actively engaged with them in
common activities, so that their behaviors seem us pristine and fullfledged of
meaning. Within the minimal communicative situation, the other is from the
start available, not present-at-hand (Cornejo 2008, p. 175).
Whilst it is not the fact that I am engaged with the Other(s) in some
common activity that allows me to draw conclusions about their Background,
the intersubjectivity of meaning is something that is meaningless without
common activity. The most obvious illustration of this point is Searle‘s own
example f money – money is only money (that is, only has monetary value)
17

See e.g., Searle 1995.

Liz Disley – The Non-Mysterious Flesh

229

because of some tacit agreement that we will all accord it this meaning and
accept it as such. So, whilst it is possible to have a we-intention as an individual
even as a brain in a vat if that individual posits the existence of others who hold
this intention, it is only when genuinely engaged in common activities that
intersubjective meanings can actually come into existence. Meijers and others
enforce this point with the objection that Searle does not take into account the
extent to which collective intentions are rule-governed (Meijers 2003). Joint
action is essentially normative. If we examine again Searle‘s own example of the
football team who have some joint intention or joint goal, the forming of the
intention to play football and perhaps beat the other team involves the forming
and accepting of some kinds of rights and obligations which all of the players,
at least in broad terms, understand. It is not in the least bit meaningful to speak
of these norms if the person who has formed the we-intention is a brain in a vat.
Whilst the kind of we-intention Searle describes might be sufficient for
collective intentionality in the narrow sense in which he describes it, it is
clearly not sufficient for intersubjectivity.
4.1. FOOTBALLERS AND CHESS PLAYERS – WORK, EMBODIMENT AND
SHARED INTENTIONS

Is the physical dimension of the football game crucial to the players‘ experience
of the normative nature of collective action, or could the essential facts of the
situation be transferred to a non-physical sphere such as that of a quiz team? In
all other respects, the situations are similar – the members of the quiz team and
the football team are focused on a common goal, bound by established and
accepted rules, and with each individual engaged in more or less the same
activity, with some subtle variations in role (the difference between the attacker
and the defender, and between the sports specialist and the history specialist).
One essential difference between the two scenarios is that Merleau-Ponty‘s
point about the external barriers placed on any physical activity applies only to
the football and not the quiz scenario. There remains a physical element to the
quiz example that could fall under the heading of Merleau-Ponty‘s concept of
intercorporeity, which is facial expression and gesture. The quiz team whose
members are familiar with each other‘s physicality will come to recognise the
subtleties of expression and gesture to signal someone‘s confidence in a given
action or decision, which, depending on the set-up of the particular quiz, could
be seen as a skill to gain an advantage which is honed over time until the
maximum grip is reached and the symbiosis of their actions reaches perfection.

230

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

The situation with the footballers is almost exactly the same. The physicality
involved in the quiz players‘ action is not incidental to the intersubjective
action.
At this point, it is worthwhile to ask whether perhaps the terms ―intention‖
and ―goal‖ need to be carefully distinguished, and refer back once more to the
notion of basic and higher purposiveness. There is clearly a distinction in
everyday speech, as an intention is generally a firm plan to perform a particular
action – e.g., I intend to pick up my umbrella before I leave the house in order
to serve my goal of remaining dry should it rain. Sometimes we use the term
―intend‖ to refer to goals that are very near or achievable. The sentence ―I
intend to be the President of the United States‖ sounds somewhat odd unless
uttered by someone about to take the oath of office in the next few weeks, or on
the brink of being elected. The way Searle uses the term ―intention‖, for
example in his discussion of the group of friends rushing to get out of the rain,
focuses on simple and straightforward activities that lead to a short-term goal
and do not necessarily involve the suppression of one‘s natural or first-order
desires. Indeed, action from this level of basic purposiveness might well be
motivated solely by such natural desires, as in Searle‘s example (Searle 1990).
Can we say, then, that sharing collective goals of basic purposiveness does not
demonstrate full intersubjectivity and empathy?
Bratman, in Bratman 1993 and elsewhere, provides us with a suggestion
using the vocabulary of subplans which have to mesh in particular ways. He
uses the vocabulary of ―shared‖ rather than ―collective‖ intentions, which I
have regarded as synonyms thus far in this analysis but can clearly be
differentiated in an account of meshing subplans. ―Shared‖ seems more
appropriate for Bratman‘s analysis because the intentions or goals produced by
meshing subplans results in an analysis which posits common content that
directly concerns the social world. According to Bratman, we can share an
intention that we wash the dishes if and only if:
1. (a) I intend that we wash the dishes and (b) you intend that we wash
the dishes
2. I intend that we wash the dishes in accordance with and because of 1a
and 1b, and meshing subplans of 1a and 1b; you intend the same.

Liz Disley – The Non-Mysterious Flesh

231

3. 1 and 2 are common knowledge.18
On my description of basic and higher purposes, washing the dishes would
count as a basic purpose subordinate to the higher purpose of, for example,
maintaining a pleasant and hygienic living environment. On Bratman‘s
account, subplans in 1a and 1b could be ―washing the dishes with Brand A
washing-up liquid‖ and ―washing the dishes with Brand B washing-up liquid‖.
Could subplans A and B also be basic purposes serving a higher purpose in the
terms described above? What difference would it then make if the higher
purpose was not shared? For example if we imagine the context of a newdesk of
a newspaper, the higher purposes could be, for one person, to improve sales
figures for the week, and, for another, to impress a particular government
minister in order to gain an advisory position. The subplans on the level of
basic goals could mesh but be serving different higher purposes – the subplans
could both mesh in such a way that the basic goal is to write and publish a
scandalous story on a political rival to the minister in the second worker‘s
subplan. Depending on all kinds of facts about the particular situation, the
shared intention could persist if there were complete common knowledge
about everyone‘s higher purposes. Indeed, it would be perfectly possible for
there to be a higher purpose on the part of the newspaper‘s proprietor that
does not overlap, or is even antagonistic towards, the higher purposes of the
workers (for example, her intention could be to discredit the government in
general for some political purpose). Whilst subplans as they are described by
Bratman provide an empirically convincing description on the micro-level, and
could also fit in well with a Merleau-Pontian account of skill where close
association allows subplans to be carefully balanced in order to achieve mutual
satisfaction, they cannot explain why it should be necessary that higher goals
and purposes should be shared on the macro-level. In itself this is not an
objection to an account that makes use of the concept of subplans, but it
directly contradicts what might be seen as Husserl‘s very promising account of
mutual striving which focuses more obviously on complex, higher, long-term
shared goals.

18

See Bratman 1993, p. 106; Bacharach and Tollefsen 2008, p. 32.

232

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

CONCLUSION – THE WIDER ONTOLOGICAL FRAMEWORK
In this paper, I have attempted to demonstrate that the way in which joint
commitments and goals fit into the general framework of our desires and our
Background/idios cosmos is crucial for intersubjective action, and that, for
this reason, the phenomenological experience of work is a paradigmatic
example of effective intersubjectivity and human interaction. I have suggested,
based on Husserl‘s account of communal striving, that work that is seen by its
group workers to have a higher purpose involving the subordination of basic
purposes to enable more effective intersubjectivity because of the skills that are
developed as a result of such work, and that are used in such work. Perhaps
somewhat counter-intuitively, my enquiries suggest that there is no special
bonus for intersubjectivity when group workers agree on the higher purpose of
their work, that is, what that higher purpose is. In the same vein, it makes no
difference to intersubjectivity in working environments whether or not a group
of workers is somehow deceived or mistaken about the higher purpose of their
work. I have also observed that accounts of intersubjectivity that are relevant to
the experience of work strongly tend to support a simulationist account of
empathy, where the empathiser experiences the emotions of the Other rather
than ascribing them to her on the basis of a theory of mind. I suggest, following
Hegel and using an argument from Merleau-Ponty, that individual physical
work (or, more specifically, goal-directed activity) can improve one‘s capacity
for intersubjectivity by encouraging the worker to think of themselves as a
subject and an object simultaneously, since physical activity brings with it the
consciousness of the limits of one‘s freedom.
As for the comparison between physical and non-physical work, I have
examined Merleau-Ponty‘s account of skill and suggested that it could apply
equally to non-physical activities. I suggested also that his account of
intercorporeity could function as a paradigm of the intersubjectivity of action,
since this phenomenon is most acutely observed when two or more people are
engaged in similar physical work together, although not necessarily for the
same basic or higher purpose (as in the example of the footballers). I suggest
that physical work is therefore more likely than non-physical work to foster
solidarity, and that there is also an element in solidarity which concerns
hardships experienced by oneself and the Other, making physical work more
relevant to the phenomenon than non-physical work. At the same time, since
all work by my definition involves the suppression of natural desires, hardship

Liz Disley – The Non-Mysterious Flesh

233

on some level is always involved in work, despite the ―rewards‖ in terms of
higher purpose. In this sense, feelings of solidarity are likely to arise from any
type of work.
In general, I found the difference between physical and non-physical group
work in terms of fostering intersubjectivity and empathetic understanding to
be one of degree rather than form, and maintain that the whole range of
intersubjective relationships and empathetic reactions that arise from group
work are equally possible in non-physical group work. At the same time, such
relationships and reactions are particularly likely to develop in physical group
work – indeed, there might also be a biological dimension in terms of mirror
neurons, endorphins and lactic acid in the muscles. However, I do not believe
that this biological dimension is necessary for the development of
intersubjectivity and empathy.
One extremely important question that remains is that of whether these
instances of intersubjectivity and empathy must have an ontological basis. I can
make only the briefest remarks about what this paper adds to this particular
debate here. What I mean by a ―monistic ontology‖ is described in a concise
manner by Rolf-Peter Horstmann in a 2006 paper:
The entirety of actuality must [if we are to accept a monistic ontology] be seen
as a single all-comprehending, self-developing rational entity, which achieves
knowledge of itself in a spatio-temporal process of realizing its distinctive
conceptual determinations. (Horstmann 2006, p. 109)

I can make only the briefest of comments on this topic here, namely that
all of the aspects of promising theories of intersubjectivity and empathy
as they apply to the world of work have in common a concern with a
balance of experience between objectivity and subjectivity. This is
certainly not enough in itself for an argument for a monistic ontology,
but is perhaps the starting-point of an enquiry into the relationship
between the phenomenology of intersubjectivity and the wider
ontological framework.
REFERENCES

Bacharach, S., & Tollefsen, D. (2008). Collaborative art and collective
intention. In H.-B. Schmid, K. Schulte-Ostermann & N. Psarros (Eds.),

234

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Concepts of Sharedness: Essays on Collective Intentionality, (pp. 2140). Heusenstamm: Ontos Verlag.

Bratman, M. (1993). Shared intention. Ethics, 104(1), 97-113.
Brubaker, D. (2000). Merleau-Ponty‘s three intertwinings. The Journal of
Value Enquiry, 34(1), 89-101.
Cornejo, C. (2008). Intersubjectivity as co-phenomenology: From the holism
of meaning to the being-in-the-world-with-others. Integrative
Psychological and Behavioral Science, 42(2), 171-178.
Donohoe, J. (2004). Husserl on Ethics and Intersubjectivity: From Static to
Genetic Phenomenology. Amherst, NJ: Humanity Books.
Dreyfus, H. (2002). Intelligence without representation – Merleau-Ponty‘s
critique of mental representation. Phenomenology and the Cognitive
Sciences, 1(1), 367-383.
Drummond, J. (2002). Forms of social unity: Partnership, membership, and
citizenship. Husserl Studies, 18(2), 141–156.
Flay, J. (1984). Hegel‘s Quest for Certainty. Albany, NY: SUNY Press.

Frankfurt, H. (1988). Freedom of the will and the concept of a person.
In H. G. Frankfurt, The Importance of What We Care About, (pp.
11-25). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hadreas, P. (2007). A Phenomenology of Love and Hate. Aldershot, UK:
Ashgate.
Heal, J. (1995). How to think about thinking. In M. Davies & T. Stone, Mental
Stimulation: Evaluations and Interpretations, (pp. 33-52). Oxford:
Blackwell.
Hegel, G.W.F.(1979). The Phenomenology of Spirit (trans. A.V. Miller).
Oxford: Oxford University Press
Hegel, G.W.F. (1991). Elements of the Philosophy of Right. (tr. by H.B.
Nisbet). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Horstmann, R.-P. (2006). Hegel‘s Phenomenology of Spirit as an argument
for a monistic ontology. Inquiry, 49(1), 103-118.

Liz Disley – The Non-Mysterious Flesh

235

Husserl, E. (1950). Cartesianische Meditationen und Pariser Vorträge.
(Husserliana I). The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Husserl, E. (1973). Zur Phänomenologie der Intersubjektivität. Texte aus dem
Nachlass, Zweiter Teil. (Husserliana XIV). The Hague: Martinus
Nijhoff.
Husserl, E. (1976). Die Krisis der Europäischen Wissenschaften und die

Transzendentale Phänomenologie: Ein Einleitung in die
Phänomenologische Philosophie. (Husserliana VI). The Hague:
Martinus Nijhoff.

Husserl, E. (1991). Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie und

phänomenologischen Philosophie: Zweites Buch: Phänomenologische
Untersuchungen zur Konstitution. (Husserliana IV). The Hague,
Martinus Nijhoff.

Kelly, G. A. (1984). Notes on Hegel‘s Lordship and Bondage. In J. Stewart
(Ed.), The Phenomenology of Spirit Reader, (pp. 172-191). Albany,
NY: SUNY Press.
Kojève, A. (1969). Introduction to the Reading of Hegel. New York: Basic
Books.
McDowell, J. (2009). Having the World in View. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Meijers, A. M. (2003). Can collective intentionality be individualized?
American Journal of Economics and Sociology, 62(1), 167-183.
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1962). The Phenomenology of Perception. London:
Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1964). The Visible and the Invisible. (tr. by A. Lingis).
Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.
Reynaert, P. (2001). Intersubjectivity and naturalism — Husserl‘s Fifth
Cartesian Meditation revisited. Husserl Studies, 17(3), 207-216.
Scheler, M. (1970). The Nature of Sympathy. Hamden, CT: Shoe String Press.
Searle, J. (1990). Collective intentions and actions. In P. Cohen, J. Morgan &
M. E. Pollack (Eds.), Intentions in Communication, (pp. 401-415).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

236

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Searle, J. (1995). The Construction of Social Reality. New York: The Free
Press.
Storey, D. (2009). Spirit and/or flesh – Merleau-Ponty‘s encounter with
Hegel. PhaenEx, 4(1), 59-83.
Theunissen, M. (1991). The Repressed Intersubjectivity in Hegel‘s
Philosophy of Right. In Cornell, D., Rosenfeld, M. & Carlson, D. G.
(Eds.), Hegel and Legal Theory, (pp. 3-63). London: Routledge.
Williams, R.(2000). Hegel‘s Ethics of Recognition. Berkeley, CA: University
of California Press.
Wood, A. (2006). Fichte‘s intersubjective I. Inquiry, 49(1), 62-79.
Wringe, W. (2003). Simulation, co-cognition, and the attribution of
emotional states. European Journal of Philosophy, 11(3), 354–374.

Practical Intentionality:
A Balance Between Practical and Theoretical Acts*
Susi Ferrarello**

ferrarello.susi@tiscali.it
ABSTRACT

The main purpose of my research is to examine that kind of intentionality
which underpins every decision. By the help of Husserl‟s phenomenology, I
would answer to the following questions: Is every decision determined by a
logical reasoning and an axiological evaluation? What do we commonly mean
with practical intentionality and how does it affect a decision-making process?
Usually the idea of intentionality has been linked up to the activity of giving
meaning about what one wants to do. I can intend something to acquire
information on it and then deed. Although it is simply a matter of opening a
window. However, I retain that even in these early stages of the intending, the
practical acts convey their own kind of intentionality which could be
occasionally covered up by theoretical acts.

1. INTRODUCTION
The main purpose of my research is to examine that kind of intentionality
which underpins every decision. By the help of Husserl‟s phenomenology, I
would answer to the following questions: Is every decision determined by a
logical reasoning and an axiological evaluation? Or is it a result of mood and
instinct? What exactly flows in a mood? Why are my decisions not always
successful?
For instance, when one decides to go out for a walk, he/she could be
compelled to make this decision because of a logical inference. I know that
outside is a warm and sunny day, so I evaluate the situation in a positive way
* I am grateful to Federico, Valeria and the staff of Humana.Mente for their helpful contribution
to this article.
** University of Rome “La Sapienza”

238

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

and I decide to go out and enjoy the pleasant day. Yet the example becomes
more complicated when one thinks fit to want something, but his/her body
does not seem agree. Namely, I want to get that job, because it is commonly
held in great esteem and it is well paid, but once I reached it, I begin to suffer
from daily migraines or worse I behave myself so as not to keep it even if I am
sure to do my best.
Thence my research aims mostly to a definition as clear as possible of what
we commonly mean with practical intentionality and how it affects a decisionmaking process. Usually the idea of intentionality has been linked up to the
activity of giving meaning about what one wants to do. I can intend something
to acquire information on it and then deed. Although it is simply a matter of
opening a window. However, I retain that even in these early stages of the
intending, the practical acts1 convey their own kind of intentionality which
could be occasionally covered up by theoretical acts.2
To carry out this analysis I will rely on Husserl‟s Analyses Concerning
Passive Synthesis (Husserl 19663) and Active Synthesis (Husserl 20004).
Following Husserl‟s path I should be able to draw an analysis of will conducive
to put in evidence both subordination and superiority of willing respect to
knowing. In fact, by Husserl‟s former works (Husserl 19755, Husserl 19846
and Husserl 19887), I will emphasize why he conceives will subordinated to
the logical reason. On the contrary, quoting some passages of his latter studies
(particularly Husserl 2004), I will be able to display how Husserl combines his
former with his latter idea of will and accordingly his theory of knowledge with
his idea of decision-making process.
2. AFFECTIVE AND SIGNITIVE ACTS
In this paragraph I will try to provide with a tentative definition of what Husserl
1
Although the rank of practical acts is quite wide, here I will refer to Husserlian definition of
practical acts as it is given in his lectures on ethics (Husserl, 1914). The practical acts encompass the
acts of will, evaluations, emotions, instincts, feelings, sentiments.
2
In the class of theoretical acts Husserl usually puts the acts of judgment and knowledge.
3
From now on: Hua XI.
4
From now on: Hua XXXI.
5
From now on: Hua XVIII.
6
From now on: Hua XIX.
7
From now on: Hua XXVIII.

Susi Ferrarello – Practical Intentionality

239

means by intentionality and which kind of rationality lays at the basis of this
idea.
Intentionality is mainly the term by which phenomenologists describe the
movement of consciousness to mean something. In Logical Investigation,
Husserl mainly uses the term of intentionality in the meaning of
Bedeutungsintention (Benoist 2004 and Souche-Dauges 1998). As Føllesdal
remarks, the Husserlian perspective consists in the description of Richtung not
of the object toward which the act is aimed, but of a certain structure of
consciousness (Føllesdal 1990).
Das determinierende Beiwort intentional nennt den gemeinsamen
Wesenscharakter der abzugrenzenden Erlebnisklasse, die Eigenheit der
Intention, das sich in der Weise der Vorstellung oder in einer irgend analogen
Weise auf Gegenständliches Beziehen. Als kürzeren Ausdruck werden wir […],
das Wort Akt gebrauchen. (Hua XIX, p. 406)

The Erlebnisse of pure consciousness are intentional acts that for economy‟s
sake can be called „acts‟. It is relevant to note here that we are going to handle
this term in the sense of mental act, that is the act as we perceive it (Hua XIX,
p. 406).8 In fact in this quest, we have no interest in describing the action as a
bodily movement or an external intended action, rather we want to figure out
how the mental act of a practical decision comes to realization. In the fifth
Logical Investigation, Husserl employs two definitions to classify all the acts of
consciousness; he writes that all the psychic phenomena are characterized by
an intentional reference and «sie entweder Vorstellungen sind oder auf
Vorstellungen als ihrer Grundlage beruhenit» (Hua XIX, p. 406). Therefore
the Erlebnisse of consciousness can be either acts (reel) or non acts (real). All
the acts are intentional; on the other hand, non acts are not intentional because
they do not relate to any represented object. They are tied to the psychological
sphere of consciousness. «Dass nicht alle Erlebnisse intentionale sind, zeigen
die Empfindungen und Empfindungskomplexionen» (Hua XIX, p. 382).
Sensations arise without an object being represented or sensed. Accordingly
these are not properly intentional. Nevertheless acts of feeling can also be
taken up into the range of intentional acts: «Sie alle „verdanken‟ ihre
intentionale Beziehung gewissen ihnen unterliegenden Vorstellung» (Hua
XIX, p. 404).
8

Husserl borrows the distinction between mental and physical acts on the basis of an inner and
external perception from Brentano‟s Psychologie (1874).

240

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Ein Kentaurenkampf, den ich mir in einem Bilde oder in der Phantasie
vorstelle, „erregt‟ ebenso mein Wohlgefallen wie eine schöne Landschaft der
Wirklichkeit, und wenn ich die letztere auch psychophysisch als reale Ursache
für den in mir seelisch erwirkten Zustand des Wohlgefallens auffasse […]. Das
Wohlgefälligsein, bzw. das Wohlgefallenempfinden „gehört‟ zu dieses
Landschaft nicht als physikalischer Realität […], sondern in dem hier fraglichen
Aktbewusstsein gehört es zu ihr als so und so erscheinender evtl. auch so und
so beurteilter, an dies oder jenes erinnernder usw. als solche ‚fordert‟, ‚weckt ‟
sie dergleichen Gefühle. (Hua XIX, p. 405)

Here it can be pointed up the influence of Brentanian thought. In fact a feeling
of pleasure may be intentional whenever it is provided with the representation
of the object.
Findet man eine Schwierigkeit darin, dass nicht jedes Begehren eine bewusste
Beziehung auf ein Begehrtes zu fordern scheine, da wir doch oft von einem
dunkle Lagen und Drängen bewegt und einem unvorgestellten Endziel
zugetrieben werden; und weist man zumal auf die weite Sphäre der natürlichen
Instinkte hin, denen mindestens ursprünglich die bewusste Zielvorstellung
mangle, so würden wir antworten: Entweder es liegen hierbei bloße
Empfindungen vor […], also Erlebnisse, die wirklich der intentionalen
Beziehung ermangeln und daher auch dem wesentlichen Charakter des
intentionalen Begehrens gattungsfremd sind. Oder wir sagen: es handle sich
zwar um intentionale Erlebnisse, jedoch um solche, die als unbestimmt
gerichtete Intentionen charakterisiert sind.
[…]
Die Freude ist nicht ein konkreter Akt für sich und das Urteil ein daneben
liegender Akt, sondern das Urteil ist der fundierende Akt für die Freude , es
bestimmt ihren Inhalt […], denn ohne solche Fundierung kann Freude
überhaupt nicht sein. (Hua XIX, p. 405, my emphasis)

Thus, judgment is always an ultimate act with respect to an act of feeling,
because it gives a meaning about which we can feel the sentiment. Joy could be
an intentional act only when it relies on the epistemological contents given by
the logical reason. We can feel joy just after we know at what we are rejoicing.
The content (Inhalt) is determined by the judgment.
Nevertheless, also theoretical acts, like those of judgment, can determine
their contents by the tools of intuition and perception. They are able to collect
all the data which are going to be represented. Every intuitive act is an
objectifying act and it encompasses the act of perception. In the sixth Logical
Investigation Husserl seems to construe intuition as a distinct and particular

Susi Ferrarello – Practical Intentionality

241

property of perception and vice-versa. Intuition is a sort of perception of the
universal and then a way of perceiving, which is exploited in order to account
for the fullness of meaning, the truthfulness of our perception and the
possibility of its representation (Hua XIX, pp. 64-84 passim). At large, it is
posed on the same stage of perception, even if it seems to work just from the
inside of consciousness.
Die Anschauung als Perzeption […] – gleichgültig ob sie kategorial oder
sensual, ob sie adäquat oder inadäquat ist – wird in Gegensatz gebracht zum
bloßen Denken als dem bloßen signifikativen Meinen. (Hua XIX/2, p. 731)

Both intuition and perception can be addressed to an ideal or empirical object
which could even be not respondent to reality. Yet both contribute to the
effectiveness of any intentional or objectifying act by the meaningfulness
fulfilment of signitive acts (which could be considered empty boxes until then).
Therefore intentionality could be defined as the skill of mental acts to be
directed to an object. Objectifying acts are for Husserl «vorstellig machende
Akte»: the acts which make present the intentional object for the
consciousness, the acts which institute the intentional relation between
consciousness and the object. They do this job also for non-objectifying acts
(hence also for affective acts). Objectifying acts are both signitive acts
(judgment and representation) and intuitive acts (external and internal
perception, eidetic intuition, imagination, remembering, empathy, etc.).
Accordingly objectifying acts are both acts of meaning and thinking (signitive
acts) and acts of intuition. Yet, affective acts are not fully acts as they require
the empty boxes of signitive acts to express at all their intention or even to
exist. As Husserl wrote about the joy, it calls for the judgment in order to be an
effective act. Without the judgment, it could not have its object on which it
operates.
Das determinierende Beiwort intentional nennt den gemeinsamen
Wesenscharakter der abzugrenzenden Erlebnisklasse, die Eigenheit der
Intention, das sich in der Weise der Vorstellung oder in einer irgend analogen
Weise auf Gegenständliches beziehen. (Hua XIX, p. 46)

In this sense the act of feeling has its essence (Wesenscharakter), but it is
founded on a judgment because it needs the predicative voice of logical acts (or
the boxes of signitive acts) to determine its object. This is still more evident in
Husserl‟s ethical lectures of 1914, when he talks about a Verflechtung
between practical and logical acts to explain completely how an affective

242

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

intention works.
In ihr <Parallelismus> drückt sich eine gewisse Wesensverflechtung des
doxischen Bewusstseins mit dem Gemütbewusstsein und so jedem Bewusstsein
überhaupt aus, dergemäss jedes Stellungnehmen, jedes Schön- oder GutWerten apriori in ein urteilendes Stellungnehmen umgewandelt werden kann.
(Hua XXVIII, p. 63)

The will could not know what to want if it has not a box where to put its feeling.
Therefore it is necessary to display the process of practical intentionality by the
device of interlacing and parallelism between affective and signitive acts.
3. PRACTICAL INTENTIONALITY
Now if the signitive acts are fundamental to express an affective act and if they
represent or judge just what I can already represent or know, how do I make a
decision on what I just feel but not understand? How could I make a decision if
I do not know all that I am feeling? Still, if intentionality is the skill of mental
acts to be directed to an object and if this skill is balanced on the complicated
relationship between objectifying (signitive and intuitive acts) and not
objectifying acts (affective and conative acts, i.e., practical acts), how could I
justify these mental acts or their objects? How could I fill the lack of the object
of practical acts and their inability to create „new boxes‟? To answer these
questions, I should deepen the understanding of how Husserl define will in his
former and latter studies.9
In Husserl‟s former work, namely in the lectures on ethics (Husserl
1988)10 will is defined as one of the several regions of consciousness and it
holds a prominent function to connect consciousness with the outside world
(Hua XXVIII, p. 59). In his Husserls Phänomenologie des Willens, Melle
(1992) helps us to sketch out the main influences on Husserl‟s idea of will.
Namely, he refers to the work of James (1950) and Ehrenfels (1887), since the
former retains that the main characteristic of will is the attention and its fiat, the
„act of mental consent‟. The latter construes the act of will not as a founding
act, because it is just a pretension (Forderung) of something and thus it needs
the representative and theoretical acts. As it concerns the present research, it
9

I will refer to Hua XIX, XXVIII and Hua XI, XXI, XXXVII.
These lectures are the result of the ethical researches carried out by Husserl since 1902.

10

Susi Ferrarello – Practical Intentionality

243

could be fruitful to pay attention to the influence exerted by both philosophers.
In fact, the will could be depicted not only as a region of consciousness but also
as a kind of intentionality which underpins every action even if it is always
interlaced with its founding signitive acts.
In 1914 Husserl conceived will as a way of consciousness‟ being which
needed the represented objects to exist. In other words, its object is a
represented content which is already explained, at least formally, by signitive
acts. The distinctive characteristic of will is not the intended object, but its
“fiat!” (Hua XXVIII, p. 107), i.e., that kind of power addressed toward the
object. Will adds something to the structure of intentionality, since it is the
motor of any act and it yields new reality. As a matter of fact, every act of will
modifies, in a certain way, reality or leads it toward new directions. As Husserl
remarks, the thesis of will (Willensthesis) is mainly a position of realization and
creation which is interwoven with the position of theoretical acts (in virtue of
their „Allwirksamkeit‟ or predicative voice, see Hua XXVIII, p. 58). When one
wants to go for a walk, one should know before what a walk means or rather
what he needs, then one decides to go. During the walk new situations could
be generated by his/her decisions.
Another element, which should be emphasized in this analysis, is the
axiological component. According to Husserl of 1914 every decision arises
from an epistemological intention which is evaluated by the axiological reason
(Hua XXVIII, pp. 70-71). The inference of any decision should be drawn by
the evaluation of what it is given. One should decide what to do, after having
understood what to do and evaluated what is the best for him/her.
Consequently, citing Husserl‟s words
Das Alles ist Sache der vernuenftigen Konsequenz. Aber solche Konsequenz
verbindet auch das intellective Gebiet mit den Gemütsgebieten; theoretische
und wertende Vernunft sind miteinander überall verflochten. (Hua XXVIII, p.
72)

Thus, will makes its decisions on the predicative voice of theoretical acts (i.e.,
its meanings) and on the evaluation of the axiological acts. Consequently, will
is a rational region of consciousness which depends strictly on theoretical acts
to interact with reality.
3.1 SECOND VERSION OF PRACTICAL INTENTIONALITY
In Husserl‟s Analyses concerning Passive and Active Synthesis (Hua XI, XXXI)

244

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

the definition of will is not exactly the same, as though, like Peucker (2008)
claimed, Husserl will keep in a certain way the former view. In this latter
version of practical intentionality he will also seek to give an answer to the
following questions: what happens when one begins to pay his/her attention to
an object, such as a dawn or a laughing child? Why is one attracted to an object
more than others? There could be a kind of objects which pertains specifically
to the sphere of practical reason? Then does practical intentionality exist?
At first glance, I believe that the beginning of knowing is practical.
Effectively it is quite easy to show that the intention to know is driven by the
choice to know and intend the object. I want to focus on a dialogue between
two friends of mine instead of the noise of a barking dog (or vice-versa),
because I decided so. Husserl explains this attitude by the key concepts of
affection (Affektion) and attention (Aufmerksamkeit). In the Analyses
Concerning Passive Synthesis, Husserl explains that the affection is the first
striving which exerts its influence on attention and then on intention (Hua XI,
p. 152). Affection arises in contrast with what is used to perceive – «Affektion
ist also Kontrast» (Hua XI, p. 149). We can take the example of the walk given
in the first paragraph: one is walking in a sunny day and a sudden outburst
could interrupt all that he/she was perceiving. This event will change the focus
of his/her perception. Affections are located exactly in this feeling of contrast
which arises from what one is used to perceive. Affections are driven also by the
mixture of attention and interest. The act-motivating passive sphere does not
only consist of merely neutral presentations, but it is rather penetrated by
elementary strivings and feelings which carry evaluative features. Affection is a
sort of „emotional‟ emergence which comes out so strongly that one is
compelled to move his attention to another field of perception (Hua XI, p.
149). It drives the direction of evaluation, representation and attention.
Another example could be the one given by Husserl himself, I am listening to a
music and everything around me is stimulating my senses, when a sudden loud
noise attracts my attention. I am affected by that noise and my previous
affections has been interrupted by this new event. In this case, I have been
stricken by an event which is not consistent with all that I used to perceive.
Consequently, I can claim that «Affektives Relief» (Hua XI, p. 168)
characterizes the passive foundation of what we can call a practical

Susi Ferrarello – Practical Intentionality

245

intentionality.11 These acts are always combined with certain evaluative

features that are given in feelings, and only these qualitative differences inside
the passive sphere of affection can explain why the ego turns toward an
affection but not toward another. Therefore, attention (and then perception) is
a tension got in motion by affection. «Das Affektion zur Aufmerksamkeit, zur
Erfassung, Kenntnisnahme, Explikation sich auswirkt» (Hua XI, p. 151). The
attention is that form of tension which allows the practical and passive
intentionality to become active and operating. If these blind drives work
themselves out, they neither involve the activity of a genuine act of will nor the
ego. Husserl describes these subjective occurrences as the intentionality of
drives (Triebintentionalität) and he even calls them a very “low form of the
will” or “passivity of will”. As he wrote:
jedes […] ego cogito ist an die Voraussetzung gebunden, dass vorher das Ich
affiziert wurde, das sagt, das vorher eine passive Intentionalität, in der das Ich
noch nicht waltet, einen Gegenstand konstituiert hat, von dem aus der Ichpol
affiziert und zum actus bestimmt worden ist. (Hua XI, p. 209)

The antichamber («Vorzimmer», Hua XI p. 166) of every decision is a
combination of passive affections which strike the attention and its activity.12
Thus the intention to know or to give a meaning about what I am living is
always preceded by a practical intention. The interlacing between these two
positions has not necessarily a theoretical prevailing thesis.
Moreover, in Analyses concerning Active Synthesis, Husserl emphasizes
the role played by the Willensintention and complains about its
misinterpretation. The consistency between attention and affection is the first
step of any practical or theoretical decision. «Der Wille ist kein bloßes
Begehren; er gehört in die allgemeiner Sphäre der reinen Aktivität» (Hua
XXXI, p. 10). Will represents a very activity which involves aware and
discretionary acts.
Es will mir immermehr scheinen, dass Wille nicht eine eigene Weise des
Bewusstseins ist, sondern eine besondere und höhere Form der Aktivität, die
unter gewissen Wesensbedingungen, die in vorausgesetzten Objektivierungen
11
See Hua XXXVII, pp. 339-340: «Allem Triebmäßigen, mich affektiv Motivierenden oder zu
motivieren Tendierenden schleudere ich mein ewiges Nein entgegen. Die willensbestimmende Kraft
aller passiven Motive durchstreiche ich. […] Triebe dürfen mich nur motivieren, wenn ich sie an der
Leine habe, wenn ich ihnen ihre Funktion und den Rahmen ihrer Funktion vorzeichne».
12
See expressions as «eine niedere Form des Willens», «Willenspassivität» (Ms. M III 3 102f).

246

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

und Fühlungen liegen, überall auftreten kann. (Hua XXXI, p. 10)

The will represents a particular and superior aspect of the rational activity
of consciousness and it can „come into play‟ under certain conditions. These
conditions coincide with those of 1914, namely with those objects of meaning
that the acts have to assume before making a decision. The activity of will is
considered as a particular and superior kind of rational action, in virtue of the
key role played by affection and attention with driving the interest to perceive
something. Attention is a positive feeling, or better it is an act that makes the
interest real. This feeling makes a simple act of perception, an act of interest.
Attention is in fact the tension „to be‟ in the things that we perceive. As it was
in the Psychology of James, taken by Husserl as a model to his investigation 13,
the tension of attention is the main instrument to fix the direction of will. It can
change perception in interest and interest in will. As a matter of fact, it adds to
the interest „the tension‟ which unifies the ego to the object of perception and
will to its productive characteristic (namely, the skill to modify reality and to
yield new reality by its fiat). For instance when one is listening to music,
his/her perception is focused at all on that. A sudden outburst moves the focus
of attention on itself. The affection is driving the attention to change the aim of
his/her interest. Then, the simple act of perception becomes an act of interest
and active will.
Differently from the lectures on ethics (1988), now the affective acts,
particularly the volitional ones, are not totally subordinated to the
representations of signitive acts to be effective, because the very first
beginning of their intention is a passive and instinctive strive. In fact, Husserl
wrote in his manuscript that the reason is always a practical reason and it is
servant of will (Ms, E III, 7, 85). There is an intertwined coexistence between
practical and logical position within practical intentionality. Will is a primitive
form of action; it is „superior and particular‟ because it is at the basis of all
kinds of acts, also of the logical acts. Indeed, the first step of any acquaintance
is not a real form of knowledge but a „will to know‟. The true knowledge
consists in the productive action of the ego. The logical reason can be really
13

In 1891/92 Husserl took a class on psychology and on that occasion he read for the first time
the Principles. In may 1894 he came back on Principles, while he was working on his logic and its
elementary concepts and he praised Jamesian effort of “depsychologizing psychology”. At that time he
had planned to publish a series of articles in the Philosophishe Monatshefte, but he published only the
first and decided to wait to see what James had done, before publishing the others. The next article is
probably his Psychological Studies for Elementary Logic.

Susi Ferrarello – Practical Intentionality

247

directed to the knowledge, only if the will realizes itself in the will of doing. As
Nam-In Lee wrote, every kind of intentionality should be regarded as a
practical intentionality (Lee 2000), because every act of consciousness is
always a practical act. Also Hart remarked that only by volitional acts it is
possible to put in light all the contents of the other kinds of reason (Hart
1992). In fact, the theoretical reason does not understand its representations
until they do not reflect on them. And even the acts of reflection are the result
of the fiat of will. As Husserl wrote, every act is an act of will (Ms A V, 22, 5).
The predicative activity of logical reason is still necessary to give voice to the
reality we know, but differently from the lectures of 1914, now (lectures of
1920) the process of communication between consciousness and the world is
not due to theoretical but to volitional acts. Even if the former are still essential
to make possible the expression of what we know, the latter are the starting
point of every logical act.
4. HOW DO WE MAKE A DECISION?
To elucidate all that we acquired until now, we can claim that the practical
intentionality is explained on the complicated balance with signitive and
affective acts. Both are equally relevant in the making-decision process (even a
decision to know!). I make a decision because: 1) an affection moves my
attention toward a certain object, 2) I can represent what the object is and
fulfill my representation with meaning thanks to my intuition and perception,
3) I can evaluate how much this object is important to me. Yet, if my intention
remains just a passive level, the second point is not always needed. In fact, I can
decide instinctively what to do just on a dim sensation without knowing exactly
why I decided so.
Generally, I perceive a dawn and not a barking dog because at that time, my
attention is attracted to the dawn and I want to admire it. If I want to
understand why one has a particular affection rather than another, I have to
keep in mind that affections are not just neutral theoretical data. Conversely
they work on the emergency of contrast in our habits to perceive. The
emotional objects toward which the acts are directed, are epistemological and
represented data lived in a practical way (a passive, affective or instinctive way).
In 1920 Husserl is not so far from what he stated in 1914. He simply added
new elements to explain the practical components of intentionality. In his

248

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

lectures course on ethics from the 1920s he explicitly says that
Wertende Akte und Willensakte sind in Erkenntnisakten, eventuell schon in
bestimmenden Urteilen, fundiert […]. Was ist nicht mindest vorstelle, kann ich
nie werten.

Consequently the founding of the volitional acts has to be understood against
the background of this passive sphere in which theoretical, emotional,
instinctive and drive-related tendencies are already mutually intertwined. The
acts of willing are not based on mere presentations and some higher ordered
feelings, but rather on the dynamic processes of the passive subjective life in
which a separation of independent spheres of acts would make no sense. As a
matter of fact, the feeling consciousness presupposes a cognitive act, while the
volitional consciousness in turn presupposes the feeling (Hua XXXVII, p.
274).
Therefore, when one seeks to decide what to know, one is equally led by
theoretical and practical intentions which are intertwined in the same act of
intending the outside world. In the making-decision process, sometimes it
happens that what I perceived from my practical instincts (i.e., from all the
practical components of my will) is put aside by my theoretical acts of
knowledge. Consequently, it would take place a processes of detachment.
Therefore, a successful decision should be based on a perfect consistency
between theoretical and volitional acts. The reasons provided by knowledge
become usually stronger than those given originally by practical acts. It could
even happen that I forget all that I originally felt about a certain object, a job for
instance, because I assign higher values to what theoretical acts say. Then I
decide to follow what is logical without reflecting on all the components of my
will. Nevertheless, in this complicated balance between logical and practical
acts it remains an open and unsettled issue how my feelings could be
represented if I do not know well all that I am feeling. I can make my decision
just on what I already know about my practical acts (feelings, instincts,
sensations) because of the cognitive limits of signitive acts. This kind of
communication could be a term of a new philosophical research.

Susi Ferrarello – Practical Intentionality

249

REFERENCES

Benoist, J. (2004). La fenomenologia e i limiti dell‟oggettivazione: il problema
degli atti non obiettivanti. In B. Centi & G. Gigliotti (Eds.),
Fenomenologia della Ragione Pratica, (pp. 153-174). Napoli:
Bibliopolis.
Brentano, F. (1874). Psychologie vom empirischen Standpunkt. Leipzig:
Duncker & Humblot.
Von Ehrenfels, C. (1887). Über fühlen und Wollen. Wien: Carl Gerold &
Sohn.
Føllesdal, D. (1990). Noema and meaning in Husserl. Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research, L, 263-271.
Hart,

J. (1992). The Person and the Common
Dordrecht/Boston/London: Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Life.

Husserl, E. (1966). Analysen zur passiven Synthesis. Aus Vorlesungs- und
Forschungsmanuskripten, 1918-1926 .M. Fleischer (Ed.). The Hague,
Netherlands: Martinus Nijhoff.
Husserl, E. (1975). Logische Untersuchungen. Erster Teil. Prolegomena zur
reinen Logik. Text der und der 2. Auflage, Halle: 1900; rev. ed. 1913,
E. Holstein (Ed.). The Hague, Netherlands: Martinus Nijhoff.
Husserl, E. (1984). Logische Untersuchungen. Zweiter Teil. Untersuchungen
zur Phänomenologie und Theorie der Erkenntnis, Halle: 1901; rev. ed.
1922, U. Panzer (Ed.). The Hague, Netherlands: Martinus Nijhoff.
Husserl, E. (1988). Vorlesungen über Ethik und Wertlehre, 1908-1914. U.
Melle (Ed.). The Hague, Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Husserl, E. (2000). Aktive Synthesen: Aus der Vorlesung Transzendentale
Logik 1920/21 Ergänzungsband zu Analysen zur passiven Synthesis.
R. Breeur (Ed.). The Hague, Netherlands: Kluwer Academic
Publishers.
Husserl, E. (2004). Einleitung in die Ethik, 1920/1924. H. Peucker (Ed.).
Dordrecht/Boston/London: Kluwer Academic Publishers.

250

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

James, J. (1950). Principles of Mental Psychology, vol. 1. New York: Dover
Publications.
Lee, N.-I. (2000). Practical Intentionality and Transcendental Phenomenology
as a Practical Philosophy. Husserl Studies, 17(1), 49-63.
Melle, U. (1992). Phänomenologie des Willens. Tijdschrift voor Filosofie, 54,
280-304.
Peucker, H. (2008). From logic to person. Review of Metaphysics, 62(2),
307-319.
Souche-Dauges, D. (1998). Le développement de l‟intentionnalité chez
Husserl. Paris: Vrin.

Is Balancing Emblematic of Action?
Two or Three Pointers from Reid and Peirce
David Vender*

dvender@utas.edu.au

ABSTRACT

Defining actions in contradistinction to mere happenings runs into the
problem of specifying the role of the agent and separating what the agent does
from what they exploit or suffer. Traditionally these problems have been
approached by starting with a simple act, such as an incidental movement, and
considering causality, or by seeking to elucidate the connection between the
act and the agent‟s intentions or reasons. It is suggested here that a promising
approach is to shift attention from „simple‟ movements and start instead by
exploring the general character of acquired skills. Balancing the body is one
such skill and serves here as an exemplar. Some remarks made by Reid on
balance are used in a Peircean framework for perception to suggest that, at
least for humans, an action is always the performance of an acquired skill. Also,
while action is constitutive of perception, bodily perception is the basis of
action, providing in a feeling of ownership direct knowledge of an asymmetric
opposition between the agent and the world.

ACTION, INTENTION, FREEDOM
Attempts to understand human action have often been framed in the context of
the problem of free will. This relies on an analysis of some behaviors of agents,
particularly those thought to require the kinds of motivation informed by
reason, custom and moral purpose. Distinguishing which aspects of these
behaviors qualify them as acts – in contrast to those behaviors which lie beyond
the agent‟s control or influence – runs into diverse difficulties, particularly if
the explanatory efforts also take up the task of naturalizing agency and the
agent‟s intentions and purposes.
* School of Philosophy, University of Tasmania

252

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Many problems may be thought of as arising from difficulties in separating
the agent, with their incidental motivation and arbitrating and arbitrary
judgment, from the presumably orderly processes which underlie the
expression of the agent‟s intentions.
The object of an act may well be to cause some change in the external world,
something like the shifting of a stone, which is well described by elementary
physics. But it may also be to move a part of the agent‟s body, and this is only
partially described in physiological models of moving organisms.1 The object
may even be to suppress an unwelcome memory, and this type of act is even
less well understood. In each case the difficulties turn on the role of the
individual agent, and drawing a boundary line between the agent and the realm
of effects at the skin, or perhaps the periphery of the central nervous system, is
rarely satisfactory.
In preference to exploring how this difficulty in defining agency and action
operates in previous analyses of action, such as those of Davidson or Frankfurt,
the present paper seeks to identify a kind of behavior which might be taken as
emblematic of action. Examining this behavior may not escape all the
traditional difficulties of analyzing action, but it may lead to some insight into
how these difficulties arise and which directions of inquiry seem promising for
their resolution.
The approach taken is to consider balance, which underlies human
perceptual and bodily orientation as well as the active maintenance of posture,
and through that the performance of every movement, including locomotion. I
draw on some ideas from Thomas Reid2 and Charles Peirce in order to do
justice to balancing and its characteristic phenomenology.3

1

The notion that muscular motion is now well understood by analogy with cybernetically
sophisticated robots is quickly dispelled if one considers historically the issue of the operation of the
heart, as done by Thomas Fuchs (2001).
2
Particularly the remarks in the 1795 essay called Of Muscular Motion in the Human Body,
published in Wood 1995.
3
The sense in which „phenomenology‟ is intended here is not the phenomenology of modern
philosophical schools, but the kind of Baconian bringing together of sundry but relevant facts and
characteristics which enables systematic inquiry by making the first steps towards a general
description possible. Cf. Peirce 5.37; in common with the secondary literature, the Collected Papers
of Peirce are cited by volume and paragraph number.

David Vender – Is Balancing Emblematic of Action?

253

SKILLED ACTION
Recent work on the explanation of action is largely confined to the tradition of
treating actions as events and exploring how causes and reasons might play into
these events as well as the complications introduced into the conception of
agency by morality, determinism and the specification of intention (Sandis
2009). Human intentions might be described in terms of goals and aims, or
purposes, and evaluated in connection with reasons and expectations.
Perceptual knowledge, direct and mediated, plays a central part in all such
descriptions, but the kind of knowledge amenable to declarative expression as
objective fact is insufficient. The self-reflective awareness of some striving, the
apprehension that it is I who is acting in at least a subjectively voluntary and
deliberate way also appears to be necessary. We do not have to insist that this
awareness actually dominates the agent‟s concerns, only that if the relevant
action is suitably attended to, these aspects of its character are evident to the
agent. In this sense, the signature of action can be said to be the agent‟s
ownership of it.
Focusing on the awareness of what the agent feels to be doing in acting
shifts the inquiry away from an examination of the reasons which the agent may
cite in justifying or explaining their actions. While this may seem to make an
analysis of the agent‟s reasons more, not less, difficult – and it may be
protested that intention without reasons is no intention – it may actually help
to clarify important matters. It helps by bringing into sharper relief the factors
more immediate to the agent‟s act. These are best considered first, leaving
conceptual re-descriptions of the act waiting until the primary characteristics
of an act are agreed upon.
The contrast here is not a difference between the how and why of an action.
It is more a matter of neglecting, at least initially, elaborated narratives
justifying what happened or even constructing post hoc explanations of it.
These narratives and explanations have a more theoretical character, and their
development must logically follow from an appraisal of those data which
ultimately validate these theories. These data are initially given in how the
agent perceives their own doing.
It is a truism that an individual agent rarely understands much of what
constitutes their act. Not only do chains of Why? questions retreat unstoppably
in manifold directions, the consequences of even trivial acts can hardly be
followed out fully, so in large part they remain obscure and unheeded.

254

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Intention and result also usually match in only a rough-and-ready manner.
Furthermore, in performing even the most routine movements (or, if we insist
on separating them out, mental acts) the agent‟s body and brain are implicated
in exquisitely complex processes, most of which the agent has no inkling of.
Even now our most advanced scientific inferences regarding these processes
are sketchy at best, and demonstrably incomplete. But such knowledge is not
needed to make the agent feel empowered. Finally, even the stories that agents
tell themselves and others about the reasons for their own behavior are subject
to the limitations of self-knowledge and the knowledge of the context in which
an act arises.
Given all this, it would seem best to begin with the direct perception of what
we are doing when we act, rather than trying to impose a conceptual system on
inherently complex acts, whose available justification is schematic.
Doubts concerning a correct identification of the intentions informing an
act, and an appreciation of its full complexity, point quite precisely in the
direction where we should seek the kind of actions most suitable for an initial
attack on the general problem. Confidence that we are acting successfully in
accord with our intention and purpose is characteristic of skills which we learn
and finesse through patient repetition and practice.4
Rather than considering isolated acts such as an incidental movement of an
arm (which can be justified by an endless list of unrelated intentions) it is better
to start with routines which have a constant character. The movements used for
walking and running are not always or even often precisely the same, but
walking is easily distinguished from running or standing still, and whatever
additional reasons may apply in specific cases, the immediate intention
informing those movements is to walk or run, and success or failure are
relatively easy to judge. It is of no concern if the penultimate reason for our
skilful movement just now is rarely (if ever) successful performance of the
movement itself. What matters is that our ownership of the movements as
agents or actors is uncontroversial, the immediate reasons for them are well
defined, and criteria for success are clear.
4

Skills have recently been considered in the context of causal theories of action by Clarke 2010,
who seeks to quell worries that skills undermine causal accounts by trying to extend these to cover
skills such as shaving and dancing. The present work differs not only in leaving causality aside until
some of the basic phenomenology of skilled behavior is clear, but also in attempting to dispel the
notion that «skilled activity differs in important ways from many of the stock examples that are
employed in action theory, such as raising one‟s arm» (Clarke 2010, p. 523).

David Vender – Is Balancing Emblematic of Action?

255

BALANCE IN THE HUMAN ANIMAL
What has just been said about walking and running points to the fundamental
importance of balance and orientation in routine human actions. Humans are
unusual animals in that it takes them an inordinately long time to acquire the
habits needed for even minimal locomotion. The high degree of plasticity and
incomplete development of the human brain at birth are important factors in
explaining why humans are so slow at first. The usual posture they finally adopt
is also precarious, requiring constant monitoring and feedback for its
maintenance. The bipedal stance may be useful in minimizing the moment of
inertia around the vertical axis – facilitating a quick turnaround – but it comes
at a price.
An understanding of orientation and balance and how these are exploited in
holding posture and getting about is quite recent. We might even speculate
that before it could be developed, Newtonian physics had to displace
Aristotelian paradigms. Its development was also hampered by the fact that the
sensory part of the story is complex and well hidden.
Information on the dynamical variables needed to maintain balance is
obtained through the use of several groups of organs, among which the most
important is the vestibular apparatus of the inner ear. The semicircular canals
and utricles which are parts of these organs contain mechanoreceptors which
are used to detect rotational and linear accelerations, and these are
instrumental in orienting and stabilizing the head in relation to the reference
frame of the earth. It is easy to see how important this information is for the
perception of the location and motions of physical objects.5
The significance and functioning of the vestibular apparatus has been
clarified only recently.6 However, even before the role of vestibular functioning
in providing the basic dynamical information needed for orientation and
movement became known, the Scottish philosopher Thomas Reid said some
remarkable things about balance.

5
These comments should not be misconstrued as a suggestion that fully functioning vestibular
organs are necessary for balance. These organs are grossly impaired in some deaf individuals who can
nevertheless attain balance by means of other organs, using various receptors in the muscles and
joints, particularly in the neck.
6
See Howard and Templeton 1966. Early research focused on vertigo, motion sickness and
nystagmus. Wade 2000 presents the early history. Recent developments have been reviewed by
Angelaki and Cullen 2008.

256

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Reid was led to consider bodily sensations by his epistemological scheme,
in which subjective sensations function as signs for the real qualities of bodies.7
Since we are manifestly able to move our bodies in space, we must be able to
feel bodily motions and exertions in order to control our limbs effectively, and
we perceive the direction of the gravitational force, or whichever resultant
force acts when we are accelerated bodily through space. Reid spoke about our
balancing not only in a way which appeals to common sense, but noticed some
characteristics which we should never lose sight of.
The first of these is that Reid prioritises perception in action, noting that:
There are however many voluntary Motions in which some previous Perception
of the Understanding is necessary to direct us to the Motion which the occasion
requires. (Wood 1995, p. 110)

Reid is primarily concerned with how active agents use the muscles, but he
does not make the problematic move in insisting that we must at each moment
be conscious of the muscular movement, strain, position and whatever else is
required to specify the initial conditions for and the performance of a particular
act. He recognizes that much of this may be subliminal or unattended, and by
his epistemological scheme is led to search for sensations which in the normal
course of action are «absolutely unheeded», as he puts it in a related context
(Reid 2000, p. 82).
The second important characteristic of maintaining our posture is that it
requires unceasing effort:
Although all voluntary Motion is performed by the Contraction of Muscles, we
must not from that conclude that when no Motion is willed, the Muscles are
inactive. The Exertion of Muscles is no less necessary to rest than to Motion. In
every position of the Body excepting perhaps that of lying prone . (Wood 1995,
p. 112, emphasis in original)

The third important characteristic is that balance is not something that we
learn once and for all. It must be continuously cultivated and can even be
improved:
When we observe with what ease, and Grace those Motions are performed by
those who are expert, and compare them with the Laws of Motion, we must be
convinced that this Sense by which we perceive the least deviation of the Body

7

A valuable introductory account is provided by Wolterstorff 2001.

David Vender – Is Balancing Emblematic of Action?

257

from its Ballance, may by Use be brought to a degree of Accuracy which is
hardly to be observed in any of our other Senses. (Wood 1995, p. 110)

Finally, the fourth important point is that the actions underlying balance do
not require explicitly formulated purposes to be meaningful – we might say that
verbally or conceptually elaborated explanations and justifications can in some
sense remain only implicit in actions. Reid does not say this explicitly, but he
focuses on sensations and feelings in perception, and notes that balancing is of
immediate concern to the pre-verbal infant:
This sense of Ballance may be seen in a Child of two or three Months old. If
sitting upon ones knee he begins to tumble, he immediately starts &
endeavours to recover himself; But it is greatly improved by Use, in every
Employment that requires its exercise; […] This sense of our Ballance is
produced not onely by the impression made by the power of gravity but by any
other Force which endangers the Ballance. (Wood 1995, p. 111, spelling
original)

As already stated, Reid thought about balancing well before the functioning
of the vestibular apparatus was clarified. Modern research has revealed that this
set of organs does have the most significant position among the organs we use
to perceive the downward direction and rotational motions of the head. Not
only are these dynamic data crucial for orderly movement, they play a
fundamental role in perceptual development, and it is not too much to say that
our ability to see objects located in and moving through space is founded on
the integration of information on dynamical variables mainly from vestibular
receptors with light signals detected by the retina. The vestibular organs
mature early – even before brain structure develops fully – and the chief
perceptual learning tasks for the infant appear to be to integrate visual and
vestibular signals so that they can see like an adult, while separating their
sensations into visual, auditory, olfactory and other streams.8
It is remarkable that even here Reid, who was keenly interested in medicine
and surgery and a careful observer of children, has something interesting to
say. Although he felt obliged to maintain that our perceptions of primary
qualities such as extension and hardness were original and unlearned, he left
room in his epistemology for acquired perceptions. He does insist, against
Berkeley, that we see depth immediately, yet he notes that:
8

Empirical work on infant development supporting these assertions is presented by Maurer and
Maurer 1988.

258

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

From the time that children begin to use their hands, nature directs them to
handle every thing over and over, to look at it while they handle it, and to put it
in various positions, and at various distances from the eye. […] It is this childish
employment that enables them to make the proper use of their eyes. They are
thereby every day acquiring habits of perception, which are of greater
importance than any thing we can teach them. (Reid 2000, p. 201)

Balancing bodily members is the first step in the control of movement,
developing even before the upright stance is achieved. Lifting and turning the
head are important in the infant‟s first efforts. Once control of movement is
adequate, control not only determines the character of all our movements, it is
also fundamental for not moving. Keeping still and maintaining a particular
orientation or attitude is the basic requirement for seeing remote objects,
indeed for all visual perceptions, which we control instrumentally by turning
the head, directing the eyes and then keeping the gaze directed. The link
between the eyes and the vestibular apparatus is so strong that compensatory
eye movements which preserve clear vision while the head is moving exhibit the
character of reflexes. In humans, however, this vestibulo-ocular „reflex‟ is
learned, plastic, and adaptive when the apparent motion of visible objects is
artificially manipulated (Benson 1982).
It would seem that a problem of the genesis of agency arises here. There are
two reasons why we should not get distracted by it in considering action. The
first is that understanding agency and understanding the genesis of agency can,
at least to some extent, be separated. An analogous situation exists in the
domain of language. This too is a problem of agency since the question being
asked is when we first decided to associate arbitrary signifiers with reasonably
constant meanings. The origin of language is a formidable puzzle, but the
structure and continuing development of languages can be studied profitably
without solving it. It is just so with action.
The second reason why the question of origins is not as acute as it may
appear is that habits do not get started from scratch. The awakening infant is
not faced with a perceptual nothingness, a kind of blank screen in a stationary
void. Their body is already structured and their field of experience is pregnant
with possibilities of action. The development of agency is not the initiation of
movements from a dead stillness. It is the gradual bringing of order and
expectation into the operations of an animated body, and taking control of preexisting motions and adapting them creatively for invented purposes. How

David Vender – Is Balancing Emblematic of Action?

259

adults do this can be considered without fully understanding how infants get
started, although mimesis is evidently a key ingredient for both.
To sum up, the actions we perform depend on balancing the body and
making efforts and as such are combinations of learned skilled acts. Action has
a recursive structure. We do not assemble any movement „from scratch‟, but
try to adapt previously performed actions to the problem at hand, and develop
these adaptations by comparing our intentions and expectations to the effects
of the action. Perception, memory and imagination are the three cognitive
pillars of this process, and balancing is the central activity which allows the
agent to pursue their particular goals – both perceptual and operational – as a
physically effective participant in the real world. Instead of now leaving this
central activity aside in favor of considering abstract notions of causality or the
conceptual structure of how specific acts are justified, it is better to remain
with balancing in order to explore how we perceive our own effectiveness in
acting. Peirce is a valuable guide in these matters.
PERCEPTION IN DOUBT, EFFORT, HABIT AND SKILL
Reid‟s epistemology was based on a dualism of mind and body, and while he
was an enthusiastic proponent of science and of efforts to naturalise the mind,
he resolved the problem of relating subjective experience to objective reality by
an appeal to an order preordained by God. This explanation carries little
weight now, and dualism is seen to underlie some difficult problems in
naturalizing subjective states.
A fresh approach to these problems can be found in the ideas of Charles
Sanders Peirce. Not only is Peirce one of the foremost authorities on the
methodology of modern science, he was also thoroughly anti-Cartesian in his
epistemology and in his metaphysical speculations. However, his opposition to
dualism did not turn him towards materialism. On the contrary, he felt it
necessary to formulate new categories which could support a unified
theoretical framework not just for psychology, but also for language and logic.
It is not necessary to enter into the technical details of Peirce‟s theory of
signs in order to describe action from his perspective. It will be sufficient to
consider his categories of firstness, secondness and thirdness – which he never

260

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

tired of describing and explaining – and how they relate to subjective
experience.9
Action is at the heart of Peirce‟s version of pragmatism and only a sketch of
how he explained its characteristics is attempted here.10 For Peirce, pervasive
doubt in the style of Descartes is a methodological hoax, a pretense at best.
Actual doubting is a felt irritation at the failure of expectation, present mainly
when our habitual actions do not adequately meet their imagined ends. Actions
are informed by beliefs, and the «essence of belief is the establishment of a
habit; and different beliefs are distinguished by the different modes of action to
which they give rise» (Peirce 5.398).
To dispel any impression that this may be related to behaviorism, we only
need to turn to the primacy of thinking in what Peirce calls belief and action.
«The soul and meaning of thought […] can never be made to direct itself
toward anything but the production of belief» (Peirce 5.396).
As it appeases the irritation of doubt, which is the motive for thinking, thought
relaxes, and comes to rest for a moment when belief is reached. But, since
belief is a rule for action, the application of which involves further doubt and
further thought, at the same time that it is a stopping-place, it is also a new
starting-place for thought. (Peirce 5.397)

Thinking (and in general all inference and cognition) is a process which takes
time. If we wish to comprehend what it is, we must examine what we can
become aware of when we are actually thinking.
Peirce analyzes this self-reflective awareness into three subjectively
distinguishable categories of conscious experience which, while they are
always all present when suitably attended to, modify the character of our
awareness as one or another predominates. These categories can most briefly
be characterized as a pure quality (e.g., redness) for firstness, a dual opposition
or relation for secondness, and a threefold relation for thirdness. The last has
the general nature of the sign and it informs our awareness when we find some
symbol or experience meaningful. For Peirce these categories are not invented
descriptions of subjective episodes but «modes of being» which he sought to
9

Peirce brings particular expertise to this topic too, since he made a seminal contribution to the
development of psychophysics by developing measurement techniques and introducing statistical
methods.
10
A fuller treatment can be found in Potter 1997, where what I wish to call action is more often
called habit, and the role of the classical normative sciences of esthetics, ethics and logic (as Peirce
understood these) is explained.

David Vender – Is Balancing Emblematic of Action?

261

validate and apply through scientific, logical and philosophical explorations
(Peirce 8.328-332). The most important category to consider first in
connection with balance is secondness.
Among varied illustrations of secondness, the one relevant for us is physical
effort:
Standing on the outside of a door that is slightly ajar, you put your hand upon
the knob to open and enter it. You experience an unseen, silent resistance. You
put your shoulder against the door and, gathering your forces, put forth a
tremendous effort. Effort supposes resistance. Where there is no effort there is
no resistance, where there is no resistance there is no effort either in this world
or any of the worlds of possibility. (Peirce 1.320)

What is explained here applies precisely to balancing. The sensory and
motor aspects are inseparable. This does not mean that we immediately lose
orientation and perspective if we lie down and relax, since perceptual and
cognitive habits can persist against neglect for some time, but it does mean that
prolonged isolation from opportunities to refresh dynamical perceptions
through active efforts must be expected to lead to such loss. In balancing we
are participants in a supra-individual order, but this order has to be actively –
i.e., voluntarily – explored by the participant. As embodied knowers we are not
spectators, but actors. Now Peirce insists that secondness is irreducible:
You have a sense of resistance and at the same time a sense of effort. There can
be no resistance without effort; there can be no effort without resistance. They
are only two ways of describing the same experience. It is a double
consciousness. We become aware of ourself in becoming aware of the not-self.
The waking state is a consciousness of reaction; and as the consciousness itself
is two-sided, so it has also two varieties; namely, action, where our modification
of other things is more prominent than their reaction on us, and perception,
where their effect on us is overwhelmingly greater than our effect on them.
(Peirce 1.324)

The notion of cause expresses secondness, as does any constraint. The flow
of time, in how the past is expressed in the present, does also. The contrast
between sensing (feeling) and will is in how we trace the antecedents. If these
are internal we are agents, while:
In sense, the antecedent events are not within us; and besides, the object of
which we form a perception […] remains unaffected. Consequently, we say that
we are patients, not agents. In the idea of reality, Secondness is predominant;

262

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

for the real is that which insists upon forcing its way to recognition as
something other than the mind‟s creation. (Peirce 1.325)

What we normally call sensing is thus for Peirce secondness as much as
doing is. Even in the simplest perceptions, such as the awareness of a color,
secondness intrudes. Not necessarily, to be sure, through the awareness of any
effort, but through the externality of the quality itself. This is sometimes
expressed by calling the color „given‟, but Peirce also emphasizes the fact that
color is not perceived as color simpliciter, in a kind of anoesis, but as located
and spread out (Peirce 1.313n1).
We have noted that balancing is the foundation of perspective and
orientation. It is also, through the vestibular and other organs, the basis of the
directed spatiality which we call spatial awareness. Objects are not merely in
space, they lie in a particular direction and occupy a definite location. Sense
impressions are not simply extended, or distant, they arise from a specific
somewhere relative to the perceiver‟s viewpoint.
The complexity of our direct experience in the course of the development
of skills, indeed in any doing, has been noticed, and much can be gained in
realizing that our awareness is mischaracterized if it is thought to consist
simply of attention directed sequentially to this or that thing or feeling.11 But it
is not enough to admit that awareness is rarely if ever unitary, and to convert
the passive perceiver into an actor by making it dual. What is still missing is
thirdness, which expresses the fact that the objects of our consciousness are all,
at least to some extent, meaningful. This is to say that in recognizing
something, we comprehend at least minimally what kind it is or, equivalently,
what might or might not be done about it.
THINKING IN ACTION
In common with other philosophers, Thomas Reid‟s theory of perception was a
sign theory (Clark 2007, ch. 10). Simple unitary experiences, such as the
impression of a vivid color or the sound of a bell, act as signs. These signs
coupled with certain judgments inform us about objects and events in a way
analogous to how we grasp the meaning of words. The knowledge acquired this
way is superior to the mere enjoyment of sensations, and Reid distinguished
11

See Polanyi 1969 and Sennett 2008.

David Vender – Is Balancing Emblematic of Action?

263

sensation from perception, claiming that when we perceive we not only
understand the significance of particular sensations, but we are assured of the
relevant object‟s independent existence.
Reid did not go into much detail on how a sign acquires meaning and how it
is understood. The use of the analogy between perception and comprehension
takes for granted our familiarity with language in order to illuminate
perception. If one wishes to go further than naïve views on language, what is
needed is a theory of signs.
In his attempts to formulate a general theory and classification of signs,
Peirce came to believe that for something to be a sign three elements had to
come into relation. This threefold unity could not be reduced to a set of dual
relations and still keep its functionality. The simplest illustration of this
interdependence may be gathered by considering that a symbol cannot have a
meaning until it is properly embedded in a system: a group of letters cannot be
a word until it has a place in a language. A dual association, such as between a
written symbol and a sound, is only a code, not a symbolism.
Peirce presents a barrage of explanations and arguments to make himself
understood, but rehearsing any of these would divert us too far from action.
Suffice to say that the development of the idea of thirdness may come directly
from logical considerations, from an examination of inference, and anyone
wishing to argue that thirdness is reducible needs to do so by (irreducibly)
bringing three terms together – hence the would-be reductionist cannot
practise what they preach.12
While the theory of signs developed by Peirce is complex and the
terminology he used to classify signs mind-boggling in its unfamiliarity, the
motivation for developing it can readily be understood when we consider
routine actions such as balancing and keeping still. Just as the human
awareness rarely if ever rests in firstness, so the experience of secondness is
not a simple feeling of dual consciousness in which efforts strive blindly against
opposition. Our efforts are directed and we attach at least a minimal
significance to them (Peirce 1.532). Without this significance or meaning we
may fail to identify the feelings and sensations experienced, and tend not to
even perceive them.

12

Cf., «When people ask me to prove a proposition in philosophy I am often obliged to reply that
it is a corollary from the logic of relatives» (Peirce 1.629).

264

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Our intelligence is an intelligence that deals with signs. In striving to do
anything, what is present to our reflection is not a bare feeling, but an effort
which has this (rather than some other, or no) direction, as well as some
significance and expectation indissolubly bound to it.
In characterizing an intelligence which deals with signs, it is important not
to restrict the meaning of „sign‟ to lexical constructs. Signs are available to the
human intelligence even before the mastery of language, and anything at all can
serve as a sign to this intelligence. We are primarily not language users, but
thinkers, and while using language is perhaps the most efficient form of
thinking for some purposes, it is not exclusive.
Peirce described our intelligence in a telling manner as «a “scientific”
intelligence, that is to say, […] an intelligence capable of learning by
experience» (Peirce 2.227). Not only is this directly relevant to the exercise of
skills and to experiencing «genuine doubt» (Peirce 5.443) – which to Peirce is
a truly affective state – it also allows a „scientific‟ intelligence to be preverbal.13 The only prerequisite is that this intelligence is an active, thinking
one, i.e., one judging expectation against result and modifying its future
actions and expectations in the process. As is evident from the quotation on
page 260 above, for Peirce this process is the essence of thinking.
Understanding thinking in this way advises the adoption of a very inclusive
conception of inference and indeed:
When Peirce speaks of an “inference,” he means any cognitive activity
whatever, not merely conscious abstract thought. Specifically, he includes
perceptual knowledge and even subconscious mental activity. (Davis 1972, p. 9)

There is on this account no fundamental difference between a syllogism
expressing clear conceptual relations and worked through explicitly from
premises to conclusion, and the routines implicit in perceptual habits or in
acting generally. Perceiving and acting are subsumed into forms of inference,
and a categorical difference between knowing how and knowing that becomes
untenable. As Peirce puts it: «To act intelligently and to see intelligently
become at bottom one» (Peirce 7.562).
This all inclusive nature of what are taken to be thinking and inference
might provoke the worry that the generality of this theory makes an account of
action unusably vague. If we cannot even keep practical skills separate from
book knowledge – two accomplishments which are clearly not interchangeable
13

Cf. Peirce 5.227-235.

David Vender – Is Balancing Emblematic of Action?

265

– how can we hope to formulate a clear difference between action and mere
behavior? Some brief comments can be offered to suggest that this worry is
unfounded.
If the difference between action and behavior is sought in the explicability
of actions in terms of the agent‟s reasons, the recursive complexity of reasons
advises that we are not in any position to simply match actions (classified
perhaps as various movements) with reasons. It must be sufficient that suitable
reasons can be given and that we are convinced, on investigating the concrete
case, that the agent performed the act. The role of the agent presupposes
effort, but for the agent to be appropriately involved in the act any effort must
be directed and as such grounded in those skills which underlie orientation and
balance. This is why balancing can serve as exemplary of the „simplest‟ kind of
act.
It is not essential for the agent to attend to any particular aspect of their
performance – they are usually captivated by the goal anyway. However, it is
important that the skills relevant to the act have been acquired by the individual
in question in the inferential cycle starting from expectation and going through
doubting, thinking, and settling on belief, as Peirce explained it. It is only the
adequate repetition of this cycle which can furnish a movement with a felt
significance, and it should come as no surprise that two of the earliest verbal
expressions of infants are those of satisfaction with something well done and
disapproval at some action whose result did not meet expectation (Gopnik et
al. 1999).
The only kind of action we can perform is one which is constituted from a
combination of learned skilled acts. While the underlying skill is the signature
of action, it is still quite possible that there is no rule which can be formally
applied to differentiate between action and behavior in any specific instance. It
is even likely that the distinction may need to be drawn differently for various
acts or for different agents. Much depends on what the individual agent has
acquired some measure of control over. This imperative to remain in the
concrete might be an impediment to formal theory, but it is not an impasse in
practical life where common sense counsels that the most effective agents learn
by doing.
The distinction between behavior and action need not be abandoned, but a
spectrum is revealed ranging from bodily processes which we have never
thought to influence or master, all the way to what Peirce called conduct, which
is «action that is self-controlled, i.e., controlled by adequate deliberation»

266

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

(Peirce 8.322). Although we judge children differently from adults, and also
subject the unintended consequences of adult actions to the arbitration of
judgment, wherever we recognize that some skill or mastery has been acquired
by the individual, there we accept that the individual is acting.
BROKEN SYMMETRIES
The perspective arising from the participation in a dynamical order by
balancing makes all our actions necessarily directed. This directedness is part
of the meaning of all our movements, and even those acts which are normally
spoken of as if no movements were involved – mental acts such as imagining
and thinking – turn out on close inspection to be closely related to physical
movement.14
The directionality of our movements as well as the spatial content of our
perceptual states presupposes an asymmetry between a here and a there. It
makes all the difference in the world if something moves from here to there or
vice versa. There are also such differences between what it takes to move
upwards voluntarily – as in standing up, jumping or climbing – and downwards
– as in falling or crouching – that it would take very peculiar circumstances for
us to confuse them.15
The particular perspective of our experience is evidently consistent with the
spatial order in which our physical body exists, and we cannot literally move in
a direction orthogonal to the three axes defining up-down, left-right, and
forward-back. However, there would seem to be no logical necessity in a
universe to have a certain spatial or temporal order, so the embodiment we
enjoy as biological organisms on earth can be at least speculatively taken as
contingent. This raises the question of what may be the minimal requirements
for an intelligence to be active.
The idea that perceiving is possible without embodiment in three
dimensions was already considered by Reid (2000, pp. 108-112). Elaborating
on a hint from Berkeley, Reid imagined a race of spirits who see but cannot
14
For the intimate relation of thinking to what may seem trivial or superfluous movements see
McNeill 2005, who explores the deep connections between gestures and verbal expression. Reid
believed that we share the language of gesture with the animals.
15
This is in contrast with the perfect symmetry of the action and reaction pair in Newtonian
physics.

David Vender – Is Balancing Emblematic of Action?

267

touch. These Idomenians lack the notion of a third dimension and to them
objects occluded by nearer bodies are theorized to be „overcome‟, but both
objects must occupy the same space since those occluded have nowhere to
hide.16 Reid used this fable in developing a non-Euclidean spherical geometry
for visible (depthless) objects (Grandi 2005). However, even for these
hypothetical beings a perspective enabling rotations is necessary so the
symmetry between here and there is (dynamically) broken.
The dynamical asymmetries just mentioned arise from embodiment, which
allows us to participate in the physical world. Still, the asymmetry inherent in
the directional perspectivity of this participation is neither the same nor likely
to be sufficient for us to feel that it is we who are acting. There would seem to
be an experiential difference between perceiving that our body is moving in a
particular direction and the knowledge that we are striving in that direction. It
is this asymmetry between effort and resistance that Peirce pointed to in
describing the dual consciousness, and the duality comes not from a simple
opposition, or even from the opposition of two directions, but from the fact
that we feel ourselves to be the owners of one side of the opposition of forces,
of the balance.
There are thus at least two asymmetries operating in physical action, and if
one asks about the necessity of embodiment for action, what is being asked
includes asking how dynamical participation relates to the ownership felt when
we act. It may be true that, as a matter of fact, these asymmetries are
inseparable in our course of life. But it is difficult to decide on this basis alone
whether they must be inseparable. If they can be separated then it would seem
that it is the apprehension of ownership that is necessary, while how this
ownership is exercised, be it through directed movement or through some
other perhaps difficult to imagine process, is unessential.
Saying that a feeling of ownership is essential in acting is not the same as
claiming that we must be aware of our body or in any particular affective state
while performing an act. It is often said that in acting it is precisely these bodily
feelings and states which we neglect, and when we balance we generally do so
unthinkingly.17 When action is considered as a skilled performance, however,
16
It is interesting that the ontological persistence of occluded or hidden objects is a kind of
discovery for infants, and this relates to the popularity of „peek-a-boo‟ games. See Gopnik et al. 1999.
17
An argument against the necessity of explicit bodily knowing (performative or affective) in
some specific acts has been given by Young 2004. It is based on pathological cases, so its impact on a
description of action in general is limited.

268

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

what we are momentarily aware of in acting proves to be consistent with the
phenomenology of craftsmanship.18 In exercising a skill we are intent on the
end result and, having mastered the skill, can afford to neglect attending to
what the performance requires of us. Yet, just as reasons can be supplied after
the fact, we can rehearse our movements and choose to pay closer attention to
them and our ownership of them whenever the need arises.
CONCLUSION
In seeking to understand action, the first task is to identify those actions which
are typical and can serve as exemplars of human agency. The next important
step is to trace how these are developed and cultured, since human actions are
best characterized as performances of acquired skills. In examining how we
perceive ourselves to be acting, the asymmetry which Peirce defined as dual
consciousness would seem to be a fundamental requirement, but moving
becomes acting only when an intelligence which deals with signs thinks
through its actions and modifies them to meet expectations.
Following Reid‟s indications, I have suggested that balancing is emblematic
of action. Not only is it a cultured skill, it serves as the basis for the whole
variety of human actions, including those highly cultivated acts which follow
from deliberation and are explicitly justified by causal explanations and
reasons. We do not have to be fully aware of our contribution for something to
count as an act, or be able to justify it rationally, but we must be able to adapt
our efforts to the momentary situation which we perceive ourselves to be in, so
that our expectations have some hope of being met.

REFERENCES

Angelaki, D. E., & Cullen, K. E. (2008). Vestibular system: The many facets
of a multimodal sense. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 31, 125-150.

18

Craftsmanship is considered in detail by Richard Sennett (2008). Michael Polanyi has also
made valuable remarks on these topics, even explaining how active doing informs book knowledge in
the acquisition of expertise, and formulating the idea of „tacit knowing‟ to characterize how bodily
knowledge underlies meaningful activity in Polanyi 1969, part 3.

David Vender – Is Balancing Emblematic of Action?

269

Benson, A. J. (1982). The vestibular sensory system. In H. B. Barlow & J. D.
Mollon (Eds.), The Senses, (pp. 333-368). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Clark, S. (2007). Vanities of the Eye: Vision in Early Modern European
Culture. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Clarke, R. (2010). Skilled activity and the causal theory of action. Philosophy
and Phenomenological Research, 80(3), 523-550.
Davis, W. H. (1972). Peirce‟s Epistemology. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Fuchs, T. (2001). Mechanisation of the Heart: Harvey and Descartes.
Rochester, NY: University of Rochester Press.
Gopnik, A., Meltzoff, A. & Kuhl, P. (1999). How Babies Think: The Science
of Childhood. London: Phoenix.
Grandi, G. B. (2005). Thomas Reid‟s geometry of visibles and the parallel
postulate. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science, 36(1), 79103.
Howard, I. P., & Templeton, W. B. (1966). Human Spatial Orientation.
London: John Wiley & Sons.
Maurer, D. & Maurer, C. (1988). The World of the Newborn. New York:
Basic Books.
McNeill, D. (2005). Gesture & Thought. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Peirce, C. S. (1931-1958). Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Polanyi, M. (1969). Knowing and Being. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Potter, V. G. (1997). Charles S. Peirce on Norms & Ideals. New York:
Fordham University Press.
Reid, T. (2000). An Inquiry into the Human Mind on the Principles of
Common Sense. University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University
Press.

270

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Sandis, C. (Ed.) (2009). New Essays on the Explanation of Action.
Hartfordshire: Palgrave Macmillan.
Sennett, R. (2008). The Craftsman. London: Penguin Books.
Wade, N. J. (2000). William Charles Wells (1757–1817) and vestibular
research before Purkinje and Flourens. Journal of Vestibular Research,
10(3), 127-137.
Wolterstorff, N. (2001). Thomas Reid and the Story of Epistemology.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wood, P. (Ed.) (1995). Thomas Reid on the Animate Creation: Papers
Relating to the Life Sciences. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Young, G. (2004). Bodily knowing: Re-thinking our understanding of
procedural knowledge. Philosophical Explorations, 7(1), 37-54.

Book Review

Effective Intentions:
The Power of Conscious Will
Alfred R. Mele
Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2009

Marco Fenici*

fenici@unisi.it
Mele‘s book is a concise analysis of much research in neurophysiology and
neuroscience – starting from the pioneering works of Libet (Libet 1985, Libet
et al. 1983) – claiming that, although we conceive ourselves as free agents with
the power to influence our behaviour by our volitions, free will as well as the
causal power of conscious intentions are illusions. Against this claim, Mele
argues that it depends on a naïve picture of human agency, thus, it disappears if
we develop a sophisticated framework about the explanation of action. When
understood according to this framework, empirical data is open to alternative
interpretations, and it does not warrant the illusion thesis anymore.
Here is a summary of the book. In Chapter 1, Mele introduces the basic
psychological notions involved in ordinary explanations of action. The largest
part of the book is then devoted to an extended analysis of many empirical
results. In Chapters from 2 to 4, Mele challenges Libet‘s (1985, 2004) claim
that the brain ―decides‖ to initiate actions prior to subjective awareness of the
decision. In Chapter 5, Mele argues that the phenomena grounding Wegner‘s
(2002) thesis about the illusion of free will are instead consistent with the
causal relevance of intentions in the production of action. In Chapter 6, Mele
argues that Lau, Rogers and Passingham (Lau et al. 2007) have not shown that
conscious proximal intentions emerge too late to be among the causes of
corresponding intentional actions. The last two Chapters focus positive
evidence to Mele‘s thesis that there are effective intentions, that is, «intentions
that issue in corresponding actions» (p. vii). Hence, Chapter 7 reports

* University of Siena

272

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

empirical data supporting the causal role of conscious decision to the
production of action. Finally, in Chapter 8, Mele discusses which empirical
discovery would persuade him of the truth of the thesis about the illusion of
free will and of the causal power of conscious intentions.
Mele sometimes discusses much specific technicalities, an analysis of which
is beyond the scope of this review. Herein, I will just attempt to re-compose the
book‘s general strategy by putting together Mele‘s several—and sometimes
fragmented—discussion about contemporary research. Mele aims to depict a
mature framework where the concept of intention may be defined in
accordance to the thesis that intentions play a causal role in the production of
intentional action. He sketches this framework mostly in Chapter 1 by largely
referring to his previous works (Mele 1992, 2003, 2007).
Mele attempts to precisely identify the concept of intention as it appears in
the discussion about the illusion of free will. According to him, intentions are
«executive attitudes toward plans» (p. 6). He distinguishes occurrent from
standing intentions – which are dispositions to have corresponding occurrent
intentions. Furthermore, he also distinguishes distal intentions – that is,
intentions which are for the non-immediate future – from proximal intentions
– that is, intentions to do something in the very moment. He thus explains he
will limit his analysis to occurrent proximal intentions – from here on, just
―intentions‖ – because empirical investigation almost exclusively focused their
causal role with respect to intentional behavior.
According to Mele, there are two ways – not mutually exclusive – for an
intention to A to be an occurrent intention at that time:
One way is for it to be suitably at work at that time in producing relevant
intentional actions or in producing items appropriate for the production of
relevant intentional actions; the other is, roughly, for it to be a conscious
intention at that time, provided that the intention is not wholly constituted by a
disposition to have occurrent intentions to A. (p. 4)

Thus, Mele rejects the idea that all intentions must be conscious. In order for
an intention to be an occurrent intention, it is sufficient ―for it to be suitably at
work at that time in producing relevant intentional actions or in producing
items appropriate for the production of relevant intentional actions‖. That is,
although Mele concedes that some intentions are conscious, awareness is not a
necessary characteristic of all of them. Instead, we may identify intentions by
their effect – i.e., intentional action. This is a fundamental point to Mele‘s

Book Review – Effective Intentions

273

general analysis, as it is the key concept to understand how he will later reject
the thesis about the illusion of free will and of the causal power of intentions.
Finally, in Chapter 1, Mele also distinguishes intentions from desires, the
function of which is to help to produce occurrent intentions. Someone who has
a desire may still be deliberating about whether to follow it or not for action.
Instead, intentions are more connected to intentional action than
corresponding desires. Still, they are also different from practical decisions to
do something, in that they may come to be without being formed in acts of
deciding.
As I have already remarked, a discussion of the many technical points of
contention in the book is beyond the scope of this review. Let me just show
how Mele applies his analysis of the notion of intention to one of the most
popular experiments leading to claims about the illusion of free will. Libet
(1985) wired experimental subjects‘ with electroencephalogram (EEG) and
asked them to flex their wrist at an arbitrary moment. He measured both the
shift in the readiness potentials (RPs) in the EEG tracing anticipating the
muscle contraction and the time at which the subjects first became aware of
their decision to flex. He found that RPs manifested a reliable change 550 ms
before subjects begun to flex their wrist, while subjects declared on average to
have made the decision to flex only 350 ms before they started flexing.
Therefore, Libet claimed, the flexing was triggered by the RP-shift before
subjects became aware of their intention to flex. He concluded that intentions
are an echo of the brain activity, but that they do not have the power to
influence people‘s decisions.
In discussing Libet‘s experiment, Mele shows that the experimental data
does not warrant that the measured RP-shift stands for subjects‘ intention to
flex their wrist. On the one hand, the experiment does not demonstrate that the
RP-shift necessarily triggers the flexing reaction: «‗whenever you wiggle your
finger, signal S appears a second before you wiggle it‘ does not entail
‗whenever signal S appears, you wiggle your finger a second later‘» (p. 81). On
the other, Mele reports much empirical evidence showing that «it is much more
likely that what emerges around – 550 ms is a potential cause of a proximal
intention or decision than a proximal intention or decision itself» (p. 51), and
that it may more accurately characterised in the terms of «urges to (prepare to)
flex soon, brain events suitable for being proximal causal contributors to such
urges, motor preparation, and motor imagery» (p. 56).

274

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

If Libet was wrong in interpreting his experimental data, Mele argues, this
is because he relied on what it is «a popular folk theory about intentions or the
folk concept of intention, not empirical considerations» (p. 37). Such a folk
theory mistakes intentions for conscious intentions. However, as I have noted
above, Mele have argued that intentions are not necessarily conscious. Given
that, it is still possible for the subjects‘ conscious experience of their intention
to flex to appear later than the RP-shift without we are forced to claim that
intentions play no causal role with respect to action. In fact,
A subject‘s wanting to flex soon and his experience of wanting to flex soon are
not the same thing. So to grant that a subject‘s flex soon experience of wanting
to flex soon is not a cause of his flexing is not to grant that his wanting to flex
soon also is not a cause of his flexing. My flipping a light switch—not my
experience of flipping it—is a cause of the light going on. Analogously, a
subject‘s wanting to flex soon may be a cause of his flexing even if his
experience of wanting to flex soon is not. (pp. 32-33)

Therefore, even if Libet were correct about the average time of initial
awareness, existing evidence does not warrant his conclusion.
Instead, Libet‘s experimental data is compatible with the claim that
intentions have a causal power in determining intentional behavior. In the light
of both the positive evidence attesting the causal role of intentions reported in
Chapter 7, and his detailed analysis of the variety of experimental settings
leading neuroscientists to claim that free will is an illusion, Mele concludes that
a sophisticated analysis of the concept of intention allows one not to exclude
that conscious intentions do play a causal role in the production of action:
Conceived of as essentially supernatural, effective intentions and decisions and
the power of conscious will have a ghost of a chance—or, more aptly, a ghost‘s
chance—of existing. Conceived of more naturally, their being every bit as real as
you and I are is consistent with the scientific findings examined in this book. (p.
160)

In conclusion, Effective Intentions is a nice example of philosophical
sensibility applied to scientific research, and it is recommended to both
neuroscientists and philosophers of the cognitive sciences. Mele‘s careful
examination of the current debate in psychology and neuroscience about the
illusion of free will and the causal efficacy of intentions makes the book a
fundamental reading for anyone interested to the topic. However, it should be
noted that Effective Intentions is all but introductory. Despite the broad scope

Book Review – Effective Intentions

275

and interest of the issues discussed, and despite the remarkable stylistic
concision, both the technicality of the analysis of contemporary experiments
and the detail of the theses discussed all concur to make the book hard to nonspecialists.
Furthermore, concision sometimes is not a merit. Mele‘s argument that
intentions may effectively issue in intentional action strongly depends on their
broad interpretation as executive attitudes toward plans. However, this
interpretation is as important to the general economy of the argument as much
as it is not almost theoretically supported. It may be possible that, having
addressed the issue in many of his previous works, Mele did not felt the urge to
provide his reader with more details. But it is equally undeniable that the reader
would have been more convinced by the whole discussion if such an important
piece of the puzzle had been more carefully considered.

REFERENCES

Lau, H. C., Rogers, R. D., & Passingham, R. E. (2007). Manipulating the
experienced onset of intention after action execution. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 19(1), 81-90.
Libet, B. (1985). Unconscious cerebral initiative and the role of conscious will
in voluntary action. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 8(04), 529-539.
Libet, B. (2004). Mind Time: The Temporal Factor in Consciousness.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Libet, B., Gleason, C. A., Wright, E. W., & Pearl, D. K. (1983). Time of
conscious intention to act in relation to onset of cerebral activity
(readiness-potential). The unconscious initiation of a freely voluntary
act. Brain: A Journal of Neurology, 106 (3), 623-642.
Mele, A. R. (1992). Springs of Action: Understanding Intentional Behavior.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Mele, A. R. (2003). Motivation and Agency. New York: Oxford University.
Mele, A. R. (2007). Persisting Intentions. Nous, 41(4), 735-757.
Wegner, D. M. (2002). The Illusion of Conscious Will. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

276

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Book Review

The Actor‟s Brain:
Exploring the Cognitive Neuroscience of Free Will
Sean A. Spence
Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2009

Roberto Di Letizia*
r.diletizia@tin.it

Sean Spence‟s The Actor‟s Brain sees free will through the wide-angle lens of
cognitive neuroscience by furnishing the readers with a terrific amount of
evidences from neuroscience. Spence‟s work does not offer only a close
examination of the recent studies on volition. In chapter 10, he proposes a new
overview on the volitional control as a result of the empirical studies quoted in
the previous chapters. The human capacity for volition is presented as a
multidimensional space subject to multiple constraints. The volitional control
is represented by the „human response space‟, the range of behavioral
responses that the agent is enabled to perform. „Human response space‟ is set
by multiple constrains (i.e., factors which determine the boundaries of the
human response space), as result human freedom is not a binary property,
something that humans have or do not have, but a scalable property, something
that humans have more or less depending on these constrains. Accordingly, the
human response space can be expanded or contracted by changing these
constrains. Both internal and external to the subject, these constrains are (i)
anatomical (chs. 2, 4, 6); (ii) physiological (ch. 4); (iii) neurochemical (ch. 4);
(iv) psychological (chs. 2, 8, 7); (v) emotional (ch. 9); (vi) social (ch. 9); (vii)
genetic (ch. 9). These constrains are not static as they may be altered in
different manners in order to “sculpt” the response space (e.g., drug therapies
may potentially restore the response space).Throughout the whole book,
Spence explores and examines these constrains.

* University of Salento

278

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

In chapter 1, he focuses on the journey of the motor signal, which allows
the subject to move the right index, through the central nervous system and the
peripheral nervous system.
In chapter 2, Spence considers the „anterior‟ frontal lobes in order to walk
backwards towards the initiation of the action. Voluntary behavior is the result
of the integrated work of (1) dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), involved
in the „self-generation‟ of the action and the planning of action of a response,
(2) orbitofrontal prefrontal cortex (OFC), implicated in relating the relative
„reward value‟ to objects or targets towards which the action is directed, and
(3) frontopolar cortex (BA 10), involved in planning an alternative response to
that programmed by DLPFC. DLPFC and BA 10 plan two different alternative
responses, whereas the preference is determined by OFC which attributes
„value‟ to these perceived behavioral alternatives. Finally, premotor cortex
(PMC) has the role in determining the „script‟, the „pattern‟ of motor events‟,
that the motor cortices may be subsequently called upon to execute.
In chapter 3, Spence faces the timing of volition. Indeed, conscious
awareness of acting seems to arise later than the onset of the motor
programming and the content of motor programming. These findings suggest
that the intention of acting is subject to a double „delay‟. First, the intention of
acting precedes our awareness of movement onset. However, the onset of
motor programming precedes the finalization of the content of such motor
programming. Second, the intentional act is temporally related to the late RP
(namely readiness potential, the brain‟s electric activity related to voluntary
action), whereas the onset of motor programming is temporally linked to the
early RP.
In chapter 4, the main issue pertains to how the brain initiates, modulates,
and terminates action, in the absence of a central controller. At a
neuroanatomical level, several brain regions are involved in volitional behavior,
especially five basal ganglia-thalamo-cortical „circuits‟ – re-entrant loops in
which information is recurrently re-cycled, in trajectories that are circular –
that contribute to volitional control in several manners (e.g., suppression or
execution of finely tuned and overly learned motor routines, motor skill
acquisition, emotional behavior). At the neurochemical level, volitional
behavior is analyzed in terms of neurotransmitters (i.e., dopamine, serotonin,
noradrenaline, acetylcholine) whose different levels of distribution may affect
both higher and lower aspects of volition. At a cognitive level, Spence follows
Tim Shillice‟s model of volition‟s cognitive architectures. According to this

Book Review – The Actor‟s Brain

279

model, the human executive system is composed by a lower and a higher
system. The lower system performs the routine, automated, and stereotypical
behaviors by means of schemata – overly learned and simple motor routines
which are automated and triggered by cues in our external environment. The
higher system (or, executive system) performs consciously planned and
spontaneous novel behavior by means of a „Supervisory Attentional System‟
(SAS).
In chapter 5, Spence focuses upon abnormalities of volitional experience,
with particular regard to those instances when human agents may be deprived
of both their motor control and their sense of agency. Relatively complex
behaviors may arise unbidden (e.g., anarchic hands, namely limbs that „will not
do‟ what their owners „wish them to do‟) or under the „influence‟ of „external
forces‟ (e.g., a patient with schizophrenia moves her hand but feels as if she is
subject to the play of „cosmic strings‟). According to Spence, the organic
causes of these diseases are structural and functional abnormalities located in
several distributed brain regions, and seem to impair agency via two
mechanisms: (i) a disinhibition of „lower‟ motor centres giving rise to relatively
stereotypic and contextually inappropriate motor routines (e.g., anarchic
hands); (ii) a disturbance in the perception of voluntary movement (e.g., alien
agency).
Chapter 6 is dedicated to avolition, the apparent absence of voluntary
behaviors. Avolition is present in schizophrenic patients as they exhibit limited
behavioral repertoire and a poor responsiveness to their environment. The
poverty of the behavioral repertoire indicates that in avolition the prefrontal
and anterior cingulate should be implicated in some way. Indeed, avolitional
patients exhibit greater prefrontal lobes deficit, whether in terms of „function‟
or „structure‟. According to Spence, avolitional syndromes may emerge when
the executive system is impaired (e.g., by genetic factors impacting the
dopaminergic and glutamatergic systems), so that the agent‟s behavioral
repertoire is limited to the performances of the subordinate slave system.
Chapter 7 faces a volitional disorder: hysteria. Hysteric patients exhibit
unusual, but purposeful, behaviors („motor hysteria‟), which are apparently
without any organic cause. According to Spence, hysteria phenomena come
and go in response of social milieu of the patient, insofar as they are products
of social influences on the subject‟s executive motor system. Indeed hysterical
signs appear to be dependent on the patient‟s ability to attend to its
production. In hysteric patients, distraction or sedation reveals the emergence

280

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

of normal action, so that the attention is central to the patient‟s performance of
the abnormal act. Spence points out that certain environments encourage the
exhibition of hysterical motor signs whereas other environments serve to
reverse such behaviors. This means that hysteria is an instance of the
„conspecific‟ influences on the subject‟s motor executive system.
In chapter 8, Spence discusses about the cognitive neurobiological basis of
an inherently interpersonal behavior: deception. Also deceptive behavior is
based on the above examined twofold volitional system. The executive motor
system is implicated in producing „lie‟ as a novel response and in suppressing
the „true‟ response by readdressing the value of falsehoods higher than the
truths‟ one. The subordinate slave systems produces the „true‟ response, hence
it is the „baseline‟, the default response of the brain, which is however inhibited
by the executive system while deception.
Chapter 9 faces the moral issue whether bad things that human agents do to
others are „chosen‟ or „determined‟. According to Spence, human beings are
not „perfectible‟: they are animals who can and will behave „well‟ and „badly‟,
according to their needs and desires: evil and good are both features of human
nature. Thereby deviant acts are only examples of abnormal behaviors. Here
„abnormal‟ has a statistic sense, that is, the characterization of „normal‟
depends on our assumptions about what it is that „most people‟ do in some
specified circumstances. Although „abnormal‟ violence may be the result of
human response space‟s decrease determined by contingent factors such as
structural/functional anomalies in the perpetrator‟s brain and genetic
abnormalities concerning with neurotransmitter metabolism, Spence
recognizes that these biological anomalies are not a sufficient condition for
acting badly. The causal power of these anomalies is effective only under
specific circumstances (e.g., aberrant influences located within experiential
and social spheres), which means that bad behavior is the result of the
interaction between the genes, the brain and the social environment.
Finally, in the Epilogue, Spence tries to solve „Libet‟s paradox‟, namely,
how can we defend „free will‟ if our intentional acts are all unconsciously
initiated? According to Spence, even though we cannot control our
unconscious processes, we can consider an action as morally evaluable if the
subject is consciously aware of his/her actions. In conscious awareness, (a) the
subjects feel like they are controlling conscious thoughts, and (b) they are
conscious of what they are thinking or doing. Consequently: «without
consciousness, we cease to be moral agents» (p. 382).

Book Review – The Actor‟s Brain

281

In summary, Spence‟s book serves as an excellent source book for those
philosophers who are interested in neurobiological and naturalistic
foundations of free will. His model of human response space may be seen as a
characterization of free will in the terms of cognitive neuroscience in order to
elaborate a compatibilist view on free will, which attempts to conciliate free will
with determinism of natural sciences. Hence his account on free will reminds
of Hobbes‟ compatibilist defense, where free will is not conceived as the
subject‟s capacity of choosing otherwise, but rather of acting without coercion,
according to his/her own needs and desires.

282

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Book Review

Cognitive Systems and the Extended Mind*
Robert D. Rupert
Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2009

Mirko Farina**

m.farina@sms.ed.ac.uk

Cognitive Systems and the Extended Mind defends an embedded view of

cognition according to which cognitive processes can causally depend on
environmental resources in hitherto unexpected ways but cognitive systems are
located inside the heads of biological organisms. Rupert firmly rejects the
thesis of the extended mind (EMT) according to which cognitive processes can
sometimes spread across brain, body and world. In Cognitive Systems he
surveys most of the arguments that have been offered in defense of EMT and
makes a valiant (but ultimately unsuccessful) attempt at refuting them one by
one. The volume however isn’t entirely negative. Part three of the book
develops in detail Rupert’s alternative somewhat conservative view of cognitive
systems as computational systems located inside the heads of organisms, and of
cognitive processes as the manipulation and transformation of internal mental
representations.
The volume is organized around three main parts. Part one of the book is
mostly methodological and largely devoted to the investigation of how to
demarcate cognitive processes from non-cognitive background conditions. In
chapter two, in the attempt to delineate cognition, Rupert introduces three
desiderata (conservatism, simplicity and scientific feasibility or empirical
progress) that are used as theoretical virtues to set up grounds for
distinguishing a causal contribution from a cognitive one. Rupert deploys
these three desiderata against EMT. Particularly, he asserts that all the criteria
EMT enthusiasts have put forward for determining the boundaries of a
cognitive system fail to meet his three theoretical virtues. The only account of
*

I owe an immense debt of gratitude to Julian Kiverstein for his influence on my work. Thanks too
to Andy Clark, John Sutton and Erik Myin for their very helpful comments on a previous draft of this
review. Any remaining errors are of course down to me.
**
School of Philosophy, Psychology and Language Sciences, University of Edinburgh

284

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

the cognitive, he thinks, that satisfies his theoretical virtues is an embedded
one, which takes cognitive systems to be characterized as an integrated set of
internal, biological mechanisms interacting with an ever-changing cast of
external materials to produce intelligent behavior.
Part two of the book looks at the arguments for EMT and attacks them with
a view to defending a system-based approach. More specifically, Rupert calls
into question the functionalist credentials of EMT defending the view that the
causal roles which are definitive of our mental states should be individuated
using the fine-grained details of human psychology as described by cognitive
psychology as our benchmark. Chapter five assesses a number of empirical
studies that have been used to motivate EMT and shows how these studies can
be reinterpreted so as to support an embedded account of cognition. Rupert
further emphasizes the virtues of his system-based approach and argues that
«the acceptance of the embedded alternative encourages researchers to keep
clearly in mind the important asymmetries (between the organism and the
external resources), while in no way encouraging them to neglect the interface
with or heavy dependence on the environment»(p.107). Rupert takes such
asymmetries to count against EMT. He reasons that internal biological
processes make a causal contribution to cognition that is very different from
anything located in the external environment. These differences (between the
biological and the external), he continues, preclude the causal contribution of
the external environment from counting as cognitive. However according to
some proponents of EMT, it is precisely these differences in causal
contribution that motivate EMT. The external makes a causal contribution that
is different from but complementary to the contributions of processes taking
place inside the head. The complementarity of the inner and outer enables us
to cognize in new ways that go beyond what we could achieve on the basis of
the bare biological processes taken in isolation. I shall tackle this point in
greater detail later in this review. For now, let me add that Sprevak (2009) has
also noticed a potential stand-off in Rupert’s argument. We can redescribe the
empirical evidence for EMT in ways that favors an embedded view but all this
shows is that the empirical evidence doesn’t decide between extended or
embedded. It doesn’t support EMT but nor does it favor an embedded view.
Part three develops the system-based approach in much more detail
focusing on representation and computation. In this section of the book
Rupert aims to develop a positive account according to which cognition is
located inside the boundaries of the organism. He does so on the basis of the

Book Review – Cognitive Systems and the Extended Mind

285

arguments from empirical success proposed in chapters two and three. These
arguments largely rely on methodological considerations, which favor an
organismically bounded perspective that seems to provide the best account of
explanation in cognitive psychology. Rupert also attempts to demonstrate how
his embedded account can accommodate everything that EMT wants to say
without abandoning the traditional computational framework. It should be
noted that many proponents of EMT such as Clark, Wheeler and Wilson also
accept the computational framework. They argue for what Robert Wilson
(1994) has dubbed “wide computationalism”. The book finishes up with a
chapter on embodied cognition and with some work in cognitive linguistics.
Rupert carefully distinguishes embodied from extended approaches.
The volume centers around two themes. One is the notion of integration, the
second is the need for a mark of the cognitive. In the rest of this review, I
intend to attack Rupert’s account of integration from a complementarity
standpoint (Menary 2007, 2010; Sutton 2010; Rowlands 2010) and cast
some doubts upon those views that take the mark of the cognitive to be
necessary for cognitive science.
Rupert defines a cognitive system «as an integrated set of stable and
persisting mechanisms that contribute distinctively to the production of
cognitive science’s explananda» (Rupert 2010, p. 344). On his account, a
mechanism counts as cognitive and therefore becomes a part of an integrated
cognitive system, when it contributes to the production of a wide range of
cognitive phenomena across a variety of conditions. The organism is taken as
an integrated physical entity whose persistence and relative durability explains
the persistent appearance of the integrated set of cognitive capacities realized
by the organism itself. But there are other ways of thinking about integration
that are consistent with the soft-assembly of cognitive systems on the fly, and
that therefore call into question Rupert’s persistence and durability
requirement.1 Different components of a soft-assembled system can play quite
different roles and have different properties while nevertheless combining to
make complementary contributions that enable flexible thinking and acting. A
biological cognizer tight coupled with the right kinds of environmental
resources, can permit the organism to perform cognitive functions that it
wouldn’t be able to accomplish in the absence of such external resources. This
tight coupling can provide the right kind of temporary integration of the
1

See Clark 2001, 2003; Sutton 2010; Menary 2007.

286

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

internal and external for the organism to accomplish its goals. There is no need
for the integration to last beyond the organism’s successful performance of a
task. The asymmetry point aforementioned becomes particularly relevant here.
Extended cognition doesn’t require a fine-grained functional isomorphism
between inner and outer processes. We get something new by working in
mutual partnership with the external environment, something that we wouldn’t
get from the biological taken on its own. The complementarity between the
internal and external therefore «directs our attention to rich, full, and often
idiosyncratic cognitive ecologies in which the computational power and
expertise is spread across a heterogeneous assembly of brains, bodies,
artifacts, and other external structure» (Sutton et al. 2010, p. 6).2 This is why,
I think, the human biological cognizer and the environment need to be taken as
a complementarily integrated system of cognitive analysis, with neural, bodily
and environmental components making equal contributions in the
performance of cognitive tasks.
The second central theme of the book is the mark of the cognitive. The
need for a mark of the cognitive has been famously promoted by Adams and
Aizawa (2008), Rupert (2004) and more recently endorsed by Weiskopf
(2010a, 2010b). Its necessity has been postulated, even if with dissimilar goals,
by some friends of EMT.3 However, Clark (2008, 2010a, 2010b) and Sutton
(2010) have resisted this claim on the grounds that it unnecessarily
complicates EMT. Let me dig a bit more into this. According to Rupert, EMT
needs a mark of the cognitive if it is to succeed in arguing that the environment
is playing a constitutive role in the emergence of a cognitive process. The need
for such a mark follows from the necessity to distinguish factors that are
genuinely parts of a cognitive system from factors that only causally contribute
and don’t have any constitutive involvement. Rupert individuates the locus of
such a mark in the organism and his view of cognitive systems, discussed above,
is taken as a measure to distinguish what is cognitive from what is not.
Particularly, Rupert believes that what happens within the biological cognizer
(the set of mutual interrelations between body and brain) can entirely account
for cognition. What is external to the bio-physical architecture of the organism
can only ever make a causal contribution. The debate around the mark of the
cognitive famously emerged from the discussion of the causal-constitutional
2
3

Also see Hutchins 2010, Tribble and Keene 2010 for similar arguments.
See Rowlands 2008, and particularly Wheeler 2005 and forthcoming.

Book Review – Cognitive Systems and the Extended Mind

287

conflation. Some people assume (and Rupert certainly stands among them) that
this conflation entails the need for a mark of the cognitive. Rupert provides one
that entails that an external resource can make a cognitive contribution to
behavior only if it corresponds in a fine-grained way with the causal
contribution of our inner states. There are specific psychological effects for
instance (e.g., negative transfer, primacy and chunking effects) that we do not
find in cases of extended memory. Because of this failure of fine-grained
correspondence we shouldn’t treat use of external resources in memory tasks
as cognitive uses. We should say instead that the external resource is only
making a causal contribution.
Now, as I stated above, Clark (2008, 2010a, 2010b) believes that the
attempt to identify a mark of the cognitive is unlikely to bear fruit.4 First of all
Clark denies that the differences in fine-grained functional role of the external
and internal matter, arguing instead that the sort of functional equivalence that
counts for the parity argument is determined at a fairly coarse-grained level. If
the cognitive were marked out by a fine-grained correspondence, this would
prevent us from attributing cognition to creatures that are appreciably different
(either biologically or psychologically ) from us. The demand for a fine-grained
correspondence requires us to scale new heights of neurocentrism and
anthropocentrism. Cognition, as far as Clark is concerned, does not
necessarily necessitate minds that work in the same fine grained ways as human
minds work. Additionally, since the differences between «external-looping
(putatively cognitive) processes and purely inner ones will be no greater than
those between the inner ones themselves» (Clark 2010a, p. 51), it is likely that
the inner goings-on, postulated by opponents of EMT, will turn out to be a
motley crew. Clark has in fact brilliantly noticed, that we already possess a
practical grasp on the kinds of coarse-grained behavior patterns that we
presume to be characteristic of key cognitive processes, such as the holding of
a standing (dispositional) belief (Clark 2010b). A very basic and relatively
liberal appeal to folk psychology would therefore suffice to guide us in working
out what counts as cognitive and what does not. Wheeler has recently
disagreed arguing that EMT needs «a scientifically informed, theory-loaded,
locationally uncommitted account of the cognitive» (Wheeler 2010). Clark has
responded that such a quest is unnecessary and unlikely to succeed. The shape
and the contour of any such a theory will always and ultimately be determined
4

Also see Sutton 2010 and Menary 2007 for similar arguments.

288

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

by what one takes as central examples of real-world realizers of cognitive
processes (Clark 2010b).
To conclude: Cognitive System and the Extended Mind raises some
significant challenges for EMT and provides powerful support for a more
traditional orthodox approach to cognitive science. The book is not for
everyone: it is densely written and some of its arguments remained cryptic at
least to this reader. It nevertheless succeeds in making a strong case for an
embedded perspective even if Rupert’s opponents are unlikely to be
convinced. Rupert’s arguments remain undecisive. He fails to point to any wayout from the impasse in which the debate between embedded and extended has
fallen that favors Rupert’s embedded conservatism over the more radical ideas
of friends of the extended mind.

REFERENCES

Adams, F., & Aizawa, K. (2009). The Bounds of Cognition. Oxford: Wiley
Blackwell.
Clark, A. (2001). Mindware: An Introduction to the Philosophy of Cognitive
Science. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Clark, A. (2003). Natural Born Cyborgs, Mind, Technologies and the Future
of Human Intelligence. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Clark, A. (2008) Supersizing the Mind: Embodiment, Action and Cognitive
Extension. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Clark, A.(2010a). Memento’s revenge: The extended mind, extended. In R.
Menary (Ed.), The Extended Mind, (pp. 43-66). Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Clark, A. (2010b). Finding the mind. International Journal of Philosophical
Studies, 1-15.
Hutchins, E. (2010). Cognitive ecology. Topics in Cognitive Science, 2(4),
705-715.
Menary, R. (2007). Cognitive Integration: Mind and Cognition Unbounded.
New York: Palgrave Macmillian.
Menary, R. (2010). The Extended Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Book Review – Cognitive Systems and the Extended Mind

289

Rowlands, M. (2009). Extended cognition and the mark of the cognitive.
Philosophical Psychology, 22(1), 1-19. [2008]
Rowlands, M. (2010). The New Science of the Mind: From Extended Mind to
Embodied Phenomenology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Rupert, R. (2004). Challenges to the hypothesis of extended cognition. The
Journal of Philosophy, 101(8), 389-428.
Rupert, R. (2010). Extended cognition and the priority of cognitive systems.
Cognitive Systems Research, 11(4), 343-356.
Sprevak, M. (2009). Extended cognition and functionalism. Journal of
Philosophy, 106(9), 503-527.
Sutton, J. (2010). Exograms and interdisciplinarity: history, the extended
mind, and the civilizing process. In R. Menary (Ed)., The Extended
Mind, (pp.189-225). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sutton, J, Harris, C., Keil, P., & Barnier, A. (2010). The psychology of
memory, extended cognition, and socially distributed remembering.
Phenom Cogn Sci, 9(4), 521-560.
Tribble, E., & Keene, N. (2010). Cognitive Ecologies and the History of
Remembering: Religion and Education in Early Modern England.
London: Palgrave.
Weiskopf, D. (2010a). The Goldilocks problem and extended cognition.
Cognitive Systems Research, 11(4), 313-323.
Weiskopf, D. (2010b). Review of Cognitive Integration: Mind and Cognition
Unbounded. Mind, 119(474), 515-519.
Wheeler, M.(2005). Reconstructing the Cognitive World. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Wheeler, M. (2010). In defence of extended functionalism. In R. Menary
(Ed.), The Extended Mind, (pp. 245-270). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Wheeler, M. (forthcoming). Extended X: Recarving the Biological and
Cognitive Joints of Nature. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Wheeler, M., & Clark, A. (1999). Genic representation: Reconciling content
and causal complexity. Br J Philos Sci, 50(1), 103-135.

290

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Wilson, R. (1994). Wide Computationalism. Mind, 103(411), 351-72.

Book Review

Embodied Cognition
Laurence Shapiro
Routledge, London, 2010

Andrea Danielli*

andrea.danielli@collegiodimilano.it
1. THE BOOK AND ITS MERITS
Shapiro has the extraordinary merit of analyzing a highly debated subject, as
embodied cognition, with honesty and cold blood. He is able to disentangle
fascinating views comparing all the supportive arguments and experimental
evidences without prejudices.
The structure of the book is very clear and effective in organizing the large
literature with all its trends; embodiment is decomposed over three themes:
conceptualization, replacement, and constitution. Conceptualization gives
accordance to the idea that «the properties of an organism’s body limit or
constrain the concepts an organism can acquire» (p. 4). The concept of
replacement bases on this claim: «an organism’s body in interaction with its
environment replaces the need for representational processes thought to have
been at the core of cognition» (p. 4), finally constitution assert that «the body
or world plays a constitutive rather than merely causal role in cognitive
processing».
Of course it is a choice with some arbitrariness, as in the case of including
system dynamics in the replacement theme. Certainly dynamicists discard
representations and insist on the coupling between brain, body and the
environment, but we see several exception as Van Gelder and Port’s moderate
claim «a wide variety of aspects of dynamical models can be regarded as having
a representational status: these include states, attractors, trajectories,
bifurcations, and parameter settings» (Van Gelder and Port 1995, my
emphasis), as well as Edelman and Izhikevich (2008) that analyze in their

* University of Paris 1 Panthéon-Sorbonne

292

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

model only brain dynamics, with no regard to environment. Another reason to
be cautious resides in the great novelty of system dynamics: their conceptual
and mathematical tools. These tools are not extendable to all the embodiment
paradigm: in terms of set theory, between embodiment and system dynamics
we have an intersection, not an inclusion.
2. SOME (LITTLE) CRITICISM
I found disputable most part of the chapter devoted to cognitive sciences: it is
too brief, only twenty pages, it holds on old case histories, with no historical
treatment at all. Some remarks about cognitive sciences’ origins: without a
brief account of behaviorism it is difficult to understand the novelty, and I
would had like just a few words about functionalism. For what it concerns case
histories, why is Shapiro talking only about Newell and Simon 1961’s research,
when we progressed through fuzzy logic, heuristics, intelligent agents, data
mining? In this strange arbitrariness, Shapiro did not talk of object recognition
(Marr, Tarr, Biederman), nor language acquisition (generative grammar is the
best didactical example to explain cognitive sciences).
Finally, Shapiro should had invested more time to talk about
representations, moving from classical treatment and penetrating the
neuroscientific approach as did Bechtel (2008).
3. SIMULATION
When talking about conceptualization, Shapiro admits that bodily
characteristics may well be simulated by an algorithm, and this induces him to
conclude: «embodiment is not inconsistent with computationalism» (p. 93).
Unluckily, when examining the envatment argument, which opens the
possibility to generalize this statement, Shapiro reduces its range to a lesser
extent.
That is a pity: simulation is a clear concern for embodied cognition,
because it shifts attention from the body to the brain, where information is
really processed. As in phantom limb syndrome, what counts is not the origin
of information (that may not exist), but its elaboration. I believe that simulating
the brain itself discloses the opportunity of a computationalism without
representations, indeed dynamicists use software to model brain at neural
level. These are the early steps to make neural mechanisms’ simulation a means

Book Review – Embodied Cognition

293

to shed light on information processing.
4.

COMPETING PARADIGMS

Is embodied cognition a unified body of knowledge, a new promising
paradigm? I do not think so, and I agree with Shapiro conclusions, as he finds
conceptualization and replacement loosing the challenge with cognitive
sciences. In fact, the real changes will arrive from neurosciences, especially
when we will be able to correctly read brain coding, using fluorescent optical
imaging, in vivo single cell recording, or new nanotechnological techniques
still at conceptual development. New data will oblige us to change definitely
our old assumptions. I am not proposing to quite our theoretical attitude,
waiting for brute powerful solutions, but I do not share this author’s optimistic
claim «work on Conceptualization is ongoing, and neuroscientific findings
promise to energize some of its basic assumptions» (p. 210). The use of
neuroscientific knowledge seems an improper attempt to revitalize a gloomy
paradigm. Instead of this risky strategy, philosophers shall focus on
epistemology of the cognitive sciences, dissecting methods and conceptual
tools.
A simple comparison between different paradigms, both diachronic and
synchronic, allows us to see at the same time the inadequacy and fragmentation
of the cognitive domains of research. Indeed, every cognitive paradigm works
well over few cognitive capacities: computationalism started with problem
solving, connectionism is good at describing learning mechanism from
complex patterns, embodiment is perfect at explaining action and motion
control. When we try to extend those paradigms beyond the border they fail
completely their explicatory mission. I would have liked if Shapiro had
developed this statement further to account for this fiasco: «I think that an
effort to cover all the evidence under a single umbrella is not likely to succeed»
(p. 2).

REFERENCES

Bechtel, W. (2008). Mental Mechanisms: Philosophical Perspectives on
Cognitive Neuroscience. New York: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

294

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Izhikevich, B. E., & Edelman, G. M. (2008). Large-scale model of mammalian
thalamocortical systems. PNAS, 105(9), 3593-3598.
Van Gelder, T., & Port, R. F. (1995). Mind as Motion. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.

Book Review

Siamo davvero liberi?
Le neuroscienze e il mistero del libero arbitrio
M. De Caro, A.Lavazza and G. Sartori (Eds.)
Codice Edizioni, Torino, 2010

Giuseppe Vicari*

giuseppevicari@unipa.it
The book focuses on the impact of neuroscience on our conception of free will
as the capacity of an agent of rational self-determination given a set of possible
alternative courses of action (pp. IX, 111): a theme which is a core part of the
more general issue whether the central traits of human beings as biologically
embodied and socially embedded mindful, rational, morally responsible agents
can be adequately located inside a naturalistic conceptual framework, or if the
development of neuroscience will force us to get rid of them.
The two parts of the work – “The fall of the ancient certainties” and
“Theoretical horizons and social perspectives” – review the relevant results of
scientific investigations and discuss their theoretical and social implications,
together with a critical discussion of the interpretation of the empirical
evidence.
The well-known starting point is given by Libet’s studies of the neural
mechanisms underlying the production of voluntary movements, where
subjects are required to perform a simple wrist movement whenever they feel
the desire to do so and to report the onset of the conscious decision by
indicating the position of a dot revolving on a clock located in front of them.
This setting allowed Libet to compare the onset of conscious decision with:
a) the onset of the “readiness potential”, the increased electric activity in
the supplementary premotor cortex which precedes voluntary
movements and is detected through EEG; and

* University of Palermo

296

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

b) the onset of the movement, identified through electromyography.
The readiness potential starts 350 ms before the conscious decision takes
place. It seems, then, that the conscious decision is causally inert with respect
to the performance of the movement. In fact, so the reasoning goes, the
conscious decision is made only after the onset of the relevant (neural) causal
chain: therefore, in short, the decision has not been made by the subject, but
rather by “his/her” brain.
As John-Dylan Haynes points out this methodology can be criticized with
regard to both the reliability of subjective reports as measures of the onset of
the conscious decision1 and with respect to the assumption that the readiness
potential is a causally sufficient antecedent of the action. The latter point, in
particular, is due to the fact that Libet’s studies focused only on the
supplementary motor area. Moreover, the experiment tests only one of the
variables involved in conscious decision making – the “when”, but not the
“what” of the action.
The subjects of Haynes’ study choose whether to push the left or right
button whenever they want while looking at a series of letters appearing on the
screen located in front of them. When the task is performed the subject
chooses the letter seen while he/she was making up his/her mind. In this way
the onset of the conscious decision can be determined without relying on the
possible distortions of subjective timing. The finding of the study is that the
frontopolar cortex contains information predictive of the content of the
decision from seven to ten seconds before the decision is made, with an
accuracy of 60%. It seems, then, that a set of unconscious neurobiological
processes takes place over time before the conscious decision is made, and that
it contributes to prepare decisions experienced by the subject as free and as
occurring in a single moment in time (p. 16).
What is the role played by conscious intentions in this framework?
According to Daniel Wegner folk psychology cannot account for the
complexity of behavior as it is revealed in borderline cases such as automatisms
(like anarchic-hand syndrome, where apparently goal-directed movements are
produced against the subject’s conscious will) and delusions of control, where
subjects think of themselves as authors of actions that they have not, in fact,

1

99.

See Filippo Tempia’s contribution for an excellent discussion of this point, especially pp. 92-

Book Review – Siamo davvero liberi?

297

done.2 These cases suggest that thought and action could result from distinct
mechanisms (pp. 26ff.), where the ones responsible for behavior would drive
online performance of actions, while the thought-producing mechanisms
would just give the agent a first-person prediction, or indication, of what is
going to happen (pp. 40-41). From a causal point of view the will is nothing
but a useful illusion, an “emotion of authority” (pp. 46-48) allowing the
organism to distinguish between what he/she is doing from what other
organisms are doing in a shared physical and social environment.
Mental causation is, then, “narrative” or “apparent” (p. 39): according to
the studies reviewed by Rigoni and Brass (pp. 73-75) a conscious intention of
acting would be just a process of inferential reconstruction partially based on
events taking place after the performance of the action. In a typical experiment
(p. 73), TMS application over the presupplementary motor area (PRE-SMA)
200 ms after the action causes the subject’s perception of the onset of the
intention to shift backward in time, while the perceived performance of action
shifts forward in time. This would prove that PRE-SMA activity taking place
after the action is relevant for the perception of the intention and, therefore,
for its “construction”.
The second part of the work starts with Filippo Tempia and Roberta De
Monticelli’s different but convergent criticisms of the standard interpretation
of the studies illustrated in the first part.
Tempia points out that the standard interpretation would rely on a dualistic
model of the relationship between conscious and neurobiological processes.
This model would postulate, dualistically, separate and mutually inconsistent
mental and physical causes where the former, if free will and voluntary actions
have to be genuine phenomena, are supposed to occur before and
independently of the latter.
Given this basic dualistic framework, it is obvious that Libet’s results can be
interpreted as a “scandal”: saying that the decision-maker is the brain and not
“you” makes sense only if one assumes that the conscious will is a sort of causa
sui separated and independent from brain processes (pp. 88-90, 100ff.).
Tempia opposes this model to the one exemplified, in physics, by magnetic
fields, where cause and effect are simultaneously realized: an electric discharge

2

Cf. Wegner and Wheatley 1999.

298

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

creates the field which in turn affects the discharge, with cause and effect
simultaneously realized.3
According to this model the neural processes examined by Libet, Haynes
and others do not correlate with conscious will, but rather with other stages of
voluntary action preparation, such as recalling to memory the instructions of
the task or translating these instructions into a motor performance (p. 101).
Moreover, this model would take into account the scientific evidence showing
that emotions play a direct causal role with respect to the modulation of
practical rationality and social interactions (pp. 102ff).4
Of course, that the ontology of mind underlying Libet’s studies is
controversial, and probably contradictory, has already been noted by Dennett
(2003)5 and by those contemporary philosophers of mind interested in the
problem of mental causation, from Donald Davidson to Jaegwon Kim’s
dilemma of causal exclusion.
However, although these criticisms usually lead to materialism as the right
solution of the mind-body problem, we could observe – following the spirit
and, I believe, the letter of Tempia’s proposal – that inferring
epiphenomenalism from a neural explanation of behavior reveals an implicit a
priori acceptance of dualistic categories, such that it would be impossible that
consciousness itself is a higher-level brain process. We might say, as Searle
once put it, that materialism (the denial of any ontological and/or causal reality
to the mind as such) is in this sense «the finest flower of dualism» (Searle
1992, p. 26).6

3

Similarly, John Searle has argued that the mechanism of bottom-up, no time gap causation
exemplified in physics and biology gives us a general theoretical model of the ontology of mind (which
he dubs “biological naturalism”) which takes into account both the ontological irreducibility of the
subjectivity of mind and its causal reducibility. For a systematic analysis of this model even with
respect to the problem of mental causation, see Vicari 2008.
4
Cf. Damasio 1994 and 1999.
5
Cf. De Monticelli’s contribution, p. 106.
6
More recently Searle (2001, pp. 288-289) has integrated Roger Sperry’s model of top-down
causation within his “biological naturalism”. He also points out, however, that the uncritical use of
metaphors such as “bottom-up” and “top-down” causation could be misleading in this context
because it suggests the existence of mutually separated and independent “mental” and “physical”
causal chains and obscure the fact that consciousness is a “system feature” of the brain (Searle 2001,
p. 287). As such, consciousness can affect the behavior of the elements of which the system is
composed without postulating any breakdown in the causal closure of physics. For an analysis of the
notion of “systemic causation”, see Di Lorenzo Ajello 2009.

Book Review – Siamo davvero liberi?

299

According to Andrea Lavazza and Luca Sammicheli a dualistic model of
mind would implicitly shape our legal systems. Concepts such as “being
chargeable”, “being responsible”, “being guilty” are grounded on the
assumption of free will. Neuropsychological tests are already used in criminal
trials to establish the ability of a person to understand and will under the
presupposition that free will exists, though it might break down.7 But what
happens if neuroscience shows that “the real decision-maker” is just a set of
“material causes” such as automatic neural mechanisms? Again, if the
juxtaposition of “I” and “my brain” holds, then the notion of free will is in deep
problems (p. 153). It is unclear, for example, whether we would be entitled to
hold a retributive view of legal punishment or if we should see crimes as the
result of a “malfunctioning” of a system and, then, think of the guilty person
simply as a damaged element that must be kept away from society.
While Tempia puts forward an ontologically and scientifically motivated
criticism of Libet’s results, Roberta De Monticelli works out a
phenomenological criticism.8
The materialist argues that every event has a causally sufficient antecedent
that determines it, and since actions are events, then actions are determined.
But this argument leaves out the fact that actions are not experienced as
determined events, but rather as motivated acts. This experience, she argues,
reflects an ontological difference between, for example, falling asleep and
going to sleep: the former case is determined by a causally sufficient
antecedent, but the latter case – the action case – requires that the agent takes
a position toward his/her motives and makes them effective through his/her
decision (p. 121). But then, if a decision is the act through which a person
makes his/her motives effective through an exercise of his/her “positionality”,
it seems that an unmotivated decision, like the ones typical of the experimental
settings, is not a decision at all (pp. 124ff.).9
Mario De Caro argues against the re-actualization of emotivism as a
reductive explanation of morality put forward by Chapman and colleagues
(Chapman et al. 2009), who claim that “moral disgust” is strongly associated

7

Cf. Gnoato and Sartori’s contribution.
For a criticism of Wegner based on his misleading description of – or lack of attention to – the
phenomenology of agency, see Bayne 2006.
9
Cf. Tempia’s contribution, pp. 97-99.
8

300

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

with the evolutionarily more primitive emotional reaction of disgust that one
has, for example, while standing in front of a rotten food.
The claim is plausible provided that one does not interpret it – as Chapman
and colleagues apparently do – as the claim that the evolutionary account of the
mechanisms enabling morality offers ipso facto an explanation of its contents.
This is a stronger thesis, even because it implies the reduction of the normative
concepts of morality to the non-normative concepts of emotional reactions and
evolutionary neuropsychology.
For example, if moral judgments were reducible to emotional reactions we
could not understand why two persons, endowed with different cultural
systems, could react in quite different ways (like moral disgust and moral
approval) to the same event and context: in cases like these the order of
explanation could plausibly go from culture to physiology, while it would be
useless to explain the different moral reactions in terms of emotional reactions
because the latter should in turn be explained by something else capable of
taking into account the normative character of moral judgments (pp. 137139).
Morality requires the possibility of a detached look at our own emotional
and instinctive reactions because without it we would not be able to understand
that a given reaction is not only wrong with respect to a certain context, but
also, in a deeper sense, morally, normatively, rationally unacceptable. And the
deep reason of this fact is that, as De Caro also argues, morality requires the
articulation of reasons justifying a moral judgment in the language game of
asking and giving reasons, while nothing similar seem to be required to
emotional disgust – especially when food-related (pp. 142-145).
De Caro’s argument, at least as I understand it, does not deny, for example,
the significance of Damasio’s analysis of Phyneas Gage’s case as showing that
emotions play an active causal role in shaping the rationality of our social
interactions. Rather it points out the difference between a condition enabling
some capacity to work, and the reductive identification of the capacity itself
with its causal precondition.
Being characterized by a multidisciplinary approach, this book offers the
reader a highly detailed while accessible picture of the problems, of the
different theoretical views, of the arguments supporting the views and of their
implications for our self-conception. As such it provides the reader with a
useful tool to find one’s way in an extremely stimulating, rich and complex
debate. Whether we are free remains an empirically and conceptually open

Book Review – Siamo davvero liberi?

301

question, as some of the essays here collected convincingly argue, and, as
Adina Roskies argue in her contribution, perhaps neuroscience will just
explain the mystery without explaining the phenomenon away.

REFERENCES

Bayne, T. (2006). Phenomenology and the feeling of doing: Wegner on the
conscious will. In S. Pockett, W. Banks & S. Gallagher (Eds.), Does
Consciousness Cause Behavior? (pp. 169-185). Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Chapman, H. A., Kim, D. A., Susskind, J. M., & Anderson, A. K. (2009). In
Bad Taste: Evidence for the Oral Origins of Moral Disgusts. Science,
323(5918), 1222-1226.
Damasio, A.(1994). Descartes’ Error: Emotion, Reason and the Human Brain.
New York: Gosset/Putnam Press.
Damasio, A. (1999). The Feeling of What Happens. San Diego, CA:
Harcourt.
Dennett, D. (2003). Freedom Evolves. New York: Viking.
Di Lorenzo Ajello, F. (2009). La mente in azione. Introduction to J. R. Searle
(U. Perone, Ed.), Coscienza, linguaggio e società, (pp. 9-17). Torino:
Rosenberg & Sellier.
Searle, J. R. (1992). The Rediscovery of the Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Searle, J. R. (2001). Rationality in Action. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Vicari, G. (2008). Beyond Conceptual Dualism. Ontology of Consciousness,
mental Causation, and Holism in John R. Searle’s Philosophy of Mind.
Amsterdam/New York: Rodopi.
Wegner, D. M., & Wheatley, T. P. (1999). Apparent mental causation: Sources
of the experience of will. American Psychologist, 54(7), 480-492.

302

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Book Review

Out of Our Heads: Why You Are Not Your Brain,
and Other Lessons from the Biology of Consciousness
Alva Noë

Hill and Young, New York, 2009
Marco Spina*

mar.spina@gmail.com
As the author notes at the beginning of the book,
we live in a time of growing enthusiasm for the brain. Perception, memory,
pleasure or displeasure, intelligence, morality […] the brain is supposed to be
the organ responsible for all of it. It is common belief that even consciousness,
the Holy Grail of philosophy and science, will soon become the object of a
neural explanation. (p. XI)

As Patricia Churchland, one of the most important experts of philosophy of
neuroscience, has noted: «the weight of evidence now implies that it is the
brain, rather than some non-physical stuff, that feels, thinks, decides»
(Churchland 2002, p. 1).
However, after decades of common endeavors on the part of
neuroscientists, psychologists and philosophers, the only point that seems non
controversial about the role of the brain in making us consciousness – that is,
the way it brings upon sensations, feelings, and subjectivity – is that we know
nothing about it. This is what the American philosopher Alva Noë states in his
book. In this book the author deals with the problem of consciousness,
suggesting a radical solution: abandoning the assumption that, ever since
Descartes, confines the mind within the brain.
Thus, the idea that the only properly scientific inquiry of consciousness is
the one that identifies it in the events occurring within the nervous system
collapses. Accordingly, Noë suggests a new thesis consisting in the claim that,
in order to understand consciousness – meaning the fact that we think, feel and

* Paris-Sorbonne University (Paris IV)

304

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

that a world manifests itself in front of us – we need to look at a larger system of
which the brain is only element. Consciousness is not something the brain
achieves on its own. Consciousness requires the joint operation of brain, body
and world.
Two notable aspects surface from these lines: the first one concerns what
has been sometimes called the “gap” or “explanatory blank” (which scientists
haven’t yet been able to fill) between neural states and conscious experience.
The central thesis of this book is to recognize that the brain, in itself, is not a
source of experience or cognition. Experience and cognition are not bodily byproducts. The second aspect sheds light on the new task of philosophy: in
order to advance in the understanding of consciousness one must abandon the
internal neural micro-analyses and look instead at how each of us, in his
wholeness, carries forth his life in the surrounding world, with it and in
response to it.
This is why Alva Noë tries to show the assumption that the current research
in neuroscience is badly mistaken. Indeed, as the first chapter of the book
shows, the brain (on its own) doesn’t explain what we are:
my consciousness now – with all its particular quality for me now – depends not
only on what is happening in my brain but also on my history and my current
position in and interaction with the wider world. (p. 4)

In light of these considerations, the author assumes a critical attitude
towards all those theories, scientific or philosophical, that deal with “the
problem of other minds” (the way we decide who or what is conscious) starting
from a theoretical point of view. The attack is directed especially toward the
theory of mind, accused of treating consciences like something private and
hidden. There is an experiential and essentially practical reason for our faith in
the existence of the minds of others. No “sane” person could take seriously the
idea that our knowledge of other minds is merely hypothetical. However weak
our proof that others possess a mind may be, it would be altogether absurd to
think that because of this our commitment to the existence of others’ minds
fails.
A simple example is enough: Noë notes, in this regard, that the
relationship between the young child and whoever takes care of him is truly
paradigmatic. There is no theoretical distance between the child and the
caregiver. The child does not question whether his mother is an animated
being or not. For the child the living consciousness of his mother is simply

Book Review – Out of Our Heads

305

something present, like her warmth or her breath; it is, in part, what animates
their relationship. The mind of the mother and that of the child manifest each
other in the direction that is made up of tenderness and cuddling. This is why,
if one wants to speaks of a commitment to the alive consciousness of others
here, one should speak not of a cognitive commitment but, rather, of a
practical commitment.
This statement sheds light on two very important aspects of Noë’s
provocative and stimulating theoretical suggestion: the first one is that like the
child in his relationship to the mother, we are involved in one another; it’s our
living together that assures our living conscience of other people. The second
consideration regards the clarification of the field of enquiry within which the
philosopher’s speculation occurs. Indeed, Noë shows that there is something
paradoxical in the science of the mind: scientific knowledge requires a
detached attitude, but the mind become object of study only if we assume a
different attitude, that is, a much more involved one.
The example of the relationship between mother and young child illustrates
well that the perspective that we need, from which the meaningful, non
mechanical nature of conscious life can come into focus, is none other than the
biological perspective. To understand an organism, we must take up a
perspective on its life that is at once narrative and historical and also ecological.
This shows that the question of consciousness arises for living beings and it
arises for them because living beings exhibit at least primitive agency. To study
mind, as with life itself, we need to keep the whole organism in its natural
environmental setting if focus. Neuroscience matters, as does chemistry and
physics. But from these lower-level or internal perspectives, our subject matter
loses resolutions for us.
The aim of this book is therefore to convince the reader that there is
something perverse in believing that we are our brain, that the world we have
experience of is within us. We don’t need to have the world inside us: we have
access to the world that surrounds us; we are open to it. The idea according to
which we are our brain is not something scientists have learnt; instead, it is a
prejudice that they take from home into their laboratories.
Once any type of prejudice has collapsed, at the end of the book, Noë
outlines a new conception of conscience: the substratum of our life and our
experience is nothing but the world we live in. The entire world and the nature
of our situation within it are the material of a theory of conscious life. In this
story, the brain has the leading role, no doubt. But the task of the brain is not to

306

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

“generate” consciousness. Consciousness is not this type of thing.
Consciousness is not a thing. This is what a genuine biological approach to the
study of human mind and human nature teaches us. So if we want to understand
consciousness we must turn our backs on the orthodox conception according
to which consciousness is something that happens within us and we must make
progress in the creation of an authentic ecological theory of ourselves. This is
why, it is now clear that consciousness is achieved in action, by us, thanks to
our situation in and access to a world we know around us.
Thus this book – rich of reflections and argumentations, lucid and
systematic in examining (and confuting) the different positions on the subject –
don’t fail to make readers reflect and to provoke discussions really helping to
understand in which way the encounter between our brain and our experiences
allow us to become the people we are.

REFERENCES

Churchland, P. S. (2002). Brain-Wise: Studies in Neurophilosophy.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Book Review

Radical Embodied Cognitive Science
Anthony Chemero
MIT Press, Cambridge (MA), 2009

Silvano Zipoli Caiani*

silvano.zipoli@unimi.it
Three tenets make Chemero’s embodied cognitive science “radical”, as stated
in the title: anti-representationalism, direct perception and realism. The
combination of these three assumptions offers something excitingly new to
several fields of philosophy such as phenomenology, theory of perception and
epistemology of cognitive science. This book also represents an intriguing
challenge to many established ideas in philosophy of mind, especially
representationalism and computationalism. Indeed, Chemero’s book is an
ambitious work, aiming to become in the field of embodied psychology what
Fodor’s famous book The Language of Thought was for computational
psychology. Accordingly, a great deal of the book is devoted to dismantling the
Fodorian paradigm.
The book is divided into four sections. The first section (chapters 1-2)
introduces the author’s dissatisfaction with traditional arguments in cognitive
science. In the second section (chapters 3-5), Chemero presents an alternative
to representationalism in philosophy of mind, namely, a dynamical approach to
cognition. In section three (chapters 6-7), the author attempts to define
ecological psychology as the background theory for his Radical Embodied
Cognitive Science (hereafter, RECS). Finally, section four (chapters 8-9)
investigates some philosophical consequences of reductionism and realism in
cognitive science. Let me now introduce and comment on each chapter
individually.
Chapter One is a nice introduction to what Chemero calls the “Hegelian
arguments”, that is, arguments based on theoretical posits and no empirical

* University of Milan

308

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

evidence, stating (a priori) that some particular explanatory approach will
certainly fail. According to Chemero, there are currently numerous Hegelian
arguments in the field of cognitive science; it is therefore a field characterized
by several contrasting theoretical frameworks, each aspiring to establish itself
as the main research paradigm, even if it lacks any empirical support. Although
Chemero contrasts such a priori approaches in cognitive sciences, he
encourages theoretical pluralism as a positive condition for the development of
a scientific discipline. Referring to Feyerabend’s epistemological analysis,
Chemero emphasizes the fact that the presence of many competitors enhances
scientists’ ability to deal with the empirical findings of rivals, providing new
potential falsifiers and more refined interpretations.
The second chapter proposes a taxonomy that enables Chemero to frame
his conception within the contemporary debate in philosophy of mind. The
author thus distinguishes between representationalist and eliminativist
approaches to the mind. The former is characterized by the assumption that
there are mental representations that stand for external things in the world.
The latter, on the contrary, assumes that cognition does not mirror the world
and should be understood as a vital function of the animal. Based on this
distinction, Chemero’s conception emerges as the result of an eliminativist
choice where the agent and the environment are intended as two coupled
systems that cannot be modeled as a set of separate parts. Following this line,
Chemero considers the body and the environment as a dynamical system
constituted by variables that change according to mathematical laws. This
makes it possible to account for cognitive processes through differential
equations that pair animal parameters with environmental parameters. Here,
Chemero also introduces Randy Beers’ model of the artificial agent and the
Van Rooij et al. account of imagined actions as two examples of how dynamical
systems have the power to explain different cognitive situations without relying
on the concept of mental representations.
In chapter three Chemero considers different accounts of representation,
presuming Millikan’s conception is representative of the entire field. This
functions as an introduction to Chemero’s argument against
representationalism. It should be noted that Millikan account of representation
is characterized by a teleological approach, which means it can be classified as a
non-radical theory of representation. As such, what Chemero faces is a
definition of representationalism where the question is not simply whether a
neuron, or a portion of the nervous system, codifies for something in the

Book Review – Radical Embodied Cognitive Science

309

world; he aims to show the supremacy of a non-representational approach even
over non-naïve theories of mental representation.
In chapter four Chemero introduces his argument against
representationalism in cognitive science. He initially distinguishes between
two different anti-representationalist stances: the metaphysical and the
epistemological. The metaphysical claim is that nothing in the nature of a
cognitive system is a representation; the epistemological stance, on the other
hand, is that we need not resort to mental representations in order to explain
cognitive processes, without assuming anything about the nature of the
cognitive systems itself. Chemero’s point is that endorsing a metaphysical
stance doesn’t add relevant information to a dynamical account of a cognitive
process. According to Chemero, even if representational accounts of cognitive
systems are possible, that is, even if a cognitive process may be interpreted as
positing a role for representations, they appear superfluous and unnecessary
when a dynamical account is also available. It is effectively an argument of
simplicity (like Ockham's razor), where dynamical descriptions are considered
simpler, more complete accounts of cognitive processes, while mental
representations are considered nothing but redundant entities. According to
this view, a representationalist approach to cognitive systems is superfluous
only when a complete dynamical description has actually been developed, so as
Chemero himself notes, how much of cognition can be accounted without
reference to “representational glosses” is a matter of fact.
According to this empirical characterization, a potential problem for a
dynamical account arises. Given the Humean roots of dynamical cognitive
science, according to which no unobservable entity should have an explanatory
role, one could argue that it doesn’t provide a useful guide to predictions and
new discoveries. In order to face this problem, chapter five is dedicated to a
defense of the heuristic value of anti-representationalism in cognitive science.
With this purpose in mind, Chemero analyzes the Haken-Kelso-Bunz
dynamical model, showing how this framework is able to produce predictive
systems without any reference to mental representations.
In order to make sense of Gibson’s ecological psychology as a theoretical
background for a dynamical and anti-representationalist approach to cognitive
science, chapter six is devoted to introduce the critical notion of direct
perception. In the first part of this section Chemero explicitly acknowledges
his debt to the Turvey-Shaw-Mace approach, which has introduced a new order
in the field of ecological psychology. He thus outlines a philosophical account

310

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

of Gibson’s ecological theory of perception, according to which environment,
information and perception determine one another. In the second part of the
chapter, Chemero tries to overcome the limits of the Turvey-Shaw-Mace
approach (concerning its generalizability and its application to social
information) focusing on the unmediated character of perceptual processes.
The assumption of perception as a direct and unmediated process leads
Chemero to emphasize the animal’s ability to use environmental information to
guide actions without necessarily needing mental representations. Drawing
from this view, chapter seven focuses on a renewed definition of Gibson’s
famous notion of affordance, aiming to make it more clear and sound.
Chemero endorses a notion of affordance that is actually deeply different from
Gibsonian and post-Gibsonian definitions. According to Chemero, affordances
are relationships between the perceiver and the environment and cannot be
reduced to mere properties of the perceived things. More precisely, Chemero
emphasizes the causal role of the perceiver’s motor abilities, arguing that the
agent’s motor repertoire may cause changes in the layout of the available
affordances and that the perception of affordances may changes the way motor
activities are exercised. Accordingly, perception and action cannot be
considered two independent cognitive modules. Rather, perception emerges
as a type of action; furthermore, a great deal of action can be considered
functional to realize perceptive purposes.
Chapter eight turns to the implications of anti-representationalism for
reductionism. Radical reductionism (i.e., physicalism) ignores the ecological
character of perception, confining the entire account of cognition to the
nervous system. Chemero’s RECS focuses primarily on the relationships
between action, perception and environmental information, resisting the
“brain obsession” that frequently inspires reductionism in philosophy of mind.
Chemero also includes in this chapter an analysis of animal exploration based
on a comprehensive review of many published papers on this subject, showing
that the literature often ignores the ecological character of the object employed
in the experiments, and therefore fails to notice their effects on the animal’s
exploratory behaviour.
Finally, in the last chapter of the book, Chemero defends a realist approach
to radical embodied cognitive science. Here, as the author himself notes, the
source of the problem is represented by the notion of affordance and its
dependence upon the perceiver. The question is: can an affordance be
considered an autonomous thing, distinct from the basic furniture of the

Book Review – Radical Embodied Cognitive Science

311

world? According to Chemero, affordances are not something pertaining to the
domain of subjectivity, nor are they mere properties of external reality.
Affordances are relations between the agent’s motor abilities and the features
of the environment (chapter 7). Therefore, their ontological status appears
controversial in light of traditional views such as physicalism or idealism.
Referencing to Hawking’s entity realism, Chemero argues that affordances are
genuine theoretical entities that acquire their value of reality in light of their
role in actual experimental practice. This constitutes what can be considered a
pragmatic stance about scientific realism that makes it possible to disentangle
affordance perception from the domain of subjectivity, without committing
RECS to an untenable metaphysical notion of reality.
Let me conclude this review with some brief remarks about Chemero’s
book. The work is certainly a provocative presentation of an alternative to the
mainstream representationalism in cognitive science. It provides both an
introductive and a “technical” approach to what cognitive science might look
like without reference to inner mental representations and computations.
Accordingly, Chemero’s book is accessible to readers with different
backgrounds and from different areas of expertise. Philosophers such as
phenomenologists and epistemologists will find many intriguing suggestions
concerning the development of a theory of perceptive experience linking
traditional pragmatism, ecological psychology and contemporary enactivism.
At the same time, scientists confident with questions involving the modeling of
perception will find this book an incisive attempt to establish a new framework
in cognitive science. The many experimental examples contained in the book
represent a challenge to scholars who are still skeptical about a cognitive
science that affords no role for mental representations.
As for RECS potentially becoming a mainstream framework in cognitive
science in the near future, that depends on the empirical adequacy of its
theoretical model. As Chemero himself recognizes in his endorsement of a
pluralistic stance in epistemology, RECS is not the sole true account of the
mind. Yet it is certainly the most comprehensive conception that links the mind
to the body and the ecological order.

312

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Commentary

From the Puzzle of Qualia to the Problem of Sensation
Phenomenology of Perception
Maurice Merleau-Ponty

Roberta Lanfredini*
lanfredini@unifi.it

Phenomenology of Perception is the expression of Merleau-Ponty’s
epistemological and methodological perspective, whereas The Visible and the
Invisible represents its natural ontological extension.
Merleau-Ponty’s epistemology considerably sets a limit of some conceptual
tools employed in Husserl’s phenomenology, such as those expressed by the
notions of intentionality, constitution, reflection, transcendental, and gives
stability to others such as those represented by the notions of passivity,
genesis, motivation, sedimentation, noticeably extending their meaning. In
many respects, concepts with a critical role in Husserl’s phenomenological
epistemology find in Merleau-Ponty a deeply different orientation. As
Husserl’s phenomenology, Merleau-Ponty’s epistemological project is
radically anti-reductionist and deeply anti-naturalistic.
Scientific points of view, according to which my existence is a moment of the
world’s, are always both naïve and at the same time dishonest, because they
take for granted, without explicitly mentioning it, the other point of view,
namely that of consciousness, through which from the outset a world forms
itself around me and begins to exist for me. To return to the things themselves
is to return to that world which precedes knowledge, of which knowledge
always speaks, and in relation to which every scientific schematization is an
abstract and derivative sign-language, as is geography in relation to the
countryside in which we have learned beforehand what a forest, a prairie or a
river is. (p. IX)

However, differently from the Husserlian phenomenology, Merleau-Ponty’s
anti-reductionist attitude and anti-naturalism don’t involve the suspension, or

* University of Florence

314

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

the bracketing, of the natural stance. In a different way, the anti-naturalism
professed by Merleau-Ponty has the aim to recover and preserve the natural
stance, as well as a space for the pre-categorical thought, within which the
consciousness, by its nature and genesis, inhabits.
In other words, according to Merleau-Ponty, differently from Husserl, the
naturalization and the natural stance don’t follow the same way. The
naturalization implies a process of conversion, that is, the translation of
something derivative and secondary (for example the phenomenal and
qualitative world) in something considered epistemologically basic and
grounded (for example the world described by the physics). Instead, the natural
stance reveals the necessity of an immersion in the broad context of nature, a
process required if we want to give a full and authentic account of these
“things” that phenomenology aims to describe from a morphological point of
view.
The exclusion of the natural stance involves a description of the things very
similar to that provided by a map, which is to a particular region what
geography is to a landscape. Accordingly, the segregation of the natural
dimension, in addition to the rebuttal of a natural attitude, risks to drain the
content of the experienced thing, showing the image of a disembodied object,
deprived of its flesh, that is a mere functional element with no depth.
In philosophy of mind, the rebuttal of the naturalistic stance, as well as the
assumption of a natural attitude involve a departure from the supposition that
the physical states, e.g., the neuronal states, are primary and irreducible
elements. At the same time this involves a departure from a kind of antireductionism which, on the contrary, considers the states of consciousness as
primary and irreducible, that is, as free elements independent from any natural
position.
It is interesting to observe that the anti-reductionism, as stated by Husserl,
implies the assumption of a reductive stance. Definitely, in certain respects,
the concept of phenomenological reduction has a meaning contrasting the
concept of reduction used in philosophy of mind. The phenomenological
reduction requires giving up, or at least taking distance from, the natural
stance (the scientific and object-oriented attitude) emphasized by reductionism
in philosophy of mind.
However, as paradoxical as it may sound, the phenomenological reduction
and the reduction in philosophy of mind share a critical aspect that justify, at
least in part, their homonymy: both of them affirm the necessity of a radical

Commentary – From the Puzzle of Qualia to the Problem of Sensation

315

departure from the natural stance (in the case of phenomenology) and from the
manifest image (in the case of philosophy of mind). Starting from this shared
necessity, the phenomenological approach and the reductionism in philosophy
of mind turn into two antithetical paths: the former establishes the priority of
conscious experience and considers the physical states – the neuronal states
included – secondary and derivative; while the latter establishes the priority of
the physical states and considers the states of consciousness as derivative and
according to some of its defenders not existing and illusory, therefore
eliminable.
Assuming this point of view, the absence in Merleau-Ponty’s works of a
process of reduction – also of the phenomenological one – is perfectly clear.
To endorse a philosophical project characterized by a radical anti-naturalism is
not to deny the natural character of the consciousness. In this basic
methodological distinction a critical change of paradigm can be summed up
noticing that on the one hand the exigency of Husserl’s phenomenology was
that of disentangling the subject from the world, and that on the other MerleauPonty’s phenomenology is concerned to completely immerge the subject in the
world, restoring the natural bilateralism between thought and the environment
that an original phenomenological description should always preserve.
The reflective subject of the Husserlian phenomenology, that is, the subject
conceived as the condition of possibility, rather than the bearer, of an actual
experience is the result of an analytic reconstruction and not of an original
phenomenological description. Differently from this paradigm, in MerleauPonty’s phenomenology there is no absolute priority for an impenetrable and
objective reality, as well as there is no absolute priority for the idea of a subject
conceived as a constitutive power, that is, as an invulnerable inwardness that
can be reached through a backward walk.
Merleau-Ponty transforms the correlative analysis, typical of the Husserlian
phenomenology within which the structure of consciousness is the basic
element, in a bilateral analysis according to which both the subjective and the
objective poles require a foundational priority. Accordingly, he extends the
methodological approach from a perspective that privileges the external frame
of the experience, to a perspective that fills that frame with an actual content.
In this view, the constitutive structure, or the reflective component, is
progressively placed side by side with the domain of the unreflecting; the
transparency of representation with the opacity of the feeling; the expressible
character of the structured datum shows the relevance of the dumb, tacit,

316

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

unexpressed and inexpressible nature that the experience inexorably brings
with itself.
This is a powerful change of perspective that makes it possible to transform
puzzles in philosophy of mind (as in the case of the “question” of qualia), in
“genuine” problems. On the other side, as noticed by Kuhn, the conversion of
a puzzle in a problem becomes possible only when a change in the theoretical
and conceptual background happens, a change that opens the door to a
different definition of the problem and not to other solutions of the same
puzzle.
This conceptual change is evident in the way Merleau-Ponty faces the
problem of sensation as opposed to the puzzle of qualia. As it is well known,
because of their subjective nature (intrinsic, private, and hardly reducible to a
third person perspective) and their essentially qualitative character (direct,
immediate, and so ineffable), qualia are considered in philosophy of mind the
only and genuine hard problem. But Merleau-Ponty’s phenomenology adds
another trait, maybe the most important, to those that can be considered the
standard features usually ascribed to qualia. Qualia are essentially and not
accidentally associated to the subject’s embodied dimension, that is, to the
possession of a lived body contrasting the mere possession of a physical body
(as in Descartes’ philosophy). The introduction of the body establishes the role
of the natural subject, that is, the role of the embodied, situated subject as
regard to which both the notions of reduction in philosophy of mind and the
phenomenological reduction appear to be inadequate.
On the other side, the introduction of the body determines an
epistemological shift from the abovementioned puzzle of qualia to the problem
of sensation.
There are two ways of being mistaken about quality: one is to make it into an
element of consciousness, when in fact it is an object for consciousness, to treat
it as an incommunicable impression, whereas it always has a meaning; the other
is to think that this meaning and this object, at the level of quality, are fully
developed and determinate. (p. 6)

According to Merleau-Ponty, it is necessary to consider the question of
sensitivity as a genuine problem: this is not a question concerning the
possession of inert qualities or contents defined by well marked boundaries.
Contrasting the identification of the notion of sensation with that of qualia
assumed as a reply to external stimuli, the sensitivity is not something
determined, instantaneous and detailed, but it is vague, ambiguous and

Commentary – From the Puzzle of Qualia to the Problem of Sensation

317

indeterminate. On the other side, for Merleau-Ponty, it is not correct to
consider the domain of sensitivity as intrinsically formless and structureless
except when a theoretical and meaningful system intervenes to check the rush
and chaotic sphere of sensorial stimuli. This is the idea of a great part of post
neo-empiricist epistemology, according to which, to be accessible the datum
should be interpreted and embedded in a circle of hypotheses and background
theories. On the contrary, according to Merleau-Ponty, the sensible datum is
not tied to a theoretical and conceptual apparatus, but shows its own a proper
structure, even if flowing and ambiguous.
The sensible field – that qualities inhabit – far from representing the
immediate result of an external stimulus, or a mere reply to an external
situation, depends on specific variables such as for example the biological
sense of the situation. This makes the sensible experience a critical process
analogous to that of procreation, or that of breathing and growth. Things are
for Merleau-Ponty flesh and not mere bodies, they are not a mere extensions or
bodily surfaces covered by specific qualities. Accordingly, sensations are not a
mere reception of qualities but represent a living inherence, they don’t offer
inert qualities but active and dynamic properties characterized by a proper
value related to their functional role in preserving our life.
The pure quale would be given to us only if the world were a spectacle and
one’s own body a mechanism with which some impartial mind made itself
acquainted. Sense experience, on the other hand, invests the quality with vital
value, grasping it first in its meaning for us, for that heavy mass which is our
body, whence it comes about that it always involves a reference to the body.
(Merleau-Ponty, p. 60)

The identification between qualia and sensitivity derives from a process of
alienation suffered by the concept of body that inevitably leads to the leveling
off of both the notion of consciousness and the notion of experiential thing.
Contrasting this view, the embodied thought becomes the result of a circular
conception of experience and knowledge. This is a conception within which
the experience assumes an insight that nor the Husserlian notion of plena, nor
the notion of qualia in philosophy of mind, are able to show. In the first case
because the former notion is too close to an extensional idea of the qualitative
element. In the second, because the latter notion is too close to an empirical
notion of sensible datum and to a physiologic and mechanistic interpretation of
sensation.

318

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

The idea of sensation conceived as a filling quality and the idea of sensation
assumed as the phenomenal and qualitative reply to an external stimulus,
contribute to leveling out the domain of experience, draining and atrophying
its own sense, that is, the idea of sensitivity as a living rhythm. A sensitivity that,
in order to be understood, cannot be divorced from the analysis of the notions
of body and embodiment, together with the awareness of the radical change of
paradigm introduced by them.

Commentary

Neurophilosophy of Free Will
Henrik Walter
MIT Press, Cambridge (MA), 2001

Lorenzo Del Savio*

lorenzo.delsavio@ifom-ieo-campus.it

Neurophilosophy of Free Will frames the analytic debate about free will within

current neurophysiological theories. The introductory chapter overviews
several decades of discussion by listing three intuitions that should be
accounted for by any eligible theory of free choice: freedom (ability to do
otherwise), intelligibility (acting for reasons) and agency (being the source of
our own choices). A moderate neurophilosophical manifesto is then outlined in
the second chapter: knowledge of the brain should inform philosophy of mind.
Chapter three eventually tries to meet these analytical and methodological
desiderata: freedom, intelligibility and agency are extensively (though
tentatively) naturalized by means of neuroscientific insights. Walter draws the
conclusion that libertarianism should be rejected and free will explained by
natural autonomy, a concept that should save phenomena and intuitions alike.
The relevance of Henrik Walter’s book goes well beyond the issue that it
explicitly addresses. His naturalization effort covers a wide range of traditional
topics, from intentional content to the concept of a person. Many scientific
theories that had been picked up were admittedly fairly hypothetical (p. 259)
and so they still are. Thus the fate of Walter’s specific proposals is open to
scientific scrutiny. His main methodological point is nonetheless irreversible.
Nobody would deny that philosophizing should be conscious of scientific
developments. Walter claims it should be also involved in empirical inquiries:
he urges for a «bridge discipline between subjective experience, philosophical
theorizing and empirical research» (p. 125).
This review will focus on Walter’s way of fulfilling his naturalistic program
and, therefore, the first two chapters are let aside. It is nonetheless worth to

* University of Milan; IEO European Institute of Oncology

320

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

remember that, when the book was published, neither an extensive overview of
the free will debate (chapter one) nor a plea for non-reductive physicalism
(minimal neurophilosophy – chapter two) was yet commonsense. After more
than a decade, Walter’s three core proposals of naturalization instead deserve
our attention. Part (1) presents Walter’s ideas about chaos theory and free
choices, part (2) deals with his naturalistic conception of brain content and
part (3) outlines the link envisaged by Walter between the concept of a person
and some neuroscientific insights about emotions.
(1) Walter’s thoughts about freedom are organized in two sections: a pars
destruens in which he argues that quantum physics is not relevant for the free
will debate and a pars construens that borrows from chaos theory in order to
dissolve the puzzle of freedom. The latter goes as follows: free choices require
that, at some instant, more than one future is possible. Choices are bifurcating
paths. Now, either the world is deterministic or it is not. If the former is the
case, then there are no alternative paths by definition (van Inwagen, 1986) and
it only seems there are. On the other hand, if indeterminism is true, then there
are alternative paths at some point, but the choice is indeterminate. Therefore,
which path is taken does not depend on anybody’s decision (agency intuition)
nor can it be explained by reasons (intelligibility intuition). The three core
intuitions cannot hold simultaneously.
Penrose famously proposed to link agency and indeterministic phenomena
of quantum mechanics to discard the second horn of the dilemma. According
to Walter, linking agency and quantum phenomena has an obvious hurdle:
agency is prima facie an organism level phenomenon, thus macroscopic, and
macro-systems are practically deterministic. In fact, mainstream
neurophysiologists take atomic and subatomic processes for granted and
typically work on macromolecules (actually, dynamics of a huge number of
them). To bridge the gap with the atomic level we would need an amplifier
theory like Penrose’s. A common criticism to this proposal points out that it
rests on promissory notes about future physical theories. Walter’s objection is
rather that it is not even compatible with what we know about the brain: he
gives compelling reasons to the effect that the brain is quite unaffected by
atomic phenomena (p. 161).1 Instead, we should focus on brain level
phenomena rather than cell-level interactions.
1

Those reasons are also independently interesting for who is concerned with inter-level reduction
and levels of mechanistic explanations (see Darden 2008).

Commentary – Neurophilosophy of Free Will

321

Compatibilist strategies often rest on a shift of meaning. Possibility of
doing otherwise in the same circumstances is weakened and becomes
possibility of doing otherwise if one had wanted to. Same circumstances are not
identical, they are fairly similar – a move that resembles Lewis’ thesis on
identity across possible worlds. Would these counterpart-circumstances
rescue freedom? Walter claims they would and try to explain why these
circumstances are neurophilosophically relevant. In a nutshell, he suggests that
brain network dynamics is likely to be chaotic and hence extremely sensitive to
small fluctuations of parameters. «Using chaotic behavior, a cognitive system
retains the option of reacting quickly, flexibly, and sensitively to relevant
stimuli, changes in the environment, or ideas» (p. 182). These outcomes
cannot be predicted despite their being wholly deterministic: epistemic
indeterminacy suffices to account for the intuition that we could have done
otherwise.
Yet an objection easily comes up: dependence on chaotic outcomes would
end up in auto-epistemic indetermination. We would be astonished by our own
decisions all the time. Not so, according to Walter: he takes a revisionist stance
on decisions to blur the objection. «Decisions are not processes that occur at a
point in time, they are events extended through time» (p. 183), indeed we
would speak of mere reflexes – not choices – beneath of a certain time
threshold (p. 184). Throughout the decision process, our cognitive system
follows unpredictable trajectories, eventually resting down to a stable state:
this is the decision. Nonetheless a major trouble remains: who controls the
values that determine the trajectories? Walter admits to be again in a thicket,
but a very different one indeed: the problem has shifted from availability of
alternatives to agency. Walter’s solution falls or stands with his naturalization
of agency, a topic that is tackled towards the end of the book.
(2) Although the success of Walter’s conception of free will depends
mainly on later paragraphs, his treatment of intelligibility has several farreaching philosophical consequences. The issue is spelled out in terms of
acting for reasons and the latter is linked with the debate about intentionality.
Millikan’s ideas are then borrowed in order to explain intentionality of mental
states in a physical world (neurosemantics). Intentionality is naturalized by
adaptation and adaptations are explained by natural selection. Walter’s step
forward deals with the last concept: the scope of Millikan’s teleosemantics gets
wider to become neurosemantics. The explanatory power of selection is

322

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

stretched beyond the usual evolutionary time spans: selective-like processes in
ontogenetic or even instantaneous times produce meaning in the brain.
Walter proposes that a physical state comes to be about a chunk of reality
having a relational proper function. In Millikan’s words, it is an intentional
state that has been selected for conveying certain contents. Walter’s specific
contribution takes natural selection as a rather abstract schema and suggests
that it applies to evolutionary times, ontogenetic times and even ultra-fast
instants phenomena. The adaptive immune system is often the main example of
a selective-like mechanism that produces specificity (antigens recognition – an
intentional metaphor indeed) in ontogenetic times. The same token could well
be true for the brain:
among the constraints that support stability [of a brain structure] are not only
complementary effects within the brain, but also interaction with the external
world. […] A temporarily stable state can be interpreted semantically because
the stabilizing process is an adaptation. (p. 228)

An early proponent of this theory was not by chance Edelman (i.e., Edelman
1992), a Nobel-awarded immunologist.
A further dimension taken into account is subsequently the inter-subjective
language, by mean of which content plays a physical causal role in the world.
Causal networks including contents are bona fide physical interactions,
nonetheless they might be paraphrased (p. 240) by reason talk in virtue of the
selective history of their components. These intentional states, in the wording
of Walter, supervene on physical structures and environmental surroundings.
Something of our intuitions about intelligibility has faded away (p. 243): an
intentional state does not have causal power as intentional state but only as
physical state, nonetheless it can be given an intentional content because of its
history. It is noteworthy that the puzzle of free will vanishes even when one
accepts this conclusion: here, reasons determine course of action only in a
loose sense and the underlying physical process might well be indeterministic.
(3) Free choices belong to the physical (chaotic) causal network (freedom
naturalized) and can be interpreted as reasons in virtue of the proper function
of some physical state of the brain (intelligibility naturalized). Yet only a small
subset of these reasons are recognized by a person as her own. «A compatibilist
theory of agency must postulate that the determinants converging in a person
are action of that person. In other words, it must be a theory about what makes

Commentary – Neurophilosophy of Free Will

323

an executing instance a “self” or “person”» (p. 263). How can we
naturalistically make sense of attributions of reasons to persons?
Frankfurt (1971) argued that identification with second order volitions is
crucial: a person’s will is free only if he is free to have the will he wants.
Mention of freedom in the definiens would end up in a regress, but
wholehearted identification with a volition guarantees that a second order will
is authentically expression of a person. Yet we are not given further
clarifications: Walter suggests neuroscience can provide some fruitful insights:
indeed he claims that emotions play a pivotal role in this identification.
According to Damasio’s work, while pondering, we simulate a
counterfactual scenario by means of an imagined outcome of a choice and a
correspondent body state representation. Crucially, body state representations
get stabilized throughout the life of an individual, thus implicitly containing the
past history of a person (p. 284). Frankfurt’s regress of always higher-level
volitions is stopped by emotional identification with a self-representation,
Walter’s naturalistic rephrasing of wholeheartedness. Only those volitions that
are embedded in this emotional way are authentic. «Self-determined behavior
is not a result of rational considerations, instead we learn to make clever and
socially responsible decisions with the aid of our emotions» (p. 290).
Walter concludes summarizing his theory of natural autonomy:
under very similar circumstances we could also do other than we actually do
(because of the chaotic nature of our brain). This choice is understandable
(intelligible – it is determined by past events, by immediate adaptation
processes in the brain, and partially by our linguistically formed environment),
and it is authentic (when through reflections loops with emotional adjustment
we can identify with that action). (p. 299)

Whether this natural autonomy is compatibilist or hard-determinist won’t
concern us here: it all depends on our attitudes toward libertarianism (Kane
2001).
Still Walter’s conclusions are open to conceptual as well as empirical
challenges. Conceptually, the natural philosophy side of the debate loses its
strength in Walter’s treatment because there is no longer the issue
determinism versus indeterminism in the foreground: natural autonomy is
compatible with both metaphysics. This deflationary result instead brings
authorship and the notion of agency at the core of the philosophical concern
about freedom. Two main topics are therefore worth pointing out:
consciousness and moral responsibility.

324

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Although it is mentioned throughout the book, there is no extensive
treatment of consciousness. Later works on free will turned to the topic
claiming that consciousness lies at the very center of our conception of agency
(and hence responsibility), namely Wegner’s idea of consciousness as emotion
of authorship (2002). Despite its frankly hard-deterministic framework,
Wegner’s proposal begins where natural autonomy ends. It shows how
emotions, self and consciousness are entrenched.
A second topic is moral responsibility. Walter declares not to deal with
moral theorizing because he wants to single out the pure metaphysical nucleus
of the debate. I have argued that Walter’s results turned out to be deflationary
exactly as far as natural philosophy is concerned. Yet it is arguably not possible
to clarify the concept of an agent without any link to responsibility, if not to
explain why we have such a concept in the first place.
Aristotle’s sea battle argument rested on logical worries. Medieval work on
free will was carried out against a theological background. In modern times,
the debate has shifted into a mechanistic framework and, perhaps more
surprisingly, it has resurfaced even when statistical social laws have been
discovered (Hacking 1990). Cognitive sciences have also been used as the last
scenarios of this ancient battle (e.g., Libet 1985). Walter conceives the role of
neurosciences more broadly. They do not simply challenge the pre-theoretical
concept of free will. Rather, neurosciences might cast light on the notion of a
person who is the author of her own decisions.

REFERENCES

Churchland, P. (2007). Neurophilosophy: The early years and new directions.
Functional Neurology, 22(4), 185-195.
Darden, L. (2008). Thinking again about biological mechanisms. Philosophy
of Science, 75, 958-969.
Edelman, G. (1992). Bright Air, Brilliant Fire. New York: Basic Books.
Frankfurt, H. G. (1971). Freedom of the will and the concept of a person.
Journal of Philosophy, 68, 11-25.
Hacking, I. (1990). The Taming of Chance. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Commentary – Neurophilosophy of Free Will

325

Kane, R. (2001). The Oxford Handbook of Free Will. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Libet, B. (1985). Unconscious cerebral initiative and the role of conscious will
in voluntary action. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 8, 529-566.
Van Inwagen, P. (1986). An Essay on Free Will. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Walter, H. (2001). Neurophilosophy of Free Will: From Libertarian Illusion
to a Concept of Natural Autonomy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Wegner, D (2002). The Illusion of Conscious Will. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.

326

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Commentary

The Illusion of Conscious Will
Daniel M. Wegner
MIT Press, Cambridge (MA), 2002

Roberto Di Letizia*
r.diletizia@tin.it

In this Commentary, I intend first to introduce the philosophical discussion
about the conscious experience of will advanced in Daniel Wegner‟s The
Illusion of Conscious Will. Second, I will criticize his theory of conscious will
as it does not solve the hard problem of consciousness. Furthermore, I will
show how one of its keys concepts (namely, the distinction between
nonvoluntary and voluntary actions) is a special case of mereological fallacy. In
the end, I will refer to Dynamical System Theory (TSD) to suggest “to put into
brackets” our natural attitude towards agency (inner mental states as causes of
our actions), thereby introducing a more neutral framework to talk about
natural agency as an emergent self-organizing behavior of nonlinear coupled
systems.
1. THE ARGUMENT OF THE ILLUSION OF CONSCIOUS WILL
According to Wegner, conscious thoughts are not the actual causes of our
actions as they play no causal role in action-making processes. Instead, human
behavior is caused by unconscious mental states at a subpersonal level, that is,
the real causal sequence underlying human behavior involves massively
complicated sets of mental mechanisms whereof the agent is not aware. Hence,
if Wegner is right, free will is ruled out from our action-making processes: it is
just an illusion.1

* University of Salento
1
For Wegner, conscious will is an illusion as much as a magic trick (Wegner 2002, p. 27). The
audience believes in a magic trick because the perceived causal sequence (i.e., «the set of events that
appears to have happened») is the best and easy way to explain what is happened, when the real causal
sequence, i.e., («the set of events the magician has orchestrated behind the scenes») is often more

328

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Following Wegner, there are two different kinds of mental causation: (i)

apparent mental causation, that is, phenomenal will, or “the feeling of doing

something”: conscious experience of will that is self-reported by an agent at a
personal level; (ii) real mental causation (i.e., empirical will: the actual
unconscious linkage between mind and action, namely an intricate set of
physical and psychological processes at a subpersonal level).
From the distinction between these two kinds of mental causation, Wegner
moves to explain why people believe that conscious mental states are the actual
cause of their actions. He argues that «people experience conscious will when
they interpret their own thought as the cause of their action» (Wegner 2002,
p. 64).2 Experience of will arises when the agent infers an apparent causal path
between conscious thought and action whereas the actual causal path is not
present in agent‟s consciousness: conscious thought and action are both
caused by unconscious events. Thereby, experience of will is actually an
inference about the cause of our actions which may be mistaken.3 Most
important, Wegner adds that this inference will produce the experience of
conscious will only when the perception of the action satisfies three conditions:
priority, consistency, and exclusivity of the thought about the action.
The priority principle claims that the experience of conscious will depends
on «the timely occurrence of thought prior to action» since «causal events
precede their effects, usually in a timely manner». Therefore, «thought that
occurs too far in advance of an action is not likely to be seen as the cause of it»
(Wegner 2002, pp. 70-71). The consistency principle claims that “the
thoughts that serve as potential causes of actions typically have meaningful
associations with the actions”, which means that conscious thoughts occurring
prior to the act must be semantically related to the latter. Accordingly, when
people «think of one thing and do another – and this inconsistency is
observable to them – their actions does not feel as willful» (Wegner 2002, p.
79). Finally, the exclusivity principle claims that the experience of will arises

complicated than the perceived sequence: «The illusion of conscious will occurs by much the same
technique» (Wegner 2004, p. 653).
2
This is Wegner‟s theory of apparent mental causation (Wegner and Wheatley 1999).
3
As Wegner pointed out, it does not matter «how we are convinced that our thoughts cause our
actions, it is still true that both our thought and action could be caused by something else that remains
unobserved» (Wegner 2004, p. 655). Indeed, an experimenter can make arise the experience of
conscious will so as to the subjects believe that they are controlling a perceived action though they are
doing nothing actually (see Wegner 2002, pp. 74-78).

Commentary – The Illusion of Conscious Will

329

when the conscious thoughts are perceived as the exclusive cause of the action.
Thus, the exclusivity that when conscious thoughts «do not appear to be the
exclusive cause of the action” then people “experience less conscious will»
(Wegner 2002, p. 90).
Nonetheless, according to Wegner, even though the experience of free will
is a mere epiphenomenon it may work as a mind‟s compass. The feeling of
doing is an indicator telling us something about the state of our own agency.
Experience of conscious will inform us about the authorship of perceived
causal sequences, whether what it is happening is or is not in our control:
«conscious will is an emotion that authenticates the action‟s owner as the self»;
– «This helps us to tell the difference between things we‟re doing and all the
other things that are happening in and around us» (Wegner 2002, p. 327).4
According to this hypothesis, we do not experience conscious will when the
consequences of our actions do not satisfy one of these three conditions of
causal inference: experience of conscious will is undermined by the «absence
of any of these conditions» (Wegner 2002, p. 70). Consequently, an action is
experienced in-control when the three conditions are satisfied as well as it is
experienced out-of-control when one of those conditions is absent.
Wegner‟s philosophical main argument is based upon the explicatory
distinction between the personal and the subpersonal level (e.g., Dennett
1969 and Stich 1978).5 Conscious will belongs to the personal level whereas

4
Wegner underlines that conscious will is an emotion, “an informative feeling” (i.e., Damasio‟s
somatic marker; see also Damasio 1994).
5
On the one hand, the personal level explains agent‟s behavior in the terms of their conscious
mental states (i.e., desires, beliefs, plans, intentions). Accordingly, the causes of the behavior are
conscious mental states such as intentions and purposes. For they are teleological explications. At this
level, the content of mental states is conceptual, that is, (a) the subject is able to access consciously to
it, (b) it is compositionally structured (i.e., inferentially integrated with other mental content, namely
holistic), and (c) it is semantically evaluable by means of truth-conditions, truth-makers, and so on.
Furthermore, the mental states are attributed to the whole person (the subject who perceives, believes,
desires, acts). On the other hand, the subpersonal level explains agent‟s behavior in the terms of
unconscious mental events (i.e., computational, functional, neurophysical states) attributed to
domain-specific and informationally encapsulated cognitive subsystems, or modules. In other words,
subpersonal states are attributed only to an anonymous part of a person: the brain. Finally, the content
of subpersonal states is nonconceptual, which means that (a) the subject cannot access consciously to
it, (b) it is unstructured (i.e., inferentially isolated), and (c) it is non-semantic (i.e., it does not have
truth conditions). Finally, sensory inputs, neural events and motor outputs are connected by causal
factors. For subpersonal explanations are not teleological, but mechanistic. (For a debate on the
relationship between these two levels, see Clark 2003 and Bermúdez 2003; for a critical point of view

330

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

the actual causes of our actions lie on the subpersonal one. I suggest that the
problem of free will (namely, how can something like the free will exist in a
causally determined universe?) emerges when human behavior is explained at
the subpersonal level. At this level, mental phenomena are explained as
mechanisms6 whose function is to connect some sensory inputs to some motor
outputs. Most important, a mechanism is causally determined, its operations
are always initiated or maintained by an external cause and the state of each
component depends on the operations of another component. Now if we think,
as Wegner does, that action-making process is sustained by psychological
mechanisms, then free will cannot play any causal role in them. For the free will
is not a mechanism but it is an uncaused cause which cannot be caused by any
external cause.
2. WEGNER‟S ANTI-LIBERTARIAN INCOMPATIBILISM
The current philosophical debate on free will shows two opposite views:
compatibilism and incompatibilism (Watson 1982). On the one hand,
according to compatibilism, causal determinism does not rule out the free will.
On the other hand, according to incompatibilism, free will is not consistent
with the causal determinism. Furthermore, there are two different kinds of
incompatibilism: libertarianism and anti-libertarianism. Libertarianism claims
that free will exists and, consequently, causal determinism must be false. On
the contrary, anti-libertarianism claims that free will does not exist because
causal determinism is true. With the respect of these sketched framework,
Wegner‟s account of free will belongs to the anti-libertarian incompatibilist
view.
First, it endorses incompatibilism because free will and causal determinism
are «incommensurable» (Wegner 2002, p. 322). Free will is conceivable only
as an uncaused cause, which should be «unresponsive to any past influence»
and derives from agent‟s ability «to do things that do not follow from anything»
(Wegner 2002, p. 323). However, if causal determinism is true, then

on personal/subpersonal distinction, see Hurley 1998, pp. 29-54; Bennett and Hacker 2003, pp.
68-107).
6
A mechanism is a structure performing a function in virtue of its components parts, component
operations, and their organization (e.g., Bechtel and Richardson 1993).

Commentary – The Illusion of Conscious Will

331

everything is caused by something else, and the concept of uncaused cause is
not acceptable
Second, Wegner‟s account is anti-libertarian as he thinks that free will
cannot be integrated in a rational theory of human action. Indeed, free will as
an uncaused cause is caused by nothing, neither by the agent. For this reason,
free will can act only randomly. It follows that none is able to control their own
actions, and that free will deprives the agent of any causal power on his/her
own actions. Instead, Wegner claims that only causally determined
psychological mechanisms can provide us to an effective theory of human
action: «free will is not an effective theory of psychology and has fallen out of
use for the reason that it is not the same kind of thing as a psychological
mechanism» (Wegner 2002, p. 324).
As anti-libertarian incompatibilist approach, Wegner thus proposes
eliminative view about free will concept. Indeed, if free will cannot describe the
actual psychological mechanisms causing human action, then it can be ruled
out from the psychological vocabulary.7 Wegner advises a paradigm shift in the
analysis of free will from intentional psychology to cognitive neuroscience.
Depending on this ungrounded concept, the debate between determinists
(“robogeeks”) and free-willers (“bad scientists”) is futile and ill-posed as it
depends on the concept of free will, but if we eliminate this concept, we
eliminate the debate as well. Instead, we should not look for a neural surrogate
of free will because free will is conceptually wrong. Rather, we have to study
two distinct phenomena: mechanisms of action-making and feeling of doing.
The former consists in causally determined unconscious thoughts that are the
actual causes of our actions. The latter (namely, conscious will) is just a kind of
feeling, a perception detecting whether an action is in control or out of control:
Whether we embrace the illusion of control or reject it, the presence and
absence of the illusion remain useful as clues to what is real. Just as the
experience of will allows us to know what we can control, the lack of this feeling

7
We can outline three reasons to eliminate free will following Paul Churchland‟s eliminative
materialism (Churchland 1981, pp. 75-76): (i) free will suffers explanatory failures on epic scale, it
explains only some aspects of human actions but it is not able to solve many others issues (e.g., How
can an uncaused force exist in a deterministic world?); (ii) free will has been stagnant for a long time as
compatibilist and incompatibilist views still show the same unsolved problems (e.g., the problem of
self-control); (iii) free will explanations are not reducible to neuroscience because they involve
uncaused processes whereas brain‟s processes are mechanistic.

332

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

alerts us to know what we can‟t control, what surely exists beyond our own
minds. (Wegner 2002, p. 333)

3.

THE HARD PROBLEM AND THE MEREOLOGICAL FALLACY

I suggest Wegner‟s account on conscious will does not succeed to solve two
problems, namely the hard problem and the mereological fallacy.
First, the hard problem is the problem about the conscious experience, that
is, why something like conscious experience exists (Chalmers 1996, ch. 3).
For cognitive sciences, consciousness is a hard problem because whilst
psychological states can be reduced to functional or computational states, the
consciousness resists to any reductionist attempt. Indeed, two subjects may be
functionally identical even though only of them has a conscious experience.
Therefore, psychological explanations are blind about conscious experience
insofar as they do not distinguish a subject who has a conscious experience
from a subject who has not (e.g., a zombie, a robot). Now, Wegner‟s account
exposes conscious experience as a detector of authorship (a “mind‟s
encompass”) about our actions. Nevertheless, robotics shows us that some
embodied agents are able to control and to detect whether an action is selfperformed or not without conscious experience. This is recognized by Wegner
himself when he writes that even a robot may have conscious will if it was able
«to keep track of what it was doing, to distinguish its own behavior from events
caused by other things» (Wegner 2002, p. 340). However, if conscious
experience is not necessary for an authorship detector, then we are not
explaining why in human beings the former supervenes on the latter. In other
words, the hard problem is still there: why does the conscious experience of
will exist if an embodied agent is able to detect the authorship about its own
actions without conscious experience?
Second, Wegner‟s account rules out the distinction between in-control and
out-of-control actions. Indeed, according to Wegner, conscious experience of
will is a kind of knowledge, it is nothing else than an inference about the causes
of our actions. As a result, the voluntariness experience of our actions is an
illusion, for the subject does not actually control his/her own actions.
However, if the subject cannot control his/her actions at all, nonvoluntariness
experience is an illusion as well. For non-voluntariness is not a matter of fact,
rather it is an epistemic instance that informs the subject when his/her
knowledge about the cause of our actions is wrong. Accordingly, the

Commentary – The Illusion of Conscious Will

333

distinction between voluntariness and non-voluntariness is not an ontological
instance but it depends on subject‟s epistemic structure: actually there are not
real things like voluntariness and nonvoluntariness actions.
I suggest that the concepts of being-in-control and being-out-of-control are
related to folk psychology inasmuch as they imply a substantial Self (i.e., a
central controller) enabled of controlling its behavior by means of conscious
thoughts, but this is exactly what Wegner denies. As personal categories, at a
subpersonal level voluntariness and nonvoluntariness have not place, for there
is not a person enabled of controlling his or her behavior. The point is that at
the subpersonal level, we have only loop circuits or recurrent networks wherein
the events are transformations of state vectors, whilst we can see voluntary or
non-voluntary actions only if we interpret these subpersonal events as result of
a conscious Self which is endowed with contentful mental states.
Consequently, Wegner makes the “mereological fallacy” (Bennett and Hacker
2003, p. 73). He applies psychological predicates, which are attributable only
to human beings as whole (i.e., a Self) to subpersonal processes and states.
I suggest that Wegner‟s theory on conscious will make the mereological
fallacy as they contain descriptions which are encapsulated in the human
observer‟s “cognitive domain” (e.g., Maturana and Varela 1980). The
cognitive domain is nothing else than the observer-centred theory which
describes the cognitive system‟s behavior in terms of inner mental states (i.e.,
propositional attitudes, informational states, inner representations). Thereby,
the challenge is to explain why agent‟s behavior shows recurring patterns of
activity, which constitute his personality, without any reference to observercentred descriptions. In order to provide a naturalist account of agency, we
ought “to put into brackets” our natural attitude towards the agency, which
posits (un)conscious mental states as the causes of the behavior, and to address
to a more neutral framework (namely, non-observer-centred).
4.

AGENCY IN MOTION

Dynamical Systems Theory (TSD) may be a powerful framework to explain
natural agency.8 Self-organizing complexity is a powerful tool for
8
Dynamical system‟s state evolves in real time and may show significant nonlinearities (i.e., it is
often discontinuous, or disproportional, and hardly predictable as well). Dynamical system‟s state
(i.e., instantaneous physiologic state) changes continuously in time plotting trajectories in phase

334

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

understanding psychological systems (e.g., Piers et al. 2007) as well as agency
without personal concepts such as voluntariness and nonvoluntariness. The
brain is a self-organizing nonlinear system coupled with the environment.
Thus, the behavior of the system depends on many variables concerning both
the nervous system and the environment.9 As any nonlinear dynamical systems,
psychological systems will show a self-organizing dynamics (i.e., phase
transitions, attractors). In this sense, personality, which depends on recurring
patterns of the agent‟s activity, is the spontaneous dynamics of the brainenvironment system:
There is no unitary „ego‟ or „self‟ that directs what we do. Instead, the
spontaneous activity of neurons and groups of neurons, in continual
transaction with the environment, is associated with the complex emergent
activity we call personality. A complete description of personality therefore
should involve neuroanatomy, neurodynamics, environment, and functioning.

space. Most important, their dynamics may show phase transition, attractors (i.e., regular patterns of
activity which may be periodic, quasiperiodic or chaotic), and repellors (i.e., unstable configurations
of a system which tends to “avoid” them). Nonlinear dynamical systems encompass chaotic, complex,
and self-organizing systems. A chaotic system has two proprieties: i) it is sensitive to initial conditions;
ii) its behavior is unpredictable over a long time level though it is strictly deterministic. A complex
system is composed by a network of heterogeneous parts that interact nonlinearly in order to produce
an emergent global behavior. A self-organizing dynamical system has no internal or external program
that directs its functioning, though its behavior can produce recurrent patterns of activity. Biological
systems, such as a brain, are complex, dynamic, nonlinear, chaotic and self-organizing systems (e.g.,
Kelso 1995). (For a general introduction to TSD see, also Stewart 1990).
9
Thus, this dynamical account is clearly externalist. Indeed, when we talk about the object of
study of cognitive science, we can be internalist or externalist. Rougly, internalism claims all cognitive
processes and states are encapsulated in the head of the subject, so that it proposes a methodological
solpsism: the behavior of the subjects can be explained referring only to the internal processes and
states occurring in their own brains. Externalism, instead, claims cognitive processes and states
extend and encompass features of the physical and social environment (e.g., Clark and Chalmers
1998; Wilson and Clark 2009). How is it possible? Part of answer lies in the premise of TSD: brain
and environment are nonlinear coupled systems (e.g., Van Gelder 1998). Indeed, as Tony Chemero
and Michael Silberstein have pointed out: «Dynamical systems theory is especially appropriate for
explaining cognition as interaction with the environment because single dynamical systems can have
parameters on each side of the skin. That is, we might explain the behavior of the agent in its
environment over time as coupled dynamical systems, using […] coupled, nonlinear equations»
(Chemero and Silberstein 2008, p. 14). In other words, the state changes of the brain depend on
changes in the external environment as much as the changes in the external environment depend on
the changes of the brain. For it is important for cognitive modeling to track causal processes that cross
the boundary of the individual organism as it is to track those that lie within that boundary.

Commentary – The Illusion of Conscious Will

335

(Grigsby and Osuch 2007, p. 42)10

From this dynamical standpoint, personality depends on the dynamics of the
brain-environment system which may exhibit basins of attraction (namely, a
region of states wherein more attractors are placed) and repellors. As the
variables of the systems are distributed between brain and environment, a small
change in the brain activity, or in the environment, may provoke a global
evolution in the whole system changing its basin of attraction. Some basins of
attraction are “stronger” and more stable than others insofar as they can be
changed only by altering order parameters deeply. In fact, unlike “weak”
attractors and repellors, the change of a “strong” attractor requires much
energy and time.
Agency is a self-organizing capacity of the system of altering its own state
by engaging in certain actions. In fact, nonlinear dynamical systems are wellknow for the circular causality (Kelso 1995, pp. 8-9), that is, their own states
are able to alter the order parameters in order to alter their own states. The
significant propriety of self-organizing systems is the capacity of adapting their
spontaneous dynamics according to the changes of order parameters.
Consequently their dynamics is context-sensitive, for its evolution depends on
the changes of order parameters.
Order parameters may be changed by some performed actions that provoke
a phase transition switching the basin of attraction. Depending on gravity force
of the basin of attraction, the agency is a continuous fuzzy process that may
require time for changing dynamics:
those acts that require greater alterations from habitual patterns of behaving
require more agency (viz., greater deliberate effort) than those that represent
repetitive behaviors with strong attractors and high probability of occurring.
(Grigsby and Osuch 2007, p. 64)

10

As nonlinear result of a complex dynamical system, person‟s behavior is determined by many
factors. Some of them operates at the cellular level (e.g., membrane permeability and ion channel
conductance, blood glucose level, concentration of neurotransmitters), others operate at a
neurodynamical level (e.g., emotional state, motivational status, pain or discomfort, level of
energy/fatigue, level of arousal), others reflect physiological state such as the sleep-wake cycle or
neuroendocrine influences (e.g., cortisol, testosterone, progesterone, adrenaline), and still others are
environmental features such as ambient temperature, level and type of sensory stimulation), or the
presence or absence of certain people (e.g., parents, enemies) (Grigsby and Osuch 2007, p. 42).

336

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

5. THE DYNAMICS OF FREE WILL
Surprisingly, the dynamical agency view may be consistent with free will,
although self-organizing systems are deterministic.
Firstly, we can reshape the concept of autonomy or libertas spontaneitatis.
According to the classic view, an action is not free-willed if it is
heterodetermined. However, from the standpoint of TSD, there are not
distinction between endogenous and external causes since brain and
environment are a whole system. Environmental and cerebral factors are
equals: there is not an inner Self separated to an outer environment. As
Maturana and Varela have pointed out: organism and environment are
structurally coupled (Maturana and Varela 1980).
Even though the distinction between autonomy and heteronomy does not
make sense, we are nevertheless able to reshape the concepts of voluntariness
and nonvoluntariness without a central controller. Control is not a dichotomist
propriety but it is conceivable as continuous gradual process so as to a system
can have more or less control. As a consequence, systems with more control are
those that are able to change easily their basins of attraction, whereas systems
with less control are those that are not able to change basins of attraction even
though the order parameters have been altered by their own actions. Indeed,
strong attractors are invariant respect to initial condition, for this reason the
systems with strong attractors are not really responsive to environmental
changes. If so, the behavior‟s stability is not a synonymous of control, but of
out of control. Instead, the random, chaotic or unstable activity of the brain is
warranty of control because this kind of activity allows the brain to be in «a
state of maximum responsiveness» (Freeman 1995) so that it is «poised on the
brink of instability where it can switch flexibly and quickly» (Kelso 1995, p.
26). Inasmuch as the brain has and shifts multiple co-existent attractors, which
can be competitive or cooperative, the dynamics of the brain-environment
system is “metastable”. Accordingly, the agents experience loss of control
when some attractors are stronger than others so as to they cannot change the
behavioral patterns. This does not mean that the Self is weak but that the Self is
the intrinsic dynamics of a dynamical system (namely, an autopoietic unity)
which is able to self-produce and self-regulate its own processes. In this sense,
the behavior is what the organism does when it engages the world by actively
regulating its exchanges with it (e.g., Di Paolo 2005). As autopoietic system,
the organism‟s behavior has the only purpose of maintaining its intrinsic

Commentary – The Illusion of Conscious Will

337

dynamics in a range of state‟s values. In other terms, natural agency is the
regulation of the organism‟s intrinsic dynamics which is enacted by itself in
order to maintain the state‟s variables in a certain range of state‟s value.
Second, a dynamical view of agency can partially preserve libertas
indifferentiatae. How could agent‟s ability of “doing and choosing otherwise”
be consistent with a deterministic view? First of all, libertas indifferentiae
depends on a decision-making process. Decision-making process can be
understood using theory of chaos as a trajectory of a system unfolding in real
time: beginning at an unstable state, “visiting” various places in phase space
and finally moving toward a stable state that corresponds to the nonchaotic, or
chaotic, basin of attraction (Walter 2001, p. 185). Hence, decision-making
process is a point of instability (namely a „bifurcation‟) into a phase space
where the behavior of the system is unsteady and fluctuating so as to it could
take either of two directions until it settles down in a steady state. In this sense,
the agent, as chaotic system, could have chosen or done otherwise.
Furthermore, initial conditions does not causally determine the behavior of the
system, rather a chaotic system is more or less sensitive to some changes and
variables. Therefore, the switch from chaotic to stable behavior can be achieved
by altering a single order parameter. Changes of order parameters can only
increase or decrease the probability of occurrence of a behavior where
attractors and repellors are only behaviors with a high or a low probability of
occurrence. Hence, the ability of “doing and choosing otherwise” is a
continuous gradual process as some changes of order parameters can increase
or decrease the probability of occurrence of some behaviors reducing subject‟s
agency.11

11

For instance, consider a subject affected by a tumour of adrenal gland provoking an
overproduction of hormones. This disease causes features of his personality such as aggressive mood.
Suppose he has killed his wife when he had a fit of anger: could he have done or chosen otherwise?
Probably he did, but an alternative behavior had a low probability of occurrence because his tumour
has changed some order parameters (i.e., hormones level in the blood). So his agency has been
reduced by order parameters‟ alterations that have increased the probability of occurrence of a
aggressive behavior, seen as a strong attractor. Degree of agency depends on system‟s chaoticness: the
initial conditions (i.e., order parameters) can increase, or decrease, the degree of stability of a system.
Thus, when they increase the instability of the system, more the system will have the control of its
behavior and the capacity of could have done otherwise (i.e., of switching from a steady state to
another one).

338

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

6. CONCLUSION
The aim of this Commentary was to philosophize Wegner‟s theory of
conscious will. I have suggested some philosophical implications and a
proposal of solution. First of all, I have introduced the main philosophical
argument assumed by Daniel Wegner in The Illusion of Conscious Will,
namely the distinction between personal and subpersonal level of explanation.
Wegner‟s theory of apparent mental causation claims the existence of
conscious and unconscious mental states, where only the latter are the actual
causes of our actions. Second, I have situated Wegner‟s account of free will in
the current philosophical debate in which it may be seen as a form of antilibertarian incompatibilism. Third, I have criticized Wegner‟s theory as it does
not solve the hard problem of consciousness. Moreover, it fails to distinguish
in-control and out-of-control actions. The reason of this misunderstanding is
in the mereological fallacy: Wegner applies psychological predicates
(voluntariness and nonvoluntariness), which are attributable only to human
beings as whole (i.e., a Self, central controller, executive program), to
subpersonal processes. Fourth, I have proposed as neutral framework the
Dynamical System Theory (TSD) which may allow us to “put into brackets”
our natural biases concerning agency. I have suggested that agency is the selforganizing capacity of a nonlinear dynamical system of altering its own state by
engaging in certain actions without controller by adapting their spontaneous
dynamics according to the changes of order parameters. Finally, I have
sketched up two dynamical accounts of the concept of agency in order to
reshape both the concepts of autonomy or libertas spontaneitatis and of
libertas indifferentiatae by means of tools of TSD.

REFERENCES

Bennett, M. R., & Hacker, P. M. S. (2003). Philosophical Foundations of
Neuroscience. London: Blackwell.
Bermúdez, J. (2003). Nonconceptual Content: From Perceptual Experience to
Subpersonal Computational States. In Y. Gunther (Ed.), Essays on
Nonconceptual Content, (pp. 183-216). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
[1995]

Commentary – The Illusion of Conscious Will

339

Chalmers, D. (1996). The Conscious Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Chemero, T., & Silberstein, M. (2008). After the philosophy of mind:
Replacing scholasticism with science. Philosophy of Science, 75(1), 127.
Churchland, P. M. (1981). Eliminative materialism and propositional
attitudes. Journal of Philosophy, 78(2), 67-90.
Clark, A. (2003). Connectionism and Cognitive Flexibility. In Y. Gunther
(Ed.), Essays on Nonconceptual Content, (pp. 165-182). Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press. [1994]
Clark, A., & Chalmers, D. (1998). The extended mind. Analysis, 58, 10-23.
Damasio, A. (1994). Descartes‟ error: Emotion, reason, and the human brain.
New York: Avon.
Dennett, D. (1969). Content and Consciousness. London: Routledge.
Di Paolo, E.

(2005). Autopoiesis,

adaptivity, teleology, agency.

Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 4(4), 429-452.

Freeman, W. (1995). Societies of Brains: A Study in the Neuroscience of Love
and Hate. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Grigsby, J., & Osuch, E. (2007). Neurodynamics, state, agency, and
psychological functioning. In C. Piers, J. Muller & J. Brent (Eds.), SelfOrganizing Complexity in Psychological Systems, (pp. 37-82).
Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.
Hurley, S. L. (1998). Consciousness in Action. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Kelso, J. A. S. (1995). Dynamic Patterns: The Self-Organization of Brain and
Behavior. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Maturana, H. R., & Varela, F. J. (1980). Autopoiesis and Cognition: The
Realization of the Living. Dordecht: Reidel Publishing Company.
McGinn, C. (1989). Can we solve the Mind-Body Problem? Mind, 98, 349366.
Piers, C., Muller, J., & Brent, J. (2007). Self-Organizing Complexity in
Psychological Systems. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.

340

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Stewart, I. (1990). Does God Play Dice? London: Penguin Books.
Stich, S. (1978). Belief and subdoxastic states. Philosophy of Science, 45,
499-518.
Van Gelder, T. (1998). The dynamical hypotesis in cognitive science.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 21(5), 615-628.
Walter, H. (2001). Neurophilosophy of Free Will. From Libertarian Illusions
to a Concept of Natural Autonomy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Watson, D. (1982). Free Will. New York: Oxford University Press.
Wegner, D. (2002). The Illusion of Conscious Will. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Wegner, D. (2004). Précis of The Illusion of Conscious Will. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 27(5), 649-659.
Wegner, D., & Wheatley, T. (1999). Apparent mental causation: Sources of
experience of will. American Psychologist, 54, 480-491.
Wilson, R. A, & Clark, A. (2009). How to situate cognition: Letting nature
take its course. In P. Robbins & M. Aydede (Eds.), The Cambridge
Book of Situated Cognition, (pp. 55-77). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Commentary

The Volitional Brain
B. Libet, A. Freeman and K. Sutherland (Eds.)
Imprint Academic, Thorverton (UK), 2004

Elisabetta Sirgiovanni*

elisirgiovanni@hotmail.com
First published in 1999, as a collection of 18 influential papers from two
important issues (No. 8-9) of the Journal of Consciousness Studies, and
reprinted in 2004, The Volitional Brain results a work in what would have
been called, at least since 2002, “neuroethics” (see Illes 2006). The
neologism “neuroethics” does not appear in the book. As a matter of fact, even
though first mentioned by A. Pontius on Psychological report in 1993, the
term rapidly imposed itself only after a series of meetings in Europe and United
States in 2002 producing a general agreement of a new burgeoning
disciplinary field on brain research related to ethical and moral issues (just
think about the publication of the proceedings Neuroethics: Mapping the Field
by Dana Foundation in 2002). Given two general approaches to neuroethics
(Roskies 2002), the ethics of neuroscience and the neuroscience of ethics, the
book turns out to be a work in the neuroscience of ethics and thus privileges
cognitive neuroscience, instead of philosophical bioethics, as a framework for
ethical theory. This approach has been recently developed and has produced a
number of international works among which this book can be considered a real
classic.
In its four sections (Neuroscience, Psychology and Psychiatry, Physics,
Philosophy), followed by Comments, the book discusses the relevance of
neuroscience research for free will debate pertaining to the different
theoretical areas. The various chapters arises as comments of the editor
Benjamin Libet’s results in 1985 showing automatic unconscious brain
processes, preceding the awareness of a decision, as responsible of human
volitional behavior. Although the reference to the unconscious with regard to

* University of Rome “La Sapienza”

342

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

free will could recall the debate about Sigmund Freud’s psychic determinism, it
should be clear for outsiders that Libet’s intent was referring to non-conscious
mental events – in other words, completely inaccessible to consciousness –
differently from what stated by Freud through the object of psychoanalytic
therapy and properly expressed by himself as “sub-conscious” (Ostrowick
2007). Thus, according to neuroscientific findings,the problem of free will
becomes even more worrying. Are we free? Are we the authors of our volition?
The way this book faces the subject is surely not a traditional one.
Traditionally, free will has been considered a problem of over-causation
between human volitional causation and deterministic one (that of God
foreknowledge or physical laws). The spectrum of traditional responses has
framed the debate concerning the relationships between free will and
determinism. In other words, whether free will and determinism were mutually
exclusive opposite (incompatibilism) or not (compatibilism). Incompatibilism
provides solutions among libertarianism (indeterminism), hard determinism
(free will illusion) or skepticism (randomness). The book covers all positions
well.
The aim of the book is to highlight Libet’s findings thanks to more recent
scanning techniques as PET and fMRI (see Chs. 1, 2, 3). Despite what Libet’s
results might appear at a first sight, the book maintains an equilibrium between
the compatibilist alternatives (e.g., Gomes, Ch. 5; Clark, Ch. 18) and Libet’s
work (Ch. 4): it just lightens the idea of free will (as a consciousness veto over
volitional activity) but does not jettison it. Contrary to all expectations for a
neuroethical text, even anti-materialistic positions (see Chs. 17, 13, 8, 11) or
suggestions from Eastern cultures and meditation traditions (especially
Buddhism, see Chs. 8, 6, 7, 14) are presented. These two groups of articles,
which respectively prefer non-physical mental forces as a solution even in
clinical contexts (see Schwarz, Ch. 8, on OCD) or offer an “ambiguous
phenomenology” (Libet et al., Introduction, p. XIX), are a fault for a book that
pretends to be neuroscientific. Moreover, the discussion on mind-body
relation interestingly involves constraints coming from physics: laws of nature
conception (Hodgson, Ch. 12), quantum theory (Stapp, Ch. 9), conservation
law (Mohrhoff, Ch. 10), time (Lanier, Ch. 15). And finally it turns to law and
compares free will to the problem of the power and penal responsibility (Chs.
16, 17).
The non-traditional way according to which the book presents the subject is
referring to the reducibility of folk psychological notion of volition (and

Commentary – The Volitional Brain

343

choice) to brain processes. Admittedly free will has two components to be
showed. Obviously free will is something dealing with freedom and will. So free
will contains a metaphysical component (freedom) and a psychological one
(will). As freedom has been traditionally contrasted by referring to physical
laws (scientific determinism) and the mental event of volition to neurological
causation (mind-brain problem), free will can be regarded as a question of
reducibility of higher-level causal processes and explanations to lower-level
ones. Accordingly, freedom and volition are two common sense intuitive
notions related to the scientific conception of the world.
Nevertheless the traditional philosophical debate on free will has attributed
a low value to the volitional component, so that the entry “free will” has been
explained as «the conventional name of a topic that is best discussed without
reference to the will» (Strawson 1998, p. 743). What I am going to discuss
here is whether such a book, which deals with the volitional brain in order to
propose what explicitly declared in the subtitle as a “neuroscience of free will”,
can genuinely represents a contribution to the free will debate. Or rather,
whether (1) investigating volition is relevant to free will, and (2)
neuroscientific findings can challenge or inform our notion of free will (see
Roskies 2006).
First of all, there are three kinds of freedom: social freedom, which is
conceived as a relation between an agent, an action and a power and sounds
like “I’m free to do X with regard to P if P cannot oblige me to do it or prevent
me from doing it”; freedom of action, which is a relation between an agent and
an action in the sense that “ I’m free to do X if I am able or I have a chance to do
it”; freedom of will, which made the philosopher Jean-Paul Sartre (1943)
seeing humans as “condemned to be free” and corresponds to something like
“I could have acted in other ways, as I act on the basis of reasons, that is, I am
the author of my decision”. Only the third kind of freedom pertains to free will
as the will is the entity that needs to be characterized as free. Questions at the
end of the second paragraph can be hence reformulated as following: What is it
to act (to choose) freely? What is it to be morally responsible for one’s actions
(or choices)?
It should be mentioned that a psychological conception of free will as selfdetermination is the basis of penal law theory. The core of imputability in
Western penal codes is the volitional character of a criminal action,
independently from how free will is intended as a metaphysical notion, namely

344

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

its reducibility or not to physical causation. Therefore, volition is at least an
important component in the way we are ordinarily involved in the matter.
Nevertheless there is an argument according to which neuroscience is not
in a position to undermine our intuitive notion of free will, and consequently
that of moral (and then penal) responsibility. The argument focuses on the fact
that problems on these notions exist independently of neuroscientific advances
and depend on the existence of external forces such as God or nature (Roskies
2006). Neuroscientific inquiry is a matter of discovering mechanisms
underlying cognitive phenomena (Bechtel 2008 and Craver 2007), while the
problem of free will is a metaphysical problem that regards the deterministic
(or indeterministic) nature of the universe. It is true that a naturalistic
investigation of the wider problem concerns more physics than neuroscience.
But intuitive concern on free will maintains that human agency requires
freedom whereas mechanisms behave deterministically and that is why
volitional brain mechanisms have been recently called into question.
Regardless whether or not the universe is deterministic, however,
neuroscience aims to show at best whether the brain is. So even if this work
cannot give an answer to the wider metaphysical problem, it is still an
important direction of inquiry.
Contrary to what people think, mechanism and determinism are not the
same thing. A view of ourselves as biological mechanisms should not
necessarily undermine our freedom. There are various ways to escape the
problem. For example, recent neuroscientific accounts claim that «freedom is
not freedom from causation, but the freedom of a system that is directing its
own engagement within its environment» (Bechtel and Abrahamsen 2007, p.
63).
What Libet’s results showed is that people are not actually conscious of
their decisions. So these experiments focus on the relation between
consciousness and free action within the brain. As a matter of fact we think of
free will as self’s ability to choose whether or not to act. There are arguments
against this view and against the link between awareness and decision (for a
discussion, see Mele 2005). Apart from the metaphysical framework we
choose, our intuitive notion of free will regards our feeling of control on our
decisions and actions, not the control itself. And this accounts for
neuroscientific inquiry. For example, literatures has presented contradictory
experiments showing folk conception on free will both compatibilist and
incompatibilist depending on the circumstances (Roskies and Nichols 2008).

Commentary – The Volitional Brain

345

Therefore even if cognitive neuroscience cannot give an answer to the
question of freedom with regard to determinism, it can evidence other factors,
which may inform our evaluations on freedom and responsibility. These factors
are features of the functioning of mechanisms of choice and decision-making
underlying folk psychological processes we refer to when we attribute freedom
or responsibility to agents. Independently from the deterministic or stochastic
nature of these mechanisms, their understanding corresponds to such essential
attribution.
We usually count on our intuition of free will, we make use of it in our
ordinary lives and in legal contexts. Recent titles testify that the interest in free
will has come back again thanks to neuroscientific discussions introduced in
books like this. Even though each paper should be judged separately from the
others and some of them might result worthless if we refer to present debate,
this text should be read as a precursor. It is a topical work facing the problem of
a neuroscience of free will.

REFERENCES

Bechtel, W. (2008). Mental Mechanisms: Philosophical Perspectives on
Cognitive Neuroscience. London: Routledge.
Bechtel, W., & Abrahamsen, A. (2007). Explaining human freedom and
dignity mechanistically: From receptive to active mechanisms. The
Journal of Philosophical Research, 32, 43-66.
De Caro, M., Lavazza A., Sartori G. (Eds.) (2010). Siamo davvero liberi? Le
neuroscienze e il mistero del libero arbitrio. Torino: Codice Edizioni.
Illes, J. (Ed.) (2006). Neuroethics: Defining the Issues in Theory, Practice and
Policy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Mele, A. (2005). Action theory meets neuroscience. Paper at the International
Conference on Intentionality, Deliberation and Autonomy, University
of Siena, 11st-13th March 2005:
http://www.unisi.it/eventi/practical_philosophy/paper/Mele.pdf.
Morris, S. G. (2009). The impact of neuroscience on the free will debate.
Florida Philosophical Review, IX( 2), 56-77.

346

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Ostrowick, J. M. (2007). The timing experiments of Libet and Grey Walter.
South African Journal of Philosophy, 26(3), 9-26.
Roskies, A. L. (2002). Neuroethics for the New Millennium. Neuron, 35(1),
21-23.
Roskies, A. L. (2006). Neuroscientific challenges to free will and
responsibility. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 10(9), 419-423.
Roskies, A. L., & Nichols, S. (2008). Bringing moral responsibility down to
earth. Journal of Philosophy, 105(7), 371-388.
Strawson, G. (1998). Free will. In Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy (pp.
743-753). London: Routledge.

Commentary

Living Without Free Will
Derk Pereboom
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2001

Giuliano Torrengo*

giuliano.torrengo@unito.it
The thesis that we utterly lack free will and thus we are not morally responsible
for our actions looks difficult to reconcile with the basic features of our
ordinary experience. In his influential book, Derk Pereboom argues in favor of
it, as the most rational view on agency on the market. In this commentary, I will
discuss his view and make few remarks on the connection between certain
problems in the philosophy of agency and problems in the metaphysics of time
and persistence.
Remember the general framework of the debate over free will and moral
responsibility. If someone is morally responsible for her actions, she can
deserve praise or blame for them. But moral responsibility requires freedom,
since if someone is not free, she cannot deserve praise or blame. The
compatibilist thinks that being free in the sense required for moral
responsibility is compatible with physical determinism. We can be free even if
our actions are determined by all what has happened in the past, given the
actual laws of nature. The incompatibilist disagrees and thinks that if
determinism is true, we can’t be free in the sense that matters for moral
responsibility, and thus we cannot be morally responsible. Traditionally, there
are two varieties of incompatibilism. The first is libertarianism, who maintains
incompatibilism and denies determinism. According to the libertarian, we are
free agent in a indeterministic world. Therefore, we are morally responsible. It
follows that praise and blame can be rationally justified reactions to human
actions. The second one is hard determinism. According to the hard
determinist, incompatibilism and determinism are both true. Thus, we are
agents who lack free will and who inhabit a deterministic world. We lack moral

* University of Turin

348

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

responsibility and judgments of moral praise or blame are always irrational —
they only seem to be justified.
Pereboom defends a form of incompatibilism — which he calls hard
incompatibilism — that is neither libertarianism nor hard determinism,
although it is clearly closer to the latter than to the former. This is true not only
because hard determinism is subsumed under hard incompatibilism: being a
hard determinist is a way of being a hard incompatibilist, although not always
the other way around. But more profoundly because Pereboom’s
incompatibilism, in a sense, embodies the gist of hard determinist, without
entailing determinism across the board. The idea is that neither deterministic
aspects of our agency nor indeterministic ones are compatible with the tenet
that we are morally responsible and free. Not all incompatibilist positions that
refute both the libertarian notion of free will and determinism share the notion
of agency that Pereboom outlines. The no-free-will-either-way position, for
instance, maintains that we cannot be free and morally responsible, regardless
of whether determinism or indeterminism is true. Galen Strawson defends one
version of this view. According to Strawson, it is metaphysically impossible for
human beings like us to be free agents. That is why, no matter whether
determinism is true or not, we cannot be morally responsible. According to a
even stronger version, free will is not just metaphysically impossible, but even
conceptually so: the very notion is contradictory.
Contrary to those positions, Pereboom argues that the concept of free
agency is both logically and metaphysically well-behaved. Besides, the
difference between living in a deterministic world and living in a
indeterministic world is relevant for human morality and the rationality of our
moral appraisals. Between the two main varieties of libertarian incompatibilism
— leeway incompatibilism and causal history incompatibilism — he thinks that
only the second one catches what is essential to freedom and responsibility.
Leeway incompatibilism rests on the tenet that having alternative possibilities
is not only a necessary condition for freedom and responsibility, but it is a
condition with an explanatory import. We are free, morally responsible and
thus blameworthy or praiseworthy for our deeds because we could have done
otherwise than we actually did. Whereas according to causal history
incompatibilism, having alternate possibilities as such — even if it turned out to
be a necessary condition for being free — cannot explain human freedom and
responsibility. An action is free not because the agent could have done
otherwise, but because it is not produced by a process that traces back to causal

Commentary – Living Without Free Will

349

factors beyond the agent’s control, as deterministic processes typically are. In
other words, what accounts for an agent being free and morally responsible for
her actions is the causal history through which the agent has arrived to those
actions. But it is not indeterminism per se what makes an agent free. We can
think about that in terms of the distinction between open and close future.
There is a sense of ―open‖ in which if the future is open, then there is nothing
in the present that settles what will be the case tomorrow. Suppose that we live
in a universe in which the future is open in that sense: are we thereby free? No,
because many things in the future may be unsettled while our decisions being
inescapable consequences of factors beyond our control. Thus indeterminism
is not a necessary condition for being free.
However, if we share the incompatibilist intuition that if everything is
already settled in advance than we cannot be free, we may think that a open
future in the indeterminist sense is at least necessary condition for being free.
Frankfurt-style examples, though, provide powerful objections to the idea that
someone is free and responsible only if she could have done otherwise than she
actually did. Suppose that George has to decide whether to lie about his taxes
or be honest. Eventually, he decides to act immorally and to lie. However,
unbeknownst to him, a neuroscientist has implanted in his brain a device that
can detect his intentions. The device is such that were he to form the intention
to act honestly with respect to fiscal behavior, it would intervene and make him
act immorally instead. In such a situation, George could not have done
otherwise than he actually did, and thus the leeway condition for being free is
not fulfilled. Yet, we share the intuition that, in the situation described, since
the device implanted by the neuroscientist has not intervened, his action has
been freely chosen. Contrary to what the leeway incompatibilist theory
predicts, he is morally responsible and blameworthy for what he has done even
though he could have not done otherwise. If those counterexamples go
through, having alternative possibilities is not a necessary condition for being
free and the whole project of leeway indeterminism fails. Note that Frankfurtstyle counterexamples do not impinge on the requirement of a indeterministic
condition on the causal history of the decision of the agent. Indeed, in all such
cases, the lack of alternative possibilities is a consequence of ―external‖ factors
concerning the situation in which the agent find himself. If we changed the
story and assume that the device influenced the causal history in a way to make
it deterministic, or in other ways beyond the agent’s control, our intuition that
an agent is free and morally accountable would fade away.

350

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

However, classical Frankfurt-style examples cannot force the libertarian to
a causal history version of the position. The intuition that having the capacity of
doing otherwise is relevant for our freedom and responsibility is hard to give
up. The libertarian can still argue that the intervening device in Frankfurtstyle’s examples does not touch the agent’s capacity of doing otherwise that is
essential for moral responsibility. It is true that the agent cannot act differently,
because if he decided to do so, the device would intervene and prevent him
from acting differently. However, an alternative possibility conditions is still at
work in explaining why even in those circumstances the agent is free. If the
agent could not decide to do otherwise, we would not have the intuition that
she acted freely and she is morally responsible for her action. As it is sometimes
put, the possibility of a ―flicker of freedom‖ is required for moral
responsibility. Does this fact confirms that the fundamental idea of leeway
incompatibilism, i.e., that possessing alternative possibilities is a fundamental
factor in explaining freedom and responsibility? No, Pereboom seems rather to
think that if the incompatibilist takes seriously the challenge set by Frankfurtstyle cases, a indeterminist condition on the causal history of the agent’s
actions will emerge. Even if eventually the leeway incompatibilist may be right
in claiming that there is an alternative possibilities condition necessary for
freedom, that is so only in virtue of the holding of a condition on the causal
history of the agent’s decision.
Consider the compatibilist objection to the tenet that the possibility that a
flicker of freedom occurs is necessary for our responsibility. There are more
complex Frankfurt-style cases, in which the device implanted by the
neuroscientist is able to detect some previous sign of the agent’s decision to
act immorally. Thus, if the sign does not manifest itself, the device intervenes
and forces the agent to decide to act immorally. Suppose that the sign is
blushing at a certain moment t, and that it does manifests itself at t. Of course,
if indeterminism is true, it is still true that the agent could have not blushed at t,
but this flicker is not ―robust‖ enough to ground freedom in the sense required
for moral responsibility. Indeed, we have the intuition that whether the agent
blushes or not at t is irrelevant for the moral import of her action. It cannot be
the occurrence of the blushing or the lack thereof per se that accounts for the
agent’s moral responsibility. The alternative possibilities that can justify the
leeway incompatibilist condition on freedom must be such that whether the
agent goes for one or the other is relevant for her moral responsibility. If she is
blameworthy, then it has to be the case that had she done otherwise, she would

Commentary – Living Without Free Will

351

have been praiseworthy and vice versa. But clearly she is not blameworthy for
blushing at t as such. Whether the agent decide or not to act immorally would
be a flicker robust enough to ground moral responsibility, but in the new
scenario it is not the case that the agent could have decided otherwise, and thus
it is not a flicker at all.
Pereboom sides with the libertarian in the debate over this refined
Frankfurt-style cases, since he thinks that although it is not the presence of
alternative possibilities as such what makes the agent free and responsible, the
refined version of Frankfurt-style arguments still leave the leeway core
intuition intact. It is important to notice that the link between the sign and the
decision has not to be either deterministic or in any way sufficient for causally
determining the agent’s decision. If that were the case, then the intuition that
the agent is free will be too weak to survive the incompatibilist standards. If the
agent is forced to act in a certain way by the occurrence of the sign, then he is
not free in any interesting sense. But if the sign is not sufficient to determine
that the agent will act in a certain way, than it is still in the power of the agent to
do otherwise, and the example does not disproof the alternative possibilities
condition on freedom. Indeed, the agent is free only if the possibility of a
robust flicker of freedom is still open to her. And the leeway incompatibilist
can claim that her moral responsibility is explained precisely by the fact that she
is praiseworthy or blameworthy depending on which way she goes.
However, Pereboom parts company with the libertarian because he does
think that there are Frankfurt-style cases in which the leeway compatibilism
fails. Suppose the sign for deciding to act immorally at t' is that the agent at t
does not consider some strong moral reason to act morally, and suppose that
considering such reason is not causally sufficient for her decision to act
morally, but only necessary. Furthermore, the neuroscientist has implanted a
device that is idle in so far as it does not detect any activity of considering moral
reasons at t, but it forces the agent to act immorally at t' in case it detects moral
considerations at t. Now, the agent at t does not engage in any moral
considerations, and consequently the device does not intervene. We have the
intuition that the agent is free, even if it is not the case that the agent could
have done otherwise, not even in the sense that she could have decided
otherwise. Letting apart the details of the discussion, which have given raise to
much interest in literature, what is relevant here is to stress that Pereboom
version of the Frankfurt-style objection to the leeway incompatibilist is
designed to show that the causal history condition is fundamental for

352

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

explaining moral responsibility. After all, why in Frankfurt-like cases we have
the intuition that the agent is still free and morally responsible? Insofar as the
causal history of the decision is not touched by the intervening device or other
factors that are not in power of the agent, the intuition of freedom is left
untouched by the presence of intervening devices — no matter how subtle and
―invasive‖ they are. Note, for instance, that if we make the connection between
the sign and the decision too strict in terms of sufficient causal determination,
then we lose the intuition that it is still in control of the agent to do otherwise.
That is because if the link is causally determining, then the causal history of the
decision would contain aspects that are beyond the agent’s control. Therefore,
the relevant condition for having freedom and responsibility — the conditions
with explanatory power — is having a indeterministic causal history, such that
allow for the agent to have control over her decision. If this condition holds,
then we can derive some sort of alternative possibilities conditions too — but
the core of the notion of freedom that is relevant for moral responsibility does
not lie in the presence of alternative possibilities, rather in having control over
one’s own decisions.
If the condition of alternate possibilities does not catch the core of our
notion of freedom and moral responsibility, the problem of determining
whether someone ―could have done otherwise‖ is no longer crucial for
establishing moral responsibility and freedom. And this is good news because
the debate on freedom and moral agency risks to wind up in a stalemate by
focusing on the he proper analysis of ―could‖. A compatibilist would argue that
a counterfactual analysis of ―could‖ is required in such cases. Very roughly, if
there are possible words close enough to ours in which the agent acts
otherwise, then it is true in the actual world that she could have done
otherwise. But the fact that her choice is causally determined by previous facts
beyond her control does not imply that its occurrence is metaphysically
necessary, i.e., that there are no possible worlds in which she acts otherwise.
Thus, since the agent could have done otherwise, she is free even if she
inhabits a deterministic world. The incompatibilist objects to a counterfactual
analysis of ―could‖ here, and argue that there is a sense in which if determinism
is true, then the agent could have not done otherwise, and thus it is not free in a
deterministic world. Which sense of ―could‖ should we consider here? If we
maintain that the alternative possibility condition is explanatory central for
freedom, both are relevant for the question whether the agent is free or not.

Commentary – Living Without Free Will

353

And — most importantly — both senses are legitimate, since the nicely match
the compatibilist and the incompatibilist supporting intuitions respectively.
The version of incompatibilism that Pereboom puts forward is immune to
the risk of finding itself in such a dead-end. According to causal history
incompatibilism, we are free only if the causal history of our choices and
deliberations involves some essential factor that is under our control. If an
agent is morally responsible for her decision to perform a certain action, then
the production of this decision must be something over which the agent has
control, and an agent is not morally responsible for the decision if it is
produced by a source over which she has not control. The point is not only that
if an action is a inevitable consequence of what has happened so far in the
universe (given the actual laws of nature), then it cannot be a free action and
the agent cannot be morally responsible for it (note that leeway
incompatibilism, too, may be claimed to catch this aspect). The point is that we
are justified to believe that the agent is not free and morally responsible for her
actions only in case that her actions have originated from something over which
the agent has not control. But being a deterministic consequence of previous
events is not the only way in which an event can escape our control. Also a
event that happens for no cause at all or randomly may be completely beyond
our control.
It is crucial to stress here that indeterminism as such is no warrant of
freedom and responsibility — as compatibilists have often stressed. And for the
same reason that leeway incompatibilism fails to catch the core of the notion of
freedom. Suppose that our world is indeterministic, and more precisely, the
processes through which a agent gets to a decision are indeterministic. What
we decide will be a consequence of which ones among the alternative
possibilities have turned out to be actual, and if we have no control over those
events, then we are not free. What, as a matter of fact, is beyond our control
can account for our freedom no more if it is a consequence of a indeterministic
process than if it is the outcome of a deterministic process. Therefore, no
matter whether the causal history of our decisions is deterministic or
indeterministic, if there are no crucial elements of it that are under our control,
we cannot be free. However, can the processes underpinning our deliberations
be such that they are in some relevant way under our control? Libertarians
think it can, whereas hard indeterminists maintain that all our decisions are
determined causally by things outside our control, since they are alien
determinist events. Pereboom sides with the libertarian in maintaining that it is

354

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

metaphysically possible that a human agent be free because in control of her

deliberations. However, he sides with the hard determinist in maintaining that
we do not have free will and moral responsibility. His reasons for that claim,
however, are not grounded in the truth of determinism: rather, there are very
good empirical reasons to believe that we are not in control of any of the events
that constitute our decisions.
Actually, with respect to what he calls ―event-cause libertarianism‖ as
opposed to ―agent-cause libertarianism‖, Pereboom’s position is slightly
stronger, since he thinks that event-cause libertarianism encompasses a notion
of agent such that, at least by metaphysical necessity, is not in control of her
deliberations. I think that the idea of event-cause libertarianism can be made
more precise by appealing to the underlying metaphysics of persistence, and in
particular, to the distinction between endurantism and perdurantism.
According to the perdurantist, agents — as any other entity that persists in
time, namely that exists at more than one time — are nothing over and above
mereological sums of instantaneous events. Those events are the temporal
parts of the agents — those commonly said to be the phases of the agent’s life.
Within this framework, it is easy to tell what is an agent’s decision: it is a
temporal part of the agent. What causes a decision, though? If it is the outcome
of a deterministic process, it is caused by former parts of the agent in such a
way that the agent has no control over the process and thus she is not free. If it
is a truly random event, viz. something that happens with no cause whatsoever,
the agent will not have control over it either. But even if it is a partially random
event, which the agent cannot causally determine, the agent will not have
enough control over her decisions to be free. Therefore, if decisions are events
either without a cause or caused by other events, as in the even-based version
of libertarianism, it is hard to see how there can be decisions over which the
agent has enough control to be free and morally responsible. Since, even the
non-random part of the determination can only be another event over which
the agent has no control. And the same goes if the libertarian insists that the
causally determining factors are things like the agent’s character or her
capacities. In the event-based version of the theory, what causes an agent to
have her actual character cannot be something over which the agent has
control.
However, there is a way to add the kind of control required for freedom to
the indeterminist picture of the libertarian. In so far as it is coherent to
maintain that the agent herself, and not an event (even if one strictly connected

Commentary – Living Without Free Will

355

to the agent, as one of her temporal parts), causes her decisions without being
determined by factors beyond her control, the notion of a free agent in the
sense required for moral responsibility and thus the notion that the libertarian
needs to state her position is coherent. Agent-cause libertarianism is precisely
the view that it is a primitive feature of the agent to be such a causal source of
her actions. Although we can make sense of the idea that the agent as the whole
composed by temporal parts, and not any of the parts as such, is the ultimate
free cause of her actions, I think that a endurantist metaphysics makes the
picture far neater. According to the endurantist, the agent — as any entity that
persists in time — persists by being wholly present at each moment of her
existence. That is, it is the agent itself, and not any of her temporal part that we
find in each phase of her life. Within the framework of a endurantist
metaphysics it is clear how the causal relation underpinning the agent’s choices
looks like: one of the term of the relation is the agent, the other term is an
event, namely the choice that the agent has caused to occur (or to whose
occurrence the agent has contributed fundamentally).
Now, endurantism is a less revisionary metaphysics than perdurantism, i.e.,
it is closer to common sense. However, it is also a position less sympathetic to
hard sciences. This is true in general, but it is even more apparent in the
present case. Modern science makes the notion of an agent as the free cause of
her decisions suspicious. The non-reductive materialist strategy to
accommodate agent causation within the physical world looks the most
attractive, but — as Pereboom convincingly argues for a whole chapter — is not
better off than the alternative strategies. At the end of the day, the notion of
agent causation of the libertarian violates well-established scientific
conceptions. Therefore, even if freedom and moral responsibility are coherent
notions, and it is metaphysically possible for a free agent to exist, we are not
likely to live in a world inhabited by free agents, and thus we are not justified in
seeing us or the other as morally blameworthy or praiseworthy. In other words,
the best libertarian version of causal history incompatibilism, namely the agentbased one, has to be abandoned, and the only plausible incompatibilist
alternative left is hard incompatibilism. The conclusion is that we are not in
control of any of the outcome of our choices, because the causal history of our
decisions is entirely made of events over which we do not have control: alien
deterministic events, truly random events or partially random events.

356

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Hard incompatibilism has to be defended also from the compatibilist
challenge. A compatibilist could agree with Pereboom’s picture of a agent as
causally determined both in the deterministic and in the indeterministic
aspects of the processes underpinning her decisions. Yet the compatibilist
ascribes moral responsibility and freedom to humans. According to
compatibilists, indeed, causal determination — the sort of lack of control that
Pereboom ascribes to agents in ordinary cases — does not exclude free will and
grounded ascriptions of responsibility. Therefore, Pereboom has to
distinguish his position from its compatibilist counterpart, namely the position
embracing both causal determination and moral responsibility, and to defend it
as the only viable alternative. To that effect, Pereboom argues that
compatibilism fails to spot the relevant similarity between ordinary decisions in
which the agent is causally determined by factors behind her control and
situations in which the decision is the outcome of a covert manipulation. Since
our intuitions in cases of covert manipulations are that the agent is not free and
responsible, we should conclude that causal determination in ordinary
situations, too, is incompatible with the assumption that the agent is free and
responsible. In the present context, I will not discuss the ―four-case argument‖
that Pereboom puts forward to defend his tenet that the two situations are
similar in the relevant respect and thus compatibilism fails. Rather, I wish to
focus on the modal status of the incompatibilist’s notion of determination.
Although Pereboom is right in claiming that the focus on the issue of the
proper analysis of ―could‖ leads the debate on free will to a stalemate, I do not
think that that is true with respect to all modal considerations about decisions
and actions, in particular with respect to the distinction between determination
of the future and necessity of the future. Firstly, it is crucial for hard
incompatibilism that causal determination does not imply metaphysical
necessity. If every human choice is metaphysically necessary, then its
occurrence is entailed by the state of the world up to the moment of its
occurrence together with the laws of nature (since anything entails a necessary
truth), and hard indeterminism collapses on hard determinism. Secondly, the
hard incompatibilist’s notion of causal determination should not imply
nomological necessity either, and essentially for the same reason: if the choices
of the agent are determined by what happened in the past together with the
laws of nature, indeterminism cannot be true, and full-fledged hard
incompatibilism follows the same fate. Can the hard incompatibilist resorts to a
notion of ―logical‖ determination, which is weak enough to allow for both

Commentary – Living Without Free Will

357

determinist and indeterminist factors to enter the causal history of the agent’s
decisions? If ―logical determination‖ here means simply that every statement
about an agent’s choice is bivalent (either true or false, but not both or neither)
then I maintain that he can. Maybe there is a stronger notion of indeterminism
to the effect that statements concerning our choices are logically
undetermined, but physical indeterminism (the tenet that the history of the
world up to a given moment together with the laws of physics does not settle all
aspects of the future) surely is compatible with the claim that statements
concerning our choices are logically determined. Moreover, once it’s clear that
the hard determinist should endorse this notion of determination, because it is
the only plausible alternative left, it becomes also clear that in the hard
incompatibilist’s picture, it is not the case that the agent lacks freedom in
virtue of the outcome of her choices being logically determined. And this is a
important difference between hard incompatibilism and hard determinism,
which can rest on the idea that we lack moral responsibility because every
action of ours is determined in advance. To see the point, consider the
following: even in a indeterministic world with free agents, the logical sense of
determination can be maintained (for instance, if something like ―the thin red
line view‖ is true). Therefore, if the agent lacked freedom only in virtue of her
choices being logically determined, hard incompatibilist would overgeneralize
to libertarianism and it would turn out to be incoherent. That situation forces
the hard incompatibilist to put the crucial distinction between the libertarian
and himself in some other feature of the causal processes that leads to
decisions. For the libertarian there is a causal link between the agent and the
choice, which is under the agent’s control, whereas for the hard incompatibilist
there is no causal link of this sort, because all causal relations that underpin the
agent’s decisions are relation between event.
In the last three chapters, Pereboom focuses on the moral consequences of
his theory, in order to defend it against the charge of making morality
impossible. The central idea here is that moral responsibility is only an aspect
of morality, and it is not even likely to be the most essential one. Indeed, praise
and blame seem to be relevant only to the ―irrational‖ part of morality, and
moral value is untouched by them. Actions can be either morally good or
wrong, even if they are never praiseworthy or blameworthy. Pereboom does not
deny that sometimes a emotional twist may be beneficial for morality, but he
argues that for the most crucial aspects of morality there are incompatibilist
―surrogates‖ for praise and blame. In any case, the overall appraisal of the

358

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

moral role of rationally ungrounded emotions seems to suggest that we should
dispense with them. Pereboom, thus, does not think — as certain hard
determinists do — that for pragmatic reasons we should act as if we were
morally responsible. Living by thinking that we lack freedom and responsibility
is morally desirable and within our ordinary capacities. Even if the argument of
these chapters probably will not convince anyone who, at this point, is not
already both incompatibilist and non-libertarian, they provide lively challenges
for libertarians and complete the overall plausibility of the hard incompatibilist
view of reality.

Interview

Sean Spence
Edited by Duccio Manetti*
We very much regret to inform that Professor Sean Spence died on Christmas
day (2010) after a long illness. This interview is probably one of the last
expressions of Professor Spence’s thought. We are grateful to him for being so
kind and helpful as to honor us with his exhaustive answers despite his illness.
SEAN SPENCE was Professor of General Adult Psychiatry at the University of
Sheffield. Psychiatry and Philosophy has lost a great scholar. Our sincere and
heartfelt condolences go out to his family and loved ones.
1. Your latest book is entitled The Actor’s Brain. Can you tell us what is an
actor’s brain?
The purpose of using the term the ‘actor’s brain’ was to identify what I hoped
would be captured and characterized over the course of the text: namely, those
conditions (anatomical, physiological, psychological, etc.) which must pertain
within the nervous system of a human being in order for them to be seen to be
performing, what appear to be, ‘purposeful’ acts in the world. In other words:
What is it within the systems of the brain that ‘supports’ the emergence of
apparently voluntary behaviour? Such an account could not be exhaustive
(hence, the book’s subtitle: ‘Exploring the Cognitive Neuroscience of Free
Will’). However, I was very concerned that it should be grounded in
neurobiology, unapologetically building upon what is known of neural
function, while also eventually arriving at behavioural, phenomenological
distinctions that would be recognizable to a philosophical readership, e.g., the
difference between ‘actions’ and ‘movements’, between ‘purposeful’
behaviours and mechanical ‘events’, as these might be understood by an author
such as MacMurray (1991). One of the most prominent themes to emerge
across the book was that of constraint: the limitations set upon the extent of
* University of Florence

360

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

our freedom and manifest within many domains (e.g., in our neuroanatomy,
neurochemistry, and indeed our subjective temporal awareness, as revealed by
Libet and others).
I was also mindful that much of the second half of the book would deal with
‘real-life’ situations, encountered in the clinical arena, where voluntary
behaviour is either mechanically aberrant or undesirable in terms of its valence;
situations in which the constraints upon the human actor become even more
obvious, forcing the clinician/observer to consider factors ranging from what
one might call our ‘brute neurology’ to rather more diffuse interpersonal,
social influences. This would lead on to the raising of some pivotal questions
concerning the future of psychotherapeutics (Chapter 10), namely: Whether,
once damaged, an actor’s brain may be restored to volitional function? Might
freedom return?
2. The acts performed by the subjects in Libet’s experiments seem too simple
and not enough representative of everyday life decisions. Do you think it is
possible to include value choices in the experimental sets?
I think the experiments performed by Benjamin Libet and colleagues in the
1980s were necessarily simple in some aspects of their design, since they
sought to strip a voluntary act to its minimal constituents: a single subject
introspecting about their motor intentions, while they made self-paced
movements of their right index finger or wrist. By acquiring objective
electroencephalographic (EEG) and electromyographic (EMG) response data,
together with the subject’s internal estimation of the time of onset of their own
‘intention to act’, Libet et al (1983) were able to elicit their central finding:
namely, that the EEG antecedents of a voluntary act arise in the brain before
the subject’s conscious intention to perform that act. The simplicity of this
design is part of its beauty.
Now, there is a vast array of more complicated acts that one might wish to
study (as opposed to the simple movements of a finger). However, I think this
is essentially a question of empirical ingenuity: designing experiments that may
sequentially access actions of increasing complexity, e.g., the learning of motor
skills, the generation of novel behaviours, the formulation and expression of
moral preferences, the telling of lies, etc. This is a theme that I return to
throughout the book.

Interview – Sean Spence

361

3. Do you think that a neuro-philosophy, as Henrik Walter pointed out, could
be useful for a science of volition?
Yes, I think there are certain areas where the interests of neurology and
philosophy overlap sufficiently for synergy to emerge. Such areas of
convergence may also yield useful insights into disturbances of volition
(Spence 1999).
One area that provides a clear example is the problem of hysteria (or
conversion disorder), which I address in Chapter 7 of The Actor’s Brain. As
the reader may be aware, the sort of problem we encounter in hysteria may be
such that a patient presents as being unable to move her arm, for no apparent
reason. Medical examinations and investigations are ‘negative’ and it seems to
the doctor that there is no biological, physical explanation for the symptom
(i.e., paralysis). In addition, the impairment appears to come and go; it may be
present in company but not when the patient believes herself to be alone,
unobserved. The patient says she cannot move yet, medically, there is no
apparent impediment to her movement. Eventually, the medical ‘explanation’
offered is that there is some unconscious process that prevents the patient from
moving (a process which serves to resolve a latent conflict of some sort). To
borrow one of Freud’s examples, it may be that a young woman exhibits a
paralysed right arm, which impedes and (thereby) conceals her unconscious
desire to hit her father (Freud and Breuer 1991, pp. 93-94). Somewhat
anachronistically, this form of hysteria has served to enshrine a Freudian
understanding of the mind in the psychiatric diagnostic systems currently
available to us (e.g., the DSM IV; APA, 1994). These systems each require the
physician to diagnose hysteria/conversion on the basis of the patient
exhibiting a functional deficit, which is neither attributable to a physical cause
nor (explicitly) the product of feigning (i.e., malingering). However, this
distinction between hysteria (unconscious, unknowing causation) and
malingering (conscious, knowing causation) is impossible to justify on
empirical grounds; unless, that is, one believes that the physician can tell what
the patient is thinking (Spence 1999)!
However, there is another way of formulating the problem of hysterical
conversion, which, informed by the language of action philosophy (and
cognitive neuropsychology), actually points us towards the likely causal
mechanisms at play. For, while the Freudian formulation of our patient’s
paralysis emphasizes her inability to move due to the influence of some

362

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

unconscious force (outside her awareness), closer examination of hysterical

phenomenology in the light of action philosophy suggests something quite
different (Spence 1999). The patient exhibiting a hysterical paralysis
maintains her symptom while she is awake and alert; she ‘loses’ her symptom
when sedated or distracted. Indeed, it is this symptomatic inconsistency that
prompts the diagnosis (above; though notice, that the same phenomenology
would arise in malingering). Hence, it is likely that the patient’s attention to
action is, in some way, necessary for the maintenance of her paralysis; it is not
an unconscious process. Therefore, while we may draw a philosophical
distinction between an ‘action’, chosen by an agent, and a motor event, or
movement (e.g., a reflex), arising automatically, what we appear to have in the
hysterical symptom is an example of the former action, a voluntary action (no
matter how aberrant): the patient’s attention to action is pivotally implicated in
its maintenance (this is the opposite of what we might expect were the
symptom to be maintained by a Freudian unconscious).
Furthermore, if we then go back to the empirical literature, we find that
certain objective (e.g., EEG, EMG and ergonomic) measures acquired from
hysteria patients do in fact support the contribution of so-called ‘higher
centres’ to the ‘performance’ of hysterical symptoms (see Chapter 7 of The
Actor’s Brain). Hence, combining an analysis of hysterical phenomenology,
with the vocabulary of action philosophy, and the acquisition of more subtle
biological measures leads us to a deeper (and contrasting) view of the nature of
hysteria: it is not a product of unconscious desires but may be understood
cognitively as the product of an executive system (where conscious awareness
assists in its maintenance).
4. If we discover an abnormal situation in the volitional processes like one of
the patients with anarchic hand syndrome, can we infer that a ‘normal’
agent exists and acts somewhere in the brain?
In the case of the anarchic hand syndrome, where a man may experience his
right hand as reaching for and grasping objects inappropriately, ‘against his
will’, I think what we are witnessing is evidence that agency may be frustrated.
It is as if an automatic sequence of behaviours (a ‘schema’, in the vocabulary of
Shallice 1988) had been liberated from the hierarchical control of the motor
system as a whole. Hence, the limb appears to behave autonomously: the man’s
agency does not encompass his affected limb. He retains awareness of the

Interview – Sean Spence

363

discrepancy and this suggests that ‘somewhere’ within the nervous system
there is a rational actor ‘looking on’; he cannot exert control over the limb but
he knows enough of his plans as to know that they are not being ‘obeyed’. In
Chapter 5 of the book I deal with the different forms of anarchic and alien limb
that may arise, and what seems common to them is that the patient, the
frustrated agent, retains an awareness of what they would like their limb to do
or refrain from doing, yet they cannot control it. Hence, they continue to
experience themselves as agents (with preferred goals), but they are faulty
agents, agents who cannot realize those goals.
Indeed, we might contrast such patients with those who experience what
seems to be an even more profound disturbance of agency: namely, utilization
syndrome. For while the anarchic hand patient knows that their limb ‘will not
do what I want it to do’, the patient exhibiting (severe) utilization appears not
to notice that their limbs are interacting automatically with the environment.
Hence, if a pen is left on the table they will start to write with it, if there is a cup
they will drink from it. They may even perform quite complex behaviours, in
response to environmental cues, apparently without any awareness that their
behaviour is being manipulated.1 So, in this case, we seem to witness both the
disturbance of objective movement (control of motor events, for these are not
chosen ‘acts’) and the absence of a subjective agent (since, in extreme cases,
the patient/subject seems unaware of their lack of volitional control, their
manipulation by their surroundings).
5. Some philosophers, like Dennett for example, consider Libet’s
experiments too Cartesian. Libet’s original intention was to discover and
legitimate the mind against or beyond the brain. Do we have to reformulate
these experiments? Are they corrupted by a mild form of dualism?
I think it is inevitable that Libet’s experiments be conceptualised in dualist
terms, merely because of the methodology used and the questions he asked. In
essence, he was examining the correlation between certain subjective firstperson phenomena (the perception of an urge to move) and externally detected
(objective) third-person phenomena (EEG and EMG signals, the latter
indicative of movement). So, his results would inevitably consist of a temporal
comparison between the emergence of a highly subjective event occurring in
1

See Lhermitte 1983.

364

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

‘inner space’ (the intention to move) and a verifiable, manifest event arising in
the outer world (the movement itself). Hence, to adequately understand his
findings would seem to require a solution to the ‘hard problem’ of
consciousness, although further empirical refinement would still be necessary
to distinguish correlation from causation.
6. In The Actor’s Brain you say that neuroscience is searching for the ‘it’: do
you think that this ‘it’ could be the intentions? Which role do intentions
play in the volitional mechanism?
When I mention an ‘it’ I am really attempting to describe the source of
intentions, whatever it is that precedes our conscious choice, both in terms of
its temporal and neurophysiological characteristics.
7. One of the purposes of your book is to deconstruct Libet’s arguments. Can
you explain how this is possible?
As I state at the beginning of the book, I regard Libet as having made a major
contribution to this field and it is because of its importance that I seek to clarify
what it means. One way of summarizing his contribution is to say that he
demonstrated the temporal constraints impacting human volition: whether that
is our awareness of our own agency (becoming aware of our intentions only
after they appear to have been set in motion) or our awareness of ‘incoming’
sensory data (only becoming aware of sensorimotor phenomena (qualia) after a
finite period of specific neurological activity, so-called ‘neuronal adequacy’,
has taken place).2 Hence, what several of his experimental designs serve to
show us is the limited extent of our agency. If I only become aware of
intentions to act after their related act has begun to emerge from the brain then
to what extent am I in control (Spence, 1996)? It strikes me that Libet’s work
emphasizes volitional constraint and there is an account that may be given of
the many constraints that impact our apparent volitional freedom (and I deal
with these in ensuing chapters of the book: temporal, neurochemical, socially
hierarchical, etc.).
But it is also possible to critique some of the conclusions Libet derived
from his own work. For instance, he argued that free will was still justifiable if it
2

See Libet 2004 for an overview.

Interview – Sean Spence

365

functioned as a form of ‘veto’, a kind of ‘free won’t’ active prior to actions.
Hence, being aware that an emerging action was inappropriate the
subject/agent could decide to stop it or change course. This would provide
evidence of freedom. My response to this is that if Libet’s basic findings are
correct, i.e., if a period of neuronal adequacy is necessary for us to be aware of
subjective phenomena (including our own thoughts), then the veto thought,
the idea of stopping an ongoing action is itself likely to be the product of
foregoing neural activity (arising out of awareness). So the veto thought is just
as ‘post hoc’ as the initial ‘urge to move’. They both appear to arise in
subjectivity after neural control mechanisms have commenced. So, if Libet’s
neuronal adequacy hypothesis is correct then, the veto does not preserve the
libertarian’s notion of free will.
8. Do you think agency is an important topic in the investigations about free
will?
Yes!
9. Is it correct to think that free will is an evolutionary instrument that biology
gives to humans in order for them to direct their own behaviour?
Clearly, this would be a highly teleological way of understanding the outcome
of evolution. What seems to be the case is that the existence and optimal
functioning of the human nervous system supports the generation of what
appear to be purposeful behaviours under certain circumstances. Nevertheless,
as we examine each of the many domains of biological, psychological and social
influence at play within and around us, we find that we can increasingly identify
tangible contributors to human actions, or at least, apparent constraints upon
its parameters. This has led me to focus on the idea of a ‘Human response
space’ (the subject of Chapter 10 in the book). What I am trying to get at here
is the idea that there might exist a finite, though probably highly variable
capacity for freedom, varying both between and within individuals over time.
Hence, we might be each capable of acting freely under optimal conditions but
the opportunities for those conditions to arise and the specifications of
‘optimality’ might vary greatly between individuals. The man who sits in the
refugee camp, close to the point of starvation may exhibit less purposeful
behaviour than the choreographer in prime physical health who is at the height

366

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

of their powers. These are dramatic examples but the book abounds with more
subtle examples: e.g., the extent to which prefrontal lobe dopamine
metabolism may impact inappropriate repetitive behaviours, or serotonergic
dysfunction relate to violent self-harm, or the presence of an apparent authority
figure sanction the performance of cruel acts towards a stranger. There are
many domains of influence that may distort or constrain Human response
space.
10. Some philosophers think that the real problem of free will is to define
exactly what this very concept means; for example if it corresponds to the
intentions, or the power of acting or to long-term decisions and choices.
Do you think philosophy could help neuroscience clarify the notions in
this field?
Help in fine analysis of action and avoidance of sloppy thinking (remember
Libet paradox, veto and my long-term comments…)
11. Can the movements that a player makes in sports like basketball or soccer
be considered an example of the gap between automatic acts and
conscious deliberative acts?
Yes, absolutely, Shallice – schema, increasing automation with practice.
12. Your recent work is about the neural correlates of deception: does it
invoke the function of ‘higher’ brain systems?
Chapter 8, summarizes. Of interest to a neuroscientist not least because it is
one of those areas where imaging may inform us of something we did not know
already. As in the case of hysteria, where we wish to make a distinction that
cannot be justified empirically in the clinic (i.e., between ‘hysteria’ and
feigning), here we have the distinction between truth and lying, a distinction
that most humans can judge at little above the level of chance (Bond and De
Paulo 2006). Furthermore, it is another example of an executive control
process, one that a subject must attempt to deploy in real-time, e.g., when
calling to mind, suppressing or creating new scenarios.

Interview – Sean Spence

367

REFERENCES

American Psychiatric Association (1994). Diagnostic Criteria from DSM IV.
Washington DC: American Psychiatric Association.
Bond, C. F., & De Paulo, B. M. (2006). Accuracy of deception judgements.
Personality and Social Psychology Review, 10(3), 214-234.
Freud, S., & Breuer, J. (1991). Studies on Hysteria. (Tr. by J. Strachey & A.
Strachey). London: Penguin. [First published in The Standard Edition
of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, Vol. II.
London: Hogarth Press and Institute of Psycho-Analysis, 1955]
Lhermitte, F. (1983). ‘Utilization behaviour’ and its relation to lesions of the
frontal lobes. Brain; 106, 237-255.
Libet, B. (2004). Mind Time: The Temporal Factor in Consciousness.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Libet, B., Gleason, C. A., Wright, E. W., & Pearl, D. K. (1983). Time of
conscious intentions to act in relation to onset of cerebral activity. Brain,
106, 623-642.
MacMurray, J. (1991). The Self as Agent. London: Faber and Faber. [1957]
Shallice, T. (1988). From Neuropsychology to Mental Structure. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Spence, S. A. (1996). Free will in the light of neuropsychiatry. Philosophy,
Psychiatry & Psychology, 3(2), 75-90.
Spence, S. A. (1999). Hysterical paralyses as disorders of action. Cognitive
Neuropsychiatry, 4(3), 203-226.

368

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Interview

Daniel Dennett
Edited by Marco Fenici* and Stefano Di Piazza*
DANIEL CLEMENT DENNETT (1942, Boston, MA) is an American philosopher
and cognitive scientist. His research work mostly concerns the philosophy of
mind, the philosophy of science and the philosophy of biology. He has been
one of W. V. O. Quine’s students at Harvard University, where he graduated in
philosophy in 1963. In 1965, he achieved his Ph.D in philosophy at the
University of Oxford under Gilbert Ryle’s supervision. In his academic career,
he has taught at the universities of Irvine, Harvard, Pittsburgh, Oxford, and the
École Normale Supérieure in Paris. Since 1971, he is professor of philosophy
at Tufts University, where he co-directs with Ray Jackendoff the Center for
Cognitive Studies. Among his books, Content and Consciousness (1969),
Brainstorms (1978), The Mind's I (with D. R. Hofstadter, 1981), Elbow
Room (1984), The Intentional Stance (1987), Consciousness Explained
(1991), Darwin's Dangerous Idea (1995), Kinds of Minds (1996),
Brainchildren (1998), Freedom Evolves (2003), Sweet Dreams (2005),
Breaking the Spell (2006), and Science and Religion: Are They Compatible?
(2011).
1. Professor Dennett, thank you very much for accepting this interview with
Humana.Mente. Consistent with the topic of this issue, I would like to
discuss your Freedom Evolves (2003). Can you explain to our readers what
urged you to write a book about the problem of free will?
Let me start by saying that we should anchor the concept of free will to the fact
that people think that it is important. I can define free will in such a way that we
do not have it but this is little interesting. Instead, there is a variety of concepts
of free will worth wanting that we are talking about. What is important about
free will is that it gives us the chance to be moral agents. Chimpanzees do not
have minds that can appreciate what murder is. Accordingly, if a chimpanzee
* University of Siena

370

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

kills a person, this is not murder. Similarly, we do not hold children
responsible or retarded people, in that we do not think they have free will in an
important sense. Instead, it is normal adults who are morally competent. It is to
this capacity to be moral agents, therefore, to be moved by reasons, to be able
to preserve and protect our mental autonomy through time — as when we
discover, for instance, that other agents are intending to usurp our autonomy
or to manipulate us — that the concept of free will in which I am interested is
connected.
2. A long philosophical tradition denies that we are free because of the
supposed truth of determinism. Indeed, many philosophers have argued,
we cannot say that we are free to act if what is happening in a second is
already defined by the current situation of the world. How can you develop
a concept of free will that is important to moral agency while at the same
time it does not oppose determinism?
The key concept, herein, is our ability for anticipation. We are free to act
because we are able to look at the world that we are in and anticipate likely
futures, evaluate them, and then avoid the ones that we evaluate as less valuable.
It is this capacity that makes us moral agents. At the same time, this capacity
does not define a variety of free will outside of the deterministic natural order.
A simple case of that is if I throw a rock at your head, and you duck, avoiding
getting hit with the rock. Thanks to the deterministic path of light rays, being
regular and predictable, the light that bounced off the rock into your eyes
allowed you to anticipate the trajectory of that rock with great accuracy. Thus,
determinism is actually our friend, because it provides regularities in the world
that we can exploit. It is this mega-capacity to secure the good and to avoid the
bad that is the essence of free will. You want to have your will cause you to
move in the best directions by your assessment of the world’s situation. You
have desires and intentions you would like to fulfil. Perception causes you to
acquire facts about the world that are relevant to those desires. When all goes
well, those facts about the world cause your body to make the choices that will
most probably satisfy your deepest intentions. That is what free will worth
wanting is: the capacity to be guided to effective choices.

Interview – Daniel Dennett

371

3. Your concept of free will is thus preferentially related to the complexity of
the relation between human agency and the environment. We act freely
because we are able to cope with unexpected changes in the environment.
However, the concept of free will is traditionally connected to the
perception of our own agency. We retain us to be free because we feel free
when making our choices. Do you think that this perception of free will is
an illusion?
No, that is not an illusion or, if it is, it is like the user’s illusion on our
computer. When using our computer, we have the sense that we can open and
close files, and we can move them around, drag and drop, and so forth. The
actual processes involved behind the scenes in the computer are more
complicated than the icons suggest: the interface between the user and the
computer is a valuable — because vivid and memorable — simplification of the
actual events. Our brain has a lot of user illusions as well — which is a good
thing. They help us coping with all the complexities of our brain by
oversimplifying the vision of what is going on in it. According to this user
illusion, we are not wrong when we see our future as open. In fact, our future is
open in a very important sense. I will take a deliberately simplified example. If
you play chess against your computer, your computer has the perspective that
the future is open. Indeed, it has the sense that it can choose any of the legal
moves and that so can you. If that presumption is built into the control of the
software, then your computer — although it is an entirely deterministic system
— has the perspective that the future is open. But it has a perspective of
openness because that perspective is required for making choices. Similarly,
our perception to be able to act freely is related to our perception that the
future is open — that is, that we perceive ourselves as capable of choosing
between different real alternatives. This does not means that the future actually
is open, but it is important to make our choices.
4. Thus, your compatibilist view acknowledges that determinism is true while
at the same time this does not affect the reality of free will. However, many
have claimed that free will is opposed to the truth of determinism. For
instance, many neuroscientists nowadays reject human free will based on
Libet’s (1985) findings, which correlate neural events and the
phenomenological experience to decide to act. According to them, Libet

372

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

demonstrated that our brain decides to act before we do. What do you think
about that?
I think that the interpretation of Libet’s findings as demonstrating that specific
individuated neural events are the real causes of our decisions to act is the huge
artefact of a mistaken conception of consciousness. Libet’s work is a perfect
paradigm of how you get in trouble if you are what I called a ―Cartesian
materialist‖. If you think of consciousness as being something that happens in
one place of the brain, to which all contents must be moved to be experienced,
then you make a big mistake. But look at how you put the questions: ―the brain
decides to act before we do‖. Who is this we? Where is it? If you are thinking
of the we as being somehow resident in one place or another somewhere in the
brain, and you are thinking that the decision is already made before it arrives
there, you are just making a huge mistake. When I wrote Consciousness
Explained (1991), I was specifically trying to expose this error. I used Libet’s
work as my chief target. Amazingly, I underestimated how potent the
seductiveness of Cartesian materialism is. People just will not give it up. They
all agree when I say that Cartesian materialism is a bad idea, and then two
minutes later they are right back using conceptualizations which would only
make sense if they are supposing the Cartesian theory. However, if you do not
permit yourself the mistake of the Cartesian theory, you cannot formulate
Libet’s results in a way that looks problematical at all.
5. The interpretation of Libet’s experiments is significant not only to the very
issue of free will. Indeed, many have claimed that, if our free will does not
determine our behaviour, then our social concepts should be changed. For
instance, if free will is an illusion, then a retributivist conception of justice,
according to which criminals are judged and punished based on the harm
they have caused, is not acceptable anymore. They would not be morally
responsible for the harm they had caused.
That is what Greene and Cohen (2004) say. There are two things to say about
this. First, what Greene and Cohen claim is subordinated to the condition ―if
free will is an illusion‖, which is not the case. But, in any way, one of the main
points I was trying to make is that the relationship between a mild gentle
human retributivism and what we know about the brain is intact. I resist
vigorously the idea that we should abandon all elements of retributivism from

Interview – Daniel Dennett

373

our view of the law, and move to a sort of pure medicalization idea. Because, if
we did that, we would no longer be able to make the distinctions we need if we
are to apply the law, not just to punish the guilty criminal but also to enforce
the signing of contracts, for instance. You need the concept of a morally
competent agent for that.
6. By ―pure medicalization idea‖ you perhaps mean a consequentialist view of
justice, according to which judgement and punishment are inflicted
according to the social benefit of their consequences. Why, according to
you, staying away from consequentialism is so important?
Because it does not permit the protection of freedoms. Consequentialism
treats law violation as a sickness; and, if you’re a sick person, you go to an
institution to cure you. In an authoritarian state, when people say they have
broken the law because the law is unjust, they get the reply: ―Well, your brain
is not sufficiently mature for that, and we need to cure you by appropriate
punishment with good social consequences‖. Well, we want to be able to
restore ourselves to freedom by taking the punishment because we broke the
law. If you get a car speeding you would pay a ticket, you do not want to be sent
to the speeding hospital for a month. And of course if you really get rid of
retributivism and if your model is a medicalization model, then one cannot
distinguish the morally competent, adult agents from those who are not able to
make promises, sign contracts, and so forth.
7. If consequentialism cannot grant the conception of human being as morally
responsible agents, how do you think that a retributivist conception of
justice may do better? After all, even retributivism has its flaws. ―An eye for
an eye, a tooth for a tooth‖ is not what we may call a valuable saying for a
modern conception of justice. In some cases people are not morally
responsible for what they do (e.g., children, mentally disturbed people),
thereby the punishment nor addresses an intention to break the law neither
has a positive effect for the society. Considering these cases, how can a
retributivist conception of justice be preferable to consequentialism?
There’s a process that protects us all from the excesses of retributivism. We
legislate past laws, then, in order to keep respect of the law, we acknowledge
very exclusive conditions not to apply it. This creates the opportunity for

374

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

people to try finding loophole, trying to exploit the exclusive conditions we
have introduced — everybody always tries to exploit any law, whether it’s a tax
law, or any kind of law. Thus, we have to come back legislating, and to do
something to prevent people from exploiting the special exclusive conditions
we previously introduced. This creates an ―arms race‖ between exemptions
and exploitation of exemptions that is the source of stability in the law. I would
like to take a very simple case: how old do you have to be in Italy to have a
driving licence?
18 years old.
Ok, it is 16 in the United States. Is one of them right and one of them wrong?
No, and maybe you can make the case that you have to be a politician, not a
scientist, to lower the age to 16 in Italy — or to raise the age to 18 in the United
States. In any case, once we have made that decision — for instance, we decided,
that you need to be 18 to drive a car — we fix a legal threshold. If you are not 18,
we do not look never more at how mature you are, we do not care if you are a
genius, or the most literate person in the world, if you are not 18, then you
cannot drive yet. On the other side, if you are 19, then you can be pretty idiotic,
you can be pretty dangerous, and you still have the right to drive. Then we
adjust that in turn. Indeed, we say: ―Maybe, if you are caught during this or that
you are going to lose your licence for a while, or maybe you cannot drive at
night, or a truck, and so forth‖. All of this is done to provide some bright lines
as the law says where Nature has not done big bright lines. It is not that when
you wake up on your eighteenth birthday your brain changes so we can expect
from neuroscience another source of evidence about where to draw these
bright lines (e.g., about the right age to drive). There is nothing to say exactly.
At what age people should be allowed to drive is a political issue, and we want
to keep it that way. We want to be able to rely on the world’s future, and do not
allow anyone to deprive our liberty or our opportunities to set these edges
because somebody has decided that we are not competent anymore.
8. Resuming, you are suggesting that we are always judged in front of the law
according to a standard of competence which is not fixed by Nature.
Accordingly, we do not want to delegate our capacity to fix these standards.
Any reasonable view about justice should keep retributivism — i.e., the
principle that we are judged according to what we did — but also the

Interview – Daniel Dennett

375

principle that the standards defining the moral competence according to
which we are judged may change. Is this correct?
Exactly. That is why I think that a mild form of ―revisable‖ retributivism is
preferable.
9. We long discussed the incompatibilist position of the eliminative
materialist. Considering another incompatibilist position, the libertarian,
who claims that we do have free will not just because we are able to protect
our mental economy but also because we are able to do that by ourselves —
that is, without being caused by anything external to us — may object that
your definition of free will is very weak. What would you reply?
Yes, my concept of free will would seem like a weak one to the libertarians. To
act freely, they claim, you have to act independently from external causes, that
is, indeterministically. However, what they have not shown is why
indeterminism would make it any better. I have argued that, if what I do is
completely random, then I am no more responsible for that than if it is
determined: deterministic chaos essentially is indistinguishable from
randomness. I think it should be an embarrassment to the libertarians that the
very models we have of randomness is throwing the dice, or flipping a coin.
Indeed, those models are chaotic and important, but they are not random.
Instead, I argue, those models are useful, and they indicate a way to construct a
concept of free will that is relevant to the definition of us as moral agents.
Indeed, the unpredictability of chaotic events — such as flipping a coin, or
something like that — is the kind of unpredictability needed to decouple from
features of the world, hence to act freely. We show to have this kind of
unpredictability in our behaviour, but actually even animals employ. The rabbit
that runs from the fox takes a very chaotic trajectory. The butterfly moves very
chaotically. These are evolutionary adaptations that make these animals harder
to catch. That kind of randomness, that kind of freedom is all around us in
Nature. It is not the kind of free will the libertarian would like to have for the
human species. It is not free will, either. But it is all we need in order to
construct a concept of free will that is relevant to the definition of us as moral
agents.

376

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

10. You seems suggesting that free will is not construed as a sharp-bounded
concept. This poses the issue of how free will is obtained. From an
evolutionary standpoint, should we say that free will has been gradually
construed during the history of life on Earth?
Definitively yes. From an evolutionary standpoint, the fact that only one
species currently has free will is only an empirical fact. Maybe in the future
there will be more. The important thing is that free will is a new phenomenon
in the biosphere. That means that free will has nothing to do with the physics,
indeed the physics has not changed since the origin of the Earth. What has
changed is biology. There has been an explosion of evitability in our world.
The earliest forms of life could not produce any significant behaviour to chance
their destiny. Consider again my examples of the rabbit or of the butterfly that
move very chaotically. Those are all examples of avoiding activities. However,
our nervous systems have more estimable competences that animals and even
our ancestors did not have. We can avoid all kinds of things, and of course we
can even avoid avoiding, and we can avoid avoiding avoiding, and so forth. We
have all recursive capacities to avoid things that we can anticipate.
11. The absence of sharp boundaries to the concept of free will also poses an
issue with respect to the ontogenesis. Should we say that children are
already born with the capacity to act freely, or is it acquired during child
development?
I think both. Even small babies have the fundamental capacity to address the
world and to make simple choices — e.g., whether to lift this or that hand up.
However, at the beginning of their lives, they have not yet coordinated their
sense of action, and, with this respect, they still do not act freely. This is
something which requires more time. We know they go through a period when
they are simply unable to avert their eyes from a stimulus, and the capacity to
move your attention away from one object to another is actually something that
requires maturity. Until you do not have that, I think you do not have much of
the bases for free will.
12. Herein, I see an important issue for your proposal. It seems to me that
you believe that language is the most important ability we need to detach
form contextual stimulation, thereby even to become free agents.

Interview – Daniel Dennett

377

Yes, language certainly is very important. In order for an agent to be moved by
reasons as concept, it is very important for her to have language.
13. Now, I would like to understand the reasons why you think that language
is really important. Let me now just quote your Kinds of Minds (1996, pp.
146-147): «Of all the mind tools we acquire in the course of furnishing
our brains from the stockpiles of culture, none are more important, of
course, than words — first spoken, then written. Words make us more
intelligent by making cognition easier, in the same way (many times
multiplied) that beacons and landmarks make navigation in the world
easier for simple creatures». You are suggesting that language scaffolds
though in that word learning increases our cognitive capacities. This
proposal alone raises some perplexity to me. Word learning does not
seem a fundamental ability to language development. In fact, even animals
can learn words by associative processes. Instead, other features of
language really might make the difference to the development of our
cognitive abilities. For instance, we know that children exploit syntactic
hints in their word learning processes…
Well, animals do not really learn words. They learn sounds that have
associations, and that is a big difference. I think Terrence Deacon has
important things to say about this in his book of The Symbolic Species
(Deacon 1997), and also my colleagues Ray Jackendoff in his book
Foundations of Language (Jackendoff 2002). What I really like about Ray’s
recent work is that syntax is still important but it is no longer the driving
machine of language acquisition. Syntax is a feature of words, but words are a
sort of semi-autonomous entities, which appropriately move from one
language to another. I have been recently thinking of words as a sort of Java
Applet. On your laptop, you have a Java Virtual Machine, which permits people
to write Java applets who will run beautifully on your laptop no matter what the
architecture of the laptop is. Similarly, you have a sort of EVM, an English
Virtual Machine. That permits me — without I have to know how your brain
works — to talk to you and to know that the words I am telling to you play
roughly the role that I intended to play because you have the EVM system for
realising those words when they come in. This is the reason why words are not
sounds. Sounds are just means that can be pronounced; however, these means
convey informational structures, they are like software to the brain.

378

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

14. If syntax is secondary relevant to develop language, what is distinctive of
words that can alone provide the complexity of language?
I think that words open up the explosion of cultural transmission because they
are the key to the digitalization of language. When I talk about digitalization, I
am thinking to the fact that, for instance, when you download something from
the web, there are lots of tiny variations in the voltages but the finally
digitalized value is either 0 or 1. In the end, every voltage is corrected to a prefixed value by a norm. The same thing is true for the words. Digitalisation gives
language its fidelity. This is very important. You cannot transmit anything
without a set of basic fixed elements. This is clear if we look at primates.
Consider, for instance, chimpanzees. They exhibit a smattering of culture but
they cannot do anything combinatorial — certainly, they can pass along few
local techniques for breaking up a nut, for instance, or for fishing termites, but
really they cannot put them together in interesting ways. And so their
capacities for transmission are very little.
15. I see. Therefore, the ability to learn words, and not just sounds, is what
you think grounds our higher level cognitive abilities. Is language equally
important to acquire the ability to enter what you called the «intentional
stance» (Dennett 1987)? This is a question that always bothered me.
Indeed, the capacity to assume the intentional stance is connected to the
capacity to attribute rationality, and rationality is clearly a normative,
social concept. However, the intentional stance might also be hard-wired
in our brain as a case limit of the design stance. On which side of the
Nature/Nurture divide should we put the capacity to enter the intentional
stance?
On both sides. I think that, at its bases, the capacity to enter the intentional
stance is like an instinct, that in principle we might share even with animals.
And indeed, there have been a lot of research in the last 35 years on the so
called theory of mind that shows that animals do attribute cognitive states to
others — at least to some degree — and that certainly human beings, even from
the very young edge, are already alert to picking up the symptoms of the
intentional system. Despite of that, there is something in the capacity to enter
the intentional stance that is the outcome of cultural inheritance. In fact, very
often we over-attribute understanding and rationality to animals and to young

Interview – Daniel Dennett

379

children. In a sense, we deliberately do this, we treat children as more rational
than they are, and this behaviour provides them some scaffoldings. Due to our
tendency to treat children as more rational than they are, children grow a more
mature capacity to adopt the intentional stance.
16. Before finishing this interview, I would like to discuss more in general the
extent of your research work. In listening to you giving a speech some
days ago, I felt as if you have some sort of social, or ethic, aspiration in
your work. You are concerned with the problem of free will because it is
related to people’s concept of human agency, and you want to change
people’s way of thinking about moral agency. Is this correct?
Yes, it is. I realised that I am opposing a tradition that is several thousand years
old but it is simply a mistake to think that free will in the morally important
sense is in any conflict with determinism. Now, various people have realised
that over the millennia. I think that early appreciations of this were not very
convincing too many people because we did not have conceptual tools to take
carefully about reason and intention, but now we do. I think that the idea that
moral agency depends on physics, or on the indeterminism of physics, is not
just a mistake, but a sort of crippling mistakes. It is a confusion that can lead to
seriously pernicious social consequences. For instance, Vohs and Schooler
(2008) showed that people who read a passage explaining that they do not have
free will are more likely to cheat. I think that, if that vision really takes hold, this
can be a misconstrual of the science, a one that is really socially unfortunate.
17. So we have that bad philosophy made from scientists might bring people
to have bad ideas about moral agency?
Yes, and I think that it is philosopher’s personal responsibility helping
everyday folk to understand the implication of science. Right now there is a lot
of confusion on this very score. I think that scientists are very good at
confusing things, and who better should do clarification work than the
philosophers? So we have a job. It is an important job.
18. In conclusion, you think the idea that free will is not compatible with
determinism is a false myth, which should be abandoned. I wonder

380

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

whether you think that philosophical analysis should bring people to
abandon other concepts — specifically, the concept of God. I would like to
ask you for a comment on an Italian contemporary debate. Giulio Giorello
recently wrote a book, Senza Dio. Del buon uso dell'ateismo (Giorello
2010), in which he supports the importance of atheism as a value for
democratic societies. He argues that denominational dialogue is not
enough to democratic societies if they do not also respect the opinion of
those who are not the followers of any religion. Such an idea is open to
two interpretations. On a weaker politically-correct reading, religions
should be ready to confront even with those accounts rejecting the
existence of God. Accordingly, atheism represents a social value because
it sticks the public debate on values to a human dimension. On a strongest
impolite reading, which maybe Giorello is also supporting, religions are
supposed not to be able to dialogue with anyone denying the existence of
God. Therefore, atheism is a value because it remembers the importance
of reason against any form of absolutist obscurantism of reason. On this
second reading, the concept of God becomes more harmful than neutral.
Which kind of reading do you think is the more proper to the current
situation?
I think that this is a delicate political question, not a metaphysical issue. What
we are currently seeing is the continuous retreat of religious conceptions of the
world in the face of the advance of the scientific understanding. This is a
painful process, and we should recognize that a lot of people had a lot of
trouble with it. We should accept that well meaning and intelligent people are
trying to devise gentle revisions that will preserve as much as possible of their
traditions. I think that is a respectable attempt in what I think it is just
postponing the inevitable. We should be firm and as polite as we can be with it,
but we should not continue to honour the invocation of mysticism and
irrationality, and treat it as if it had some privileged position in the space of
public reason. I think that the impolite atheists would say — as I myself used to
say — that other religions very often want to ―play intellectual tennis without a
net‖. They use reason when they think they can score points, and, as soon as
they are going get stuffed, they play the faith card, and they switch to a different
game. I am simply not going to play that game anymore.

Interview – Daniel Dennett

381

19. So you are more on Giorello’s side… but what about the concept of God?
Do you think we should get out the idea of it, or is there a chance to keep
it? Let me translate the question in other words. Feuerbach thought that
religion is anthropologically grounded, thereby, it cannot be eradicated
from the image the Man has of himself. On the contrary, Marx thought
that religion is a part of the Super-structure, thereby a day we will be able
to get rid of it. In the debate between the two, you seem to me definitively
on Marx’s side…
Well, I think that that is not quite right the way how to formulate it. It may be
that human frailty and disability are so strong that getting rid of the concept of
God entirely is not what is going to happen. In the United States we have these
hyper-liberal religious denominations or confessions, like the Episcopalians
(i.e., the American branch of the Anglicans), the Congregationalists, and the
Unitarians, holding that there is at most one God. Most of them are really
atheist, but they like to go to church and to have their own community. If
religion were like that everywhere, there would be no particular reason to
discourage it. So, I am in favour of talking candidly about religion. If we just
get used to talking more openly, more candidly, and more factually about
religion, getting away from the idea that we are not supposed to talk about
these things that would be a breath of fresh air.

REFERENCES

Deacon, T. W. (1997). The Symbolic Species: The Co-Evolution of Language
and the Brain. New York: W. W. Norton & Company.
Dennett, D. C. (1987). The Intentional Stance. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dennett, D. C. (1991). Consciousness Explained. Boston: Little Brown &
Company.
Dennett, D. C. (1996). Kinds of Minds: Toward An Understanding Of
Consciousness. New York: Basic Books.
Dennett, D. C. (2003). Freedom Evolves. New York: Viking Adult.
Giorello, G. (2010). Senza Dio. Del buon uso dell'ateismo. Milano:
Longanesi.

382

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

Greene, J., & Cohen, J. (2004). For the law, neuroscience changes nothing
and everything. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of
London - Series B: Biological Sciences, 359(1451), 1775-1785.
Jackendoff, R. (2002). Foundations of Language: Brain, Meaning, Grammar,
Evolution. New York: Oxford University Press.
Libet, B. (1985). Unconscious cerebral initiative and the role of conscious will
in voluntary action. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 8(4), 529-539.
Vohs, K. D., & Schooler, J. W. (2008). The value of believing in free will:
Encouraging a belief in determinism increases cheating. Psychological
Science, 19(1), 49-54.

Report

Truth, Knowledge and Reality

SIFA (Società Italiana Filosofia Analitica) – IX National Congress
University of Padua, Dep. of Philosophy, 23-25 September 2010

Claudio Calosi*

claudio.calosi@uniurb.it

The IX National congress of the Italian Society for Analytic Philosophy was
held in Padua, from 23 to 25 September 2010. It was ambitiously titled Truth,
Knowledge and Reality and has welcomed more than a hundred speakers from
all over the world. It has been structured both in plenary and parallel sessions
covering areas as diverse as aesthetics, practical philosophy, epistemology,
metaphysics, philosophy of science, logic, philosophy of language and
philosophy of mind. Needless to say it is impossible even to think of giving a
comprehensive account of the conference. In what follows we will then focus
on some of the given talks.
We could not but start from one of the most important contributions to the
overall congress. In a plenary session Stathis Psillos (University o Athens) and
Mauro Dorato (University of Roma 3) have discussed Ontic Structrural
Realism1 and the possibility to add modality in its support.
Psillos in his paper repeats his celebrated critique to OSR. It has been
argued, in particular by French and Ladyman, that this critique can be
overcome if only we add modality to the picture, i.e we require that structure
has an irreducible modal nature. Psillos then rehearses various ways in which
modality can be added in support of OSR and finds them all untenable. In
particular he argues that the most promising strategy, that of employing so
called structural universals, fails on both physical and metaphysical grounds.
Mauro Dorato, in his discussion of Psillos’ contribution, has pushed his
points even further. He claims that the compatibility claims between physics
and metaphysics are indeed all we can ask and that we should stop imposing
metaphysical categories, such that of structure, as intended sometimes by
* Urbino University
1
OSR from now on.

384

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

OSR, in order to describe the ontology of natural sciences. Rather we should
understand science in its own terms.
In what follows we focus on three different papers given in the parallel
sessions. In the first one, Towards a C-Theory of Time, Matt Farr (University
of Bristol) attempts to construct a theory of time that is a viable alternative to
the main celebrated theories, namely A and B theories of time. The main
difference between a C-theory of time and its more celebrated rivals is that this
theory does away with the notion of directionality of time, understood as
directionality of time itself rather than objects and events in time. Farr’s main
motivation for constructing such a theory comes from physics. Fundamental
laws of physics such as laws of classical and relativistic dynamics, laws of the
electromagnetic theory, and the Schroedinger’s equation governing quantum
evolution are all time reversal invariant. This fact, Farr contends, should be
adequately reflected in a metaphysical theory about time. The primitive
notion of such a C-theory should be Betweness, B (e1, e2, e3), for event e2 is
between events e1 and e3. This account leaves open the question of the
temporal relation holding between e1 and e3 and so it genuinely does away with
any directionality of time. A major problem could come for this account when
considering measurement in quantum theory. Suppose you have e 1 = a
quantum state being c1|↑> + c2| ↓>, e2 = the quantum state being after a spin
measurement |↑> and e3= the quantum state being after another spin
measurement |↑>. The Farr’s theory of time would be just able to say that e2 is
between e1 and e3. However, based on our present knowledge of Quantum
Mechanics, we would want to be able to say that there is just one possible
direction for the quantum system evolution, namely e1, e2,e3.
The next paper we want to focus on is, in our opinion, one of the strongest
presented. We are talking about Andrea Borghini (College of the Holy Cross)
and Marco Nathan’s (Columbia University) Diachronic Identity in Biology and
Philosophy. This paper explores four different independent criteria for
identifying individuals, i) morphology, ii) function, iii) evolutionary history and
iv) development. The authors focus on the fourth criterion that has so far been
rather neglected. They present a detailed case study, taken from recent
biological studies in the fields of embryonic stem cells 2 , in which, they
contend, the first three identity criteria, would fail to distinguish individuals.
They go on to argue, rather convincingly, that in the ESC case, the
2

ESC from now on.

Report – Truth, Knowledge and Reality

385

development criterion scores better. With these results, learned in close
proximity to biological sciences, they rethink classical philosophical problems
related to diachronic identity, such as persistence through time and change.
Their work is one of the finest example of fruitful interaction between sciences
and philosophical reflection at its best.
To conclude we spend two words on another work, namely Claudio
Calosi’s (University of Florence) Metaphysics of Persistence and Unrestricted
Composition. In this paper the author sets out to prove rigorously that the
endorsement of the rather controversial mereological principle of unrestricted
composition, roughly the principle according to which given any two non
empty sets of objects there always exist a mereological sum of those objects,
dims one particular metaphysics of persistence, namely ThreeDimensionalism3, wrong. 3D roughly maintains that all material persisting
objects are multilocated at temporally unextended spacetime regions. The
author constructs a counterexample to such an universal claim using the
principle of unrestricted composition. The weakness of this kind of argument
is probably that it will appeal to a four-dimensionalist but will not move a threedimensionalist. She will probably just insists that the argument shows we
should not have bought into the unrestricted composition principle in the first
place.
This works were chosen just to give a flavor of the entire conference. It
covered basically every crucial field in contemporary analytic philosophy and
had gathered together leading scholars and young researchers, discussing and
confronting different approaches and thesis. And this is, supposedly,
philosophy.

3

3D from now on.

386

Humana.Mente – Issue 15 – January 2011

HUMANA.MENTE -

ISSUE 15, JANUARY 2011

Agency: From Embodied Cognition to Free Will
Edited by Duccio Manetti & Silvano Zipoli Caiani

Today embodiment is a critical theme in several branches
of the contemporary philosophical debate. The term
embodiment refers to the role of an agent’s own body in
making possible many experiential and cognitive abilities,
suggesting the existence of a deep connection between
action and perception.
This issue of Humana.Mente will focus on the relationships
between our sense of agency and the various models of
the mind and of the self. The volume will be organized into
two different sections: one concerning the discussion
about the theory of agency; the other concerning the
theories on free will. The purpose of this project is to
collect relevant studies in these fields, opening the door to
an interaction between perspectives from various
disciplines such as psychology, cognitive sciences,
neuroscience and philosophy.

For more information about the journal
visit our website at:
www.humanamente.eu

www.humanamente.eu

Humana.Mente – Journal of Philosophical Studies was
founded in Florence in 2007. It is a peer-reviewed international journal
that publishes 4 issues a year. Each issue focuses on a specific theme,
selected from among critical topics in the contemporary philosophical
debate, and is edited by a specialist on the subject, usually an emerging
researcher with both philosophical and scientific competence.

Humana.Mente wants to be a place for exploring the most recent

trends in the international philosophical discussion and wants to give the
opportunity to the international community of young researchers to
confront each other, and to discuss, control and verify their theories. An
analytic perspective is favored, and particular attention is given to the
relationship between philosophy and science, without however
neglecting the historical aspects of the philosophical topics.

In this issue papers by:
MARK H. BICKHARD (Director of Institute for Interactivist Studies, Lehigh
University) - TONY CHEMERO (Franklin and Marshall College) & MICHAEL D.
SILBERSTEIN (Elizabethtown College) - TERRY HORGAN (Arizona University) ROBERTA DE MONTICELLI (San Raffaele University, Milan) - SHAUN
GALLAGHER (Florida University) - MAURO MALDONATO (University of
Basilicata) - SUSAN POCKETT (University of Auckland) - DAVIDE RIGONI
(University of Padua), LUCA SAMMICHELI (University of Bologna), MARCEL
BRASS (Gent University) - STEVE TORRANCE (Sussex Uk) & TOM FROESE
(University of Sussex) - JING ZHU (Institute of Philosophy of Mind and Cognition,
National Yang Ming University)

HUMANA.MENTE
Journal of Philosophical Studies
ISSN: 1972 -1293

