feature

mHealth @
UAH: Computing
infrastructure for
mobile health and
wellness monitoring
New health care systems that integrate wearable sensors, personal
devices, and servers promise to fundamentally change the way health
care services are delivered and used.
By Mladen Milosevic, Aleksandar Milenkovic,
and Emil Jovanov
DOI: 10.1145/2539269

M

obile health (mHealth) represents the use of mobile wireless communication
devices to improve health outcomes, healthcare services, and health research [1].
mHealth monitoring systems typically integrate wearable physiological sensors,
personal devices like smartphones, and servers accessed over the Internet. They
have emerged as a promising technology for real-time, unobtrusive, and continuous health
and wellness monitoring of individuals during activities of daily living. Such systems
promise to radically modernize and change the way healthcare services are deployed and
delivered. They allow an individual to
closely monitor changes in his or her
vital signs and provide feedback to
help maintain an optimal health and
wellness status. When integrated with
healthcare providers, these systems
can even alert medical personnel when
life-threatening changes occur. In addition, mHealth monitoring systems
can be used for health monitoring of
patients in ambulatory settings: as
part of a diagnostic procedure, an optimal maintenance of a chronic condition, or a supervised recovery from an
acute event or surgical procedure. They
XRDS • Winter 2013 • Vol.20 • No.2

can also be used to monitor adherence
to treatment guidelines (e.g., regular
cardiovascular exercise) or to monitor
effects of drug therapy.
At the University of Alabama in
Huntsville (UAH) an mHealth infrastructure, including both hardware
and software components, was created to support research and education in the area of computer systems
for mobile health and wellness monitoring. It is designed to help address
critical design issues in the next
generation of health monitoring systems—including their functionality,

reliability, and energy-efficiency—to
support creation of a repository with
vital signs and physical activity parameters during normal daily activities, and to enable rapid prototyping
of new monitoring applications.

HEALTH AT THE TOUCH OF A BUTTON
Convergence of smart biosensors,
smartphones, and cloud computing
services have enabled the development and proliferation of affordable
mHealth monitoring systems capable of continuous health and wellness monitoring. Advances in sensor
43

technology have enabled miniature
smart sensors to unobtrusively monitor physiological signals, body posture, type and level of physical activity, and environmental conditions.
Physiological signals include heart
electrical activity (electrocardiogram
/ECG), muscle electrical activity (electromyography/EMG), brain electrical
activity
(electroencephalography/
EEG), pulse and blood oxygen saturation (photoplethysmography/PPG),

blood pressure, respiration/breathing rate, galvanic skin response
(GSR), blood glucose level, and body
temperature. In addition to the physiological signals, mHealth wearable
monitors may include sensors that
can help determine the user’s location, discriminate between user’s
states (e.g., laying, sitting, walking,
running), or sensors that can help estimate the type and level of the user’s
physical activity (e.g., low-, moder-

Figure 1. Data flow in mHealth’s three-tiered architecture.

44

ate-, or high-intensity aerobic activity). Since environmental conditions
may influence the user’s physiological state or accuracy of the sensors,
mHealth monitors may integrate
information about environmental
conditions, such as: humidity, light,
ambient temperature, atmospheric
pressure, and noise.
Availability, affordability, and excellent performance make smartphones
an ideal platform for mHealth applications. According to a report from August 2013, 225 million smartphones
were sold worldwide in the second
quarter of 2013, which represent an
increase of 46.5 percent compared to
the same period in 2012 [2]. With the
recent proliferation of smartphones
and tablet computers, the number of
health monitoring and wellness applications has exponentially increased.
According to a report from March
2013, more than 97,000 mHealth applications are listed on a variety of application stores [3]. Moreover, Google
and Apple recognized this trend and
made modifications in their operating systems to directly support health
and wellness applications. The Android operating system incorporates a

Photograph by Warren Goldswain

feature

service that detects the user’s current
physical activity, such as walking, driving, or standing still. Apple went one
step further with the latest iPhone 5S
by designing and implementing a separate motion coprocessor to analyze
user’s activity from the motion sensors (accelerometer, gyroscope, and
magnetometer). The availability of affordable smartphones and wearable
devices, their widespread use, and
consumer acceptance create new opportunities for users and healthcare
professionals. An increasing number
of users, who actively monitor their
own health and fitness status, further
underscores this trend [4].

more wearable and intelligent sensor
nodes. We rely on commercially available sensors and wearable monitors
that sense vital signs, body posture,
and environmental conditions. They
range from inexpensive sensors (less

than $100) intended for fitness monitoring applications to more sophisticated monitors designed for research
(more than $2,000).
For monitoring cardiac activity we
use a range of monitors differing in

Figure 2. mHealth @ UAH.

MHEALTH @ UAH
The mHealth infrastructure at UAH is
designed as a three-tiered architecture
with wireless body area sensor networks and other physiological monitors at Tier 1, personal computing devices at Tier 2, and mHealth servers at
Tier 3. This is represented in Figure 1.
Tier 1 consists of one or more body
area networks (BANs) or body sensor networks (BSN) optimized for a
specific health monitoring application. Each network integrates one or
45

feature
Figure 3. iTUG test phases and smartphone instrumentation of the subject.

Figure 4. sTUG: Smartphone TUG Android application screen displaying the
parameters of the TUG test.

form factor, weight, functionality, accuracy, and cost. They range from fitness grade monitors that can report
only an average heart rate to medical
grade monitors that can report and
record interbeat intervals (RR intervals) and electrocardiogram (ECG).
For example, the Garmin ANT+ or
Zephyr HxM heart rate monitors are a
46

good choice for applications that have
a long battery life and a small form
factor as prime requirements. The
Zephyr BioHarness 3 and Hidalgo
Equivital 2 physiological monitors,
capable of recording RR intervals and
raw ECG signals, are a good choice
for applications where accuracy and
resolution are prime requirements.
They also include additional sensors
such as a three-axis accelerometer
and a respiration sensor, and use the
Bluetooth wireless interface for communication at Tier 2.
For monitoring brain electrical
activity we use Zeo sleep monitors,
NeoroSky MindSet EEG sensors, and
Emotiv EEG neuoroheadsets. The Zeo
sleep monitor is a low-power headband with a single channel EEG intended for sleep studies. The MindSet
EEG provides a single channel EEG in
the form of a wireless headset, whereas the Emotiv EEG headset offers 14
channels of EEG sampled, filtered,
and reported through Bluetooth to a
custom application.
For monitoring physical activity,
body posture, and transitions we use
a range of commercially available sensors, such as the Garmin ANT+ foot
pod sensor and the Garmin ANT+
bike sensor or inertial sensors featuring accelerometers, gyroscopes, and
magnetic sensors. The foot pod sensor
measures the number of steps made
and speed during walking/running,
while the speed/cadence sensor measures cycling speed. Both sensors use
the low-power ANT+ wireless interface
for communication at Tier 2.

Personal devices like smartphones
can also be utilized for sensing body
posture, physical activity, and environmental conditions. For example, a
Google Nexus 4 smartphone includes
a three-axis accelerometer, a three-axis gyroscope, a three-axis magnetometer, a barometer, a proximity sensor,
an ambient light sensor, a GPS (Global
Positioning System), and two cameras.
Personal applications running on
a personal device (e.g., Android and
Apple/iOS smartphones, tablets, or
personal computers) represent Tier 2
of the proposed architecture. Applications are designed to facilitate (1) interface and management of a variety of
sensors in the sensor network; (2) data
retrieval from individual sensors, data
logging, and analysis to extract health
status information; and (3) user interface providing real-time feedback with
health parameters and recommendations (e.g., guided rehabilitation or exercise). The collected health status information is periodically uploaded to
the mHealth servers over the Internet.
The majority of applications are developed for Google’s Android and Microsoft Windows operating systems.
A group of servers providing storage, access, visualization, and support for data mining of physiological
records forms Tier 3 of the mHealth
infrastructure. The servers are running a free operating system, Ubuntu
Server, and are designed and implemented to work as virtual machine
appliances in either open source VM
VirtualBox or proprietary VMWare
environment. This approach offers
flexibility and easy deployment and
migration to new physical platforms
or even to cloud infrastructure. Tier 3
of the mHealth infrastructure is composed of three main components:
mHealth Database, Web API, and
Web Portal. System architecture and
sample applications are presented in
Figure 2.
The mHealth database is developed using Oracle’s MySQL relational
database. The open-source database
is specifically designed to support
efficient storage of a variety of physiological records and record annotations. Each record has information
about the subject, equipment used to
collect records, and conditions under

which the data are recorded. Physiological records can be organized by
application type, and each record is
precisely time-stamped. In addition,
the database provides support for
management and guidance of a variety experiments in research environment. Experiments can be conducted
using a specific protocol and have
authorized investigators, a list of sessions with individual participants,
and individual physiological, activity,
and multimedia records.
The Web API component is designed to be an intermediary between
the personal devices and the mHealth
database. It accepts data from personal devices and stores it into the database, and also allows personal devices to retrieve stored data from the
database. Any action using Web API
requires successful authentication.
Upon a successful authentication, a
Web session is created, allowing further execution of Web API requests
without additional authentication.
After a predefined period of inactivity, the session automatically expires
and the authentication process has to
be repeated.
The Web Portal component provides easy access to physiological
data and its basic visualization. It requires only a Web browser to access
a recorded session in the mHealth
database. It is developed using the
Sencha JS framework. Each authenticated user is allowed to access only a
subset of data he/she is authorized to
access. The user can easily visualize
data by selecting the desired session
and the particular signals inside the
session.

The availability
of affordable
smartphones and
wearable devices
and their widespread
use and consumer
acceptance create
new opportunities
for users and
healthcare
professionals.
ease. It is simple and easy to administer in an office, and thus can be used in
screening protocols. The test measures
the time a person takes to perform the
following tasks: rise from a chair, walk
three meters, turn around, walk back
to the chair, and sit down. Longer TUG
times have been associated with mobility impairments and increased fall
risks. TUG duration is also sensitive to
therapeutic interventions, such as in
Parkinson’s patients.
We have developed a smartphone

application called sTUG that completely automates the instrumented
Timed-Up-and-Go (iTUG) test so that
it can be performed at home [5]. sTUG
captures the subject’s movements utilizing a smartphone’s built-in accelerometer and gyroscope sensors, determines the beginning and the end of
the test and quantifies its individual
phases, and optionally uploads test
descriptors into the mHealth server.
A subject mounts the smartphone
on his/her chest or belt and starts the
application, as illustrated in Figure
3. The application records and processes the signals from the smartphone’s gyroscope and accelerometer sensors to extract the following
parameters that quantify individual
phases of the iTUG: (a) the total duration of the TUG, (b) the total duration
of the sit-to-stand transition, and (c)
the total duration of the stand-to-sit
transition. In addition, we extract parameters that further quantify body
movements during sit-to-stand and
stand-to-sit transitions, including the
duration of sub phases, maximum
angular velocities, and upper trunk
angles. These parameters are recorded on the smartphone and optionally
uploaded to the mHealth server. The
application stops monitoring auto-

Figure 5. Smartphone instrumentation of a wheelchair.

EXAMPLE APPLICATIONS
At UAH we originally developed two
mHealth applications: sTUG and
mWheelness. sTUG quantifies and
automates a standard Timed-Upand-Go (TUG) test used to assess
mobility of individuals. mWheelness
monitors physical activity of individuals who rely on wheelchairs for
mobility.
Real-time quantification of TUG
test. TUG is a frequently used clinical
test for assessing balance, mobility,
and fall risk in the elderly population
and for people with Parkinson’s dis47

feature
matically once it detects the end of
the stand-to-sit transition. Figure 4
shows a report generated by the application at the end of a TUG test.
sTUG is developed for the Android
operating systems and requires a
smartphone with the accelerometer
and gyroscope sensors running Android 2.3 or above. The application has
been tested on a Nexus 4 smartphone,
a Motorola RAZR M, and a RAZR HD.
We believe this application could
be of great interest for older individuals and Parkinson’s disease patients
as well as for healthcare professionals. The procedure requires minimum
setup (a chair and a marked distance
of three meters) and inexpensive instrumentation (a smartphone running the sTUG application is placed
on the chest or belt). The feedback is
instantaneously provided to the user
in a form of a report with the values of
all significant parameters that characterize the TUG test. It is easy to use
and users can take multiple tests in a
single day at home (e.g., to assess the
effects of drugs). With automatic updates to the mHealth server, caregivers and healthcare professionals can
gain insights into overall wellness of
the subjects. For example, they can
assess the impact of therapeutic interventions (e.g., impact of drugs)
by analyzing the parameters from
multiple tests performed in a single
day. Healthcare professionals and researchers can monitor and evaluate
the evolution of a disease by analyzing the trends in the parameters collected over longer periods of time.
Real-time monitoring of activity of
wheelchair users. Physically inactive
individuals are almost twice as likely
to develop coronary heart disease
compared to those who exercise regularly. Recent estimates suggest the
impact of physical inactivity on mortality risk is approaching that of tobacco as one of the leading causes of
death in the able-bodied population.
People with limited ambulatory skills
who use wheelchairs for mobility are
especially at high-risk for all inactivity-related diseases. For example, it
has been reported that a person with
a spinal cord injury (SCI) has a significantly greater risk of mortality from
coronary heart disease (225 percent)
48

than an able-bodied person. According to a 2005 U.S. Census Bureau’s
Survey, more than 3.3 million Americans use some type of wheelchair for
mobility and with the aging population this number is likely to continue
to grow.
In order to provide an affordable,
reliable, and easy to use solution for
monitoring the physical activity of users who rely on wheelchairs for mobility we developed a smart wheelchair
[6]—a common wheelchair instrumented only with a smartphone that
is used to track a user’s physical activity. The system can record, log, display,
and communicate information about
the user’s physical and heart activity
during normal daily activities or exercise sessions. For monitoring the
user’s physical activity we utilized the
smartphone’s built-in sensors such
as a magnetic sensor for monitoring
wheelchair speed and distance traveled, an accelerometer for monitoring
smartphone’s orientation and wheelchair inclination, and a proximity sensor to determine whether the wheelchair is hand-propelled or pushed. In
Figure 6. mWheelness Android application screens.

addition, we employ a wearable chest
belt to monitor and record the user’s
heart activity and energy expenditure. A smartphone application called
mWheelness collects data from the
sensors and performs periodic uploads to the mHealth server.
Figure 5 illustrates the proposed
wheelchair instrumentation with
a smartphone. The smartphone is
placed in a holder on a side of the
wheelchair. The smartphone’s magnetic sensor senses the x, y, and z
components of the magnetic field
as illustrated in Figure 5. By placing
a small magnet on the wheel, we induce a change in the magnetic field
sensed by the magnetic sensor of the
smartphone when the magnet moves
over the smartphone. This change
produces a characteristic signature
in the magnetic field signals that can
be sensed, recorded, and processed
on the smartphone. By processing the
magnetic field signals we can detect
and timestamp an event, when the
magnet moves right over the smartphone, which corresponds to one revolution of the wheelchair’s wheel.
A smartphone’s accelerometer
measures proper acceleration and is
typically used to keep the screen upright regardless of the smartphone
orientation. In our setup we process
the x, y, and z acceleration components to determine smartphone’s
orientation, i.e., whether it is placed
in the wheelchair holder or not. Activity recording is enabled only when
the smartphone is properly mounted
on the wheelchair. In addition, the accelerometer data is used to determine
slope of the wheelchair, which can
further be used to determine vertical
gain and loss during exercise.
A smartphone’s proximity sensor is
typically used to determine when the
smartphone is brought up to the user’s
ear and usually acts as a binary sensor.
In our deployment, the smartphone’s
proximity sensor is used to determine
whether the user hand-propels the
wheelchair or it is pushed. This information can be used to further qualify
the user’s activity.
Figure 6 shows one of the characteristic screens of mWheelness. The
user starts recording physical activity and heart activity by pressing the

Availability,
affordability,
and excellent
performance make
smartphones an
ideal platform
for mHealth
applications.

start/stop recording button, although
the processing of the signals from the
magnetic sensor will not start before
the smartphone is in the upright position. During an exercise session
mWheelness displays current inclination, speed, and distance traveled.
In addition, it displays information
about heart activity.
The mWheelness application has
been tested on several Android smartphones (Nexus 4, Motorola RAZR M,
and HTC One X) in controlled and
free-living conditions. The controlled
experiments were conducted on a
treadmill while varying speed and inclination. Distance traveled and inclination as reported by the application,
were then compared against the corresponding parameters reported by
the treadmill.

CONCLUSION
The infrastructure proved very effective in supporting research projects,
course projects, and senior design
projects in the exciting and emerging area of mobile health monitoring.
More information about the mHealth
infrastructure at UAH can be found
at
http://portal.mhealth.uah.edu.
mHealth infrastructure developed
and implemented at the University of
Alabama in Huntsville was supported
in part by NSF grant 1205439 mHealth
- Computing Infrastructure for Mobile
Health and Wellness Monitoring. Similar systems can be deployed at other
institutions to support research and
education and to enable students
from different disciplines (e.g., computer science/engineering, medical,

biomedical, nursing, and health sciences) work together and develop
new exciting multidisciplinary health
applications and services that may
lead to improved quality of life and
reduced cost of healthcare.
References
[1]

Istepanian, R. S. H., Jovanov, E., and Zhang, Y. Guest
editorial introduction to the special section on
m-health: Beyond seamless mobility and global
wireless health-care connectivity. IEEE Trans.
Inform. Technol. Biomed. 8, 4, (2004), 405–414.

[2]

Gupta, A., Milanesi, C., Cozza, R., and Lu, C. K. Market
Share analysis: Mobile phones, worldwide, 2Q13.
Gartner, Aug. 2013.

[3]

Jahns, R.-G. and Houck, P. Mobile Health Market
Report 2013-2017, research2guidance, Mar. 2013;
http://www.research2guidance.com/shop/index.
php/mhealth-report-2

[4]

Quantified Self; http://quantifiedself.com/.
[Accessed: 18-Jan-2013].

[5]

Milosevic, M., Jovanov, E., and Milenkovic, A.
Quantifying Timed-Up-and-Go test: A smartphone
implementation. In Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE
International Conference on Body Sensor Networks
(Boston, MA, May 6-9). IEEE, New York, 2013,
302–307.

[6]

Milenkovic, A., Milosevic, M., and Jovanov, E.
Smartphones for smart wheelchairs. In Proceedings
of the 2013 IEEE International Conference on Body
Sensor Networks (Boston, MA, May 6-9). IEEE, New
York, 2013, 404–409.

Biographies
Mladen Milosevic received his Dipl. Ing. Degree in electrical
and computer engineering from the University of Belgrade
Serbia and his Ph.D. from the University of Alabama in
Huntsville in the area of wearable health monitoring. His
areas of expertise include ubiquitous health monitoring,
smartphone application development, software
development, and physiological signal processing.
Aleksandar Milenković is associate professor of electrical
and computer engineering at the University of Alabama in
Huntsville, where he leads the LaCASA Laboratory (http://
www.ece.uah.edu/~milenka). He received the Dipl. Ing.,
M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in computer engineering and
science from the University of Belgrade, Serbia in 1994,
1997, and 1999. His research interests include computer
systems architecture, embedded systems, and wearable
health monitoring systems. Prior to joining the University
of Alabama in Huntsville he held academic positions at
the University of Belgrade in Serbia and the Dublin City
University in Ireland. He is a senior member of the IEEE, its
Computer Society, the ACM, and Eta Kappa Nu.
Emil Jovanov is an associate professor in the Electrical
and Computer Engineering Department at the University
of Alabama in Huntsville. He received his Dipl. Ing. (1984),
M.Sc. (1989), and Ph.D. (1993) from the University
of Belgrade. He is recognized as the originator of the
concept of wireless body area networks for health
monitoring and he is one of the leaders in the field of
wearable health monitoring. Dr. Jovanov is a senior
member of IEEE, and serves as associate editor of
the IEEE Transactions on Information Technology in
Biomedicine and IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Circuits
and Systems , and as a member of Editorial Board of
Applied Psychophysiology and Biofeedback . He is a
member of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology
Society (IEEE-EMBS) Technical Committee on Wearable
Biomedical Sensors and Systems and a member of the
IEEE Medical Technology Policy Committee. Dr. Jovanov
has spent more than 25 years in the development
and implementation of application specific hardware,
software, and systems. His current research interests
include ubiquitous and mobile computing, biomedical
signal processing, and health monitoring.

Copyright held by Owner/Author(s).
Publication rights licensed to ACM $15.00

49

