Journal of Ambient Intelligence and Humanized Computing (2019) 10:3739–3745
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12652-019-01425-9

EDITORIAL

Special issue on bio‑medical signal processing for smarter mobile
healthcare using big data analytics
Gwanggil Jeon1 · Awais Ahmad2 · Salvatore Cuomo3 · Wei Wu4
Published online: 24 August 2019
© Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2019

With the technological advancements, quality of human
health measurements has reached to a new realm. Medical
devices are routinely used to detect and record physiological signals that are essential for human health monitoring.
Health monitoring and sensing devices are ranging from
thermometers, heart rate monitors, blood oxygen monitors,
and EEG recorders to ultrasound and MRI machines. Further, with the increase in human population, the data generated in hospitals and other health concerned places rapidly
growing. However, the processing of huge amount of data
generated from various sources such as Body Area Network
(BAN), IoT-enabled health devices such as blood pressure
and sugar monitoring devices, etc. is becoming an alarming
issue in near future. Nevertheless, current health monitoring
systems can be further improved by facilitating real-time signal measurements, modeling, and processing using Hadoop
ecosystem, SPARK, GraphX and other data analytical tools.
However, the existing advancements significantly influence
the early diagnosis of a disease or disorder, while empowering preventive care practices, drug administration processes,
and rehabilitation of physically disabled people. Moreover,
noise filtration is demanded the betterment of bio-signal
processing to determine dynamic models to understand the
* Gwanggil Jeon
gjeon@inu.ac.kr
Awais Ahmad
aahmad.marwat@gmail.com
Salvatore Cuomo
salvatore.cuomo@unina.it
Wei Wu
wuwei@scu.edu.cn
1

Incheon National University, Incheon, Korea

2

National University of Computer and Emerging Science,
Islamabad, Pakistan

3

University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy

4

Sichuan University, Chengdu, Korea

characteristics and behaviors that provide prominent features
in detecting abnormalities within those signals.
In the last decade, a significant development has been
made in the area of medical signal processing measurement
techniques, e-health monitoring through body area networking, medical assisted rehabilitation, and remote clinical diagnosis. However, integrating health services with the existing
communication technology and performing remote health
treatments with accuracy and precision is still challenging
job. Therefore, it is necessary to analyze the existing data
using various data analytics techniques and tools such as
Hadoop ecosystem etc. The development of sensors technology that can accurately measure the bio-signals generated
from a patient body in various forms and diagnosis different
diseases based on these signals revolutionized the new era
of modern health techniques. These concepts can be used in
future in minimizing the doctors’ efforts and telemedicine
activities. However, still sophisticated and dynamic medical techniques and approaches are needed to overcome the
challenges present in the current research. The goal of this
special issue is to provide a forum for the research activities
currently going on in the above fields and also developing
and designing techniques for efficient sensing, processing,
and analyzing the patient health conditions based on the
bio-signal processing. In addition, novel mechanisms and
algorithms are needed to overcome the deficiencies present
in the current models for EEG, ECG, and MEG signals. Further, the data generated from various health services, such as
hospitals, clinics, etc. is in huge and enormous form. Therefore, it is difficult to present a dynamic and autonomous
system based on the conventional data analysis techniques.
Therefore, a solution and system is needed which efficiently
analyze and process data in real-time. Similarly, autonomous
system can build on top of the hospital services to provide
first-aid activities in various environments such as disasters,
accidents, etc.
Starting from the above considerations, this special
issue aims to bring together researchers coming from both

13

Vol.:(0123456789)

3740

academia and industry, asking them to contribute to refining
technologies and services aimed at personalization, monitoring, and recommendation in multimedia applications in
using various techniques for Bio-medical Signal Processing for Smarter Mobile Healthcare using Big Data Analytics. This issue is intended to provide a highly recognized
international forum to present recent advances in Ambient
Intelligence and Humanized Computing. We welcomed both
theoretical contributions as well as papers describing interesting applications. Papers were invited for this special issue
considering aspects of this problem, including:
• Signal processing techniques for geriatric disease assess-

ment using Big Data analytics.

• Analysis of Big Signal Data using Hadoop ecosystem.
• Sensing and data gathering techniques of bio-signals via

WSN.

• Analysis and processing of Bio-signal Dataset.
• Application of BAN in data generation and analysis.
• Techniques to analyze brain signals using existing tech-

niques and datasets.

• E-health monitoring using bio-signals in real-time using

SPARK, GraphX, etc.

• Design architecture for IoT-enabled health activity moni-

toring devices.

• Medical signal processing using digital signal processing

techniques.

• Designing advanced telemedicine techniques based exist-

ing telemedicine data.

• Analysis of various diseases such as Aphasia, etc. using

bio-signal processing.

• Advance techniques to measure EEG, ECG, etc. signals.
• Designing of embedded devices for smart health.

After review, a total of 34 papers out of 49 submissions
have been accepted for publication in this issue.
Diabetes is featured by the high prevalence and low control resulting in high premature mortality rate. Maintaining
the blood glucose level can bring considerable medical benefits and reduces the risk of diabetes. In real-time, continuous monitoring of blood glucose level is the major challenge.
However, monitoring only glucose level without considering
other factors such as ECG and physical activities can mislead to improper medication. To address the aforesaid issues,
the contribution by Ravi et al. “Fog-assisted Personalized
Healthcare-Support System for Remote Patients with Diabetes” proposes an energy efficient fog-assisted healthcare
system to maintain the blood glucose level. By deploying fog
computing, an emergency alert is generated immediately for
precautionary measures.
Wireless body area network (WBAN) plays an important role in human health monitoring for mobile healthcare.
The improvement of service performance and low-power

13

G. Jeon et al.

consumption are the two challenges for these medical
WBANs, because those energy-limited wireless medical sensors must transmit the monitoring data to the personal server
(PS) via intra-WBAN in time. Further, precise mathematical
modeling combining with the sleeping state to measure this
improvement theoretically is still lack. In the contribution by
Guan et al. “A Polling Access Control with Exhaustive Service in Wireless Body Area Networks for Mobile Healthcare
using the Sleeping Schema,” a polling control with exhaustive service using the sleeping schema is proposed to address
the problem in WBANs communication for smart health.
Wireless Body Area Network is the emerging field in
domain of healthcare to monitor vital signs of patients with
the support of bio-medical sensors. The design of delayaware and energy efficient routing protocol based on the
traffic prioritization is the key research theme in WBAN.
In addition, WBAN has challenging issues of packet loss,
temperature rise, delay with retransmission of the lost packets due to which it does not extend the network life time and
is not acceptable for life critical data. The contribution by
Ullah et al. “Traffic Priority based Delay-Aware and Energy
Efficient Path Allocation Routing Protocol for Wireless
Body Area Network” proposes a method which selects the
optimal paths with high residual energy of nodes with minimum temperature rise. Specially, the design of Tripe-EEC
routing protocol is mostly divided into four Folds.
Personal Health Records (PHR) System serves not just
as static repositories for data but it also combines knowledge and software tools with patients’ data that results in
empowering patients to become active participants in their
own healthcare management by providing their own medical
history. In the contribution by Asif et al. “Towards Reliable
and Trustful Personal Health Record Systems: A Big Data
case of Cloud-Dew architecture based Provenance Framework,” a framework for PHR system is proposed which goes
beyond the trivial network/storage/service concept to a new
micro-service level concept offering high scalability and
availability in vertically distributed computing hierarchy. It
pushes the frontiers of computing applications, data, and
low-level services away from centralized virtual nodes to the
end users. To measure the benefits of enabling provenance in
dew computing, the pre-collected provenance and services
of the proposed framework are utilized.
In spatiotemporal multi-channel surface Electromyogram (EMG) images where the x-axis is time, the y-axis
is EMG channels and the gray level is EMG amplitude,
the motor unit action potential (MUAP) appears as a linear
Gaussian structure. The appearance of this MUAP pattern
in the spatiotemporal images is mostly distorted either by
the destructive superposition of other MUAPs occurring in
the conducting volume or by various noises such as a power
line, bad electrode and skin contacts and movement artifacts.
For accurate automatic detection of MUAP, EMG image

Special issue on bio-medical signal processing for smarter mobile healthcare using big data…

enhancement is needed to suppress the background noises
and enhance the line-like MUAP propagation patterns. The
contribution by Hanif et al. “Spatio-temporal sEMG image
enhancement and Motor Unit Action Potential (MUAP)
detection: algorithms and their analysis” presents several
candidate filters to enhance the MUAPs propagation pattern
in spatiotemporal EMG images. The filters, which can detect
and enhance line-like structure in digital images, are used.
Metaheuristic algorithms are popular techniques used
to solve several optimization problems. Among the key
algorithms, cuckoo search (CS) is a comparatively novel
and promising metaheuristic algorithm. Various researchers have shown that it performs better when compared to
other metaheuristic algorithms while searching for optimal
value and is being used to solve various real-world problems. However, the basic cuckoo search (CS) algorithm can
be improved by enhancing the probabilities of survival of
the eggs. The contribution by Imran et al. “An Alternative
Approach to Neural Network Training based on Hybrid Bio
Meta-Heuristic Algorithm” proposes a new method known
as Hybrid Accelerated Cuckoo Particle Swarm Optimization (HACPSO) algorithm, based on two metaheuristic algorithms. In the proposed HACPSO algorithm, APSO provides
communication for looking better place having the best nest
with greater survivability for cuckoo birds.
Recently, commercial physiological sensors and computing devices have become cheaper and more accessible,
while computer systems have become increasingly aware of
their contexts, including but not limited to users’ emotions.
Consequently, many studies on emotion recognition have
been conducted. However, boredom has received relatively
little attention as a target emotion due to its complex nature.
Moreover, only a few researchers have tried classifying boredom using electroencephalogram (EEG). In the contribution
by Sohn et al. “Machine learning approaches for boredom
classification using EEG,” authors first reviewed studies
that tried classifying emotions using EEG. Further, authors
designed and executed an experiment, which used a video
stimulus to evoke boredom and non-boredom, and collected
EEG data from 28 Korean adult participants. After collecting the data, authors extracted its absolute band power, normalized absolute band power, differential entropy, differential asymmetry, and rational asymmetry using EEG, and
trained these on three machine learning algorithms: support
vector machine, random forest, and k-nearest neighbors.
The levels of student engagement refer to the degree to
which students are immersed in learning when they are
being taught in class. This paper deals with an ambient
intelligence algorithm for a smart classroom; the algorithm
provides information to the teacher by measuring the level
of student engagement in real time. In this study, the algorithm for assessing student engagement levels has been presented; it evaluates the psychological states of students by

3741

measuring a thermal infrared image. The contribution by
Kim et al. “Ambient Intelligence in a Smart Classroom for
Assessing Students’ Engagement Levels” proposes a method
which allows teachers to provide feedback to students while
monitoring their students in real time. The measurement
model for representing the student engagement level by
using thermal infrared imaging is presented. The color of
the teacher’s mobile phone application changes in real time
according to the immersion levels of the students in class.
Medical image segmentation has been widely used in
clinical practice. It is an important basis for medical experts
to diagnose the disease. However, weak edges and intensity
inhomogeneity in medical images may hinder the accuracy
of any traditional active contour segmentation methods. In
the contribution by Han et al. “Boundary Constraint Factor
Embedded Localizing Active Contour Model for Medical
Image Segmentation,” authors propose an improved active
contour method by embedding a boundary constraint factor
and adding the local information of images to the energy
function of Chan-Vese model. Then graph cuts method is
used to optimize the new energy function of the improved
active contour method in this paper.
Recently, Internet of Vehicles (IoVs) is captivating a lot
of interest due to a wide range of applications in various
domains. These applications rely on up-to-date information
of vehicles for provisioning various services. However, frequent message transmissions by a sheer number of vehicles
may not only engulf a centralized server but may also cause
a severe congestion which is not suitable for ongoing services specially in emergency situations. The contribution by
Imran et al. “Congestion Avoidance through Fog Computing
in Internet of Vehicles” presents a fog-assisted congestion
avoidance scheme for IoV named Energy Efficient Message Dissemination (E2MD). Unlike most of the existing
schemes, E2MD capitalizes the merits of fog computing to
minimize communication cost and manage services. Each
vehicle is required to update their status to a fog server frequently, either directly or through intermediate nodes. The
performance of the proposed scheme is validated through
NS 2.35 simulations.
Motor Neuron Disease (MND)/Amyotrophic Lateral
Sclerosis (ALS) is a progressively degenerative disease of
nervous system that mainly affects spinal cord, brain stem,
and cerebral cortex motor neurons. Due to the unclear pathogenesis, early clinical symptoms are occult and heterogeneous, and lack of biological markers and characteristic neuroimaging changes. At present, there are difficulties in its
early diagnosis and correct diagnosis. The contribution by
Nana et al. “Big data of clinical manifestations combined
with neuro-electro-physiologic features in the early diagnosis of motor neuron disease” studies how to explore the early
diagnosis of ALS and the factors that affect early diagnosis
by collecting case data and literature review. The purpose

13

3742

of this study was to explore the early diagnosis of ALS and
the factors that affect early diagnosis by collecting case data
and literature review. The authors retrospectively analyzed
ALS patients from 23,427 patients in department of neurology in Xi’an Gaoxin Hospital between December 2006 and
March 2017. The gender, age at onset, time of diagnosis,
first site, first symptom, and neurophysiological examination
of ALS patients were collected, including the first time of
neurophysiological examination, needle electromyography
(EMG) data, and nerve conduction velocity data.
Biomedical data classification tasks are very challenging because data is usually large, noised and imbalanced.
Particularly the noise can reduce system performance in
terms of classification accuracy, time in building a classifier and the size of the classifier. Accordingly, most existing
learning algorithms have integrated various approaches to
enhance their learning abilities from noisy environments,
but the existence of noise can still introduce serious negative
impacts. A more reasonable solution might be to employ
some preprocessing mechanisms to handle noisy instances
before a learner is formed. The contribution by Chang et al.
“A New Complement Naïve Bayesian Approach for Biomedical Data Classification” introduces a method called double
learning (DL), which is to improve the classification performance. The main idea of this paper is to construct a model
using noised instances. This approach minimizes the model
construction time by reducing the number of instances and
improves classification performance.
Nowadays, radar technique is widely used in many applications, such as electronic warfare, weather prediction, navigation, and self-driving car. Large amounts of radar data
have been generated by the wide use of radar technique.
Analyzing radar data has a quite important role in daily life,
as well as in military. Finding the frequent sequences in
radar data is significant for radar data analysis. However, traditional analysis systems using standalones cannot process
big data due to the four features of big data, namely, volume, velocity, variety and value. In the contribution by Yang
et al. “A system based on Hadoop for radar data analysis,”
authors propose a method where Hadoop Distributed File
System offers stable data storage, and Spark offers efficient
in-memory calculation. In this work, a three-node HadoopSpark cluster was built to perform the distributed data mining algorithm. To make the analysis of radar data accurate,
authors proposed ideas of preprocessing radar data and post
processing mining results.
The knowledge of dependency of a particular factor on
another is a very important aspect in the healthcare field.
If one has a rough idea about the effect a prescribed drug
has on the cure of a disease or sufficient information about
certain symptoms of a disease being linked to each other,
one can make an informed decision about its treatment over
a period of time. The contribution by Chilamkurti et al.

13

G. Jeon et al.

“Analysis of Inter-Concept dependencies in Disease Diagnostic Cognitive Maps using Recurrent Neural Network and
Genetic Algorithms in Time Series Clinical Data for targeted
Treatment” proposes a method which makes use of a special
kind of Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) known as Long
Short Term Memory network to make predictions for time
series data. This method makes use of the weight matrices
obtained after training the neural network It is shown to be
an improvement over the previous work done in this domain.
The contribution by Dawood et al. “Detail-preserving
switching algorithm for the removal of random-valued
impulse noise” presents a new algorithm for the de-noising
of images corrupted with random-valued impulse noise
(RVIN). It employs a switching approach that identifies the
noisy pixels in the first stage and then estimates their intensity values to restore them. Local statistics of the textons in
distinct orientations of the sliding window are exploited to
identify the corrupted pixels in an iterative manner; using
an adaptive threshold range. Textons are formed by using an
isometric grid of minimum local distance that preserves the
texture and edge pixels of an image, effectively. At the noise
filtering stage, fuzzy rules are used to obtain the noise-free
pixels from the proposed tri-directional pixels to estimate the
intensity values of identified corrupted pixels. The proposed
de-noising algorithm also has robust de-noising and restoration power on biomedical images such as, MRI, X-Ray and
CT-Scan.
Reduced bit representations of video sequences are
employed in order to mitigate the computational complexity
of block matching algorithms. The idea is to explore computationally cheaper matching criteria than the conventional
sum of absolute difference or fuzzy theory. Such low cost
matching criteria result in substantial time saving and can
therefore achieve real time video compression. To reduce
the computational burden of such algorithms even further,
the contribution by Kim et al. “Efficient Motion Estimation
Using Two-Bit Transform and Modified Multilevel Successive Elimination” uses a method which reduces the number
of search points in the search window. The speedup in computation as a result of using two-bit transform is rectified by
imposing a modified version of multilevel successive elimination algorithm in orthogonal form.
Emotions play an important role in human communication, interaction, and decision making processes. Therefore,
considerable efforts have been made towards the automatic
identification of human emotions, in particular electroencephalogram signals and Data Mining (DM) techniques have
been then used to create models recognizing the affective
states of users. However, most previous works have used
clinical grade EEG systems with at least 32 electrodes.
These systems are expensive and cumbersome, and therefore unsuitable for usage during normal daily activities. The
contribution by Ortiz-Barrios et al. “Affective Recognition

Special issue on bio-medical signal processing for smarter mobile healthcare using big data…

from EEG Signals: An Integrated Data-mining Approach”
investigates the accuracy and applicability of previous affective recognition methods on data collected with an Emotiv
headset while participants used a personal computer to fulfill several tasks. Several features were extracted from four
channels only (AF3, AF4, F3 and F4 in accordance with the
10–20 system). Both Support Vector Machine and Naïve
Bayes were used for emotion classification.
The development in the field of advanced biomedical
sensors has resulted in a large volume of data being collected and transmitted wirelessly. The IEEE 802.15.6-2012
standard has specified a communication protocol for body
area networks (BAN), however existing general-purpose
communication protocols such as Bluetooth and Zigbee
are more widely used due to multiple reasons. One of the
critical issues is the lack of baseband processing hardware
modules that implement the aforementioned standard. In the
contribution by Han et al. “A Baseband Processing ASIC for
Body Area Networks,” authors propose a baseband transceiver implementation in ASIC, which meets the 802.15.62012 standard requirements. Compared to other published
designs, the proposed implementation exhibits better performance and low hardware cost, while also offering a complete
standard implementation.
Latent fingerprints are acquired from crime places which
are utilized to distinguish suspects in crime inspection. In
general, latent fingerprints contain mysterious ridge and valley structure with nonlinear distortion and complex background noise. These lead to fundamentally difficult problem
for further analysis. Hence, the image quality is required
for matching those latent fingerprints. In the contribution
by Manogaran et al. “Bio-Medical and Latent Fingerprint
Enhancement and Matching Using Advanced Scalable Soft
Computing Models,” authors develop a model for enhancement of latent fingerprint and matching algorithm, which
requires manually marked (ground-truth) ROI latent fingerprints. This proposed model includes two phases (i) Latent
fingerprints contrast enhancement using type-2 intuitionistic
fuzzy set (ii) Extract the minutiae and Scale Invariant Feature Transformation (SIFT) features from the latent fingerprint image.
In response to the increasing need of assistance services
for people with disabilities and elderly, eAssistance focuses
on the development of tools to increase their autonomy
and self-sufficiency. In this paper, authors present a new
eAssistance system based on Ambient Intelligence (AmI)
designed to monitor the user’s activities and to improve the
self-sufficiency together with the Quality of Life of dependents. The system can be adapted to a wide range of users
and easily integrated into their homes or residences. The
contribution by Poncela et al. “Smart Care Home System:
A platform for eAssistance” proposes an inference of user’s
behavior patterns with the support of the home automation

3743

system, the obtainment of high level conclusions and the
possibility of identify derivations and anomalous actions.
Liver cirrhosis is an advanced, diffuse stage of liver
injury which usually entails pathologists to check a large
number of microscopic images. Obvious differences between
liver cirrhosis microscopic images and normal microscopic
images, such as the arrangement of hepatocytes, the degree
of hepatic fibrosis and the appearance of pseudo lobule, can
be efficiently used in medical images classification systems.
In the contribution by Shi et al. “Data augmentation on mice
liver cirrhosis microscopic images employing convolutional
neural networks and support vector machine,” deep learning
and standard machine learning methods were applied for
helping pathologists making disease diagnosis easier. In this
work, the convolutional neural networks and support vector
machine were employed to complete the pre-classification of
mice liver cirrhosis microscopic images and normal images.
Software configurable radio with dynamic spectrum support is the inherent property of Cognitive radio. Interoperability of Cognitive radio with wireless sensor network
would enable the sensor nodes to access and transmit the
application data in licensed PU free channels. Since wireless sensor nodes operate in heavily crowded ISM bands
(902 MHz/2.4 GHz), there will be severe performance degradation during channel saturation and increased collision
rate. With opportunistic spectrum access, enhanced performance can be achieved by minimizing the channel access
collisions and control message overhead delays. The contribution by Gohar et al. “Cognitive Radio Assisted WSN
with Interference Aware AODV Routing Protocol” proposes
a novel approach to integrate the sensor nodes with cognitive radio (CR) nodes to route sensor data to sink using
licensed channels opportunistically. Then, the authors extend
the method to cluster senor node and CR nodes to achieve
energy efficiency.
As a potential way to dramatically save energy and live in
a green and smarter planet, the Internet of Things (IoT) aims
to utilize energy-efficient enabling technologies such as the
RFID systems in our daily life applications. In the contribution by Choudhury et al. “Scheduling RFID Networks in the
IoT and Smart Health Era,” authors propose localized reader
scheduling algorithms for RFID networks. The authors consider readers with limited amounts of energy, powered by a
battery. Using only local information, the readers schedule
themselves to minimize energy usage and maximize network
lifetime. The authors compare the performance of localized
algorithms to a centralized heuristic (the research problem
is NP hard) based on a set cover approximation solution and
show that the localized algorithms obtain equal or better
performance in comparison to centralized solution.
With the rapid growth of medical big data, medical signal processing measurement techniques are facing severe
challenges. Enormous medical images are constantly

13

3744

generated by various health monitoring and sensing
devices, such as ultrasound, MRI machines. In the contribution by He et al. “Pulse Coupled Neural Network based
MRI Image Enhancement Using Classical Visual Receptive Field for Smarter Mobile Healthcare,” authors propose a contrast enhancement of MRI image to improve the
accuracy of clinical diagnosis for smarter mobile healthcare. As one premise, the parameters of DOG are estimated from the fundamentals of CVRF; then the PCNN
parameters in image enhancement are estimated eventually
with the help of DOG. As a result, the MRI images can be
enhanced adaptively. Due to the exponential decay of the
dynamic threshold and the pulses coupling among neurons, PCNN effectively enhances the contrast of low grey
levels in MRI image.
Data science has been empowered with the emerging
concept of big data that enables data scalability in many
ways. Effective prediction systems for complex analytical
problems dealing with big data can be created by the use
of evolutionary computing and associate feature selection
and reduction techniques. In the contribution by Paul et al.
“A big data analytical framework for analyzing solar energy
receptors using evolutionary computing approach,” authors
propose a big data analytical framework to analyze solar
energy receptors based on a set of features to estimate pressure loss coefficients (PLC) that can greatly improve the
design of a solar collector. This computation is a time and
resource consuming process as the flow rate and Reynolds
number changes at every riser-manifold pair. Moreover, a
suitable and appropriate algebraic expression is not well
defined that can approximate the complex relationship
among different features and variables. The overall heat gain
of the solar receptor is dependent upon flow rates in the risers and the flow distribution among them.
Anomalies in cardiac functionality can be fatal. Early
detection of these anomalies, and in many cases their precursors, can save lives. The probability of the occurrence
of these anomalies is extremely among people with a prediagnosed heart condition. In the contribution by Jabbar
et al. “Using Casual Reasoning for Anomaly Detection
Among ECG Live Data Streams in Ubiquitous Healthcare
Monitoring Systems,” authors discovered that much remote
Electrocardiography (ECG) monitoring systems do not convey “enough” information to the diagnosing doctor or the
nominated caregiver. A few examples of this information
can be the type of cardiac abnormality, the exact waveform
of the ECG signal, time and frequency of the occurrence of
the anomaly, machine-understandable part so that medical
SCADA be alerted about the case, and immediate preventative urgent steps correlated to that emergency. It is also
important to delivery surrounding context to the Health
Information System so that the medical expert make his/her
diagnosis with ample support data.

13

G. Jeon et al.

Dermoscopy is an excellent method of detecting melanoma in its early stages. Skin is the principal organ of human
body. It covers bones, muscles and all parts of the body.
Melanoma is rare, but it is the most dangerous form of skin
cancer. It is curable if it is detected in its early stages. Digital
dermoscopy help dermatologists in the examination of cancerous skin lesions. It enables doctors to capture microscopic
images of moles by using a mobile phone, corresponding
application or any handy scope device. In the contribution
by Jamil et al. “Melanoma Segmentation using Bio-medical
Image Analysis for Smarter Mobile Healthcare,” authors
propose an approach that can automatically preprocess the
image and then segment the lesion. The gradient magnitude
of the image is calculated to filter the images. The proposed
technique is tested on European dataset of dermoscopic
images.
Delay tolerant networks is the most growing application
of wireless multi-hop networking under the umbrella of
research done so far in sensor networks. Numerous challenges have to be faced by such networks; because of disconnection in terms of intermittent community, long delays
etc. in network due to drastic mobility. An intermediate node
therefore interested to take custody of the transmission till
subsequent notable appropriate is located toward destination.
The contribution by Sajid et al. “History and Buffer Rule
based Intelligent System for Storage level Big Data Congestion Handling in Smart Opportunistic Network” specializes
on this key issue how selection as best custodian node in
terms of storage capacity as mobile devices have limited
storage capacity for the transmission to raise delivery of the
packets with less drop rate. In this research a history and
buffer based totally intelligent approach based expert gadgets has been added and validated and compared with existing
MAXPROP protocol.
According to the World Health Organization (WHO), a
significant reduction in mortality and maternal morbidity
has occurred in developed countries over the past decades.
In contrast, these rates remain high in developing countries. Smart mobile-health (m-health) applications that use
machine learning (ML) approaches are necessary tools for
pregnancy monitoring in an accessible, reliable, and costefficient manner, making the prediction of high-risk situations possible during gestation. The contribution by Rodrigues et al. “Biomedical data analytics in mobile-health
environments for high-risk pregnancy outcome prediction”
proposes the development, performance evaluation, and
comparison of ML algorithms based on Bayesian networks
capable of identifying at-risk pregnancies based on the
symptoms and risk factors presented by the patients. The
contribution of this study focuses on finding a smart classifier for the development of novel mobile devices, which
presents reliable results in the identification of problems
related to pregnancy.

Special issue on bio-medical signal processing for smarter mobile healthcare using big data…

Lung cancer has been one of the major threats to human
life for decades in both developed and under developed
countries. Computer Aided Detection (CAD) can be an
important tool for early lung nodule detection and preventing
the deaths caused by the lung cancer. In the contribution by
Ahmad et al. “Artificial Neural Network based Classification
of Lung Nodules in CT Images Using Intensity, Shape and
Texture Features,” authors propose a novel technique for
lung nodule detection using a hybrid feature set and artificial neural network. Initially, the lung volume is segmented
from the input CT image using optimal thresholding which
is followed by image enhancement using multi scale dot
enhancement filtering. Next, lung nodule candidates have
been detected from enhanced image and certain features are
extracted.
Cloud Computing (CC) and the Internet of Things have
emerged as new platforms in the ICT revolution of the 21st
century. The adoption of the CloudIoT paradigm in the
healthcare field can bring several opportunities to medical IT, and experts believe that it can significantly improve
healthcare services and contribute to its continuous and systematic innovation. The contribution by Muhammad et al.
“The Impact of the Hybrid Platform of Internet of Things
and Cloud Computing on Healthcare Systems: Opportunities, Challenges, and Open Problems” presents a comprehensive review of the current literature on integration of CC
and IoT to solving various problems in healthcare applications such as smart hospitals, medicine control, and remote
medical services. This paper aims to present the state of the
art and gap analysis of different levels of integration components, analyzing different existing proposals in CloudIoTHealth systems.
In recent times, a massive amount of smart devices or
objects are connected that enhances the scale of the digital
world. These smart objects are referred as “things” or physical devices that have the potential to sense the real-world
physical objects, collect the data, and network with others.
The objects are connected through the internet, which crafts
the terminology of Internet of Things. In the contribution by
Babar et al. “Real-Time Data Processing Scheme using Big
Data Analytics in Internet of Things based Smart Transportation Environment,” authors propose architecture for smart
transportation system using Big Data analytics, in order to
achieve real time processing and facilitate a friendly communication in the environment of Internet of Things based
smart transportation. The proposed architecture is a 3-phase
scheme which is responsible for the organization and management of Big Data, real-time processing of Big Data and
service management.
The contribution by Alavalapati et al. “Chest X-ray
segmentation using Sauvola thresholding and Gaussian

3745

derivatives responses” presents a simple, flexible and an
effective lung segmentation technique called ST-GD (Sauvola thresholding-Gaussian derivatives) method. This technique for extraction of lung field area is consist of six main
steps. This developed system tested on JSRT, Montgomery
and a self collected dataset. The self-collected database
has been collected from Northwest General Hospital and
Research Center, Peshawar, Pakistan. The proposed system
produced an accuracy of 94.57% on JSRT dataset, 90.75%
accuracy on Montgomery dataset and 65.25% on Northwest
dataset using Jaccard coefficient. Furthermore, it is also
investigated that the proposed study has outperformed as
compared to the state-of-the-art methods.
Alzheimer patients face difficulty to remember the identity of persons and performing daily life activities. This
paper presents a hybrid method to generate the egocentric
video summary of important people, objects and medicines
to facilitate the Alzheimer patients to recall their deserted
memories. Lifelogging video data analysis is used to recall
the human memory; however, the massive amount of life
logging data makes it a challenging task to select the most
relevant content to educate the Alzheimer’s patient. To
address the challenges associated with massive life logging
content, the contribution by Javed et al. “A Hybrid Egocentric Video Summarization Method to Improve the Healthcare
for Alzheimer Patients” applied static video summarization
approach to select the key-frames that are more relevant in
the context of recalling the deserted memories of the Alzheimer patients. This paper consists of three main modules
that are face, object, and medicine recognition. Experimental
results signify the effectiveness of the proposed system in
terms of providing the most relevant content to enhance the
memory of Alzheimer patients.
We hope that this special issue would shed light on
major developments in the area of Ambient Intelligence and
Humanized Computing and attract attention by the scientific
community to pursue further investigations leading to the
rapid implementation of these technologies.
Acknowledgements We would like to express our appreciation to all
the authors for their informative contributions and the reviewers for
their support and constructive critiques in making this special issue
possible.

Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

13

