International Journal of Technical Research and Applications e-ISSN: 2320-8163,
www.ijtra.com Special Issue 39 (KCCEMSR) (month 2016), PP. 52-53

INNOVATIVE BRAIN WAVE BASED
CONTROL SYSTEM
Yash Mahajan, Tejas Nikam, Harish Nikte, Kedar Phadke
Prof. Deepali K.
Department of Electronics and Telecommunication
KCCEMSR, Thane(E).
Abstract— This paper describes the development and testing of
an interface system whereby one can control external devices by
voluntarily controlling alpha, beta and theta waves, that is
through concentration & eye movement. Such a system may be
used for the control of prosthetics and external devices like
wheelchairs or other household devices using the alpha brain
waves. The response generated through the movement of the eye
(detecting and controlling the amplitude of the alpha brain
waves) is interfaced and processed to smart home control. Three
electrodes are required to measure brain wave. The electrodes
perform the function of capturing the brain waves and also
converts the captured EEG signal into a JSON format. This
signal format is transmitted via Bluetooth to computer and a
Java programming is used as it is compatible to JSON format.
Eye blink signal along with the concentration signal is used to
control the device. The eye blinks are used as a counter or to
select the device while the concentration signal are used to toggle
the device i.e. to switch ON/OFF the devices.

flexible design that can be expanded in the future to
encompass more complex communication schemes. An
electroencephalogram (EEG) is a measure of the brain's
voltage fluctuations as detected from brain signals. It is an
approximation of the cumulative electrical activity of
neurons.BCI research programs have began and encouraged
new understanding of brain functions.
Brainwave
type
Delta
Theta
Alpha
Low Beta

Keywords —
electroencephalograph
Electrode.

Brain–computer interface (BCI),
(EEG),
wireless
communication,

I. INTRODUCTION
The device consists of eight main parts, ear clip,
flexible ear arm, battery area, power switch, adjustable head
band, sensor tip, sensor arm and inside think gear chipset.
Fig.1 represents the frequencies generated by different types
of activities in the brain. The principle of operation is quite
simple. Two dry sensors are used to detect and filter the EEG
signals. The sensor tip detects electrical signals from the
forehead of the brain. At the same time, the sensor pick up
ambient noise generated by human muscle, computers, light
bulbs, electrical sockets and other electrical devices. The
second sensor, ear clip, is a grounds and reference, which
allows thinkgear chip to filter out the electrical noise. The
device measures the raw signal, power spectrum (alpha, beta,
delta, gamma, theta), attention level, mediation level and blink
detection. The raw EEG data re- ceived at a rate of 512 Hz.
Other measured values are ma- de every second. Therefore,
raw EEG data is a main source of information on EEG signals
using Mindwave headset. A Brain-Computer Interface (BCI)
enables communication under such circumstances. Using data
recorded from the brain, the BCI processes it, interprets the
intention of the user, and acts on it. The BCI has a robust and

Midrange
Beta
High Beta

Frequency
Range
0.1Hz to
3Hz
4Hz to
7Hz
8Hz to
12Hz
13Hz to
15Hz
16Hz to
20Hz
21Hz to
30Hz

Mental states & Conditions
Deep, dreamless, non-REM sleep,
unconscious
Intuitive, recall, fantasy,
imaginary, dream
Relaxed, but not drowsy, tranquil,
conscious
Formerly SMR, relaxed yet
focused, integrated
Thinking, aware of self &
surroundings
Alertness, agitation

( Fig.1 Frequencies Generated By Different Types of Activities in the Brain.)

II. LITERATURE SURVEY
Electroencephalography (EEG) is the measurement
of electrical activity in the living brain. The first electrical
neural activities of the human brain were registered by Hans
Berger (1924) using a simple galvanometer. On the human
scalp was placed only one electrode and one wave was
identified. It was alpha wave (also called Berger’s wave).
Nowadays in clinical use of EEG, 21 electrodes are used to
identified 5 fundamental waves, but this kind of the device
costs thousands of dollars. In recent years, inexpensive mobile
EEG devices have been developed by Avatar EEG Solutions,
Neurosky, OCZ Technology, InteraXon, PLX Devices and
Emotiv Systems. These devices are not used in clinical use,
but are used in the Brain Control Interface (BCI) and neuro
feedback (one of biofeedback type). The BCI is a direct
communication pathway between the brain and an external
device. The cheapest EEG device is single-channel MindWave
headset produced by Neurosky Inc., San Jose, CA. It cost only
around $80[1].

52 | P a g e

International Journal of Technical Research and Applications e-ISSN: 2320-8163,
www.ijtra.com Special Issue 39 (KCCEMSR) (month 2016), PP. 52-53
LM7805 (VOLTAGE REGULATOR):- Output current in
excess of 1A,Internal thermal overload protection, No external
components required, Output transistor safe area protection,
III. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
In this an EEG based brain computer interface system
is the proposed system has been implemented for making the
people by combining the brain commands to the machine.
Hence, the machine can be controlled by the brain commands
(thoughts) which make the system move. The commands used
in this proposal are right and left. The system is designed with
an aim of natural and direct navigational control of the
machine[2]. Hence, our system employed thought-dependent
control architecture that can perform right and left movements
with respect to the appropriate user’s intentions. This is the
semi DSP system. Three electrodes are used, in this 2 are
placed on the forehead and another one which is ground is
placed near the right side of the neck for the user, the signal is
extracted according to the thought through that device. The
signals from the electrodes are nearly a milli volt it is
amplified in the first stage[3]. Output of the amplifier
selection, the analog signal is formed. It is the first stage
output in this system.

Internal short circuit current limit, Available in the aluminum
TO-3 package[5].
Brain waves: The last century of neuroscience research has
greatly increased our knowledge about the brain and
particularly, the electrical signals emitted by neurons firing in
the brain. The patterns and frequencies of these electrical
signals can be measured by placing a sensor on the scalp. The
Mind Tools line of headset products contain Neurosky Think
Gear technology, which quantify the analog electrical signals,
commonly referred to as brainwaves, and exercise them into
digital signals.
Recently, research and development of braincontrolled robots have received a great deal of attention
because of their ability to bring back to people with
devastating neuromuscular disorders and improve the quality
of life and self- dependence of these users. It includes various
applications such as a cursor on the screen, selecting letters
from virtual keyboard, browsing internet, and playing games.
REFERENCES

(Fig.2 Architecture of this proposal[1])

Crystals are commonly used to provide a stable clock
source for micro-controllers. This has a freq. tolerance of +50ppm, temperature stability of +-50ppm and load capacitance
of 18pF.Here are 22pF ceramic disc capacitors commonly
used with this crystal to provide a clock source to microcontrollers. When installing, be sure that the case does not
make contact with any other conductors; i.e don't push it all
the way flush with the board.+-5ppm (parts per million) per
year aging drift. The ATmega16 is a low-power CMOS 8-bit
microcontroller based on the AVR enhanced RISC
architecture. By executing powerful instructions in a single
clock cycle, the ATmega16 achieves throughputs approaching
1 MIPS per MHz allowing the system designer to optimize
power consumption versus processing speed[4].
Display:- Drive method: 1/16 duty cycle, Display size: 16
character * 2 lines, Character structure: 5*8 dots., Display data
RAM: 80 characters (80*8 bits), Character generate ROM:
192 characters, Character generate RAM: 8 characters (64*8
bits),Both display data and character generator RAMs can be
read from MPU. Internal automatic reset circuit at power ON.,
Built in oscillator circuit.

[1] A. Kavitha Rajesh ,EEG based Machine Control
[2] Wojciech SAŁABUN, Processing and spectral analysis of the raw
EEG signal from the MindWave
[3] Crowley K., Sliney A., Pitt I., Murphy D., Evaluating a BrainComputer Interface to Categorize Human Emotional Response, 10th
IEEE International Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies,
pp. 276-278, 2010.
[4] International Journal of Advanced Research in Electrical,
Electronics and Instrumentation Engineering (An ISO 3297: 2007
Certified Organization)
[5] Prachi Kewate, Pranali Suryawanshi, Brain Machine Interface
Automation System: A Review, ISSN 2277-8616

53 | P a g e

