명상음악의 효과검증을 위한 뇌파특성 분석
http://dx.doi.org/10.13067/JKIECS.2014.9.10.1139

명상음악의 효과검증을 위한 뇌파특성 분석
조준모*

Analysis of EEG Characteristics for the Effectiveness Verification of Meditation Music
Jun-Mo Jo*
요 약
최근에 웰빙의 열풍을 타고 명상에 대한 관심이 날로 커지고 있다. 다양한 명상방법들이 소개되고 있으나
사람에 따라 알맞은 방법으로 명상을 할 필요가 있다. 특히, 명상음악을 이용하여 명상을 즐기는 사람들이 늘
고 있으며 어떤 사람은 그것이 도움이 된다고 하고 그렇지 않다고 하는 사람들도 있다. 따라서, 이러한 명상
음악이 명상에 과연 얼마나 도움이 되는지를 본 논문에서 연구하게 되었다. 뇌의 좌우반구의 전전두엽 영역
에 배치된 14개의 채널을 가진 EEG 장치를 이용하여 명상음악을 사용할 때와 그렇지 않을 때 어느 방법이
더욱 효과적인 명상을 할 수 있는지를 비교 실험하였다. 그 결과 2개의 실험에 큰 차이를 볼 수 있었다.
ABSTRACT
Recently, the meditation is getting a major concern because of the trend of wellbeing. The various meditation methods are
introduced, but, we need to take an appropriate method for himself or herself. Especially, the numbers of meditators who are using
meditation music while they are meditating are increasing. Some people say it is helpful, but others don’t. Therefore, I have
studied the impact of the meditation music in this paper. I have compared between the meditation with the music and without the
music by measuring the channels of left and right hemisphere of prefrontal lobe with 14-channel EEG device. For the result, I
have found that there are great difference between two experiments.

키워드
Brainwave(EEG), Alpha Wave, Theta Wave, Meditation, Meditation Music, Frequency Band
뇌파(EEG), 알파파, 세타파, 명상, 명상음악, 주파수대역

Ⅰ. Introduction
The meditation is getting a major concern these
days because of the trend of wellbeing and there are
some researches on meditation using EEG as elaborated as follows. Some researches are using multiple
EEG channels detecting advanced meditators brainwaves. During volitionally self-initiated, altered states

of consciousness that were associated with different
subjective meditation states and different brain neuronal populations were active. The brain areas
predominantly involved during the self-induced meditation states aiming at visualization on right
posterior[1]. The locations of electrodes are mainly
prefrontal lobe of both left and right hemisphere.
Another research is related to the Transcendental

* 교신저자(corresponding author) : 동명대학교 정자공학과(jun@tu.ac.kr)
접수일자 : 2014. 08. 15
심사(수정)일자 : 2014. 09. 25

게재확정일자 : 2014. 10. 17

1139

JKIECS, vol. 9, no. 10, 1139-1144, 2014

Meditation(TM). This random assignment study
compared coherence, amplitude, and eLORETA

relatively clean signal detection only below 30Hz
and with ignoring signals above that frequency.

patterns during practice of the TM and the
TM-Sidhi programs. The TM technique involves

The EEG is classically composed of four frequency
bands: Delta(0-3Hz), Theta(4-7Hz), Alpha(8-12Hz),

systematic transcending of contents of experience
to a state of pure consciousness[2].
There are many researches related on the

and Beta(13-24Hz). The EEG is classically
described as occurring between 0 and 30Hz, recent
work and precise notch digital filtering has defined
a gamma frequency greater than 24Hz extending to
50-60Hz[5-7].

concentration. They are known that the particular
brainwaves
are
induced
when
a
human
concentrates. To analyze the brain waves related to
human concentration using visual stimulus is to
induce the concentration. The visual stimulus tasks
were presented to subjects for concentration. The
method is to measure EEG signals with several
channels and analyze the signals into several
frequency bands[3]. The concentration is mostly
related to the Theta, SMR and mid-Beta waves.
There is an interesting research by measuring and
analyzing the brainwaves to observe the
characteristics of human drowsiness. The basic
method is to analyze the EEG signals from
subjects according to the frequency band and the
Alpha wave[4].
In II, the basic concepts are related to the
measuring meditation EEG signals. Then, in III, the
environments and specifications of the experiments
will be discussed. In IV, the result of experiments
and analysis will be elaborated. Finally, there will
be the conclusion about the impact of the
meditation music on deep meditation.

Ⅱ. Measuring Meditation EEG Signals

For analysis, this study used Discrete Fourier
Transform to observe the signals in the frequency
domain and Pearson Product-Moment Correlation
Coefficient to quantify the correlation between the
signals. To obtain EEG signals, the Discrete
Fourier transform is used because they reveal
periodicity in input data as well as the relative
strengths of any periodic components. The discrete
Fourier transform of areal sequence of numbers
will be a sequence of complex numbers of the
same length. The equation (1) is shown below[8].


 

 

 

 

(1)



Some researchers have studied on a concentration state. The Concentration Index(CI), a state
on concentration, can be calculated with power
spectrum of EEG. The concentration factors Theta,
SMR and mid Beta waves represent as P(ɵ),
P(SMR) and P(mid ϐ) respectively. The equation is
shown as the equation (2)[9].

     
  
 

(2)

2.1 Measuring EEG Signal
The brain system produces electrical signals at a

2.2 Meditation EEG Signals
The

overall

rhythmic

waves

of

brain

is

variety of frequencies. Early EEG researchers were
limited in their ability to record EEG signals by
AC current artifacts and the inability to filter out

dramatically changing while meditator meditates. In
usual daytime activity of human brain generates

60Hz noise precisely. Thus, the EEG was recorded
by using simple 'band pass' filters that allowed

Beta waves(13～30Hz). When the meditators meditate, the rhythmic waves go down to the Alpha

1140

명상음악의 효과검증을 위한 뇌파특성 분석

waves(8～13Hz) and stay in relaxation or calm
state. The experienced meditators can go further to

and the last line in Fig. 4. Likewise, other EEG data
is geographically symmetric in the picture. The ‘P’

the state of Theta waves(4～7Hz) which is deep
state of meditation. There are some locations where

stands for ‘Parietal lobe’, the ‘O’ stands for ‘Occipital
lobe’ and so on.

the electrodes are placed in the surface of head as
shown in Fig. 1. AF3, and AF4 are the prefrontal
lobe of left and right hemisphere respectively.
These two signals of the location will be used for
this experiment in this paper since the prefrontal
lobe is very sensitive to the meditation.

Fig. 2 14 Frequencies of channels

IV. Experiment Results and Analysis
4.1 Without Music Meditation

Fig. 1 Electrode location for EEG signal

Ⅲ. Meditation Experiments
There will be two types of meditation experiments.
One is a With_Music_Meditation, and the other is a
Non_Music_Meditation. The With_Music_Meditation is
a meditation with meditation music, while the
Non_Music_Meditation is a meditation without a
music meditation experiment. For these experiments
3 experienced meditators are participated and they
have 3, 4, 12 years of meditation experiences. For
these experiments, the meditators have used ‘Emotiv
EPOC’ device with 14 channels of electrodes. The
EEG signals measured by electrodes are shown in
Fig. 2. For the main channels using in these
experiments, the two channels of frequencies will be

The result of the ‘Non_Music_Meditation’ will be
discussed with the result of experiment. Especially,
the rhythmic waves of prefrontal lobe will be
analyzed.
4.1.1 Beginning of Meditation
The Fig. 3 shows the beginning period of the
experiment. The (a) AF4 is a Theta and Alpha
wave of right hemisphere, and the (b) AF3 is a
Theta and Alpha wave of left hemisphere.
This figure shows that the right hemisphere is
little bit more active than the left one, which
means there are no big differences between them.
However, the important part in here is the Alpha
rhythm is more active than the Theta wave.
Although the Beta wave does not show in this
figure, the wave is high at this moment since the
experimenter just started to meditate.

used; one is AF3 and AF4 shown at the first line

1141

JKIECS, vol. 9, no. 10, 1139-1144, 2014

(a) AF4
(a) AF4

(b) AF3

(b) AF3

Fig. 5 Non_Music_Meditation waves(end)

Fig. 3 Non_Music_Meditation waves(start)

4.2 With Music Meditation
4.1.2 Middle of Meditation
The Fig. 4 shows the mid(5 minutes of meditation)
period of the experiment. The AF4 is little bit more
active than the AF3, but it doesn’t seem to be a
meaningful result. The important factor here is the
Theta wave is much higher than the beginning of the
meditation. That means the meditator started to be in
the state of deep meditation.

(a) AF4

The result of the ‘With_Music_Meditation’ will
be discussed in this section. Same as the section
4.1, the rhythmic waves of right and left prefrontal
lobe will be analyzed.
4.2.1 Beginning of meditation
The Fig. 6 shows the beginning period of the
experiment. The phenomenon that the power of
AF4 is greater than the AF3 is the same as the
No_Music_Meditation experiment’s. The Alpha
rhythm is also greater than the Theta wave.
Therefore, there is not much difference between the
two experiments.

(b) AF3

Fig. 4 Non_Music_Meditation waves(mid)

4.1.3 End of Meditation
The Fig. 5 shows the end(10 minutes of meditation)
period of the experiment. The Theta wave finally
dominates over the Alpha wave. That means the
meditator is in deep state of deep meditation. The
most interesting part in here is the right hemisphere
is much more active than the other part.

1142

Fig. 6 With_Music_Meditation waves(start)

4.2.2 Middle of meditation
The Fig. 7 shows the mid(5 minutes of meditation) period of the experiment. The power of
Theta and Alpha is in the high level at the same
time especially in AF4. So to speak, as the Theta

명상음악의 효과검증을 위한 뇌파특성 분석

wave goes up to the high level the Alpha wave
does not go down as it supposed to be. This is

V. Conclusion

somewhat different from the experiment result of
the Non_Music_Meditation.

People are interested in the meditation for their
health on these days. I have compared the two

Somehow the meditation music stimulates the
tension of the meditator even though it’s calm
music. The strong signals at both Theta and Alpha
at the same time don’t help for getting at the deep

experiment for founding out the better method
between the meditation with music and the without

meditation state.

(a) AF4

(b) AF3

Fig. 7 With_Music_Meditation waves(mid)

4.2.3 End of Meditation
The Fig. 8 shows the end(10 minutes of
meditation) period of the experiment. Even at the end
of the experiment, the Alpha wave does not go
down. In other words, the meditators are hard to be
in the deep meditation state no matter how long they
meditate. The deep meditation state should be in
high level of Theta and low level of Alpha wave.

music. Through this experiment, some interesting
results have been found. At first, the meditators
had no trouble reaching at the right rhythmic
waves through the Non_Music_Meditation experiment. The Alpha wave is getting stronger from
the Beta wave at the beginning of the meditation.
Then in the mid part, the strong Alpha wave
gradually reduced and the Theta wave increased.
Finally, the Theta wave dominates over the Alpha
wave. However, in the With_Music_Meditation
experiment, not only the Theta wave grew enough
to the high level of power but also the Alpha wave
went down at all.
Therefore, the meditation music could help the
meditator to the calm or relaxed state with Alpha
wave, but not to the deep meditation state. So as
the conclusion, the meditation with music could
help the novice of meditation to the calm and
relaxation state. And the meditation music is not
suggested for the experienced meditators.
Secondly, the meditation activates prefrontal lobe
of the right hemisphere not the left one in the deep
meditation state of the meditator.
For the further study, influence of meditation for
concentration will be studied with the frequency
related to the SMR wave(12～15Hz).

References
[1] D. Lehmanna, P. L. Fabera, P. Achermannb, D.

(a) AF4

(b) AF3

Fig. 8 With_Music_Meditation waves(end)

Jeanmonodc, L. R. R. Gianottia, and D. Pizzagallid, “Brain sources of EEG gamma frequency
during volitionally meditation-induced, altered
states of consciousness, and experience of the

1143

JKIECS, vol. 9, no. 10, 1139-1144, 2014

self,” Neuroimaging, Elsevier, Sec. 108, 2001, pp.
111-121.
[2] F. Travis, “Comparison of coherence, amplitude, and eLORETA patterns during Transcendental Meditation and TM-Sidhi practice,”
Int. J. of Psychophysiology, Elsevier, 81, 2011, pp.
198-202.
[3] Y.-S. Jang and D.-W. Han, “Analysis of EEG
Generated from Concentration by Visual
Stimulus Task,” J. of the Korea Institute of
Electronic Communication Sciences, vol. 9, no. 5,
2014, pp. 589-594.
[4] Y.-S. Jang, S.-L. Lee, and S.-A. Ryu,
“Characteristics of Frequency Band on EEG
Signal Causing Human Drowsiness,” J. of the
Korea Institute of Electronic Communication
Sciences, vol. 8, no. 6, 2013, pp. 949-954.
[5] J. W. Sleigh, D. A. Steyn, M. L. Steyn, M. L.
Williams, and P. Smith, “Comparison of
changes in electroencephalographic measures
during induction of general anaesthesia: influence of the gamma frequency band and
electromyogram signal,” Br. J. Anaesth, vol. 86,
no. 1, 2001, pp. 50-58.
[6] H. F. Unterrainer, M. J. Chen, and J. H.
Gruzelier, “EEG-neurofeedback and psychodynamic psychotherapy in a case of adolescent
anhedonia with substance misuse,” Int. J. of
Psychophysiology, Elsevier, vol. 93, no. 1, 2014,
pp. 84-95.
[7] J. H. Gruzelier, “EEG-neurofeedback for optimising performance,” Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, Elsevier, vol. 44, 2014, pp.
124-141.
[8] C. E. Reyes, J. L. C. Rugayan, C. Jason, G.
Rullan, C. M. Oppus, and G. L. Tangonan, “A
Study on Ocular and Facial Muscle Artifacts in
EEG Signals for BCI Applications,” Tencon,
IEEE Conf., Cebu, Philippines, Nov. 2012, pp.
1-6.
[9] Y.-S.

1144

Jang,

G.-C.

Park,

and

D.-W.

Han,

“Comparison of EEG Characteristics between
Dementia Patient and Normal Person Using
Frequency Analysis Method,” J. of the Korea
Institute of Electronic Communication Sciences, vol.
9, no.5, 2014, pp. 595-600.

저자 소개
조준모(Jun-Mo Jo)
1991년 아이오아주립대학교 컴퓨
터과학과 졸업(공학사)
1995년 경북대학교 대학원 컴퓨터
공학과 졸업(공학석사)
2004년 경북대학교 대학원 컴퓨터공학과 졸업(공학
박사)
1998년～현재 동명대학교 전자공학과 교수
※ 관심분야 : 이동통신, 뇌파통신, 뇌과학

