명상이
집중도에 미치는 영향조사를 위한 EEG 뇌파 분석
http://dx.doi.org/10.13067/JKIECS.2014.9.12.1421

명상이 집중도에 미치는 영향조사를 위한 EEG 뇌파
분석
조준모*

EEG Brainwave Analysis for Research on Meditation Influence to the Concentration
Jun-Mo Jo*
요 약
현대의 복잡한 도시생활로 인하여 많은 이들이 크고 작은 정신적인 스트레스를 호소하고 있으며 이에 따라
각종 정신질환에 노출되어 있다. 특히, 학생이나 직장인 할 것 없이 많은 이들이 집중력 부족으로 인하여 일
의 능률 저하나 양질의 생활 유지에 어려움을 가지고 있다. 이러한 집중력을 향상시키기 위해 명상이 대안으
로 떠오르고 있으며, 이러한 명상이 집중력에 어떠한 형태로 영향을 미치는지 알아보기 위해 EEG 뇌파를 활
용하여 실험하였다. 명상경험자를 실험대상으로 하였으며 뇌의 좌우반구의 전전두엽 영역에 배치된 AF3와
AF4영역을 중점적으로 관찰하고 분석하였다. 그 결과 리듬성 활동 뇌파의 특유한 패턴과 파워 스팩트럼의 변
화를 관찰할 수 있었다.
ABSTRACT
Many people complain their big or little stress due to the complicated city life in modern times, so they are exposed of the
mental illness. Especially, not only students and office workers but also most people suffer from degradation of efficiency at work
and keeping the high quality of life because of the insufficiency of concentration ability. To improve the concentration ability, the
meditation is a substitution. The influence of meditation for the concentration ability is experimented with EEG brainwave. Some
experienced meditators are participated for the experiments, and the left and right portion of prefrontal lobe, AF3 and AF4, are
measured and analyzed. As a result, the changes of rhythmic activity of a unique pattern and power spectra are observed.

키워드
Brainwave(EEG), Concentration, Meditation, SMR Wave, Alpha Wave, Theta Wave
뇌파(EEG), 집중력, 명상, SMR파, 알파파, 세타파

Ⅰ. Introduction

the elementary to high school students have that

Many people in the industrialized countries suffer
from excessive stress and are exposed of the

kind of stress and complaints about their lack of
concentration while they are studying. There are
some researches that the meditation helps to

mental illness. Especially, in Korea, from most of

improve the concentration ability as well as to

* 교신저자(corresponding author) : 동명대학교 전자공학과(jun@tu.ac.kr)
접수일자 : 2014. 08. 25
심사(수정)일자 : 2014. 11. 25

게재확정일자 : 2014. 12. 15

1421

JKIECS, vol. 9, no. 12, 1421-1426, 2014

resolve the stress.
There are some experiments related to the
meditation using 19 EEG channels to find out the
function of the brains. They were established by
functional connectivities between brain regions. The
EEG was recorded before, during and after that
meditation exercise. The head surface EEG data
were recomputed into 19 cortical regional source
model time series. Mostly the locations of electrodes are mainly prefrontal lobe of both left and
right hemisphere[1].
Another research is related on the changes in
EEG and autonomic nervous activity during meditation and their association with personality traits.
They have carefully experiment the EEG with the
meditation as the attainment of a restful yet fully
alert physical and mental state practiced by many
as a self-regulatory. The result showed that the
power on EEG predominantly in the frontal area[2].
Another research related on the meditation is to
analyze the brainwaves related to human concentration using visual stimulus is to induce the
concentration. The visual stimulus tasks were
presented to subjects for concentration. The method
is to measure EEG signals with several channels
and analyze the signals into several frequency
bands[3]. The concentration is mostly related to the
SMR, Alpha and Theta waves. There is an
interesting research by measuring and analyzing
the brainwaves to observe the characteristics of
human drowsiness. The basic method is to analyze
the EEG signals from subjects according to the
frequency band and the Alpha wave[4].
The Theta wave gradually increases as well as
the concentration within most of their sessions.
Furthermore that was consistent with the subject's
acknowledgments of tiredness as well as reports of
increases in anterior Theta with
concentration and cognitive demands[5].

sustained

In chapter II, the basic concepts are related to
the measuring meditation EEG signals. Then, in

1422

chapter III, the rhythmic activities related on the
concentration are elaborated. In chapter IV, the
result of experiments and analysis will be
elaborated. Finally, there will be the explanation of
the unique patterns of rhythmic activity and power
spectra.

Ⅱ. Measuring Meditation EEG Signals
2.1 Measuring EEG Signal
There are some rhythmic activities from the
human brain. The EEG is classically composed of
four frequency bands. The Delta, Theta, Alpha, and
Beta waves have their own frequency bands like
0-3Hz, 4-7Hz, 8-12Hz and 13-24Hz respectively.
The EEG is classically described as occurring
between 0 and 30Hz, and recent work and precise
notch digital filtering has defined a gamma
frequency greater than 24Hz extending to
50-60Hz[6].
For analysis, this study used Discrete Fourier
Transform to observe the signals in the frequency
domain and Pearson Product-Moment Correlation
Coefficient to quantify the correlation between the
signals. To obtain EEG signals, the Discrete
Fourier transform is used because they reveal
periodicity in input data as well as the relative
strengths of any periodic components. The discrete
Fourier transform of areal sequence of numbers
will be a sequence of complex numbers of the
same length. The equation (1) is shown below[7].


 

 

 



 

(1)

The Concentration Index(CI), a state on concentration, can be calculated with power spectrum
of EEG. The concentration factors Theta, SMR and
mid Beta waves represent as P(ɵ), P(SMR) and
P(mid ϐ) respectively[8]. However, the Alpha wave

명상이 집중도에 미치는 영향조사를 위한 EEG 뇌파 분석

is also a critical rhythmic activity[5],[9], so the mid
Beta is replaced by the Alpha wave in this paper.
The equation is shown as below(2).

      
  
 

(2)

2.2 EEG Signals for Concentration

both on the changes of the rhythmic activity and
the power spectra of frequencies related to the
concentration fields such as SMR, Alpha and Theta
waves during experiments. There are 5 experienced
meditators are participated for this experiments, and
they have 2, 3, 4, 12, 15 years of meditation
experiences. Each meditators meditated for 10

There is some specific field like SMR waves
related to the concentration, but it is also part of

minutes for this experiment. The meditators have
used ‘Emotiv EPOC’ device with 14 channels of

the Beta wave. The rhythmic waves of brain are
dramatically changing while meditator meditates. In
usual daytime activity of human brain generates
Beta waves. When the meditators meditate, the
rhythmic waves go down to the Alpha waves and
stay in relaxation or calm state. The experienced
meditators can go further to the state of Theta
waves which is deep state of meditation.
There are some locations where the electrodes
are placed in the surface of head as shown in Fig.
1. AF3, and AF4 are the prefrontal lobe of left and
right hemisphere respectively. These two signals of
the location will be used for this experiment in this
paper since the prefrontal lobe is very sensitive to
the meditation.

electrodes. The EEG signals measured by electrodes are shown in Fig. 2. For the main channels
using in these experiments, the two channels of
frequencies will be used; one is AF3 and AF4
shown at the first line and the last line in Fig. 4.
Likewise, other EEG data is geographically
symmetric in the picture. The ‘P’ stands for
‘Parietal lobe’, the ‘O’ stands for ‘Occipital lobe’ and
so on.

Fig. 2 14 Frequencies of channels

The concentration related rhythmic activity
waves are Theta, Alpha and SMR waves. There

Fig. 1 Electrode location for EEG signal

Ⅲ. Meditation Experiments
For the experiment, I have carefully examined

are many related researches on the subjects.
Frontal Theta, while associated with increasing
memory load, also synchronize with task demands,
focused attention, sustained concentration and
meditation. And gaining in music performance was
associated with the elevation of Theta over Alpha,
and termed the Alpha/Theta protocol, and the
SMR[9].

1423

JKIECS, vol. 9, no. 12, 1421-1426, 2014

IV. Experiment Results and Analysis

show that the meditators just started to meditate
from usual activity. The Beta wave dominates over

4.1 Changes of Rhythmic Activity

all other waves. The well-known wave field SMR

In order to analyze the concentration aspects
with the EEG signals, analyzing both on the AF4

as a concentration factor showed the similar results
with the graph of Beta since they have an

and AF3 is essential. However, the graphs of AF3
will be omitted in this section since AF4 and AF3

overlapping portion. We can see the experienced
meditators having a great improvement on the
SMR wave in a short period of time.

have the same pattern.
Through the experiments, the changes of the
rhythmic activity of AF4 during the meditation will
be compared and analyzed in this section. The
specific rhythmic waves such as SMR, Alpha and
Theta are selected and analyzed since they are the
waves related to the concentration. The ‘Custom’
waves showing in the figures in this section are
set for the SMR(13～15Hz) waves.
4.1.1 Start Stage of Meditation
The start stage of meditation means that the
meditators just sit for the meditation from usual
activity. So he or she might be in the state of
stress, uncomforted or fatigue before he or she
comes to the meditation.

4.1.2 Middle Stage of Meditation
The middle stage of meditation means that the
meditators are in the state of meditation. The
meditators who are in this state usually started to
feel a relaxation and comfort. The Fig. 4 shows the
middle(5 minutes of meditation) period of the
experiment. The SMR wave has been decreased
and the Alpha wave has been increased. It is
obvious that the meditators are in the state of
meditation. Moreover, the concentration is also
increased in the deeper state.

Fig. 4 Meditation waves(mid)

4.1.3 End Stage of Meditation
Fig. 3 Meditation waves(start)

The Fig. 3 shows the rhythmic waves of the
beginning period. The Theta, Alpha, Beta and the
Custom waves are shown in order. The Custom
wave is set as SMR waves. The waves from AF4

1424

The end stage of meditation means that the
meditators are in the deep state of meditation. The
meditators who are in this state are similar with
the state of sleeping, but they are in conscious.
The Fig. 5 shows the end(10 minutes of meditation) period of the experiment. The Theta wave
finally dominates over the Alpha wave. That means

명상이 집중도에 미치는 영향조사를 위한 EEG 뇌파 분석

the meditator is in the state of deep meditation as
well as the concentration factor.

The patterns are similar with the graph of AF3
shown in Fig. 7. But the Fig. 7 shows that the
patterns are evenly distributed, unlike the graphs
shown in Fig. 6. The Theta wave shown in AF4
severly increased the end of the meditation. The 4
meditators out of 5 showed the same results.

Fig. 5 Meditation waves(end)

4.2 Changes of Power Spectra
Unlike with the rhythmic changes, the power
spectra pattern of AF4 and AF3 are somewhat
different. So in this section, the power spectra of
each AF4 and AF3 are described and analyzed.
The Fig. 6 and Fig. 7 are the changes of the
power spectra of AF4 and AF3 respectively. X axis
shows that the 3 periods of meditation and Y axis
shows the power spectra level.
The AF4, the prefrontal lobe of right hemisphere, shown in Fig. 6, showed that every
rhythmic waves started with high level of powers,
but they gradually went down and went up at the
end of simulation.

Fig. 7 Changes of power spectra(AF3)

V. Conclusion
There are some researches related on the
meditation that improves concentration ability. To
find out the influence of meditation for the
concentration ability, some experienced meditators
are experimented with EEG brainwave. There has
been many researches measured in the various
areas in a brain however the specific areas of AF3
and AF4 are measured and analyzed in this paper.
At first, there is a sequence of pattern in the
rhythmic activity by the levels of concentration. If
the meditator in the shallow meditation state, SMR
wave dominates among other waves such as Alpha
and Theta waves. If the meditator in the deeper
level of meditation, the Alpha wave dominates
among others. Finally, if the meditator in the deepest state of meditation, the meditator is in the
highest level of concentration with the Theta wave.
Secondly, the changes of power spectra between

Fig. 6 Changes of power spectra(AF4)

AF4 and AF3 have similar pattern that there was
a declination from ‘start’ to the ‘mid’ state, then

1425

JKIECS, vol. 9, no. 12, 1421-1426, 2014

goes up to the end of the meditation.
With the result of this paper, we can verify the
density of concentration at certain period of time
during a meditation.
For the further study, influence of meditation for
drowsiness will be studied by analyzing many
portions of brainwaves simultaneously.

References
[1] D. Lehmanna, P. L. Fabera, S. Tei, R. D. Pasculal-Marqui, P. Milz, and K. Kochi, “Reduced
functional commnectivity between cortical sources in five meditation traditions detected
with lagged coherence using EEG tomography,”
Neuroimaging, Elsevier, Sec. 60, 2012, pp.
1574-1586.
[2] T. Takahashi, T. Murata, T. Hamada, M.
Omori, H. Kosaka, M. Kikuchi, H. Yoshida,
and Y. Wada, “Changes in EEG and autonomic
nervous activity during mediation and their
association with personality traits,” Int. J. of
Psychophysiology, Elsevier, Sec. 55, 2005, pp.
199-207.
[3] Y.-S. Jang and J.-W. Han, “Analysis of EEG
Generated from Concentration by Visual Stimulus Task,” J. of the Korea Institute of
Electronic Communication Sciences, vol. 9, no. 5,
2014, pp. 589-594.
[4] Y.-S. Jang, S.-L. Lee, and S.-A. Ryu, “Characteristics of Frequency Band on EEG Signal
Causing Human Drowsiness,” J. of the Korea
Institute of Electronic Communication Sciences, vol.
8, no. 6, 2013, pp. 949-954.
[5] H. F. Unterrainer, M. J. Chen, and J. H.
Gruzelier, “EEG-neurofeedback and psychodynamic psychotherapy in a case of adolescent
anhedonia with substance misuse,” Int. J. of
Psychophysiology, Elsevier, Sec. 93, 2014, pp.
84-95.

1426

[6] J. W. Sleigh, D. A. Steyn-Ross, M. L. Steyn-Ross,
M. L. Williams, and P. Smith, “Comparison of
changes in electroencephalo-graphic measures
during induction of general anaesthesia: influence
of the gamma frequency band and electromyogram signal,” Br. J Anaesth, Sec. 1, 2001,
pp. 50-58.
[7] C. E. Reyes, J. L. C. Rugayan, C. Jason, G.
Rullan, C. M. Oppus, and G. L. Tangonan, “A
Study on Ocular and Facial Muscle Artifacts in
EEG Signals for BCI Applications,” In Proc.
IEEE Conf., TENCON, Cebu, Philippine, Nov.
2012, pp. 1-6.
[8] Y.-S. Jang, G.-C. Park, and D.-W. Han,
“Comparison of EEG Characteristics between
Dementia Patient and Normal Person Using
Frequency Analysis Method,” J. of the Korea
Institute of Electronic Communication Sciences, vol.
9, no. 5, 2014, pp. 595-600.
[9] J. H. Gruzelier, “EEG-neurofeedback for optimising performance,” Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, Elsevier, vol. 44, July 2014, pp.
124-141.

저자 소개
조준모(Jun-Mo Jo)
1991년 아이오아주립대학교 컴퓨
터과학과 졸업 (공학사)
1995년 경북대학교 대학원 컴퓨터
공학과 졸업(공학석사)
2004년 경북대학교 대학원 컴퓨터공학과 졸업(공학
박사)
1998년～현재 동명대학교 전자공학과 교수
※ 관심분야 : 이동통신, 뇌파통신, 뇌과학

