Mind Pool: Encouraging Self-Reflection
Through Ambiguous Bio-Feedback
Kiel Long

Abstract

HighWire DTC

In this interactivity we present Mind Pool, an
exploratory Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) interactive
artwork that provides real-time feedback of brain
activity to those interacting with it. Brain activity is
represented sonically and physically via a magnetically
reactive liquid that sits in a pool in front of the
participant. Mind Pool is designed to present this
information ambiguously so as to encourage sustained
interactions and self-reflection from participants
through motivating them to relate the ambiguous
feedback with their brain activity.

Lancaster University
Lancaster, UK
kslong@highwire-dtc.co.uk
John Vines
Culture Lab
School of Computing Science
Newcastle University, UK
john.vines@ncl.ac.uk

Author Keywords
Digital art; ambiguous feedback; self-reflection;
mindfulness; brain-computer interface

ACM Classification Keywords
H.5.m [Information interfaces and presentation (e.g.,
HCI)]: Miscellaneous.

Introduction

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
CHI 2013 Extended Abstracts, April 27–May 2, 2013, Paris, France.
ACM 978-1-4503-1952-2/13/04.

In recent years there has been sustained interest in
HCI about how technologies can be designed to support
reflective practices and behaviors. Past work has
explored the design of technologies that support
reflection on technology use over extended periods of
time [5] and the design of systems to support

Figures 1-3. Mind Pool in use in
public gallery settings.

emotional self-regulation [9]. In this vein, Mind Pool is
a Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) [7] based artwork
that is designed to support participants in reflecting
upon their brain activity by providing sonic and visual
feedback. Feedback is produced from 12 dominant
brainwave frequencies of a participant wearing a BCI
device. These are represented through ambiguous
forms allowing participants to associate the information
provided with their own mental state. With the mode of
feedback provided in Mind Pool, we aim to provoke
mindful reflectivity between participants, the biofeedback technology and those observing nearby.

The relationship between human emotion and biometric
signals that can be interpreted by computers is highly
debated [3] but they do highlight possibilities for
supporting aspects of mindfulness [8,9]. Furthermore,
some of the main values of Mindfulness practice—such
as concerted concentration on sensorial objects for a
sustained period of time—are highly sympathetic to the
aims of reflective aesthetic engagement [1]. The
experimental design of Mind Pool was therefore
designed with these ideas as underlying design
principles—aiming to provoke states of mindful
reflectivity for those interacting with the artwork.

Mindful reflectivity

Mind Pool’s system

The development of Mind Pool was inspired by the selfreflective practice of Mindfulness. Mindfulness is a
meditative practice based upon Buddhist philosophy
that emphasizes conscious attention towards momentto-moment sensory experience to ease emotional
suffering and encourage self-understanding [6]. A core
value of mindfulness is focused attention on sensorial
‘objects’, such as breathing and other bodily sensations
[6]. Biofeedback and affective technologies have been
used in the past to support the type of self-regulatory
practices associated with mindfulness, typically focusing
on respiration [9]. In the context of new media art,
Bolter and Gromala [1] refer to how interactions with
affective technology can lead to ‘reflectivity’ for those
interacting with the artwork. Reflectivity is an attribute
of interface design that invites participants to reflect on
their relationship with the interface. This draws upon a
long lineage of new media arts practice where the aim
is to mystify the relationship between people and
technology and provoke effortful explorations of
interfaces by those experiencing the artwork [1].

Mind Pool utilizes EEG (Electroencephalography) as a
source of control from 12 dominant brainwave
frequencies that alter parameters of information
feedback. The brain is a structure of approximately 100
billion neurons in connection that communicate with
each other to process information [4]. This
communication between neurons manifests as electrical
currents pass across their surface. EEG measures these
fluctuations in electronic charge by the placement of
electrodes across the scalp. The frequency in which
these groups of neurons fire indicate the level of
activity, measured in Hz. A high brainwave frequency
(e.g. >13Hz) indicates fast information processing (e.g.
alertness) and lower frequency (e.g. 10Hz) indicates a
lower workload (e.g. relaxation) [9]. Although the brain
produces many frequencies of brainwave activity, a
persistence of a frequency may arise and provide an
indication of the mental state of an individual [9]. By
invoking different mental states by relaxing or
concentrating on specific objects a participant can
develop “skills” to control brain activity [9].

Figure 4. Diagram of Mind Pool’s
magnetic fluid visual interface.
Ferro-fluid pool is represented by
black. Electromagnet position is
indicated by solid white circles
and are not visible through pool.
White rings indicate waves visible
in the ferro-fluid and occur on
both sides of the pool. The
frequency of the waves are
determined by brainwave
frequency. Waves aggregate in
the center to produce a broader
indication of activity.

Figure 5. Image of the Mind Pool
magnetic fluid visual interface.

Mind Pool uses an Emotiv [2] EEG head unit to capture
brainwave activity of both left and right hemispheres.
This information is relayed to an embedded computer
via Bluetooth. Custom software using the Max/MSP
programming environment converts the information of
voltage fluctuations (caused by groups of neurons
firing) into frequency information through a Fourier
Transform calculation. This provides information of the
frequencies (cycles of groups of neuron firing measured
in Hz) present and their amplitude for both sides of the
brain. This frequency information is windowed between
0 and 48Hz and then further divided into six
bandwidths of 8Hz (i.e. 0-8Hz, 8-16Hz and so on). This
equal frequency division avoids participant’s using any
existing knowledge of brainwave pattern categorization
and their associations (e.g. “Alpha (8-13Hz) is
relaxation”), promoting self-derived correlations of
mental states with feedback. The frequency with the
highest amplitude within a bandwidth is used as the
dominant frequency providing six dominant frequencies
per hemisphere. It is these dominant frequencies that
alter the parameters of the installation (such as pitch
and timing of audio triggered, and control of physical
computing devices via an Arduino).
The final iteration of Mind Pool consists of a large flat
surface with a pool of ferro-fluid at its center. 12
electromagnets below the pool produce ripples through
alternating on/off cycles (controlled by Arduino) at a
rate determined by the dominating frequency for that
bandwidth. The electromagnets are arranged in a circle
with lowest bandwidth closest to the participant and
higher bandwidth furthest and are split left and right
according to the hemispheres. Audio is triggered in
correlation to ripples produced and alters pitch
according to dominant brainwave frequency.

Participants may sit at the installation although are free
to move around the environment.

Explorations of Mind Pool
As noted, the motivation behind the design of Mind Pool
is that information represented to participants has to
balance opportunities to interpret its meaning (i.e., its
relationship to brain activity) with motivating sustained
interaction. Early iterations of the system incorporated
only audio feedback. It was notable how those
exploring these early iterations focused on trying to
produce audio that they recognized primarily as music.
Following this, a number of alternative feedback
mechanisms were considered. We tested both a
‘physical’ visual feedback system (a series of moving
actuators) and graphical displays (graphs of the full
spectrum of brain activity) alongside the audio
feedback. There were stark contrasts in the ways in
which participants reacted to these two forms of
representation. When observing the graphical display,
which was very information rich, participants would
initially be highly engaged. Very quickly however they
would come to passively observe the information and
there was very little impetus to explore how the
information related to actual brain activity. Contrasting
with this, the combination of ‘physical’ visual
representation and sonic feedback led to less
immediate engagement but it did support exploratory
interactions over more sustained periods of time.
Following these explorations the ‘pool’ was designed to
provide an additional but still ambiguous [3] level of
feedback for participants. The inspiration for this was
two-fold. First, participants can observe activity for
individual brain hemispheres and bandwidths. Second,

by viewing the center of the pool the waves of each
bandwidth aggregated to produce a pattern of activity
across the entire brain. An additional effect of
introducing multiple forms of feedback was that
participants began focusing on finding correlations
between the audio and visual feedback and how this
related to their own mental state.

framing the mind as disembodied from body and world.
Furthermore, our work suggests the relationships
between body, brain and technology is a fruitful space
to explore how future consumer and mundane
technologies may facilitate self-reflection and regulation
for users beyond the context of digital art.

Acknowledgements
Conclusion
To date, the latest version of Mind Pool has gone
through a number of informal evaluations with groups
of participants both within the laboratory and in public
settings. It has become clear that the form in which
brain feedback is presented has significant impacts
upon the quality of engagement with the interface. The
introduction of two channels of feedback has had the
effect of providing sources that could be correlated with
one-another. While one of our key aims was to provide
an ambiguous [3] interface where participants could
explore relationships between brain activity and
feedback it is still important for participants to be able
to ‘see themselves’ in the interface in order to provoke
reflectivity [1]. Providing more than one channel of
feedback has supported this.
Furthermore, testing and exhibition of the installation
revealed opportunities to explore the relationship
between the body and the mind. While the study of the
human brain is often claimed to be a disembodied
science [4], it is very clear that to those exploring Mind
Pool their body is tightly entwined with their mental
activity. They frequently moved around the space and
gesticulated in various ways to see what impact this
would have on the feedback provided. We suggest that
future BCI research explores the space of relationships
between embodied action and brain activity rather than

This work was supported by the RCUK Digital Economy
Theme funded HighWire Doctoral Training Centre.

References
[1] Bolter, J., and Gromala, D. Transparency and
Reflectivity: Digital art and the aesthetics of interface
Design. In: Fishwick, P (ed.). Aesthetic Computing. Boston:
MIT Press, 2006.
[2]

Emotiv. http://emotiv.com/

[3] Gaver, W., Beaver, J., and Benford, S. Ambiguity
as a resource for design. In: Proc. CHI ’03, ACM
(2003), 233-240.
[4] Gazzaniga, M. Human: The science behind what
makes your brain unique. New York, harper Collins,
2009.
[5] Hallnas, L., Redstrom, J. Slow technology:
Designing for reflection. Personal and Ubiquitous
Computing, 5 (3), 201-212.
[6] Kabat-Zinn, J. Full catastrophe living: using the
wisdom of you body and mind to face stress, pain, and
illness. New York, Delta, 1991.
[7] O’Hara, K., Sellen, A., and Harper, R. Embodiment
in brain-computer interaction. In: Proc. CHI ’11, ACM
(2011), 353-362
[8] Shaw, C., Gromala, D., and Fleming Seay, A. The
meditation chamber: Enacting autonomic senses. In.
Proc ENACTIVE ’07, 2007.
[9] Teplan, M., Fundamentals of EEG Measurement,
Measurement Science Review, 2 (2), 2002.

