Journal of Assistive Technologies
Emerald Article: Realistic expectations with brain computer interfaces
Maurice Mulvenna, Gaye Lightbody, Eileen Thomson, Paul McCullagh, Melanie
Ware, Suzanne Martin

Article information:
To cite this document: Maurice Mulvenna, Gaye Lightbody, Eileen Thomson, Paul McCullagh, Melanie Ware, Suzanne Martin,
(2012),"Realistic expectations with brain computer interfaces", Journal of Assistive Technologies, Vol. 6 Iss: 4 pp. 233 - 244
Permanent link to this document:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/17549451211285735
Downloaded on: 23-11-2012
References: This document contains references to 34 other documents
To copy this document: permissions@emeraldinsight.com

Access to this document was granted through an Emerald subscription provided by UNIVERSITY OF ULSTER
For Authors:
If you would like to write for this, or any other Emerald publication, then please use our Emerald for Authors service.
Information about how to choose which publication to write for and submission guidelines are available for all. Please visit
www.emeraldinsight.com/authors for more information.
About Emerald www.emeraldinsight.com
With over forty years' experience, Emerald Group Publishing is a leading independent publisher of global research with impact in
business, society, public policy and education. In total, Emerald publishes over 275 journals and more than 130 book series, as
well as an extensive range of online products and services. Emerald is both COUNTER 3 and TRANSFER compliant. The organization is
a partner of the Committee on Publication Ethics (COPE) and also works with Portico and the LOCKSS initiative for digital archive
preservation.
*Related content and download information correct at time of download.

Peer-reviewed paper
Realistic expectations with brain computer
interfaces
Maurice Mulvenna, Gaye Lightbody, Eileen Thomson, Paul McCullagh, Melanie Ware and
Suzanne Martin

Maurice Mulvenna is based
at the TRAIL Living Lab,
School of Computing and
Mathematics, University of
Ulster, Newtownabbey, UK.
Gaye Lightbody is based at
the School of Computing
and Mathematics,
University of Ulster,
Newtownabbey, UK.
Eileen Thomson is Deputy
Chief Executive of the
Cedar Foundation,
Belfast, UK.
Paul McCullagh and
Melanie Ware are based at
the School of Computing
and Mathematics,
University of Ulster,
Newtownabbey, UK.
Suzanne Martin is a
Co-director of the TRAIL
Living Lab, School of
Health Sciences,
University of Ulster,
Newtownabbey, UK.

Abstract
Purpose – This paper describes the research underpinning the development and evaluation of a brain
computer interface (BCI) system designed to be suitable for domestic use by people with acquired brain
injury in order to facilitate control of their home environment. The purpose of the research is to develop a
robust and user-friendly BCI system which was customisable in terms of user ability, preferences and
functionality. Specifically the human interface was designed to provide consistent visual metaphors
in usage, while applications change, for example, from environmental control to entertainment and
communications.
Design/methodology/approach – The research took a user centred design approach involving
representative end-users throughout the design and evaluation process. A qualitative study adopting
user interviews alongside interactive workshops highlighted the issues that needed to be addressed
in the development of a user interface for such a system. User validation then underpinned prototype
development.
Findings – The findings of the research indicate that while there are still significant challenges in
translating working BCI systems from the research laboratories to the homes of individuals with acquired
brain injuries, participants are keen to be involved in the deign and development of such systems. In
its current stage of development BCI is multi-facetted and uses complex software, which poses a
significant usability challenge. This work also found that the performance of the BCI paradigm chosen
was considerably better for those users with no disability than for those with acquired brain injury.
Further work is required to identify how and whether this performance gap can be addressed.
Research limitations/implications – The research had significant challenges in terms of managing the
complexity of the hardware and software set-up and transferring the working systems to be tested by
participants in their home. Furthermore, the authors believe that the development of assistive
technologies for the disabled user requires a significant additional level of personalisation and intensive
support to the level normally required for non-disabled users. Coupled with the inherent complexity of BCI,
this leads to technology that does not easily offer a solution to both disabled and non-disabled users.
Originality/value – The research contributes additional findings relating to the usability of BCI systems.
The value of the work is to highlight the practical issues involved in translating such systems to participants
where the acquired brain injury can impact on the ability of the participant to use the BCI system.
Keywords Health care, Computer applications, Special purpose computers, Brain,
Brain computer interface, Steady state visual evoked potential, Usability, Configuration, Personalisation

The BRAIN consortium would
like to acknowledge all the
people who participated in the
field tests in Northern Ireland
and Spain. The research
leading to these results has
received funding from the
European Community’s
Seventh Framework
Programme under grant
agreement no. 224156.

DOI 10.1108/17549451211285735

Paper type Research paper

Introduction
Hundreds of thousands of people across the world are unable to interact effectively with other
people, assistive devices, or information and communication technologies due to
disabilities and functional impairments. Persons with traumatic brain injuries (for more

VOL. 6 NO. 4 2012, pp. 233-244, Q Emerald Group Publishing Limited, ISSN 1754-9450

j

JOURNAL OF ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGIES

j

PAGE 233

details, see www.brainline.org/landing_pages/categories/abouttbi.html) (Holder, 2005),
spinal cord injury, or who have suffered a stroke are examples of groups who are often
excluded. Communication is a fundamental need that is empowering to the individual’s
recovery and participation in society. The challenge of technology-enhanced rehabilitation is to
develop a system that allows for individual users’ preferences to be accommodated, in this
case in a user interface that does not depend upon their impaired movement ability. Braincomputer interface (BCI) systems possibly uniquely offer the promise to address this need,
and they have emerged as plausible alternatives for offering communication and control to
physically disabled people (Wolpaw et al., 2002; Allison et al., 2007; Future BNCI, 2012).
Availability, lower cost, portability and convenience make the electroencephalogram (EEG)
the dominant choice in non-invasive monitoring. The EEG is typically recorded using an
array of electrodes positioned around the scalp of the user. This forms the input to a
computerised system from which desired actions may be performed (Figure 1).
Despite numerous endeavours, a practical and convenient BCI system that can be used in
everyday situations still poses a challenge. Besides the known issues of time-consuming
and difficult setup (e.g. positioning the electrodes and applying conductive gel to obtain a
proper signal), fast, easy and accurate personalisation, customisation, and calibration of
such a system to a particular user is a big hurdle for practical application of the technology.
A convenient calibration procedure is among the main challenges to be addressed in order
for successful user adaptation of BCI to be achieved.
There has, however, been some evidence of success for long-term home use of BCI as
reported by Sellers et al. (2010). In this paper they report the progress over two and a half
years of independent use of a P300-based BCI for a particular user with amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (ALS). They highlight the key challenges faced by enabling such independent use,
such as difficulty of use by non-technical personnel, limited applications, user-configurability
issues and sustained and manageable support long term. They have endeavoured to
improve upon these key issues and report some success. Careful selection of a potential
user was undertaken; Vaughan et al. (2006) highlight six criteria used in determining a
suitable candidate for long-term BCI use, ranging from the user’s underlying condition to
their support network of carers, family and friends.
Birbaumer (2006) gives a valuable overview of the progress of invasive and non-invasive
BCI at that time, which is still relevant mostly today. Birbaumer et al. (2003) investigated slow
Figure 1 Main components of a non-invasive EEG-based BCI system
The user interface provides visual feedback to the user
that a task or decision is being performed based on their
BCI interaction. Configuration of the system optimises
the quality of the signal for use.

Interacting with user interface and
calibration/personalisation of system

Signal
Acquisition
Recording the
EEG, signal
processing to
enhance signal
to noise ratio

j

j

PAGE 234 JOURNAL OF ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGIES VOL. 6 NO. 4 2012

Extracting the
command
classification

Performing
the task

Signal
processing to
determine the
key features and
using these
for classification

Selecting control
paths on the user
interface and
interacting with
multimedia and
external devices

cortical potentials (SCP) for control and showed some positive outcomes in terms of longterm use for ALS patients. They trained 32 patients in its use but they report that long training
sessions were needed. They also reported the persistent need for professional attention and
continuous technical support. Only one patient showed potential for independent home use.
A joint project investigated the comparison of SCP-BCI, sensorimotor rhythm (SMR) BCI and
P300-based BCI working with seven ALS (pre-locked in state) patients. BCI-SMR and P300
showed some positive use after 20 training sessions but the SCP-based BCI required further
training. They comment on the factors against widespread non-invasive BCI use, stating that
long training times still often result in high error rates. Furthermore, they highlight the
disparity between BCI efficacy for healthy users and the patients within their studies. Healthy
users were able to achieve a level of control over a number of sessions whereby; the patients
needed 20 sessions to achieve a 70 per cent accuracy using SMR BCI (Kübler et al., 2005).
Neuper et al. (2003) provide a case study for BCI use of a severely paralyzed patient using
event-related desynchronization and event-related synchronization (ERD/ERS) based BCI
for verbal communication. The BCI was established within the patient’s home (clinical)
setting and training was performed over several months. Technical assistance was also
provided on-line. An average spelling accuracy of 70 per cent was achieved.
The literature highlighted in this introduction aims to give some overview of the complexity
involved in providing successful BCI for the individual. Some key repeating issues are
present such as the technical complexity of the BCI system, the need for strong carer and
family support, the need for training, on-going technical support, and the BCI accuracy
disparity between users. The latter is also highlighted by Allison and Neuper (2010a), stating
that there is no ‘‘universal BCI’’.
The desire to promote domestic BCI use is evident (Future BNCI, 2012; Brain
Communication Foundation, 2012) but the challenges are significant. As such, BCI
deployment to the home environment to date has been carefully focussed possibly centred
on an individual user or a small group of users, perhaps often with a defined neurological
condition. Brain-computer interfaces with rapid automated interfaces for nonexperts
(BRAIN) aimed to develop a framework and BCI system that would support a more wide
spread deployment to the disabled user in their own domestic setting.
The paper describes the research work undertaken, describing the selected BCI paradigms
used, and the development of a user interface for the BCI system. The findings indicate the
complexity in setting up the BCI systems outside of a lab environment and the difference in
efficacy of use between disabled and non-disabled participants, and both issues are
examined in the discussion section. The paper concludes by highlighting the challenges to
successful BCI deployment and indicates some possible areas for future research.

BRAIN research project
The work presented in this paper was part of a European funded project called BRAIN. The
primary aim of the research was to promote inclusion by developing, integrating, and testing
technology that makes real world BCI systems more flexible, usable, reliable, and
accessible (BRAIN Project, 2012).
We believe that the underlying technology and software that facilitates BCI is at an early and
evolving stage of development. However, recent endeavours to promote commercially
viable BCI systems (Intendix, 2012; eMotiv, 2012) support the investment of effort for
development in future BCIs (Future BNCI, 2012).
The research hurdles that limit BCI adoption are varied and encompass challenges in signal
acquisition, signal processing, configuration of the system for individuals and support for
the breadth of applications to be used. Figure 1 shows the key components of a typical
BCI system.
Nam et al. (2009) report that BCI’s lack of acceptance could be a consequence of a lack of
understanding of the usability of BCI systems. Finding the right opportunities to make BCI usable

j

j

VOL. 6 NO. 4 2012 JOURNAL OF ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGIES PAGE 235

and accessible offer the potential to turn BCIs into practical assistive technologies that can help
users interact with family, carers as well as home-based technologies including assistive
devices, home appliances, or computer and internet technologies, A key challenge to this is to
minimise the work in deploying BCI systems successfully for users and their supporters.
In order to facilitate this, a European consortium of academic (Universities of Bremen, Ulster and
Warsaw) and industrial partners (TMSi, Telefonica, and Philips) and a non-government
organisation (The Cedar Foundation) working for people with disabilities collaborated, with each
focusing on a key target area for improvement. While the ambition of the project overall required
research advances in signal acquisition, processing, interfacing with home-based applications,
etc. this paper reports on engagement with disabled and non-disabled users as participants
trialling the research prototypes developed in the project, describing the development of the
user interface to the BCI system, for the steady-state visual evoked potential (SSVEP) paradigm
and discussing the findings. This BCI paradigm is described in the next section.

BCI paradigms
Core to the BCI setup is the software that utilises the electrical activity of the brain. There are
a few approaches that may be considered. These are referred to as the BCI paradigms, and
BRAIN set out to evaluate these. Two paradigms explored were: SSVEP; which uses variable
frequency flashing lights to evoke the EEG, and ERD/ERS which uses cued imagined
movement to generate the EEG. The SSVEP paradigm is discussed within this paper and
used in the research and by participants for assessment of engagement and for evaluation.
The following section describes SSVEP.

SSVEP paradigm
Steady-state visual evoked responses use a flashing or flickering stimulus, generally small
lights placed around a monitor (typical useable range 5-48 Hz, at 2 Hz intervals, with .25 Hz
considered as high frequency (HF) SSVEP), which the participant looks at. In doing so this
activates an electrical response in the participant’s EEG that matches the chosen frequency.
Signal processing algorithms and classification procedures map designated responses to a
desired task to enable the participant to make a selection; for example, to open the door.
By using a number of differing flashing objects, decision paths can then be supported by the
participant focusing in on a particular action of interest that represents the activity that they want
to do. There are limitations on the number of usable frequencies in SSVEP due to the user’s
susceptibility to the paradigm in terms of differentiated response in the EEG and other physical
and mental activity, e.g. movement artefact, environmental conditions. The issues relate to the
strength of the SSVEP signal and how each person reacts to the different frequencies.
These factors impact on the user interface development, where the architecture has to
facilitate the user interface to react to individual SSVEP capabilities as well as to personal
capabilities. The benefit of this paradigm is that the user requires minimal training and the
paradigm can potentially support multiple frequencies depending on the responses of the
user to the flashing stimuli. Within the project a target of four distinguishing frequencies was
aimed for to enable a four-way decision-navigation possible.
Using SSVEP an initial calibration process was performed to determine the best frequencies
of operation for a particular participant. These frequencies were then used to set up the
conditions of operation for the BCI system. The objective was to make the system more
suitable for widespread end-user deployment and more usable for the non-expert. The key
stages are shown in Figure 2.

SSVEP paradigm – the variations
a) High frequency SSVEP (30-48 Hz)
In its first phase, the research focused on HF-SSVEP-based BCI (Garcia-Molina and
Mihajlovic, 2010; Durka et al., 2009). Keeping the frequencies used in the range of 30-48 Hz
produced an SSVEP interface that was more comfortable and less tiring for the user as the
flashing component produces less irritation. This provided significant scientific challenge to

j

j

PAGE 236 JOURNAL OF ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGIES VOL. 6 NO. 4 2012

Figure 2 Key stages of SSVEP user calibration and testing

overcome as it becomes more difficult to differentiate between the higher frequencies than it
does with the lower frequency SSVEP.
The aim was to automate the calibration for the HF-SSVEP. However, this proved to be
a complex issue particularly with the disabled user due to general lower accuracy rates.
Progress was made by sequencing through a range of frequencies and choosing the
optimal top four. However, even at the second stage of the testing process (Figure 2 –
accuracy test) it became evident that there was a disparity between accuracy for the
disabled user and the user with no brain injury.
b) HF with phase discrimination
As a result of such difficulties the project investigated an alternative phase-based SSVEP
algorithm to allow classification to be discriminated based on the dominant frequency alone
(Garcia-Molina and Mihajlovic, 2010).
c) Low frequency SSVEP
Whilst development continues on the phase-based SSVEP, user trials continued using an
existing low frequency SSVEP algorithm within the consortium that had previous success in
larger users trials for healthy users in Hannover Messe with 86 users, in 2010 (Volosyak et al.,
2011; Allison et al., 2010b).

Human interfaces for BCI
Much of the research in BCI systems initially focuses on the significant and fundamental
technical challenges with signal acquisition and processing. However, while these remain
imperative, there is now an opportunity to consider user perspectives more strongly. Another
area where opportunities arise is in considering the breadth of applications that need to be
controllable in the user’s environment in order for a BCI system to make a significant potential
impact on the quality of life for the user. These are two areas in which our research focused in
order to provide steps towards a more holistic solution that is of value to users and supports
the European policy area of social inclusion. The interfaces considered in this project are
explained in the following paragraphs.
Smart home and universal interface systems have been developed with other assistive
technologies (Bond et al., 2006; Martin et al., 2006) and BCIs that allow limited control of
household electronic devices have also been validated and a demonstration of smart homes
issues via virtual reality has been proposed (Holzner et al., 2009) but a complete BCI for
control of home devices or other applications is not available in 2012. Many users are also
excluded because they are elderly, uncomfortable with computers, or have various
different limitations. The visual interface and key technologies that integrate with the BCI

j

j

VOL. 6 NO. 4 2012 JOURNAL OF ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGIES PAGE 237

components are important to achieve a system that is inclusive, user friendly and is
accessible to wide range of user groups.
In the research, a component key to accessibility and usability was the intuitive graphical
user interface (IGUI) that is customisable to the needs of the user. The IGUI was developed
and tested with regard for creating an experience that is easy, enjoyable, and rewarding for
users with different disabilities and limitations. The IGUI is customisable according to the
user’s abilities, stated preferences, and BCI paradigm selected.
The IGUI offers a bridge from the BCI platform used in our research (BCI2000, 2012;
McCullagh et al., 2010) and a universal application interface (UAI) (McCullagh et al., 2011)
to common home-based interface technologies (such as X10 and UPnP) allowing users to
control any of the devices using these well-established protocols. The smart home and
the communications and entertainment package that were developed incorporated
components of several systems that have already been developed for non-BCI interfaces.
These included applications to help users monitor and interact with electronic devices,
access consumer services, information, and communication tools via the internet. Typical
tasks undertaken by participants were to navigate and switch on light in the dining room;
choose a film, play it and subsequently stop it; and choose an icon to show feelings, for
example, ‘‘I want to eat’’.
The IGUI module provides a graphical menu display which co-ordinates its operation with
visual stimuli in the form of light emitting diodes (LED) in line with the SSVEP protocol. Each
of these four LEDs relate to an arrow on the interface (Plate 1).
The combined operation of the LEDs with the menu icon display provides the user with the
means by which they can communicate and control the operation of the IGUI. The BCI
paradigm offers the user a restricted ability to operate a command interface due to the low
bandwidth communication associated with this technology. With reference to this a minimum
desirable interface had been identified which requires four command options. Where
possible the IGUI offers the user an ability to navigate through a list of menu items (left or right),
select a menu item (down), or exit a menu item (up). Therefore, the SSVEP operation was
adapted to provide a four-way choice mechanism. The means of achieving this is dependent
upon the measured user capability. Based on a number of set-up parameters, each user’s
display and the architecture behind it, it can be generated automatically.
Plate 1 Photograph showing IGUI with SSVEP LEDs

j

j

PAGE 238 JOURNAL OF ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGIES VOL. 6 NO. 4 2012

The initial design of the interface was influenced by a user study and questionnaire. From a
developmental aspect there were several areas of consideration in the design of a practical
and intuitive user interface. First, how will the user interface vary in appearance and
operation for different BCI paradigms if needed, and second, how will the user interface for a
given paradigm remain intuitive for each of the variations in application? Namely, how can a
user interface both support the switching on of a light and the control of a media player using
the same fundamental control?
The left and right arrows act to rotate the images within the centre of the screen to reflect the
location of the user, i.e. in which room are they aiming to control devices. The down arrow
allows the user to enter the desired location or enter into the controls for the particular
chosen application, or activate a particular control. The up arrow allows the user to step back
up through the command hierarchy. Once the room has been chosen, the user interface will
replace the images of the locations with images of applications, for example, lights, heat,
etc. This same extensible structure is used to control media devices. This is optimised
through three forms of BCI command from the BCI system. Binary command signals from the
BCI system enable discrete decisions to be made, such as entering a particular location, or
switching on a light. But for the media player this is not an intuitive approach. A continuous
analogue command is extracted from the BCI system, which enables a more suitable control
of, for example, volume of a media device (McCullagh et al., 2010).

User engagement methodology
The development approach (Lightbody et al., 2010) was to include participants with a
disability and those without to help inform the design. An ethical framework was developed
for the project and ethical approval provided by the University of Ulster[1].
Two groups of users in two countries were identified and recruited. In Northern Ireland,
disabled participants with acquired brain injury were recruited, while in Spain, participants
without movement disabilities were recruited.
In Northern Ireland the Cedar Foundation was the research partner working locally in
partnership with people with disabilities including brain injury. Cedar convened workshops
and surveyed the user needs of their tenants in supported smart housing. The participants
were keen to take part in the project and were interested in the BCI development. Those
participants interviewed face-to-face expressed an appreciation of the value of the BCI
system and a sense of satisfaction of being involved in the development process. Only one
participant was unsure if they would use the technology, all the others were keen to try it. Within
this group Cedar identified a lead user who was more closely involved in the project. Initial
investigations involved five disabled users who were residing within Cedar’s supported smart
housing (of which one was the lead user). Later studies involved a wider group of participants
(n ¼ 20) with a broad heterogeneity of brain injury and physical disability.
In Spain, the research partner Telefonica recruited healthy subjects who participated in user
sessions at their site. A total of 23 people participated in the final sessions. The quantitative
research was conducted by focus groups of seven to eight participants each and the
quantitative part was gathered from surveys delivered to users. The results of the user
survey influenced the design of the user interface, and the target applications. For the final
user validation, a protocol was developed to gather user perspectives and record functional
efficacy on pre-determined tasks.

Findings from the user trials
Within an established ethical framework, user involvement commenced with a preliminary
workshop to provide project information to interested participants. During this they were
invited to participate in the research and provided with an information sheet. Further
discussions with the users followed, with those still interested signing consent forms.
In the trials, the efficacy of the SSVEP paradigm was evaluated for users with and without
brain injury.

j

j

VOL. 6 NO. 4 2012 JOURNAL OF ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGIES PAGE 239

Initially a range of frequencies was investigated for each user. From the optimal frequencies,
four were chosen for navigation with each flashing LED assigned to an arrow. However,
some complexities in this process were uncovered.
The high-level findings from initial evaluations were that the detection of SSVEP is
considerably better for healthy users than for Cedar tenants. The median area under curves
(AUCs)[2] for healthy users was 0.93, while the median AUCs for Cedar tenants are 0.72.
Participants in this experiment included 11 Cedar tenants (five males, six females, mean age
37.9 ^ 9.7) and 17 controls from a healthy population who could be available at the Cedar
location (ten males, seven females, mean age 41.3 ^ 10.8).
In general, only a few frequencies are suitable for BCI operation in the HF range. This leads to
the problem that a high accuracy may be achievable for independent frequencies but this
accuracy does not translate when multiple frequencies are being used as stimuli. In other words
difficulties arise in differentiating between responses from multiple flashing LEDs. This problem
is compounded when fewer suitable frequencies can be supported. Thus, to increase the
number of possible stimuli and consequently the information throughout, one can think of
several solutions including: use a single frequency of stimulation but modulate the phase of
each stimuli; and encode more than one frequency on a single target (Zhu et al., 2011).
We observed a significant variability for different stimulation frequencies with each
participant.
In the testing of a integrated final prototype with healthy participants (n ¼ 23) in Spain, the
results in general show that 53 per cent of participants could finish all of the three tasks
presented to them, 17 per cent were able to complete only the first task, 4 per cent were able
to complete the first two tasks and 26 per cent could not complete any of the tasks. The most
positive result of this experiment was the high rate of success for these subjects able to use
the integrated system. The issue where most of the users were either completely able or
unable to use the system requires further work to understand.
Whilst results with the participants in Spain were encouraging, the results with Cedar
participants were disappointing and highlighted that significant technical development and
fine-tuning would be required to enable this SSVEP paradigm to support people with
acquired brain injury.
In summary, a high accuracy for a particular frequency did not necessarily relate to a high
accuracy in navigation. A dominant frequency could lead to a misclassification of other
frequencies. The results showed great difficulty in achieving a four-way decision path
required to navigate the IGUI. Work to enhance the algorithms to enable more accurate
differentiation between decision paths was undertaken (Zhu et al., 2011) and in parallel user
studies continued with a lower frequency SSVEP algorithm (Volosyak et al., 2011).
Given that the research consistently highlighted that users with acquired brain injury
provided lower accuracies as compared to those users without brain injury it is conceivable
to suggest that emphasis should be placed on the intelligence behind the user interface and
supported applications; including more context aware technology (Zander and Jatzev,
2012; Millán et al., 2010), for example, to minimise the choices to the user dependent on
activity in progress. The consequence of this would be to facilitate BCI system navigation
with fewer actuating frequencies but using those that provide greater accuracy, promoting a
more robust and usable system.

Discussion
While the research undertaken successfully developed a working BCI system that
supported a selection of BCI paradigms enabling the control of a range of domestic and
multimedia applications (e.g. video player, control of lights, fan, and introduced icon-based
communication), the system could not compensate the lower accuracies achieved for the
participants with brain injury, therefore failing on the overall aim for social inclusion for users
with disabilities. There were several reasons for this outcome.

j

j

PAGE 240 JOURNAL OF ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGIES VOL. 6 NO. 4 2012

Trials showed that users with brain injury systematically achieved lower BCI accuracies than
their non-disabled counterparts. Ware et al. (2010) demonstrate that there is a divide
between acceptable user accuracy for an interface and the accuracy actually achieved by
the user. Attempts were made to reduce the number of frequencies used within the system
thereby reducing the decision choices available for the interface. This was still not
successful in providing a robust system, capable for use by non-experts, possibly due to the
increased number of elements within the decision path to reach the desired command.
Furthermore, the disabled users were considered within the project as a homogeneous
group. The goal of the project had been to mechanise the calibration process for the BCI
system to a level that the individual characteristics of the user could be supported without
expert intervention. However, clearly this is not the case. There are examples of successful
long-term use of BCI for the disabled user (Sellers et al., 2010), but what seems clear from
the literature is that such systems are uniquely customised for particular users with expert
assistance available.
Other factors such as concentration, perception, movement, fatigue, and cognitive load of
the interface all influence the use of the BCI system. In all electronic assistive technology
there is a level of expert intervention at initial setup (e.g. Dynavox EyeMax for eye-tracking),
and with the added complexity of the BCI system it seems realistic to expect a similar if not
more involved setup process.
One of the major factors is the lower BCI accuracy for the users with brain injuries. It could be
that, alternative tailored BCI paradigms could offer the accuracies required for operation,
but just consider how best to operate BCI under these conditions? Effort is needed to develop
the surrounding system to the BCI with inbuilt intelligence, a concept of ‘‘shared autonomy’’
as voiced by Millán et al. (2010). Context aware information (Martin et al., 2007) could be
included or hybrid BCI established (Pfurtscheller et al., 2010; Allison et al., 2012). The specific
needs of the disabled user have to be investigated further and the BCI system designed
accordingly.

Conclusions
The need for home-based technical solutions to support the inclusion of people with
acquired brain injury grows year on year – both as medical advances ensure people survive
trauma and there is a move away from acute care into the home environment. From a
practical view point it is obvious from the research and evaluation of the BCI system that to
be useable in a domestic environment the system needs considerable rationalisation,
including hiding the complexity of the various items of the equipment from the user, reducing
the bulkiness of the equipment and reducing the wiring involved. Furthermore, with respect
to wheelchair users the equipment would have to be of a size to be portable and with no
dependency on a mains power supply. Concerning the use of LEDs for stimulation the
participants found this acceptable. One participant needed help to maintain the position but
was able to rest her head. This is not possible with her current form of assistive device, which
is a Dynavox system where she controlled a pointer using her mouth and consequently
smooth movement is difficult.
The overhead and logistics of removing the technology from its initial laboratory setting to
a second technical team and thence to the Cedar environment was considerable. This
demonstrates that the tasks involved in ensuring that the technology is transferable and
usable should not be underestimated. This includes provision of accurate technical
documentation, provision of technical support and ensuring that all technology is freely
available. Furthermore, for use in a domestic setting a considerable amount of end-user
training support would be required. This would include devising dedicated training
documents and provision of ongoing technical support.
In terms of the challenges that lie ahead for the research, a general one is to develop an
interface that remains intuitive to a broad range of users for the diverse range of applications
expected to be made available for use. The key challenges to be tacked for BCI systems to
be more successful in the mainstream can be enumerated as:

j

j

VOL. 6 NO. 4 2012 JOURNAL OF ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGIES PAGE 241

B

Portability. Ensuring that systems work as well in the field as in the research lab.

B

Mobility. Ensuring that systems can work at home, work, in wheelchair, etc.

B

Configuration. Ease of calibration or configuration of these complex systems
encompassing initial setup and subsequent use.

B

General efficacy. Ensuring that BCI systems work as well for brain-injured people as for
non-disabled users.

B

General applicability. Ensuring that BCI systems integrate more easily into a broad range
of different types of home-based automation and assistive technologies.

B

Deployment. Enabling easier deployment of systems by users and their support staff.

Each of these challenges requires significant research effort across different technical
domains in order make progress and help build BCI systems that are more usable by a broader
population of people. However, the most significant challenge identified in our research is that
of achieving general efficacy of use of BCI systems. It is unfortunate that those people with
acquired brain injury who may potentially receive maximum benefit from using BCI systems are
those identified in our research as a group who systematically achieved lower accuracies than
non-disabled participants. Our research identifies that BCI systems need to be able to
compensate for this lower efficacy of use by those with brain injuries. As the nature of the injury
may directly affect the quality of the BCI signal for a brain-injured user, the compensation by the
BCI system needs to be capable of being individually configured for that user.
This individually configured compensation may be viewed as a form of personalised shared
autonomy and indicates that more research is required on so-called ‘‘smarter’’ BCI systems
using hybridization and intelligent control (Allison et al., 2012).

Notes
1. University of Ulster Ref: REC/09/0034.
2. AUC, where curve is receiver operating characteristic curve – AUC is measure of operating
performance and is a good indicator of the detectability of the SSVEP at the stimulation frequency.

References
Allison, B.Z. and Neuper, C. (2010a), Could Anyone Use a BCI? Brain-Computer Interfaces, Springer,
Heidelberg, pp. 35-54.
Allison, B.Z., Wolpaw, E.W. and Wolpaw, A.R. (2007), ‘‘Brain-computer interface systems: progress and
prospects’’, Expert Review of Medical Devices, Vol. 4 No. 4, pp. 463-74.
Allison, B.Z., Luth, T., Valbuena, D., Teymourian, A., Volosyak, I. and Graser, A. (2010b), ‘‘BCI
demographics: how many (and what kinds of) people can use an SSVEP BCI?’’, IEEE Transactions on
Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, Vol. 18 No. 2, pp. 107-16.
Allison, B.Z., Leeb, R., Brunner, C., Müller-Putz, G.R., Bauernfeind, G., Kelly, J.W. and Neuper, C. (2012),
‘‘Toward smarter BCIs: extending BCIs through hybridization and intelligent control’’, Journal of Neural
Engineering, Vol. 9 No. 1, p. 013001.
BCI2000 (2012), available at: www.bci2000.org/BCI2000/Home.html (accessed April 2012).
Birbaumer, N. (2006), ‘‘Breaking the silence: brain-computer interfaces (BCI) for communication and
motor control’’, Psychophysiology, Vol. 43 No. 6, pp. 517-32.
Birbaumer, N., Hinterberger, T., Kubler, A. and Neumann, N. (2003), ‘‘The thought-translation device
(TTD): neurobehavioral mechanisms and clinical outcome’’, IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and
Rehabilitation Engineering, Vol. 11 No. 2, pp. 120-3.
Brain Communication Foundation (2012), available at: www.braincommunication.org/index.php
(accessed June 2012).
BRAIN Project (2012), BRAIN: BCIs with Rapid Automated Interfaces for Nonexperts, BRAIN,
FP7-ICT-2007-2, Project Number 224156, available at: www.brain-project.org/ (accessed April 2012).

j

j

PAGE 242 JOURNAL OF ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGIES VOL. 6 NO. 4 2012

Bond, R., Mulvenna, M.D., Nugent, C.D. and Wallace, J.G. (2006), ‘‘Nestling technology between
life-enhancing environments and caring community services, smart homes and beyond’’,
in Nugent, C.D. and Augusto, J.C. (Eds), ICOST2006 4th International Conference on Smart Homes
and Health Telematics, Belfast, Northern Ireland, 26-28 June, IOS Press, Amsterdam, pp. 335-9.
Durka, P., Kus, R., Zygierewicz, J., Milanowski, P. and Garcia, G. (2009), ‘‘High-frequency SSVEP
responses parametrized by multichannel matching pursuit’’, Frontiers in Neuroinformatics, Conference
Abstract: 2nd INCF Congress of Neuroinformatics.
eMotiv (2012), available at: www.emotiv.com/ (accessed April 2012).
Future BNCI (2012), available at: http://future-bnci.org/ (accessed April 2012).
Garcia-Molina, G. and Mihajlovic, V. (2010), ‘‘Spatial filters to detect steady state visual evoked
potentials elicited by high frequency stimulation: BCI application’’, Journal of Biomedical Engineering,
Vol. 3 No. 55, pp. 173--182.
Holder, G. (2005), Project Final Report, Project Number 030/0067: Epidemiology of Traumatic Brain
Injury, available at: www.ukabif.org.uk/uploads/Tennant_Final_report.pdf (accessed July 2012).
Holzner, C., Guger, C., Edlinger, G., Grönegress, C. and Slater, M. (2009), ‘‘Virtual smart home controlled
by thoughts’’, 8th IEEE International Workshop on Enabling Technologies: Infrastructures for
Collaborative Enterprises, pp. 236-9.
Intendix (2012), available at: www.intendix.com (accessed April 2012).
Kübler, A., Nijboer, F., Mellinger, J., Vaughan, T.M., Pawelzik, H., Schalk, G., McFarland, D.J.,
Birbaumer, N. and Wolpaw, J.R. (2005), ‘‘Patients with ALS can use sensorimotor rhythms to operate a
brain-computer interface’’, Neurology, Vol. 64, pp. 1775-7.
Lightbody, G., Ware, M., McCullagh, P., Mulvenna, M.D., Thomson, E., Martin, S., Todd, D., Medina, V.C.
and Martinez, S.C. (2010), ‘‘A user centred approach for developing brain-computer interfaces,
pervasive computing technologies for healthcare (PervasiveHealth)’’, 4th International Conference on
No Permissions, 22-25 March, pp. 1-8.
McCullagh, P.J., Ware, M.P., Lightbody, G., Mulvenna, M.D., McAllister, H.G. and Nugent, C. (2010),
‘‘Brain computer interfaces for inclusion’’, Proceedings of the 1st Augmented Human International
Conference (AH ’10), ACM, New York, USA, Article 6.
McCullagh, P.J., Ware, M.P., McRoberts, A., Lightbody, G., Mulvenna, M.D., McAllister, H.G.,
GonzÃlez, J.L. and Medina, V.C. (2011), ‘‘Towards standardized user and application interfaces for the
brain computer interface’’, Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Universal Access in
Human-Computer Interaction: Users Diversity, Springer, Berlin, pp. 573-82.
Martin, S., Nugent, C.D., Wallace, J.G., Kernohan, G., McCreight, B. and Mulvenna, M.D. (2007), ‘‘Using
context awareness data from a smart home environment to support social care for adults with
dementia’’, Journal of Technology and Disability, Vol. 19 Nos 2/3, pp. 143-52.
Martin, S., Nugent, C.D., Wallace, J.G., Mulvenna, M.D., Thomson, E. and Mathews, S. (2006),
‘‘A community based integrated service model to support adults with physical disability living in the
United Kingdom’’, in Mann, W.C. and Helal, A. (Eds), Promoting Independence for Older Persons with
Disabilities, IOS Press, Amsterdam, pp. 27-32.
Millán, J.D.R., Rupp, R., Müller-Putz, G.R., Murray-Smith, R., Giugliemma, C., Tangermann, M.,
Vidaurre, C., Cincotti, F., Kübler, A., Leeb, R., Neuper, C., Müller, K.-R. and Mattia, D. (2010), ‘‘Combining
brain-computer interfaces and assistive technologies: state-of-the-art and challenge’’, Frontiers in
Neuroscience, Vol. 4, p. 161.
Nam, C.S., Jeon, Y., Li, Y., Kim, Y. and Yoon, H. (2009), ‘‘Usability of the P300 speller: towards a more
sustainable brain-computer interface’’, eMinds: International Journal on Human-Computer Interaction,
Vol. I No. 5, pp. 111-25.
Neuper, C., Müller, G., Kübler, A., Birbaumer, N. and Pfurtscheller, G. (2003), ‘‘Clinical application of an
EEG-based brain-computer interface: a case study in a patient with severe motor impairment’’, Clinical
Neurophysiology, Vol. 114 No. 3, pp. 399-409.
Pfurtscheller, G., Allison, B.Z., Bauernfeind, G., Brunner, C., SolisEscalante, T., Scherer, R., Zander, T.O.,
Müller-Putz, G., Neuper, C. and Birbaumer, N. (2010), ‘‘The hybrid BCI’’, Front. Neurosci., Vol. 4, p. 42.

j

j

VOL. 6 NO. 4 2012 JOURNAL OF ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGIES PAGE 243

Sellers, E.W., Vaughan, T.M. and Wolpaw, J.R. (2010), ‘‘A brain-computer interface for long-term
independent home use’’, Amyotroph. Lateral Scler., Vol. 11 No. 5, pp. 449-55.
Vaughan, T.M., McFarland, D.J., Schalk, G., Sarnacki, W.A., Krusienski, D.J., Sellers, E.W. and
Wolpaw, J.R. (2006), ‘‘The Wadsworth BCI research and development program: at home with BCI’’, IEEE
Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, Vol. 14 No. 2, pp. 229-33.
Volosyak, I., Valbuena, D., Lüth, T., Malechka, T. and Gräser, A. (2011), ‘‘BCI demographics II: how many
(and what kinds of) people can use a high-frequency SSVEP BCI?’’, IEEE Transaction Neural Syst.
Rehabil. Eng., Vol. 19 No. 3, pp. 232-9.
Ware, M.P., McCullagh, P.J., McRoberts, A., Lightbody, G., Nugent, C., McAllister, G., Mulvenna, M.D.,
Thomson, E. and Martin, S. (2010), ‘‘Contrasting levels of accuracy in command interaction sequences
for a domestic brain-computer interface using SSVEP’’, 5th Cairo International Biomedical Engineering
Conference (CIBEC), 16-18 December, pp. 150-3.
Wolpaw, J.R., Birbaumer, N., McFarland, D.J., Pfurtscheller, G. and Vaughan, T.M. (2002), ‘‘Brain-computer
interfaces for communication and control’’, Clinical Neurophysiology, Vol. 113 No. 6, pp. 767-91.
Zander, T.O. and Jatzev, S. (2012), ‘‘IOPscience-context-aware brain-computer interfaces: exploring the
information space of user, technical system and environment’’, Journal of Neural Engineering, Vol. 9,
p. 016003.
Zhu, D., Garcia-Molina, G., Mihajlović, V. and Aarts, R. (2011), ‘‘Online BCI implementation of
high-frequency phase modulated visual stimuli’’, Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on
Universal Access in Human-Computer Interaction: Users Diversity, Springer, Berlin, pp. 645-54.

About the authors
Professor Maurice Mulvenna researches pervasive healthcare technologies and the
application of information and computing technologies to support social inclusion. He
served on Ofcom’s Advisory Committee on Older and Disabled People and serves on the
editorial boards for several journals. He is a Fellow of the British Computer Society and a
Senior Member of the IEEE and ACM. Maurice Mulvenna is the corresponding author and
can be contacted at: md.mulvenna@ulster.ac.uk
Dr Gaye Lightbody received an M.Eng. (1995) and a PhD (2000) in Electrical and Electronic
Engineering from Queen’s University of Belfast. Her research interests include high
performance VLSI hardware design, FPGAs, adaptive filtering, biomedical signal
processing and brain computer interfaces.
Eileen Thomson is Deputy Chief Executive of the Cedar Foundation, a non-governmental
organisation, which delivers services to people with complex disabilities. She is a Queen’s
University graduate with Master’s in Social Work, Master’s in Organisational & Management
and NVQ Level V in Strategic Management. Her background is in social work in the statutory
sector in both practitioner and management posts before joining Cedar Foundation in 1984.
She has extensive experience working on European Projects, including the BRAIN research
project.
Dr Paul McCullagh received a BSc (1979) and a PhD (1983) in Electrical Engineering from
Queen’s University of Belfast. His research interests include biomedical signal and image
processing, data mining, brain computer interface, and assisted living applications. He is
interested in advancing the education and professionalism of biomedical engineering and
health informatics.
Dr Melanie Ware is the researcher at School of Computing and Maths, working on the BRAIN
project.
Dr Suzanne Martin (Dip. OT, PhD) is an Occupational Therapist and Reader in Health
Sciences. She has worked on a number of international research projects, with a focus on
healthcare technology to deliver services for people with complex needs living at home. She
is a trainer and contributor to the Cochrane library and a Co-director of the TRAIL living lab.

To purchase reprints of this article please e-mail: reprints@emeraldinsight.com
Or visit our web site for further details: www.emeraldinsight.com/reprints

j

j

PAGE 244 JOURNAL OF ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGIES VOL. 6 NO. 4 2012

