NeuroPad: Use Cases For A Mobile Physiological Interface
Denys J.C. Matthies1, Jan-Niklas Antons2, Frank Heidmann1, Reto Wettach1, Robert Schleicher2
Department of Design
Telekom Innovation Laboratories
Fachhochschule-Potsdam
Technische Universität Berlin
Pappelallee 8-9
Ernst-Reuter-Platz 7
14469 Potsdam
10785 Berlin
Germany
Germany
{denys.matthies, heidmann, wettach}
jan-niklas.antons@telekom.de,
@fh-potsdam.de
robert.schleicher@tu-berlin.de
ABSTRACT

Being engaged with real-world tasks – when hands are
busy – also means not being able to use mobile devices.
Trying to overcome this problem we present NeuroPad, an
iPad-application that connects a commercially available
low-cost neuro headset with an iPad. The read
physiological signals are used for controlling different
functionalities in a touchless manner. The implemented usecases include simple interactions with a virtual toy, a
browser "boss button" activated by eye winks, and head
movements to control a music player. The prototype intends
to exemplify the usage of such interfaces as an additional
input modality in the context of mobility beyond a mere
gaming purpose, while pointing out limitations of the
current device like the limited data quality.
Author Keywords

Facial muscle activity; physiological interfaces; affective
computing; mobile computing; mobility; touchless; head
gestures & facial expressions control.
ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.2. User Interfaces: Input devices and strategies
INTRODUCTION

Emotiv (www.emotiv.com) manufactures a headset for
recording physio-logical data called EPOC. The signals,
recorded with sponge-metal electrodes - attached to the
head, are a mixture of brain waves (electro-encephalogram,
EEG) and, facial muscle activity (electro-myogram, EMG)
and
eye
movements
(electro-oculogram,
EOG).
Additionally it in-cludes a gyroscope for measuring head
movements. Compared to professional physiology
recording systems with sampling rates above 1000 Hz for
EEG, the data quality of the Emotiv EPOC is limited due to
the sampling rate of 128 Hz and the construction of the
sensors. Particularly in mobile situations head and body

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
NordiCHI’12, Oct 14-17 2012, Copenhagen, Denmark.
ACM 978-1-4503-1482-4/12/10.

movements might also interfere. On the other hand it is
comparably inexpensive and offers wireless data
transmission, which makes it attractive for mobile HCI
research. Originally intended as a gaming gadget, this
headset has been used to conduct research on potential
implementations such as wheelchair control [2], driving a
car [1], or dialing contacts with an iPhone [3]. As the signal
quality is limited, most applications require extensive
machine learning or calibration prior to use.
NEUROPAD

Our intention was to provide a simple setup that is
integrated within the normal iPad usage and furthermore to
offer additional interaction possibilities without requiring
too much previous data processing.
General Setup

The physiological and gyroscope sensor data from the
neuro headset are transmitted via Bluetooth to a USB
receiver that plugs into the server. The server forwards the
data in a wireless network using TCP / IP for further
processing on the iPad. The aim was to accomplish all
signal processing on the mobile device without using the
Emotiv API.
The headset consists of 14 electrodes with felt pads, which
are attached to skull of the user. To increase conductivity,
they are moistened with an electrolyte fluid, e.g. contact
lenses solution – there is no further gel or medical strip
required. The sensors can be moved slightly until the signal
acquisition is optimal.

Figure 1. The NeuroPad calibration user interface.

Physiological Parameters

To avoid a lengthy calibration procedure, we focused on a
distinct event - voluntary eye winks - which can be detected
quite reliably in the raw signal. The user interface offers a
simple way to adjust an individual sensitivity threshold with
a slider and gives instant feedback: A successful event
detection makes the depicted eye blink as well.
Gyroscope

The head movement detection was accomplished by a
simple threshold analysis. A head shake or nod can start
with the left or right, and ends with a weaker follow-up
movement in the opposite direction. There is no prior
calibration required here.
Applications

The following application scenarios were implemented to
exemplify the use of the NeuroPad in combination with an
iPad:
Music player

Music Player is a touchless control of the iOS iPod through
head gestures and facial muscle activity. Eye winks play or
pause songs, shaking head skips the current song and a nod
repeats it. Figure 2 shows the graphical user interface.

The exercise of winking excessively relaxes the eye
muscles, improves blood circulation in the head and thus
the oxygen supply to the brain.
CONCLUSION

The technical challenge was to combine two different
technologies: a mobile physiology recording system
(Emotiv EPOC) and a mobile device (Apple iPad). After
identifying capabilities and limitations of the system under
custom test conditions, namely easy setup and mobility vs.
limited data quality, we developed interaction concepts
suitable for mobile contexts. Instead of relying solely on the
physiological data for controlling the iPad, the biosignals
are used as an auxiliary input to increase the available
interaction modalities. We think that this approach shows
an appropriate deployment of such low-cost devices, as it
does not impose too high demands on the quality of the
available signals and thus might help to decrease one of the
main drawbacks of physiological interfaces so far – the
limited wearing comfort of professional recording
equipment. Current developments show how EMG sensors
appropriate for HCI might look like [4]. Besides extending
our concept to other scenarios, we also intend to conduct
user tests to evaluate the reliability of the NeuroPad during
longer sessions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We would like to thank the participants of the "NeuroUsability" student project for their help as well as the
Bernstein Focus: Neurotechnology – Berlin (BFNT-B)
which supported our work by the Federal Ministry of
Education and Research (BMBF) grant FKZ 01GQ0850.

REFERENCES

1. Brain Driver, Autonomous Labs, 2011.
http://autonomos.inf.fu-berlin.de/subprojects/braindriver
Figure 2. The NeuroPad music player user interface.
Boss button

When browsing on the Internet in public areas like at work
or in the subway, people nearby can invade one’s privacy
by watching the screen. The app enables a quick switch to a
neutral screen view by eye wink instead of a frantic gesture.
Virtual Scapecoat

"Furny" is a furry plush ball with eyes and mouth, the
minimal components that create a face for us humans.
Furny offers the possibility to reduce frustration by teasing
it with excessive strong eye winks. Furny does not like it,
and in reaction distorts its face and emits painful noises.

2. Lin C. T, Euler C., Mekhtarian A., Gil, A., Hern, L.,
Prince, D, Shen, Y,, and Horvath, J. A brain-computer
interface for intelligent wheelchair mobility. In PAHCE
2011, IEEE (2011), 316.
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpl/freeabs_all.jsp?arnumber=
5871916
3. Mukerjee, M. K., NeuroPhone: Brain-Mobile Phone
Interface using a Wireless EEG Headset, Dartmouth
College, Hanover, NH, USA, 2010.
http://katahdin.cs.dartmouth.edu/reports/TR2010666.pdf
4. Saponas, T. S., Dan, D. S., Morris, D., Balakrishnan, R.,
Turner, J., and Landay, J. A. Enabling AlwaysAvailable Input with Muscle-Computer Interfaces. In
Proc. UIST 2009, ACM Press (2009), 167-176.

