Brain-Controlled Biometric Signals
Employed to Operate External Technical
Devices
Vasily I. Mironov, Sergey A. Lobov, Innokentiy A. Kastalskiy,
Susanna Y. Gordleeva, Alexey S. Pimashkin, Nadezhda P. Krilova,
Kseniya V. Volkova, Alexey E. Ossadtchi and Victor B. Kazantsev
Abstract We present a solution to employ brain-controlled biometric signals to
operate external technical devices. Such signals include multiple electrode electroencephalographic (EEG) signals, electromyography (EMG) signals reflecting
muscle contraction pattern, geometrical pattern of body limb kinematics, and other
modalities. Being collected, properly decoded and interpreted, the signals can be used
as a control or navigation signals of artiﬁcial machines, e.g., technical devices. Our
interface solution based on a combination of signals of different modalities is capable
to provide composite command and proportional multisite control of different technical devices with theoretically unlimited computational power. The feedback to the
operator by visual channel or in virtual reality permits to compensate control errors and
provides adaptive control. The control system can be implemented with wearable
electronics. Examples of technical devices under the control are presented.





Keywords Neurointerface Pattern recognition Electroencephalography
Electromyography Signal Processing Biofeedback Control







Introduction
The development of technologies of human–machine communications using human
intellectual functions, e.g., the brain power, to control technical devices (TD) is,
certainly, one of the most promising and dynamically progressing directions of
scientiﬁc and technological development. Such control strategy will theoretical
V.I. Mironov (&)  S.A. Lobov  I.A. Kastalskiy  S.Y. Gordleeva
A.S. Pimashkin  N.P. Krilova  V.B. Kazantsev
Nizhny Novgorod Neuroscience Centre, National Research Lobachevsky
State University of Nizhny Novgorod, Novgorod, Russia
e-mail: mironov@neuro.nnov.ru
K.V. Volkova  A.E. Ossadtchi
Centre for Cognition and Decision Making, National Research University
Higher School of Economics, Moscow, Russia
© The Author(s) 2018
K.V. Anisimov et al. (eds.), Proceedings of the Scientiﬁc-Practical Conference
“Research and Development - 2016”, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-62870-7_7

59

60

V.I. Mironov et al.

have almost unlimited computational power. For example, simple brain-controlled
grasping movement of a ﬁnger (1015 possible combinations of muscle contraction)
can be estimated as 106 GHz computer equivalent to choose a correct muscle
contraction template in real time [11]. Brain mechanisms of such control remain
largely unknown. However, being properly collected, detected, and classiﬁed
brain-controlled signals from the human body can be further utilized for highly
efﬁcient, even intelligent control of multiparameter TDs.
This study mainly focused on the development of new methods and technologies
used for remote control of TDs respecting to particular applications. The key
purpose was the integration of human biometrical, particularly bioelectrical signals,
into a control loop. Such an approach involved online collection and interpretation
of different modalities signals, particularly, EEG and multisite EMG signals for
different TDs and robotic systems. For this purpose, we developed technical
solutions associating patterns of human brain and muscular activity with commands
of the controlled object, according to a user-deﬁned translation algorithm.
Despite signiﬁcant achievements in the ﬁeld of machine learning, quite recently,
it was proved that within the existing theories, the creation of a universal algorithm
that can adapt to different conditions in a technical control system was theoretically
impossible [24]. One of the expected advantages of brain-controlled devices to
traditional control electronics could be the possibility of adaptation due to human
brain plasticity. Despite the fact that research in neurointerface electronics is currently one of the key world trends, there have not been yet presented commercial
devices for TD control where the control signals generation is based on registration,
decoding and wireless transmission signals from the human brain and bioelectrical
activity of muscles. During the past decade, several groups of researchers and
developers have been formed specialized on the development of portable interfaces
that can be applied in everyday life. The best known of these are NeuroSky,
MindWave, MindBall, and Emotiv EPOC devices. However, these devices have
limited functionality in terms of implementation of multisite adaptive control system. Their most signiﬁcant drawbacks were long response times and relatively low
degree of reliability when it comes to classiﬁcation of bioelectrical activity patterns.
In this paper, we present a solution of EEG and multisite EMG human–machine
interface with the user-deﬁned programmable function of translation of sensory
signals to motor command. For simplicity, we further call the solution as “SRD -1”
abbreviated from “system for registration and decoding.”

Materials and Methods
Motor Imagery BCI System
Our brain–computer interface (BCI) designed as a part of the SRD-1 consisted of
several elements. Some of them were used traditional EEG data analysis tools,

Brain-Controlled Biometric Signals Employed to Operate …

61

while some other classiﬁcation algorithms were originally developed. Initially
designed for a 32-channel EEG cap (including 10–20 system electrodes and two
additional rows over the motor cortex), it can also be used with fewer electrodes,
although with some density recommended of their placement over motor cortex.
For any given montage, the number of channels can be further optimized with one
of the two following procedures. The ﬁrst one was based on common spatial
patterns (CSP) and the second one on spatio-spectral decomposition (SSD) [18].
Physiological basis behind the developed BCI was the phenomenon of sustained
desynchronization of the sensory-motor rhythm (SMR) over motor cortex [27]. The
designed BCI operated in the so-called asynchronous mode continuously decoding
the EEG signals and generating control signal, what permits to a pilot to operate at
his/her own place.
The control of any type of BCI required preliminary training, which included
both the procedure of BCI pilot obtaining the skill to control the interface and the
training of the data processing algorithm with the data from the training recording
[15]. This gave us two major ﬁelds of potential improvement: ﬁrst, different
practices can be used to improve the learning process of the user. It was shown that
certain types of feedback allow more accurate control of the interface (as shown in
Fig. 1). Another way was to modify signal processing and data analysis algorithms
used to decode commands.
There is a large variety of techniques but the most common sequence of processing
steps includes removal of eye artifacts (e.g., with ICA), bandpass ﬁltering, feature
vector construction (the method of common spatial patterns, e.g., the CSP, was often
used to contrast the data from two classes) and eventually classiﬁcation. The implemented BCI partly followed this chain. Signal processing algorithm included scanning
for the optimal bands (in the 8–24 Hz range) to distinguish each pair of commands,

Fig. 1 Neurofeedback signal processing schema

62

V.I. Mironov et al.

building CSP features for each pair and using regularized linear regression as a
classiﬁer. Then the output from linear classiﬁers for all pairs were processed by
multilayer perceptron, which permitted performing multiclass classiﬁcation.
It should be mentioned that the EEG data analysis was hampered by the signal
non-stationarity, high noise, and limited amount of training data, which led to
classiﬁer overﬁtting. As one of the proposed solutions to the overﬁtting problem in
this context, we would like to highlight the method of CSP components choice
based on the dipole ﬁt of their topographies. The premise used in this solution was
that topographies, which can be accurately described by the ﬁeld of a dipole (e.g.,
the value of residual ﬁtting error was under certain threshold), can be considered
more plausible from the physiological point of view. Thus, such solution is considered as more reliable in the sense that they reflect the activation of the corresponding regions of the cortex and not the artifacts unrelated to the task.
To perform such analysis, the topography corresponding to each of the found
common spatial patterns were ﬁtted with a dipole using the process of minimizing
the discrepancy between synthetic data and the topography vector. In practice, for
given point in physical space, it involved the calculation of the topographies of
three orthogonal dipoles situated at this point and the projection of the CSP
topography into the space orthogonal to the space of these topographies. The calculation of the dipole topographies was based on the three-layer spherical volume
conduction model of the head [2]. Either each point of the three-dimensional
coordinate grid was scanned, or a procedure of non-gradient optimization (e.g.,
Nelder-Mead Simplex [19]) was used to ﬁnd the coordinates of the dipole minimizing the residual error.

EMG-Based Neuromuscular Interface
Original multielectrode arrays for simultaneous monitoring of multiple muscles
were developed. The ﬁrst layout contained four pairs of medical AgCl electrodes,
which were suitable for surface electromyogram recording of the muscle activity.
The electrodes were placed on the flexible tissue which then was worn on the arm
(Fig. 2a). The experimental results showed that such array was not suitable for
long-term recording (several hours), because the electrodes could easily move. The
loose contact with the skin and electrodes motion eventually led to EMG signal
distortion.
Then we developed the array consisted of 12 silver coated flexible planar
electrodes mounted to the flexible substrate to provide maximum attachment to the
body surface (Fig. 2b). The registration was performed in bipolar mode, e.g., the
muscle signal was sensed by the pairs of electrodes (6 in total) and one reference
electrode which was mounted to the place near the elbow. The array was used to
decode gestures generated by the arm. We composed the electrodes to match
anatomy of the arm—the diameter of the electrode was 1 cm and interelectrode
distance was set to 2 cm.

Brain-Controlled Biometric Signals Employed to Operate …

63

Fig. 2 Multielectrode array for electromyography recording. a Array of medical electrodes to
record multiple muscles activity. b Flexible multielectrode array for arm gesture recording.
c Signals from 2 different electrodes of the array

The cover material of the electrodes provided stable and long-term recording
with amplitude up to several hundreds of microvolts. In particular, such approach
can be used in further development of neurointerface for prosthetic limb control in
medicine and rehabilitation and commercial interfaces for everyday usage.
Further, registered signals used for classiﬁcation of nine static hand gestures as
motor patterns. During an experiment, users performed two series of nine gestures
each, selected in random order. The ﬁrst series was learning set while the second
was testing one. For extraction of the discriminating features from EMG signals
root mean square (RMS) was calculated. Each 50 ms RMS feed to a multilayer
artiﬁcial neural network (ANN) for the feature classiﬁcation. The standard error
backpropagation algorithm was used for learning. Earlier we suggested to use the
network of spiking neurons as a feature extractor instead RMS [12]. In particular,
we showed that mutual inhibition contrasted EMG signal from different sensors and
improved the classiﬁcation accuracy.
To optimize the ANN performance, we ran the process of gesture recognition on
the same set of data and varying the number of layers of the ANN, the number neurons
in hidden layers and the learning rate. Figure 3 shows the results. The ANN error
dropped signiﬁcantly between one and two layers and then lightly arose while learning
time increased signiﬁcantly (Fig. 3a). The similar picture one can see with changing
the number of neuron in hidden layers (Fig. 3b). Thus, we selected a network with two
layers and eight neurons in the hidden layer for further experiments. We also observed
that the learning rate 0.01 optimizes both the learning error and the learning time
(Fig. 3c). Thus, this value was used in all experimental tests of the interface.
Our software and hardware implement both command control based on pattern
classiﬁcation and proportional control based on muscle effort estimation. We
suggested several schemes of combination these strategies [13, 14]. In particular,
recognized patterns can be used for choice of movement direction and muscle effort
for its speed.

64

V.I. Mironov et al.

Fig. 3 The performance of the artiﬁcial neural network (mean square error and learning time) at
classifying nine hand gestures with different number of layers (a), different number of neurons in
the hidden layer (b) and different values of the learning rate (c). Error bars show the standard error

Fig. 4 Evolution of the interface performance due to the training procedure. All data were
normalized to the ﬁrst training day

Note that personal classiﬁcation accuracy varied signiﬁcantly. For example, the
accuracy of 9 patterns recognition at 10 pilots was 86.5–98.5%. In this regard, we
explored the possibility of improving personal performance by training the user. In
this investigation, eight pilots showed positive dynamics in the performance after
several days of training which included sEMG-feedback and playing a training
game with the sEMG-interface. Figure 4 shows this result in term of normalized
classiﬁcation error. The main progress was achieved to the second training day.
However, in any case, there should be some short training course before a pilot can
effectively operate with the EMG interface.

Brain-Controlled Biometric Signals Employed to Operate …

65

Results
Motor Imagery BCI System
To estimate the effect of the proposed enhancements of the EEG data analysis
algorithm (see Methods), we used pairs of recordings with the identical paradigm.
The ﬁrst one was used as training data and the second one as testing data. Table 1
shows the results for the topography choice procedure. The CSP components choice
based on the dipole ﬁtting improved the overall decoding accuracy. There are a
number of ways for the further enhancement the decoding quality with this method.
First, a simpliﬁed common model was used during dipole ﬁtting. Since the accuracy
of dipole localization depends substantially on the head model so this method can
be signiﬁcantly improved by using individual head parameters. Second, the
heuristics for the optimal threshold choice can be developed (the results given in
Table 1 correspond to the threshold of 15%).
Other proposed methods that leverage additional information included the
techniques of both CSP ﬁlters and neural network weights regularization with the
templates calculated for experienced pilots (users who can generate clearer patterns). It can help preventing overﬁtting and distinguishing informative features.
The designed BCI took its place among the most advanced systems of its kind
(see Table 2 for comparison). The unique combination of features permitted to
reach high decoding accuracy of multiple commands while maintaining asynchronous paradigm and requiring relatively few electrodes and short training time.

EMG-Based Neuromuscular Interface
The quality of the sEMG data was comparable to the similar ones found in the
literature [7, 9, 20, 21, 23, 26]. One of the most important characteristics was the
low noise level in the raw signal. Spectral characteristics correspond to the expected
values. A signiﬁcant part of the signal was localized in the range of 20–300 Hz
(Fig. 5).

Table 1 Decoding results for the algorithm using all components and the algorithm with the
choice of components based on dipole ﬁt
Dataset

Training data
size

Decoding accuracy (all
components)

Decoding accuracy
(choice)

A1
P1
P2
K1
K2

360
270
270
270
270

0.66
0.46
0.32
0.75
0.55

0.74
0.51
0.40
0.78
0.63

s
s
s
s
s

Num. of
channels

64

64

2

5

8
32

Synchronous/asynchronous

Synchronous

Synchronous

Asynchronous

Asynchronous

Asynchronous
Asynchronous

3
4

3

2

4

4

Num. of
commands
6–9 sessions, 240–360
trials total
6 sessions, 192 trials
each
4 months of usage of
Graz-BCI
A couple of sessions,
3 min (30 trials) each
*4 sessions, 5 min each
*6 min

Training duration

Table 2 Comparison of various motor imagery BCI implementations

yes
no

yes

n/a

yes

no

Online
feedback

[16]
[27]
Designed
BCI

*70
81

[10]

[1]

[22]

Source

75

>90

72

63

Accuracy
(%)

wavelets, CSFP
Bandpass ﬁltering, CSP, LDA,
MLP

Bandpass ﬁltering, CSP,
regularized LDA
Decision rule based on power
threshold in frequency band
Local neural classiﬁer [9]

AAR, SVM

Methods

66
V.I. Mironov et al.

Brain-Controlled Biometric Signals Employed to Operate …

67

Fig. 5 Power spectrum of sEMG signal a ﬁgure from [20], b SRD-1 based raw data analysis

The accuracy of the pattern classiﬁcation algorithm was 92% ± 4% in the case
of nine gestures and 97 ± 2% in the case of six gestures in the command control
mode [12]. Such quite a high accuracy rate was very close to the attainable limit
(“error-free”) in the development of human–machine interfaces (Table 3).
The complete SRD-1 device consisted of the EEG- and EMG-modules and
permitted to control of TDs by both brain intention and muscle effort pattern. The

5 gestures

5

9 gestures

8 for
recording + 1
reference

Number of
gestures/commands
Number of EMG
channels/sensors

Linear
discriminant
analysis

Hybrid neural
network

Classiﬁer

Consistent
proportional
control

Command and
proportional
control

2 DoF, 5
gestures
6

Motion pattern
recognition.
Proportional
control
Linear
discriminant
analysis

[25]
96%

[4]

–

SRD-1

98.3%

Indicator measured

Recognition
accuracy
Control

Table 3 Comparison of various myoelectric control devices

7 pairs for
each forearm

Artiﬁcial
neural
network
(perceptron)
3 DoF

Proportional
control

>90%

[8]

[5]

192-channel
electrode array in
the monopolar
conﬁguration

2 DoF, 4 gestures

Artiﬁcial neural
network
(perceptron)

Proportional
control

–

2 DoF, 4
gestures
4 for each
type of
electrode

Command
and
proportional
control
Linear
regression

*90%

[6]

[3]

12 pairs of
bipolar
electrodes

8 gestures

Motion pattern
recognition.
Proportional
control
Linear
discriminant
analysis

–

68
V.I. Mironov et al.

Brain-Controlled Biometric Signals Employed to Operate …

69

Fig. 6 a User interface of the SRD-1 programmable translator, and b SRD-1 control of NAO
robot by means of the signals of bioelectric muscle and brain activity

list of tested devices included mobile robot LEGO NXT Mindstorms (LEGO,
Denmark) [12, 13], humanoid robot NAO (Aldebaran, France), and exoskeleton
Ilya Muromets (UNN, Russia) [17]. We used standard SDKs developed by manufacturers of the devices. The connection between the SRD-1 and tested TD was
wireless using Bluetooth for LEGO or Wi-Fi for NAO, and for the exoskeleton.
If SDK had a support of movement instructions, we sent a macro command directly
(e.g., “go forward” in case of NAO and exoskeleton). Otherwise, we implemented
required macro command in our software and sent to the device elementary command (e.g., “rotate motor A with speed x%” in case of LEGO). According to our
results, it was succeeded to achieve correct control of tested TD by means of the
signals of bioelectric activity of the pilot interpreted by the hardware and software
system to robotic commands (Fig. 6).

Conclusions
We developed a technical solution of collecting, decoding, and translating multimodal biometric data to control external TDs. Novel algorithms for the classiﬁcation of human bioelectric activity patterns were developed. In particular, a new
approach to the implementation of muscle activity patterns classiﬁcation was proposed, using a hybrid neural network, thus demonstrating an ability to classify 9
patterns with an accuracy of up to 98.3%. Furthermore, during the study, a possibility to achieve an acceptable (>75%) median accuracy of classiﬁcation for four
motor-imaginary commands, according to EEG activity signals, was demonstrated.
Special attention should be paid to the fact that the speciﬁed accuracy has been
achieved using only 7 electrodes, which is important, from the standpoint of
practical use of the developed complex.
The experimental studies of the developed experimental model of the software
and hardware complex of recording and decoding system (SRD-1) have been

70

V.I. Mironov et al.

performed. During operational testing, the SRD-1 showed correct operations when
controlling real TD (Aldebaran Robotics NAO and an exoskeleton for the lower
limbs). We hope that the results of the study will be useful in many areas of human
life and activity, including rehabilitation medicine, industrial robotics, and virtual
reality systems. We believe that the development of the software and hardware
complex designed for interpretation of human bioelectric activity signals will
provide a quantum leap in the technical development of these areas and devices
expanding human capabilities become a reality.
Acknowledgements The research was carried out with the ﬁnancial support of the State represented by Ministry of Education and Science of Russian Federation. Agreement (contract) no.
14.581.21.0011 01. Dec 2014. Unique project Identiﬁer: RFMEFI58114X0011.

References
1. Blankertz, B., Müller, K.-R., Curio, G., Vaughan, T.M., Schalk, G., Wolpaw, J.R., Schloegl,
A., Neuper, C., Pfurtscheller, G., Hinterberger, T., Schröder, M., Birbaumer, N.: The BCI
competition 2003: progress and perspectives in detection and discrimination of EEG single
trials. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 51(6), 1044–1051 (2004)
2. Dumitru, D., Delisa, J.A.: AAEM minimonograph: volume conduction. Muscle & Nerve.
(1991)
3. Earley, E.J., Hargrove, L.J., Kuiken, T.A.: Dual window pattern recognition classiﬁer for
improved partial-hand prosthesis control. Frontiers Neurosci. 10, 58 (2016)
4. Fougner, A., Stavdahl, O., Kyberd, P.J., Losier, Y.G., Parker, P.A.: Control of upper limb
prostheses: terminology and proportional myoelectric control—a review. IEEE Trans. Neural
Syst. Rehabilitation Eng. 20, 663–667 (2012)
5. Hahne, J.M., Biessmann, F., Jiang, N., Rehbaum, H., Farina, D., Meinecke, F.C., Muller, K.R., Parra, L.C.: Linear and nonlinear regression techniques for simultaneous and proportional
myoelectric control. IEEE Trans. Neural Sys. Rehabilitation Eng. 22, 269–279 (2014)
6. Hahne, J.M., Farina, D., Jiang, N., Liebetanz, D.: A novel percutaneous electrode implant for
improving robustness in advanced myoelectric control. Frontiers Neurosci. 10, 114 (2016)
7. Hargrove, L., Englehart, K., Hudgins, B.: A comparison of surface and intramuscular
myoelevtric signal classiﬁcation. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 54(5), 847–853 (2007)
8. Jiang, N., Vest-Nielsen, J.L., Muceli, S., Farina, D.: EMG-based simultaneous and
proportional estimation of wrist/hand kinematics in uni-lateral trans-radial amputees.
J. Neuroengineering Rehabilitation 9, 92 (2012)
9. Lee, S., Oh, J., Kim, Y., Kwon, M., Kim, J.: Estimation of the upper limb lifting movement
under varying weight and movement speed. In: Proceedings of 2011 International Conference
on Engineering and Industries (ICEI), Jeju, Korea, 29 November–1 December, pp. 1–6 (2011)
10. Leeb, R., Friedman, D., Mueller-Putz, G.R., Scherer, R., Slater, M., Pfurtscheller, G.:
Self-paced (Asynchronous) BCI control of a wheelchair in virtual environments: a case study
with a tetraplegic. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabilitation Eng. 11(2), (2003)
11. Llinás, R.R.: I of the vortex: from neurons to self, 320 p. The MIT Press (2001)
12. Lobov, S., Mironov, V., Kastalskiy, I., Kazantsev, V.: A Spiking Neural Network in sEMG
Feature Extraction. Sensors 15(11), 27894–27904 (2015)
13. Lobov, S., Mironov, V., Kastalskiy, I., Kazantsev, V.: Combined use of
command-proportional control of external robotic devices based on electromyography
signals. Sovremennye Tehnologii v Medicine [Modern technologies in medicine] 7(4), 30–38
(2015)

Brain-Controlled Biometric Signals Employed to Operate …

71

14. Lobov, S., Krilova, N., Kastalskiy, I., Kazantsev, V., Makarov, V.A.: A human-computer
interface based on electromyography command-proportional control. In: Proceedings of the
4th International Congress on Neurotechnology, Electronics and Informatics
(NEUROTECHNIX), vol. 1, pp. 57–64 (2016)
15. Lotte, F., Larrue, F., Muehl, C.: Flaws in current human training protocols for spontaneous
brain-computer interfaces: lessons learned from instructional design. Frontiers in Human
Neurosci. (2013)
16. Millan, J. del R., Mourino, J.: Asynchronous BCI and local neural classiﬁers: an overview of
the adaptive brain interface project. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabilitation Eng. 11(2), (2003)
17. Mironov, V., Lobov, S., Kastalskiy, I., Kazantsev, V.: Myoelectric control system of lower
limb exoskeleton for re-training motion deﬁciencies. Lect Notes Comput. Sci. 9492, 428–435
(2015)
18. Nikulin, V.V., Nolte, G., Curio, G.: A novel method for reliable and fast extraction of
neuronal EEG/MEG oscillations on the basis of spatio-spectral decomposition. Neuroimage
55(4), (2011)
19. Olsson D.M., Nelson L.S.: The nelder-mead simplex procedure for function minimization.
Technometrics 17(1), (1975)
20. Parker P.A., Englehart K.B., Hudgins B.S.: Control powered upper limb prostheses. In
electromyography physiology, engineering, and Noninvasive Applications. IEEE Press Ser.
Biomed. Eng. 453–475 (2004)
21. Pistohl, T., Cipriani, C., Jackson, A., Nazarpour, К.: Abstract and proportional myoelectric
control for multi-ﬁngered hand prostheses. Ann Biomed. Eng. 41(12), 2687–2698 (2013)
22. Schloegl, A., Lee, F., Bischof, H.: Pfurtscheller, G.: Characterization of four-class motor
imagery EEG data for the BCI-competition 2005. J Neural Eng. 2, 14–22 (2005)
23. Tang, Z., Zhang, K., Sun, S., Gao, Z., Zhang, L., Yang, Z.: An upper-limb power-assist
exoskeleton using proportional myoelectric control. Sensors (Basel) 14(4), 6677–6694 (2014)
24. Wolpert, D.H., Macready, W.G.: No free lunch theorems for optimization. IEEE Trans
Evolutionary Comput. 1(1), 67–82 (1997)
25. Wurth, S.M., Hargrove, L.J.: A real-time comparison between direct control, sequential
pattern recognition control and simultaneous pattern recognition control using a Fitts’ law
style assessment procedure. J. Neuroengineering and Rehabilitation 11, 91 (2014)
26. Yungher, D., Wininger, M.T., Barr, J.B., Craelius, W., Threlkeld, A.J.: Surface muscle
pressure as a means of active and passive behavior of muscles during gait. Med. Eng. Phy. 33,
464–471 (2011)
27. Zhao, Q., Zhang, L., Cichocki, A.: EEG-based asynchronous BCI control of a car in 3D
virtual reality environments. Chin. Sci. Bull. (2009)

Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and
indicate if changes were made.
The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the chapter’s Creative
Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the chapter’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by
statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
the copyright holder.

