Network Intelligence Studies
Volume I, Issue 1, 2013

Adriana-Emilia ROBU
Alexandru Ioan Cuza University of Iaşi, Romania

USING EYE TRACKING TO MEASURE
ONLINE INTERACTIVITY:
A THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK

Keywords
Eye tracking
Website interactivity
Eye movement
Consumer behavior, visual attention
JEL classification
M300

Abstract

Notwithstanding that each and every company, even the sweetshop around the corner has
found its way to the Internet, some customers still hesitate to shop online or to shop from one
site and ignore the other. In order to build an online effective communication between the
participants, one of the most important factors is interactivity. In the last decade it received
extensive attention in the marketing literature, but few are the studies which have seen new
methods to measure it. Eye tracking technology has been broadly used in the cognitive
sciences.
The purpose of this study is to investigate the existing literature in order to give insights
into the eye tracking methodology when measuring the online interactivity. It also describes
the eye tracking technology in general, extracts various examples from the eye tracking
research field, with different applications, highlights its importance when analyzing the
online consumer behavior, giving examples from various studies and finds the key points of
the methodological difficulties.
Finally, this work has an important merit for the future studies when taking into
consideration the eye tracking technology in the online interactivity research and further, it is
relevant for marketers, regarding the enhancement of online interactive interfaces and web
or mobile applications.

118

Network Intelligence Studies
Volume I, Issue 1, 2013

1.

INTRODUCTION

There is a saying: ‘the eyes are the
window to the soul’1.Their investigation
and their path can provide us valuable
information
concerning
the
users`
personality,
preferences
and
their
behavioral intentions. When investigating
the websites, our eyes can reveal various
patterns by following the eyes` pathways,
the preferences for certain characteristics,
the time spent on these characteristics, the
frustrating characteristics for the user. Eyetracking technology offers the possibility
to measure the users` eye movements
when scanning the website and searching
for information. Thus, we can identify the
most commonly viewed pages and regions
of the website, the time spent on these
regions and the moment when the eyes
moved from one object to the other.
Achieving this information, one can
understand the user’s visual process and
the factors which determine a loyalty
behavior.
Using the eye tracking technology,
when measuring online interactivity, one
can validate the final results gathered, by
using another method, previously applied.
All in all, the eye tracking technology can
be used and it is used mostly directly,
without any other methods, when
assessing the interactivity`s characteristics.
This technology is now used in the
Romanian marketing research, namely in
the online consumer behavior. Initially
applied in medicine and psychology, today
the eye tracking technology is used in the
marketing research.
In this section we propose an
examination of the visual attention, the
neural mechanisms of the eye movement
measurement
techniques,
a
short
presentation of the online interactivity and
the most important implications of it in the
online marketing.
The user`s attention is focused on
certain objects inside the website. This fact
1

From Latin: „oculus animi index”

points out their potential of attraction. A
fixation larger than 300 milliseconds
(Djamasbi, 2010) on a certain object,
inside a website, will infer an intense
cognitive processing, which means that
this object is interesting to the user and it
has captured his attention. In order to
justify the decision to use the eye tracking
technology in studying the human
behavior towards a website interface, we
will bring some arguments from two
points of view: psychological and
physiological. From a psychological point
of view, we will investigate the visual
attention as it is analyzed in the literature.
From a physiological point of view, we
will investigate the neural mechanisms.
2.
INVESTIGATING
VISUAL ATTENTION
The visual attention represents an
important factor in information processing
and in pursuing the long term objectives.
The visual attention can reveal more than
it is expected, not being any more a simple
incipient phase, but an essential element in
understanding the human behavior.
Duchowski (2007) delivers us a detailed
analysis of the visual attention, evaluating
different authors who along the time
elaborated various definitions of the visual
attention. From this perspective, the visual
attention is defined through three
characteristics: where, what and how.
From the Von Helmholtz`s “where’’
perspective (Duchowski, 2007, p.5), the
user has the tendency to identify all the
new objects he meets. This type of
attention can be controlled in a conscious
way, thus it is led to the elements which
are placed at the periphery. The eye
movements show exactly the voluntary
action of the user to inspect these elements
in detail.
From the “what” perspective,
Duchowski (2007) emphasizes the user`s
need to inspect the object in detail, namely
foveal. The two aspects, “where” and
“what”, can be explained by introducing a

119

Network Intelligence Studies
Volume I, Issue 1, 2013

stimulus. Thus, introducing a stimulus like
a certain banner, the user will be attracted
by certain regions inside it. In the first
phase, the user will perceive parafoveal,
namely overall and subsequently he will
feel the need to analyze in detail, namely
foveal inspection. Certain marginal
elements from the image will lead the user
“where” to look further and “what” to
examine in detail.
The third characteristic considers
the user`s attitude and his perceptual
waiting. Duchowski (2007, p.6) enhances
the importance of the attitude when a
stimulus is presented in an ambiguous
way. In this case, a question arises: how
will the user react when that stimulus is
distorted? We can observe that these
theories are grounded on the human vision
which includes the foveal vision (the
central area which is clearer and has a
higher resolution) and the peripheral vision
(which has a lower resolution).
Like the theories analyzed at
Duchowski (2007), Velasquez (2013)
emphasizes the existence of a link between
the regions of interest and the eye
movements. Nevertheless, the peripheral
elements may receive the proper attention
but without making such movements. This
is named the “covert attention”
(Velasquez, 2013, p.3).
At Velasques (2013) we also
observe a model of the vision, the attention
being from bottom to up or from top to
bottom. According to the first model, the
objects of interest attract the attention so
much that it will not be distracted by the
peripheral elements. Concerning the
second model, the attention is influenced
by the users’ expectations, by the previous
knowledge he holds or by other external
factors.
Nevertheless, today there is no
proof to show clearly what elements attract
the user`s attention. We encounter, on both
Duchowski (2007) and Velasquez (2013) a
model through which one can observe the
attention`s evolution from the moment the
user becomes exposed to a certain

120

stimulus. Thus, in the first stage, a
stimulus like photography is perceived
overall through the peripheral vision. In
this moment, the resolution of the image is
low and gradually, the objects of interest
will appear so that in the second stage, the
main region of interest is focused. In the
last stage, the foveal vision is aligned with
the region of interest and subsequently, the
attention will be tightly bounded with the
perception (Velasquez, 2013, p.4). In this
moment, these elements will succeed to
capture the user`s attention, the stimulus
being perceived at a higher resolution.
A newer perspective comes from
the Gestalt theory, according to which
“one`s perception of an object cannot be
decomposed into its elementary parts”
(Djamasbi, 2010, p.308). This view is a
holistic one in which the vision is mainly
based on this tendency of the user to group
the elements (Duchowski, 2007, p.7). On
the other side and contrary to the Gestalt
theory, Yarbus (1967) argues that
photography or an image in general, is
shaped after the vision is focusing on
different regions of interest. This image is
not formed by its elements seen together,
but contrary, this is formed by each part,
by each region focused by the user.
The eye movement takes into
consideration two of the three previously
mentioned hypotheses: “what” and
“where”. Consequently, Duchowski (2007,
p.11) defines the vision as a cyclical
process, formed by the three stages
mentioned above. This represents a model
of bottom-up visual attention, representing
an important side of the natural human
attention.
3.
INVESTIGATING
NEURAL MECHANISMS
The neural mechanisms are
analyzed from a physiological point of
view, the arguments being grounded in the
literature which targets the Human Visual
System (HVS). Further, it is described the
neural side which underlies the visual

Network Intelligence Studies
Volume I, Issue 1, 2013

process and the attention, the brain`s
regions involved in the eyes movement
process. Investigating these regions of the
brain, one can understand the way it
process the visual information. Certain
areas of the brain answer to certain
characteristics which attract the attention.
According to Duchowski (2007),
the entire visual field is formed by “brief
fixations over small regions of interest.
This allows perception of detail through
the fovea” (Duchowski, 2007, p.14). When
the attention is turned to a new area from
the visual field, the fast movements of the
eyes will reposition the fovea. These rapid
movements of the eyes from one region to
another are called saccades (Duchowski,
2007, p.14). The human visual system is
grounded in the connections which are
formed between the retina and the brain`s
regions. A connection represents the
pathway between a region of the brain and
the retina and the paths which link the
various regions of the brain and the retina,
are called flows. Recalling these notions,
Duchowski (2007) builds a scheme of the
brain`s regions involved in the eyes
movement and which are relevant when
taking into consideration the attention.
These regions are visually represented in
Figure 1. Table 1 represents a synthesis of
the neural regions and their implications.
According to Duchowski (2007,
p.16), the main regions involved in
programming the eye movement are the
following: Posterior Parietal Complex
(disengages attention), SC (relocating the
attention) and Pluvinar (engages and
intensifies the attention).Through this
simplified image of the brain`s regions and
the links between these areas and the
retina, one can understand the attention
cycle, from disengaging the attention,
changing it and the eyes, processing the
regions of interest and reengaging the
attention and the brain`s regions.
Before discussing the main eye
tracking techniques, we have to present the
main types of eye movements. The same
author
(Duchowski,
2007,
p.17),

distinguishes between five main categories
of eye movement. Thus, we identify the
saccadic movement, the smooth pursuit,
vergence, the vestibular movement and the
physiological nistagmus. On the other
hand, Rauthmann and others (Rauthman et
al., 2011, p.148) propose a different
category in comparison with the one
proposed by Duchowski. Additionally, he
proposes the following: the saccadic
acceleration, the saccadic amplitude,
duration of fixations, and the duration of
the eye fixation for regular distances.
These
movements
proposed
by
Rauthmann,
represents
rather
the
parameters of the types of movements
previously proposed by Duchowski.
Thesaccadic movement represents
the fast eye movement in the process of
fovea`s passing from one object to other,
in the visual field. These movements can
be voluntary or reflexed. Duchowski
(2007) argues that these movements can
last from 10 to 100 milliseconds. Instead,
Wendel and others (2008), argues that
these saccadic movements represent
ballistic bounces of the vision and the time
is very short, lasting from 10 to 40
milliseconds (Wendel et al., 2008, p.124).
Smooth pursuit takes place when the
moving objects are focused. Fixations
represent the eye movements which fixate
the retina upon a stationary object of
interest. These fixations last from 200 to
700 milliseconds (Wendel et al., 2008,
p.124). If the smooth pursuit was
characterized by the velocity of the
followed object, then the fixation is
characterized by a level of velocity closer
to 0. This means that fixation does not
have the velocity 0 but it is characterized
by movements like tremor, deviation or
micro saccades. The physiological
nistagmus represents the involuntary eye
movement, characterized by the model
repetition. Satu (2012) defines the
vergence as being the movements useful
for the profound perception and the
vestibular movement as being useful when

121

Network Intelligence Studies
Volume I, Issue 1, 2013

fixating a certain object when there takes
place a head movement.
Only three of the eye movement
types mentioned above are significant
when analyzing the attention: fixation,
saccadic movement and the smooth
pursuit. At Duchowski (2007, p.47) we
identify a linear model, invariant (Time
Invariant-LTI) for the approximation of
the eye movements. The same eye
movements are voluntary and thus, they
provide evidence in what concerns the
analysis of human attention. The eye
tracking instruments records the various
models of fixation and the saccadic
movements a user makes through the
process of visualizing a visual stimulus.
Thus, in order to understand how the
process of measuring the eye movements
is taking place, it is required a presentation
of the main eye tracking techniques.
4. EYE TRACKING
TECHNIQUES
Over time, the techniques for
measuring eye movements have evolved
from the simple analysis of the photos (late
1940) and till today when we have the eye
tracking technology. The development of
the measuring systems for eye movements
took place initially in the physiological
research of the oculomotor system.
Hammond
and
Mulligan
(2008)
distinguish between these systems. They
can be invasive and inactive, on the one
hand, noninvasive and passive, on the
other hand. Noninvasive systems differ
toward the invasive ones. They are not
attached to any part of the human body,
the participant expressing in his natural
environment.
In contrast with Duchowski (2007),
which offers a restricted number of
techniques for measuring eye movements,
Hammond and Mulligan (2008) go further
in the history of this long debated
technique. They describe one of the first
eye trackers of great precision – Dual
Purkinje Image (DPI). “The first Purkinje

122

image represents a virtual image formed
by the first layer of the cornea, meanwhile
the fourth image is a real one, formed by
the concave surface of the crystalline”
(Hammond and Mulligan, 2008, p.2). This
instrument has the disadvantage of not
being noninvasive, being necessary the
head stabilization. All in all, the DPI eye
tracker is efficient in what concerns the
sensibility and the temporal bandwidth.
Both
Duchowski
(2007),
Hammond and Mulligan (2008) and
Wendel and Pieters (2008) find the
Electro-oculography technique (EOG) as
being the most used technique over time
and even today. This method is based on
measuring
the
potential
electrical
differences by means of electrodes placed
on the skin around the human eyes. In the
retina is gathering an electrical load which
offers the eye a dipole moment and its
movement makes the electrical potential to
vary in the area. Velasques (2013, p.4),
argues that today, this technique cannot be
used anymore because measuring the
relative position of the eyes to the head,
calculating the point of attention is not
efficient. Measuring the point of attention
can be possible only if we will calculate
the position of the head by means of a
head tracker (Duchowski, 2007, p.52).
Electro-oculography is easy to implement
but being intrusive due to the electrodes,
today it is not used anymore, only
occasionally in laboratory.
The Scleral Contact Lens or the
Search Coil represents a precise method in
measuring eye movements. It consists of
attaching a mechanical or optical object or
reference to a lens which subsequently will
be carried directly on eyes. The attached
objects can be: reflecting phosphor,
diagrams in line or wire coils, and the most
used in optical magnetic configurations.
The principles suggested by Duchowski
(2007, p.53) shows the measuring of the
wire coil by moving in the magnetic field.
The precision of this method, according to
the
previously
mentioned
author
Duchowski (2007, p.53) is of 5-10 arc-sec.

Network Intelligence Studies
Volume I, Issue 1, 2013

with a limit of 5°. Like the electoroculography, the contact lenses represent
an intrusive method, being uncomfortable
for the participant. Because this method
assumes to measure the eyes position
towards the head, it is not recommended to
measure the point of attention.
Photo-Oculography (POG) or
Video-Oculography (VOG) represents
another technique which involves the
measuring of the eye characteristics when
moving, like the corneal reflexion or the
pupil shape. Using this technique, one
cannot measure the point of attention.
By comparison with the previous
techniques which cannot measure the point
of attention, in Duchowski(2007) we
identified the techniques based on corneal
reflexion or video-based combined pupil.
Nowadays, these techniques are the most
used and consist of an infrared camera,
mounted to the bottom of the monitor or in
the hinge area of the laptop (Figure 2).
Equiped with a software for image
processing, this camera identifies and
locate the cornea reflexion and the pupil
centre. Velasquez (2013), argues that this
technique can measure the user`s point of
attention because it can dissociate between
the eye movement and the position of the
head (Velasquez,2013, p.4).
“An infrared light from a LED is
directed toward the user to create
noticeable reflections on the features of the
eyes, thus making tracking easier (infrared
light is used to avoid dazzling the user)”
(Velasquez, 2013, p.4).In this way, the
light can enter the retina and thus, it can be
reflected, the pupil becoming very bright.
The light thus reflected will be
subsequently collected and recorded by a
digital camera. The collected data will be
used in measuring the eye rotation through
the variations of the corneal reflexions.
Finally, using a trigonometric calculation,
the instrument will find the point of
attention.

5. ONLINE
INTERACTIVITY
Becase the purpose is to investigate
the eye tracking technology and the
manner of using it in measuring websites
interactivity, we must make a short
summary of what interactivity means.
Therefore, from a structural point of view,
interactivity supposes the existence of
‘hard’ instruments and from an
experiential point of view, interactivity
represents the communication process, as
it is perceived by users (Liu et al., 2002,
pp.55-56). For example, synchronicity,
from a structural point of view, assumes
the existence of an appropriate server
structure, of a bandwidth which has to
guarantee the proper link between various
documents. From an experiential point of
view, synchronicity assumes the way in
which the users feel the communication
process, if this communication between
them is synchronized and totally felt.
One of the first stages of the
interactivity
is
called
“reactive
interactivity” (Chaffey, 2006). This is
formed when the medium is developed,
when the virtual selling space is created. In
this moment, the first questions appear.
They refer to the way in which the system
will function and answer, as well as to the
way in which the user will react.
The concept of interactivity is used
in various fields but in this paper it will be
defined for the marketing literature. Liu
and Shrum (2002) present one of the first
definitions of this concept. Interactivity is
defined from the marketing perspective
and it comprises three aspects: user-user
interactivity, user-computer interactivity
and user-message interactivity. Thus, in
this respect, interactivity represents the
way in which two or more communication
channels operates between them, on the
communication medium and on the
messages, as well as the way in which
these influences are synchronizing (Liu,
2002, p.54). This definition reflects the
multidimensional character of interactivity.

123

Network Intelligence Studies
Volume I, Issue 1, 2013

The Internet does not represent a linear
medium,
interactivity offering the
possibility to the user to have a total
control active. Interactivity can also be
described as a two way communication of
the companies with the users and of the
user with other user. The marketing field
has now a new way of achieving
information concerning the consumers
need. It receives an instant feedback due to
the interactive element by surveying the
performed clicks by users, of its presence
online or offering a direct feedback from
users by sending an e-mail or filling the
fields inside the website.
Therefore,
two-way
communication enables the online
transactions and deliveries. At this time,
synchronicity has an important role which
allows a faster response to those who
launched interrogations. The system
responsiveness represents the essential
element of interactivity to which the online
experience could not be possible.
The concept of interactivity is used
in various fields and its origin is the
interpersonal communication, as we can
observe in the Liu and others studies
(2011), in the Sun and Hsu`s study (2012)
which analyze the interactivity concept in
the online educational context. They argue
that interactivity can improve the cognitive
and operational skills (Sun et al., 2012,
p.172). Interactivity represents here a
communication process which fastens the
relationship between the students and
media, on the one hand, between teachers
and media, on the other hand. Thus, their
involvement level in the learning process
is enhanced. Interactivity has the same
effects on the users `actions. It enhances
the attention, raise the involvement and
curiosity level, thus leading to higher level
of conversion.
Joshua Noble speaks about the
didactic model of interactivity. For him,
didactic interactivity implies the running
of the system in a continuous way and the
data it delivers are used for the purpose of
learning. In this situation, the system and

124

the user get advantages. The first one
acquires data about the user in what
concerns his preferences and the searched
information. The second one has the
chance to search for information without
being forced.
In Chang and others (2008,
p.2930), we identify in the interactivity
definition
the
same
two-way
communication element. At Chang (Chang
et al., 2008, p.2930) and Cyr (Cyr et al.,
2009, p.853), the novelty in defining
interactivity suggests “the instruments
availability and efficiency which supports
the user”. We can observe in this situation
the common element with the other
definitions of interactivity: interactivity as
a dialogue between the website and the
user. In fact, interactivity represents an
interpersonal communication. Moreover,
Cry outlines a definition for interactivity
which is centered on the user. She defines
this concept in the following way:
“allowing the user control and access to
information on the site in a variety of
ways, which is both personal and
responsive” (Cyr et al., 2009, p.853). From
this point of view, interactivity assumes a
larger control of the user in modifying the
structure, the content and the speed of the
accessed medium. In the same time, the
system must be able to respond the
requests users made. Without this
communication between the user and the
system, interactivity cannot be possible.
But then, Yoo and others (Yoo et
al., 2010 p.90) defines interactivity
through three dimensions: controllability,
synchronicity and bi-directionability. All
dimensions described interactivity as a
way of controlling the content, the
sequence of communication, the speed and
the possibility to change the sender role
with the receiver. Online interactivity
assumes the possibility to personalize the
medium. Its functions can include the
feedback forums, e-mail addresses links
and chat-rooms. Some of the dimensions
are found and are common in some studies
and other parts are new and recently

Network Intelligence Studies
Volume I, Issue 1, 2013

defined. In a study realized by Carnegie
(2009), interactivity is defined by three
main
attributes:
multi-directionality,
manipulability and presence.
6. THE IMPLICATIONS OF
EYE TRACKING
TECHNOLOGY IN
MARKETING
One of the reasons we choose to
use the eye tracking technology in
marketing research is because we are keen
to understand the users’ actions in the
online medium. In the decision making
process, a user is influenced by internal
factors, on the one hand, and external
factors, on the other hand. The external
factors are related to the marketing actions
and the competitive and environmental
factors. These factors are the only one
which can be measured and subsequently
measured with the results of the users’
actions. The internal factors are related to
the cognitive and perceptual processes.
These factors represent the crucial factors
in establishing efficient marketing actions.
Thus, the main purpose lays in
understanding the type of information the
user needs to make a decision.
The eye tracking technology may
be used in advertising, copy-testing,
television, product design and online
research. Interactivity and website design
have become the main studying areas in
differentiating one site of another. In this
section will be described and analyzed
some studies realized on this segment
which implemented the eye tracking
technology. The way in which these
studies will be synthesized will be
chronologically. Thus, we will emphasize
the evolution in what concerns the way in
which the instrument is used and the way
in which the characteristics of the
interactivity have been approached.
One of the analyzed studies
succeeded, using the hidden Markov
model, to model the relationship between
the eye movements and the cognitive states

of the participants (Simola et al., 2008). In
this study, we have to notice the analysis
of an entire fixation sequence and the
saccadic movements. In this way, the
authors succeeded in understanding the
way in which the information processing
varies along the reading process. The
analysis has focused on three tasks:
searching various words, question-answer
and searching the most interesting subject.
When identifying the way in which it is
realized the link between language
processing and the eye movement, the
authors have implemented a modeling of
the fixation time series and eye
movements. This was achieved by
assuming the hidden states, supposed to be
signs of the cognitive system which varies
between different processing states
(Simola et al., 2008, p.239). Like the
majority of the studies (Liu et al., 2011
N=16; Khushabaet al., 2012 N=18; Roth et
al., 2012 N=40; Gidlofet al., 2013 N=40;
Velasques ,2013 N=33, etc. ) realized with
the eye tracking technology, the sample
was very small, including 6 participants.
Studying the works of the authors
who analyzed the interactivity`s elements
with the eye tracking technology, Ozcelik
and others (2009) and Djamasbi and others
(2010) have focused on the introduction of
visual elements. Thus, the study realized
by Ozcelik (2009) has the main purpose
the identification of the color effect on the
process of multimedia learning. The
optimal combination of the interactivity`s
elements enhances the online learning
process. The users will learn faster and the
information is better stored by visual
means. On the other hand, Djamasbi and
others (2010) analyses the visual
information, taking into consideration four
characteristics: large images, images with
celebrities, small text and the search
characteristic. From a methodological
point of view, the eye tracker device
completes and confirms the results of the
first study. The first study uses the online
questionnaire
to
identify
if
the
participants’ evaluations about the

125

Network Intelligence Studies
Volume I, Issue 1, 2013

websites visual attraction correspond to the
experts given scores. In fact, it was
identified the information concerning the
visual attraction of 50 websites. The
second study included the eye tracking
device. Collecting the information of the
vision pathway and fixation duration, the
authors have identified if the participants
has taken into account the four
characteristics as well as the time spent in
front of each one. The output offered by
the eye tracker (heat-maps) revealed the
importance of each element.
Moreover, the investigation of the
areas in which the participants have fixated
initially, indicates what characteristics play
an important role in shaping the users`
thinking about the visual attraction of each
website. The eye tracker has identified the
regions fixated in the first 5 seconds. It
also identified their succession according
to the time spent by each participant to
fixate those regions.
This study has used the Tobii 1750
Eye Tracker, developed by Tobii
Technology, being a non-intrusive device,
allowing a natural behavior. In contrast
with Djamasbi (2010), Liu and others
(2011) have implemented a face LAB™ 4
eye tracker, developed by Seeing
Machines, non-intrusive. If the redundant
multimedia information had an influence
on the users cognitive processes, Liu and
others (2011) tells us in a study realized
with this type of eye tracker. The results of
the study have indicated a cognitive load
of the user when the visualized text
information was doubled by the narration
(verbal) of the same text. In the same
situation, we observe a difference in the
cognitive processing when narrating the
text to the user (Liu et al., 2011, pp. 24102417). Thus, we observe a decrease in the
cognitive loading and the capacity to avoid
the redundant information. The eye tracker
showed the way in which the users have
processed various types of information.
Nevertheless, they did not identify the type
and the level of the cognitive loading. In
this situation, it is necessary to determine

126

the patterns of the eye movements and the
cognitive processing, in terms of
superficial or profound level.
Moreover, we identify a new way
to implement the eye tracking technology
at Rauthmann and others (2011): the
linking between personality and the
individual differences concerning the eye
movements. The lineal model has proved
that personality (Big Five, Behavioral
Activation System) can involve the
individual number of fixations and their
duration. Nevertheless, this study could
have included a larger number of stimuli,
personality traits and moreover, a larger
number of eye movement parameters.
The eye tracking technology can be
used in combination with other methods.
The methods from neurosciences are also
used in the marketing research with the
purpose of analyzing and understanding
the consumer behavior. Thus, Khushaba
and others (2012) have used both the
electroencephalogram (EEG) and the eye
tracker when observing the brain`s
response when exposed to various
marketing stimuli. One of the envisaged
objectives consisted in the evaluation of
the cortical activity from different regions
of the brain. This study has identified a
new method to quantify the importance of
certain product characteristics. In this
situation, it is about the biscuits
characteristics which contribute to the
product
design.
The
implemented
instruments
were
the
electroencephalogram (Emotiv EPOC
wireless EEG headset) and a Tobii Eye
Tracker.
On the other side, the eye tracking
device can be used when analyzing the
relationship between the usual location and
efficiency in what concerns the
identification of the targeted elements
from various websites. Roth and others
(2012), as well as Velasquez (2013)
establish a new approach in collecting and
processing the users’ data with the eye
tracker. It is identified the way in which
certain areas from a website and the

Network Intelligence Studies
Volume I, Issue 1, 2013

inserted elements in these regions are
complying with the users’ expectations.
7. CONCLUSION
This paper offered a starting point
for the future studies interested in using
eye tracking technology and for those who
are interested in the new methods and
instruments in the marketing research.
Even if the eye tracking technology
is told to be hard to implement, because of
the calibration process and hardly
accessible because of the higher prices,
today it is used more and more due to the
technological advances, improvements and
a much lower price.
References
[1]
Carnegie, T.A.M. (2009), Interface as
Exordium: The Rhetoric of Interactivity,
Computers and Compositions, pp. 164-173.
[2]
Cebi, S. (2012), Determining Importance
Degrees of Website Design Parameters Based on
Interactions and Types of Websites, Decision
Support Systems, pp.1-13.
[3]
Chikkerur, S., Serre, T., Tan, Ch., Poggio,
T. (2010), What and Where: A Bayesian Inference
Theory of Attention, Vision Research, pp.1-15;
[4]
Chiou, W.C., Lin, C.C., Perng, C. (2010),
A Strategic Framework for Website Evaluation
Based on a Review of the Literature from 19952006, Information & Management, 47, pp.282-290.
[5]
Cyr, D., Head, M., Ivanov, A. (2009),
Perceived Interactivity Leading to E-loyalty:
Development of a Model for Cognitive-Affective
User Responses, International Journal of Human –
Computer Studies, pp.850-869.
[6]
Cyr, D., Head, M., Larios, H.
(2009),Colour Appeal in Website Design within
and Across Cultures: A Multi-method Evaluation,
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies,
pp. 1-21.
[7]
Djamasbi, S., Siegel, M., Tullis, T. (2010),
Generation Y, Web design, and Eye Tracking,
International Journal of Human – Computer
Studies, pp. 307-323.
[8]
Duchowski, A. T. (2007), Eye Tracking
Methodology – Theory and Practice, Second
Edition, Springer, London.
[9]
Fang, Y.H. (2012), Does Online
Interactivity Matter? Exploring the Role of
Interactivity Strategies in Consumer Decision
Making, Computers in Human Behavior, 28,
pp.1790-1804.

[10]
Gao, D., Yin, G., Cheng, W., Feng, X.
(2011), Non – invasive Eye Tracking Technology
Based on Corneal Reflex, Procedia Engineering,
pp. 3608-3612.
[11]
Hammoud, R.I., Mulligan, J.B. (2008),
Introduction to Eye Monitoring, Signals and
Communication Technologies, pp.1-19;
[12]
Hausman, A., Siekpe, J. S. (2008), The
Effect of Web Interface on Consumer Online
Purchase Intentions, Journal of Business Research,
pp. 5-13.
[13]
Kim, J. (2012), Towards a Theoretical
Framework of Motivations and Interactivity for
Using IPTV, Journal of Business Research, 66,
pp.260-264.
[14]
Koo, D., Ju, S. H. (2009), The
Interactional Effects of Atmospherics and
Perceptual Curiosity on Emotions and Online
Shopping Intention, Computers in Human
Behavior, pp. 377-388.
[15]
Lee, S.M., Ungson, G.R., Russo, M.V.
(2011), What Determines an Engaging Website?:
An Empirical Study of Website Characteristics and
Operational Performance, Journal of High
Technology Management Research, pp.67-79.
[16]
Liu, H.C., Lai, M.L., Chuang, H. (2011),
Using Eye – Tracking Technology to Investigate
the Redundant Effect of Multimedia Web Pages on
Viewers` Cognitive Processes, Computers in
Human Behavior, pp. 2410-2417.
[17]
Noble,
J.(2009),
Programming
Interactivity, Ed. O`Reilly Media. Inc, Sebastopol.
[18]
Noort, G., Voorveld, H.A.M., Reijmersdal,
E.A. (2012), Interactivity in Brand Web Sites:
Cognitive, Affective, and Behavioral Responses
Explained by Consumers` Online Flow Experience,
Journal of Interactive Marketing, 26, pp.223-234.
[19]
Oyekoya, O. (2007), Eye Tracking: A
Perceptual Interface for Content Based Image
Retrieval, PhD Thesis, University College London
[20]
Rauthmann, J.F., Seubert, C.T.,Furtner,
M.R. (2011), Eyes as Windows to the Soul: Gazing
Behavior is Related to Personality, Journal of
Research in Personality, 46, pp. 147-156.
[21]
Richard, M.O., Chebat, J.C., Yang, Z.,
Putrevu, S. (2009), A Proposed Model of Online
Consumer Behavior: Assesing the Role of Gender,
Journal of Business Research, pp. 1-9.
[22]
RikPieters (2008), A Review of EyeTracking Research in Marketing, in Naresh K.
Malhotra (ed.) Review of Marketing Research
(Review of Marketing Research, Volume 4),
Emerald Group Publishing Limited, pp.123-147;
[23]
Roth, S.P., Tuch, A.N., Mekler, E.D.,
Bargas-Avila, J.A., Opwis, K. (2012), Location
Matters, Especially for Non-Salient Features – An
eye-tracking Study on the Effects of Web Object
Placement on Different Types of Websites,
International Journal of Human-computer Studies,
71, pp.228-235.

127

Network Intelligence Studies
Volume I, Issue 1, 2013

[24]
Satu, H. (2012), Eye Tracking in User
Research, Interdisciplinary Studies Journal, pp. 6577.
[25]
Simola, J., Salojarvi, J., Kojo, I., Using
Hidden Markov Model to Uncover Processing
States from Eye Movements in Information Search
Tasks, Cognitive Systems Research, pp. 237-251.
[26]
Sun, J., Hsu, Y. (2012), Effect of
Interactivity on Learner Perceptions in Web-Based
Instruction, Computers in Human Behavior, 29,
pp.171-184.
[27]
Velasquez, J.D., (2013), Combining EyeTracking Technologies with Web Usage Mining for
Identifying Website Keyobjects, Engineering
Applications of artificial Intelligence, pp.1-10.
[28]
Vul, E., Hanus, D., Kanwisher, N. (2009),
Attention as Inference: Selection is Probalistic;
Responses are All-or-None Samples, Journal of
Experimental Pszcholog, pp.1-15;
[29]
Wendel, M., Pieters, R. (2008), Eye
Tracking for Visual Marketing (Foundations and
Trends in Marketing), Now Publishers;
[30]
Yoo, W.S., Lee, Y., Park, J. (2010),The
Role of Interactivity in E-tailing: Creating Value
and Increasing Satisfaction, Journal of Retailing
and Consumer Services, pp. 89-96.

Biography
Adriana-Emilia Robu is a PhD Student at the
Doctoral School of Economics and Business
Administration,
Alexandru
Ioan
Cuza
University of Iasi, Marketing Department.
Areas of interest: Eye Tracking Research,
Human Computer Interaction, Websites
Interactivity, Neuromarketing, Neuro Web
Design, Visual Design.

Figures and tables
Table 1
Neural regions. Source: data are collected and synthesized from Duchowski, A. T. (2007),
Eye Tracking Methodology – Theory and Practice, Second Edition, Springer, London
Regions
Implications
-SC (Superior Collicus)
Programming the eye movements
Selects the region to be fixated for saccades
and for the smooth pursuits from one object to another
-V1 (Main Visual Cortex)
Detects the stimuli
-V2, Ve, V3A, V4, MT
Process the shapes, colors and the movements
-V5, MT (Middle Temporal),
Provides the large projections to Pons, fine
MST (Middle Superior Temporal)
movements. MT provides movement signals to collicus
-LIP (Lateral Intra Parietal)
Includes receptive fields corrected before
being executed the saccadic eye movements
-PPC
(Posterior
Parietal
Fixations
Complex)
-Dorsal stream
Movement, localization, processing (where)
-Ventral stream
Cognitive processing (what)

128

Network Intelligence Studies
Volume I, Issue 1, 2013

Figure 1 – The representation of the visual pathways, relevant to the eye movements and
attention
Source: Duchowski, A. T. (2007), Eye Tracking Methodology – Theory and Practice, Second
Edition, Springer, London, p.17

Figure 2 – Attaching the Eye Tracking device to the monitor orin the hinge area of the laptop

129

